DANIEL IN THE DEN: OR, THE LORD PRESIDENT'S Imprisonment, AND MIRACULOUS
DELIVERANCE. REPRESENTED In a DISCOURSE from HEB. XI. v. 33.

By S. J. Rector of Chinner in the County of Oxon.

DAN. 6.23. Innocence was found in me, and also before thee, O King, have I
done no hurt.

LONDON, Printed by J. A. for John Dunton, at the Sign of the Black Raven in
the Poultrey, 1682.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE ANTHONY EARL of SHAFTSBVRY, Late Lord PRESIDENT of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
HOly Writ acquaints us with many cursed Conspiracies against the Innocent and
the Good. But I find none more sottish and cruel, than that we read of, John
12. v. 10.11. Where the High-prists consult to put (not Jesus only, but)
Lazarus also to Death; because by reason of him many of the Jews believed on
Jesus. Lazarus wasguilty of no Crime, but because [he was.] It seems his very
Being and Life was fault enough, which though redeemed by a Miracle, must now
be destroyed by Malice: For his bare Presence and Motion Drew Disciples; his
very Looks preached the Gospel; he opened his Eyes and Taught. And while thus
doing, he would never make an end of doing mischief to them. Therefore they
consult to dispatch him out of sight, and to silence this Teacher, by muffling
him up in a Napkin again, and laying him under a Stone.

It is certain (My Lord) that every Turn of your Head, Glance of your Eye,
Motion of your Hand, Step of your Foot is a vexation and a Plague to your
Enemies the Papists, who believe your very Shadow so fatal to all their
Contrivances and Aims, that whilst You live, they Shrivel and Wither. Your
Breath strikes confusion to all their Plots, and therefore no wonder they have
variously consulted your Death, as well as your Great Masters: Lazarus must dye
too.

But then to promote it by projecting a Design of setting Jesus against
Lazarus, and imposing a belief that He [Innocent He] should conspire the ruin
of his Masters Honor and Kingdom, is a Plot like to prosper into the same
Glory of the Projectors, as this your Lordship will hear of in the following
Discourse. One would swear such Men were Planet-struck, their Counsels
confounded from Heaven (as the Languages at Babel) and the Witnesses stammering
out an improbable Evidence.

Praised be God, who has frustrated (hitherto) all their Hellish attempts both
against your Sovereign and Self. May his Majesty live for ever, a sure Defender
of our Faith and Church: And may your Lordship live too, the Dread and Eyesore
of the Enemies of its peace. And may You never be Imagined to be lessened in
the Affections of your Prince, nor in your own to the Interests of his Royal
Person and Kingdom; but may Realize in your Devotion to Majesty, those
Hyperbolical expressions of Allegiance and Duty wherewith Furre and Velvet,
have even tired the Court all this Year. And let that idle imputation and
reproach of a Republican Design be equally the Subject of your Diversion and
scorn. When all wise Men know you too Prudent and Politic to endeavor the
unhinging those firm Establishments of Church and State, to whose fixation and
Glory you lent so Great an hand, and (I doubt not) bear so true an Heart,
however enviously the contrary be insinuated by your Inveterate Enemies. And no
wonder, when Jesus himself (who dared the World and Devil to convince him of
sin against God) was yet Indicted of Treason against Caesar, (Joh. 19.22.) and
bawled to death by the Exclamations of those, whose Hypocritical pretenses to
Loyalty, served only to mask very fitly the Face of their Cruelty. From which
God ever defend your Lordship and all Good Men. I am (My Lord)

Your Lordships Most humble Servant, S. J.

HEB. XI. 33. Who through Faith -- stopped the Mouths of Lions.


THis Chapter, (as a Cabinet enriched with Variety of costly Jewels) is all
throughout Enameled with the Glories of Faith. Some very Antique, even from
the first World, the Luster of Abel, Enoch, and Noah shine here. The rest not
Modern, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Moses, Samuel, and the Prophets (as Stars of
the first Magnitude) dart down their several Rays and Influences upon the
Church in all Ages; and here altogether make up a glorious Constellation.

And thou Daniel the Prophet, art not the least among all the Princes and
Prophets of Judah, for out of thee proceeded this Eximious Faith (in the Text)
That stopped the Mouths of Lions, so as they could do thee no harm, because
Innocence was found in thee, etc.

The Text being Historical will necessarily enforce me to give you a Cursory
and Paraphrastical account of this Prophets Story, and the several Remarques of
his Life and Honors; but especially of his Sufferings and Imprisonment, and
the Faith that procured him the Miraculous Deliverance from the Lions.

Please you therefore to take a Transient view of him, (as the Holy Ghost has
dressed him up, and displayed him before us, in his own Book:)

1. In his Lineage and Descent; Daniel's high Birth.
he is (if not of the Blood Royal) at least of the Seed of the Princes, and
Noble, Chap. 1.3. And the Great Soul that managed all his Actions with that
Bravery and Courage, confirms the highness of his Extract; E fortibus creantur
fortes. Our Prophet was Born Honorable, and the whole Series of his Life, was
no whit derogatory from, but Ornamental to the Glory of his Birth.

2. In the Beauty of his Personage; Perfect Beauty.
the Gracefulness of his Body vying perfection with the Graces of his Mind,
each striving in him for Superiority; and both rendering him very amiable and
lovely, Chap. 1.4.

3. In his excellent Breeding and Education; Good Breeding.
He is a choice Spirit, culled out to be trained up and instructed by Royal
Mandate, in all the Learning of the Chaldees, and taught the Mysteries and
Policies of State, that he might stand before the King, verse 5. And is
therefore wrought up to be a polished Pillar for the support of the Government.

4. In the admirable Abstinence of his Youth; Admirable Abstinence.
he Religiously declines from the Luxuries of the Court, and the Delicacies of
the Kings Table, and abstemiously satisfies himself with Pulse and Water, v.
12. A Rare Example.

5. In his Sublime Wisdom and Knowledge; Sublime Wisdom.
God also overlaying his humane Acquisitions with the Gold of Divine Grace,
Sanctifying him into a knotty and puzling Prophet, hard to be understood; and
giving him a particular Skill and Understanding in Unridling Dreams and Visions
of the Night, v. 17. And dissolving hard Questions, Cap. 5.12. As also the
Spirit of Government, and fitness for public Affairs.

6. In his Merited Promotion: Merited Promotion.
for his Wisdom he is preferred and made a Great Man by the King: Lord
Lieutenant over the whole Province of Babylon; to inspect the Kings Treasures,
etc. Cap. 2.48. And Chief Governor and Master of all the Magicians and Wise
Men, cap. 2.28. and 4.49. -- And is fixed at Court, Cap. 2.49.

7. In his exemplary Piety; Exemplary Piety.
for through the whole crowd of those distractions, his Offices and Honors
involve him in, yet he passes to Heaven Thrice a day, and commands Cares to
stand below, while himself climbs the Mount, and dispatches Business with his
God, cap. 6.10.

8. In his Religious Care; Religious Care for good Men's Advance.
for being himself now promoted to Honor, he improves his whole Interest for
the advancement of his Friends, (Men of the same excellent Spirit with himself)
to a share in the administration of the Government. An act of great Piety to
God, good Policy to the King, Great Favor to his Friends, and great Comfort to
the Church in her Affliction and Exile. Daniel requested of the King, and he
set Shadrach, Meshech and Abednego over the Affairs of the Province of Babylon,
Cap. 2.49.

Lastly, In the good Effect of his Care; The good-Effect of that Care.
for these brave Men being now made public Officers in the State, and summoned
to obey the Idolatrous Decree of Nebuchadnezzar (to which all his Princes,
Governors and other Officers had rendered a ready and undisputed Obedience;)
These alone find a Faith and a Courage, singly to oppose themselves, and dare
give check to the yet uncontrolled Torrent of his impious Law and Command,
owning the true God and professing the fullness of a generous confidence in his
Power, even to the very Face of the incensed Monarch: Whose angry Commands
therefore of aggravating their Torments in the Fire, did but still increase the
glorious Miracle of their Deliverance in and out of it, and at last produce a
Decree of Honor to the God and Religion they confessed, and a greater
Augmentation of Office and Power to themselves, Cap. 3. So little do faithful
Men disadvantage themselves by a fixed adherence to the Truth and Principles
they believe, and so greatly do they Honor their Profession and their God;
when in the Face of his Enemies and of Death it self, they dare own him with
constancy and courage. And what assurance do such Men give to their Prince of
all imaginable Truth and Fidelity, in the Loyal discharge of their Duties, and
faithful answering to all the Confidence and Trust reposed in them, with all
security and peace?

What a service then did Daniel to the Crown in lifting Men of such Heroic
temper into places of Authority and Power? How happy is that Prince whose
Affairs are so securely lodged in the ministration of those who had rather die
than betray their Sovereign by an ill Act; no not by an Easy humouring him in
his Sin; and sooner resign themselves into the hazard of his utmost
displeasure, than to flatter him in Designs so dishonorable to God, pernicious
to himself, and opposite to their Principles and Conscience?

Daniel thus richly clad with all the Graces of a good Prophet, Beloved of God,
and Nechadnezzar.
no wonder he is so often proclaimed the Favorite of Heaven, A man greatly
beloved of God, Cap. 9.29. and 10. v. 11.19. So, being enriched with all the
properties of a Prudent Statesman, no wonder he is so greatly beloved of the
King, as one replenished with the Spirit of the Holy Gods, Chap. 4.8, 9. In the
full luster of whose favor (we may be sure) he continued shining through the
whole Series of this Monarch's Reign without Eclipse.

There are, Love God then,
who can they but wrap themselves in the warm embraces of Earthly Majesty, very
fanatically hold the Bosom of Divine Love but for a cold Lodging. It Is pity
such should pass from the Meridian of Royal favor into the obscurities of
Divine Vengeance; but they may. I will get as close to my King as I can, but it
is good for me to draw near to God too, least my Prince die (as Daniel 's did)
and leave me miserable.

Nor is Piety it self a Protection, that can justify or secure me from the
least affront to Royalty, And the King too.
since if good Men must be loved as the Images of God's Holiness, certainly
good Princes, as the more Express ones, both of his Holiness and his Power.

Now whether (upon his death) our Prophet retired from Court, A Stranger at
Court in Belshazzar's Reign.
and betook himself to a private and more Sedate course of life, to attend the
immediate Service of his God: Or whether Bellshazzar being a dissolute Prince
gave no encouragement to so good a Man to continue about him: Or whether He,
(being but the Grandchild of Nebuchadnezzar his Daughters Son) might be too
young to hear of the Memorable passages of Daniel's Wisdom and Service in the
Life of his Grandfather, and perhaps bred elsewhere at a distance from the
Court: Or, whether times had worn off the Memory and Novelty of these
Transactions: Or what else, I know not: But he seems a perfect Stranger (now)
in the Palace: Till Letters by a strange hand (without an Arm) occasion his
Summons to Court again. Where (it seems) Belshazzar and his Lords were acting
the Religion of the Quakers, but understand not their own Institution (it
puzzled the whole Council of the Wise Men to understand it too) till the Q. But
sent for in a fright. And promoted by him.
Mother thinks that One Daniel might, whom she therefore recommends to the
King: There is a Man in thy Kingdom, of an excellent Spirit and Knowledge, etc.
Let Daniel be called, Chap. 5.12. Who is therefore sent for, and highly
caressed with proffers of Dignity and Honor; which he (brave Man) as nobly
slights (and knows that Princes in a Fright use not to bid low for their ease:)
Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy rewards to another, yet I will read
the Writing, v. 17. And generously gives his Majesty a cast of his Office, to
settle again his trembling Heart.

But Oh! in the Mystical Characters was lapped up the Tragical Prophecy of his
doom. It seems he wanted some Grains of that Weight and worth, which should
have rendered him Current in the Balance. Too vain and light a Prince to
support the Massiness of Empire. For as Esau ravenously eat up his Birthright,
so he as profanely drinks away his Kingdom; and no Cups please him to tipple
in but the poor Captive Ones of the Sanctuary (upbraiding Heaven, that could
not redeem them from his gods;) He so little remembered his Grandfathers grazing
in the Fields as a Beast, that himself was become a greater Brute in his
Palace; and forgets that the very Breath of his Nostrils is a Tenant at will to
his Maker. No wonder then that Heaven rings his passing Bell. And though he
calls for a Priest, yet he cannot revoke the immutable Decree, which seals him
up to destruction. However ever he go, has this Policy left, that he hopes to
bribe Heaven to a Reprieve, by exalting so God-like a Man as Daniel (a Friend
of the gods) to Honor, and Proclaims him The Third Ruler in the Kingdom, Chap.
5.29.

But alas! this Glory was very short-lived, Belshazzer slain.
for the Fountain of it lies (that very Night) bleeding in the Dust. The
Prophecy was fulfilled, and the King called for to Judgment, v. 30.

However, upon the Change, our Prophet is no loser, for the Kingdom being
translated to Darius the Mede, Darius succeeds, who makes him.
(to whose Ears the Report and Fame of the great Daniel's Parts and Excellency
quickly arrives, and himself being Old) for the Ease of his Government,

1. He Constitutes under him an Hundred and twenty Deputies, Chap. 6.1.

2. Over all these, Three Presidents, to whom they were to make their Accounts.

3. And of these three was our Daniel chief in Commission: Lord chief President.
The very first Minister of State. Thus you have him in the Zenith of his
Honors, Lord high President over all the Kings Councils and Treasures, next
and immediately under himself Supreme Governor, together with the Reason which
justifies the Kings great Prudence and Policy in promoting him to so high
Degree, And wherefore.
(viz.) Because an Excellent Spirit was found in him. -- He was every way
qualified for his Station.

But this Mighty Preferment soon contracts an universal Envy upon him from
those whose Dim Eyes could not see, The Princes Envy.
or whose Cankered Spirits would not weigh his Merits in a Righteous Scale. The
Hill of Honor is dangerously trod, though by never so fair and meritorious
Feet. Envious Men hate to acknowledge a worth beyond their own, and look with a
squint Eye on all above themselves. The Promotion that falls not on their own
Heads, grieves their Hearts, and is plotted against.

Indeed Daniel was an Alien and a Captive; and for such a One to top them in
their own Country, was (they thought) insufferable: For this Stranger to
Monopolize their Princes affections, and bear away the greatest share of his
Heart and Preferments, (while themselves must truckle under him, dance his
attendance, and strike Top-sail to him;) This they could with no patience
endure. Therefore the Presidents and Princes sought to find occasion against
Daniel.

Yet Safely may the Heavenly Aspirer fix his steps while he has no Competitor
to contend with him; Note.
and few are Emulous of the Caelestial Crown. The Four and twenty Elders may
pass an Eternity, e're any below disturb their Honors, while weak Eyes wax
sore at the sight but of a Coronet, though the King himself has stuck it on.

They sought to find occasion, etc. And Consult against him.
And methinks I fancy them sitting in close Consult against him, and ransacking
every Inch of his Life and Manners. Not an under-Officer, but is brought in and
strictly examined upon Oath, if possibly the least defect might be found in his
Managements or Accounts: And perhaps the very Attendants of his Family Bribed
or Menaced into an unreserved confession and disclosure of the daily Customs of
his House, nay and those of his very Oratory and Bedchamber. Nor must the
freedom of his Table be allowed him unpurged, if probably even There but a
Syllable might escape him, which may be Artificially interpreted into Treason,
or wrench'd (but) into the misprision of it; Or but any thing which might bear
the least shadow or Reflection of dishonor or damage to the great Person,
Dignity or Interest of his Royal Master.

But when now after all this, Nothing is squeezed out that can (though but)
colourably charge him; How do they fret and vex, and are ready to Indict even
his Care and his Caution? And are vexed that they want Eyes to penetrate into
the very Recesses of his Soul. For it may be, There, might Sculk some
Traiterous and Disloyal Thought, which gladly would they tear out from his
Heart, and produce in Evidence against him. But if, even That be White and
Innocent too, they again wax Mad, and Curse his very Lovalty and Truth, and
could wish that his Snowy Innocence would take a Crimson Dye, But find nothing
to charge him with.
and be (though but Superficially) Criminal. They sought occasion but could
find none, for as much as he was faithful -- Neither was there any Error or
Fault found in him, Chap. 6.4.

Prying Inquisition is the Jackall to Malice, which fetches in the Stores it
feeds on; And if it chance to light on a full Prey, how greatly does it
gratify the Beast it is Master; but if it make but a lean Hunt, what a Deal of
groaning and grumbling Discontent is there? What a plague is it to envy
Innocence, and to make another Health Ones own Disease? Is thine Eye Evil
because mine is Good?

And it is madness to forget, Note.
into how many Snares and fatal Dangers the loose and unguarded Life betrays
Men in the World, when the greatest Circumspection and most accurate Vigilance,
shall not secure the Wary and Provident Daniel from the Gripes of his malicious
and conspiring Enemies.

Yet for ever be it Remarqu'd,
to the Honor of these eager Conspirators, That the height of this Feavourish
Rage did not distemper them into the Distraction of perjurious Revenges, nor
the Detestable Contrivances of Subornation against him they hate. They will not
Damn Souls to destroy Bodies. Their very Heathen Consciences boggled at that
Hellish practice. -- It Is enough for Rome and Hell to boast such impious
Customs, and produce such frightful Monsters, where they are dispensed with and
encouraged with due rewards, (unless perhaps they have of late Landed among us,
in hopes to serve a Great Turn, but in Vain,) and O God may these Vermin
return again to their own home, and no longer infest our Air with their
infectious Breath.

And now very despair make these Plotters Witty, they alter the Measures of
their Counsels. They alter Counsels,
And since nothing can be discovered Defective in his Allegiance to his Prince,
they will weave a Net that shall ensnare him in the exactness of his Obedience
to his God. His very Devotions shall be twisted into a Cord that shall strangle
him. And if he dare pay service to his Maker, And Plot against Religion.
even That shall be High Treason against his King. And (to save them the
Labor) he shall Pray himself into the Grave. For, said these men, we shall
find no occasion against this Daniel, except we find it against him concerning
the Law of his God, verse 5.

But I would wish no greater Judgment upon Plotters than to find them bending
their Wits against Heaven, which is ever engaged to destroy Them, for its own
Security and Honor. Nor can an Arrow be shot against Piety without hitting God
himself directly in the Face. Since all that is in the World is but his
Reflection upon the Soul, and He is as much in one Beam or Ray of his Holiness
that shines in the Creature below, is in the whole Sun of it that makes Glory
above. The Malice that wounds a Saint, would destroy the Deity if it could.

How do I see them Chuckle, Which, they are sure will take.
and bless their Wits in this New Contrivance. A Plot so exquisitely woven,
that there is no room for so much as the least fear or Jealousy of its
Miscarriage and failure. They question not the success in the least. He must
turn Atheist to prevent the danger; and forsake his God, or his Life.

Projecting Heads may plod together, and jumble out a Decree of Death. Yet to
as little Reputation or Issue as a Club of Physicians that Vote that Disease to
be Mortal, which Heaven cures by a Figg. Take Counsel together, and it shall
come to naught. Speak the word and it shall not stand, for God is with us, Isa.
8.10.

The Decree is universally agreed on by the Peers. They bar Prayer by Decree.
And the Monrach addressed for his Royal Assent. They Enact him a God (by Law)
upon Earth, and make it Death to acknowledge another in Heaven. They put a
Trouble upon him, to receive all the Addresses of Men, and Create Thirty
Holy Days for all his fellow- Deities to rest in; Whosoever shall ask a
Petition of any God or Man for Thirty Days, save of thee, O King, etc. verse. 7.

Let him dye, for me, that withholds the just Tributes of Honor due unto
Caesar, ( as the Visible Idea of the Invisible God, and his Great Lieutenant
upon Earth:) But whoever shall idly presume to invest an Earthly Majesty with
Worship proper only to the King of Heaven, is so far from being Caesar's
Friend, that he betrays his Lord to Herod 's Fate, and shouts him into his
Grave. Dominum denm nostrum Papam. Extr. Johan. 22. Tit. 14. c. 4.
Thus his Blasphemous Parasites have Deified (their Lord God) the Pope into
infinite scorn and contempt.

Darius consults not his Cabal to unriddle this Flattery in his Nobles, Which
Darius too ha stily Signs.
much less does he apprehend any treacherous Design in the bottom, but is
willing to interpret it pure Loyalty, and a Politic advance of his Glory, and
greater security in his Empire, now at his first approaches unto it; and
therefore easily inclines to the proffered Honor; and (since they will have it
so) is content to justle out his Maker from his Throne for a Month. Therefore
God punished his rash and unadvised Folly and Pride, whose hand Signs the
Decree which afterward makes his Soul to Ache, and because he did not sleep
on it, a-non cannot; and endangered the breaking his Heart, as well as his sleep.

Undigested Counsels issue from us with as little benefit or comfort to our
lives, Note.
as crude and unconcocted Meats from our Stomachs, which because too greedily
taken in and swallowed, are the more speedily cast up again, leaving us empty
and dissatified, if not very sick and diseased. Whereas timely deliberation
hatches our Conceptions into life and perfection; and yields us the Honor as
well the Interest of our Patience. It Is an unpardonable Crime in a Politician,
to cry afterward, Vtinam non fecissem, Would I had not done it; and he was no
Fool who demurred, with a Cras tibi Respondebo, To morrow I will give you an
Answer.

The Sagacious Daniel quickly penetrates through this shallow Design. Daniel
discovers the Plot.
He easily sees the Warrant for his own Execution written on the backside of
this plausible Decree, yet will not prevent it. His Great Soul bids defiance to
it, and them that framed it. He scorns to live when he cannot serve his God,
yet will serve him; though he die for it. He will not neglect his Duty for
Thirty Days together, no not to save his Blood. But resolves rather to pass
into Immortality to serve him there.

In vain (says Solomon) is the Net spread in the sight of any Bird, Note.
(for then he will fly from it) but here is One that discovers the Snare, yet
has courage enough to fly into it. Nor is it worth living where we cannot enjoy
the true ends of Life, and when Death it self is but an opening into the joyful
Liberties of Eternity.

The King having passed the Law -- The Trepanners begin to sneak about the Lord
Presidents Lodgings. Malice degenerates them into Evesdroppers, they creep up
and down under his very Windows. If the Casement chance to fly open, the
project thrives, their hopes swell, and the Blood capers in their Veins. Yet
scorns to dissemble his Religion.
And he (brave Spirit) opens it on purpose, to let them see and know that he
dreaded not their impious Law, nor would slack an Ace of his Daily Zeal and
Devotion to his God; and this he did, When he knew, that the Writing was
signed, v. 10. 'Twas below his Great Person and Spirit to deny or dissemble his
Religion. Faith and Love makes him trusty to it, against all Conspiracies of
Men or Devils.

And what know we, Some are set to watch him.
but some so were impudent as to steal up Stairs and peep through the very
Keyhole to discover (but) the first Motion toward a Genuflection. But when
those Sacred joints incline to bend to the resolved Worship, how* greedily do
they suck in the very first Spiration, and preparatory Sighs? they draw in that
Incense which Perfumes the Chamber, but (they resolve) shall Poison the Priest;
They hearken not for Zeal, but Itching, they lift not up Hands but Ears, and
tho they hear him Confess so tenderly, as Heaven it self is Melted with his
Pathetick Expressions, yet they Congeal and are Petrified.

But (brave Belteshazzar!) He is acted by Contests of
how little do we know what various Passions agitate thy Sacred Breast at this
time? what contests between Nature and Grace, Flesh and Spirit? Or were thou
all Soul, and transported beyond the Cares and remembrance of thy Mortal and
Suffering part, that I hear thee break into such Raptures as these?

What! and must I forsake my God now, or not Live? 1 Spirits
and forsake him too upon such unhappy Terms as these, to gratify the Wishes
of these Malicious Confederating Heathens? Is Devotion become fatal, and must
Prayer it self Kill? Cannot I go to my God, but the next Step must be to the
Grave? It Is worse than Death to live but one Day without him who is the Life of
my Soul; how then shall I live Thirty? Must I wear these Fetters upon mine
Affections and Lips, which these Men's Envy and Cunning have clapped on me, with
design to Enslave me for ever? Rather let the Beasts tear open a Passage for
this Captive within me to pass into the Liberties of Everlastingness, than thus
to be Cag'd up in so insufferable a Vassalage! Do they think to immure up my
Soul? Let them rend me from the Court of Darius, my Heaven is not there, as is
theirs; My Body is the Kings to his Pleasure and Service, but my Soul is Gods
unto his. I Will venture an Ingorgement into the Bowels of the Lions, e're they
shall glory over mine Apostasy from my Religion and my God.

But hold! 2 Flesh.
whither does this Noble but Temerarious Zeal Transport thee, Daniel? Is this
thy Kindness to thy dearest Self? and have thou no Regard to the Glories and
Sweets of Life? Is that Holy Fire, that Devours its own Altar? and Call thou
that Zeal that hurls thee into nothing, and tempts thee to an Annihilation? Is
Death so desirable? and such a Death as will gratify thine Enemies too? Whose
Malice will Feast it self on thy Ruins, with greater Luxury than the Lions
Banquet on thy Flesh? What is this but to Execute the Plot against thine own
Life, which they cannot perfect without thee? and will thy God thank thee for
Destroying thy Self, and throwing away thy Life for a Nicety, the Ceremony and
Carcass of Devotion, which his Grace is so ready to dispense with, and for so
little a time as a Month too? Is he not the Father of Spirits, and regards more
the Oratory of a Sigh than all the luscious Expressions of the Lips?
Understands he not the Language of the Soul, and hearkens to the very desires
of the Humble? May thou not Offer up the purer Sacrifice from the Secret
Altar of a Flaming Heart, and be safe? What an advantage have thou to baffle
the Conspiracy by a Mental Devotion, and to Countermine the Villainies of their
Cursed Policy by locking up thy Soul in its self?

Ah no! Spirit prevails.
The brave Votary scorns to compound with his God for his Life, nor will save
himself by so much as Latching the Door of his Lips; He will not Stifle the
Vent of his Soul, tho it self were sure to fly through it: He will glorify God
with his Speech, tho he speak himself into Air; He will not Disfigure the Body
of his Duty, to save his own from Mangling; and would rather the Lions should
open their Mouths to Swallow him, than he by shutting up his, to Imprison his
Zeal and Affections. He resolves that his Mouth shall Confess unto God (and the
World) that his Heart believes unto Salvation; and (while his Enemies were
Watching) Imagine this devout Supplicant thus pouring out his Soul unto God.

The PRAYER.
GOD of my Soul and of my Being, the Glorious Jehovah that Inhabitest
inaccessible Light and Everlastingness, and humblest thy Self to behold the
things that are in Heaven and Earth -- Hear and have Mercy. Thou art God alone,
and besides thee there is none else: What is this Darius, whom these Men have
blasphemously Exalted to Rob thee of thy Glory and Worship, and made a God of
him that cannot help, that cannot Save himself or others -- O Pardon their Sin.
And this they have done with design to Rob me too, of this Glorious Liberty of
Access to thee my God, who art the very Life of my Soul, and whose loving
Kindness is better than Life, and without whom Life is none at all. They would
Shut me from thy Presence, but do not thou; Open the Door of thy Grace and my
Soul, that I may fly unto thee; And tho [these] these mine Enemies lie in wait
for my Blood; Yet let me Praise thee with joyful Lips, and Serve thee without
Fear. What, though they have Decreed to take away my Life, are not my Times in
thy hand? and without thee shall not fall an hair from my Head. O give me a
Faith beyond my Fear, and a Courage beyond their Malice, that I may Dye rather
than disown thee; and by Devoting my Self a Sacrifice to thy Glory, may let all
the World know that thou Lord, art the only God that Savest the Souls of thy
Servants who put their trust in thee. Redeem thy Church and People -- But here
a Noise Interrupts him: They find him Praying. v. 11.
The Confederates cry out amain, Treason, Treason, A Traitor against our King
and his Law, away with him to the Lions, Darius himself cannot Save him.

(These, we may suppose, were the Evidence ready to Swear against him, who
could safely take their Oaths (without fear of Perjury) that they heard him
making his Petitions to the God of Heaven, and so breaking the Decree.)

And now has the Plot taken effect, The Plot takes.
the Innocent man falls by the Councils of the Wicked; Righteous art thou O
Lord, yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments; Wherefore does the way of the
wicked Prosper? wherefore are they happy that deal very Treacherously? Jer.
12.1. So foolish was I and Ignorant -- Surely thou did set them in slippery
places, thou Castest them down into Destruction; how are they brought into
Desolation as in a moment, they are utterly Consumed with Terrors, Psalm.
73.18, 19, 22.

Now may you see them troop together with Joy and speed to the Court, They go
to Court
where they subtly repeat the Contents of the Law to the King, with a Cursed
Policy of designing to oblige him to a Sacred and Inviolable observance of his
own Edict, e're ever they discover the Transgressor, who (they knew) was so
dear to him, that (for his Sake) he might have strained his Prerogative unto
the length of a Pardon, (if possible.) But having once obliged him by the
honor of his Royal word to confirm the Decree, then they presume to produce
the Indictment, and thus Address:

O King Live for Ever.
THat Daniel who pretends so much Love and Loyalty to thy Royal Person, And
Indict him.
so much Veneration and respect to all thy Laws, He, He is the first Rebel.
Ungrateful man that he is, whom of a Captive of the Children of Judah thou have
loaded with such Honors, whose very weight has unfortunately caused him to
Stagger in his Loyalty; and it is visible (Dread Sir) that the Sublimity of his
State has giddied him into Fanaticism too; he Trants after other Gods, as if
thou O King were not God enough for him, who have been so kind and Royal to
him. Never has the Largess of Princely Bounty so unluckily miscarried by
Ingratitude and Treachery, which dares be so Insolent to give so pernicious an
Example of first Violating that Law, which he should have valued infinitely
dearer than his Life, and rather than have prostituted it to vulgar Contempt,
should have Sacrificed the warmest Blood of his Heart to its Glory.

WE Pray therefore that he may (Suffer the Pains and Penalties of the
Irrevocable Decree He has so Profanely Despised, may receive the just
Recompense of his haughty Rebellion and Pride) -- Be thrown to the Lions.

Now is the King almost Dead with Sorrow, The King repents Signing the Decree.
the fatal News more wounds his Royal Heart than the Prisoners; he has not a
better Subject in the Kingdom, who must now be rent from his Bosom by a
Stratagem; the malicious Imputations of Disloyalty and Rebellion (he well knew)
were but the Proofs of his Innocence and their Malice; This is so far from
being a Service to his Majesty, as it is his Torment. Have they Decreed him a
God to this end, to make him a miserable Prince? The King himself Suffers in
the Plot, and is Persecuted in the Captive; basely Betrayed to Sign the Decree,
which Seals his own Vexation and Trouble: It Is they, and not Daniel, were
guilty of the Treason against his Royal Tranquillity and Peace.

Ill-condition'd Men! Is this your Loyalty to your King? must the Object of
your Princes Favor become presently the Subject of your Hate? must he not
live, because the King Loves and has Honored him? Then is Royal Affection
become miserably Ominous, its Embraces are avoided as a Disease, the Eye of its
Favor become Mortal as a Basilisk's.

Unhappy Daniel! to be so Loved and so Hated! so passionately Loved by the
King, so universally Malign'd by his Nobles. Here Is not one of all the Peers
has a pity for thee, The Princes Address for Execution. But the King Demurrs.
they jointly Address for thy speedy Execution; (Nemine Contradicente.) The
King singly demurrs, and while he does so, they impatiently Address a second
time, (and had not so prosperously succeeded hitherto, now to suffer their Plot
to Perish in Embryo.) Malice makes them forget good Manners, they incroach on
Majesty, grow Rude and Uncourtly: Know, O King, that the Law of the Medes and
Persians is, that no Decree nor Statute which the King Establishes may be
changed, v. 15. q. d. We have thee now at a Bay, this Rebel may not be
Pardoned, the Laws of thy Kingdom will not bear it, tho thou would;
therefore in vain do thou labor to deliver him, for Dye he must and shall.

Fettered Majesty! that can not deliver thy Darling from the Lions! that
can not Pardon him nor thy Self for Betraying him to his Enemies! Now reap
(Darius) the disquiet Fruits of thine own unadvisedness and haste! it is Death
to thee to Suffer him to die, yet he must; here dies a Prisoner without whom
the King himself lives not, yet must dye.

God is bound up by his Decrees, At length delivers him up.
and so is this Monarch; He could (almost) himself have Suffered to save his
Favorite alive, yet must now Sacrifice him to the honor of his Laws: How
Sacred are those Obligations that manacle the hands of Sovereignty? these call
for the Offenders blood, and shall have it. Even Laws are Canibals too: Then
the King Commanded, and they brought Daniel, etc. v. 16.

But how do I see the great Darius hugging him in his Arms; whilst he beholding
him (as he fears) with his last eyes, breaths out his very Heart to him in such
dear Expressions as these?

And takes his last leave as lie fears.
DAniel, my dearest Daniel, the brightest Star that ever Illustrated a Princes
Court! the faithfullest Servant that ever blessed a Master! the very Glory and
Flower of my Kingdom and Palace, who art passing up into those more glorious
Mansions, where only dwell such Spirits as thine. Thou will no more envy the
Toys of Regality, nor need the aerie Honors of an earthly Palace; I am
distressed for thee my dearest Daniel; How willingly could I uncloath my self
from these vain Badges of Majesty to pass into Spirit with thee? were it not
that I stay behind to Sacrifice Hecatombs of thine Enemies to thy Ghost, who
shall dearly pay the recompenses of their Envy and my loss -- But stay, may not
thy God meet thee in the Den, as (I have heard) Shadrak's did him in the
Furnace; and methinks I have Faith to believe he will; and least thine Enemies
should think so too, and send in Ruffians more cruel than the Beasts to destroy
thee, My care shall obviate that danger, while I Seal thee up under the
Protection of Heaven and thy God.

How stately passes the Captive to the Den, He passes to the Den.
richly Laden with the Trophies of his Princes affections, and the Graces of
his God! He leaves nothing behind him, that he should take to Heaven with him,
but the Thoughts of Revenge; (which he therefore leaves, because there is no
room for them there.) Nay he could have even wished their Company with him,
whose causeless Malice had too subtly contrived his (designed) dispatch from
the World:

The Innocent Victim is now (as Isaac) upon the Altar, but wants a Priest to
Sacrifice him. The Lions hurt him nor.
Is astonished at the Miracle of his own Deliverance, and wonders to find
better Friends in the Den, than at Court. A Spirit of Glory rests upon him,
which put the very Lions in a fright. They had no stomach to him, who had no
stomach against him; and though his Enemies could have eaten him up, they were
more merciful and would not. He had a Surplice of Innocence upon him which was
Lyonproof. It made him look Sacred, and struck such a Reverence and Aw, that
they rather fawn and crouch, then grin or wax surley. He stands armed with the
Shield of that Faith which wrought Miracles, (even) this of Stopping the Mouths
of Lions: Who were so Civil as not to fall out with him, against whom God and
the King had no Quarrel.

Daniel has done what he could, He has done his Duty.
and God himself expects no more. He has yielded his Life (in Testimony of his
Faith) and now he will give it him back. Because he was ready to lose it,
therefore shall he surely keep it. Let Heaven dispose of us as it please, it is
enough for us to resign our selves and be willing.

While Daniel is in Danger, No Feasting at Court.
there is no Feasting at Court, the King himself Fasts for him, that the Beasts
may not Feast upon him. Surfeits and Mirth speak little Sympathy with the
Churches Sorrows. 'Twas unnaturally done once of the Patriarch's to sit them
down to Eat and to Drink, while their poor Brother was Fasting in the Pit, Genesis
37.24, 25. A piece of Cruelty acted over again by their obdurate and ungracious
Posterity: Who fed on the Lambs of the Flock and the fat Calves of the Stall,
and Drank their Wine in Bowls, but were not grieved for the Affliction of
Joseph, Amos 6.5, 6.

Nor could Music be in season, Nor Music.
when the King himself was out of tune. The Air of a Viol could not drive out
of his mind the sad scrieches of his Friend, while the Beasts (as he feared)
were champing him in their Teeth. Yet was there a brave Consort in the Den: For
the Snorings of the sleeping Lions kept so Even an Accent, that Daniel was
ready to dance for Joy.

Yet could not the King close his Eyes, The King cannot sleep.
while he is jealous his Favorite has none to close. He had slept so soundly
hitherto, while this careful Superintendent had a Vigilant Eye over all his
Affairs, that he might well awake (one Night) to condole his loss, and learn
himself to watch, when now his Watchman (for ought he knew) might be fallen
asleep in Death.

Yet is Daniel awake too, and while the Lions Couch, he gently lies by in
peace, and is here become the Guard of his (intended) Executioners. God had
shut their Eyes as well as their Mouths, and while theirs were closed down in
Rest, his were lifted up in Faith and Prayer, that They might sleep on
securely, who might have chanced else to have made a Meal upon him at Midnight.

No sooner had the Night began to draw it is Curtains, And Rises early.
but Darius draws his. Neither Bed nor Palace can hold him while Daniel was
missing. The first Light leads him to pay his visit to him either Dead or
Alive; He is resolved to have an end of his Fears or his Hopes; (Delays in
great Expectations are Killing, it is perfect Hell that puts off for ever.) He
hastens his Body thither to meet his Heart, which he had left locked up with
Daniel in the Den all the night. Then the King arose very early in the Morning,
and went in have to the Den, etc.

How nimbly do I see his Royal Feet pace the Streets, while yet his affections
Lacquey before him, And hasts to the Den.
and are impatient after the first Tidings? See, how love fascinates Majesty
into a forgetfulness of its Grandeur. He values not the Complements of State,
so he find Daniel alive it is Great enough.

Why may not Darius measure Faith with Abraham, who against hope believed in
hope too? And being not weak in faith, considered not the natural fierceness of
these voracious Beasts, nor the biting rage of their hungry Bellies, nor the
Luscious sweetness of Daniel's Blood; but against all these, expected life to
start out from the very Womb of Death? For, When he came to the Den, And cries
lamentably to Daniel.
he cried with a Lamentable voice unto Daniel, etc. v. 20.

Object. But does not his kindness run him into folly here, and Daniel into
hazard; since by so loud an Exclamation at his coming to the Den, he might
chance to rouse up the sleepy Lions to an early execution, which all the Night
long they had fasted from, with purpose to reserve him for a Breakfast in the
Morning, and now comes the King and halloo's them to it?

Answ. Brutes (like some Men as bad) consult not the Morrow, but love to make
sure of the present Prey. Sense knows no Life of Faith, and seldom trusts out
of hand; grapples at every thing coming in its way, and so its Panch be
presently stuffed, has confidence enough to trust till hereafter. -- The King
knew that if he were yet alive, 'twas Providence, not Project, that kept him so.

He cried with a lamentable Voice unto Daniel, etc. What surer Indication
could thou have given thy Daniel of the fixed unalterableness of thy Princely
Affections to him, An assurance of his Love.
even beyond the Grave? While thus thou sendest thy very Soul to him (wrapped up
in a Sigh) that pierces through the very Stone which yet seperates thee from
him, and safely arrives into his joyful Ears? For now assuredly he was not dead
at Court, who was still alive in the Prison. To me (Darius) art Thou a fair
Precedent of entire and absolute Freindship, and the Illustrious Copy of him,
who will never leave, nor forsake. And I thank thee (O King) for minding me of
my Savior, who (methinks) with the same Accent, is ever crying unto me in the
midst of my dangers, Is Joseph yet alive?

How good is God, Note.
to those that trust him! Daniel has the Heart of his Prince as sure as God
has his own. Wolseys heavy Groan upbraided his Masters Inconstancy to him in
his Age, but was (confessedly) grounded on his own to God. There is all Gain in
Godliness, (that universal Trader,) which has a Patent from Heaven, to
Traffic for it self in the very Bosom of Kings, which Themselves cannot
prevent though they would.

For what an Honor was this to the Imprisoned Daniel, to have Majesty waiting
on him at the Door? The King had sent no less Person than Himself, to enquire
of his Welfare, and to return the Lions his thanks for their Civility that
night to his Friend. And now may you hear him thus Passionately Crying

O Daniel! Servant of the Living God, is thy God able to deliver thee, etc?
Daniel had entered the Den inthe Faith of Gods Word and the Kings Affidavit, Thy
God will deliver thee, v. 16. and does he now abate of his Confidence? Is he
able? Great dangers try the Mettle of our Faith, and swelling Fears sink our
Courage: He is more than a Peter that can tread the Waters and not cry out;
there is a Fear hangs on our very Faith. The King might averr that God would
(for he had heard that he had, in as great dangers) yet might he doubt, lest he
now had not: Historical Faith made him Promise, but Passionate Love made him
fear and be jealous.

But Daniel is yet alive, The King finds Daniel alive.
and Blesses God and the King: He imployes his Breath to the ends it was given
him; O King Live for ever! Thy Servant (yet Alive) darts up that Sacred Option
from his very Soul for thee: It Is Stinking Breath that Curses any, but
Infectious it is that Curses the King. Tho the Tongue be a Fire, it is Insolence
in it to make havoc of the Palace.

From Prayer the Prophet proceeds to Preaching, and (the Chapel not yet open)
Darius is content to be his Auditor in the Porch: He divides his Sermon into
two parts, and treats, First, Of Gods goodness to him in shutting the Lions
Mouths, (or else his own had not been open this Morning:) Who pleads his
Innocence and Loyalty.
Secondly, His own Innocence, where he justifies his most entire Duty and
Veneration both to God and the King; (and he handles these both together,
because they are inseparable.) The Life of the Preacher was the visible proof
of the whole Sermon. The King never heard one that better pleased him, and the
very Lions themselves seem to understand it, while they stand Mute and Demure,
and are more Mannerly than to disturb him; nay, they are his very Converts, and
the proof of his Ministry, who from his first coming among them, by the
Reverence of his Person (his very Silence) had transformed them from their
natural Ferity, into a wonderful Humanity! How much more his Eloquence!

And Experience now makes him confident of their Love and his own Safety. And
therefore is fearless.
Deliverances (like some Friends) are Security each for the other, and the more
the stronger still, especially where Faith stands Principal, and a good Life as
Witness. David Slings the Bear and the Lion with the Stone that Stunned the
Philistine; and the Israelites on the Shore, stood as Sureties to the rest in
the midst of the Channel. The same Faith that hung the Padlock on the Mouths of
these Lions over night, was strong enough to keep it on till such time as it
Self pleased to unlock it next day, to make room for the Conspirators.

The Sermon (now finished) has the Effects of Thunder, The Den is opened, and
Daniel delivered.
the Seals are rent away, and the Stony Door of the Chapel flies open, the
Preacher is hurled (he hardly knows how) into the Royal Presence, where he
finds the King Heaven-strucken too; an Ecstasy of Joy had Ravished away his
Senses, and he talks (like a Fanatic indeed) Distractedly; Ah Daniel, art thou
indeed my very Daniel? May mine Heart believe what mine Eyes see? Then stands
like a Statue: (his rolling eye the only Index of his Life:) Is astonished and
admires what he cannot express; at length recovering himself into Majesty
again, he thunders out his dreadful Mandates, And his Enemies cast in.
and orders the Execution of his own and the Lord Presidents Enemies.

This is a Day of Memorable Deliverance, and the King dubs it into a Festival;
the Commons are doubled at Court, but the first Course shall be served up to
the Lions: Good reason they who so Superstitiously Fasted all the night, should
now Feast the next day: Therefore the King orders them Messes of all sorts and
Sexes, Young and Old. They stay not laying the cloth, (and Daniel had given
thanks before,) but they hastily fall too; nay, they meet the Waiters in the
Entry, and catch away their Meat e're it come to the Table, and make no Bones
of these Trepanners; (the Crackling of whose Joints make Music, while they are
Scranch'd by the Teeth of the Beasts,) and all together they Tip off the King's
Health and Daniel's in the very Heart Blood of their Enemies, they leave not a
drop behind; and should any chance to drivel down their Beards, they lick them
clean again, make a clear Riddance and quick dispatch. But if his Majesty has
any more such Presents to make them, they have reserved a Corner of their
Stomachs, and would be glad of another Draught next day.

'Twas but natural that the Flesh of these Monsters should be Incorporate into
the Bodies of these bloody Beasts, whose very Souls were degenerated into their
Nature before; neither needed there the C^remony of Process and Trial, where
God himself had Sat as Judge, and Condemned them by a Miracle.

So let all thine Enemies [and thy Peoples] Perish, O Lord!

It Is the first Lesson of Court-Policy, to secure it self. Where a Conspiracy
had the Impudence to dare at the first Minister of State, 'twas time for
Majesty to Consult its own Safety; those who would adventure to its Bosom, will
next tear out its very Heart if they can.

Darius is Decreeing again, A Decree of Honor to God.
but not against Heaven: He is Sick of his Godship, the Robe of Divine Honor
sat too uneasy upon him: Besides, its sparkling Brightness struck him Blind,
that he could not see through the Treacheries of Designing Men; He resolves
therefore to resign it up to him that had a better Title to it than he. ('It Was
Happiness enough for himself to enjoy his Daniel below.) And now all Nations,
People and Languages have free Liberty of Conscience to own the God of Heaven:
They should not need fear to Pray to that God that had been so kind to him to
spare his Daniels Life: Yea, (upon their Allegiance) he Commands them to fear
before him; He is a God working Wonders, they might chance need his Deliverance
too. Thus Daniel stands a Figure of Christ, whose Imprisonment and Redemption
(as Jesus his Death and Resurrection) is the means of Salvation to the World.

APPLICATION.
NOW folding up Daniel's Robe, let us not be ashamed to present him to you in
his naked Vest, and give you a short Revise, (as it were in little) both in the
Character of his Piety; The Cause of his Sufferings; The Quality of his
Enemies; And the End of all.

1. He was Heavens visible Representative upon Earth; a Beam of the Divine
Nature; the Church in Epitome; a mighty Man of Prayer; One who would give
Heaven no rest, and therefore the better beloved; One that kept up the
Reputation of Piety, and its sinking Interest in the World; One who was Valiant
for God and Truth upon Earth; that valued his Soul and Salvation above all the
concerns of Life; who spent much ^ime in his Closet, conferring with God and
his He^^^ notwithstanding the Noise and Avocations of a perplexing World; One
whose Eye was directly fixed upon God, but an utter Enemy to all the Selfish,
Hypocritical, Squint-eyed Designs of Men; One in whose Thoughts God was always
uppermost, and Scorned to let his Maker stand by, while he Embraced an (...):
When but a Youth, he was even so Wonderfully Temperate, that he fasted himself
into Beauty, and would rather have eaten nothing than have Swallowed down Sin.
When raised to Degrees of Preferment and Honor, the Air of a Title did but
blow him nearer to Heaven, and was as humble as Jonah when he Rode Leviathan
toward Nineve. The Cringes of his Flatterers made him Bow the more humbly to
God: and no wonder, while he Harbors so lowly Apprehensions of Honors vanity
and Nothingness. Is so far from Impaling himself within the Grandeurs of State,
that he is Proud only of a Free Condescension, and Opens himself to universal
Service: But when his Prince Commands him to Court, he is (there) the whole
Cabal himself; and that mighty Empire stands steady on the safe Basis of his
Councils, which made the Kingdom have an Ague all the time he was in the Den;
and while he Improves his profound Parts for the King, has yet Policy enough to
be wise for his Soul. In short, an excellent Pattern and glorious Exemplar of
all Piety and Policy to those great Ones of his Station.

2. Admire not then that he is sent to the Prison, and you find him among the
Lions; is maliciously Conspired against, as the Burden and Plague of the
Generation he Lived in. He that will be so Impudent as to Court Heaven more
heartily than others, (when Righteousness and Goodness is out of Fashion) shall
not need Complain of too much Ease in the World. And this Great Man was
resolved to be Devout, on purpose to dare their Malice, tho sure to be thrust
out of (not Commission only, but) Life. Let them Plot their Hearts out, (as
they did) his Resolutions were Set for Heaven: He kept God in his Eye, whose
Faith scattered his Carnal Fears as the Clouds fly before the Sun, or his
Enemies before the Lions; He knew all the Motions of the Inferior World, to be
guided by that Great Agent, whose very Faithful Servant he was. Besides, the
King was his Friend, whose Favor and Protection he worthily Merited, does
therefore heartily trust to both, and is no Loser by his Considence.

3. For his Enemies, who were they, but the Cursed Enemies of God? The Heathen
that knew him not, and the Families that Call not on his Name? Jer. 10.25. Men
of the World, whose Portion was in this Life, and were without God, and without
Hope for the next? Men that had no Prospect beyond the Grave, and who Hated the
poor Remains of Piety that still survive the Fall, and upbraided all their
Actions. Who because themselves never Kneeled, (but to an Idol) Fret that
another should to the True God they knew not. No wonder then, their Consults
took no faster Hold together, than the Extenterated Bowels of the Spider so
weakly pinned to the Wall: God Swept them away with the easy Hand of his
Providence, but afterward twisted them into a Cable that hales them into the
Bowels of the Beasts, where I am very willing to leave them. (Unless perhaps
Nature having cast them out at the back Door, they are become as Dung to the
Earth.)

O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that
rewards thee, as thou have served us.

Psalm. 137.8.
FINIS.

