NAZIANZENI QUERELA ET VOTUM JUSTUM. The Fundamentals of the HIERARCHY examined
and disproved:

Wherein the choicest Arguments and Defenses of the most applauded and latest
Hierarchick or Prelatick Writers, A. M. D. D. the Author of An Enquiry into the
New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in Scotland, the Author
of the Fundamental Charter of Presbytry examined and disproved, and many others
are sincerely expended, the Plea they bring from Ignatius's Epistles more
narrowly discussed, many things much enlightening this Controversy, either not
at all, or not so fully hitherto unfolded, are, from ancient Church-Writers,
and other unsuspected Authors, advanced.

By William Jameson.

(...).

Would to God there were no Prelacy, no Prerogative of Place, no Tyrannical
Privileges, that by Virtue alone we might be discerned. Now this Right and
Left Hand, and middle Rank, these higher and lower Dignities, and this Statelike
Precedence, have caused many fruitless Conflicts and Bruises, have cast many
into the Pit, and carried away Multitudes to the place of the Goats.

Gregorius Nazianzenus Orat. 28.

GLASGOW, Printed by Robert Sanders, for the Author. Anno DOM. 1697.

The Introduction to all the sincere Lovers of the Christian, truly Catholic,
Protestant Principles; and the Haters of Romish Dross and Innovations, but
Chiefly to these of the Church of SCOTLAND.
I Can truly say I am so far from loving a Salamandra's Life, the line of
Contention, or Controversy for Controversie's sake, as to pray earnestly that
all our intestine Heats and Strugglings may resolve into that happy and lawful
Striving, how each of us may best please him that has called us unto Holiness
and Peace, and that there be no Provocation, save unto Love and to good Works.
My main End is only to Dis-abuse my Protestant Brethren mislead by some who are
so uncharitable as to Vn-church and Damn the greater and better part of the
Reformed, because they embrace not as Divine that which, at best, is but of
Humane Device, and who thus conspire with the mortal Enemies of all
Protestants, against these of 'em whom the common and unsatiable Adversaries
most implacably hate: for, above all others, the Presbyterian Puritans (as they
speak) are acknowledged to be most irreconcilable to the Roman Catholic
Doctrine, and on this account, the prime Object of their Malice. This is
obvious in the Writings of the Romanists; but chiefly in these of the Jesuits;
witness (to name no more) Petavius in his books of the Hierarchy and Appendix
thereto, and another Papist the Author of Presbytries Trial, prime Armories
whence our present Adversaries fetch most of their weapons. The Papists in
this, as in many things else, are followed by the Quakers, as is evident from
most of their Pamphlets, but more especially from a pretended Answer to a part
of a Book, wherein I gave some further Discoveries than had been already made
of the Impieties and Self-contradictions of that Sect. This Answer they (for I
do not think that it belongs all to one Parent) name The Plowman rebuking the
Priest: of which I can say, with with the Prophet Jeremiah, that I have
suffered Rebuke for my God's sake; and, with Job, can take mine Adversaries
Book on my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown to me, having received all along
thro't, in stead of a Confutation, a most strong Confirmation of the Truth of
the Doctrine I propugn'd, and much more ground to abhor the Impieties of
Quakerism, and to bless God who has brought to pass that their very Attempts
to palliat their Abominations, proved a further Detection thereof. Read, pray,
earnestly, and compare it with mine, and you shall find them most frequently
yealding the whole Controversy, as also overskipping the marrow of what I had
adduc'd, and yet anon triumphing as if they had never, in the least, been
guilty of such dealling; you shall find that the most pardonable pieces of
their Book are wild Gibberies, extravagant Roveries, mere Impertinencies,
palpable Perversions, loud Lies, Heresies, Blasphemies, and, in a ward, a lump
of stuff so Atheistical, that it proclaims the Authors neither to fear God,
nor regard man, never to have consulted Conscience, nor to have remembered of
future Judgment, or of the account they must give at the tremenduous Tribunal
of God. Yet all this is but what I expected, and is not unworthy of these, who,
with Satan's sworn Slaves, renounce their Holy Baptism, and, therewith,
whatsoever is constitutive of a Christian. For a further Manifestation whereof,
hear the Quakers themselves, who are now split into Factions; to wit, into
Keithians, after George Keith a prime Pillar of Quakerism; and Foxonians, as
they are called: These reckon the Keithian Quakers for lost, and call G. K.
Judgment given forth etc. Page 12.
Brat of Babylon, Apostate, worse than profane, a Liar, Devil, one that always
endeavored to keep down the Power of Truth, gone into a spirit of Enmity,
foaming out his own shame, without the Fear of God before his Eyes, a Preacher
of two Christ's etc. Again G. K. Ibid.
who is herein approved by his Keithian Quakers, calls them Fools, ignorant
Heathens, Infidels, Liars, Heretics, rotten Ranters, persecuting Quakers The
Trial of Peter Boss etc. Page 6.
; And informs us Plea for the Innocent. Page 12.
that no such damnable Heresies etc, are tolerated in any Christian Society as
are among many called Quakers. For Example that Page 11.
they deny the Day of Judgment and any Resurrection, but what they have
already attained; that they make the Light sufficient without any thing else
excluding the Man Christ Jesus, and his Obedience, Death and Resurrection,
Ascension, and Mediation for us in Heaven. I am grieved (writes J. Humphrey's
More Divisions amongst the Quakers Page 15.
to hear some say they expect to be justified by that Blood which was shed at
Jerusalem. Wherein, as G. K. shows, he is patronized by not a few. Another great
Zelot among the Quakers said, and affirmed boldly (says G. K. Judgment given
forth etc. Page 17. and Append. to the History of the Quakers. Page 16.
that he expected not to be saved by that which di'd at Jerusalem, to wit the
Man Christ. And again G. K. Ibid. page 12.
calls them Pelagians and Deists. And ibid. page 17.
To many of the Quakers (says G. K.) all are Christians [to wit, Jews,
Mahumetans, Painims] in whom any good seed of Religion appears, and which
they say is from Christ, yea is Christ himself. And ibid. page 20.
Many, yea the most, or rather almost all the Ministers among the Quakers (
very few excepted) do affirm, that this inward Light is sufficient to bring
forth the new Birth, and to give eternal Salvation, without any thing, without
us, that is, without the man Christ that was outwardly born, and crucified and
rose again, whom some of their Ministers in my hearing, has called an outward
thing, a shell, a husk, that does little or nothing profit us, and the Faith of
which does nothing profit us. And William Penn (continues G. K.) in that
Meeting at Ratcliff, where he falfly called me an Apostate, did publicly
proclaim after this manner: Friends, said he, I see no great need of preaching,
the Faith of Christ's Death and Sufferings, for all England and all Christendom
has that Faith, and it does not profit them. But the Faith which profits Men
is the Faith of Christ within, and that Friends preach. Let now (says G. K.)
the Author judge, or any other intelligent Person (professing Christianity)
whether William Penn has not sufficiently by these words proved himself an
Apostate from the Christian Faith.

Thus you have a taste (for it is no more, compared with what I could produce)
of Quakerism from the Quakers themselves. Surely most admirable and adorable is
divine Providence in so prodigiously strange, and clear a Detection of these
infernal Blasphemies and Abominations, from the very Mouths of the chief Actors
themselves; to the end, doubtless, that all may hear and fear, tremble and
quake indeed to meddle, in the least, with these Quakers, least God (as is the
Lot of these Wretches) by giving them up to so strange Delusions and damnable
Lies, make their Plagues wonderful. May God mercifully grant, (as the Effect
of this Discovery) that the sound and stable Christians may regard the
Operations of his Hand, and give due Praise to him that preserves them from so
deadly an Infection; that the Weak may be confirmed in their Belief of these
Divine Verities which are revealed in the Holy Scriptures, and that these who
are caught in the Gin may yet escape, like a Bird out of the Snare of the
Fowler.

But of Quakers enough; only I must repeat that I cannot think my Plowman to
be the sole Author of the Book that bears his Name; no, I think some good part
thereof belongs to some, who own neither Name nor Profession of Quakerism. It Is
true, they hate all Protestants, and, chiefly, Presbyterians; yet, there is in
that Book something singular, its Author appears rather to have studi'd the
blackning and bespattering of Presbytry, than either the Defense or Palliation
of Quakerism: for in lieu hereof, I find, in many places, only Libells larded
with such Lies, Calumnies, and Slanders, as the more invective Romanists, and
other invective Hierarchicks used to throw at all true Protestants, but mainly
at the Puritan Presbyterians. There is, moreover, in some places, more plainly
expressed, but all along couched, yet obvious enough to the observant, a warmth
and kindness for these of the Hierarchick, or Prelatical Principles. In a word,
much of the Book breaths forth another Species or sort of Malignancy, than is
that of Quakerism, a Malignancy peculiar to the Author of Presbytries Trial,
and such professed Romanists; to Heylen and Le Strange, and such barefaced
Papaturians, much rather than to these more fallacious and spiritual
Antichristians. Neither can any sensible Man earnestly read their Book, and not
perceive so much. Strange! Cannot they not uphold their Hierarchy, except they
thus study to undermine Christianity, and join with its deadly Enemies, and
that too with such Varlets of 'em whose Brutishness and molish despicableness,
as was the good fortune of Aesop's Ass, are their only security, and set them
too low for any Man to nottice them? I Am also informed that the pretended
Author used to have most closs and frequent Converse with an Episcopal Minister
of no mean Rank. Moreover, seeing many of the Prelatists oppose the sometimes
received Sentiments, yea and common Articles of the Church of England, for
which they pretend such Veneration, by Espousing, with Papists, Quakers, and
the like Opposers of Truth, the Tenets of Pelagians, and Arminians, no great
wonder though they syncretize with such Sectaries against the Presbyterian
Calvinians (as they speak) and accordingly the Neopelagian Hierarchicks (for
there are Episcopals, surely of a better Mind, and Judgment more Orthodox)
make a third Squadron of this unsanctifi'd Army, and in Railing, Antichristian
Sophistry, and such unworthy Methods, labor to come short of neither Quakers
nor Papists. Such a black Combination would well nigh move one to say of
Presbyterians as Tertullian said of Christians, There must needs (says he) be
some good thing among Christians, seeing they were chiefly persecuted by such a
Monster as Nero. It Is a sign of your greater Glory (says Hierome Inter Epist,
Augustini 25.
to Augustine) that all the Heretics abhor you. And here I cannot but nottice
how the Author of The fundamental Charter of Presbytry etc. (having most
untruly insinuated, as if we ascribed to our first Reformers an Impeccability,
and espoused every particular Sentiment or Expression of every one of 'em, as
infallible) no less falsely gives out and earnestly studies to persuade the
World that all these our first Reformers, and especially Mr. Knox, were nothing
but a pack of treacherous bloody Rebels and most odious Men: see, to name no
other places, from page 334. to 346. and is not this sufficient Evidence that
the Author has a large measure of the Spirit of Ham the cursed Exposer of his
Father's nakedness, but he knows who will thank him, Hoc Italus velit and magno
mercetur Abaddon. The matter is, these Men are much grieved that ever we were
fre'd from Rome's Tyranny and Superstition, and so know not how to be even with
these precious Instruments of that our most happy and admirable Deliverance.
Another of their Arts is that they use boldly to pretend the Doctrine of their
Hierarchy to be most Catholic and absolutely necessary, and so Vn-church most
of the reformed Churches; and, which is no less Unchristian, they strive to
support it with such Arguments as equally serve to establish an universal
Papacy. Again, they use to English these Romish Sophisms, and yet quite
dissemble the Answers and Refutations the Reformed have given thereto, as, to
name no more, is the constant Practice of A. M. D. D. Moreover they now darr to
assert, contrary to the acknowledgement of all Men, and the Concessions of the
greatest Prelatists, that our first Reformers were of the Prelatical
Persuasion. They would possess Men with the same thoughts of the Transmarine
Reformers, and therefore, among other Means to effect it, they use to work on
the necessituousness or ambition of some foreign Protestants, as the Romanists
do on needy Greeks and other Easterns, and bribe them to publish, for the
received Doctrine of the Churches they were bred in, what is quite contrary to
their known and common Sentiments and public Confessions. I only give some
Examples of these their Arts (for who can recount them all) this is certain
that if ye ransack and unfold their Methods, you shall find none of 'em without
some noteable Cheat and fallacy at bottom. Their Hierarchy leans on three
Props, as its fundamental Supporters: The first is their wretch'd perversion of
some Scriptures, the second is their Fancy that it still obtained in the
primitive Church, the third, that 'twas believed by all Ages to be of
Apostolic Institution. These Conceits are the very Fundamentals of the
Hierarchy, which I here examine, and, as I trust, disprove, and accordingly so
Intitulat the subsequent Papers. I repeat as little as is possible of what has
been said before, and especially meet with the Hierarchys most applauded and
latest Asserters, and among these A. M. D. D. and the Author of the Fundamental
Charter etc. the far more considerale part, yea the very substance of both
which Books I examine and exartuat. I discuss moreover the Plea they bring from
Ignatius's Epistles, as also detect most of the forementioned Artifices
together with many such ungenerous Methods not hitherto so fully discovered
Hence I hope I cannot be justly accounted an Aggressor or Provocker, nor yet my
Papers superfluous: I don't notwithstanding impeach as guilty of these
Deallings all Episcopal men, for of these there have been and doubtless now
are both good men and stout Protestants, and such, I know, will never be
offended if I lay open open the Weakness and unworthy Deallings of such as
anathematize whosoever prefer the Model of the prime ptimitive
Church Government, the Apostolic Humility and Simplicity, to their Diocesan
Hierarchy, the secular Grandeur of subsequent and more degenerat Times, if I,
among many other Demonstrations hereof, bring a Cloud of most competent and
unsuspected Witnesses, who depone that during the Apostolic Age and the prime
Primitive Church, there was a Bishop for each Congregation, an Identity of
Bishop and preaching Presbyter, and, finally, a complete Parity of ordinary
Pastors; if I make appear that the greatest Enemies to this Truth and Adorers
of the Hierarchy are (maugre all their Cunning) compelled to subscribe and
seall it. If yet some hesitat and admire, how then so many of the Learned can
give their Hierarchy a divine Sanction, or set it so high as the times of the
Apostles, such wowld remember that to fewer, at least, and these of no less
Learning, no less confidently pretend a Divine Origin for many things, the
Foundation whereof notwithstanding is undenyably in the dust of humane
Corruption. How many Torrents of Wormwood hide their little heads in sources in
that Christian (...) the space of about an hundred years after the Canon of the
Scriptures was sealled, whereof so few genuine Monuments now remain, and
wherein Christians (as they were also for a good many years after that time)
being astonished at these more prodigious Heresies, and wholly employed in
quelling these Hydra's, were kept from watching against more fly and subtle
Assaults of the Enemy, the Danger of whose Tares was scarce discernable till
they were hardly to be eradicated.

Again, it is to be remembered that there are vast Ods between the Cases of the
Contending Parties; many things tempt and invite men to patronize the
Hierarchy, whereto the other side is not obnoxious: for whosoever confides in
his own Parts and Abilities may probably promise to himself a graduall Ascent
even to the satiety of worldly Ease, Riches, and Honor. Did not these and such
Motives bias too many men, together with the Liberty Prelacy gives to
Heterodox Principles and to licentious Practices, how few should there be found
to agent its Cause? On the other hand Pre^h^^^erian Discipline they think too
rigid against both these Enormites: and as to worldly Encouragements, there is
nothing in Presbytry but a mediocrity of Stipend with a hard and perpetual
Labor without any Hope of Ease, Grandor, or more opulent Fortune. I should now
have done, only I can not but express how desirable 'twere that haying aside
our own unscripturall Fancies, the Grounds of these most lamentable
Contentions, all of us followed after the things which make for Peace, and
things wherewith one may edify another. Who would have thought, not many years
hence when all true Protestants were at the very bri^k of Destruction, but that
the admirable Delivera^ce God give us, should have had this most desirable
Consequent. How amazing is it that a number called Protestants should vent
their Spite, Malice and Treason against the most happy Instrument of this our
Delivery in Peace, His Majesty King WILLIAM, who is under God, the main Stay of
Protestants, whom yet God protects, and I pray may protect, maugre all the
malicious Machinations of wicked Men. God yet continues to call us to the same
Duty of Christian Concord, to name no others, by terrible Monitors: for at one
Quarter we are besieged by nominal Theists but real Atheists who ridicule God's
Sacred Word as the product of Rogues or Sots, and explode the Doctrine of the
Existence of Angels and Spirits, and consequently of the Being of God the
Father of Spirits, as the Dream of some Brainsick Weaklings, and below a man of
sense: and at another Quarter, by a direful Combination of Infernal Fiends and
wretch'd Mortals. It Is pleasant notwithstanding to observe how the latter of
these Satanical Machines split and undo the former: for the well known and
confessed Compacts and Commerce between these wicked Spirits and Miscreants of
human Race, and Operations of Demons, and such Effects undenyably proceeding
from preternatural and incorporeal Causes are sure Proofs of such immaterial
Beeings, and so demonstrat the Falsehood of what is broached by these abominable
Saducees, -- aliquisque malo fuit usus in illo.

O how clossly ought all of us to join in Weeping, Sighing, and Crying, not
only for our oun Guilt, but also for these and such horrible Abominations that
be done in the midst of the Land. In the mean while these and a thousand such
Mischiefs mostly owe themselves to this Controversy, our Divisions, Ignorance,
want of Church Discipline, and other such its odious Effects. How many, through
God's Blessing, should that Zeal, Learning and Industry spent for the support
of men's unscripturall Conceits, have brought to the Obedience of Christ from
both Romanists and open Infidels? Heu, quantum potuit Terrae, pelagique parari
Hoc, quem Civiles hauserunt, sanguine, dextrae!


Blessed then in this Case should be the Peacemaker, wherefore, let all of us
Pray for our Jerusalem that Peace may be within her Walls, and Prosperity
within her Palaces. Let us also with Tertullian Adversus. Herm^o^enem.
adore the fullness of the Scriptures; which (as Augustine De Doctrine
Christiana. Lib. 2. Cap. 9.
teaches) contain all things needful either for Faith or Life. The Books
(says Constantine the Great Theodoret. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. and Hist.
Trip^rtit. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
of the Evangelists, Apostles and ancient Prophets, clearly teach us the Mind
of God wherefore laying aside hostile Discords, let us seek from these the
Determination of our Controversies. Surely this is a Catholic Principle: Good
had it been if the Fathers had as clo^ly stuck to it in Practice as they firmly
believed it. You assert (says Optatus Lib. 5.
to the Donatists) We deny; between your Assertion and our Denial the Peoples
minds Waver; let none believe either you or us, we are all contentious Men,
Judges must be sought, if these be sought for among Christians, they can be
found among neither of the Parties, because the Truth is impeded through
Partiality; we must seek for Judges from without, if the Judge be a Pagan, he
cannot know the Mysteries of Christians; if a Jew, he is an Enemy to Christian
Baptism; on Earth therefore there cannot be round a Determination of this
Controversy: a Judge must be sought from Heaven; but why should we knock at
Heavens Gates, when, hearing the Gospel we have Christ's Testament. And having
elegantly compared the Scripture to Man's Testament, which is able to determine
every Controversy that may arise among his Children, adds, He who le^t us this
Testament is in Heaven; let his Will therefore be sought for in the Gospel as
in a Testament: for the things which you now do, Christ forsaw before they came
to pass. The same Justice and no more do we require in the present Case; we
require, with Cyprian Epist. ad Pompejum.
that Custom or Tradition which is without Scripture, though otherways never so
Old, be thrown away as moldy Errors. Let not the Hope of Emoluments, secular
Grandeur, or Power, make Men rack their Wits to D^prave and Detire the Truth,
and despise the Apostolic Humility, and Parity. Then (says Chrysostom In
Acta Apost. Homil. 3.
speaking of these Apostolic Times, and that by way of Opposition to his own
Age) Church Government was not Honor or Grandeur, but Watching and Care of the
Flock. Seeing it is evident (says Isidorus Pelusiota) how vast a difference
there is between the Ancient humble Ministry and the present Tyranny: Why don't
ye Crown with Garlands and Celebrate the Lovers of Parity or Equality? Let not
the gay Pageantry of foppish Ceremonies steal away our Hearts from the
simplicity of the Gospel. Is such trash worth the patronizing? Nay rather, Let
the Sword of God (The^'re Jerome's words In primum Haggaei.
cut off every thing that men, without the Authority and Testimony of the
Scriptures, have devised and pretend as if they had it by Apostolic Tradition.
Let all such things be broken in Pieces called Nehustan, and, finally,
sacrificed to Truth and Peace. Whatsoever thing God commands us let us observe
to do it, and neither add thereto nor diminish from't. This I Am sure is the old
Path, and the good Way wherein if we Walk we shall find rest to our Souls, our
Peace shall be as a River, and our Righteousness as the Waves of the Sea, we
shall Dwell together in that Brotherly Unity, which is a true Antecedent of
Life for evermore. And thus I can freely say, is the ultimat Design of
Composing and Emitting the ensuing Treatise, and is and still shall be the
fervent Prayer of

Will. Jameson. Nazianzeni

THE CONTENTS.
PART I.
SECT. I. The Scope of the ensuing Treatise.
The ancient Church for no Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy. page 1. The
ablest of its late Patrons of no other mind, where Dr. Sandersone is noted. 2
An examen of the Conveniences and Inconveniences of Prelacy undertaken. 5
SECT. II. The Aphorism No Bishop no King discussed.
Prelacy contributes not a little to introduce Tyranny. ibid. Prelates several
ways most hurtful to Princes. 6 Presbytry well agrees with Monarchy: where
their Charge of Sedition and Disloyalty is largely vouched to be most unjust,
from the most applauded Writers of our Adversaries themselves. 8
SECT. III. Their Argument taken from Order weighed.
Their strange Improvement thereof. 17 It equally serves Prelatists and
Papists. Ibid.
SECT. IV. The Plea for Prelacy drawn from Unity discussed.
Dissentions most frequent where Bishops bore sway. 18 Unity and Parity
harmoniously lodged in one and the same Assembly. 19
SECT. V.
The Argument Prelatists bring from antiquity canvass'd. Ibid.
SECT, VI.
The Instance of Aerius condemned by Epiphanius proved to be unserviceable to
our Antagonists. They join with the most disingenous of Papists in using this
Argument. 21 The choicest of the Fathers for the Scriptural and Apostolic
Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter. 22 Epiphanius gives little
Patrociny to our Adversaries. 23 His Injustice to Aerius in this matter. ibid.
If Aerius was Arrian largely disputed: the affirmative whereof is rendered
improbable by the profound Silence of those who were concerned to have
mentioned it. 24 The Tractate ascribed to ^^siliu^ (...) is judg^d
supposititious: wherein there is nothing to be found concerning Aerius. This
report of Aerius his Arrianism leans on Epiphanius's testimony alone, whose
great Levity and Credulity is universally noted. 25 It is instanced in his
dealing with the Donatists whom on no good ground he accuses of the same crime
of Arrianism. 26 They Are absolved by Augustine and Optatus. Ibid. It Is objected
that Aerius his commerce with Eustathius of Schastia may give countenance to
the report of Epiphanius. Ibid. Eustathius though a Heretic yet was not Arrian
but a Macedonian, who seems rather to have been dangerously shaken then
entirely wedded to Macedonianism. Ibid. But on supposition of the worst several
reasons are brought making probable that nothing can be inferr^d from his
commerce to prove Aerius Heretic. 27. The loss of the Writings of the Ancient
and traduced witnesses of truth is lamentable. Ibid. The Judgment of
Philastrius concerning Aerius related; against whom the Aerians are vindicated
from the Crime of Encratitism. 28 They were fiercely persecuted and why. 29
Between Philastrius and Epiphanius no good agreement. The negative testimony of
both Philastrius and Rabanus Maurus against what is delivered by Epiphanius. 30
SECT. VII. No Diocesan Bishops in several ancient Churches.
This Instanced in the Churches of Ireland, of Africa, and of Scotland. 30 The
ablest of our Adversaries brought to a sore pinch hereby. 34 Sir George
Mckenzie's Epistolary Defense of Prelacy canvassed: where Bid is vindicated
against the Bishop of St. Asaph, and Buchanan and Hector Boethius vindicated
against Spotswood, to whom the Advocat referred. Ibid. That we had a constitute
Church before the coming of Palladius evinced against both Bishop and Advocat.
38 Our Primitive Doctors why called Monks. The cavills of Spotswood and the
Bishop of St. Asaph removed. 39 Small power of Prelates for a long time after
Palladius. 40 The most memorable result of the Combat between the Advocat and
the Bishop of St. Asaph. Ibid. D. M.'s exceptions removed. His negative
argument no argument. 42 ^^^ndel vindicated. 44 D. M's perversion of Baron's
clear testimony detected. Ibid. He in vain attempts to deprave, and then to
exauctorate Prosper himself. 46 Other specimens of D. M's unhandsome dealing.
47
SECT VIII. Prelacy opposite to the Principles of our Reformers.
The Hierarchy is condemned by our Confession. 49 Knox and his fellows are
proved to have been most opposite to the Hierarchick Domination. 50 The Author
of the Fundamental Charter of Presbytry adventures not on our special
Arguments. Ibid. Against whom Knox's great aversness from Prelacy is evinced by
vindicating of his Letter to the Assembly. 51 And by vindicating of Knox's
words and actions at the Installment of John Douglas. 52 And from clear and
unsuspected records: where it is also evinced that the bulk of both Ministers
and People were then opposite to Prelacy. 54 This Authors cavills from the
meeting at Leith 7 and from some expressions of the Assemblies canvass'd and
annihilated. 56 Knox's antiprelatical judgment demonstrated from Beza's
Letter, which is vindicated from this Authors exceptions. 60 Who pretending to
make Knox a Prelatist only labors to prove him and our other Reformers
self-repugnant Bablers. 61 His ridiculous Sophisms examined and exposed. 62
Knox allows no Prelacy to England. 66 He exhorts the English to embrace a
Church Government and Discipline altogether Antiprelatical. 67 The Assemblies
letter 1566. vindicated from this Author's pretended allowance of Prelacy. 69
Knox acknowledged by the fiercest Prelatists to be truly Presbyterian. 70
Superintendents in Scotland a temporary expedient. The nullity of this Author's
reasons to the contrary detected. 72 The falsness of his Gloss of our first
Book of discipline largely demonstrated. 76 Superintendency not really
inconsistent with parity. This Authors unchristian rallery, his overthrowing of
the great principle of Hierarchicks are discovered, and his bottomless cavills
enervated. 77 The stock of Prerogatives he pretends to have belonged to
Superintendents evinced to be unserviceable to his design of giving
Superintendents a superiority over their Pastors. 81 He at once yields the
whole cause, and clasheth with himself. Our first Reformers their opposition
to, and hatred of Prelacy's being damnable demonstrated. The Helvetian and
other (...) Churches opposite to Prelacy as being destitute of
Scripture-foundation. 86
SECT. IX. The foreign Reformed Churches truly Presbyterian.
The Judgment of Luther and Lutherans. 89 The mind of Calvin and those called
Calvinists both in their private capacities, and confessions of the most famous
Churches. 90 Specimens of the chiefest objections adduced and removed where the
uncandide dealing of our Adversaries is unfolded. 91 Who yet are forced to
acknowledge the truth of our assertion. 95 The eminent Opposers of Popery
before Luther truly Presbyterian. 96 The first Reformers and body of the Church
of England at that time for no divine right of Prelacy where some of Saravia's
qualities are noted. Ibid.
SECT. X. Some of the manifold Inconveniences attending Prelacy briefly
mentioned.
A Spirit of Persecution still attended it. 98 The Principles of Prelacy and
practice of Prelatists most Schismatical. Ibid. It Is native tendency to
introduce Popery. 99 And to a Papal Domination and enslaving of the Kingdom.
100 The spite and hatred the Hierarchicks show against our Reformation from
Popery, their impiety, and affection to Popery. Ibid. Dr. Burnets exceptions
from the Regulars the^r trampling on the Bishops and the dealing of the
Papalines at the Council of Trent enervated. 102 Another exception or retortion
of this Author cashiered. 105 Lousness and Prophanity the constant attendent of
Prelacy. 106
PART II.
SECT. I. Of Ignatius and his Epistles.
Papists and other Hierarchicks make a fairer appearance from humane than from
Divine Writings. 109 A short account of Ignatius and of the Epistles bearing
his name. 110 Various Editions thereof. Ibid. Our Adversaries now acknowledge
to be spurious that they once gave out for genuine: where of the Florentine
Copy. 111 Debates among the Learned concerning it. Ibid. The unhandsome arts of
our Adversaries to free themselves of further dispute. 112 The great Confidence
they place in Ignatius. 113 Three Hypothese laid down, according to each
whereof Ignatius becomes unserviceable to the Prelatists. Ibid.
SECT. II. The first Hypothesis viz. that Ignatius is, at best, interpolated.
Writings pretending to greatest proximity to either Old or New Testament carry
most manifest signs of spuriousness, in which Divine Providence is observed.
114 Their Epistolick Ignatius's want of Apostolic Gravity and Humility: his
enslaving of the People and flattering, yea deifying of all Churchmen. 115 Dr.
Pearsons Exceptions removed. 119 Du Pin's self-repugnancy. 121 Dr. Wake's Error
discovered. 122 A brief sum of the Arguments evincing our assertion. 124 Other
things very early falsely fathered on Ignatius. Ibid His Journey to Rome
uncredible. 125
SECT III The second Hypothesis, viz. That the Antiquity of the true Ignatius
could not secure him from all Lapses or Escapes, nor serve to prove that there
were no declension in his time.
Whole Churches suerving during the life of the Apostles themselves. They grew
worse after their death. 126 Papias's mistakes and multitude of Followers. 127
The failings of Justine Martyr and Irenaus. Ibid. The influence they had on the
Church. The common mistakes of these times in Practicks no less than in
Dogmaticks; which is instanced in their debate about Easter. 128 Both parties
went contrare to the Apostolic practice; which is proved by clear Testimonies
of Iranus and Socrates. 129 Their strange conduct in managing this debate, who
Metamorphosed some Apostles into Jewish Highpriests. 130 The Credulity and
Oseitancy of Hegesippus. 131 We are to hearken to God before the chiefest of
Men. Divine providence observable in the mistakes of the Ancients. 132
SECT IV. The third Hypothesis, that there is no real disagreement, but a true
concord betwixt the Doctrine of Ignatius and that of the present Presbyterians.
They are reconciled by sustaining the Hypothesis of ruling Elders, which
Office is vouched to be of greatest Antiquity; and where Ambrose or Hilary is
vindicated against Dr. Field. 134 Ignatius most express for the reciprocation
of a Bishop and a Pastor of one Congregation 136 Our Adversaries yield the
whole Controversy; where Dr. Maurice's Mist is dispelled. 138 Vindiciae
Ignatianae destroy their Authors ultimate design. 140
SECT. V. The Objections they pretend to bring from Scripture against the
Doctrine now deduced from Ignatius, removed.
D. M's reasonings for the Diocesan Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus,
annihilated 140 No power properly Apostolic ordinary and permanent in the
Church. 143 Willet's answer to the Iebusites vindicated against their Advocat.
D. M. 147 The Office and nature of an Evangelist declared out of the Ancients.
148 D. M^s mutilation and perversion of Eusebius. 149 That Timothy and Titus
were Evangelists, and not Diocesan Bishops made out from Scripture. Ibid.
Apostles and Evangelists degraded by the Hierarchicks. 150 Their Arguments for
Timothy and Titus their Diocesan-ship houghed by the very Authors in whom they
most confide, both ancient and modern. Ibid. Their Argument from the Asian
Angels several ways overthrown, and D. M's shifts and perversions expunged. 151
Malach. 2. 7. vindicated against Dr. Hammond. 153 His Correction of the
received Greek Copy of Rev. 2. 24. corrected D. M's strange and wild Gloss.
Ibid. Salmasius vindicated against him, and the mind of Presbyterians
concerning Apocalyptick Angels fully sustained by Scripture and Fathers. 154
The best of our Adversaries really acknowledge Episcopacy destitute of
Scripture warrant. Dr. Hammond wholly destroys Episcopacy while he attempts to
establish it. 155
SECT. VI. Our meaning of Ignatius confirmed from the writings of the Apostles
his immediate Ancestors.
Acts 20. v. 17, 28 vindicated against Dr. Maurice and others who are by the
ears among themselves. 157 Philippians 1. 1. vindicated; where the Diocesanists
their Digladiations are exposed. 158 Philippi no Metropolis; where Dr. Maurice
his weakness is detected; the fiction of the existence of Metropoles in the
Apostolic age exploded by the Hierarchy's truest friends; Dr. Maurice's
slippery dealing. 159 The first to Timothy 3. vindicated against Bellarmine,
and his Friend D. M. 162 As is also Titus 1. 164
SECT. VII. The grand objection taken from the Commentaries of the Ancients.
The primitive Doctors (as themselves acknowledge) were subject to many
considerable lapses and escapes. 165 The causes thereof. 167 Several reasons
demonstrating that if ever the Fathers so glossed these texts as not to hurt
Diocesan Episcopacy, they then gave not their genuine sentiments. 168
SECT. VIII. More clear testimonies of the Primitive Doctors against the Divine
right of Diocesan Episcopacy produced and vindicated.
The testimony of Ambrose or Hilary: Bellarmine's perversion discovered. 171
Petavius's vain attempts both to exauctorate and deprave Hilary. 173 The
testimony of Chrysostom 174 He Is vindicated from Bellarmine's depravation.
175 The testimonies of Pelagius, Sedulius, and Primasius. 176 Augustine
vindicated against Bellarmine and his Plagiary D. M. 177 Apart of Jerome's
testimony on the epistle to Titus vindicated against the dish^nest dealing of
Bellarmne and D. M. 178 No ground to think that ever Jerome accounted James
Bishop of Jerusalem. 180 All Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments are in
Jerome's account the Apostles Successors. 181 The rest of Jerome's testimony on
the Epistle to Titus vindicated. 182 His testimony out of the Epistle to
Enagrius vindicated against Bellarmine and D. M. 183 This doctrine of Jerome
most catholic and universally received. 188
SECT. IX. The testimenies of Ignatius his Contemporaries and Suppars
disproving what our Adversaries would force him to speak, and confirming what
we have proved to be his mind, viz. that he cashiers a Diocesan Prelacy.
Negative testimonies. 190 Clemens Romanu^'s positive and clear testimonies.
192 Petaviu^'s exceptions met with. 194 As are these of his Underling D. M. 197
The testimony of Polyca^p: where Dr. Pearson's strange evasion is routed: and D
M ^ ill gronnded vaporing exploded. 199 The testimonies of Hermas: where the
vanity of D. M. ^ Romish Cavills is discovered and Blondel vindicated. 200 The
testimony of Justine Martyr where Dr. Maurice's perversions are detected, as
is also the unreasonableness of D. M's. reasons against Justine Martyr's plain
meaning. 204 Irenaeus identifies Bishop and preaching Presbyter. 206 D. M's.
Popish querie. 207
SECT. X. Other Observations and Arguments eversive of Diocesan Prelacy.
A Bishop is a name of labor, a Presbyter a name of honor, Ibid The true
notions of the Apostolic and Hierarchick Bishop diametrically opposite one to
another. 209 The example of the Apostolic Bishop followed, and the Idea
thereof retained by all the true primitive Bishops or Doctors, which is all one
with the notion of a laborious Pastor of a Congregation. Ibid. This is
confirmed out of the Council of Sardica and others of these times, where Dr.
Maurice and Dr. Beverige their sly and perverse dealing is discovered. 2^0 The
subjecting of one Pastor or Church to another finally resolved into a Romish
slavery. 213 Every Disepnser of the Word and Sacraments is a true Bishop. 214
That in the least Village and meanest Countrie-places, where there was a
Congregation, there was a true Bishop largely evinced: where Dr. Maurice his
exceptions is obviated. Ibid. All Bishops equal among themselves; hence their
Hierarchy is overthrown. 216 Their Romish argument from the pretendedly
uninterupted succession of Diocesan Bishops enervated. 217 The argument drawn
from the lists of Bishops in Rome and such great Cities satisfied; First, From
the positions already demonstrated, which are further confirmed: Secondly, From
the confessed uncertainty of these lists: Thirdly, From this that in Rome there
was at once a plurality of Peter's pretended successors: Fourthly, From this
that Peter was never at Rome, which is largely demonstrated: Fifthly, from the
evident falsity of the lists of the Bishops of Jerusalem. 218 That the
government of the prime primitive Church was truly Presbyterian made out from a
cloud of most unsuspected Authors, 225 A prostasy gradually turned into a Papal
Tyranny 230 The Ancients kept fast the Foundations of Christianity, but strayed
exceedingly in superstitious additions, 231 The Hierarchicks embraceing diverse
novell Enormities desert the Primitive Church: where Heylen's preversion of the
Ancients is discovered: Matthew 20, 25, etc. vindicated. and D. M's Romanism
and Judaism detected. 223 The Bishop of Aiace his Christian Discourse
unchristianly eluded and slighted by the Trent-Hierarchicks. 239
ERRATA.
page lin. read 2 7 r. this 4 23 r. thereto is sufficient. 7 1 r. palpably. 8
10 r. Jac. 14 1 r. the fears of the. 26 33 dele comma. 32 penult. r 158. Ibid
ibid r 163. Ibid. ult. r 53. 37 25 dele ( y) 59 10 dele as 69 21 r hope of
their. 80 25 r is enjoined. 82 32 r life. 84 1 r Act. 85 13 r their. 87 ult. r
disaprov'd. 92 15 r liked. 104 33 r from. 125 7 r leanes. 129 6 r Apostles. 137
13 r breaking on bread. 140 30 r whereon. 150 28 r Apostles. 168 21 r
expositures: 175 24 r other Pastors. 178 5 r in. 184 12 dele that. 185 18 r
Apostolical. 186 28 r were. 188 27 add it. 197 26 dele it. 202 18 r from. 207
1 r our. 214 6 r or. Ibid. 7 r of. 216 ult. r are. 217 20 add acknowledged.
Ibid. 31 r them. Ibid. pen. r de cornu. 219 20. r breaks. 223 1 Babylon, and is
called a Persian i. e. a Parthian City, and the Metropolis. 237 16 r allowable.
239 28 r would

ADDENDA
page 71. lin. 21.
But (says Heylen, Cosmographie page 332.) being once settled in an orderly
and constant Hierarchy, they held the same until the Reformation began by
Knox: when he and his Associats approving the Genevian Platform, took the
advantage of the Minority of King James the sixth, to introduce Presbyterian
Discipline and suppress the Bishops.

page 96. lin. 9.
What was the mind of the Waldenses and Hussites (says Voetius speaking of the
Opposers of Prelacy, Polit. Eccles. part. 2. page 833.) is evident from their
most accurat History written by Joh. Paulus Perrinus, which is not extant save
in their vulgar Tongues.

Nazianzeni Querela et Votum Justum. OR, The Fundamentals of the HIERARCHY
examined and disproved.
Part I.
Which briefly handles the prime Arguments for the Hierarchy, as also some of
its Concomitants and Qualities.
Section I.
The Scope of the ensuing Treatise.
THE purpose of our present Discourse is not directly to handle that much
tossed Debate; if an Office in the Church for species or kind superior to that
of dispensing the Word and Sacraments has any footing or warrant in the Word
of God? Neither will this be judged necessary by any who call to mind that many
Treatises disproving the divine right of Episcopacy, as Altar Damascenum, and
Rectius Instruendum, have had so good success that, for ought I know, they
stand entirely without any shadow of an Answer. Yea the most learned that ever
pleaded for the Lawfulness of Episcopacy, will not blame us, though we yield no
Scripture-ground to it, but only consider it in it self as a thing indifferent;
of which mind, among the Ancients, were, not only those who denied not the
exercise of his Office to be Lawful, as Hierome; but also the very Bishops
themselves, as Augustine, all of them founding this Office, not upon Jus
Dominicum, the Law of God in the Scriptures; but Ecclesiasticam consuetudinem,
the practice of the Church.

Add hereto that both Fathers and Councils equally in Opinion and Practice,
stuck no less to the lawfulness of Patriarchat, than that of simple Episcopacy;
and yet I believe few among real Protestants will either assert the Divine
Right of this Office of Patriarchat, i. e. that it had any Warrant for it in
the Word of God; or yet that those Fathers and Councils so believed. Which
present Consideration furnishes us with another Argument sufficient to evince
that the ancient Church founded this Office only upon Custom; and, as they
thought, Christian Prudence, and not at all upon the Books of the Old and New
Testament.

. 2. Neither do the most Learned of the Modern Episcopals in the least swerve
from this Opinion; amongst whom I reckon D. Forbes, who, Iren. lib. 2. Caput 11.
having, for a while with the greatest tenderness and fear, handled this
Matter, propones at length the Question, If Episcopacy be of Divine Right? And
yet declares himself highly difficultated what to Answer; for absolutely deny
it, he will not: and positively assert it he dares not: he therefore confounds
it with a Synodical Moderatourship, and then fairly tells us that it is of
Divine: Right; because of the general Scripture-Precepts of Church Order and
Decency. And indeed he carries himself all along in this Matter with so much
nice Caution, Ambiguity and Fear, that he evinces the desperation of the
Episcopal Cause, to which so learned a Man could afford no better Defense, than
really to destroy what he pretends to vindicat.

Neither is the most Learned Bishop Vsser of another mind, who has reduced it
to a mere shadow, and nonentity.

And Synop. pap. conti. 5. Quest. 3. Part 2.
Willet, though he says that a difference is needful for Church-Policy, yet
affirms, that this cannot be proved by the Word of God, and that in the
Apostles times a Bishop and Presbyter were neither in Name nor Office
distinguished. And he at large answers all Bellarmine's Arguments to the
Contrary. See the Appendix to the second part of the forecited Question. Of
this same Judgment is their applauded Hooker Preface to his Ecclesiastical
Policy* p. 2. 19. and 20.
viz. that there is no ground for their Hierarchy in the word of God; while he
declares himself against all particular Forms of Church Government, and
acknowledges that nothing for Diocesan Prelacy can be brought therefrom. The
necessity of Policy (says he P. 131.
) and regimen in all Churches may be held without holding any one certain Form
to be necessary in them all. And the general Principles are such as do not
particularly prescribe any one, but sundry Forms of Discipline may be equally
consonant unto the general Axioms of Scripture. It has been told them that
Matters of Faith, and in general, Matters necessary unto Salvation are of a
different Nature from Ceremonies, Order, and the kind of Church Government,
that the one are necessar to be expressly contained in the Word of God, or else
manifestly collected out of the same; the other not so, that it is necessary
not to receive the one unless there be something in Scripture for them, the
other free if nothing be alleged against them. And the Learned D. Stilling
fleet is at no small pains to cashier and expunge, among the rest of peculiar
Forms of Government. This Diocesan Prelacy out of Scriptural-Articles; and not
only acknowledges, but also, In Iren.
musters not a few Arguments, whereby to Prove that it has no Ground in Holy
Scripture.

And, Dr. Morton, Apologiae Cathol. lib. 1. p. 118. 119. 120.
Though a zealous Defender of Episcopacy: Asserts that Hierome made not the
Difference between Bishop and Presbiter of Divine Institution; he ass^nts to
Medina the Jesuit, and asserts, that there was no Difference in the matter of
Episcopacy betwixt Hierome and Aerius: He averres further that not only the
Protestants, but also all the primitive Doctors were of Hierome' s mind And
finally he concludes, that according to the Harmonious Consent of all Men in
the Apostolic Age, there was no Difference between Bishop and Pesbyter, but
was afterward introduced for the removal of Schism. And Jewel Bishop of
Sarisburie (a Man for Piety, and Ability, Second, I am sure, to few that ever
filled an Episcopal Chair) most expressly asserts the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter Here (says Defense of the Apology of the Church of England. page 121.
he) Mr. Harding finds great fault, for that I have translated these words,
ejusdem Sacerdotii, of the same Bishopric, and not, as he would have it, of
one Priesthood. God wott a very simple Quarrel. Let him take, whether he
lists best: if either-other of these words shall serve his turn. Erasmus
says, id temporis idem erat Episcopus, Sacerdos, and Presbyter: these three
Names, viz. Bishop, Priest. and Presbyter at that time were all one. And page
248.
but what meant Mr. Harding here to come in with the Difference between
Priests, or Presbyters and Bishops? Thinks he, that Priests, and Bishops hold
only by Tradition? Or is it so horrible an Heresy, as he makes it, to say,
that by the Scriptures of God, a Bishop, and a Priest are all one? Or knows
he, how far, and unto whom, he reaches the Name of an Heretic? Verily
Chrysostom says, Inter Episcopum, and Presbyterum interest ferme nihil;
between a Bishop, and a Priest, (which is all one with Presbyter) in a manner
there is no difference. St. Hierome says, somewhat in a rougher sort, Audio
Quendam etc. I hear say there is one become so Peevish, that he sets Deacons
before Priests, that is to say, before Bishops: whereas the Apostle plainly
teaches us that Priests, and Bishops be all one. Thus far Jewel.

The Bishops and Priests (says the famous Bishop Cranmer Stillingfleet Iren.
page 392.
) were at one time, and were not two things, but both one Office in the
beginning of Christ's Religion. And, In the New Testament, he that is appointed
to be a Bishop or a Priest, needs no Consecration by the Scripture; for
Election or Appointing thereto sufficient.

In the same MS. (says Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. page 393.
) it appears, that the Bishop of St. Asaph, Therleby, Redman, and Cox, were all
of the same Opinion with the Archbishop, that at first Bishops and Presbyters
were the same; and the two latter expressly cite the Opinion of Jerome with
Approbation. Thus we see by the Testimony chiefly of him who was Instrumental
in Our Reformation, that he owned not Episcopacy as a distinct Order from
Presbytry but only as a prudent Constitution of the Civil Magistrate, for the
better governing in the Church. And having proved that Whitgift, and with him
the whole Body of the English Episcopal Divines were of the same Judgment,
thus concludes; page 395.
By which Principles the Divine Right of Episcopacy as founded upon Apostolical
Practice, is quite subverted and destroyed.

Now judge if Dr. Sandersone Episcopacy not prejudicial to regal Power. Page
13, 14, 15.
spoke not without the allowance, ye acontrary to the express Mind of his
Brethren, when he says that the Difference among the Advocats for Episcopacy is
only Verbal, and that all of them, even those who yield that it is not of
Divine Right, no less than the rest, assert that it is founded on the Example
and Institution of Christ or his Apostles.

. 3. This Discourse therefore shall weigh the Advantages alleged to flow from
Episcopacy, that it may appear if it have such Effects as they Promise; As also
inquire if the Hurt and Damage does not preponderat all the Good they can
pretend to be linked to their Hierarchy. Neither shall we neglect to examine,
if what the most Learned of that Persuasion bring from Ecclesiastic Antiquity,
be subservient to their Cause.

Section II.
The Aphorism No Bishop No King discussed.
A Chief Argument whereby they would prove the necessity of Prelacy they bring
from the great Support which they say it affords to Monarchy. Hence with them
No Bishop No King is an axiomatick Aphorism, which cannot be readily granted,
seeing, to name no more, the charges the Hierarchy stood the King and Kingdom
made a dear Bargain. Much was spent in their stated Revenues, but more by their
clandestine Exactions, and other sinistrous means of draining the Country, and
places of their pretended Jurisdictions, throw which there are Incorporations
that, even at this day, groan under the Debts they then contracted: And yet
more by sustaining Standing-forces to be Janissaries to the Prelates and their
Accomplices, and persecute the sincerer part of Protestants, for else there was
then no use of such numbers. Yet their Maxim may be thus far granted, that
Prelacy may much contribute to the introduction of a Despotick and Arbitrary
Government: And indeed the great Power they usurped, and manifold Influences
they had over both Cities and Country, either to wheedle or menace them to
elect such Members of Parliament as pleased them; and to Cajole or awe these
Parliament Men to speak in their own Dialect: And the being of a good number of
them prime Lords of the Articles, whereby they had either the mediat or
immediate Flection of the rest, made them well nigh able to effect no less:
Which kind of Government no Wise and Paternal Prince will desire.

2. Moreover that Princes have no great reason to be fond of them is apparent
from their great unfitness to manage Politic and State Affairs.

There are two Ways whereby one may be fitted for being a Statesman; either
when Natural induements are extraordinary, which I doubt if many of our Prelates
could affirm of themselves: Or else that of Education and continued Industry
whereby to be fitted for State-imployments; but so far were they from any thing
of this, that during their greener years, they had quite other Studies and
Employments, being designed for the Ministry; and so were obliged to prosecute
hard the Study of Divinity, which, I am sure, will give any Man his handsfull
of Work, who makes earnest of it.

From this they are taken to feed some Flock, which, at least, will give them
no less exercise. Now, how these Men can be fit for managing State Affairs, or,
how they can be well kept from falling into Solecisms therein, whose skill is
so small, is not very discernable. But though they were never so well
fore-armed for such high State-imployments, how find they leisure to exercise
them? Is not the Ruling, and Governing so many Ministers and Churches, which
they allege themselves to be entrusted with, a Work heavy enough to exercise,
if not to bruise any one Man? Or, where have they found Warrant to relinquish
the Ministry, and turn themselves to Offices of State when offered, or to
undertake both together? Do they not believe that either of them is heavy
enough? Know they not that not only the Apostle, but also the ancient Canons,
and, to name no others, these which (though not truly) are called the Canons of
the Apostles, most clearly condemn this their Practice?

Let neither (say they ( a)) Bishop, Presbyter or Deacon taken upon him any
secular Business; otherways let him be cast out off his Office: Hence we may
learn, Canon 6. (...).
if it be out of Conscience that these Men plead for Antiquity, when they
palpable contemn and trample what themselves count the most venerable Precepts
thereof. Moreover it is observable how they, so far as their Interest led them,
still studied the ruin of those to whom they owed their Being, as Bishops.
Thus the Roman Prelates studied the Ruin of both the Eastern and Western
Emperors: Thus the Bishops of Scotland brought no small Vexation to both King
and Nobility, in the Reign of Alexander the III. And so Becket of Canter^ury,
and his Faction handled Henry the II of England. But worse did their
Successors treat Richard the II, whom, in his Absence, they deprived of his
Kingdom. It Is vain to repone that these were Papists; seeing the ambition of
Prelates is well enough known of whatever Name they be: Yea such also have been
the Practices of Prelates who acknowledged no Pope, as diverse of the Greek
Patriarks, who helped not a little to Dethrone their Emperor. And the English
Bishops (as Sir Francis Knols complains in a Letter to Secretary Cicil)
encroached not a little upon the Privileges of the Crown, kept Courts in their
own Name, and still give out, that the Complex of their Office, i. e. the civil
part of it, as well as the other, without any Distinction, was not from the
King but from Jesus Christ. Which Encroachments are really Imperium in Imperio.

On which account, this their usurped Power, as being dangerous, and of a
Romish Original, was abolished in the first Parliament, of Edward the VI. The
Substance of what Dr. Sanderson either insinuats or more clearly expresses in
Answer hereto, is, that this was a Corruption in Edward 's Reformation: And
that some other Courts in England, as well as these of the Bishops are not kept
in the King's Name. But sure, it is not very credible that this was a Corruption
seeing nothing else, since Edward's Days, has been done, during the succeeding
Reigns, for that Church's further Reformation; but it is an odd Paradox if we
consider the Author, for it was Mary who Abolished this Act of Edward, and
restored their Power when she brought back the rest of Popery: And though other
Courts, as he says, be not kept in the King's Name, yet reason teaches, and
former experience proves, how dangerous it was to give Ecclesiastics ought
that looks like an Absolute power, and worldly Grandeur, whereby, like the
Pope, they may, by his Artifices arrive, at length, to a real Independency. And
indeed B. Laud made large steps toward it, who, as Roger Coke relates,
Detection of the Court and State of England. Vol. 1. Page 361.
copt with the King himself, and maugre both his Will and Authority must visit
Colleges not as his Commissioner, but by his own Metropolitan right, and
plumed (thus says the Author) in his own Feathers, all black and white,
without one borrowed from Caesar whereby the more he assumes to himself the
less he leaves to the King, he now soars higher.

And notable here is Dr. Sanderson's disingenuity, who always gives out that
the Marian Act, which he still compares with, yea prefers to that of Edward,
was never repealed by any succeeding Parliament. But we are informed by the
same R. Coke (d) that by the 1. Tac. 25. the Marian Act was repealed and so
that of Edward revived. And now to see him, who pretends to be a Minister of
the Gospel (whose Office is only Ministerial and spiritual, exercised only in
spiritual things, without reaching Men's Bodies, inflicting only Rebukes, and
such verbal punishments) to see such I say keeping Courts altogether Civil, and
inflicting corporal mulcts and Punishments after the manner of Worldly
Potentats, but especially when all this is done in their own Name, would really
make the indifferent Beholder aver that such imitated, to the Life, his
Romish Holiness, and believed much better his Doctrine of his receiving both
spiritual and temporal Sword, than that of our Savior, whereby he prohited his
Apostles and their Successors all such earthly Grandeur and despotick Power,
as resembles the Lordship and Dominion of worldly Princes.

. 3. But their Maxim not only intimats that Prelacy well accords with
Mouarchy; but also, that any other Form of Church Government is destructive
thereof. Which how they will evince I know not: How they can show that
Presbytrie, with which I am only here concerned, is destructive of, or in the
least inconsistent with Monarchy I cannot perceive. They can, I am sure,
neither deduce their Inference from the Practice of Presbyterians, nor the
Principles of Presbytrie: Not from the first, for though they load them, as if
they had been the Cause, of many Civil Broyls and Calamities, and especially of
these ensuing the Year 38. We may justly, yea with the allowance of the
Hierarchie's greatest Favorers, reject the Charge, and send it home to the
Prelates, who, by their attempting to introduce into the Church a Mass of Romish
Superstitions, and their Pride and Tyranny exercised on all sorts, were become
unsupportable to both Nobility and People.

B. Laud, Montegue and such Papaturients were then earnestly laboring the
reintroduction of a Mass of Romish Leaven into England, though there were but
too much there already which had never been cast ^ut. Take one Instance or two
in the words of R. Coke a high Church-of-England-man, and no Lover of
Presbyterians, I Am sure. The Bishops (says he Vol. 1. Page 361.
) of the Province of Canterbury in their own Names, enjoin the removal of the
Communion Table in the Paroch Churches and Universities, from the body of the
Church or Chancel to the east of the Chancel, and cause Rails to be set about
the Table, and refuse to administer the Sacrament to such as shall not come up
to the Rails, and receive it Kneeling: that the book of Sports, on Sundays, be
read in Churches, and enjoin Adoration. I do not find that Adoration was ever
enjoined before, nor any of the forenamed Injunctions in any Canon of the
Church. Our Bishops were of the same metal with these Innovatours in England,
and their most docile Scholars: Laud therefore and his Faction apprehending
that we would make but a small resistance against them to whom England was
likely to yield, prepared for us all her Cup with some other additional Drugs
more Romish, than what was obtruded on the English. Witness the Form in the
Administration of the Sacrament which (as R. Coke Page 368.
acknowledges) was the same in the Mass. But seeing, the knowledge of the state
we were in, when the Nation entered into a Covenant, and opposed that Stream of
Romish Abominations, contributes not a little to repel their fierce charges of
Rebellion and Sedition; the Reader will pardon me though at some length I
transcribe a Passage from one who is beyond suspicion of being partial in
favors of Presbytrie, Covenant, or ought of that nature: I mean Dr. Burnet
Memoires of the D. of Hamiltoun. Page 29. 30.
The Bishops (says he) therefore were cherished by him (the King viz.) with
all imaginable expressions of kindness and confidence; but they lost all their
Esteem with the People, and that upon diverse Accounts. The People of Scotland
had drunk in a deep prejudice against every thing that savoured of Popery. This
the Bishops judged was too high, and therefore took all means possible to
lessen it, both in Sermons and Discourses, mollifying their Opinions and
commending their Persons, not without some reflections on the Reformers. But
this was so far from gaining their Design, that it abated nothing of the Zeal
was against Popery, but very much hightned the rage against themselves, as
favoring it too much.

There were also subtle Questions started some Years before in Holland about
Predestination and Grace; and Arminius his Opinion, as it was condemned in a
Synod at Dort, so was generally ill reported of in all reformed Churches, and
nowhere worse than in Scotland: but most of the Bishops, and their Adherents,
undertook openly and zealously the Defense of these Tenets. Likewise the
Scottish Ministers and People had ever a great respect to the Lord's Day, and
generally the Morality of it is reckoned an Article of Faith among them: but
the Bishops not only undertook to beat down this Opinion, but by their
Practices expressed their neglect of that Day; and after all this they declared
themselves avowed Zealots for the Liturgy and Ceremonies of England, which were
held by the Zealous of Scotland all one with Popery. Upon these Accounts it
was, that they lost all their Esteem with the People. Neither stood they in
better Terms with the Nobility, who at that time were as considerable as ever
Scotland saw them; and so proved both more sensible of Injuries, and more
capable of resenting them. They were offended with them, because they seemed to
have more interest with the King than themselves had, so that Favors were
mainly distributed by their Recommendation; they were also upon all Affairs,
nine of of them were Privy Counselors, diverse of them were of the Exehequer,
Spotswood Archbishop of S. Andrews, was made Chancellor, and Maxwell Bishop
of Ross was fair for the Treasury, and engaged in a high rivalry with the Earl
of Traquair, then Treasourer, which tended not a little to help foreward their
Ruin. And besides this, they began to pretend highly to the Titles and
Impropriations, and had gotten one Learnmonth a Minister presented Abbot of
Lindoris, and seemed confident to get that state of Abbots, with all the
Revenue and Power belonging to it, again restored into the hands of Churchmen;
designing also, that according to the first Institution of the College of
Justice, the half of them should be Churchmen. This could not but touch many of
the Nobility in the quick, who were too large sharers in the Patrimony of the
Church, not to be very seusible of it. They were no less hateful to the
Ministry, because of their Pride, which was cried out upon as unsupportable.
Great Complaints were also generally made qf Simoniacal Pactions with their
Servants, which was imputed to the Masters, as if it had been for their
advantage, at least by their allowance.

They also exacted a new Oath of Intrants, (besides what was in the Act of
Parliament for obedience to their ordinary) in which they were obliged to obey
the Articles of Perth, and submit to the Liturgy and Canons. They were also
daily making Inroads upon their Jurisdiction, of which the Ministers were very
sensible; and universally their great rigor against any that favored of
Puritanism, together with their meddling in all Secular-affairs, and
relinquishing their Dioceses to wait on the Court and Council, made them the
Object of all Men's fury. But that which heightened all to a Crisis was, their
advising the King to introduce some Innovations in the Church by his own
Authority; things had prospered so ill in general Assemblies, that they thought
of these no more. And in the Parliament 1633. that small addition to the
prerogative, that the King might appoint what habits he pleased to the Clergy,
met with vigorous opposition, notwithstanding the King seemed much concerned
for it; those who opposed it being sharply taken up, and much neglected by his
Majesty, which stuck deep in their Hearts, the Bishops bearing all the blame of
it. At this time a Liturgy was drawn for Scotland, or rather the English
reprinted with that Title, save that it had some Alterations which rendered it
more invidious and less satisfactory; and after long consulting about it and
another Book of Canons, they were at length agreed to, that the one should be
the Form of the Scotish-worship, and the other the model of their Government,
which did totally vary from their former Practices and Constitutions: and as if
all things had conspired to carry on their Ruin, the Bishops not satisfied
with the General High-commission-court, produced Warrants from the King for
setting up such Commissions in their several Diocesses, in which with other
Assessors, Ministers, and Gentlemen, all of their own Nomination, they might
punish Offenders. That was put in practice only by the Bishop of Galloway, who
though he was a pious and learned Man, yet was fiery and passionate, and went
so roundly to work, that it was cried out upon as a Yoke and Bondage which the
Nation was not able to bear. And after all this the King (advised by the
Bishops) commanded the Service Book to be received through Scotland, and to be
read according to the New Book at Edinburgh on Easter Day in the year 1637.

Thus Dr. Burnet, of which kind much more might be taken from his, and the
Writings of other Adversaries themselves, and yet far more from these of the
Disinterested. And now judge under how woeful a Burden we then groaned, and if
it was not high time for the Nation to curb such Tyranny over Bodies and
Consciences, and stemm the tide of these hateful Corruptions, which not softly
and by a stelth, but by violence, like a mighty torrent, were bearing all
before them, and at once ready to sweep away both Religion and Property: Should
they not by sitting still and quietly yielding both Sacred and Civil Rights,
have proved in the highest degree treacherous to their God, Country and
Posterity? And seeing the Prelates were either the Authors, or great Promoters
of all this Mischief. and the Office it self asserted only upon human-right,
and so as a thing indifferent, by its ablest Advocats; and by the King himself
Nalson's Collections Vol. 1. Page 247.
yielded to be contrary to the constitution of the Church of Scotland; And,
finally, by the body of the Nation held to be unlawful, Tyrannical and
Antichristian: Were they not then highly obliged, not only, to cashire the
Officers, but also to abolish the Office it self? In the mean while, though
their Supplications were both most humble and reasonable, yet so had B. Laud
and his Faction mislead and abused the King's Majesty, who otherwise was both
Virtuous and Laudable, that the Suppliants were at first answered with terrible
Menaces, then with dilatory and ambiguous Speeches, which were seconded with
earnest Preparations for a most destructive War, and vengeance on the supposed
Delinquents. Nor was ever ought granted but by inches as the urgency of the
Courts Affairs compelled them, resolving in the mean while only to gain time,
and practice such Artifices until strength being recovered, the Suppliants,
either broken among themselves, or lulled into security, might be overwhelmed
at unawars, and with the more ease sacrificed to the fury of the Canterburians.
As for the black and criminal Actions imputed, during these Times, to the
Covenanters ( i. e. to the body of the Nation, seeing not only the Bulk of the
Commonalty, and Gentry, but also the Nobility well nigh to a man, save the
Papists, as is acknowledged on all hands, joined in opposing these Enormities)
as I shall ever most frankly condemn them when the charge is proved, and doubt
not (which falls out in the best of Actions) but that diverse who joined them
might drive sinistrous Ends; so I aver that all the impartial will
distinguish between Scelus and Error, and ascribe any Escapes or Solecims, any
way chargeable on others, not to their want of Conscience and Loyalty, but at
worst to their want of foresight: to which bias the odd dealings of the
Court, and their want of Experience of these with whom they afterward joined,
doubtless contributed not a little to incline them. They were not ignorant that
King James who (as Dr. Burnet Memoires Page 29.
intimats) opposed Presbytry, not out of Conscience, but Policy, rarely minded
to keep what he promised; and, at every innovation he introduced, averred that
it should be the last, while he only designed to make it a preparative for
more. And indeed, to name no others, King James his prevaricating, temporizing,
promising, and consenting to what he never mean'd to stand longer than until
by force, he should be able to undo them, is not altogether concealed even by
his own Spotswood Hist. Page 447, 453.
himself, though rarely, I acknowledge, guilty of so much ingenuity. Neither
made he any bones to obtrude on this Kingdom inquisitionlike
High-commission-courts, without any Law Memoires Page 47. and alibi
or Acts of Parliament.

These his steps were troaden by his Successor, who, being Prepossessed by the
Canterburians, with all imaginable severity, urged and increased these lawless
Innovations, and yet stuck not to aver that he took Arms only to surpress
Rebellion, and not to impose Novelties Memoires Page 60.
. And that all Concessions then given were only to gain time, till sufficient
strength to overwhelm this Kingdom, might be recovered, is not only colligible
from the more impartial Accounts of these Times, but also from Nalson himself.
The King (says he Collections Vol. 1. Page 245.
) was prevailed with, by this reason offered by Traquair to sign the following
Instructions. That his Majesty notwithstanding whatever the Parliament could
do, might, whenever he was in a better Capacity, introduce Episcopacy, because
the Bishops being by all the Laws of Scotland, one of the three Estates of
Parliament, no Act that passed without them would be of force, much less an Act
for their Abolition, especially they not appearing or consenting to it, but
protesting against it. Now, as the same Nalson relates, In these Instructions
the King allows his Commissioner to cousent in his Name to the abolishing of
Episcopacy when it should be enacted by the General Assembly. And now judge
what strange Policy this was, which left the King at Liberty to null all Acts
of Parliament wherein Bishops had not a Vote, even though himself had ratified
the Abolition of Episcopacy, and added never so positive a Sanction to these
Acts made without Bishops, which presupposed his Ratification of their
Exclusion from voting in Parliament. Now I say, such strange dealings as these,
and thereupon the dreadful Effects of the Court's fury, so soon as it could
gather strength to exercise them, might promp Men to an extreme sheiness of
believing any of its Promises, and incline them to a closser Conjunction with
these of whose Arts they had less Experience. And doubtless when they made the
League with the English Parliament, they were far from believing that some of
them drove such Ends as afterward appeared, and far from foreseeing (as
certainly were many of the then English Parliament) the dismal Alterations
which ensued; otherwise certainly they had never joined with the English or
done ought of that kind. And indeed, as to their second entry into England, Dr.
Burnet Memoires Page 235, 236.
ingenuously demonstrats that it was well nigh impossible for them at that time
to do otherways. Moreover that the Crime of Selling his Majesty is falsely
imputed to the State or Church of this Nation, and that they abhorred and
detested so wicked a Parricide as was committed on his Royal Person, may be
attested even by the greatest of Royalists themselves; whereof, their Reception
of, and standing for King Charles the II, and that in opposition to
Antimonarchicks, until they together with him were broken by the prevailing
Enemy, is a sufficient evidence.

And as I shall not defend the separate actings of some called the Associats,
so I say that every just Estimator of these Affairs will, after serious
reflection, be ready, at least, to excuse and pity them; seeing they not only
had fresh memory of the scarce paralelled dealing of the preceding Reign, but
also perceived evident Specimens of a strange Genius in the Successor; whence
they might collect how sad and terrible things might be feared from him, should
he be permitted to give the reins of Affairs to the Popish and other
Incendiaries, whom even at that time he was observed most to favor; and if his
subsequent Actions have not given these too much to say for themselves, I leave
to the judgment of the unbiased. However things be, seeing these were but a
handful never approved by the body of the Nation, or the most part of
Presbyterians therein, their doings cannot in the least infringe the instance.
Another instance is that of the Presbyterians their assisting and preserving of
King James the VI in his Minority.

But now put case many foul and unjustifiable things might be objected, and
these their Actions accompanied with many Circumstances and Concomitants not to
be defended; yet how levels this at the core of the Controversy? Jam dic
Posthume de tribus capellis? Let them either speak to the purpose, or
acknowledge their extravagancies: It Is evident, and we prove, yea even from
their own most approved Writers, that then, Liberty, Religion, and all morality
was struck at and well nigh overwhelmed; the Body of the Nation jointly opposed
themselves, that they might stop the Torrent. Now the Question is, if this was
Lawful and well done? and with this they rarely dar meddle, or if they do, it
must be on presupposition of pure passive obedience, without any exception, and
of other such Hypotheses as not only equally level at the Reformation of most
of the Churches from Popery, but also transform regular Monarchy into an
absolute Tyranny, ruin all Subjects, and at length prove really destructive of
what they pretend to advance: either I say they must use these or the like
Hypotheses, and so give what is well nigh nothing to the purpose, or else
adduce what is wholly foreign thereto, and only load our stout and worthy
Opposers of that Mass of Romish Superstition, Irreligion, and Prophanity, with
most heavy Accusations, as false and perfidious, acting from bad and base
Motives, using unworthy Methods, driving sinistrous Ends, and thus only
endeavor to bespatre and blacken their Adversaries, not to handle the
Controversy: And this minds me of what I have observed in some of the Popish
Historians, and others of their Declaimers against our first Reformers, for
their bad cause permitting them to speak little or nothing directly to the
Purpose, and their Malice allowing them as little to be silent; they spend most
of their Harangues in decrying and reproaching all who were active in that
Reformation as guilty of many foul personal Blemishes, acting nothing sincerely
but out of base Principles, and to as ill Designs: and amongst other things is
chiefly objected the Crime of Rebellion, whereon the Romanists most commonly
expatiat: and some of them add much about Conspiracies between these Reformers
and the Turk against the Catholics as if He had been at the bottom of most was
then done: just as our Adversaries make Cardinal Richlieu, and the French, the
Authors and chief Promoters of our opposing Laud's Popish Innovations: surely
the former is less ridiculous and carries more color of possibility than the
latter. In the mean while it will make their Calumnies of less Credit with all
true Protestants, that they load Knox and the rest of our first Reformers with
no less black detraction and slander, than they do these of the 38, accusing
and condemning them of an anarchick and ungovernable Temper, hatred against all
Kings, Faction and Rebellion: and on this false pretense they breath out their
malice and bitterness against them, and that no less fiercely than they do
against the Opposers of the Canterburian Incendiaries. And thus much of the
Practice of Presbyterians.

Neither have they any more reason to allege the second, that the Principles
of Presbytry are contrary to Monarchy, none of them yielding any such
Inference. Their peculiar Hypothesis wherein they oppose Prelacy is, that no
Pastor ought to usurp a Dominion or Superiority over his Brethren: And how this
Principle can induce any to attempt the eversion of Monarchy, is not easily
conjectured.

They have yet another Principle, that whosoever is called to the Ministry
ought not to entangle himself in any Civil Affairs, but to lay out himself
wholly for the Souls of Men, and to this end be instant in season and out of
season: Which is consonant enough to the former, but opposite to the Principles
of Prelates; who assert that Civil and Ecclesiastic Offices are compatible, and
may be lodged in the same Subject: and accordingly they grasp and inhance
whatsoever Places of State they can come by, both of higher and lower degree.
Now, whether that Government which is only Ministerial, not, if they hold to
their Principles, concerned with Politics, or Civil Government, but only with
the Souls of Men, for the Edification of whom all their Studies are directed;
or that which is pompous and despotick, allowing Churchmen to climb unto the
highest Places of State, be most opposite to Monarchy, let any Man judge. And
although the Prelates acknowledge dependence upon their Prince, they but only do
what the Popes did, who for a long time acknowledged their dependence upon the
Emperor, and sought^ their Election or the Confirmation thereof from him,
until by little and little they got to stand upon their own Legs to, almost,
the overthrow and ruin of their Sovereign and Benefactor. Now Prelacy and
Popery being really one and the same Government, Princes ought to fear no less
Mischief from the one than from the other.

Section III.
Their Argument taken from Order, weighed.
ANother Achillean Argument they bring from the Nature of Order, which, they
say, is wholly inconsistent with Parity. Hence one of their Coryphaei
brandishing it, to the end he might complete the Demonstration, cited Aristotle
himself for the Definition of Order, which (says he) is secundum quem aliquid
altero prius aut posterius dicitur. For that unhappy word simul would have
spoiled the whole Business, and therefore must be left out. And certain it is
that none of them can improve this Argument any more than he has done, seeing,
according to the express Definition of Order, a Parity is no less consistent
therewith than Superioty and Inferiority.

. 2. Moreover if this Topic do them any service, it shall, at length, establish
a Pope over them all; seeing a Parity of superior Officers, as Bishops or
Archbishops, is no less Cyclopick and Monstrous (for with these names they
calumniat Presbytry) than a Parity of Pastors. Yea by this their Argument it is
manifest how they reproach most of the reformed Churches, as if there were
nothing there but a Babylonish Confusion; and the Apostles themselves, none of
whom, I think, took the Oath of Canonical Obedience to another. Moreover,
whosoever denies a Parity in a plurality of Governors (though the chiefest in a
Society) as if 'twere unwarranted by Example, and tending to Confusion,
discovers either his Ignorance, or what is worse; seeing it is well known that
at the same time there was a plurality of Kings in Sparta, of (...) or Princes
in Athens, and of Consuls in Rome; during which Governments there was, I am
sure, as little Disorder as when they were in the Hands of one single Man. So
much is really affirmed by their own learned Sutlivius De pontif. Rom, lib. 1.
cap. 8. Praeterea exercitus non semper unum habet ducem, etc.
who brings store of such Examples, and irrefragably evinces our Purpose: so
true it is that none can smartly oppose the Pope's Crown, but must eadem opera
(were he, as indeed Sutlivius is, the greatest Friend to Prelates) ruffle also
their Mytres.

Section IV.
The Plea for Prelacy, drawn from Unity, discussed.
NO less fiercely do they argue that Episcopacy is altogether necessary on the
account of Unity; Without which (say they) there can be nothing but Schism and
Dtvision; and therefore the Ancient Church sustained it. But although this might
have deceived some of the Ancients, whose ends were good (though this mean fell
out ineffectual, yea unhappy whereby to obtain them) yet it is strange that any
now, if at all they reflect on past times, can place any confidence in such
Church-policy, in order to procure Peace and Unity: seeing it is of all things
most undeniable, that, notwithstanding hereof, the primitive Church was oppressed
and rent with innumerable Schisms, hatched and sustained by Bishops, in
opposition to Bishops; no less, at least, than by Presbyters, in opposition to
Presbyters. Yea it is certain that these, whom they contend to be Diocesans,
were either the Inventers, or, at least, the main Propagators and Abettors
thereof. Were not Victor of Rome, and Polycrates of Ephesus, the Authors of
that great Schism and Controversy anent the Celebration of Easter? Were not
Stephen Bishop of Rome, and Cyprian of Carthage Authors of another Schism about
Rebaptizing of the lapsed? Was not Paulus Bishop of Samosata, Author of that
non-such Schism and Heresy of the Samosatenians? Did not the mighty Schism of
the Donatists fall out because Sicilianus Competitor with Donatus was
preferred? And, when the Heresy of the Bishop of Samosata was varnished by a
Presbyter Arrius, how was it hugged and propagated by the bulk of the Oriental
Bishops? Was not Macedonius, Bishop of Constantinople, the Author of that most
damnable Heresy known by his Name? Again Nestorius, Bishop of that same City,
gave both Being and Name to another Schism no less dangerous than the former.
Time would fail me to reckon up Berillus, Bostrensis, Nepos an Egytian Bishop,
Fidus in Africa, Photinus of Syrmium, with many others. And in short, few
Heresies or Schisms sprang up in these Times, but they had either Bishops for
their Authors, or else for their great Abettors; without whose influence, they
were likely shortly to have starved: or else they were raised through the Pride
and Competition of men aspiring to the Episcopal Dignity* which, to name no
others, is clear in the Instance of Donatus. Yea that all the blackest Schisms
and most pestilent Heresies had Bishops for their Authors, Sutlivius De pontif.
Romans Lib. 2. Cap. 10. Nulla enim in Ecclesia Dei graviora excitata sunt
Schismata, nec Hereses exorta sunt ab ullo tetriores quam ab Episcopis.
expressly affirms.

But take one Instance further, in respect of which the rest are but
Grasshopers, in the Person of the Romish Bishop, or Bishops; who have been the
great Authors and Fomenters of the most damnable Heresies, and mighty Schisms,
that the Christian World has hitherto seen. Certainly, had the Church
contented Herself with the Apostolic Parity we plead for, the Man of Sin could
not have mounted the Throne of Iniquity; on which, for many Ages, he has
continued to the most pestiferous Infection and distracting Division of the
Church, that ever Satan did excogitat, or Man behold.

. 2. Moreover, suppose they could with the greatest plausibility conclude the
inconsistancy of Unity and Parity, they were yet to be neglected; it being
certain that, in the choicest Assembly the World ever saw, both of 'em were
harmoniously lodged; and that there are Christian Churches enjoying no less
Harmony without Diocesans, than those who have 'em.

Section V.
The Argument Prelatists bring from Antiquity, canvass'd.
THeir next Plea is from Antiquity: but for us it may be enough to say from the
Beginning it was not so. Thus Christ answered the Pharisees: thus the
Christians answered the Heathens alleging the Antiquity of Gentilism. They can
give few or no Proofs for their Proposition from the first, and best part of
the second Century: They pretend indeed to the Epistles of Ignatius, which, to
say the best, are in diverse places spurious, carrying Self-contradictions, vain
Boastings and Flattery all along; but of this more afterward.

Other Catalogues and Memorials of the Bishops of the ancientest Times, were
written long after, when Prelacy had got a higher ascendant, and the Mystery of
Iniquity was more palpably working: therefore these Authors spoke according to,
and in the Style of their own times, and not in the Style of the times wherein
these Pastors lived. And here I say nothing, but what is vouched by Dr.
Stilling fleet Iren. Part 2. Chap. 6.
. And, amongst many others, these his w^ords are most observable: for having
taken notice that Eusebius makes it a most hard Matter to know who succeeded
the Apostles in the Churches they planted, adds, say you so? is it so hard a
Matter to find, out who succeeded the Apostles in the Churches planted by them,
unless it be mentioned the Writings of Paul? What becomes then of our
unquestionable Line of Succession of the Bishops of several Churches, and the
large Diagrams made of the Apostolic Churches with every one's Name set down
in his Order, as if the Writer had been Clarenceaulx to the Apostles
themselves? Is it come to this at last that we having nothing certain but what
we have in Scriptures? And must then the Tradition of the Church be our Rule to
interpret Scriptures by? An excellent way to find out the Truth doubtless, to
bend the Rule to the croocked stick, etc. Again it is certain that, for diverse
Centuries, Bishops were nothing like what they are now, either in exercising
Civil Power, or Jurisdiction over other Pastors, or yet in the largeness of
Dioceses; so that the Term Bishop in respect of the two is little better than
an equivocal. It Is certain also that the ancient Church wanted not her own
Blemishes: which was well perceived by her Doctors, who still looked on the
Word of God only as the Rule of Faith and Manners, on which they never founded
the Episcopal Superiority. Hence this their Argument carries nothing of Cogency.

Section VI.
The Instance of Aerius condemned by Epiphanius, proved to be unserviceable to
our Antagonists.
TO Illustrat and Corroborat this their Argument from Antiquity, they adduce
the Instance of Aerius; who was for this his Judgment of Presbytry, as well as
for Arrianism, condemned and counted Heretic by Epiphanius. But it is certain
that Epiphanius censured Aerius, not only for his being Anti-episcopal, and, as
he believed, because Arrian, but also for his rejecting of Lents, set and
Anniversary Fasts, and for denial of Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead. Now
either purer Antiquity joined with Epiphanius in asserting of the necessity of
Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such Fopperies; or they did not;
and if they joined with him therein, then our Prelatists, if they be
Protestants, are concerned to reflect better of how little weight their
Argument from the Ancients, pressing their unwarrantable Additions, can be unto
them: But if they say that sounder Antiquity consented not to Epiphanius, while
he urged Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and such Anti-scriptural Fictions,
we return that neither did the choicest of the Ancients agree with him in his
Plea for Prelacy.

The Judgment of Hierom is so well known herein, that the Bishop of Spalato De
Repub. Ecclesiastica. Lib. 2. Cap. 4. Numb. 46. Sunt qui Hieronymum in rectam
sententiam vel invitum velint trahere -- neque in hoc aut excusari satis
potest, aut etc.
acknowledges that Hierom can by no means, yea not byforce be reconciled to
their Cause. Hierome's Judgment (says Saravia De diversis gradibus
ministrorum Evangelii. Cap. 23. Dico privatam fuisse Hieronymi opinionem,
consentaneam cum Aerio etc.
) was private; all one with that of Aerius, and contrary to the Word of GOD,
wherefore we shall examine his Arguments. And on this account he is much
offended with Hierome accusing him of Vanity, Ibid. 27.
Self-contradiction Exam. tract. de triplici Episcopatu. Page 25.
, and Prevarication Ibid. Page 34.
;

And Alphonsus de Castro Contra Hereses fol. 103. B. Sed revera fallitur Thomas
Waldensis quoniam in toto illo decursu p^st verba proxime citata nihil aliud
conatur Hieronymus quam ut ostendat ex Divina Institutione non esse
differentiam inter Presbyterum and Episcopum -- Et fol. 104. D. Nec etiam
mirari quisquam debet quod Beatus Hieronymus Vir alioqui doctrissimus sic
deceptus fuerit, etc.
sharply reproves Thomas Waldensis another Papist, who had intended to pervert
the Testimonies, which are commonly alleged for Presbytry out of Hierome:
There De Castro having proved, out of diverse places of Hierome, that he was
truly for the Scriptural and Apostolic Idenity of Bishop and preaching
Presbyter, concludes, against Waldensis, that of necessity there must be
another way taken to Answer the Passages alleged out of Hierome for Presbytry:
And at length flatly opposes himself to Hierome in this Matter, and says, that
we ought rather to believe the Decrees of Popes and Councils, than the Doctrine
of Hierome, though both very Holy and Learned.

And Medina, another Champion of the Hierarchy, cited by Bellarmine, asserts
the same of Hierome, saying, He was of the same Judgment with Aerius in this
Matter. Bellarmine De Cler. Cap. 15. Michael Medina -- affirmat sanstum
Hieronymum idem omnino cum Aerianis sensisse, neque solum Hieronymum in ea
Heresi fuisse, sed etiam Ambrofium, Augustinum, Sedulium, Primasium,
Chrysostomum, Theodoretum, OEcumenium, and Theophilactum, atque ita (inquit
Medina) isti Viri ali^qui Sanctissimi and Sacrarum Scripturarum consultissimi,
quorum tamen sententiam, prius in Aerio, deinde in Waldensibus, postremo in
Johanne Vvicklefo, damnavit Fcclesia. Et infra. Ergo in Hieronymo and Gracis
illis Patribus etc.
is very displeased with his Brother for his Ingenuity, and therefore attempts
to bring Hierome over to the Episcopal Party; but instead of performing this
Task, he only fruitlesly endeavors to set Hierome at variance with himself.

The like success had another of the same Fraternity, who, like Bellarmine,
attempted to draw Hierome to his Faction, Bailey the Jesuit: Catechism. tract.
2. Quest. 23.
And yet with these, the most disingenous of the whole fry of Loyolites, some
called Protestants stick not warmly to join themselves, and plead for a
Patrociny to their Cause from Hierome.

. 3. Yea not only was Hierome of the same Judgment anent Episcopacy with
Aerius, but also, as even the Jesuit Medina acknowledges, the most of the
Greek and Latin primitive Doctors, and in special Ambrosius, Augustinus,
Sedulius, Primasius, Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Oecumenius, Theophilactus. This
their Opinion (says Medina) was first condemned in Aerius, then in the
Waldenses, and lastly in Wicklef, but this Doctrine was either dissembled or
tolerated by the Church in them for the Honor that was had to them, while on
the other hand it was always condemned in these Men as Heretical, because in
many other things they swerved from the Church. Many Papists and other
Prelatists cannot away with this Medina's free dealing, and use many shifts to
refute him, and draw these Fathers to their Party. But to use the Words of
Rivet Cath. Orth. Tom. 1. Page 286.
, Whosoever shall consider their Answers collested by Sixtus Senensis Biblioth.
lib. 6. annot. 319, 323, 324. they shall presently perceive that all their
Distinctions are most pitiful Elusions, and that indeed all these Fathers were
no less Presbyterian than Aerius, although they accommodat themselves to the
Custom then received; least for a Matter not contrary to the Foundations of
Religion they should have broken the Unity of the Church. What do our Opposits
herein, but espouse what the Romanists, in whom any ingenuity remains, have
long since disowned?

. 4. But though Epiphanius were the mouth of all Antiquity, and the only fit
Judge in this Controversy, the Triumph of our Adversaries should be very
small: for Aerius to Prove the Idenity of the two, having adduced a parallel of
many particulars, Epiphanius Heresi 55. five 75. (...).
denies nothing of these to belong to Presbyters, except only Imposition of
Hands; he yields therefore that both of them equally have Power to Baptize, to
occupy the Chair, and finally to perform all Divine Worship. Our Antagonists
therefore offering to vouch the Prelacy they plead for, by the Authority of
Epiphanius, promise much more then they can perform; for what, pray, is this
Power of Imposition of Hands, or Ordination, compared with what they covet, and
pretend to support by Epiphanius, his Authority, I mean the, both great and
many Differences between Bishop and Presbyter.

. 5. In the mean while Epiphanius his unjust dealing toward Aerius, is most
palpable, for he sticks not to give out, that Aerius his Judgment of the
Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, was looked on by the whole Church as an
intolerable Heresy condemned by the Word of God, when yet the quite contrary
is so plain in the Writings of the Ancients down from the very Apostles, that
even Epiphanius himself could not be ignorant thereof. Neither are his
Deductions from Scripture more solid than his Allegation of the Suffrages of
the Catholic Church, is true: all he brings from Scripture being 1 Timothy 5. 1.
and 19. but he so grossy abuses these Scriptures that even Spalatensis De
repub. eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 5.
himself, and the ablest Patrons of Prelacy are ashamed of these Inferences.
But Epiphanius had less exposed himself, had he, as he did in the Matter of
Lents, set Fasts, Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such his dear
and beloved Doctrines, pretended only to Tradition; and so the Lettice should
have been fitted for the Lips, and also his miserable weakness have been less
apparent.

. 6. And though in the last place, to render Presbytry more odious, they still
upbraid us with the Arrianism of Aerius; we need be little concerned therewith,
seeing we have the greatest Opposers of Arrians, entirely Aerians (to speak in
the style of our Opposits) in the matter of Presbytry, as we have already
showed. But I must here add, that it is upon no good Ground believed that ever
Aerius was Arrian: all the Schisms and Divisions, though but very small, among
the Arrians themselves are diligently described by the Historians of these
times, as Ruffinus, Socrates, Sozomen, Theodoret, Theodorus Lector,
Philost^rgius, and others; but none of these or any others mention a word of
the Schism of Aerius, which if we believe Epiphanius, was a Schism among the
Arrians themselves: for he tells us that Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in
Pontus, from whom Aerius made the separation, was a downright Arrian, and
persisted therein till his Death.

Add hereto that Augustine and others, who, in their Catalogues of Heretics
mention Aerius, still in their Preambles, intimat that their Author is
Epiphanius. I name Augustine on the vulgar supposition that he is the Author of
that tract de Heresibus, which yet is very doubtful, seeing it is altogether
improbable that he ever heard off, and far less read Epiphanius his books (...)
It Is altogether unprobable that they were then translated, and it is certain
that Augustine was utterly unable to understand them in the Original. Moreover,
we have in that Tractat Relations of the Nestorian and Eutichian Heresies, not
broached till after Augustine's Death. Which Relations, although some allege to
have been added by another to the rest, which they think to be really
Augustines, yet seeing they are no less then the rest handed down under his
Name (though they now stand there as an Appendix, for in the end of the Pelagian
Heresy which is the last before the Appendix, he promises more) make a good
proof that it is not easy to discern the genuine part of that Tractat from the
Spurious. However this be from what is said, the matter of Aerius resolves into
this Issue, that we have only the report thereof from Basilius, and Epiphanius.

. 7. But that discourse of Basilius, (...), in which Aerius is mentioned, is
suspected and well nigh condemned by Erasmus Epistola ejus dedicatiora
translationi suae praefixa.
And to confirm what he asserts, Robert Cock, in his Censure of the Fathers,
adds diverse Reasons, as I am informed by Rivet, Critic. Patrum Page 330.
for I have not perused Cock himself; neither need I, seeing in all that
Tractat there is not the least mention of Aerius. The ground of somes mistake
was, that instead of Aetius, who indeed was a most noted and pernicious Arrian,
by the escape of the Printer, or some other accident, the word Aerius had crept
into Erasmus his Translation thereof: But in the Original, printed at Paris
Anno MDXVIII, there is Aetius, not Aerius. They have (says he (...). cap. 2.
(...).cap.2. (...)
) a certain old Quibble from Aetius the head of his Heresy. And indeed Basil
could never have termed Aerius, or any thing said by him, ancient, seeing he
was scarcely so old as Basil himself, As for Epiphanius, if we consider the
Passion wherewith he manages the Debate with Aerius, and his great credulity of
whatever might favor his own Cause, and his many Mistakes in Historical
Matters, he deserves little Credit in this Matter. A mighty Tide of Passion,
which both blinds Men's eyes, and opens their Ears to false Reports, visibly
appears in Epiphanius his whole conduct of the Dispute with Aerius: and that he
was most credulous, believing the most light and groundless Reports, and in
matters of Fact, of all men most frequently fell into Mistakes, is attested,
not only by Melchor Canus, and Baron, in many places of his Annals, among the
Papists; but also by the learnedest of the Protestants, as Casaubon, Vir
maximus Epiphanius, sed, quem res arguit ipsa, levibus auditiunculis, nescio
unde acceptis, facile nimis aliquando fidem habuisse.
whose words are: Epiphanius was a great Man, but, as is very evident, he did
most easily believe every most silly and groundless Report. To which also the
learned Rivet assenteth.

. 8. One Instance whereof appears in his Relation of the Donatists, whom,
either out of misinformation, or some other weakness, he accuses also of
Arrianism, and tells us Haeresi 39. vel 59. (...) --
that they agreed with Arrius in Doctrine, and that one Refutation would serve
for both.

. 9. Augustine Epistola 50. ad Bonifacium.
indeed speaks as if some of them believed the Son to be less than the Father:
But, as appears from the same Author, Ibidem.
they erred rather in expression than reality; for he presently absolves them
from the Charge, and informs us, that between the Church and them, there was no
Question concerning this Matter. And elsewhere, Tom. 6. Haeresi 69.
he imputes this dangerous Expression to Donatus their Leader, who had used it
in some of his Writings, but tells us with all that his Party follow him not
herein. Neither (says Augustine) shall ye readily find one among them all who
knows that Donatus had any such Opinion.

And Optatus Lib. 3. Page 101.
plainly declares, that in the great Foundations of Christianity, there was no
difference between the Orthodox and Donatists. And indeed it is acknowledged by
all, except Epiphanius, that the Donatists were only guilty of Schism, not of
Heresy.

. 10. But Aerius (they may object) his Arrianism is sufficiently attested by
what is recorded of Eustathius his Friend and Bishop: and indeed Basil Epist.
74.
accuses Eustathius of Arrianism, but for ought I remember the Historians of
these times differ from Basil.

. 11. They accuse Eustathius of Levity, Deceit, Macedonianism, or the denial of
the Holy Ghost's Divinity, a most damnable Heresy, yet different from
Arrianism. And herein also they represent him rather variable and unfixed, than
entirely wedded to this Heresy. He once subscribed to the Orthodox Doctrine,
and was approved as such by Liberius the Bishop of Rome, then Orthodox, and
other Catholic Christians. But they write that he relapsed. In the mean while,
when he was most for the Macedonians, he said as he would not call the
Holy Ghost God, so he durst not call him a Creature; hence, he may rather be
counted among these who were most dangerously shaken, than a downright
Macedonian; and may for all is said of his Opinions plead for some Charity from
all that well consider, the most dismal and dangerous Age wherein he lived.

. 12. But let him be an Arrian blacker than Arrius himself, it will be hard
thence to draw any Conclusion concerning Aerius.

For First, Basil, in the forecited place, tells us, that Eustathius was so
cunning, as to persuade the ablest of these times that he was Orthodox; and why
might he not then put a Cheat on his own Presbytry.

Secondly, Eustathius, as is related, was much given to Covetousness, and
although Epiphanius carried out with Passion, for his Innovations justifies and
praises him, that he may reach a harder Blow to Aerius: yet this his Avarice
was one of the Grounds wherefore Aerius, (as he professes) deserted
Eustathius: and this I think is no less to be believed, than ought else we have
from Epiphanius, uncharitably at least, wresting both his Words and Actions.
And it is not improbable that he, who had the Conscience to dislike Eustathius
for his Vices, might do no less on the account of his Errors.

Thirdly, Aerius was priviledg'd by God with, both, eyes to perceive, and
courage to oppose the unwarranted Festivals, superstitious Fasts, Prayer and
Sacrifice for the Dead, and other such then growing Dottages, notwithstanding
that they were so kindly embraced by most Christians. Now I believe that hardly
an Instance can be adduc'd, of any who set himself in Opposition to the whole
World, by condemning such growing Corruptions, and attempting at least to stop
the beginnings of Anti-christianism, and yet fell into this damnable Heresy
wherewith they brand Aerius. I hope therefore, that henceforth all true
Protestants shall enlarge their Charity, and be more backward to join with
Romanists in bespattering the memory of him who did amongst the first declare
his Detestation of the leaven of Romanism.

. 13. Had any thing written by Aerius, come unstained to our hands, I doubt not
but we had got a far other account of his Creed and Doctrine: but the Zeal of
these Innovatours prompted them to make all Opposers of their Fopperies grand
Heretics, and fasly stigmatize Truth's Witnesses with what really deserved
that name, and then overwhelmed them with Calumnies; and gave their Writings to
the Flames for a Repository. This was the Fate of Vigilantius, Claudius
Taurinensis, and others, of whose Writings nothing, except some mangled and
depraved scrapes found in the bitter Invectives of their most partial and
disingenous Adversaries, remains.

. 13. The Aerians are also remembered by Philastrius Haeresi 25. Aerii ab Aerio
quodam sic appellati sunt, qui astinentiis vacant etc.
They are so named (says he) from Aerius, they give themselves to abstinences,
and live mostly in Pamphilia, they are also called Encratites, i. e.
Abstinents. They possess nothing; They abhore Meats which God with his Blessing
has bestowed on Mankind: They condemn moreover lawful Marriage, alleging
that it is not of God's Institution. Thus Philastrius.

. 14. But to me it is not probable that any who denied, and despised all their
Lent-seasons, Xerophagies, wherein nothing was eaten but dry Bread, and such
rigorous Fasts and restraints, were ever addicted to Encratitick abstinences,
whereby all use of Wine, Flesh, and other such Delicacies was probihited.

Secondly, Epiphanius makes the Encratits and Aerians quite contrary Sects to
one another, who sustained quite contrary Doctrines and Practices: for
according to him Haeresi 27. sive 47. (...).
the former ate no living Creature -- nor drank Wine. Which is also Attested by
Eusebius Hist. Eccles. Lib. 4. Cap. 29. (...) etc.
, and Irenaeus. Lib. 1. Cap 30.
The latter Epiphanius, Haeresi 55. sive 75. (...).
according to his custom of turning all the Aerians their Practices into
Crimes, will have to be excessive Gormandizers, and but to liberal to
themselves in both Flesh and Wine: so far was he from joining with Philastrius
in ascribing Encratitism to the Aerians.

Thirdly, Another of the Heresies of these Encratites, was their rejecting much
of the New Testament, and in particular the Epistles of Paul Eusebius Eccles.
Hist. Lib. 4. Cap. 29. (...) etc.
. But so far were the Aerians therefrom, that they founded Epiphanius Haeresi
55. sive 75. (...).
the Doctrine, for which they are so much reproached by Epiphanius, viz. that
of the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, on these very Epistles of Paul citing
1 T^m. 3. 4. and 14. And the like places of Paul for Proofs of their Doctrine,
which afterward was done by Hierome, and after him by the stream of
Interpreters of these Places, and others that handled that Subject, and at this
day by the Body of the Reformed Churches. From all which is evident the
falsehood of what Philastrius alleges, and that the Aerians were far from
being guilty of Encratitism or such Crimes, but they must needs first suffer
the persecution of tongues as a preamble and preparative to make them a Prey
more obnoxious to the violent hands of these who are beginning to dote on the
Romish Superstition.

. 15. And so it fell out. For Epiphanius Ibidem (...).
himself tells us, that the Aerians were banished from Churches, Lands,
Villages, and Cities, and that often times they lodged only in the open Air,
all covered with Snow, and were obliged to seek shelter in the Woods and Rocks.
Now what was the cause of this so violent hatred and hot Persecution? Was it
their being guilty of Arrianism? sure not: For if we believe Epiphanius they
were a branch of the Arrians, and, as he insinuats, lived among them. But
suppose they did not, we find no such Persecution of the Arrians on the account
of their Faith in these times, but only their Exclusion from the public
Churches. They being permitted in the mean while to keep their Conventicles in
private Houses, even at the very Gates of the greatest Cities. Add hereto (which
we trust we have evinced) that Aerius never Arrianiz'd, and so they could not
persecute him, and his Followers upon this account. From all that is now said,
it is clear, that we most seek another spring of this violent Hate and
Persecution. And this I think may easily be reached and perceived to be nothing
else but the passionat Zeal, the World, declining more and more after
Antichristian Superstition, had for their set Lent-seasons, their Fasts of
their own making, Prayer and Sacrifice for the Dead, their despotick Hierarchy,
and other such preparatives of the Man of Sin's appearance, all which were
opposed by Aerius, and his Followers with more Zeal than they were by any
others in the World at that time, and so had presently War made upon them by
such as minded nothing more than worshipping the Rising-Sun of Unrighteousness.
And indeed to me the whole strain of Epiphanius his Discourse clearly intimats,
that not Arrianism but the opposing of these Dotages was the Ground of all this
Hatred and Spite that was poured upon Aerius and his Adherents.

. 16. And now I have done with Philastrius: only I must observe, for which I
mainly adduc'd him, that in him there is no mention of Aerius his Arrianism,
which, though a negative Testimony, yet exceedingly weakens that we have from
Epiphanius, Philastrius being a Bishop, a Man of Credit, and of no less
Antiquity than the other. In which Sentiment, I am confirmed from Rabanus
Maurus De instit. cler. Lib. 2. Cap. 58. Aeriani ab Aerio quodam nuncupati
sunt, hi offerre sacrificium pr^ defunctis spernunt.
Bishop of Mentz, who only informs us, that the Heresy of Aerius consisted in
despising Sacrifices for the Dead. From all which to me it is more than
probable, that there is no ground to believe that ever Aerius Arrianiz'd.

Section VII.
No Diocesan Bishops in several Ancient Churches.
Though their Argument brought from Antiquity, be already satisfied, we shall yet
give some Instances of Churches, which, for several Centuries, were really
without Diocesan Bishops. St. Patrick, the Irish Apostle, is commonly said to
have ordained several hundreds of Bishops in Ireland, who, I Am sure, could not
be Diocesans. Dr. Maurice, Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy. Page 153.
being displeased with this Instance, rejects Nennius, the Author from whom we
have the account of St. Patrick's ordaining 365 Bishops, as fabulous. But it is
not in their accounts of the numbers of Bishops, but of the Deeds and Miracles
wrought by Bishops, and others of their Saints, that the fabulousness of the
Writers of these times is commonly to be observed.

He next quarrels with the common reading of that Author, alleging that He
speaks only of the Bishops in France and Britain, in communion with St.
Patrick, not of his Irish Bishops. But, I think, we may, in such critical
Learning give Bishop Usher the Preference, who Of the Religion of the Irish.
Page 59.
neither judged this Book fabulous, nor its common reading to be suspected. And
this account of the great number of Ancient Irish Bishops, is strongly
confirmed by what Clarkson Primitive Episcopacy. Page 40.
cites out of Bernard and Baron, showing that there were well nigh as many
Bishops as Churches. This the Doctor passes over in silence, which was scarce
fair enough dealling. Neither can the Doctor's ordinary salvo, viz. that the
Practice was not generally approved, nor of primitive Constitution, here serve
them; for whatsoever differed from the Roman Model, was presently made a
Novelty. And though Bernard and Lanfranc dislike the Practice of having so many
Bishops, yet they adventure not to instance any time wherein the Irish had been
ruled by a few Diocesans. And lastly, the Authors most regardable herein,
inform us that this Practice of having so many Bishops had place even in St.
Patrick's time, and mere infancy of the Irish Church.

. 2. Most visible footsteps of this also appear in the African Church, during
the time of Cyprian; for in that Council of Carthage, where he presided, there
was no small number of Bishops conveen'd, though doubtless there were many more
Bishops in Africa, who could not be all Diocesans, seeing few then were
Christians in Africa, save a small part of the Roman Colonies only. Yea the
hamlets and villages, these Bishops had for their Jurisdictions, are so
obscure, that the learned Pamelius is at a stand where to place them. And, long
after, in the time of the Vandalick Persecution, as Victor Vticensis relates,
Lib. 1. Vnde factum est ut post obitum Carthaginis Episcopi Zeugitanae, and
procensulari Provinciae, Episcopos interdiceret ordinarios quorum erat numerus
164.
there were in the Zeugitan or proconsular Province alone 164 Bishops: others
reckon more. Now this was but a small part of what the Romans possessed in
Africa, and few, beside the Roman Colonies, were at that time Christian; for
the Moors, or old Africans, who, beside what they had in the Cities, possessed
almost the whole Country, are by the same Victor without exception, called
Gentiles; and many of the Romans themselves had not yet embraced Christianity.
Now subduce, from that small number of the Zeugitan Province who were
Christians, the many Arrians, and other Heretics, and Schismatics, whom these
Bishops did not reckon as a part of their Flocks, and surely there shall scare
be found so many as to make up above 164 Parishes. Dr. Maurice tells us Page
164.
that all the African Bishops in Cyprian's time, could not have supplied the
Dioceses of one Province, in the V or VI Century. Which, if true, is a strong
Confirmation of what we plead for, viz. that they then were nothing less than
Diocesans: seeing as is now evident, there were, even in the fifth Century, but
a very small number of Christians in Africa, compared with the rest of the
Inhabitans. And in Cyprian's time, it may well be judged that there were some
hundreds of Bishops in the Roman Africa. But in such Cases, not the extent of
Bounds, but number of Souls is to be considered. Wherefore he should be a wild
Reasoner, that should conclude from Africa's having a dozen, or such a number
of Bishops, or Pastors, for surely there were but few at the entry of
Christianity, that there needed be no more afterward, and so make that number
the Standard to discern how many Bishops, by primitive Right, were to be placed
in all Africa.

And this is a Kin to what he says Page 185.
elsewhere, that though there were Bishops in small Towns, this was not the
primitive State of the Church; it may be indeed; nor yet, at the first entry of
the Gospel, were there Bishops in most part of the great Towns: but was this
for fear of Multiplication of Dioceses? no surely; but these few were all could
be then gotten. The substance of his Answer here is, that Africa was most
large, fertile, popolous. The first of which is readily granted, but the second
not so easily, much of these Regions being more fertile of sand and Serpents
than of Corn and Wine: and this in part discredits the third; seeing so much as
was barren, is not to be supposed Popolous; wherefore it is surprising to find
him making the Old Roman Africa more Popolous than France is now. He Page 165.
supposes that Africa had but 500 Bishops, and yet might have 40000 villages.
But I answer, that if the villages were considerable, and had Christian
Inhabitants, for otherways this is nothing to this purpose, then had Africa
40000 Bishops: for H. Thorndick Right of Churches, review Page 153.
acknowledges that Bishops in Africa were so plentiful, that every good
village must needs be the Seat of an Episcopal Church. Which words of H.
Thorndick are cited by Clarkson but dissembled by the Doctor. In the mean
while, I can find nothing which can shake what I have said above, or overturn,
as for example, what I have noted from Victor's words, and oblige me to lessen
my substraction. Add to what is said the words of Dr. Burnet. In St. Augustin's
time (says he Conferences. Page 348.
) it appears from the journals of a Conference he had with the Donatists, that
there were about five hundred Bishoprics in a small tract of ground. But we
need not cross Seas in pursuit of ancient Churches free of Diocesans, seeing
our Country Scotland affords us so luculent a proof of our Assertion. The words
of Prosper Aquitanicus, in his Chronicle annexed to that of Eusebius and
Hierome, are most clear and cogent. Palladius (says he Ad Scotos in Christum
credentes ordinatur a Papa Caelestino, Palladius and primus Episcopus mittitur.
) is ordained by Pope Coelestine for the Scots that had already believed in
Christ, and is sent to them to be their first Bishop. Never was a passage of
any Historian more universally believed, than this of Prosper, which Beda^
Edit. Lovan. Fol. 15.
, and a MS. Chronicle of Scotland in the Library of Glasgow, yea the whole
stream of Historians repeat and approve: but none more amply and plainly, than
Cardinal Baron Ann. 429. numb. IV. Primum vero eam gentem a Coelestino Papa
Episcopum habuisse Palladium omnes consentiunt.
, whose words are, All Men agree that this Nation (viz. Scotland) had Palladius
their first Bishop from Pope Coelestine. And again Ibid. Ex his autem habes
quibus redarguas asserentes Sedulium Christianum Poetam quem tantopere Gelasius
laudat habuisse praeceptorem Hildebertum Scotorum Archi-episcopum: Etenim cum
ipse Sedulius ad Theodosii Imperatoris tempora referatur quo modo usus esse
potuit Hildeberto Scotorum Archi-episcopo Paerceptore, si nullus adhuc
ordinatus erat in Scotia Archi-episcopus and Palladius absque controversia
primus dicatur ejus Gentis Antistes.
thus you are instructed how to refuse these who allege that Sedulius the
Christian Poet, whom Pope Gelasius so much extolls, had for his Master,
Hildebert the Archbishop of the Scots: for, seeing even Sedulius himself lav'd
in the time of Theodosius the Emperor, how could he have had, for his Master,
Hildebert the Archbishop of the Scots, seeing there was no Archbishop yet
ordained in Scotland, and Palladius is without debate affirmed to have been the
first Bishop of that Nation. This is yet more plainly expressed by the most
learned Antiquaries of our Country: all of them agree in this, that before
Palladius, the Church was ruled and guided without any Diocesan Bishops. For,
as Fordun has it Lib. 3. Cap. 8. Ante cujus ( Palladii sc.) adventum habebant
Scoti Fidei Doctores, ac Sacramentorum Ministratores, Presbyteros solummodo vel
Monachos, ritum sequentes Ecclesiae primitiva.
before the coming of Palladius the Scots, following the Custom of the
primitive Church, had Teachers of the Faith and Dispensers of the Sacraments,
who were only Presbyters or Monks. And Johannes Major De gestis Scotorum. Lib.
2. Per Sacerdotes and Monachos, sine Episcopis Scoti in fide erudiebantur.
says, the Scots were instructed in the Faith by Priests and Monks without
Bishops. And Hector Boethius Fol. 132. Erat Palladius primus omnium qui apud
Scotos sacrum egere Magistratum, a summo Pontifice Episcopus creatus: quum
antea Populi suffragiis etc.
, Palladius was the first of all who exercised any Hierarchical Power among the
Scots, being ordained their Bishop by the Pope, whereas before, their Priests
were, by the suffrages of the People, chosen out of the Monks and Culdees. Add
hereto the known Testimony of Buchanan; and of Sir Thomas Craig, To pass over (
says he Scotland's sovereignty asserted. Page 134.
) that most silly' Fable of the three Archflamins, and the twenty eight
Flamins; it is plain that there was no Bishop in Britain before Palladius, who
is by the English themselves called the Bishop of the Scots; or if either the
Brittons or English have any, let them name them, and at what time they
flourished.

. 3. Yea so clear is this Truth, that the most learned of our Adversaries have
found no better way to elude, when they cannot clide it, than, as Torniellus in
another case said of Bellarmine, to endeavor the penetrating of a most firm
wall, and cast the History about forty of our ancient Scottish Kings, as a
forged legend. Among these is Loyd Bishop of St. Asaph: but both he and Dr.
Stillingfleet are nervously refuted by the learned Sir George M^kenzie Advocat;
and that their main purpose and undertaking was utterly desperate, he makes soon
appear. And though (says he) this Author could prove, that we were not settled
here, before the year 503 yet that could not answer the Argument. (viz. that is
brought against Episcopacy from the Scottish primitive Church Government for the
Culdees might have been settled before that time. And thus, in a few syllables,
he demonstrats that the Bishop, as to his ultimat design, had only his labor
for his cost. But Sir George being too sagacious not to foresee, that, from the
mutual strugglings between himself and the Bishop, any man might easily
conclude, that Presbytry was the primitive Government of the Church of
Scotland: and having been one of the prime Instruments to put in execution the
prelatical Fury, judged himself concerned, in credit, to say somewhat in
favors of Episcopacy, and attempt the stoping of such an Inference. Wherefore,
to this purpose, in a Letter to the Earl of Perth, prefixed to the defense of
the Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland, He makes several assayes: The
first whereof is,

That this is one of the meanest Arguments, that ever were used by a
Presbyt^rian: -- And that it is a weak Argument, (says he) appears from this,
that I have met with very few Laics in all our Country, who had heard of it;
nor with one, even of these few who had valued it. But be it so that the
Argument seem mean, we gain notwithstanding a most sufficient Argumentum ad
hominem, seeing our ablest Adversaries value it so much; yea, Sir George
himself clearly acknowledges this, while he says, and what can the
Presbyterians think of their other Arguments, which they value much? since
this, which they valued so little, is thought of such force by a learned
Bishop, as to deserve a whole book, the cutting off of 44 Kings, and the
offending a Nation of Friends. But it is nothing though the Laics had neither
valued nor heard it, seeing, as himself grants, Blondel, with whom join the
rest of the Presbyterian Writers, urged it. Hence appears, that this Argument
is, by both Parties, judged to be of great force and consequence: for the
solution whereof, the Advocat brings nothing save what is altogether unworthy
of any ingenous man. As for example, since (says he) it cannot be denied, but
that these who ordained our Presbyters were Bishops; it necessarly follows,
that Episcopacy was settled in the Christian Church before we had Presbyters or
Culdees. Wherein, as to the solution of our Argument, which was the scope of
his Letter, he only begs the Question, and gives us what is impertinent
thereto, and contradicts, moreover, these our Historians, whose credit he so
excellently vindicats, seeing, as we heard, they plainly tell us, that our
ancient Anti-diocesan practice was the very custom of the primitive Church.
And, when our Historians say that the Abbots of Icolm-kill had Jurisdiction
over all the Bishops of the Province, that is to be understood, as Beda
observes, more inusitato; after an unusual manner. And yet he compares this
practice of the Abbot to that of a King who makes one a Bishop, and to the
practice of a Mother who makes her Son a Churchman: now if it be any strange
or surprising thing for a King, by his Conge d'eslire, to make one a Bishop, or
for a Mother to educate her Son in order to be a Churchman, and procure some
place for him, let any man judge. And, later Historians (says the Advocat)
meeting with these ambigous words in our Annals Designatus, Electus, Ordinatus,
were, by a mistake, induced to appropriat these words to the formal Ceremony of
Ordination and Imposition of hands. As if any man in his wit could take these
words to mean any other thing than Ordination, providing they be, as they are
in our Annals, spoken of one Churchman in relation to another. Moreover, he
knew sufficiently that the best Records of our Country expressly say, that our
Church was ruled by Presbyters without Bishops, and so leave not the least room
for tergiversation. Bid is one of these Authors who creat them so much
vexation; for speaking of Icolm-kill, the Isle (says he Lib. 3. Cap. 4. Habere
autem solet ipsa Insula Rectorem semper Abba^tem Presbyterum, cujus Juri and
omnis Provincia and ipsi etiam Episcopi ordine inusitato debeant esse subjecti,
juxta exemplum primi Doctoris illius qui non Episcopus, sed Presbyter extitit.
) still uses to have for its Rector an Abbot, who is a Presbyter to whose
Jurisdiction the whole Province and even the Bishops themselves, after an
unusual manner ought to be subject according to the example of their first
Teacher, who was no Bishop but a Presbyter. Hence it is clear, that even in
Bede's time, Bishops were but of small note here, and their power much less than
in other Churches. They are therefore much pained with Bede's words, and
chiefly St. Asaph, who, amongst other odd things he excogitats, tells us, that
the Superiority this Presbyter had over the Bishops, was only in respect of the
royalty of the Isle which the King gave the Abbot. As if ever Bid, or any man
else could have marked such a Superiority as strange and unusual, it being
nothing but what every Prince or Lord of any place still practices; who, although
he subject himself to a Bishop in Spirituals, yet in respect of Temporals and
the Royalty, uses to retain the Superiority. But, which 'utterly spoils the
Bishop's comment, Bid Ibid. Vnde and praefatam Insulam ab eis in possessimem
Monasterii faciendi accepit. Neque enim magna est, sed quasi Familiarum quinque
etc.
tells that all Columbanus got, was the possession of a little Isle, able to
sustain about five Families, for building of a Monastry, without the least
mention of his being invested with the Royalty thereof, or any other Island:
and yet to him were all the Bishops of the whole Province (all the Bishops of
Scotland, says the Saxon Chronicle, cited by the Bishop himself) subjected, so
that this pretended Royalty of Columban over the Island, becomes a vain dream,
and though 'twere real could do him no kindness, the whole Province being
certainly a far other thing than any such Island; wherefore the Superiority
this Presbyter had over these Bishops, must needs have been in Ecclesiastic
affairs; and this was really remarkable and unusual. But of this enough; for,
whosoever believes that the errand of this most ancient Preacher and Propagator
of Christ's Kingdom, was to win an earthly Kingdom to himself, and that the
King shared with him his Soveraignity and Realm, may as soon swallow the whole
legend of Constantine's Donation to Sylvester.

But to return to the Advocat, as, in the things that he touches, he wholly
prevaricats, so he never handles our main Argument, which is taken from what is
related of our Churches practice, preceding the coming of Palladius. He only
refers to Spotswood who says Hist. Page 7.
Buchanan is of opinion, that before Palladius his coming there was no Bishop
in this Church; -- what warrant he had to write so, I know not, except he did
build upon that which Joannes Major says, speaking of the same Palladius; --
The Scots ( he says) were instructed in the Christian Faith by Priests and
Monks, without any Bishops. But from the instruction of the Scots in the Faith
to conclude, that the Church after it was gathered had no other form of
Government, will not stand with any reason. For be it as they speak, that by
the Travels of foam pious Monks the Scots were first converted unto Christ; it
cannot be said that the Church was ruled by Monks, seeing long after these
times it was not permitted to Monks to meddle with matters of the Church, nor
were they reckoned among the Clergy. But it is strange how he can allege
Buchanan to be supported by no Authors, except Major, for Palladius his being
Scotland's first Bishop: he could not but know, that not only Major, but also
Fordun, Bid, with many others within the Isle; Prosper, Bergumensis, and,
among the later Historians, the Magdeburgenses, Baron, with many other
Transmarines, assert it. And this last affirms that none can deny it.

4. It Is true, Spotswood says Hist. Page. 4.
that Boeth out of ancient Annals reports that these Priests were wont for
their better Government to elect some one of their number, by common suffrage,
to be Chief and Principal among them, without whose knowledge and consent
nothing was done in any matter of importance; and that the person so elected
was called Scotorum Episcopus, a Scots Bishop, or a Bishop of Scotland. But
they reap little advantage here, for in Boeth's words (y) there is no mention,
as the Bishop without book affirms, whether these Annals were ancient or
modern. But whatever they be Hector gives ground to believe that he had Annals
declaring the contrary, as appears by his words above cited, where he
homologated that common sentiment of Christians, and told us that Palladius was
our first Bishop, and that none before him had any Hierarchical Power in
Scotland. To allege therefore Boethius as espousing their cause here, is any
to set him at variance with all Christians, and by the ears with himself. But
grant it were as Spotswood says, yet there should no small damage accreu to
their Cause, seeing, on supposition hereof, it follows, that the Episcopal
Ordination was altogether wanting in the primitive Church of Scotland; it not
being supposeable that this one man could Ordain all the Pastors in Scotland,
yea, that even this their great Bishop had no other Ordination himself, but
what he received from Presbyters.

. 5. The Bishop's following words, from the instruction of the Scots in the
Faith etc. are altogether void of reason. For it is granted that after the
coming of Palladius (which is the time whereunto he must refer the gathering of
the Church) she then indeed began to have another Government, and never man yet
pleaded, that, because the Church of Scotland was not governed by Bishops
before Palladius, therefore 'twas not really governed by them after his coming;
which is the Inference the Bishop's words seem to deny. But I believe there is
more in them, for they are abstruse: and judge their meaning to be, that though
we had no Bishops before Palladius, yet this can be no ground to conclude that
we ought to have none afterward, our Church being then rude and in her infant
state. The Advocat is of the same mind, saying, that before Palladius his time
our Church was constituenda or unsettl'd. But who can believe it? For, first,
it is generally supposed that Palladius came to free this Church from
Pelagianism, and not to establish Church Government.

Secondly, Is It credible that the Church of Scotland, after so long a
continuation and flourishing of Christianity, had been, rather than any other
Churches, without any certain form of Government? This is certainly a thing
unparalellable, even according to our Adversaries, who tell us that every
Church very soon after its beginning had its Diocesan Bishops, and so a certain
form of Government.

Thirdly, Yea although many other Churches had been without all Government for
such a tract of time, there is ground to believe that Scotland could not; they
lying most of this time under the persecuting Sword, whereas we read of no
persecution in our Church, even while our Kings were Pagan; and our King Donald
the I, the first crowned Head in the World that ever subject'd it self to Jesus
Christ, very much encouraged the Christians, and was seconded herein by
severals of his Successors. And although some of 'em were vicious, and their
Reigns short, or vexed with Wars, yet such trouble never struck directly
against Christianity, like the fury of the Pagans throngh the rest of the
World: and others were both excellent Men, and had longer and peaceable Reigns,
as Findochus, and Cratilinthus, but especially Fincormachus, an excellent man
and a great promoter of Religion, and therefore, as is most presumable, was a
great Instrument under God, for the settlement of our Church Affairs.

Add to all this, Fourthly, That the terrible Storm of Persecution through the
Roman World, drove then from the Brittons, and other places, no small number of
excellent Men to Scotland, who doubtless did no small service to God therein,
and especially in the time of Fincormachus, when, as all observe, a great many
fled hither who were famous both for Life and Doctrine, yea long before this
even in the time of Tertullian, our Church was well known to much of the
Christian World, as appears from his clear Testimony. The places of Britain
(says he Contra Judaeos. Cap. 7. Loca Britannorum Romany inaccessa, Christo
tamen subdita.
) to which the Romans could not yet pass, are notwithstanding subject to
Christ. And if any have called Scotland barbarous, or not well reformed before
the coming of Palladius, Sir George learn'dly refutes them; and names severals,
and among them even Stannihurst, otherways an enemy to our Nation, who have
done it: and he well observes, that the reason why some speak of us as then not
well enough reformed, was because of our want of agreement with the Church of
Rome.

. 6. As to the last part of the Bishop's discourse, saying, that it was not
permitted to Monks to meddle with the matters of the Church etc. And wherein he
is seconded by St. Asaph, who falls foul on Presbyterians on this account, as
if they were darkners of all Church History etc. They should know, that as our
Historians called these Monks, they also called them Priests, sometimes
Presbyters, or Bishops, or Doctors, and frequently Culdees. Our people (says
Boeth Lib. 6. Fol. 95. v. 40. Coeperi and nostri eo temp^re Christi dogma
acuratissime amplexari Monachorum quorundam ductu and adhortatione qui quia
sedulo pr^dicationi vacarent, essentque frequentes in oratione, ab incolis
Cultores Dei sunt appellati: invaluit id nomen apud vulgus in tantum ut
Sacerdotes omnes ad nostra pene tempora vulg^ Culdaei; i. e. Cultores Dei, sine
discrimine vocitarentur.
) also began most seriously at that time to embrace the Doctrine of Christ, by
the guidance, and exhortation of some Monks; who, because they were most
diligent in Preaching, and frequent in Prayer, were called by the Inhabitants,
Worshippers of God: which name took such deep root with the common People, that
all the Priests, even to our time, were commonly without difference called
Culdees, i. e. Worshippers of God: Elsewhere this Author called these Teachers
and Guides indifferently Priests, Monks, and Culdees. Thus also speaks the best
of our Historians, some of whom we have heard calling them Presbyters, and
Admistrators of the Sacraments. Hence it is clear, that when they call them
Monks, the word is not to be taken in the later Popish sense, for a Layhermite;
for these our primitive Pastors were only called Monks, by reason of their
strictness of life, and frequent retirement to Devotion, when the public work
of the Ministry did permit it, and perhaps also diverse of them abstained from
Marriage, that they might keep themselves free from the World, and its care,
without urging this on others, as was the practice of the famous Paphnutius in
the council of Nice: From all which I conclude, that before the coming of
Palladius, we had a settled Church without the least umbrage of their Hierarchy.

. 7. I add, that long after that, it had but very slender footing here; seeing,
according to Spotswood, they had no distinct Titles or Dioceses, whose words
Hist. Page. 4.
are, neither had our Bishops auy other Title (then that of Scotorum Episcopi,
or Scottish Bishops) whereby they were distinguished, before the days of Malcomb
the III, who first divided the Country into Dioceses, appointing to every
Bishop the limits etc. Yea, after most strict search, Book 1.
for a long time posterior to Palladius, he can scarce find the least footsteps
of Episcopacy. And again, long it was after the distinction of Dioceses, before
they were admitted to any civil Places or Votes in Parliament, Hence nothing is
more certain than that, for many Ages, the Church of Scotland knew nothing of
their Hierarchy: the first Rudiments whereof were bronght from Rome, which was
sent packing thither again, when we renounced our obedience to Antichrist.

. 8. Take but one other particular, and I take leave of the Advocat: he is much
displeased with St. As^ph terming him a Caresser of Fanatics, for affirming
that in consequence of this our Argument taken from the confessed Practice of
our primitive Church, we might reasonably conclude, that when we covenanted
against Episcopacy, we had only used our own right; and thrown out that which
was a confessed Innovation; in order to the restoring of that, which was our
primitive Government. A notable and never to be forgotten Concession of so
learned an Adversary as is this Bishop. Let Us hear what the Advocat returns
him. It will not follow (says he) that because our Church in its infancy and
necessity was without Bishops for some years; therefore it was reasonable for
Subjects, to enter into a solemn League and Covenant, without, and against the
Consent of their Monarch; and to extirpat Episcopacy settled then by Law, and
by an Old Prescription of 1200 years at least. But this most unfair
Representation of our Arguments antecedent is, I trust, now sufficiently
discovered: wherefore, I have nothing to do here with it, not yet am obliged to
evince the consequence he denies, seeing it is not to be accounted ours but his
own, who made the antecedent. Of the Grounds why the Nation entered into a
Covenant, I also discoursed already. In the mean while, I cannot but take notice
of his settling Episcopacy by Prescription; a Romish Argument, which, whatever
it may do in Law, has no place here. His Prescription, I Am sure, essentially
differs from that of Tertullian against the Heresies of his time, seeing he
lived in a very early Age, when especially, if ever, Prescription could have
place in the Church, and the Doctrines which he defended were generally and
uninterruptedly held by the Pastors, even from the Apostles times, and more
ancient than the Heresies, against which he prescribes, whereas in the present
case all things are clean contrary. For, as the Advocat himself here supposes,
the original of Scottish Episcopacy is several Ages posterior to that of the
Apostles; so that if the Argument could militat for either Party, it served
well the Church of Scotland against Prelacy, and not at all e contra. But though
things had been quite otherwise, there had been no fear of harm from their
Prescriptions; seeing, as Vincentius Lerinensis admonishes Cap. 39. Caeterum
dilatatae and inveteratae Haereses nequaquam etc.
In refutation of inveterat Errors, we must recurr to the sole authority of the
Scriptures. And Optatus Milevit. plainly asserts that Christ's Testament
abundantly suffices to determine all, and every particular Controversy among
Christians. Thus we see how pleasant a spectacle these two Champions afford us;
the Bishop forms the Major Proposition, and asserts, on supposition of the
Antiquity of our Royal Line, and veracity of our Historians, that our Church
acted with reason enough, and was only recovering her own Right, when she
cashiered Prelacy. The Advocat, in attempting to disprove this the Bishop's
Proposition, has only given such prevarications and elusions, as most strongly
confirm all the dis-interested of the truth thereof. As for the Minor
Proposition, that our ancient Royal Line is not forged but real, and our
historical Monuments most true and credible, the Advocat himself, to the
conviction of all the unbiased, in both his Books, makes appear. It remains
therefore as a conclusion of undoubted verity that our Church was acting most
rationally, and only recovering her own Right, when at any time she expelled
Prelacy, together with all its Innovations.

. 9. There is yet another Advocat of the Party, whose look is more stout than
his Fellows. We shall try if his reason be answerable to his confidence. I mean
A M. D. D. (I shall design him D. M.) The Author of a late Book called, An
Enquiry into the New Opinions (chiefly) propagated by the Presbyterians in
Scotland. Who, Page 227. Et sequentibus.
in opposition to the Defender of the Vindication of the Church Scotland,
handles the same Argument at large, and supposes, as a main Ground of his
Discourse, that his Antagonist denies, that there is any force in Argumento
negativo. To require (says D. M.) that a matter of Fact be attested by
competent Witnesses is, in the language of our Author to raze the Foundation of
all History. He spends therefore about 14 pages, to prove that a negative
Argument in some Cases may have place. But vainly, seeing the Author of the
Vindication does not once insinuat Defense of the Vindication of the Church of
Scotland. Page 36.
that a negative Argument can in no Cases be used, or that to require competent
Witnesses in a matter of Fact, is to raze the Foundation of all History. Yea he
believed that there were Witnesses so competent for his Assertion, that no
Argument, whither negative, or of whatsoever kind else, shall ever be able to
darken their Testimony, and that we have as good ground for our ancient Church,
her being without Bishops, as for any other part of our Nations Antiquities.
And indeed the Argument the Apologist, whom D. M. would vindicat, used, levels
at all parts of our ancient History, no less then at the thing under debate.
The Argument was, There were none that lived near that age that wrote the
History of it, and the Monks who wrote any thing were extremely ignorant. Now
this, if it do any thing to the Author's purpose, equally shakes and overthrows
all parts of our ancient History, seeing with the like force and success it may
be brought against any of 'em. Justly therefore repones the Defender of the
Vindication, that this is at one blow to raze the Foundation of the History of
our Nation, and that of most others: and to make them all to be Fools, who have
enquired into these Antiquities that concern our Nation, and others: such as
Fordon, Major, Beda, Usher etc. whereto, all, D. M. rejoins, is, that many
collateral proofs may be brought from the Roman Historians, that the Scots
inhabited that part of Britain, long before the imaginary period of his
Presbyterian Church. -- And the manner of reckoning the Scottish Genealogies at
their Marriages, their Births, and other remarkable Solemnities, was an
infallible conveyance of true, constant and perpetual Traditions. Their Bards
whose Science it was to repeat those Genealogies upon solemn Occasions, and to
celebrat their greatest Achievements in verse, could not add one to the number
of their Kings, but upon the Death of his Predecessor. But in all his
Discourse, there is wrapped up a concession of all the Defender of the
Vindication charged on the Apologist; seeing he evidently intimats, that unless
it be assertin'd some other way, nothing in any of our Countries Historians
merits any credit. And to confirm this, I except, (says he) against all the
three, (viz. Fordon, Major and Boethius) that none of 'em, could be a competent
Witness in Affairs of that nature at so great a distance from their own time,
unless they had named the Authors and Records upon whose Testimony their
Relation was founded. As to his mentioning of collateral Proofs etc. it is a
mere Sham; seeing, if once we yield with him, that no credit is due to any of
our Monuments now extant, except what is confirmed by some exotic Records, how
sorry an account have we of any of our Antiquities of whatsoever kind? which
foreign Testimonies notwithstanding may, if compared with our Writers, give
light to our Histories.

I Am sure moreover, notwithstanding of whatsoever old Traditions, or Bard's
verses are mentioned, all or surely most of these now being lost, or, though
extant, mostly unintelligible, our Royal Line could never be asserted without
ascribing to our Writers, both the reach and integrity of able and faithful
Historians. And yet D. M. is not afraid to compare his Apologist negative
Argument to another of Eusebius lib. 3. Where (says D. M.) by this very
Argument, he overthrows the authority of several Books that some would impose
upon the Church, merely because they were not duly attested, and none of the
Ancients brought any Testimonies from them. But Eusebius saw and perused these
Ancients, who either directly or occasionally mentioned all the Canonical
Books, and so justly their silence overthrew the Authority of the Spurious, and
baffled the credit of their Imposers: but has D. M. or his Apologist, seen or
perused all the Monuments from which our Historians took their materials, and
which were lost long before either of them were born? Can they from these
Records, though they would fain do it, rub shame upon all the Historians of our
Country, as a creu of lying Forgers? seeing then, that this is impo^^ible to
be done, and that, as the Advocat has solidly made out, they were men of
sufficient Candor and Reputation; seeing they used many ancient Reeords now
lost, and were of sufficient Discretion and Knowledge to distinguish genuine
from fictitious, seeing they relate what we plead for with no less unanimity
and concord than they do any thing else, and either profess, or sufficiently
enough intimat, that they brought all their Composours from ancient Records,
seeing that their Judgment is confirmed by unsuspected Forerunners both
ancient and modern, yea and suffrages of all mankind, who had ever any occasion
to speak of this matter, seeing what they relate is so far from being fabulous,
that our ancient Church Government they mention is sufficiently attested and
acknowledged by the fiercest of our Adversaries to be truly Apostolic, and
seeing, lastly, as we have heard, Prelacy, for a long time after Palladius, was
of far less bulk and power in Scotland, than in other Churches; the Apologists
negative Argument has just as much consanguinity with that of Eusebius, as is
between a downright Paralogism, and a solid Deduction: yea I averr moreover,
that considering Prelacy was then at its Ela in Scotland, and none of our
Historians at least before Buchanan were Presbyterian, nor could reap any
Advantage by disobliging the Prelates, any one of their Testimonies alone might
give sufficient ground to believe that what they said was well founded on good
and ancient Records.

. 10. But after a long, and, as himself truly says, needless digression, he
comes to examine our Testimonies, and will have Boethius to contradict the
rest, alleging that his meaning is not, that Palladius was the first Bishop,
but only the first sent from Rome, but of Boethius already.

Here D. M. falls foul on Blondel as a corrupter of Boethius, because he said
as out of him that the Presbyters elected and ordained their Bishop. There is
nothing (says D. M.) said by Boethius, but that the Bishops were elected from
among both the Priests and Monks. And true it is there is no more said in the
words D. M. cites, but it is as true that elsewhere Fol. 95. Pontificem inter se
communi suffragio deligebant etc.
Boethius expressly says, that the Pastors, Priests or Culdees themselves by
common suffrage elected this Pontificem or Prefect. Add hereto, that, if
Boethius have said ought inadvertantly or obscurely, he is to be correct'd or
explained by the harmonious and most express Testimonies of Fordun, Major,
Buchanan, Craig, and other such most learned of our Antiquaries, all of whom
are, beyond scruple, most positive for what we affirm.

. 11. Next he assaults Prosper's Testimony, alleging that, according to Baron,
Palladius was not sent to the Scots in Britain, Baronius (says D. M.) never
thought that Palladius was sent by Pope Coelestine to the Scoto-Britanni, but
rather to the Irish. And, whatever the Testimony of Prosper be, Spondanus and
Baronius leave the Vindicator, for they understood Prosper' s words of
Palladius his mission to Ireland, and not to that part of Britain, which is now
called Scotland. To prove this his Assertion he adduces, but, which was his
wisdom, untranslated, these words of Baron Ann. 431. Numb. 191. Perductum
quoque fuisse ad Hiberniam Insulam, sed cito morte subduectum ex hac vita
migrasse, ex Probo qui res gestas S. Patricii scripsit dictum est superius,
Hibernorum quidem conversionem Deus S. Patricio reservavit.
; that he (viz. Palladius) was brought also into the Isle of Ireland, but was
soon taken away by Death, is related by Probus, who wrote the Deeds of St.
Patrick. Egregiously reasoned! Probus says that Palladius went once into
Ireland; therefore Baron thought the words of Prosper not at all to be
understood of his coming into Scotland. Surely this Author may be allowed a
chief place in their next Book of Sports for the Sabbath. Yea these words, that
he was brought also etc. seem clearly to hold forth that he was sent to another
place beside, out of which he came into Ireland, and what place this was, the
immediately preceding words evince Ibid. Hoc eodem anno sub iisdem Consulibus
Sanctus Prosper missum ait Palladium ordinatum primum Episcopum ad Scotos:
perductum quoque fuisse ad Hiberniam etc.
the same year and in the time of the same Consuls St. Prosper says that
Palladius was sent to the Scots, being ordained the first Bishop. That he
(continues Cardinal Baron) was brought also into the Isle of Ireland etc. Where
it is most evident that Baron distinguishes the Scots, to whom Prosper says
Palladius was sent, from the Inhabitants of Ireland. But, to cut off all
further debate of this matter, the Cardinal clearly demonstrats what we plead
for, while he expressly says, Numb. 4. -- Magno honor prosequentes ejus
Reliquias in Mernia Scotiae Provincia collecatas.
that they highly honor Palladius his Relicts which are buried in the Mernes,
a Province of Scotland. And the Cardinal continuing his Discourse of the same
Scots, whose first Bishop, in his Judgment Prosper makes Palladius to have
been Numb. 5. Porro eandem Ecclesiam nobilissimam hoc nostro saculo Deus
tentati permisit, ut Christianae constantiae praeclarissimum specimen ederet,
cum inter alios Martyrs habere etiam meruit (quod nulla hactenus Christiana
Gens habuit) ipsam Reginam, Catholica Fidei eximium Decus and ornamentum
diutissima consessione in carcere ante probatam, nobiliori corona Martyrii
auctam.
, says that their late Queen (viz. Mary) was the Glory of the Catholic Faith,
and a Martyr: but I insist not on a matter so evident, the Advocat has
learn'dly made it out, and prevented all such attempts of D. M. and the like
Enemies of our Country.

. 12. He having thus abused Baron, prepares next for the depravation of Prosper
himself, telling us, that all that can be inferred is, that Palladius was the
first Bishop of the Roman mission. But Prosper's words are clear and without
any such limitation. Palladius (says he) is ordained by Pope Coelestine for
the Scots that had already believed in Christ, and is sent to them to be their
first Bishop. Behold our very Assertion, and why we should yield it, and in
lieu thereof embrace its contrary, I am yet to learn. He adds, that as soon as
the Pope aspired to his unlimited and universal Supremacy, there were several
Bishops sent to other Churches, already constituted, not to introduce
Episcopacy, which was the Government of the universal Church, but rather a
subjection to, and uniformity with the Roman See. But though all this were as
true as some of it is false, it is nothing to the purpose, except he find good
Authors, wherein a Bishop sent to a People, who not only were Christians, but
also governed by Bishops before he came, is called without restriction their
first Bishop.

And Boethius (continues D. M.) understood the History of Palladius in this
sense, Which though 'twere yielded, stands him in little stead, seeing all the
Historians and Antiquaries of our Country, and, as we have heard from Card.
Baron, with whom joins our learned Advocat, all men everywhere else understand
Prosper in the sense we plead for; believing that there was no Bishop in
Scotland before Palladius.

But 'twill not satisfy D. M. to wrest Prosper's words, except he also at once
overthrow his whole Chronicle, telling us, that it is not thought by the
learned to be the genuine Work of Prosper. All he brings for this, is a
conjecture of Petrus Pithoeus, fancying that the Chronicle ascribed to Prosper,
and appended to that of Eusebius and Hierome, is of a different style from that
of a confused fragment, which he took for a part of the true Prosper's
Chronicle, and wherein there is nothing concerning Palladius. But why the mere
conjecture of one man should be enough to discredit that Chronicle so
universally ascribed to Prosper, I leave to the Judgment of the learned.
Vossius De historicis latinis. Page 229.
indeed mentions this fragment, but if it be preferable to the vulgar Copy,
determines not: neither, for ought I know, did ever any save, D. M. embrace
this faint Conjecture of Pithoeus, and indeed there must be brought
incomparably better Arguments before that confused fragment either be preferred
to, or vye with the universally received Copy, immemorially, under Prosper's
name, affixed to Hierome's Chronicle. Moreover, seeing this Schred is most
disordered, and the words now under debate most universally believed to have
been written by Prosper, it is highly probable, on supposition that this
fragment is a part of the true consular Chronicle, that it once contained that
passage, though, throw mutilation, and either negligent or malicious
transcribing, it has now lost it: however the matter be, we are at no loss;
for never was there a sentence more unanimou^ly ascribed to any Author than
this concerning Palladius is to Prosper, and is by all, both ancient and modern
acknowledged Vide Usserii Brit. Eccles. Antiquates. Page 799.
: so that all their endeavors to prove this passage supposititious, and that
it belongs not to Prosper, or some else of equal Antiquity, and Authority, are
the last efforts of mere desperation,

And indeed had they not in defiance of the whole Christian World and Truth it
self, resolved per fas aut nefas to maintain that there was never a Church
without Diocesan Bishops before the time of Calvine and Beza, they had never
adventured their skulls on what is so hard, firmly bottomed, and so universally
believed. Have we not already heard fully, how the most knowing and zealous for
Prelacy while they sustained the truth of our Country Histories, and yet
labored to disprove what we now plead for, gave only, in favors of their
latter Assertion, triffles so empty, and prevarications so apparent, that it is
most presumable they believed nothing of what they said, and how the most
learned of the Episcopal Persuasion acknowledged the truth of our Assertion, on
supposition that any credit is to be given to our Historians, with whom also
joins the learned Dr Stillingfleet Irenicum Part 2. Chapter 7.
, So (says he) if we may believe the great Antiquaries of the Church of
Scotland, that Church was governed by their Culdei as they called their
Presbyters without any Bishop over them for a long time. He gives also
instances of other ancient Churches without Diocesan Bishops.

. 13. It had been more manly therefore and honest for D. M. to have at least
attempted a refutation of Dr. Stillingfleet, than to have dared his Adversaries
to bring but one example of Churches without Diocesan Bishops, seeing he knew
there were store already given even by Episcopals, no less than Presbyterians,
which hitherto stand unanswered. Let them also chaw their cude on that famous
and well known Distinction of a first and second primitive Church acknowledged
by Semeca and others, even Popish Divines, notic'd by Usher Antiq. Brit.
Eccles. Page 809.
and embraced by Stillingfleet Iren. Part 2. Chapter 6.
, in the former whereof Diocesan Episcopacy was not yet come in fashion, nor
was any such thing as a Difference, either in Name or Office, between Bishops,
and Priests or preaching Presbyters, then in Being. From all which judge with
what brow D. M compares the account of our ancient Church Government to a
supposed Fiction of the King of China, and his Presbyterian Lady.

And by this dealling of D. M. I am put in mind of another piece of his Art,
who Page 39, and 40.
averres that all brought by Salmasius and Blondel to prove that Hierome was
for the Scriptural and Apostolic Identity of of Bishop and Presbyter, and
whatsoever is said by them, for Presbytry is refuted by D. Pearson in his
Vindic^ae Ignatianae. I must not (says D. M.) transcribe the acurat and
unanswerable Dissertations of several learned Men, who have sufficiently
exposed the Writings of Blondel and Salmasius on this head, particularly the
incomparable Bishop of Chester ( vind* St. Ignat.) But no where did ever Dr.
Pearson engage with these Authors on this subject, nor does he any such thing,
only he has some few excursions which touch not the marrow of the Controversy,
and therefore is nothing to D. M's purpose, whether the advantage be yielded to
Salmasius and Blondel or to Dr. Pearson. He abuses also some passages of
Hierome to prove him self-repugnant, but all such depravations had been by
Iunius and others against the Papists, and by Stillingfleet in his Irenicum
clearly discovered, and the places unanswerably vindicated, even before he
wrote his Vindiciae, which their vindications of Hierome, as also many other
defenses of the same Author brought by Salmasius and Blondel, he scarce once
adventures to handle. But he has vindicated Ignatius, they will say, and this
is enough. But suppose that he had as really evinced these Epistles to be the
genuine Work of Ignatius, as he is groundlesly pretended to have don't, yet so
far is their inference from being good, that as we shall hear, the quite
contrary follows, viz. that in the Ignatian age, Bishops were all one with the
Pastors of single Congregations. Hence it appears that this was one of D. M's
pious Frauds to skarr his vulgar Reader (for others he could not hope to catch
thereby) from the New Doctrine of Presbytry.

Section VIII.
Prelacy opposite to the Principles of our Reformers.
I Said, when we renounced our Obedience to Antichrist, we sent, amongst the
rest of the Romish leaven, Prelacy packing thither: which, though we had no more
Arguments, our Confession of Faith compiled by our Reformers clearly evinces.
We detest (say they) Antichrist's worldly Monarchy with his wicked Hierarchy.
Of which Hierarchy, as is acknowledged by the Council of Trent De Sacramento
ordinis. Can. 6.
, and Bellarmine De Clerici^ -- Cap. 11.
, the Bishops make a principal part. And the Episcopal Office with its
distinction, belong solely to their Hierarchy, otherwise, they confess, there is
no Difference between Bishop and Presbyter. At them therefore these words of
the Confession must especially level. And his subtility, who would save the
Prelates from this blow, by seeking the foundation of a distinction where it is
not; as if by the word Wicked, the Confession pointed at another Hierarchy
which is Pious, must be reckoned, by all the disinterested, to nigh of kin to
his pericranium, who, to save another part of Romanism, made a fair distinction
between Lawful and Unlawful Idolatry. I say, it can be no otherwise here;
for, to speak truth, their Hierarchy is nothing, save the Corruption of
Church Government, and pride of her Governors, raised by certain stories, and
tending toward the Papacy, as its highest pinnacle, whereof both name and
notion owe their Original to one, who indeed was not the Father of lies, yet in
lying came so near him, as readily any copy to its Original. I mean the false
Areopagite, whose whole Book may really be termed a fardel of Fictions.
Moreover, this Confession was compiled in the year 1581. when Prelacy had been
unanimously by the whole Assembly, in the preceding year cast out of the
Church. And for many succeeding Assemblies, their Declaration of their dislike
and hatred of Prelacy, and approbation of this Confession, went hand in hand,
with whom then in both of these, the King's Majesty joined. For the Assembly at
Glasgow 1581. consisting for the most part, of such as voted, and were present
in the Assembly at Dundie, in the preceding year when Prelacy had in terminis
been renounced and ejected, declares that they meaned wholly to condemn the
whole estate of Bishops, as they are now in Scotland, -- and that this was the
meaning of the Assembly at that time. The King's Commissioner presented to this
Assembly the Confession of Faith, subscribed by the King, and his household, not
long before, together with a plot of the Presbytries to be erected, which is
registrat in the Books of the Assembly, with a Letter to be directed from his
Majesty to the Noblemen, and Gentlemen of the Country, for the erection of
the Presbytries, consisting of Pastors, and Elders, and dissolution of
Prelacies, and with an offer to set forward the Policy until 'twere
established by Parliament. The King's Letter subscribed by his hand, to the
Noblemen, and Gentlemen, was read in open audience of the whole Assembly.
This Assembly ordained also that the Confession of Faith be subscribed, as
being true, Christian, and faithful. And in the Assembly 1595. amongst other
things of the same tendency, it was cleared that Episcopacy was condemned in
these words of the Confession His Wicked Hierarchy. See store of irrefragable
proofs of this our Assertion in the Acts of the Assembly at Glasgow, 1638.
Sess. 16.

. 2. They only bewray their ignorance, if not worse, while they give out, that
our Church, in her first Reformation, had Bishops (as the word is now taken)
under the name of Superintendents. For though this were true, all they shall gain
hereby, would only be the fastening of a self-contradiction on Mr. Knox, and
the rest of these most honorable Instruments of our Freedom from Mystical
Babylon: our Adversaries acknowledging that Mr. Knox, and his Fellow Laborers
in the Church-policy, did exactly follow the Genevan Model, which these men use
to make the Original of Presbytry: It Is confessed also Fuller, lives of the
Divines.
that John Knox refused a Bishopric in England on this account, that it had
Quid commune cum Antichristo. Whereby, though nothing else could be brought, it is
clear as the Sun, that Knox (I may say the same of most of his Fellow Laborers
in the Reformation) was entirely averse from their Hierarchick Domination.

. 3. Wherefore the Author of a late Book called The Fundamental Charter of
Presbytry examined and disproved, quite skips over these Evidences of Knox's
being Antiprelatick; notwithstanding that the only design of the far greater
part of his Book, was directly to prove these out Reformers, and Knox in
special, to have been of the prelatical Persuasion, However, let us hear the
chief of the Answers he gives to such other Proofs hereof, as he adventures to
engage with. Page 24. Et sequentibus.


. 4. The first is a passage of Knox's letter to the Assembly, viz. Unfaithful,
and Traitors to the Flock, shall ye be before the Lord Jesus if that with your
consent, directly or indirectly, ye suffer unworthy men to be thrust in within
the Ministry of the Kirk under what pretense that ever it be, Remember the
Judge before whom ye must make an account, and resist that Tyranny as ye would
avoid Hellfire. To which our Author answers denying that Knox by Tyranny here
means Episcopacy, and says, that it is impossible to make more of the Letter,
than that Knox deemed it a pernicious and tyrannical thing, for any Person
whatsoever to thrust unworthy Men into the Ministry of the Church. Which Answer
evanishes, so soon as we shall understand the occasion of Knox's Letter. Some
powerful Courtiers had then sacrilegiously invaded a great part of the
Churches Revenues; and were greedily grasping the remainder, to the great grief
of all good Men, and detriment of the Church, which both in her Assemblies, and
otherways, vehemently urged that these Revenues should be employed on
sustentation of Ministers, many of whom, being unprovided, were ready to
starve; and on maintaining of Schools, relieving the Poor, and other such pious
Uses. These Courtiers therefore, to free themselves of such unacceptable
Monitors, and secure them of what they had gotten, plot the reduction of a kind
of Diocesan Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other such Popish Orders, with whom
they were to make a sacrilegious Compact, and to give these titular Churchmen
some small pittance of the Revenues, the rest being possessed, in their name,
by these Courtiers. Now at the very time of the writing of Knox's Letter, this
was in agitation, and a design laid to practice upon some of the Assembly, as
shortly thereafter at the Meeting in Leith appeared, at which, and elsewhere in
these times, there were not wanting among the Ministers, who, moved with hope
of Domination over their Brethren, and some small augmentation of Rent, made no
bones of such simoniacal Pactions or (to use the express words of the
Confessions of their best Friends) such durt^ and vile Bargains. Fund. Charter.
Page 26. Spotswood. Hist. Page 316.


And now judge what Knox mean'd by his Exhortation to keep out unworthy Men,
and resist Tyranny: And it is most presumable that Spotswood Hist. Page 257, 258.
sufficiently saw, that Knox's Letter goares Prelacy, otherwise he had not
mangled the same, and wholly omitted all mention of Tyranny.

. 5. And that this Knox's Letter levelled at the Bishops then about to be
introduced, is further evident from his refusal to inaugurat John Douglas
Bishop of St. Andrews, his denouncing an Anathema to the Giver and Receiver of
the Bishopric, and his open professing his dislike of the whole Order. At this
our Author takes exception, saying, The certain Manuscript from which
Calderwood says he had this relation, is uncertain. But he should have looked
into Petrie, who Century 16. Page 371.
names the Author William Scot, that eminent Minister at Couper.

Now, that it is like enough that Knox, who was then at St. Andrews, said so,
and expressed suitable resentments of the durty Bargain between Morton and
Douglas, who by a simoniacal Paction, got into the Sea, is by our Author
expressly acknowledged. And indeed, if we consider the indignity of the Crime,
and the Lyon-like boldness of Mr. Knox against such Vices, it is altogether
incredible, but that he vented his resentments with a Witness, and to the
noticing of all thinking Men then present: yet all this is skipp'd over by
Spotswood, For he knew well enough, that this Relation should have showed how
little kindness Knox bore to their Hierarchy.

Moreover, which is most noticeable in this matter, these who then favored
Prelacy, being generally such simoniacal Pedlers, were so far from writing the
several Actions and Church-transactions of these times, that they made it their
care to suppress and destroy the public Monuments of the Church. Witness B.
Adamsone Called. Hist. Page 261.
: one of the Articles of whose Confession, to which, as is acknowledged by
Spotswood Hist. Page 385.
, he subscribed, was, that not without his special allowance, some leaves of
the Books of the Assemblies were rent out, and such things as made against the
Bishops their estate, were destroyed in Falkland, before the Books were
delivered to the King's Majesty. Which considerations, suffice to prove the
truth of that historical Relation.

He alleges next, that though we had reason to believe, that Knox said and did
so, yet it follows not that he was for the Divine Right of Parity. Adding, That
it is like enough Knox said so -- for dreadful Invasions were made upon the
Patrimony of the Church. But this Invasion was so linked with the introduction
of Prelacy, that they had both common Friends and Enemies, so that Knox
declaring against either, must be judged equally averse from both. And indeed
the introduction of Prelacy, was consequentially this very destruction and
consumption of the Churches Goods, against which Knox inveighed. Or dare he
say, that it had satisfied him, if they had been consumed in sustaining the
Luxury and Grandour of Bishops, Abbots, and Priors, whom the Court was about
then to introduce, providing only these Church Revenues, had been kept from the
secular Nobility. Moreover, it is evident, to whosoever reads Knox's words, that
the Invasion of the Church-patrimony, was far from being the sole Ground of the
dislike he showed to Episcopacy. The Matter in short is, when John Douglas was
made Tulchan Bishop of St. Andrews, Mr. Knox refused to Ordain him, denouncing
Anathemaes to the Giver, and to the Receiver: and when John Rutherford Provest
of the old College had said, that Mr. John Knox' s repining, had proceeded
from malecontentment, the next Lora's-day, John Knox said in Sermon, I have
refused greater Bishopric than ever 'twas, and might have had it with the
favor of greater Men than he has this, but I did, and do repine for discharge
of my Conscience, that the Church of Scotland be not subject to that Order.
This last Clause, viz. that the Church of Scotland be not subject to that
Order, he adventures not once to mention, which yet is a reason of Knox's
repining, and so gives the meaning of his whole Discourse. And seeing it is of
equal credit with his foregoing words, being not only with the rest taken by
Petrie, out of that Historical Relation, but related also by Calderwood Ms.
Hist. Vol. 2, Page 340.
fully scatters all his fogg, and clearly determines the present Question,
somewhat else he has here, but of small moment. As, Knox, when Douglas, who
was already Rector of the University, and Provest of the old College was made
Bishop, regrated, that so many Offices were laid on an old Man, which scarcely
twenty of the best Gifts were able to bear. Thence he Infers, that Knox' s
resentment of Douglas his advance, was not from any Persuasion, he had of the
unlawfulness of Prelacy. As if Knox might not assert the unlawfulness of
Prelacy, and yet say so much for a a Superpondium to his other Grievances. And
to show, even on Supposition, as they pretended, of the allowableness of
Episcopacy, how little sense of Duty or Conscience was in either Givers or
Receivers.

. 6. There was at this time (says M. D. Hume. History of the Houses of
Douglass and Angus. Page 320.
, no small Contest and Debate, betwixt the Court and the Church, about Bishops
and Prelates, concerning their Office and Jurisdiction. The Ministers labored
to have them quite abolished and taken away, and the Court thought that form of
Government to be agreeable, and compatible with a Monarchical Estate, and more
conform to the Rules of Policy, and Civil Government of a Kingdom. Besides, the
Courtiers had tasted the sweetness of their Rents and Revenues, putting in
titular Bishops, who were only their Receivers, and had a certain Pension or
Stipend, for discharging and executing the Ecclesiastical part of their Office,
but the main profit was taken up by Courtiers for their own use. Wherefore they
labored to retain at least these shadows of Bishops, for letting of leases,
and such other things, which they thought were not good in Law otherways. There
was none more forward to keep them up than the Earl of Morton; for he had gone
Ambassador to England on his own private Charges, and to recompense his great
Expenses in that Journey, the Bishopric of St. Andrews, being then vacant, was
conferred upon him. He put in Mr. John Douglass (who was Provost of the New
College in St. Andrews) to bear the Name of Bishop, and to gather the Rents
(till such time as the Solemnity of Inauguration could be obtained) for which
he was countable to him. This he did immediately after he came home out of
England. Now he will have him to sit in Parliament, and to vote there as
Archbishop. The Superintendent of Fyfe, did inhibit him to sit there, or to
Vote under pain of Excommunication; Morton commanded him to do it, under pain
of Treason and Rebellion. The Petition given in to the Parliament, desiring a
competent Provision for the maintaince of Preachers, in which they complained
of the wrong done unto them by the Courtiers, who intercepted their means, was
cast over the Bare, and rejected, and by the most common report, Morton was the
first cause thereof. Afterward Morton in a Meeting of some Delegats, and
Commissioners of the Church at Leith, by the Superintendent Dune's means, used
the matter so, that he obtained their Consent to have his Bishop admitted, and
installed. Wherefore, the third of February, he caused affix a schedul on the
Church door of St Andrews, wherein he charged the Ministers to conveen, and
admit him to the Place, which they did accordingly, but not without great
Opposition. For Mr. Patrick Adamson (then a Preacher, but afterward Archbishop
there himself) in a Sermon which he preached against the Order and Office of
Bishops, said, there were three sorts of Bishops: 1. The Lords Bishop (to wit
Christ's) and such was every Pastor. 2. My Lord Bishop, that is, such as Bishop
as is a Lord, who sits, and Votes in Parliament, and exercises Jurisdiction
over his Brethren. 3. And the third sort was, (my Lord's Bishop) that is, one
whom some Lord or Nobleman at Court did put into the place to be his Receiver,
to gather the Rents, and let Leases for his Lordship's behoof, but had neither
the Means nor Power of a Bishop. This last sort he called a Tulchan Bishop,
because as the Tulchan (which is a Calves skin stuffed with straw) is set up to
make the Cow give down her milk; so are such Bishops set up, that their Lords
by them may milk the Bishoprics. Likewise Mr. Knox preached against it the
tenth of February, and in both their hearings ( Morton's, and his Archbishop)
to their Faces pronunced, Athathema danti, Anathema accipienti.

And Page 333.
We showed before, how in matters of Church Government, he ever inclined (as
the most politic Course) to the state of Bishops. The Name was yet retained
by Custom^, the Rents were lifted also by them (as we have said) more for other
Men's use and profit, than their own. They had also place and vote in Parliament
after the old manner, and he would gladly have had them to have kept their
Power and Jurisdiction over their Brethren. Master John Douglass being dead, he
filled the place by putting in Mr. Patrick Adamson his domestic Chaplain, who
then followed that Course, tho before he had preached against it. Many were
displeased herewith, all the Ministers (especially they of the greatest
Authority) and all Men of Estates that were best affected to Religion. (And
which he cites out of an English Historian Francis Botevill) Page 354.
As touching his ( viz. Morton's) setting up and maintaining the estate of
Bishops (whereof there had ensued great debate and contention betwixt him and
the Ministry) he said, it did not proceed of an ill mind, of any malice, or
contempt of them, or their Callings, but merely out of want of better
knowledge, thinking that Form of Government to be most conform to the Rules of
Policy, and to be fittest for the times. That if he had then known better, he
would have done otherways. And Page 358.
He (viz. Morton) was also calm -- this appeared in his carriage toward Mr.
Knox, who had used him roughly, and rebuked him sharply for diverse things, but
especially for his laboring to set up and maintain the estate of Bishops.

Hence it is most manifest how, not only Knox, but also the whole body of our
Church disliked and hated the very first bud, and likeness of Prelacy: and how
by mere force and fraud of the voracious Court-politicians upon the dishonesty
of some, but the unwariness and faintness of many more of the Ministry. These
monstrous Tulchans, for all men even our present Prelatists are ashamed of
them, got that minot's harbor in Scotland.

. 7. Our Author Answers, for he insists long on this matter, Page 192.
That the Question is not now, how this was done, but if it was done? For if it
was done, it is an Argument that the Clergy then thought little on the
iudispensibility of Parity. Just as if what any man either by Fraud or Force is
made seemingly to yield to* were to be taken for his true and genuine
Sentiments: I thought this kind of reasoning had been peculiar to a Spanish
Inquisitor or French Converter. Or that they were bad Men (continues he) a hard
construction: For then Hierome of Prague who was forced, and so many of the
choice Fathers of the Council of Arminum, who were tricked to admit, in
appearance, something contrary to their true Sentiments; shall all be bad men?
That the Ministers at this Convention at Leith dealt most unwarily, and some of
'em also with too little integrity, is beyond scruple: But that all of 'em, or
most of 'em were poor covetous Rogues etc. neither Petrie nor any of his
Persuasion ever affirmed.

He adds that the Courts Arguments for the Leith-establiment were mainly
Politic; for they turned not Theologues to persuade Episcopacy's Divine
Institution from Scripture etc. Well then, there was little true Piety, no
consulting of Conscience or the Word of God in the Matter: And if some of the
Ministry, as he says, were taken with these politic and state Reasons, they in
so far fell from their own Principle viz. 1 Book of disc. head 1.
That in the Books of the Old and New Testament, all things necessary for the
instruction of the Church, and to make the Man of God perfect, are contained
and sufficiently expressed. But the Clergy (says he) had found that the new
Scheme of the first Book of Discipline had done much hurt to the Church. As if
the old Popish Scheme, under which the Churches goods, by God's Law destinated
for the promoval of piety and learning, and sustaining of the poor, were
consumed and debauched, in upholding the grandour and luxury of a spurious
ecclesiastic Nobility, could have been really more profitable to the Church
than that of the Book of Discipline, on of the prime designs whereof was the
bestowing of the Church Revenues for these their true uses, to which God's Law
had appointed them. Or as if Pastors, Schools, and Poor can in no place be
provided for, where the Romish Church-policy is wanting. But,

The six Commissioners ( says he) that treated with the State at Leith were
sensible Men, and far from being Parity-men. Just so far from being Parity-men,
that most of 'em, in an Assembly 1580. July 12. deliberately found and declared
Episcopacy unlawful in it self. Calderwood's Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 597.


He intimats, that the Courts motive for the Leith-establishment could not be
their desire to possess the Churches Patrimony. An untruth, as we have now
seen, too bare faced to need more refutation. His proof hereof is of the same
stamp, viz. Had the Clergy fallen so suddenly from their constant claim to the
Churches Revenues? did that which moved them to be so earnest for this meeting
with the State miraculously slip out of their minds. Seeing not the Church, but
the Court-politicians, as is evident, with desire to circumveen her, chiefly
procured that meeting, and if these Delegates were either the only or first
men, who by sinistrous Artifices fell into a bad Compact, then let him exclaim
with admiration of this matter: what follows is yet odder, viz. Was it not as
easy for the Court to have possessed themselves of a Bishopric, an Abbacy, a
Priory etc. when there were no Bishops -- as when there were. For he is to be
pitied if he be ignorant that the Courtiers having no Law-title thereto, had no
hope save under covert of their own Creatours, these titular Bishops, of any
peaceable and secure possession of the Churches Revenues.

But an undoubted Assembly [saith he] owned the Leith convention as an
Assembly, and its Authority as the Authority of an Assembly -- and for several
years after that establishment at Leith, beside which there was no other fond
for owning them for Bishops, Bishops were present, and as such were obliged to
sit and vote in general Assemblies -- and many Acts of subsequent Assemblies
put this matter beyond all probability of ever being controverted as the
Assembly in August 1574. which petitioneth the Regent, that Stipends be granted
to Superintendents in all time coming, in all Countries destitute thereof,
whether it be where there is no Bishop, or where there are Bishops, who cannot
discharge their Office as the Bishop of St. Andrews and Glasgow. And that his
Grace would provide qualified Persons for vacant Bishoprics. But this, though it
be his prime Argument, is soon removed, our Church knew that diverse Ministers
and others had been allured, or awed to that agreement: She knew that 'twas
only made for the Interim See Spotswood Hist. Page 260.
and for the Interim only did she tolerate it, with a full resolution to have a
more perfect Order. Called. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 354
And as for the words, In all time coming, there is not a syllabe of them in the
Act he cites See Page 457.
Nor indeed any where else of all the Acts of these Assemblies. She knew also
that during that Interim, 'twas impossible to get, that which had been the
Revenues of Popish Bishops and other Church Rents out of the Regent and other
Courtiers their hands. In the mean while the vast number of unplanted Churches,
weakness of the Ministry in diverse parts, and unsettlement, even unto that
time, of the Churches Affairs, allowed for a space the continuance of
Evangelistick Superintendents or Commissioners, who were to be in almost
perpetual motion and travels, and therefore needed much larger maintenance
then did fixed Pastors; which large maintenance the Church, being thus stripped
of her Patrimony, could not afford to the number that was needful. On these
and such Grounds, the Church indulged to that Convention the name of an
Assembly, tolerated in these Tulchans the name of Bishops: And, seeing they had
got more Rent then was given to ordinary Ministers, allowed them to exercise
the Labor and Travel of Superintendents or Commissioners: And thus the Church
made the best she might of that their unlawful Bargain. And though, See our
Author Pages 207, 208.
which he also objects, some Assemblies allow Bishops to conveen and proceed
against delinquents, command Ministers by their Letters to admonish concerning
persons to be excommunicated, it helps him nothing, seeing the very Acts he
cites give no less power to Superintendents, yea to Commissioners, whom yet the
Church used, even after she had declared Episcopacy unlawful in it self. So
far is our Churches tolerating for a space these Tulchans from being any
Argument, that she believed not the Divine Right of Parity. But how appears't
(says he) that our Church received the Leith Articles only for an Interim out
of a dislike to Episcopacy: -- And there were other things in the Articles
which required amendment. But sure these Articles were without any exception
received and tolerated only for the Interim, and how well these Court-bishops
were liked, is already made manifest, and our Churches subseqnent actings
declare, which never rested, but still wrestled against the storms of both
Power and Policy, until they were sent packing. It Is true, as he says, the
Church met with Opposition; but that this was only from these titular Bishops,
and Rent-gatherers to the Courtiers, supported with all the might, Wit and
Artifice of an awful gripping, politic Regent, and no few other potentand
subtle Courtiers driving their own ends, as has already appeared, and is most
evident from the best accounts now extant of these Affairs, and this is the
undoubted Cause, why the six Collocutors at the Assembly in August 1575. think
it not expedient presently to answer directly to the Question of the Function
of Bishops. But he who stilleth the noise of the Seas and the noise of their
waves, having restrained these impetuous Tempests, how cordially did our Church
proceed to the utter extirpation of Prelacy? Forsamekle (they are the words of
the Assembly holden at Dundee, Anno 1580. July 12. Sess. 4. Called. Ms. Hist.
Vol. 2. Page 597.
) as the Office of a Bishop, as it is now used and commonly taken within this
Realm, has no sure warrant, authority, or good ground out of the Book, and
Scriptures of God, but brought in by the folly and corruption of men's
invention, to the great overthrow of the true Kirk of God, the whole Assembly
of the Kirk in one voice, after liberty given to all Men to reason in the
matter, none opponing themself in defense of the said pretended Office, finds
and declares the samine pretended Office, used and termed as is above said,
unlawful in the self, as having neither fundament, ground nor warrant in the
word of God etc. And in all this, our Church, as she clearly here expresses,
did nothing save what she was obliged to do by her own Principle in the first
Book of Discipline, which affirms that all thing necessary for the instruction
of the Church is contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament. And that
whatsoever is without express commandment of God's Word, is to be repressed as
damnable to Salvation. Our Reformers therefore, except our Adversaries say,
(which even impudence, it self dare not say), that they believed the Hierarchy
to be founded on the express command of God's Word, were bound by this their
Principle to oppose it as a manifest corruption, and according to this
Principle, whenever Prelacy, by force of the secular arm, and fraud of
serpentine policy, and, as one well words it, by terrors and allurements,
crosses and commodities, banishment and benefices (for by other means it could
never be admitted) overwhelmed this Land, and discovered the Hypocrisy or
Gallio-like Disposition of many; all the true Lovers of our Reformation still
then had, in greater or lesser measure, as their love was to this truly
Protestant, yea truly Catholic and Christian Principle of our Reformers, their
Feasts turned into Mourning, their Songs into Lamentation, their Tears for
Meat, and their Harps hanged on the Willows. And now suppose that our
Reformers, in that unstable condition of our Church, and very first rudiments
of Protestancy had in some of their Doings or Saying afforded some color or
appearance, either for the scruples of the curious, or the quirks and cavils of
the captious, does not, pray, this most unanimous, most clear, and every way
most unexceptionable Act of our most full and free General Assembly, that
consisted for the far greater part of the very same Men, who were the Actors
and Promoters of our first Reformation, most fully open our Remormers their
minds, show their ultimat tendency and scope, and finally, for ever determine
the present Controversy.

. 8. He has more to say of John Knox, I return therefore to attend him. His
next Plea Page 28. Et sequentibus.
is with Calderwood about Beza's Letter to Knox, where he denies that Beza
wrote being informed by Knox of the Courts intention to bring in Bishops, and
adds, that if any thing of Knox' s Sentiments can be collected from Beza' s
Letter, it seems rather he was for Prelacy than for Presbytry: For Beza (says
he) seems clearly to import, that Knox needed to be cautioned against Prelacy.
Beza's Words are. Epist. 79. Sed and istud mi Knoxe -- sicut Episcopi Papatum
pepereunt. ita psendespiscopos -- (Papatus reliquias) Epicureismum terras
invecturos etc.
But I would have you, my dear Knox, and the other Brethren, to Remember that
which is before your eyes: that as Bishops brought forth the Papacy: so false
Bishops the relicts of Popery, shall bring in Epicurism to the World: They that
desire the Churches good and safety, let them take heed of this Pest, and
seeing ye have put that Plague to flight timously, I heartily pray you, that Ye
never admit it again, albeit it seem plausible, with the pretense or color of
keeping unily, which pretense deceived the ancient Fathers, yea even many of
the best of 'em.

Where Beza without giving any proof thereof, clearly supposes as a thing
believed by Knox no less than by himself, that the Bishops whom some were then
laboring to introduce into Scotland were false Bishops, the relicts of Popery,
which had already been once driven out of Scotland, and on this supposition, as
any Orators use to do from Principles common to themselves, and these to whom
they are speaking, he admonished him and the rest to beware of this Plague.
Certain it is then, if we believe Beza, that he knew, if by a Letter from Knox,
or otherwise concerns not the matter in hand, that Knox judged the Bishops then
to be introduced to be no others than were the Popish Bishops, whom Knox and
his fellow Reformers had lately expuls'd Scotland, and both sorts of Bishops to
be equally false and Antichristian. And now consider this Letter of Beza
written near the same time with that of Knox to the Assembly, and the
disinterested shall soon perceive that the former explains the latter, and
sufficiently shows what Knox meant by the Tyranny mentioned therein. Moreover,
whosoever finds so much against Episcopacy in Beza, even though it had been
spoken by him without any relation or respect to Knox, and remembers how
universal and firm Concord was between these excellent Persons, Qui duo
corporibus mentibus unus erant, will easily conclude that Knox bore but small
kindness to Prelacy.

. 9. He comes next to prove, Knox was not for Parity. Had he been (says he) so
persuaded, how seasonable had it been for him to have spoken out so mnch, when
he was brought before King Edward' s Council? The Question was then put to him,
whether he thought that no Christian might serve in the Ecclesiastical
Ministration, according to the Rites and Laws of the Realm of England? -- Yet
he answered nothing, but that no Minister in England had Authority to separate
the Lepers from the whole, which was a chief part of his Office. Plainly
founding all the unlawfulness of being a Pastor of the Church of England, not
only the unlawfulness of the Hierarchy which he spoke not one word about, but
on the Kings retaining -- the chief Power of Ecclesiastical Discipline. As if
Knox had judged nothing in the Church of England unlawful but the King's
retaining the Ecclesiastical Discipline in his own hand; which all Men, even
Episcopals no less than Presbyterians, know to be an arch and palpable untruth.
Does not (as for example) our Assembly Anno 1566. in a Letter to the English
Bishops and Pastors, being moved thereto by John Knox, if Spotswood Hist. Pages
198, 199.
speak truth, expressly, among many other things to this purpose, say If
Surplice, Corner-cap, and Tippet have been the badges of Idolaters, in the very
act of their Idolatry, what have the Preachers of Christian Liberty, and the
Rebukers of Superstition, to do with the dregs of that Roman Beast? yea, what
is he that ought not to fear either to take in his hand or forehead the Print
and Mark of that odious Beast? etc. See store to this purpose in Heylin's
History of the Presbyterians: whereby it is most evident, that this Author
endeavored nothing more earnestly than to persuade the World that Knox was a
self-repugnant Idiot.

It sufficed if before that celebrious Assembly he answered to the Question,
and gave some one reason that showed he could not comply with them, though he
declared not all the grounds of his dislike of their Practice.

As to the matter of Francfort, which this Author mentions, drawing from it the
like Consequences, there was no Bishop there, nor any mention of the necessity
thereof, but only a bus^e made by some superstitious Bigots for their Popish
Ceremonies or Fooleries, as Calvin calls them, and so there was no occasion of
venting himself in this matter, and though there had, he sufficiently declared
his mind while publicly in a Sermon, he alleged Called. Page 3.
that nothing ought to be thrust upon any Congregation without the warrant of
the Word of God. Yea, if we may believe Le Strange Holy Cheat. Pages 31, 32.
Knox and his Associats sufficiently discovered themselves to be of the
Consistorian or Presbyterian Persuasion.

10. He adds that Knox in his Appellation etc. plainly supposes the lawfulness
of the Episcopal Office. I deny't. But all along throw it (says he) Knox
appeals to a lawful general Council, snch a Council as the most ancient Laws
and Canons approve, and who knows not that the most ancient Laws and Canons
made Bishops the chief, if not the only Members of such Councils. Knox says, if
the Popish Clergy his Adversaries are for it, he is content that matters in
Controversy between him and them be determined by the Testimony and Authority
of Doctors and Councils, three things being granted him, whereof these are two.
1. That the most ancient Councils nearest to the primitive Church in which the
learned and godly Fathers examined all Matters by God's Word, may be holden of
most Authority. 2. That no Determinations of Councils or Men be admitted
against the plain verity of God's Word, nor against the Determinations of the
four chief Councils. Would Knox if he had been Presbyterian have agreed so
frankly to have stood by the Determination of these four chief Councils? Could
he have expected they would have favored the Divine Right of Presbyterian
Parity? Will any scottish Presbyterian now adays stand to the Decision of these
four chief Councils?

But all our Author here infers is by Knox prevented and cut off, while, in the
first place, he requires, that no Determinations of Councils nor Men be
admitted against the plain Verity, i. e. First Book of Discipline head first.
without the expressed commandment of God's Word.

We cheerfully appeal in the present Controversy, and provoke our Adversaries
to this Rule, which most of 'em I have hitherto met with, expressly acknowledge
to contain nothing in their favors.

Secondly, The Actions of the first four Councils were of two sorts, Creeds
viz. and Canons. Now, as John Knox and all the Presbyterians in cordial
subscribing to the former, viz. The Symbols of these Councils, are confessedly
not behind any part of the Christian World: so part of the latter sort, I mean
the Canons, are rejected by Episcopals no less than by Presbyterians. As for
example, the Constantinopolitan Can. 7. (...).
Council appoints that reduced Heretics and Schismatics must be anointed on
the Forehead, Eyes, Nose, Mouth and Ears. And in the Council of Chalcedon Can.
14. (...).
it is permitted only of all the Churchmen to the Lectors and Cantors to Marry.
Yea that none of the Clergy after that manner should Marry, was statuted by the
Council of Nice. Sozomen Lib. 1. Cap. 23. (...).
And they were also to have separated from their Wives the Churchmen, who were
in Wedlock already, had they not been restrani'd by the grave admonition and
solid reason of Paphnutius. Socrates. Lib. 1. Cap. 11. (...), -- (...), etc.


Now, it is true indeed Presbyterians admit not of these Decrees. But dare they
say that Knox embraced them? Or, do our present Adversaries themselves receive
them? Knox therefore spoke of the Symbols: Our Author introduces him, and gives
out as if he had spoken of their Canons, to the end he may deceive the vulgar
Reader; for none that look into the Councils can be obnoxious to this his Fraud.

The same conclusion, viz. That Knox supposes the innocence and lawfulness of
the Episcopal Office, he would deduce from Knox's following words. You may in a
peaceable manner, without Sedition, withhold the fruits and profits which your
false Bishops and Clergy most unjustly receive of you, until such time as they
shall faithfully do their Charge and Duties, which is to preach unto you Christ
Jesus truly; rightly to minister the Sacraments according to his Institution;
and so to watch for your Souls as is commanded by Christ etc. But might not
Knox, had he been there, given the like admonition to the Romans concerning
their Bishop and Clergy? should he thereby have supposed the Lawfulness and
Innocence of the Papacy and Power the Romanists gave to the Pope.

Secondly, Does not Knox admonish the People concerning the rest of the Clergy
wherein there was comprehended the Abbots, Priors, and all the rest of the
Romish rout, no less then concerning the Bishops? Did therefore Knox suppose
the Innocence and Lawfulness of all these Offices?

Thirdly, Knox utterly baffles all our Author's Sophistry, and sufficiently
preserves himself from his abuses and depravations, while he places the Office
of all true Bishops in truly preaching of Christ Jesus, rightly ministering the
Sacraments and watching for Souls: Which I hope is equally the Office and Duty
of all Christ's Ministers. So true is it, we observed from Beza's Letter, that
Knox looked on all Lordly Diocesan Prelates as false Bishops. And all they
pretend to, beside what is common to every Pastor under whatsoever Name or
Profession they go, as unwarrantable and unjust.

But (says our Author) Knox's great Work in his Admonition to the Professors
of England, was to enumerat at the Causes, which in God's righteous Judgment
brought Queen Mary's Persecution on them: But he quite forgot to name the Sin
of Prelacy as one; Ergo etc. And did he enumerat and reckon up all things he
judged to be Errors or Sins wherefore God was pleading with the English, and
had sent among them that Persecution? The truth is the main design of that
Admonition is not to give an accurat enumeration of the Causes of the
Persecution, but to give comfort to the Faithful under it. But abstracting
what Knox thought to be the Causes of that Persecution, and what not, our
Author must sustain that Knox reckoned up whatsoever he judged to be Sins and
Abuses in that Church, otherwise he does nothing. But dare he say, that Knox
there did so? Spoke he ever a word of the Tippet, Corner-cap, and Surplice,
there being Badges of Idolaters, and Marks of the odious Beast? Has he one
syllable of Christmas, Feasts and such holy Days, Spotsw. Hist. 153. 174.
which he also judged superstitious and sinful? Or of the Faults of their
Service Book about which, as all Men know, fell out the Controversy at
Francfort? or the depriving Ministers of Power to separate the Lepers from the
whole? at which our Author grants Knox to have been offended.

But Knox calls Cranmer that reverend Father in God; Ergo. Belle. As if
forsooth Knox might not use a Phrase of the common style of the times, but he
must be presently concluded a propugner of the Hierarchy. Called. Ms. Hist. Vol.
2. Page 143.
Was not at the Assembly in Edinburgh March 1570. whereof John Knox was a
Member, one of the Heads of Adam Bishop of Orknay' s Accusation, which by the
Assembly he was desired to redress, that he styles himself with Roman Titles,
as Reverend Father in God, which pertains to no Ministers of Christ Jesus,
nor is given them in Scriptures?

John Knox (continues our Author) said, the false Religion of Mahomet is more
ancient than Papistry, yea Mahomet had established his Alcoran before any Pope
of Rome was crowned with a triple Crown etc. Can any Man think (subjoins our
Author) John Knox was so very unlearned as to imagine Episcopacy was not much
Older than Mahomet? Or knowing it to be Older, that yet he could have been so
ridiculous, as to have thought it a relict of Popery, which he himself affirmed
to be Younger than Mahometism? But, was Knox so very unlearned, as not to know,
that diverse Popish Errors and Dotages had generally obtained and got good
footing before the time of Mahomet? Do not these who know any thing, know so
much? Have we not heard how he rejected, as unwarrantable and unlawful,
Christmas, Feasts, and such holy Days? Will our Author acknowledge they
obtained not before the rise of Mahomet, or the Pope's triple Mitre? I think he
will not. Have we not seen how, good space before these times, other
Innovations as unction of Poenitents, and Caelibacy of Churchmen were coming
in fashion, and countenanced by the most famous Councils. Knox had been
unlearned indeed, if he had not known so much; he spoke therefore only of the
maturity and more open appearance of the Man of Sin, and as he expresses, of
his coming to his triple Crown; and meant not at all that before Mahomet's
time, no Popish Doctrines were generally broached and embraced: yet so our
Author (otherwise he is quite beside his purpose) makes him to speak; then which
nothing more false and injurious to Mr. Knox, can be expressed.

Hitherto, we have been intertain'd with Sophistry so silly, and Paralogisms so
palpable, that 'twere unjustice done to this Gentle-man's Intellectuals, not to
believe that he sufficiently discerned the Fallacies. But he promises to make
a mends for the future; as yet, he has only brought up his Rorarios and
Velites, but now the case is quite altered.

Ecce ferunt Troes ferrumque Ignesque Jovemque!

11. He has yet more to say; yes, more with a Witness! Knox says, in his
Exhoatation to England, Let no man be charged in preaching of Jesus Christ
above that a man may do; I mean that your Bishoprics be so divided that of
every one as they are now for the most part, may be ten, and so in every City
and great Town, there may be placed a godly learned Man, with so many joined
with him for Preaching and Instruction as shall be thought sufficient for the
bounds committed to their Charge. But the Reader, impartially weighing what we
have adduced, must yield, that it is impossible, either from this, or any other
place, to make Knox a Prelatist, except we involve him in manifest
self-repugnancy, which there is no necessity to do for any thing here said: For
though Knox, considering how the English were wedded to something of a
hierarchick Splendour, had indulged them in a good deal thereof: it had been
only a parallel Action to that of his Friend Calvin, who Vide Epist. 206. Coxo
and gregalibus suis.
though sufficiently Anti-ceremonial, yields, notwithstanding, for a time, and
for Peace's sake, to that Nation, some of their Ceremonies which he calls
tolerable Fooleries, unprofitable Triffles etc. Yet I have met with none, who
on this score has taxed Calvin of Self-contradiction. But this ex abundanti;
for they cannot from these Knox's words conclude, that he favored so much as
the least grain of the substance of Prelacy: of each of their Bishoprics he
makes ten, which I think will bring his Lordship comparatively considered, to a
very narrow compass. But to show that he put a definit number for an indefinit,
he gives not only to every City, but to every great Town a Bishop: Now, of
Cities and Mercat-towns in England, which, there, are not inconsiderable, there
are odds of 600, Heylin's Cosmography. Page 305.
But that none may justly cavil, let us make a large abatement of the number
where they may be smaller; and yet, I Am sure, so many remain as there should be
ordinary Presbytries in England, providing it were so divided.

Moreover, the great End and Work of this Bishop Knox makes to be the preaching
of the Gospel, and instructing of the People; of his Dominion and Power over
the Clergy not a syllable; yea, he gives not to him alone the Charge of the
Flock, it is their Charge, the Charge of the rest, no less than the Bishop; they
are joined with him, not his Curats under him: And we have heard him already
making the Office of a Bishop nothing else but what is common to all Pastors:
And, if his Doctrine and Practice in Scotland may be allowed as an Explication
of his Exhortation to England, this Bishop was subject to the Admonition and
Correction of the Presbytry, wherein he was Bishop.

Nothing therefore can necessarily be drawn from Knox's words, except that this
Bishop was to have (if Temporary or continued, I dispute not, for it touches
not the present Question) a mere presidency of Order or Moderator-ship; nothing
of Dominion or Power to Knox's Bishop. Nothing therefore of imparity amongst
Pastors can from the words in hand with any good consequence be deduced.

Lastly, whatever 'twas, it appears clear from these words, that he allowed
this only for a time, during the rarity of Preachers.

12. But hear somewhat more of the same Exhortation. Touching the Reformation
of Religion (says he Page 108. Et sequentibus.
) ye must at once so purge and expel all dregs of Papistry, Superstition and
Idolatry, that thou, O England, must judge and hold execrable and accursed,
whatsoever God has not sanctified to thee by his blessed Word, or by the
Action of our Master Jesus Christ. The glistering beauty of vain Ceremonies,
the heaps of things pertaining nothing to Edification, by whomsoever they were
invented, justified or maintained, ought at once to be removed, and so trodden
under the obedience of God's Word, that continually this sentence should be
present in thy Heart, and ready in thy Mouth, not that which appears in thine
own Eye shall thou do etc. Deuteronomy. 12. -- Let not then the King and his
proceedings, whatsoever they be, not agreeable to the Lord's Holy Word, be a
snare to thy Conscience. -- Let God's blessed Word alone be the Rule and Line
to measure his Majesty's Religion. What it commands, let it be obeyed, and
what it commands not, let that be execrable, because it has not the
sanctification of God's Word, under what Title or Name soever it be published.
Halt no longer on both parts. Let not these Voices prevail in your Parliament,
This to our Judgment is good and godly, this the People cannot well bear, this
repugneth not to God's Word. And, But let his holy and blessed Ordinances by
Christ Jesus commanded to his Kirk, be within thy limits and bounds so sure,
and established, that if Prince, King, or Emperor would enterprise to change
or disannull the same, that he be the reputed Enemy of God. -- Which horrible
Crimes if ye will avoid in time coming, then must ye (I mean the Princes,
Rulers, and People of the Realm) by solemn Covenant renew the Oath betwixt God
and you. -- That benefice upon benefice be heaped upon no Man, but that a
suffient Charge with a competent Stipend be assigned to the Workmen; for O how
horrible was that confusion that one Man should be permitted to have two,
three, four, five, six, or seven Benefices, who scarcely in the year did so
often preach; yea, that a Man should have the Charge of them, whose faces he
never saw. -- For the great Dominions and Charge of your proud Prelates
(impossible by one Man to be discharged) are no part of Christ's true Ministry,
but are the maintenance of the Tyranny first invented, and yet retained by the
Roman Antichrist. That diligent heed be taken, that such to whom the Office of
preaching is committed, discharge and do their Duties: for it is not; nor will
not be the chanting nor mummelling over of certain Psalters, the reading of
Chapters for matines and evening Song, or of homilies only (be they never so
godly) that can feed the Souls of hungry Sheep. -- What efficacy the living
voice has above the naked letter which is read, the hungry and thirsty do feel
to their comfort. But the other makes for Mr. Parson's purpose, who, retaining
in his hand a number of Benefices, and appointed such in his place as are
altogether destitute of the Gift of Preaching; but let all such Belly-gods be
whipped out of God's Holy Temple. Let none that be appointed to labor in
Christ's Vineyard be intangl'd with Civil Affairs -- except it be when the
Civil Magistratand the Minister of the Word assemble together for Execution of
Discipline, which is a thing easy to be done without withdrawing any Person
from his Charge, if that which was before expressed be observed: For as
touching their yearly coming to Parliament for matters of Religion, it shall be
superfluous and vian, if God's true Religion be once so established that after,
it never be called in controversy. And as touching Execution of Discipline
that must be done in every City and Shire, where the Magistrates and Ministers
are joined together without any respect of Persons. So that the Ministers,
albeit they lake the glorious Title of Lords, and the Divelish Pomp which
before appeared in proud Prelates, yet must they be so stout, and so bold in
God's Cause, that if the King would usurp any other Authority in God's Religion
than becomes a Member in Christ's Body, that first he be admonished according
to God's Word etc.

Read pray, the rest of this Exhortation, and you shall find that never was
light more opposite to darkness, than Knox is to their Ceremonies and
Hierarchy, and, in a word, their whole way whatsoever they contend for in
opposition to the Church of Scotland. Now suppose, which yet he is far from
doing, that Knox allowed them some umbrage of imparity, should they not,
notwithstanding, providing they closed with what he says here and elsewhere,
really relinquish what they call the Church-of- England's way, and come over
unto us? Yea, were they according to Knox's Exhortation stripped of the hope
their exorbitant Gain, Ease, and Grandour, etc: they should soon also send
packing their Plea for Imparity, this being a mere shroud, and pretext to cover
these Enormities from which Knox so warmly dehorts, and whieh with less color
of modesty can be sustained.

Add hereto, that seeing Knox so zealously requires express and positive
Warrant in the Word of God for every thing in the Worship, Government and
Discipline of the Church; and seeing hitherto none has darred to averr, that
he was for the Divine Right of Prelacy, yea even our Author himself adventures
not plainly to assert so much, but only labors to make Knox to account it
Lawful and Innocent, and to speak nothing against it, it must undeniably
follow, that he was for a Divine Right of Parity.

. 13. Did not Knox (continues our Author) write and bear the Letter sent by the
Superintendents, Ministers and Commissioners of the Church within the Realm of
Scotland, to their Brethren the Bishops and Pastors in England, Anno 1566? Did
not he in that same Title of that same Letter acknowledge, that these Brethren,
Bishops and Pastors of England had renounced the Roman Antichrist, and
professed the Lord Jesus in sincerity? And does not the Letter all along
allow of the Episcopal Power and Authority of these English Bishops? But, had
never a Protestant to do with an Abbot, Prior, or some other such Popish
Officers, whose Offices he did not allow? Might he not therefore speak or write
to him in such Terms without which he should either not have been understood,
or his Letter, or his Discourse been altogether uneffectual? Although then it
could be proved, they had given Bishops the distinguishing Titles they assume,
by no good Logic could it be inferred that they accounted the Office, as it is
distinguished from any other Pastor, Lawful: which yet can never be proved,
nor any thing concluded from the Letter, save that they took Bishop and Pastor
for synonymous Terms.

Moreover, 'twill no more follow, that they count Episcopacy Lawful, than that
they esteem so of the Surplice, Corner-cap and Tippet, which yet in the same
Letter, they make the Marks of the odious Beast. They there indeed acknowledge
the English to have renounced the Roman Antichrist, but so as notwithstanding
to have retained diverse of his Abominations, whereof they name none, but only
the most notorious of these which the then present English Controversies gave
occasion to mention.

The rest of his Discourse on this Head leans on this, that our Superintendents
were really Diocesan Bishops, of whom more anon. And well may I deny't, were
there no more than the Doctrine and Practice of John Knox, who, as our Author
grants, compiled the first Book of Discipline, wherein the Appointment and
Duties of Superintendents are set down.

. 14. And indeed that Knox was truly Presbyterian, is so manifest, that until
now, when Men have broke the bonds of all modesty, and abandoned themselves to
averr every thing to be as they would have it, was in neither hand called in
question, but Enemies no less than Friends, either more indirectly or more
plainly acknowledged it. This was the Policy (says Hist. Page 174.
Spotswood) desired to be ratified. It had been formed by John Knox, partly in
imitation of the Reformed Churches of Germany, partly of that which he had seen
in Geneva etc. Nothing then from England, which flatly contradicts our Author,
who, throw no small part of his Book, pretends to prove that all was taken
especially from England. Now, what was the Government of the reformed Churches
of Germany and Geneva, I think few are ignorant. And elsewhere, Hist. Page 266.
Many good Men (says Spotswood) have disliked some of Knox' s Opinions, as
touching the Anthority of Princes, and the Form of Government which he labored
to have established in the Church. The Prelat indeed here, as his custom is,
delivers the Truth as sparingly, as may be; yet not so, but both Presbyterians
can perceive, and Hierarchicks must confess what is wrapped up in this forced
Confession: And while he endeavors yet more to obscure it, by impertinently
adding, that Knox was always urging the Obedience of Ministers to their
Superintendents, he only hereby shows, that he was loath the World should know,
that he had been forced to Confess that Knox was really a Presbyterian. But
their own dearest Friends and Brethren gave Testimony against them. Knox (say
they See L'estrange holy Cheat. Page 31.
) was of the Consistorian stamp. These sc. Gilby, Goodman and Whittingham led
the dance in England, Knox in Scotland, and at this day our Presbyterians do
but write after their Copy, professing the same Principles, pretending the same
Scruples, and beyond doubt proposing the same end. Page 133.
Let me be understood likewise by Presbyterians to intend these of the Scottish
Race, to whom we are beholden for our Discipline. That Faction first advanced
it self by popular Tumult and Rebellion, Knox learned the Trick of it at
Geneva, and brought it into Scotland. I forbear to cite others: see in lieu of
many Heylin's History of the Presbyterians, who is most ample to this purpose.

I only Note how various Methods have been used to destroy our Reformed
Religion: The Papists, when the Divine Light of the Gospel began to break throw
their Babilonish Foggs, to other means for extinguishing thereof, added that of
lying, reproaching and bespattering most odiously our first Reformers,
endeavoring to ridicul and expose, together with their Doctrine, their
Discipline also, and Government, which they saw like to obtain amongst most of
the reformed, and which sometimes in scorn they named after Geneva; but they
were open and professed Enemies, and so the Net was laid in sight of the Bird:
A new Squadron must be added who, under the name of Protestant, may better
manage the Romish Design, Tuta frequensque Via est per amici fallere nomen.

These in the mean while with open mouth proclaimed this Truth, that Knox, and
the rest of our first Reformers in Scotland, were, no less than Calvin, Beza,
and such transmarine Propagators of the Gospel, truly Presbyterian, and, as
they scornfully spoke, fiery Zelots of the new holy Genevan Discipline: And on
this very account threw upon them all the Iniquity, Aspersion and Infamy their
black Art could invent, or the spirit of Lies and Malice suggest. Yet with all
good Men and true Protestants they effected nothing, save to bring themselves
into just suspicion of being masked Romanists: some of 'em therefore of late,
find it there interest to alter their Method, and to forbear somewhat to utter
their wonted Calumnies, and Malice against the persons of our Reformers (for as
for speaking any good of 'em, we shall most rarely find them do it, or if ever,
it is done with so much coldness and lameness, and with such mixtures of
detraction, that they appear content that the Reader believe them not, and
resolved to pull back with the one hand, what they were compelled to give with
the other) and in the mean while, averr with an unparalled confidence, that
these our Reformers were never for the Genevan way, (as they call it) were
never for Parity of Pastors or Presbyterian Government; that so they may the
more securely follow the steps of the former, and vent their spleen at both
Government and Discipline, and yet be less obnoxious to suspicion of driving
Rome's interest. But it is to be hoped they shall not speed well, seeing herein,
they only endeavor to darken the Sun, to contradict what is known and believed
all Europe-over: And loudly, finally, to give the lie to their own dearest
Friends.

. 15. Now to their second Objection, which is from the Superintendents, which,
together with whatever else they advance from this Argument, we, having thus
evinced that Knox, whose Judgment is confessedly of such moment in the present
Case, was truly Anti-prelatick, might without just blame have neglected, it
melts quite away, if we remember that this practice was only a temporary
expedient, during the unsettl'd condition of the Church. The Objection dwindles
also to nothing on this account, that though our Reformers had designed the
perpetual use of Superintendents, yet these toto coelo, as they say, differed
from Diocesan Prelates, so that, notwithstanding hereof, the Government was
really Presbyterian, or without ought that can be called Imparity. The former
of these our Answers is plainly set down in the first Book of Discipline Head 5.
If the Ministers (say our Reformers) whom God has endowed with his singular
Graces amongst us should be appointed to several places there to make their
continual residence, that then the greatest part of the Realm should be
destitute of all Doctrine: which should not only be the occasion of great
murmur, but also be dangerous to the Salvation of many. And therefore we have
thought it a thing most expedient at this time, that from the whole number of
Godly and learned Men, now presently in this Realm, be Selected ten or twelve
(for in so many Provinces we have divided the whole) to whom Charge and
Commandment should be given to Plant and Erect Kirks, to set, order, and
appoint Ministers, as the former Order prescribes, to the Countries that shall
be appointed to their care where none are now.

This was but too plain, and therefore is much curtailed by Spotswood; Hist.
Page 158.
as our Author, who dwells long on this Objection from Superintendents Pages
143, and sequentes.
, cannot deny. He therefore takes a new Way, and thus glosses the Passage. If I
mistake not (says he) the true gloss of this Period will amount to no more
than this, that because there were then so few Men qualified for the Office of
Superintendency, though ten or twelve were, by far, too small a number for the
whole Kingdom, yet, at that time, they thought it expedient to establish no
more: and though, when the Church should be sufficiently provided with Ministers,
it would be highly reasonable, that the Superintendents should have Places
appointed them, for their continual residence; yet, in that juncture, 'twas
necessary that they should be constantly traveling throw their districts, to
Preach, and Plant Churches etc. To establish his gloss he says, the Compilers
of the first Book of Discipline, viz. Mr. J. Winrame, John Spotswood, J,
Willock, J. Douglas, J. Row and J. Knox, were still of prelatical Principles.
But though this were as true as it is false, the quite contrary would rather
follow, viz. that they had resolved to change afterward the Superintendents for
Diocesan Bishops: To prove they were Prelatists, he says, three of them were
Superintendents, begging the Question, as if Superintendent and Bishop were one
and the same. But Douglas died Archbishop of St. Andrews. But is it strange
that he, who, in favors of a Tulchan Bishopric, had a stomach able to deject
Simoniacal Pactions and durty Bargains, made no bones of sacrificing his former
Principles to his interest? But Spotswood was a constant Enemy to Parity, as
appears from his Son's account of him. But his Son says not so much: Moreover,
which quite spoils our Author's Cause, he makes Page 174.
without naming any other, John Knox the Author of that Book of Policy, yea he
averrs Page 344.
that in his Father's Judgment, the Old Policy was undoubtedly the better than
the New. John Row defended the lawfulness of Episcopacy at the Conference
appointed by the General Assembly 1575. But J. Row, no less then the other
Collocutors, in their Report to that Assembly, though, for the iniquity of the
time, not in so many words, yet really condemned Prelacy, Called. Ms. Hist. Vol.
2. Page 489.
and was also a Member of that Assembly, which with one voice -- found and
declared the Office unlawful in it self. Ibid. Page 595. Et seq.
Judge then of his confidence, who yet adventures hence to conclude that he was
a Prelatist.

He adds out of Knox, that Superintendents and Overseers were nominated, that
all things in the Church might be carried with Order and well, which reason for
establishing Superintendents (says our Author) will continue to hold so long
as the Church continues. But let him once prove that Knox speaks of the
constant and ordinary Church regimen and guidance, and not of the settling and
ordering of a Church little more then in fieri, and as yet not all sufficiently
constitute, otherwise we have a mere Paralogism. At the Admission of Spotswood
(continues he) John Knox asserted the necessity of Superintendents and
Overseers, as well as Ministers the necessity I say, and not the bare
expediency in the juncture. The words are Knox Hist. 289.
first was made a Sermon, in the which these Heads were handled: first the
necessity of Ministers and Superintendents or Overseers etc. We have indeed
here the necessity of Superintendents mentioned, but that it arose above an
expediency, we do not hence learn: That Knox asserted the necessity of
Superintendents as well as Ministers, or an equal necessity of the one and the
other, can by no means be inferred: Yea, who can, with our Author, believe that
though any People had abundance of sufficient and lawfully ordained Ministers,
yet, in Knox's Judgment, if Superintendents were wanting, such a People could
no more be counted a Church, than if they had no Minister at all?

He brings also some Expressions out of the first Book of Discpiline, as, After
the Church shall be established, and three years are past, no Man shall be
called to the Office of a Superintendent, who has not two years given a Proof
of his faithful Labors in the Ministry of some Church. Such passages indeed
suppose some continuance of Superintendents though no perpetuity. For our
Reformers could never think that within three years or thereabout, the Church
should be fully established, and few or no Churches to be planted; unto which
full settlement, the forecited passage of the Book of Policy allows the use of
Superintendents.

This Book of Discipline (says our Author) supposes that Superintendents and
Colleges were to be of equal continuance, for the Superintendent was still to
be at the choosing and installment of Principalls and Rectors etc. But this his
Argument, he himself overthrows. The Assembly (says he) May 27. 1561.
addresseth to the Council, that special and certain Provision might be made for
the maintenance of the Superintendents, Ministers, Exhorters and Readers etc.
Now, who sees not, that this Address speaks after the same manner concerning
all these, so that, using our Author's way of arguing, we should infer, that
our Reformers thought the Exhorter (which confessedly was a kind of Function
purely temporary) was no less to be perpetual than the Superintendent, yea, or
the Minister. And the Assembly at Edinburgh December 25. 1565. Called. Ms. Hist*
Vol. 2. Page 5.
appointed Mr. Knox to pen a comfortable Letter in their Name to encourage
Ministers, Exhorters and Readers to continue in their Vocation etc. From these
and the like Acts he may as well conclude the equal duration of Exhorters and
Ministers, as he inferrs from the Book of Policy, the equal duration of
Superintendents and Colleges.

He would next prove, from the account of the Election and Admission of
Superintendents, prefixed to the old Psalms, that, according to our Reformers,
this was an Office distinct from that of other Pastors, of Divine Institution,
and so perpetual. The Order and Form (says he) for admitting a Superintendent
and a Minister, was all one, and there was nothing in it importing the one
Office to be temporary, more than the other. But therefore, there is nothing
elsewhere importing so much, is a clear non sequitur. In the mean while, from
what he grants, it is plain that the Superintendent wanted the very specific
difference of a Diocesan Bishop, wherefore though they used this Phrase, The
Office to which God called him, and this Question to the People, Will ye not
acknowledge this your Brother for the Minister of Christ Jesus? your Overseer
and Pastor? Will ye not maintain and comfort him -- against all such as
wickedly would rebel against God and his Holy Ordinance. And that Petition,
Send unto this our Brother, whom, in thy name, we have charged with the chief
care of thy Church within the bounds of L. etc. They can thereby mean no other
Office, no other Ordinance of God, and, for kind, no other Charge, than what is
given to every particular Pastor. For we find mentioned the chief 2 Cor. 11. 5.
of the Apostles in Labor viz and Care, who yet were all equal. Neither is it
strange that they thus set apart him who was, for the time, found needful in
these dark times and places, to plant and erect Churches, preach perpetually
where there were none, and in a word, in several things completely to imitate
the ancient Evangelist. Thus Paul and Barnabas were separated with a solemnity
of Fasting, Prayer and Imposition of Hands Acts 13. 3. compared with 14. 26.
And yet the Work or Office for which they were separated, was neither new nor
perpetual.

. 17. Having overthrown the Reasons of his Gloss, it must yield to the Text,
expressly telling us, they were erected only for that time, and that for the
paucity of Ministers endowed with singular Graces. But this reason (says he) is
naught. For suppose we 20, 30, 40 Men in the Kingdom qualified for the Office
of the Ministry; could not these have divided the Kingdom into a proportionable
number of large Parishes? And, still, as more Men turned qualified, could they
not have lessened these greater Parishes? But he with whom our Reformers See
his Pages 242. and sequentes.
were all most contemptible Idiots, and more especially in Church-policy, needs
not wonder though they had fallen into a much greater Solecism. But he forgets,
that many in these most dark times were made Ministers, who yet needed the
Assistance and Direction of the better qualified for a while in Church-policy,
and matters of such importance, till they should be able to go hand in hand
with them, and that the main end of Superintendents was the perpetual
Traveling, Preaching and Instructing where there were no Pastors and planting
of Churches. As well (continues he) as our Presbyterian Brethren now unite
Presbytries. A strange mistake, as if, where Presbytries are united, any
Minister took for his proper Charge a multitude of Parishes. He here insinuats,
that in the Superintendents there was established a Prelacy: But the present
Question is only about the sentiments of our Reformers: and that they never
thought the use of Superintendents croffed the Doctrine of Parity, is most
clear, were there no more, from their using Superintendent-commissioners, even
after they had declared Episcopacy unlawful in it self. But all this their
jangle is the fruit of mere prejudice or worse, for none near these times
looked on Superintendency as perpetual. Not the Court Party, seeing they
endeavored to change Superintendents for Tulchan Bishops: not the rest of the
Church, who, as the necessity of them decreased, suffered them to wear out. And
after that, in an unanimous Assembly, they had ordained that the whole Church
should be divided in a competent number of Presbytries, declared that
Superintendents were no longer expedient. And good ground had they, even from
that very Book of Policy so to do: for, if the whole tenor of that Head of
Superintendents, appointing them almost constantly to Travel, to Preach thrice
a week at least, and beside that to examine the Life etc. of the Ministers, the
Orders of the Kirks, the manners of the People, care how the Poor be provided,
how the Youth be instructed, admonish, where it is needful, by good Counsel,
compose Differences, note and delate to the Kirk heinous Crimes, and all this,
because of the paucity of qualified Ministers; evidently proclaims not, that
this Superintendent was a kind of Evangelist, expedient only at that juncture
of the re-entry of the Gospel into Scotland, I appeal to the candid Judgment
of the impartial.

Moreover, if 'twere otherwise, why should they not as punctually have
described his Duties after the time of his perpetual Travels, his Preaching
thrice a week, and other such vast Labors were ended (for he grants these were
to endure but for a time) after which he insinuats, that the Superintendents
were to remain quiet in their chief Towns, but no word in all the account we
have of them of such distinctions of times, of such perpetual rest, not a word
therefore of their perpetuity.

Lastly; which he wisely, i. e. sutably to his purpose, omitted, for, like the
Council asked at Abel, it ends the matter; see this Head of Superintendents.
Because (say they) we have appointed a larger Stipend to them that shall be
Superintendents, than to the rest of the Ministers, we have thought good to
signify to your Honors such Reasons as moved us to make difference betwixt
Preachers at this time. Now, pray, may not he that runs, read here that, had it
not been for some forcing Circumstances and Exigencies of the then present
time, they had made no difference at all between one Minister and another. And
then after a few lines they laid down their Reasons in the very words, the
sense whereof is now under Debate; If the Ministers etc.

. 18. In the mean while, we need not be much concerned whether these
Superintendents were to be temporary or perpetual, there being nothing therein
that made any real difference between the Church Government which was then, and
that which is now. And indeed, these vast Travels and Pains in preaching thrice
a week etc. are sure enough Tokens that the Superintendent could not be much
distinguished from an ordinary Pastor, save in these extraordinary Labors, and
was far from the Episcopal Eminency, and Grandour, seeing he was so far from
the Episcopal ease and idleness, without which the former but rarely obtains.

This, and other such Proofs of the vast difference between the Superintendents
and their Diocesans, and of the likeness between the Government under the
Reformers and that which is now, our Author slides over with rallry saying, it
may be as well told them, that Bishops wore black Hats and silk,
Superintendents blew Bonets and tartan; as if most constant and hard labor in
the Gospel, were no more valuable for distinguishing one Minister from another,
than highland Plydes and blew Bonnets. He meets you with the like Drollery, if
you mind him, that the Superintendents had no Metrapolitan and Episcopal
Consecration or Ordination, but it is risus sardonius. And his Questions, ( What
is this to Parity or Imparity amongst the Governors of the Church? Do these
differences distinguish between Bishops and Superintendents as to pre-eminence
of Power?) flow from deep dissimulation of the mortal Wound given to his Cause,
seeing without Episcopal Ordination, which was never required to a
Superintendent (For Knox, as for example, who with our Author was only a
Presbyter, ordained or admitted, as they then spoke, Spotswood Superintendent)
there can be no Episcopal Power, no, not so much as the very essentials of a
Bishop. These Superintendents were also without any Civil Places, power or
emoluments that way, which make up the far greater part of the Episcopal
greatness, and still subject and accountable to the General Assemblies.

And there was reason for it (says our Author) supposing that General
Assemblies as then constituted, were sit to be supreme Judicatories of the
National Church, For there was no reason that Superintendents should have been
Popes. Then surely either were our Prelates, Popes, or most vehemently covetted
a papal Power, seeing above all things they feared, abhorred and studi'd the
ruin of these our General Assemblies. And no wonder if they did so, and that
our Author intimats his dislike of these our Assemblies. For if this one thing,
viz. the subjection of the Superintendents to these Assemblies, as they were
then constituted, be duly weighed, it is fair to ^et them on the very same
level with their Brethren. For, give him never so great a Power in the
Province where he superintended, and let him use it as he pleased, yet neither
can the Imparity be counted considerable, not the harm he could do very
hurtful, for within half a year at most (for there was a General Assembly
twice, at least, every year) they had a prospect of a General Assembly to right
their wrong, wherein every Pastor was to have no less Power than any
Superintendent, and no less capable to sit judge and censure the
Superintendent, than the Superintendent was on the other hand, to exerce the
like Power over him; yea, any Minister in the Assembly, and such sometimes as
were none, was as fair to be chosen Moderator as any Superintendent. By the
frequency of these Assemblies, it came to pass, that few or no matters of
importance were determined in the inferior Synods, but came thither for their
final Decision. Wherefore, if we narrowly look on these times, we shall find
that the Superintendents were rather appointed as Observers and Delators of
Matters to the Assembly, than any proper Judges thereof, save when a special
command was given him to cognosce on such and such particular Matters. He was
frequently also charged with execution of the Assemblies Determinations, all
which was common to him with other Commissioners to whom the Assembly gave the
like Charge, and sent them not rarely to these very Provinces where there were
Superintendents with equal Power and Authority to that of the Superintendent.
Sometimes they ordained Causes to be handled by the Superintendent with the
assistance of these Commissioners, sometimes by the Commissioner with the
assistance of the Superintendents, which Commissioners were sometimes Ministers
of another Province, and sometimes of that Province wherein was the
Superintendent, with whom they were joined with equal Power and Authority. From
all which it is evident, how much they are taken with the humor of cavilling,
who dare to ascribe to the Superintendents any real Superiority or Power over
other Pastors, or any thing repugnant to a complete Parity.

But there is yet more: even in his own Synod, he could do nothing contrary to
the Majority, for he was to act nothing without the Synods Consent, neither
could he impede ought done by the Majority, for he had no negative vote. See 1.
Book of Discipline. Head 5. Of the Election of Superintendents.
Yea, he was made subject to the Trial and Censures of the Synod of the very
province where he superintended. And here our Author is compelled to
acknowledge that there was a considerable difference between Superintendents
and Bishops: and indeed 'twas considerable with a witness, and so considerable
that it really sets them on even ground with each Pastor of the word. He adds,
that this was a great wrong, and error in the Constitution; and on this ocasion
has a long invective page 160, et sequentib.
against our Reformers, and in special Knox, counting them Children, Idiots,
Ungovernable, and of bad Principles, and spares not to flegg at all Scots men
or Scotch metal, as he speaks. But this is but a kicking against the pricks.
He knows all this helps him nothing, nor is to the present Question, which is
not de jure but de facto, what our Reformers freely and jointly did? Not, on
what grounds they did so?

He next retorts, that according to the book of Discipline, the Elders are
allowed to admonish, correct, and, with the consent of the Church and
Superintendent, depose their Minister. But, First, tho our Reformers had spoken
just alike of the Elders and Ministers as they did of the Synod and
Superintendent, their words will not bear the like inference: the power they
give to the Elders could certainly be a spurr to the Ministers, and yet they
might be sure the few Elders of one parish would never make so bold with their
Minister, as the whole Synod might with their Superintendent.

Secondly, There is no such allowance given to the Elders concerning their
Minister as to the Synod over their Superintendent: the former much act only
with the consent of the Kirk and Superintendent, but nothing of this enjoined
to the latter. Yea our Author himself will have the power of Deposition to be a
prerogative of the Superintendent, and no doubt he or the Commissioner did, in
the Churches name, execute her sentence. To Depose therefore here, and that
with allowance of the whole context of that 8 head of Discipline, which he
cites, is nothing else than to delate to the Church, and Superintendent the
crimes of the Minister, and in their own sphere assist them in that action. He
adds, he has no where found that de facto the Superintendent was judged by his
own Synod. And it may be so: for little do we find of any thing was then done by
provincial synods, every thing of moment being left to the General Assemblies,
which were then most frequent. Such a Constitution (adds he) inferrs no such
thing as Parity among Church-Offices Those who maintain that the King is
inferior to his Subjects in their Collection, are not yet so extravagant as to
say, he is not Superior to every one of them in their Distribution. But where
Superiors or Equals can be gotten, the Men of this Principle will freely
yield, that none, who are Inferiors in the Distribution ought to judge the
Actions of their Superiors, providing other Judges can be had, who, in this
Case cannot, there being but one King only in a Kingdom: Hence they, believing
that none may live lawless, think the King's Actions are cognoscible by these
who are his Inferiors, but altering their capacity in the Collection. But is
it so in the Case of the Superintendent, whereof there were severals, and not
one only, as there is one commonly King in a Kingdom? Seeing then he was to be
judged by the Synod, notwithstanding, that there were other Superintendents in
the Church; it is evident, they counted every Brother in the Ministry his equal.

. 19. But the Superintendents (says our Author Page 120.
) had a stock of prerogatives above other Pastors. But be it so: yet
notwithstanding hereof, if we suppose, which I trust at the narrowest search
shall appear, the truth of what we have now adduc'd, and the self consistency
of the actings of our Reformers, whom he would fain set at variance with
themselves, whatsoever Prerogatives he has really brought, can never prove that
the Superintendent had any Dominion over other Pastors, or that they acted not
in a true and real Parity; so that, from what is now said, these his pretended
Disparities are prevented and removed. For example, he tells us, that
Superintendents had a larger district, were nominated by the Council, elected
by the Nobility and Gentry; 'twas not so with the Paroch Ministers. But the
Commissioners had no less districts, and were appointed by the General
Assembly, which I Am sure is of no less weight in the case than the Councils
Nomination, even though the Gentlemen's Election be added thereto, and yet, who in
his Wit will take him for any other Officer than is every Parish-minister, or
fall into the rovery of our Author, who Page 37.
calls these Commissioners temporary Bishops.

Paroch-ministers, by the first Book of Discipline head 8, were deposeable by
the Superintendent, and the Elders of their Parishes. The Superintendent was to
be Judged by the Ministers and Elders of the whole Province. But the fraud is
palpable, the words of the Book of Discipline are, that if a Minister be worthy
of Deposition, the Elders of his Parish may, with consent of the Kirk and
Superintendent, depose him. Where you see the Kirk or Minister and Elders of
the Province are no less interested in the Deposition of a Minister than in the
judging of a Superintendent. He suppressed therefore all mention of the Kirk,
which even Spotswood, whom he cites, Page 168.
expresses: to the end he might make his Reader believe no Minister, save the
Superintendent only, had any power in Deposition of Ministers.

But private Ministers (says he) were to be admitted by their Superintendents,
but the Superintendents by the Superintendents next adjacent, and the
Superintendents had the Power of Ordination. The first Book of Discipline and
several Acts of the Assemblies. But, had only the Superintendents the Power of
Ordination? yea, not only was there no plurality of Superintendents present at
the Action, but also John Knox, who was no Superintendent, ordained or admitted
Spotswood Superintendent of L. yea, every particular Minister, when
commissionated by the Assembly, had no less Power of Ordination or any other
thing whatsoever, than is either in the Book of Discipline or any where else
given to the Superintendent. Neither might any one particular Minister while he
was a Commissioner, more than the Superintendent, be translated from one
district to another without the Counsel of the whole Church or Assembly;
neither were there meaner Qualifications requisite in any Commissioner. And I
think Knox, who was never a Superintendent, was in these not inferior to any
of 'em.

But he had a living five times so much as another Minister. But then I Am sure,
he had five times as much to do with it, being perpetually to Travel, Preach
and Exhort far and wide etc: but, if this Rule had been keep'd, our Bishops had
got five times less than any other Minister, for rarely did they any such Duty,
either at home or abroad. In the mean while, The Power of Riches, and the
baseness of Poverty, makes not a Bishop either higher or lower. Hieronymus
Euagrio.


But Superintendents (says he) were constant Members of General Assemblies,
had Power to Visit, and to try the like etc. of the Ministers of all the
Churches of the Diocese, and were to try those who stood Candidates for the
Ministry, had Power of granting Collations on Presentations. But, whatsoever he
had of these, belonged also to every particular Pastor when commissionated by
the General Assembly: but, though the Superintendent or Commissioner is only
named in such Cases, as in trial of the Candidats, granting Collations,
Deposition of Ministers etc. He is to be understood as the Moderator, and mouth
of the Synod where he Superintended, for Example, the Assembly in the case of
transportation, charge the Ministers to obey the Voice and Commandment of
their Superintendent, and yet by the very same Act, Called. Ms. Hist. Vol. 1.
Page. 789.
none can be translated without the Consent of the most part of the Elders and
Ministers of Kirks conveen'd in the Synodal Assembly; and yet from this very
Act, he adventnres to conclude the Canonical Obedience of Pastors to their
Superintendents.

But, he had Power to nominal Ministers to be Members of the General Assembly.
For, Assembly 1562. 'twas ordained, that no Minister leave his Flock for coming
to the Assembly, except he have Complaints to make, or be complained off, or at
least, be warned thereto by the Superintendent. And the L. Glamis in a Letter
to Mr. Beza, says, Apud Saraviam exam. tract. de Episcopatuum triplici genere.
Quest. 2. Page 91. Post reformatam Religionem, consuetudine receptum est, ut
Episcopi, and ex Ministris, Pastoribus, and Senioribus, tot, quot iidem
Episcopi jusserint, unum in lucum conveniant etc.
that, after the Reformation it fell out by custom, that the Bishops and so
many of the Ministers, Pastors and Elders as the Bishops appointed -- came to
the General Assembly. But touching what he alleges as said by the L. Glamis, I
can find it no where, save in the Works of Saravia; and Beza's Answer to Glamis
his second Question, wherein these words are found, neither meets with, nor
presupposes any such Clause. But be it that L. Glamis said so, what will they
hence infer? he says indeed, that this came to pass after the Reformation, but
how long 'twas after the Reformation, before this was practiced, he says not. '
It Was (says he) received by Custom: by no Decree of the Church then, or Acts of
the Assembly. And lastly, he speaks of Bishops, not of Superintendents. And I
never find that any about these times gave Superintendents the name of Bishops;
and so this makes nothing for our Author's purpose. Wherefore, if ever L.
Glamis had any such Expression, whereof I much doubt, in my mind, he mean'd it
of the Tulchans, who, for some space after the Leith-convention made some steps
toward such a Superiority; otherwise, all the accounts we have of these times,
and, in special, the Acts of our Assemblies demonstrat, that there was no such
Power or Privilege given to any then in Scotland: yea, so much our Author
himself presently proves, and overturns this his own Argument by citing another
out of the Assembly July 1563, (1568, he should have said) Called. Ms. Hist. Vol.
2. Page 87. Spots. Page 219.
viz. Anent the Order hereafter to be used in General Assemblies -- They all
voted and concluded as follows, viz. that if the Order already received,
pleases not, by reason of the plurality of Voices, it be reformed in this
manner.

First, that none have place to Vote, except Superintendents, Commissioners
appointed for visiting the Kirks, and Ministers brought with them, presented as
Persons able to reason, and having knowledge to judge: with the aforenamed
shall be joined Commissioners of Burghs and Shires, together with Commissioners
of Universities. Secondly. Ministers and Commissioners shall be Chosen at the
Synodal-convention of the Diocese, by the Consent of the rest of the Ministers
and Gentlemen, that shall conveen at the said Synodal-convention etc.

From this Act it is clear, that the former in 1562. has only been mentioned,
never concluded; or, at least, cass'd and repealed by some intervenient
Assembly, otherways, there had been no place or ground for the Act of 1568.
which presupposes, that even these, that were not at all thus Chosen at the
Synod, were free to come and Vote at the Assembly. So far was this liberty from
being put in the Superintendent or Commissioner's Power. And indeed from this
Act, it is most evident, and it is left on Record also, by the Vindicatour of
Philadelphus, that before the time of this Act, all Ministers who pleased, were
free to Vote at the Assemblies, and yet, with our Author, Petrie must be a
mixer of lies for saying so much. But Calderwood (says our Author) leaves out
entirely these words, brought with them, i. e. with the Superintendents and
Commissioners of Kirks, presented as Persons able to reason, and having
knowledge to judge, whereby the Power of Superintendents and Commissioners for
visiting of Kirks is quite stiffled, and the whole sense of the Act perverted.
For what sense is it I pray, to say, that the Ministers were Chosen by Consent
of the rest of the Ministers, when you tell not who was to choose, or who they
were to whose choice or nomination the rest of the Ministers were to give that
Consent, But to stiffle the Power he pleads for to Superintendents was a Work
impossible, either to Calderwood, or any man else, the very Act it self most
irrefragbly showing, they could have none, save such as is in any mere
Moderator of our Synods or Presbytries. For, be it, which yet the Assembly
expresses not, that the Superintendents were to nominate Ministers for the
Assembly, yet they could do no more, but only as the Synod by their Votes
assented or choosed the nominated Persons, whom if the Synod or its major part
rejected, these could not go to the Assembly, yet some behooved to go, and
consequently the Superintendent or Commissioner was to make a new Lite, and
name again; and if these did not yet please, another Lite, and so on, until
the Synod was satisfied, and choosed some Persons or other according to their
pleasure, for the Assembly. This much is undeniably contained in the Act, and
I Am sure, no Moderator of any Synod or Presbytry injoyes any less Power,
providing it deserve the name. Seeing then Brought with them, cannot possibly
mean any peculiar Power, I see not wherein Calderwood by ommitting them can be
culpable. Neither, can he be accused of nonsense, seeing it is sufficiently
intelligible and plain how these Ministers and Commissioners could be chosen by
the consent of the rest of his Brethren, the Ministers and Gentlemen, members
of the Synod, who, by joint and mutual consent, chused them after the
Superintendent or Commissioners nominating or liting, which, by a fraud too
palpable, he confounds with Election. And here it is observable in how much
torment and perplexity this so clear an Act involves all of 'em. Spotswood,
adduc'd it in his latin Pamphlet, but is so soundly chastis'd by the
Vindicator of Philadelphus, that our Author finds not a syllable to say in his
defense. He pretends also to relate it in his History Page 219.
, but with an essential Depravation, for he leaves out these words, Ministers
and Commissirners of Shires shall be chosen at the Synodal Convention of the
Diocy, with consent of the rest of the Ministers and Gentlemen that shall
conveen at the said Synodal Convention. For, he saw it quite spoiled his Cause,
and really left the Superintendent no Power, but what was equally in any of the
rest, and foists into the Text these such Ministers as the Superintendents
should choose in their Diocesan Synods. Neither can our Author be blameless in
suppressing the following words. Commissioners of Burghs shall be appointed by
the Council and Kirk of their own Towns, none shall be admitted without
sufficient Commission in write. And least this should turn to perpetual
Election of a few and certain Persons, it is concluded, Ministers and other
Commissioners be changed from Assembly to Assembly. Whereby appears the
Churches great care, that neither Superintendent nor any other might have ought
like an Episcopal Power, and that all fit Persons might have equal privilege
of Voting at the Assemblies. There yet remain many of his pretended
Disparities, but, are no more significative of eminency or superior Office, no
less communicable to the rest of the Ministers when Commissioners than were the
former, as will be evident to any, who reads the Acts of the Assemblies, among
which, he reckons the Superintendent's modifying to Ministers their Stipends,
as if, because Judas had the Bagg, and bare what was put therein, he had been
Bishop over the rest of the Apostles. In the mean while, the Superintendents
could do nothing of this, but only as Moderator of the provincial Synod.

Another Deduction of no better metal is, Pages 138, 139.
that the Lord of Dun, Superintendent of Angus, not as such, but by virtue of
a particular Commission given by the Assembly to him and others joined with
him, deposed a Regent of Aberdeen, a place entirely without the bounds of his
Superintendency; therefore Superintendents as such, had a Power Paramount and
Episcopal. And was not such an arguer a man of sense? I pass the rest of his
thirty Disparities not without admiration, that such a fertile brain could not
invent one other, for one and thirty used to carry the Game.

Add to all this, that though some that had been Popish Bishops in Scotland and
embraced the Gospel, as Mr. Gordon of Galloway a man of no contemptible Gifts,
were by our Reformers allowed, without any new Admission, to dispense the Word
and Sacraments; yet, they were never allowed to exercise what they counted
their Episcopal Function, or looked on as Bishops of these Dioceses: yea Mr.
Gordon, though he earnestly sought for it, could never be admitted to Superintend
in Galloway, which is a clear Demonstration, that our Reformers looked on the
Episcopal pre-eminence as a mere Popish Corruption, otherways, why did not Mr.
Gordon, verbi causa, remain in the Power and Character he had enjoyed while
Romanist.

It Is most clear also from all the accounts we have of the Tulchan Bishops,
that all men of all parties looked on a Bishop, as a thing altogether diverse
from a Superintendent.

. 20. And now at length hear him yielding the whole Plea, Pages 167, 168.
There was (says he) a Principle had, then, got too much footing among some
Protestant Divines, viz. That the best way to reform a Church, was, to recede
as far from the Papists as they could; to have nothing in common with them, but
the essentials; the necessary and indispensable Articles and Parts of Christian
Religion; whatever was, in its Nature indifferent, and not positively and
expressly commanded in the Scriptures, if it was in fashion in the Popish
Churches, was therefore to be laid aside, and avoided as a Corruption; as
having been abused, and made subservient to Superstition and Idolatry.

This Principle John Knox was fond of, and maintained zealously; and the rest
of our reforming Preachers were much acted by his influences. In pursuance of
this Principle, therefore, when they compiled the first Book of Discipline,
they would not Reform the old Polity, and purge it of such Corruptions as had
crept into it, keeping still by the main draughts and lineaments of it; -- But
they laid it quite aside, and in stead thereof hammered out a new Scheme,
keeping at as great a distance from the old one, as they could, and as the
essentials of Polity would allow them; establishing no such thing, however, as
Parity, as I have fully proven. And no wonder; for as Imparity has, obviously,
more of Order, beauty and usefulness in its aspect, so it had never so much as
by dreaming, entered their tboughts, that it was a limb of Antichrist, or a
relict of Popery.

But was not Episcopacy in fashion in the Popish Churches? And, dare he, yea or
any mortal say, that ever our Reformers believed it to be an indispensible part
of the Christian Religion positively and expressly commanded in the Scriptures:
Do not therefore his saying establishing however no such thing as Parity etc
and the rest of his Discourse mutually give the lie, and flee in the face of
one another. And indeed, he here at once overthrows whatsoever he said on this
Subject: and now for ever to silence all reasonable men, and stop them from
such desperate adventures as this of our Authors, take the following Argument.

Whatsoever our Reformers believed to be without the express and positive
Testimony of the Scriptures, that they believed to be a damnable Corruption in
Religion, and as such to be avoided.

This the major is put beyond scruple, by what we have brought from the first
Book of Discipline, Knox, and the Confessions of our Author: Now I subjoin.

But they believed, that Episcopacy was altogether without any express or
positive Testimony, yea, or any Warrant or Ground from the Word of God, the
Books of the Old and New Testament; Ergo etc. The minor is no less evident from
what is already adduc'd: and moreover, from the latter Helvetian Confession,
which was all (save the allowance of the remembrance of some Holy Days, which
they expressly disproved) approved and subscribed by our whole General Assembly
at Edinburgh, December 25. 1566. Called. Ms. Hist. Vol. 2. Page 24.
For, in that Confession (mark it, pray, carefully, and by no means forget,
that our Church and Reformers, who approved and subscribed this Confession,
firmly believed that, whatsoever is without the express Commandment of God's
Word, is damnable to Man's Salvation.) they say Fol. 52. Data est autem omnibus
in Ecclesia Ministris una and aequalis potestas sive functio. Certe ab initio,
Episcopi vel Presbyteri Ecclesiam communi opera gubernaverunt: nullus alteri se
praetulit -- Sic legitur secisse in Actis Apostolorum S. Petrus, qui tamen ideo
nec aliis fuit praepositus, nec potestate majore caeteris praeditus. -- Ideoque
nemo jure prohibuerit ad veterem Ecclesiae Dei constitutionem redire, and illam
prae humana consuetudine recipere.
There Is given to all Ministers in the Church, one and the same Power or
Function: And indeed, in the beginning, Bishops and Presbyters ruled the Church
in common, none preferred himself to another, or usurped any more honorable
Power or Dominion to himself over his fellow Bishops. But according to the
words of the Lord, who will be first among you, let him be your Servant, they
persevered in Humility, and helped one another by their mutual Duties, in
Defending and Governing the Church. In the meantime for preserving Order, some
one of the Ministers, did call the Assembly, and proposed these things that
were to be consulted in the Meeting; He did also receive the Opinions of
others; and finally, according to his Power, he took care that no confusion
should arise, so S. Peter is said to have done in the Acts of the Apostles, who
notwithstanding was never set over the rest, nor indu'd with greater power and
honor, but the beginning took its rise from Unity, that the Church might be
declared to be one. And having related Hierome's Doctrine of the Idenity of
Bishop and Presbyier thus they conclude. Therefore none may lawfully hinder to
return to the ancient Constitution of the Church of God, and embrace it before
human Custom.

Thus far the Authors of that most famous Confession, who both in the Title
page, and after the Preface expressly assert, that our Church of Scotland
together with the Churches of Poland, Hungary, Geneve, Neocome, Myllhusium, and
Wiend approved and subscribed this their Confession.

From all which it is easy to gather and perceive, with how black a (...) our
first Reformers and whole primitive Church Protestant branded Prelacy or
Imparity amongst Pastors.

Section IX.
The Foreign reformed Churches truly Presbyerian.
BUT let us hear the Judgment of the rest of the Reformers, and Reformed
transmarine Churches. Gerard, a famous Lutheran divine, Loc. com. Tom. 6. Col.
260.
although, for Orders sake, he admit of some kind of Episcopacy, which really he
makes as good as nothing above a Moderator-ship, yet even for that umbrage
allows nothing but humane Institution, and will acknowledge no distinction by
Divine Right between Bishop and Presbyter. The Papists (says he Col. 261.
Atqui superiorem illam jurisdictionis potestatem jure Divino Episcopis
competentem Pontificii in eo vel maxim ponunt, quod Episcopus possit ordinare
Ministros, Presbyteri vero minime, etc.
) especially place that superior Power of Jurisdiction which they make to
agree to Bishops in this, that the Bishops can Ordain Ministers but the
Presbyters cannot. And all along this Question he strongly proves that, during
the Apostolic age there was no such thing as a distinction between a Bishop
and a preaching Presbyter: and enervats all the Arguments that both Romanists
and other Prelatists commonly bring to the contrary. But, we need not insist on
the Testimonies of particular Men: we have the joint suffrages of the body of
Lutheran Divines, Luther himself being the mouth to the rest, in the Articles
of Smalcald Apud Osiandrum. Epitom. Hist. Eccles. part. 1. Page 299. Art.
Smalkald. de Episcoporum jurisdictione. Liquet autem confessione omnium, etiam
Adversariorum nostrorum, hanc potestatem (Evangelium docendi viz. peccata
remittendi etc.) communem esse omnibus, -- Hic docet Hieronymus, distinctos
graedus Episcoporum etc. tantum humana authoritate constitutos esse -- quia
autem jure Divino uullum est discrimen inter Episcopum etc.
. It Is clear (say they) even from the Confession of our Adversaries, that this
Power, to wit of preaching, dispensing the Sacraments, Excommunication and
Absolution, is common to all that are set over the Churches, whither they be
called Pastors, Presbyters or Bishops: Wherefore Hierome plainly affirms, that
there is no difference between Bishop and Presbyter, but that every Pastor was
a Bishop. -- Here Hierome teaches, that the distinction of degrees between a
Bishop and a Presbyter or Pastor, was only appointed by humane Authority. And
the matter it self (continues Luther and his Associats) declares no less, for,
on both Bishop and Presbyter is laid the same Duty and the same Injunction. And
only Ordination in after times made the difference between Bishop and Pastor.
-- And by Divine Right there is no difference between Bishop and Pastor.

2. As for Calvin, his judgment in this matter was altogether conform to his
practice, which by the very Adversaries themselves is made the very Pattern of
Presbytry, for he Instit. 4. Cap. 3. Sect. 8. and alibi.
asserts the Idenity of Bishop, Presbyter, Pastor, and Minister: and this
Idenity of Bishop and Presbyter, he founds on Titus 1. and 5. compared with the
7, as Hierome had done long before him, and Presbyterians do now. And when he
descends to after times succeeding these of the Apostles, he tells us, Cap. 4.
Neque tamen sic honor and dignitate superior erat E^iscopus ut dominium in
collegas haberet sed quas parts habet Consul in Senatu -- Atque id ipsum pro
temporum necessi^ate fuisse humano consensu inductum fatentur ipsi veteres.
that then the Bishop had no Dominion over his Colleagues sc. the Presbyters,
but was among them, what the Consul was in the Senate, and his Office was to
propone Matters, enquire the Votes, preside in Admonition, and moderat the
Action, and put in Execution what was decreed by the whole Consistory: All
which exceeded little or nothing the Office of a Moderator. And that even this
(says he) was introduced through the necessity of the time by humane consent
is acknowledged by the Ancients themselves. But I shall not insist in citing
Calvine nor Beza, who, every where is full sufficiently to our purpose, both of
'em being abundantly vindicated, and evinced to be Presbyterian in a singular
tractat by the most judicious Author of Rectius Instruendum, from the attempts
of one who pretended to be Mathematico-Theologus, but was in reality
Sophistico-Micrologus. And were there any doubt concerning these, as indeed
there is none, their Practice and that of the Church wherein they lived, our
very Adversaries being Judges, sufficiently discuss it, and prove them to be
truly Presbyterian: and to them subscribes the stream of transmarine Writers,
Systematicks, Controvertists, and Commentators. As for Example, the famous and
learned Musculus Loc. Com. Page 246. Tertio eosdem esse Presbyteros quosque and
Episcopos and Pastores, ex eo patet quod Act. 20. legimus ad hunc modum etc. --
unde videas Apostolorum tempore in Ecclesia Christi eosdem fuisse Presbyteros,
Pastores and Episcopos.
asserts and proves from Acts 20. Philip. 1. and the like Texts, which we now
use, that Bishop, Pastor and Presbyter are all one and the same, and that in
one Church there were at one time conjunctly many Bishops. Of the same mind are
all the Systematick Divines, yea even Tilen himself while Orthodox. We judge
(says he Syntag. part. alt. Page. 544. Quod ex horum Pastorum seu
Presbyter^rum collegio, unus reliquis esset praepositus and Episcopi cognomento
ornatus singulariter ab humano ortum instituto, nona divino pracepto,
existimamus, non solum cum Hieronymo verum etiam cum Lombardo, Gratiano, Card.
Cusano and aliis.
) not only with Hierome, but also with Lombard, Gratian, Card. Cusan and
others, that the preferring one out of the College of Pastors to the rest, and
giving him the name of Bishop was a humane Invention. This Author indeed
altered his mind concerning Church Government when he pelagianiz'd, for then he
turns altogether (though to his cost) a Hectorer of the Zelots of the Genevan
Discipline. Time would fail me in collecting Testimonies of this kind, seeing,
there were ever few, I may say none, save a small handful in Britain, who have
not asserted that, during the Apostolic age, there was no such thing, as any
distinction between Bishop and Pastor or preaching Presbyter: and that among
these there was an entire equality.

To these we may add the Testimonies of the most and famousest of the reformed
Churches in their Confessions, whereof we have seen not a few already, while we
related the Testimony of the Helvetian Confession, together with the
approbations thereof: no less illustrious and pregnant is the Testimony of the
French Consession: We believe (say they Art. 30. Credimus omnes veros Pastores
ubicunque locorum collocati fuerint eadem and aequali inter se potestate
essepraeditos.
) that all true Pastors where ever they be, are endu'd with equal and the same
power, under that one Head Christ the Chief and Universal Bishop. To the same
purpose also speaks the Dutch Confession: We believe (say they Credimus veram
hanc Ecclesiam debere regi etc.
) that this true Church ought to be governed by that spiritual Policy, so that
there be in it Pastors or Ministers that may purely dispense the Word and
Sacraments, that there be also Elders and Deacons etc.

. 3. The harmonius and Catholic Testimony of all the reformed Churches are to
some like pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, and therefore, most
various and hetrogeneous means are used to render it unserviceable. And amongst
other things, we are told, that many foreign Divines and Churches have a great
likeing for their Diocesan Way, and Zanchius (say they Prideaux apud Maresium
exam. prim. 4. Questionum Theolog. Page 63. pro Calvinistis etc.
) counts all its Opposers Schismatics. But Maresius answers Page 66. Quamquam
non ut dominus etc.
that Zanchius never allowed of a Lord Bishop, but only of such a one who is
like a Rector of a College, whose Power I Am sure, is little or nothing above
that of a Moderator. Maresius adds Page 65. Nullum novi Zanchii tractatum de etc.
that he can find in no place of Zanchius, the words Prideaux had alleged. And
lastly, as Maresius tells us Page 66. Profitetur se non posse nostrorum zelum
non amare qui ideo illa nomina (Episcoporum and Archi-episcoporum) oderunt etc.
, Zanchius professes that he cannot but love the zeal of such as hate the names
of Bishop and Archbishop, fearing least with these Names the ancient Ambition
and Tyranny together with the destruction of the Churches should return.
Prideaux also alleges that Calvin writing to the King of Poland, advises him
to establish Bishops and Archbishops. But has the same return from Maresius
Page 67. Nec Calvinus ut somniat doctissimus Episcop. etc.
, viz. that this is the Bishop's own Dream, and that there is no such thing to
be found in Calvin. This dealing is not very laudable.

Neither are Means wanting to procure Advocats from Abroad; one Spanhemius F.
contra Vander Waeyen.
whereof brings many things either to defend or excuse the Hierarchy, and to
show that it is not ill linked abroad, and amongst other things says, Part
speciali. Page 149.
that notwithstanding of what is in the Helvetian Confession, its Authors
condemn not the Liberty of other Churches as they manifest in their Preface,
protesting, that in all this Confession they agreed with the Church of England.
But this Author cannot be ignorant, that seeing, according to that Confession,
Christ gave equal Power to all Pastors, and according to what is alleged to be
the Judgment of the present Church of England, he did the quite contrary.
Their Preface can by no means prove, that they allow of the Sentiments and
Practice of the present English Church, except he would have the Preface to
contradict the Confession. But all this he says is only to darken an evident
Truth; the meaning of the Preface being, that between the Helvetians and the
English there was no such fundamental Difference as prohibited mutual Charity
one to another which many have given, and may give to these, who, as they
judge, retained many Errors, though not Fundamental. The same Author, Pages 129,
130, 131. 132, and alibi.
objects, that many Churches, and amongst others, that of the Helvetians, have
either Bishops over their Pastors, or, which is really the same,
Superintendents. But to instance in the Helvetians, they in their Confession
saying that, Christ gave a like Power to all Pastors etc. and therefrom
concluding, that none may hinder to return to Christ's primitive Institution,
make most apparent that they intended no continuation of any Superiority
amongst Pastors, and consequently of no Bistops, or, their equivalent,
Superintendents: but all this work he makes, is dicis gratia for the fashion
only: for if in Helvetia or else where, there be any umbrage of Bishops or
Superintendents, it is really an Obtrusion and Erastian Usurpation; and this we
may learn from himself, freely acknowledging, Nomothesia istic Ecclesiastica
penes supremum Magistratum.
that the chief legislative Power in the Church matters, is in the hands of the
supreme Magistrate. Otherways he confesses, that Page 131, 132. Haud me equidem
fugit etc.
the choicest of Writers, and amongst others, Hoornbeck, make the Discipline of
the Scots, French, Dutch, and Helvetian Churches to be one and the same.
Moreover, he sufficiently answers himself while, Page 130. Sed ut quod est
dicam longissimo inter utrosque discrimine. Priorem siquidem mera est ordinis
and honoris, null^ jurisdictionis vel potestatis proprie dictae, praerogativa.
he expressly grants, that between the Superintendents or Bishops through
Germany, and these of England, there is an infinite difference, and that these
in Germany have only a simple prerogative of Order, but not at all of any
Jurisdiction, or any thing that can be properly termed Power. Thus he. And I Am
sure, that any P^aeses of an Assembly has no less Superiority than he here
ascribes to these transmarine Superintendents or Bishops: and indeed, shortly
to give an account of this Author, besides, as we have now seen, he is obliged
to pull back with the one hand, what he had bestowed on the Hierarchicks with
the other; his whole Discourse leans upon this Supposition, that there is no
certain Form of Church Government left by Christ in his Word: on this depend
his Glosses upon the passages we produced of the French and Dutch Confessions.
Vide inter alia part. spec. a page 171 ad page 189, where he all along
presupposes and inculcats, that, though according to the Authors of the
Confessions, Christ gave equal Power, etc. to all Pastors, yet in their
Judgment if the Church will, she may alter this kind of Government, and change
that Equality which Christ gave, for an Inequality, and give some Pastors a
Power over the rest. Which, if it be not a Contradiction to these Confessions,
in stead of an Explication, it looks as like it is one Crow can be like
another. For, who can believe, but that if the Authors of these Confessions had
believed an indifferency of Equality or Inequality of Pastors, they had either
intimated so much, or been altogether silent thereof, neither of which they
did, but gave to the World solemnly as the Confession of their Belief, that
Christ gave to to all Pastors equal and the same power: and yet, if we believe
this Interpreter, this that Christ gave may, according to the Authors of that
Confession be relinquished when Men will, and Inequality, it is quite contrary
introduced in the place thereof. Is not this too like the dealing of the
Romanists, who, when they are compelled to acknowledge that the Apostles gave
the Cup to the People, yet pretend that they may deprive them of what Christ
and his Apostles gave them? Diverse indeed have said, that Church Government was
among the Adiaphora, and things indifferent. But these were more wary then to
say (as he would have the Authors of these Confessions to say) that Christ gave
equal, and the same Power to all Pastors, yea, such used not to grant that
Christ gave either Equality or Inequality of Power, but left all to the
Churches management.

Moreover, as he does us no damage, so, I Am sure, he does the present
Hierarchicks as little service; for, if this Hypothesis, that no kind of Church
Government is juris divini, stand, then the jus divinum of Episcopacy is lost,
and therefore I Am sure, they shall give him as little thanks as we. It Is also
observable, that when ever the Authors of these Confessions, or other Divines
of their Persuasion said, that Communion with Churches of a different
Government was not to be broken, or any thing of that kind; he presently
inferrs that they judged any other form no less agreeable to the word of God
than their own.

And here I cannot but take nottice of what I have met with somewhere in M.
Claude's historical defense of the Reformation (for, at present, I have not the
book) viz. that Diocesan Episcopacy is no less condemnable than Pilgrimages,
Purgatories, or some such Romish dotages which he there names, and how averse
he was from Diocesan Episcopacy, is observed by the Prefacer to the English
Translation: and yet, if we believe some, he gave large Testimonies of his
great affection to the Diocesan cause.

And this brings to mind another Artifice; for when any Protestant Divines,
considering the great Power of Popish Bishops, and vehemently desiring Peace
for the free Preaching and Propagation of the Gospel, strained their Judgment,
and seemed at any time to do or say somewhat that appeared to comply with
Episcopacy, our Prelatists anon Infer, that such Divines were great Lovers of
their Hierarchy. Thus, for Example, they abuse the Words and Actions of
Melancton; but they should remember that sometimes, driving the same Design,
some of these Divines seemed no less to comply with the Papacy it self, as
appeared at the pressing of the Interim. The same end drove Melancton, when, in
a Conference at Ausburg, as Osiander relates Epitom. Hist. Eccles. Part. 1.
Cent. 16. Lib. 2. Cap. 15. Videtur autem Melancton in causa fuisse, ut
Episcopis aliquid Jurisdictionis concederetur: speravit enim, si etc.
, he seemed to yield somewhat of Jurisdiction to Bishops; for be hoped that, if
Jurisdiction were granted them, they would not so much oppose the Gospel. But
Philip considered not, (continues Osiander) that the Fox may change his hair,
not his Temper. Melancton Osiand. Epit. Hist. Eccles. Cent. 16. Part. 1. Lib.
2. Cap. 37. De pontifice autem statuo. Si Evangelium admirteret, posse ei
propter Pacem etc.
granted also to the Pope, provided he would admit the Gospel, a superiority
over other Bishops, founded only on humane right, and yielded for procuring of
the Peace of Christendom. Thus Melancton, through his extreme desire of Peace,
forced his own Judgment, for, with Luther and the rest, he subscribes the
Smalkaldick Articles, wherein, as we have heard, the Scriptural Idenity of
Bishop and Presbyter is most clearly asserted.

But, what ever they say to persuade us, that these or other such Divines
favor them, we are little obliged to believe it, for they believe it not
themselves: and these of our Adversaries that speak out their mind freely, tell
us, that all the transmarine reformed Churches are really Presbyterian: It were
too much I Am sure, to transcribe what D. Heylin says of this, for he freely
grants it, and then through a whole large Folio, as such bespatters with the
blackest of Railings and Calumnies, every one of the reformed Churches in
particular.

No less positive is Howell, Fam. Letters. Vol. 3. Page 395.
who makes Calvin the first Broacher of the Presbyterian Religion, And a little
after, Thus (says he) Geneva Lake swallowed up the Episcopal See, and Church
Lands were made secular, which was the white they levelled at. This Geneva Bird
flew thence io France and hatched the Huguenots, which make about the tenth
part of that People; it took wing also to Bohemia and Germany high and lo, as
the Palatinate, the land of Hesse, and the confederat Provinces of the States
of Holland.

Yea Bellarmine De Clericis cap. 14. -- et nostris temporibus Lutherani and
Calvinistae etc.
, being to write against Presbytry, lays down in the entry as undeniable that '
it is the common doctrine of both Calvinists and Lutherans.

. 5. To these may be added all such as were valiant for the truths of God, and
stoutly opposed themselves to Antichrist, before Luther, as the Waldenses and
Albigenses, of whom Alphonsus de Castro fol. 102. hunc eundem errorem post
multos annos ab Inferis suscit arunt Waldenses, dicentes nullum esse inter
Sacerdotes discrimen.
relates, that they denied any difference between Bishop and Presbyter, and
herein differed nothing from Aerius. This same may be learned from Thuan Hist.
part. 1. lib. 5. Quibus respondent, qui hodie in Anglia puriorem doctrinam
praese ferunt.
, who compares them with the English Non-conformists. So far from truth was D
M. when page 239.
he says, that these only declaimed against the corrupt Manners of the Church
of Rome, but never declaimed against the subordination of one Priest unto
another.

This same doctrine held Wicklef and his followers, denying that there is any
difference between Bishop and Presbyter Alphonsus de Castro fol 102.
. The Waldenses and Wicklef were in this, as in the rest of their Articles,
followed by J. Huss and his Adherents, who also asserted, that there ought to
be no difference between Bishop and Presbyter or among Priests Aenaeas Sylvius
de Bohemorum origin et gestis cap. 53. dogmata sunt -- inter Sacerdotes nullum
discrimen esse etc.
. Yea so Catholic and universal has this doctrine, of the Identity of Bishop
and Presbyter, still been, that it has all along, by the Romanists, been
justly reck'n'd a prime doctrine of Romes Opposers see the history of the
Council of Trent pages 596, 605, 606, 607.
. Nor shall you readily find one before Luther, for of such I now speak, of
Truth's Witnesses who condemned not all distinction between Bishop and
Presbyter.

. 6. And even in England it self after the Reformation, the famousest Bishops
and lights of that Church, as Hooper, Latimer, and others, could not, without
great difficulty and reluctance, admit the exercing of the Episcopal Office,
the using of their Priestly vestments etc: to be in any sense lawful: so far
were they from believing a Divine Right of Diocesan Episcopacy. But, as Voetius
observes Polit. Eccles. part. 2. page 833.
the use of it was excused rather than defended.

The first, or at least the Standard Bearer among the first, that either in
England, or any where else in the reformed World, had the brow to assert its
Divine Right, appeared in the latter part of Queen Elizabeth's Reign: neither
was he a Native of Britain, but a Flemming, I mean Hadrian Saravia once a
Pastor in the reformed Netherlands, but, as Maresius witnesses Exam. Theol.
Quatuor Quaest. Insignium. Quaest. 1. page 68. S^raviam vero suis Belgium
orthodoxum non annumerat, utpote etc.
, reject'd by them, as being an Enemy to both their Church and State. Neither
was he better looked on, as himself acknowledges Epist. dedicat. ad Episcopos
Anglicanos praefixa libris de gradibus Ministrorum, et alibi pluries.
, by the rest of the reformed Churches abroad. And I think every true
Protestant will yield that they had reason so to do, seeing he dares make De
gradib. Ministrorum cap 24. et alibi.
not only Bishops, but also Archbishops, Metropolitans, yea and Patriarchs to
be of Divine Right. And over all these he places the Bishop of Rome, as the
Supreme in Order and Honor. He contends moreover, that one Man may be lawfully
enough both a Bishop and a Civil Magistrate, and exerce one of these Offices by
himself, and another by his Substitutes. De honor Praesulibus et Presbyteris
debito. cap. 19.
The vast Rents of Prelates, the external Pomp of Honors, Titles, and train
like that of the greatest secular Nobles, agree well enough with the simplicity
of a Gospel Ministry. They may lawfully enough in their Grandor and multitude
of Servants imitat the greatest Earls and Dukes. All this is sufficiently
warranted by Christ while he chus'd twelve Apostles, and seventy Disciples. If
you tell him that Christ riding to Jerusalem had no train of Servants, no
Noblemen attending him, adorned with golden Chains, and riding on trapped
Horses, he answers, that Christ did so throw the necessity of that time, least
he had been suspected as affecting an earthly Kingdom, and that his want of
such Splendour, was the fault of Herod and such Princes as knew him not. This
Argument (continues Saravia) that they make against the Popish Prelates and
ours, is frivolous, for it is deduced from the Deeds of the Infidels, and has
no place among Christians. Though Cap. 29.
Bishops have Bands of armed Men to guard 'em, and Noblemen adorned with
golden Chains constantly to Page and attend them; this ought to offend no Body.
And whatsoever he says for covering this Scandal that such superlative
Grandour, Pomp and Vanity give to every sober Beholder, his Reader shall find
to be nothing else save what is commonly brought to palliat the Offense which
the World so justly takes at the Luciferian Pride and Arrogance of the great
Antichrist: yea even long after that time, notwithstanding of all the
endeavors of Saravia and his Accomplices, so great a Stranger was this Doctrine
even there, that T. Holland Spanhem. part. spec. page 221. Quisc. Laudum pro
gradu disputantem asserentemque Episcoporum ordinem esse divini ac necessarii
juris, publica ignominia notavit.
, the King's Professor at Oxford branded Laud with public infamy for asserting
the divine right of Episcopacy.

Section X.
Some of the manifold inconveniences and noxious Qualities of Prelacy briefly
mentioned.
I Might, in the next place, enlarge on its Concomitants and Qualities: a few
whereof I shall only name. One of these was a direful Spirit of Persecution,
which still raged during the Prelatical Government, the sad effects whereof,
through no small part of this Kingdom, on both Bodies and Consciences of the
best part of Protestants therein, and that for their refusal of the very things
which many of the Urgers acknowledged to be altogether indifferent, are but too
well known.

. 2. Another of its Qualities, little better than the former, is their
Schismatical Practice and Principles; as for instance, at the last return of
Prelates, the Church of Scotland, whatsoever Differences might have been
therein, yet was but one, and not Altar against Altar: did they not then become
the Authors of a complete National Schism, while they broke the whole Church
into Parties, to the end (only) they might establish such things as many of
themselves acknowledged to be indifferent? Again, their re-entry into Scotland
was so far from being Legal, that it wanted the very color of all Order and
Law: for no General Assembly of whatsoever kind introduced them. Seeing then
this Church has, ever since her return from Rome, held General and National
Assemblies for her supreme Judicatory, and Prelates were extruded by full
National Assemblies, they ought, for their re-entry without the like Authority,
to be accounted, by all true Members of the Church of Scotland, manifest
Violators of all her Laws and Authority. And while they upbraid us with the
Crime of Separation, are exactly like these, who, having overturned all
fundamental Laws of a Society, and ruined all both Officers and Members
cleaving thereto, should moreover reproach them, upon this very account, that
they would not subscribe to the overthrow of their fundamental Laws and
Constitution. But marvel not though they made so wide a Breach here; for they
give but too much ground to judge, that they have separated themselves from the
Body of the reformed Churches; as appears, amongst other things, in their
Doctrine and Practice of Re-ordaining all who come over unto them from these
Churches. Some indeed would persuade us, that they hold this but as a small
Ceremony; but yet it is such an one, as, for ought I can learn, they will never
quite with, notwithstanding of all the Scandals given or taken thereby. And the
most earnest Asserters of Episcopacy have their Episcopal Ordination in such
esteem, that they account none true Ministers without it; and so look on most
of the Reformed Churches as being without all true Ministers, and consequently
without either true Preaching or true Sacraments. And is not this too like a
Donatistick Schism? And is it strange then that our Church did still, with
greatest care and vigor, though on this account only, oppose Prelacy and
Prelatists, they being generally leavened with such dangerous Principles?

And here observe that all the Heats and Debates that were in our Church since
her Reformation from Popery, owe their Original, either more directly, to
Prelacy, while she strove to keep or drive it out of Scotland: or more
indirectly, while some (if on good ground or otherwise, I determine not)
greatly feared that some Persons or Practices would prove introductive thereof;
and therefore, against the mind of others, sought to have them laid aside. And
thus Prelacy, whither present or absent, has still been the bane of this
Church. And there is little doubt, but that they were so wise, in their
Generation, as both to kindle and blow at the fire of any Division that
happened.

. 3. And, as they give but too evident signs of their separating from the Body
of the reformed Churches, so, in too many things they but too nigh approach the
Romanists. Their Government and Hierarchick Scale is one and the same, save one
roundle, with that of Rome. All their Arguments they bring, either from
Scripture or Antiquity, are learned from Bellarmine and such Romanists, and
admit no less improvement for the evincing a papal Authority, than the
Episcopals have made thereof for the establishing of their prelatical Power.
The Romanists affirm, that the Apostles and Evangelists were Prelates of
particular Diocesses, and that a power properly Apostolic still remains in the
Church. In these and other such Positions too many of our Episcopal Men are
ready to follow them. But leaving the Apostolic times, descend to the
subsequent Ages called Antiquity, there, they are Pylades and Orestes, mutual
Supporters of one another, and have, in arguing from this Fountain so great a
resemblace, that you shall scarce know with whither of the two ye are dealing.
Neither, as we have already touched, in the Topics they pretend to draw from
Reason, as that of Order and the like, is there between them any less
Consanguinity.

. 4. The Practice also of our Prelates both former and latter bore no small
resemblance to that of the Romanists, while they affected so earnestly a
secular Grandour, and the sullying the purity and simplicity of the Gospel,
with a mass of Superstition and Romish Ceremonies. The affection of too many of
that Party to Rome was also visible in their earnestness to get and keep a
zealous Papist upon the Throne, and in their melancholic and Pannick-fears at
any appearance of our Relief from Slavery and imminent danger of Popery. And
lastly, in their excessive Joy when any hope of our Delivery seem to have been
crushed and blasted. All this was most legible in their Practice at the
appearance of the Duke of Monmouth and the Earl of Argyle, and the failing of
their Designs. They were no less galled and vexed at the most noble and happy
Design of his present Majesty, praying, in the chief Churches of this Kingdom,
that he, might be sunk as a Stone in the mighty Waters. And after his entry
that, as his Army came in one way, it might be scattered seven ways.

. 5. Add to all this, their either more indirect, or downright calumniating
and maligning of the reformed Churches and first Reformers, placing them in the
same Category with Papists. Take for instance the frontispicial Lines of
Nalson's Collections, Like Bifrons Janus next does court your eye
Rome and Geneva in Epitome,
They squint two ways in the main Point agree.


And indeed this is but their kindest dealing. Neither do they then speak as
they think; for their Love and Charity is by many degrees greater toward the
Romanists, than to the reformed Churches. They will admit none of the latter to
a pastoral Office if they refuse Reordination; but kindly receive a Romish
Priest without it. Of the most learned and godly Protestant Dissenters from
them, they speak most contemptuously Dr. Pearson. prooem. ad vind. St. Ignat.
terming them Arch-schismaticks. But the Jesuit Bellarmine, and Baron the
Popish grand Legendarie, they with greatest deference call most eminent
Cardinals. Yea even in the chief Churches of this Kingdom, they repeated their
invectives against our first Reformers and Reformation, and in some Churches
thereof, they were not ashamed to say, that our Reformation was Deformation:
Knox deserved knocks. On the other hand, not a few of 'em all along showed no
little warmth of affection to Papists, intitulating them to the same God, and
Heaven with themselves, and asserting their neighborhood and conjunction to be
infinitely more eligible than that of these whom they-call'd Phanaticks, as
appears, for instance, in a printed Sermon of Mr Mcqueen. And Heylin Hist. of
the Presbyterians. Page 0.
says, that the Genevan Discipline was begotten in Rebellion, born in Sedition,
and nursed up by Faction. And indeed this Author is an Enemy so open and
implacable to all the reformed Churches, that Strada, Gretser, Becan, Campian,
or the like most fiery and venomous Loyolites could scarce, with all their
impudent slanders and infernal rage, outdo, yea or equal him. With such stuff
most of his Works, and especially his History of the Presbyterians, are wholly
crammed. Yea, he doubts not Hist. Quinquart. Pages 5, 6.
to call both Luther and Calvin Maniches, i. e. such as hold two infinite
Beings, or two Gods. Others of the Faction, as Dodwell, are ready to pronounce
all, who dislike Diocesan Episcopacy, guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost.
But the World has now seen, that the most fiery of such Zelots at length threw
off the Mask, and professed themselves Romanists: as for instance L' Estrange
or else, which their own Dr. Burnet Preface to the second Vol. of his Hist of
the Reformation.
observes of Heylin, one would think they had been secretly set on by these of
the Church of Rome. And so, they were, in their profession of Protestancy,
hateful Hypocrites, that they might the more easily bespatter and gore the
protestant Religion through the sides of Presbytry. Others of 'em are yet more
downright Atheists, who, if they hear the wrath of God, and Hells torments
denounced against impenitent Sinners, will tell you Howel. Fam. Let. Pages
471, 472.
that such a Doctctrine came from a Winter-Preacher, so that if a Schytian or
Groenlander, who are habituated to such extreme cold, had heard him, they would
have thought he preached of Paradise. And some call the Doctrine of Communion
with God and Faith in Jesus Christ, fine Fables and Stories. Behold the Men who
make it their chief Work to adore the Hierarchy, and inveigh against Presbytry:
which brings to mind the saying of Tertullian, Apolog. Cap. 5.
that Christianity must needs be some excellent thing, seeing only Nero and
such Monsters were its prime Persecuters. Some there are also (as their own
Edwards Of the style of the Scriptures. Page 34. et seq.
relates) even of their Reverend Divines, who turn all the Mosaic History
concerning Adam and Eve, the Serpent, Paradise, eating the forbidden Fruit, and
all the passages relating to them, into Parable, yea into Ridicule; saying that
Moses only so talked in compliance with the blockish, and thick skull'd
Israelites, but not a syllable of truth is in all that he says. This is very
strange language (subjoins Edwards) from a Reverend Divine, who thereby
destroys the whole system of Theology, and of Christianity it self. And yet,
for such black and heinous Crimes we cannot hear that they undergo the least
degree of Censure. In my Judgment, (says Edwards) if there be no public
Censure passed upon such a daring Attempt as this, by a Member of our Church,
Athiests will have just ground to laugh at our Discipline. And here in
Scotland, all along during their Reign, how closely did they connive at such
Irreligion, as also, at all the growth and progress then made by the active
Spirit of Popery: and in stead of being providers against such Pests, some of
our Prelates at Court proved Mediators in their behalf, saying, that there was
less to be feared from Papists than from Phanaticks. And in answer to some
imputing gross Enormities to the Church of Rome, said, that such things were
only to be ascribed to the Court of Rome, not to the Church of Rome. Add hereto
the great love of not a few of 'em to the Pelagian, Jesuitick or Arminian
Doctrines, Hypotheses clean contrary to the belief of all the reformed
Churches; and more especially to that of the Church of Scotland. They pretend
notwithstanding, as if the establishing of Prelacy were the debarring of
Popery. Episcopacy (say Burnet's Confer. Page 323.
they) was so far from being judged a step to it, that the ruin of the
Episcopal Authority over Presbyters, and the granting them exemptions from the
jurisdiction of their Ordinary, was the greatest advance the Roman Bishop ever
made in his tyrannical Usurpation over Churches. I need not here tell so known
a matter, as is that of the exemption of the Regulars, who being subject to
their own Superiors and Generals, and by them to the Pope, were sent through
the World in swarms; and with great shows of Piety, Devotion, and Poverty,
carried away all the esteem, and following from the secular Clergy; who were
indeed become too secular, and these were the Popes Agents and Emissaries, who
brought the World to receive the Mark of the Beast, and wonder at her. For
before that time, the Popes found more difficulty to carry on their
Pretensions, both from secular Princes and Bishops: but these Regulars being
warranted to Preach and Administer the Sacraments without the Bishops license,
or being subject and accountable to him; as they brought the Bishops under
great contempt, so they were the Popes chief Confidents in all their
treasonable Plots against the Princes of Europe. And when at the Council of
Trent, the Bishops of Spain being weary of the insolences of the Regulars, and
of the Papal Yoke, designed to get free from it. The great Mean they proposed,
was to get Episcopacy declared to be of Divine Right, which would have struck
out both the one and the other. But the Papal Party foresaw this well, and
opposed it with all the Artifice imaginable: and Lainez the Jesuit, did at
large discourse against it; and they carried it so, that it was not permitted
to be declared of Divine Right. And by this, judge if it be likely that the
Papacy owes its rise to Episcopacy. The emptiness of which discourse is
apparent. For,

First, The tendency and nature of Prelacy, and the Topics whereon they Found
it, aiming no less at one Head over all, then at one Prelat over a few
Churches, make evident, that he touches not the Argument in hand, only giving
out that some time by one accident or other, the humbling, and depression of
the Prelates proved the Popes exaltation.

Secondly, Strange, I Am sure, and most demonstrative must the Reasons be that
make null clear Matters of Fact, or persuade Men that such things have never
been; and it is undeniable that the Councils and other Caballs, which from time
to time raised the Pope gradually to his present hight, were all consisting of,
or managed by Bishops; and if any hapen'd to spurn at his rising, the Pope got
still far more then a plurality to crush them: and indeed 'twas impossible the
Pope should have risen by any other means, the whole sway of Church Affairs and
guidance thereof being then in the hands of Bishops: wherefore if the Pope was
raised to despotick Soveraignity, whereby he might absolutely dispense of
Church Affairs, and trample at pleasure on the fairest mitres, they only are to
be blamed, having themselves advanced him to this transcendental Preheminency.

Thirdly, Neither are the Bishops less guilty of this the Popes exaltation,
upon the account of their profound sloth and negligence: the Author well
observes, that they were become too secular, and indeed they were so immersed
in Luxury and Ambition, that providing they might wallow in their Lusts, and
obtain from the Pope a Domination over other Churches, they little valued any
thing else.

Fourthly, But it is yet more admirable how he can allege, that the Regulars
brought the World to receive the Mark of the Beast: as if the Bishops (for this
he must intimat or he says nothing) had been innocent; he is too learned not to
know that gross Papal Darkness had overspread the World ere ever any such
Exemptions were given, or the Regulars distinguished from Seculars. It Is true
indeed that the swarms of Friars were amongst the most pestiferous Locusts, the
World has been pestered withal, but, to lay all or the greatest share of this
Guilt of exalting the Pope, on their shoulders, is a shrewd evidence of
partiality; nothing being more notour, then that as the Bishops were the main
Assistants and Supporters in every Innovation he decreed, so they with the
greatest care, rigor and fury pressed them on both Clergy and People.

Fifthly, That the wicked fraternities in the several Orders of Regulars, were
the Popes Agents in contriving, and sometimes effecting the ruin of Kings and
Princes, is but too well known and evident enough; yet that the Prelates were no
less guilty, and far more efficacious herein, is no less deniable. Were there
no Bishops supporting the Pope in his War against the Emperor Barbarossa? Did
not a crew of the same Cattle join him in Dethroning Henry the IV? And at a
word, where did ever the Pope make his impresses, but he was strengthn'd by
their arm and support.

Sixthly, But though Episcopacy at the Council of Trent had been declared of
Divine Right, what great relief had this been, either from the Papal Yoke, or
insolences of the Regulars; it might perhaps for the time have procured some
more Honor to the Bishops for the Pope's Italians of other Orders: but might
not the Pope notwithstanding, by his boundless Authority and Supremacy he
pretends over all Bishops, have continued to gall and oppress their Order, and
also send, especially where the negligence of Prelates invited him, his
Missionaries through the World, yea thus the Pope's power paramount had not
once been touched at that Council, or hurt by such a Declaration. Was his
infallibility ever there questioned by the Bishops? Did they at all endeavor
the removal of the unsupportable Burdens and Slavery the Church groaned under?
And should it not have been a great benefit to the Church, or diminishing the
Pope's power, though his Holiness had pleased to declare the Divine Right of
their Office?

Seventhly, But whatever it was the Bishops aimed at in the Council of Trent,
I Am not much concerned; only I would gladly know, how from this their Action it
follows that Bishops had never been the Men, or Episcopacy one of the means
whereby the Papacy had been brought into the World; which is the Author's
Inference, and is just as one should reason thus: some of Alexander's
Macedonian Soldiers, vexed with his tyranny and insolence, and his preferring
of Strangers, attempted his down-throw: (the like may be said of some of the
Soldiers of Julius Caesar, Galba, Didius Julianus, Maximinus and others)
therefore they had not contributed to the raising and absolute Supremacy of
these Princes. And should not such an one be reckoned an admirable Logician?
And yet this Inference should be far more pardonable than the former; in so
much as the thing the Bishops aimed at against the Papacy, if it can be called
any thing, came infinitely short of what these Conspirators attempted upon the
powers they deemed unsupportable.

And by this, judge if the most earnest efforts of their chiefest Authors make
it in the least improbable, that the Papacy owes its rise to Episcopacy: and if
such pitiful paralogisms proclaim not, that they can really find nothing
wherewith to cover Prelacy from the heavy; but just imputation of being the
certain introductive of Popery.

. 6. This odd reasoning of the Doctor minds me of another of his of his
Essays, or Retorsions which is of Kin to this Argumentation. May not one
(says he Page 321.
) that quarrels a standing Ministry, argue on the same Grounds, a Ministers
Authority over the People, gave the rise to the Authority Bishops pretend over
Ministers, and so the Minister will be concluded the first step of the Beast's
Throne? But this retorsion, being once handled, shall hurt us no more, then
what we have already removed; for take a Gospel Ministry unconfounded with a
papal Hierarchy, and then there is not the least color or pretext for any
Man's ascribing to it the first rise of Popery, the parity we plead for among
Pastors of Flocks secures a Gospel Ministry from any force or appearance of
reason in any such assault: whereas (on which I Am not now to dwell) the Topics
establishing Prelacy, tend no less to assert a Papacy. But again the belief of
a Gospel Ministry as a thing altogether necessary for the Being of a Church, is
so well and so universally rooted in the hearts of all Christians, that they,
compared with the rest, have scarce amounted to a handful who had the holdness
to deny it; and so there is little hazard to be feared from these few
contemptible Objectors: and though there seemed to be, and the Objection should
appear never so pungent, yet it could be really of no weight against so
necessary and indispensible an Ordinance. Whereas on the other hand, there is so
little necessity of Prelacy, that the far greatest and best part of its
Abettors, and in these the Author himself (as in due time shall appear) grants,
that it is no different Order from Presbytry, has no footing in the Word of God,
and in a word to the overthrow of his Principles, confounds a Prelat with a
parochial Pastor.

Another grand, but just prejudice against the Hierarchy, is the looseness and
prophanity most frequently cleaving thereto: how profane and scandalous they
and theirs were, during former Prelacy, has already appeared: of the latter the
matter is no less evident; for at such a height and growth during their
Government, yea under their wings did prophanity, abusing of God's blessed
Name, and such gross immoralities arrive, that to abstain from such vices and
follow piety, was a Crime well nigh able to make a Man pass for a Whig and
Phanatick, and what hazard did enshew these Sir-names, none is ignorant. All
this and much more was not only evident to the body of this Kingdom, but was
also notic'd abroad: and, amongst others, by their Friend R. Coke. Yea his
Majesty, whom Divine Mercy sent for our Relief, well knew't, and accordingly,
in his Declaration for Scotland, has, amongst many others, this most memorable
Sentence. Although (says He) the Dissenters have just cause of distrust when
they call to mind how some hundreds of their Ministers were driven out of their
Churches without either Accusation or Citation: the filling of many of whose
Places with Ignorant and Scandalous Persons has been one great occasion of all
those Miseries which that Country for a long time has groaned under. They may
pretend that such Enormities were only accidental to Prelacy, which may fall
out under any Government: but none versant in Church Story is ignorant how much
mischief and scandal this Hierarchy has cast upon Christianity. Let them read
Socrates and other Records of these more ancient times, and they shall find
that the Prelates, though but beginning to appear, and by far, not so degenerat
from the simplicity of the Gospel as afterward by their swelling tympany, and
aspiring to Domination, induced the People to commit the most lewd and vile
Pranks readily imaginable, to the doolfull scandalizing of Jew and Gentile, and
their utter abominating of Christianity it self: as is clear from the miserable
Havoc, Destruction and Slaughter, the contrary Factions of Bishops in the Plea
for the Episcopal See between Damasus and Vrsinus prompted the People to
commit, from the most scandalous Pranks of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, the
most unhumane and barbarous concomitants and consequents of the Deposition of
Chrysostom with many other such open Impieties, all caused and occasioned by
the Prelatick pride and insolency, which public and most scandalous
Enormities, had the Christian World retained the truly Primitive and Apostolic
Parity we plead for, could never have happened: for had the Superiority, Riches,
and Grandour, the very aples of these most unchristian Contentions, been
wanting, and had every Pastor been kept at the earnest labor of Teaching,
Exhorting, and Catechizing a particular Flock or Congregation, with only such a
competent Stipend as sufficed to secure him from the contempt of Poverty, not
to feed Luxury, Grandour and such like Vices, there had been no occasion of
such lamentable Broyls. This was observed by Nazianzen, who himself was Bishop
of Constantinople, and therefore he earnestly wished Orat. 28.
that there had been no primacy of Place, no Prelacy, no Prerogative, no
Superior or Inferior Degrees of Pastors. The marrow of Saravia's Answer Def.
tract. De diversis gradibus Ministrorum Evangelii. C^p. 23.
to this most cogent place of Nazianzen, is that he finds no fault with the
Order of Degrees themselves but with Men, and with the times wherein the
ambition of the Arrians troubled the Church. The common and blunt shift of the
Romanists whereby to palliat the unlawfullness of their Papacy, and a real and
clear contradiction of Nazianzen's plain words. And was not afterward the Papal
and Prelatical pride, and affectation of secular rule the prime source of the
unspeakable Evils that reigned all along before the Reformation, and yet
continue in the Papacy? Is not that Kingdom where Prelacy is of most account
filled with the most idle, naughty, and profain Clergymen that are to be
found, at least, in the Protestant World? And how can it be otherwise, seeing
things or Offices retaining little or nothing of what did primitively constitute
them, produce quite contrary effects to these designed by the Authors thereof?
But nothing is more plain, than that the simplicity of the Gospel Ministry is
altered into a secular Grandour, more by far, resembling the Princes of the
Gentiles, than the Apostles of our Meek and Lowly Jesus, who came not to be
ministered to, but to Minister. Now the best of things once degenerat become
most noxious; what can therefore be expected from such but that they should
suit their Government and Policy, change the Spirit of a Gospel Ministry for
that of Pomp and Secularity, grow entirely Carnal, and so become the source of
Prophanity in stead of Holiness?

Part II.
Wherein the Epistles of Ignatius are more particularly considered, and the
Plea of the Hierarchicks therefrom, examined.
Section I.
Of the Author and his Work.
IT is evident and clear to the more thinking and ingenuous part of the
Christian World, how Rome's Advocats, while they Agent her Cause from the truly
Canonical Writings of the Apostles and Prophets, after some few struglings,
sorry evasions and feeble resistance, are compelled to give back, and, in
reality, abandon their Posts: but were they permitted to use Apocryphal
Writings, which, they say are Ancient enough, and written not long after the
Holy Scriptures; were not these also pulled out of their hands by demonstrating
the spuriousness thereof; they should perhaps make a greater appearance, and
keep the fields somewhat longer.

The same also is the fate of other Hierarchicks pleading the Cause of
Episcopacy: for while they manage it from Scripture-grounds, you may perceive
them to make so wide and incoherent Deductions, so slender and pitiful
Defenses, so wild and unbottom'd Distinctions, as loudly proclaim that, except
they procure Auxuliaries from some other where, they must also defert their
Cause, and leave the Field to their Adversaries. But let them descend somewhat
lower to Ecclesiastic Antiquities, we shall find their confidence stronger:
for they then bring a multitude of great Names, as so many armed Champions
marshell'd in Rank and Order. Among these there be some, wherewith, as with so
many Elephants, they threaten to make vast lanes among their Adversaries: but
there is no great cause of terror; for if they be but boldly confronted we shall
then find them either, like these Elephants Ctesias and Diodore fable to have
been used by their fictitious Semiramis, deceitful Images and hobgoblings to
strike a vain fear in their Enemies: or like the African Elephants in Polybius,
which, in stead of destroying the adverse Party, frequently turned back,
dissipated and overthrew these who brought them to the Battle. The greatest of
these, and whom they with most confidence produce, is their Epistolick
Ignatius, who is to them as one of the Hee-goats and Rams before the Flock, of
whom they boast as if nothing should stand before him. It shall not therefore
be amiss if (as we promised) we look more narrowly into this their bold
Assertion, and examine if their Grounds be equal to their Confidence.

. 2. Ignatius, as Eusebius Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 36.
relates, was a Bishop or Pastor of Antioch, and being brought to Rome in the
time of Trajan the Emperor, gloriously laid down his Life for the Cause of
Christianity. He is said to have written in his Journey to Rome, several
Epistles, viz. To the Smyrneans, to Polycarp, to the Ephesians, to the
Magnesians, to the Philadelphians, to the Trallians and Romans, all which are
either mentioned or cited by Eusebius. There are other Epistles also by Writers
of a much later date, ascribed to Ignatius; but in the first seven only do our
Adversaries place the weight of their Cause; and therefore with them alone we
shall be concerned.

. 3. Of these Epistles in the former Century, first in Latin and then in
Greek, appeared at the first but two or three only; afterward they amounted to
fifteen, all which they Fathered upon Ignatius: these were greedily hugged by
the Romanists; and reason they had so to do, most of these Epistles being
fraughted with stuff that savored of the Romish Innovations, and proclaimed
them several Centuries posteriour to Ignatius his Age, and accordingly these
Editions were scarce born while they were condemned and stigmatized by the most
learned of the Reformed viz. Calvin, the Magdeburgick Centuriators, and
afterward by Whittaker, Perkins, Scultet, Rivet, and others, as the issue of a
quite other Parent than him of whom they boasted.

. 4. Notwithstanding hereof the Advocats for Prelacy, such as Whitgift, Bilson,
Dounam, Heylyn, Tailor and the rest of the Party, leaned on these Epistles as
firm propes of their Caufe, giving severals of 'em the Epithets of Learned and
Pious without the least exception. Thus, for a long time, were these Epistles
condemned by many, yet applauded by a few.

. 5. But at length the most learned and famous Dr. Vshher lighted on two Latin
Manuscripts, much differing from the former Editions, and containing many
passages cited by the Ancients, that were wanting in the former. And soon after
Isaacus Vossius produced a Greek Copy out of the Duke of Tuscanie's Library,
in many things agreeing with Usher's Manuscripts. These Coppies bred a
wonderful confidence in the minds of the Episcopal Party: after which every
one of them gave his loud (...), and therewith pleased themselves, as if the
Controversy concerning Prelacy had been already determined by a Divine Oracle.
But in the mean while, and by this very Action of embracing and extolling this
new Edition, as the only genuine Copy of Ignatius. They published to the World
that they had all along (while in conjunction with Romanists and in opposition
to Protestants they so passionatly propugn'd the former Editions) either been
lamentably shallow in their knowledge of Ecclesiastic Antiquity,
notwithstanding their great boast thereof, as if all Men beside were Dwerfs
herein: or, which is little better, exceedingly partial in favors of their
Cause and Interest. However, maugre all such Impeachments, they alter their
Judgments as they see fit, reject what they had but the other day warmly
hugged, and applaud their new Ignatius.

. 6. Yet also they were their alone herein: for the most learned, and these of
the reformed Churches who were most able to give Judgment concerning such
Controversies, as Blondel, Salmasius and others continued in their former
Sentiment, believing that these new Copies did as really ly under just
suspicion as the Old. After diverse Re-encounters amongst learned Men concerning
these Epistles, Dallaeus a learned French Minister wrote more largely and
directly to evince them spurious, but was opposed by Dr. Beverige, and D.
Pearson who wrote his Vindiciae Ignatianae, a large and laborious Work, to
prove that these Epistles were the genuine product of Ignatius, in which his
Party triumphed not a little, apprehending that this Matter was decided; so as
there was no more Dispute or Opposition to be feared. But 'twas not long till
Daill's Defense was undertaken by Monsieur L'arroque another learned Pastor of
the French Church: and being again opposed by Pearson and Beverge, wrote a
second time concerning the same Subject.

. 7. But such Arts were used as suppressed and stiffl'd the Work of this
learned Author: of which Book L'arroque's Son, in his Life, prefixed to his
Adversaria Sacra gives us this account, Typis mandavit Observationes in
Ignatianas Pearsonii vindicias nec non in Beverigii Annotationes -- cui
responsum pa^ins, quodque prae manibus ferme absolutum habemus, Author noster,
instantibus quibusdam Amicis, alio subito divertit. Sed autem etc.
He published his Observations on Pearson's vindiciae Ignatianae, and Beverige'
s Annotations, which came to the light by this occasion: John Daille being
departed this Life, two great Englishmen who had procured to themselves a
perpetual Fame, of whom the one lately deceased, had the Name of the Bishop of
Chester, the other was adorned with the Title of Dr. but deserved a greater
Dignity, exploded what Daille had written concerning Ignatius his Epistles. But
L'arroque in favors of his deceased Friend, undertook the Patrociny of this
Hero; and except Fame be altogether false, has fortunatly defended his
Judgment. These Observations were again assaulted by the famous Beverige, to
whom our Author preparing an Answer, which we have by us, almost perfected,
through the Importunity of some Friends was suddenly turned another way. This he
did the more willingly, both because he had done enough in favors of his dead
Friend, and also that he might make it appear, that seeing while he was yet
fresh, he sounded a retreat, he had unwillingly entered the Lists with the
English Protestants. Thus he, and who these Friends were, we are informed by
another Author, a Man of the Episcopal Persuasion, and therefore may the better
be believed in this Matter, viz. Jos. Walker Translator of L'arroque's History
of the Eucharist, who, describing the Life of L'arroque, which he prefixes to
his Translation, tells us, that at the request of some Persons favoring
Episcopacy, he did not finish this his second Piece. From these Authors it is
sufficiently evident, that the issue of this Debate concerning Ignatius his
Epistles, was neither advantageous nor honorable to the Favorers of
Episcopacy; seeing by such doings they acknowledged their Adversary so
formidable that, except by powerful Solicitations and charms the Storm were
diverted, nothing less than the utter ruin of their Cause was to be feared.
Now, by these their dealings so dishonest both first and last, judge if such
Men don't at once bewray extreme want of candor and diffidence in their Cause.
And this much was meet here to be premised in favors of many, who may have
been ^^umbled at the great Name of Ignatius, and yet altogether Strangers to
the thoughts of the more learned, and ingenuous concerning the Epistles that
bear his Name.

. 8. In this Ignatius the Patrons of the Hierarchy wonderfully please
themselves, and triumph Pearson. Prooem. ad vind. Ignat. Cap. 1. In ea autem
tract and a magni ponderis merito habita esse Sancti Ignatii Viri Apostolici,
and Martyris Autori^as, etc. Burnet's Conferences. Page 314.
as if from thence Prelacy received a most sufficient support and proof, well
nigh infallible, of its divine Institution, and that if these Epistles be his,
Presbytrie's undone. For, if we believe them, Ignatius is for (...) or
genuinness of these Epistles above the smallest suspicion of Forgery, for
Antiquity and Vicinity to the Apostles, above possibility of being mistaken:
and finally, for clearness in the Episcopal Cause, above doubt or scruple. Now
seeing, so far as I know, little or nothing of this Subject is yet in English,
and the ears of many who know no other Tongue, are perpetually beaten and
deafned with a mighty noise, as if all the lofty Titles and Honors of Prelacy
were adopted by a genuine and Apostolic Ignatius; it shall neither be
improfitable nor unacceptable, if with a convenient brevity we overthrow the
principal Pillars of so proud a Structure; and render the Weapons, in the
estimat of our Adversaries so keen and weighty, completely unserviceable to
their Cause.

. 9. I therefore with no less confidence deny what they so boldly affirm. I
deny that the Epistles ascribed to Ignatius, whether of the elder or later
Editions, are thoroughly genuine, and so free of Forgeries, that no chaff has
been thrown into, and hudl'd amongst the grains of Wheat that may remain
therein. I deny that the Antiquity of the true Ignatius was able to secure him
from all Lapses and Mistakes; or that in his time some Churches might not be
itching after several Novelties. I deny finally that he is so clear and
positive in the Matter of Episcopacy, as to denude Presbyterians of all
rational Defense, should they acquiesce in his Judgment, and herein join with
their Adversaries, who still appeal to Ignatius his Bar. But I shall not rest
in Denials, but shall turn them to so many contrary Positions, and demonstrat
each of 'em in particular.

Section II.
The first Hypothesis viz that Ignatius is interpolated.
MY first Assertion therefore is that the Epistles ascribed to Ignatius,
whether of the Elder or Later Editions, are not thoroughly genuine, nor so free
of Forgeries, that no Chaff has been thrown into and hudl'd amongst the grains
of Wheat that may remain therein. As the Writings pretended to come nearest in
time to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, carry notwithstanding evident
Characters of a quite other time and Parent than these whereto they are falsely
ascribed; so also the Pieces that pretend greatest proximity to these of these
New Testament, afford no less just ground of suspicion. Of this kind are
Barnabas, Hermas and others, all which are generally either shroudly suspected
as mere Forgeries, or at least as not being without manifest corruption and
interpolation. Yea Clemens Romanus, who, doubtless, is by far the most choice
and virgin Monument of Antiquity, has nothwithstanding fallen into the like
adulterous hands as the story of the Daughters of Danaus and Dirce there
recounted among the Christian Sufferers, makes manifest. And herein Divine
Providence is to be adored, and extolled. For had such Writings as plead for
the first place after these of either Old or New Testament, not under-ly'n such
impeachments, the great proximity thereof to the Prophetic and Apostolic
Writings, had certainly allured many to take these for Canonical; whereas now
they serve, in some measure, for a rampire and hedge about the Holy Scriptures:
and by the manifest corruption of the Apocryphal Writings, we are taught to
distinguish betwixt divine and humane Letters: wherefore it should be a Paradox
and a Wonder, had Ignatius escaped all such infectious Touches. But there is no
ground for such admiration. For, that Ignatius, whither of the Elder or Later
Edition, is not thoroughly genuine, and so free of Forgery and Interpolation, a
few Examples shall make evident.

. 2. For in his Epistle to the Smyrneans, he thus discourses them. (...) etc.
All of you follow after the Bishop as Jesus Christ follows the Father, and the
Presbytry as the Apostles. Reverence the Deacons as the Commandment of God. Let
no Man without the Bishop do any of these things that ought to be done in the
Church. Let that Worship or Thanks be accounted lawful, which is either
performed by the Bishop himself or permitted by him. Wheresoever the Bishop
appears, let there also the Multitude be present; even as where Christ is,
there is also the Catholic Church. Without the Bishop it is neither lawful to
Baptize nor Celebrate the Lord's Supper or Love Feasts: but, whatsoever he
approves is acceptable to God. And again in his Epistles to Polycarp. (...) etc.
Attend to the Bishop as God does to you; my Soul for such as obey the Bishop,
Presbyters and Deacons, and with such let me have my Portion in God. And in his
Epistle to the Ephesians. (...) etc.
I write not to you as if I were of any account. For although I be bound in the
Name of Christ, yet I am not perfect in Christ Jesus. For now I begin to learn
and speak to you as my Teachers And again in the same Epistle. (...) etc.
If I in so short a time have had such familiarity with your Bishop, not Humane
I say, but Spiritual, how much more do I pronounce you blessed being joined
together as the Church to Jesus Christ, as Christ to the Father; so that all
things are in a harmonis Unity. Let none be deceived, whosoever is not within
the Altar, is deprived of the Bread of God. For if the Prayers of one or two be
of much weight, how much more these put up by the Bishop and the whole Church.
Whosoever therefore comes not into the same place, he is proud and has
condemned himself; for it is written God resists the Proud. Let us make have
therefore not to resist the Bishop, to the end, that we may obey God. And the
more silent any Man perceive the Bishop, let him fear him the more: for
whomsoever the Lord of the House sends to Govern it, we ought to receive him as
him that sends him. Let us manifest that we ought to receive the Bishop as the
Lord. And again in the same Epistle, thus. (...) etc.
I know who I am. and to whom I write, I Am condemned, ye live in Peace, I Am in
danger, ye sure; ye are a Passage to these who are slain in the Lord: The
Condisciples of Paul, sanctified, and made Martyrs, worthy, blessed, under
whose footsteps let me be found when I enjoy God. And to the Magnesians (...)
etc.
Because I was found worthy to see you in your Bishop Damas, and your worthy
Presbyters Bassus and Apollonius, and my Fellow servant the Deacon Sotion whom
let me enjoy, because he is subject to the Bishop as to the Grace of God, and to
the Presbyters as to the Law of Christ. And again, (...) etc.
Study to do all things in the Concord of God, the Bishop presiding in the
Place of God, the Presbyters in the Place of the Confession of the Apostles,
and my most sweet Deacons having committed to their Charge the Service of
Christ. And within a few lines. (...) etc.
Therefore as the Lord did nothing without the Father, being one with him,
neither by himself nor by his Apostles; so do ye nothing without the Bishop and
Presbyters. And to the Philadelphians. (...) etc.
So many as belong to God in Christ Jesus, these remain with the Bishop. And in
the same Epistle. (...). etc.
I cried in the midst of the Congregration; I spoke with a loud voice, take
heed to the Bishop, the Presbytry, and the Deacons. Somebody thought that I
spoke these things foreseeing a Division: but he in whom I am bound bears me
witness that I had this knowledge from no Man, bnt the spirit preached, saying,
without the Bishop see ye do nothing. And in his Epistle to the Trallesians.
(...).
Whom I Salute in fullness, and an Apostolic Character. And again. (...) etc.
For when ye are subject to the Bishop, ye seem not to Walk according to Men,
but according to Jesus Christ. And in an other place of the same Epistle, (...)
etc.
And in like manner, let all Men reverence the Deacons as the command of Jesus
Christ; and the Bishop as Jesus Christ, who is the Son of the Father, and the
Presbytry as the Council of God and Senate of the Apostles, without which there
is not a Church, and thus I counsel you to esteem of them, for I have gotten an
Example of your Charity, and retain the same with me, in your Bishop, whose
very composition is a great deal of Discipline, and his mansuetude Power, whom
I believe the very wicked reverence. And afterward in the same Epistle. (...).
Can I not write unto you Heavenly Things? But I sear that I should thereby
endammage you being but Children, and forgive me, least not being able to
comprehend them, you be strangled. For I am not bound in every respect, but can
be able to know things Heavenly, the Orders of Angels, their Constitutions,
Principalities, things visible and things invisible. And again, (...) etc.
Thus shall it be unto you if ye be not Proud, and remain unseparable from God,
the Bishop and Apostolic Orders. And again in the same Epistle. (...) etc.
Farewell in Christ Jesus, if ye be subject to the Bishop, as to the command of
God, and in like manner to the Presbytry.

But I Am weary, and did never translate more of any Author with less delight,
or pleasure; not because I Am in the least gravelled by what is here said
concerning Bishops, although the whole strength, of what the Episcopals deduce
from Ignatius, be wrapped up in these Passages, yea I Am persuaded, that from
these very Places the Hierarchy's wounded under the fifth Rib. But because the
most part of what we have quoted, as also no small part of what is behind, is
altogether insulfe, putide, and more tasteless than the white of an Egg: and
the Reader may easily perceive by these Examples that the Spirit and genius of
this Author is quite different from what can be looked for in Ignatius a prime
Martyr of the primitive Church. In all these Epistles it is clear as the
Noon-sun, that a headstrong Passion, and a furious Zeal of enslaving all
Christians under an illimited and blind Obedience to all Churchmen, as so many
Romish Holinesses did entirely possess, and reign in the Author of these
Epistles. The Apostle indeed sometimes admonishes the Churches of the Duties
and Esteem, Christians should pay to Church Officers; but withal uses but
rarely to handle that Subject, and with the brevity and modesty that became
him, ascribing to them only the Titles of Watchmen, and Laborers, Bishops or
Pastors and the like, which best became the simplicity of the Gospel; whereas
on the other hand, the pretended Ignatius so far swerves from this humble and
Apostolic strain, that none, though they search the Writings of the most corrupt
Ages, shall be able to find any that in exaltation of the Clergy, and
depressing and subjecting of the Laity out did him. How secure should Basilides
and Martial, two Spanish lapsed Bishops, have been, had their Flocks believed
this Ignatian Doctrine, who having consulted Cyprian Tom. 1. Ep. 68.
If they might not desert these and choose new Bishops, were by him resolved in
the affirmative, and admonished to choose other Pastors: but had they believed
this pretended Ignatius, it had been with them the blackest impiety to have
separated from their Bishop, or attempted so to do on whatsoever account.

The Apostles frequently both to Pastors and Churches inculcat the diligent
perusal and understanding of the Holy Scriptures as a special Duty, that by
them as a sure Rule all Men's Doctrines and Injunctions (without any exception)
may be tried: but in liew hereof, this their Ignatius has only Men's Persons in
admiration, perpetually deafening his Hearers, or at least wearying his Readers
with Injunctions of absolute and blind Obedience, as if all and every one of
his Bishops Dictats were to be received without the least Examination, a
Privilege that even Christ and his Apostles (though they might have done it)
never assumed to themselves; but still remitted their Hearers to the Scriptures
for the trial thereof: this cannot but in the estimat of all the judicious, be
a Fault altogether unworthy of the True Ignatius. I hope that all honest Men
shall give more Charity to this choice Martyr, than to believe that he is guilty
of so gross Idolatry (for I can call it no better) and fantastic and impious
doting on the person of any Man whatsoever: in which unworthy Work this Author
(I will not say Ignatius) spends no small part of these Epistles. Therefore,
although the asserting of all therein to be genuine, be so far from assisting our
Adversaries, that their Cause is, by the very Passages they allege for its
confirmation, mortally wounded; I can never persuade my self, but they have
fallen into the wicked hands of Forgers who, tainted with the common Vice of
the Ages subsequent to that of Ignatius, foisted in a great many Passages
wherein nothing but the illimited Power of all Churchmen is depredicated, and
the blind Obedience of the Laity is enjoined and commended.

I Am confirmed in my sentiment by Ignatius his Epistle to the Romans, who
certainly had as truly a Bishop as the Smyrneans, Magnesians, or any other
saluted by Ignatius; but of the Roman Bishop or of the Honor and Obedience due
to him in all this Epistle we find not a syllable. Certainly had this servile
Obedience to the Clergy been such a fundamental Article of the Christian
Religion, as all along through these other six Epistles he makes it, he had not
failed to have informed the Romans thereof, seeing nothing (I believe) can be
alleged to exime the Romans, more than other Churches, from paying such Honor
to their Clergy. It Is vain to repone that he was then on his Journey to Rome,
and was shortly to see that Church, and might on this account forbear: seeing
they may after this manner of arguing prove the whole Epistle spurious, or at
least superfluous; this Duty of Obedience to Churchmen, if we believe these
six Epistles being so necessary a part of the Christian Religion, that it is
never to be forgotten, but at all times with the greatest zeal and fervency to
be inculcated.

. 3. Yet in defense of all these most dangerous Injunctions of his Ignatius,
Dr. Pearson says Vind. Ignat. Part. 2. Page 220.
That there could be no fitter remedy against Heresies then that the Churches
should adhere to the Pastors whom Ignatius knew to be Orthodox. But such an
adherence as these Epistles every where command, is so far from being a Remedy
against Heresies and Schisms, that, as the sad instance of the Romanists
witness, it has been the greatest Augmentation, and the most deadly humor in
all the Disease. But why did he not acquaint the Romans with this Remedy? Did
he suspect their Bishop as unsound? Or thought he that every Roman Christian
was above danger and infallible? And indeed the scarce paralellable extolling
of Churchmen through all the former six Epistles, and the perpetual silence
thereof in that to the Romans, loudly proclaim, that either they were write by
different Authors, or else, that they have undergone no few Additions and
Corruptions, which his Epistle to the Romans had escaped, seeing, I think they
will scarce adventure to say that the Epistle to the Romans sometime had in it
such Injunctions of Obedience to the Roman Clergy, which by some chance or
other were afterward obliterate.

. 4. Again, what can we make of that proud boasting in his Epistle to the
Trallesians, as if he had been the only Muster-Master to the Angels. But
Pearson tells us Vind. Ignat. Part. 2 Pages 140, 141. Quasi vero Christiano
Viro, and quidem Episcopo, and ab Apostolis edocto nulla superc^elestium
scientia competeret etc.
That it is not strange though Ignatius a Bishop who had long conversed with the
Apostles, could write something concerning Heavenly Things which are so often
mentioned by the Apostles: and he stiffly denies, in opposition to Daille, That
such knowledge is not given to Mortals; and perhaps (says Pearson) we know not
well what Ignatius mean'd, when he wrote these things concerning Angels, and
yet who will say but that he knew them himself? And then he acknowledges that
Ignatius discourses of his Know (...) not given to any Mortal, seeing for the
proof hereof it is enough to repone the words of Elephas, to which of the Saints
will thou turn thee? Surely not to Paul, seeing it can never be made evident
that he either taught others, or ascribed to himself the knowledge of these
Ignatian (or rather Pseudo-Ignatian) Mysteries. Although therefore we know not
the meaning of these his words, we shall (I believe) incurr little hazard
thereby; and if he knew them himself I shall not debate. Certainly if we judge
of the Author by his Work, we shall have little ground to apprehend that his
Judgment was of the greatest reach, for, remove a very few flowers, this so
much celebrated Garden shall be nothing but a den of weeds: neither can better
be expected, where any intrude into the things they have not seen, as the
Author of this Passage appears to have done; boasting of that wherein neither
the Penmen of the Holy Scriptures, nor the primitive Christians professed
themselves to be skillfull: for although the Ancients acknowledged that there
were, or might be such Dignities and Distinctions among Angels, yet who before
the Impostour that borrowed the name of the Areopagite, adventured to profess
their acquaintance with the particulars thereof? But most of all I admire that
he for his purpose alleges Irenaeus, as if the Mysteries of God were nothing
else but a convertible term with the Politics or Tacticks of Angels. With how
much more reason may we understand the Mysteries mentioned by Irenaeus, to be
these magnified by the Apostle 1 Timothy 3. 16. which without Controversy are
equaly great and proffitable.

Lastly, as to Chrysostom, he cites no where, wherefore I cannot so easily make
a judgment concerning him; otherwise 'tseems he may be understood of a greater
measure of knowledge of the Mysteries frequently spoken off by the Apostle. And
withal I observe that Dr. Pearson still insinuates and intimates as if
Ignatius and other primitive Christians received from the Apostles other
mysterious Doctrines not to be committed to writing, different from what is
comprehended in the holy Scriptures; wherein, notwithstanding the whole Counsel
of God is delivered, which Opinion is much fitter for a Jewish Cabalist or
Romish Traditionary than a Protestant Doctor.

. 4. M. Du Pin Bibl. Patrum. Vol. 1. Page 42.
embraces and only contracts Pearson's Answer saying that the knowledge of the
Orders, Offices and Stations of Angels might be affirmed by an ancient Bishop,
all Christians knew Heavenly Things: And Ignatius says nothing of Angels but
what had been said by St. Paul. But herein he palpably contradicts himself, and
affirms what he had before denied; for Page 33.
to prove the Forgery of these Books that bear the Areopagites name Du Pin
gives us this Argument: He (viz. the Author of these Books) distinguishes the
several Orders of Angels and observes their difference, things that were
unknown to the ancient Writers, and concerning which they were not sollicitous
to be informed, as S. Irenaeus assures us, in lib. 2. chapter 55. He opposes also
Dr. Pearson, who, as we have heard, deduced from this same Irenaeus a quite
contrary Doctrine.

. 5. Thus far I had proceeded secure of any other Controversy concerning this
Passage, when I was surprised to find Dr. Wake His genuine Epistles of
Apostolic Fathers Page 149.
the Englisher of these Epistles make Ignatius, together with his language,
change his Doctrine, and speak quite contrary to what he had delivered either
in Greek or Latin: for thus he Englishes the now controverted words of
Ignatius. For even I my self, although I am in bonds, yet am not therefore able
to understand Heavenly Things, as the description of the Places of the Angels,
and the several Companies of them, under their respective Princes, the things
visible and invisible, but in these things I am yet a Learner. But this Version
is by no means to be embraced. For first the old Greek Copy commonly said to be
spurious, uses indeed to add to, and dilate what is comprehended in the New
Edition, yet not so as to contradict it; and therefore may serve for an
Interpreter, were there any thing dubious herein: but this Old Copy is positive
in favors of the received sense, and after an enumeration of the Particulars
whereof Ignatius professes the knowledge, concludes all with (...) when, or
although I know so much; and thus the Old Copy is understood by all Interpreters,
as the Old Latin of Vairlenius which is printed at Antwerp 1566, and by the
Author of another Version, or at least an emendation of the Old, printed
amongst the Orthodoxographa Patrum at Basile 1569, and by Videlius, and for
ought I can learn, by whosoever interpreted or revised these Epistles.

Secondly, The Cantabrigian or Vsserian Copy, the Authority whereof is little
inferior to the Florentine Original, is no less positive for us against this
New Interpreter; For (says he) I am not bound in every respect, but am able to
know Heavenly Things etc. And having enumerated the Particulars, concludes with
a praeter hoc beside or notwithstanding of this: importing that some greater
measure of that knowledge was, notwithstanding of the vast measure he had
received, yet to be sought for.

Thirdly, All Men in their Disputes and other Discourses about Ignatius, have
thus understood the Passage now under Debate. If the ascribing of such
knowledge to himself could agree to the genuine Ignatius they disputed much;
but that the now disputed Passage really ascribes, and not denies to Ignatius
the knowledge of these Heavenly Things, all except this Interpreter unanimously
acknowledge. And this certainly was the mind of Isaacus Vossius who, otherways
being a zealous Patron of the Florentine Copy, had in his Notes doubtless taken
notice of such a common mistake, and observed the contrariety between the
Cantabrigian and Florentine Editions. And Spanhemius F. Introduct. ad Chron. et
Hist. Sac. Page 127.
always supposes the sense we plead for of these words of Ignatius, and on this
ground, notwithstanding what Dr. Pearson had said, shroudly suspects these
Epistles as forged. And Daille, yea and even Dr. Pearson, his most learned and
vigilant Adversary, always supposed as uncontrovertible, the sense we now plead
for.

Fourthly, And reason they had so to do, seeing otherways both sense and the
self consistency of this Passage is lost; he had but just now arrogat to
himself such a knowledge of Heavenly Things, the very declaration whereof
should be enough to overwhelm and strangle the Church of the Trallesians, and
then as a reason or declaration of his great Knowledge, and to show how far
'twas out of their reach, advances the Passage now in hand, whereas this Clause
concerning his Bands is only introduced to show the consistency between outward
Troubles and spiritual Furniture. Excellently therefore and most conform to the
Greek, is it rendered in the Cantabrigian Copy, non secundum quodcunque ligatus
sum, I am not bound in every respect. But were this New Version admitted,
Ignatius, while he ascribes so great a knowledge of Heavenly Things to himself,
and presently afterward denies that he knew Heavenly Things, should, in esteem
of all disinterested, complete a Contradiction; whereas, according to the
Cantabrigian and our Version of the Passage, the sense runs natively without
the least appearance of any roughness.

Lastly, I do not remember that (...) any where is to be rendered although, (which
is the mind of this Interpreter) I shall not say that foreseeing this Passage
if truly translated would prove the dead Flee and make the rest both ill
savoured and justly suspected, he wilfully perverted it: I should rather
charitably think that out of ignorance, a far more pardonable weakness, he fell
into such an Error.

. 6. And now to proceed, I impeach not these Epistles, of their frequent
mention of Bishops and their Superiority over Presbyters, as if herein they
savoured a Diocesan Prelacy; nay I Am so far from this, that I Am persuaded from
the self same places, that according to this Author a Bishop and a parochial
Pastor are reciprocated; and therefore the Doctrine of our Adversaries is
overthrown by the very places from which they labor to establish it. The
Grounds on which I accuse these Epistles are, the Author (not to mention self
Contradictions) his affected Humility, hateful deifing of all Churchmen, most
unworthy and parasitick flattering of whomsoever he salutes, and, which is the
end of all, his endeavoring to persuade Christians, that an Autocratorick
Power is to be ascribed, and blind Obedience to be paid to all Churchmen, as
to so many absolute and unerring Deities. And lastly his audacious boasting of
his Knowledge of these things wherewith, for ought we can learn either from
Scripture or any Author of Credit, no mere Man has been hitherto acquainted.
And these Grounds, were there no others, may suffice at least to evince the
Interpolation of the Epistles.

. 7. And how this came to pass is not hard to conceive if we reflect upon the
genius of subsequent Ages; the uncontrolled Power and superlative Veneration of
Churchmen, the special Forerunner and introductive of Antichrist, together
with other parts of Superstition, took special rooting in the third and fourth
Centuries. Now, as the Church like a choice Garden nourished many prime and
useful Plants; she had also most pestilentious and noisome Weeds, Monsters
which you can scarcely name, and not the transported with indignation. These,
the better to promote such Impieties, Fathered the brats of their own Brains on
some choice Dr, by whose warmth they might be cherished and supported. Such Men
not only forged or (at best) polluted these Epistles, but also attributed more
of the like stuff to Ignatius, some whereof are mentioned by Daille and Dr.
Pearson, and others omitted by them, are remembered by Socrates, Lib. 6. Cap. 8.
(...), etc.
who tells us that the beginning of the Antiphones was reported to have come
from Ignatius, which they said he had revealed to him by Queers of Angels that
use to descend and sing the Praises of the holy Trinity. Add to all, which
shakes the very foundation of their Plea, the incredibleness of Ignatius his
Journey to Rome, whether he is said, after his Condemnation at Antioch, to have
been sent by Trajan, that he might be thrown to wild Beasts, on the truth of
which these Epistles leaned, still insinuating and presupposing it: But why
should Trajan be at pains to have sent him guarded thither? Certainly not for
an intertainment to the People as the pretended Acts of Ignatius affirm. They
had store of Christians of all sizes at Rome with the spectacle of whose
Sufferings they might daily be cloyed, neither, as some answer, because he was
a famous Christian and Bishop, at whose death the Roman Christians might be
terrified, seeing the Emperor might conclude from Ignatius his great
resolution and boldness which himself had perceived that he would much animat
them. But the perpetual Practice of these times frees us from further debate
herein: I can never find that the Romans brought Christians from Asia or such
remote places to be executed at Rome, but still to the nearest seats of
Justice, as is clear in Polycarp and other most famous Bishops or Pastors. And
truly (says Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. Page 298.
the story of Ignatius ( as much as it is defended with his Epistles) does not
seem to be any of the most probable. For wherefore should Ignatius of all
others be brought to Rome to suffer, when the Proconsuls and the Praesides
provinciarum did every where in time of Persecution execute their Power in
punishing of Christians at their own Tribunals, without sending them so long a
Journey to Rome to be martyred there? And how came Ignatius to make so many and
such strange Excursions as he did by the Story, if the Soldiers that were his
Guard wers so cruel to him, as he complains they were? Now all these uncertain
and fabulous Narrations as to Persons then arising from want of sufficient
Records made at those times, make it more evident, how incompetent a Judge
Antiquity is to the certainty of things done in Apostolical times.

And now from what is said, jude if D. M. Page 160.
had any good ground to query, whether there is any good and solid Argument
brought by the Presbyterians against the Authority of St. Ignatius his
Epistles, that is not already sufficiently answered.

Section III.
The second Hypothesis, viz. that the Antiquity of the trne Ignatius could not
secure him from all Lapses or Escapes in Doctrine or serve to Prove that there
was no Declension in his time.
MY second Assertion is, that the Antiquity even of the true Ignatius was not
able to secure him from all Lapses and Mistakes, and that in his time some
Churches not only might; but actually were itching after several Novelties.
Which Assertion, if once demonstrated, renders Ignatius of little or no use to
our Antagonists: their Inference is, that, if Ignatius spoke positively in
favors of Episcopacy, and lived in a closs vicinity to the Apostles, then
there is no doubt but the Apostles established such a Government: which
consequence, like the Aples of Sodom, resolves anon into smoke, our Assertion
being proved; which I now come to demonstrate. The Apostles of our Lord had not
changed their earthly Tabernacle, for that which is not made with hands; when,
to their inexpressible sorrow, they beheld not only particular Persons, but
even the greater part of some Churches, they themselves had either planted or
watered, in stead of Grapes, to bring forth will Grapes, and in place of being
the Repositories of the precious Truths of the Gospel, become nests and cages
of the most abominable Errors. Other Churches there were that holding fast the
Foundation of the Apostolic Doctrine, but raising thereupon a structure of the
stubble and hay of either Judaism or Paganism (in one of which all of them had
been educated) had well nigh made up an Edifice of most Hetrogeneous Materials.
Hence it is that the Apostle is at such pains to Correct them in their Abuses
of the Sacrament, in their Superstition concerning Meat and Drink, and their
unwarrantable observation of Times, that wanted all Divine Sanction.

. 2. But these infallible Guides being at length possessed of their Master's
Joy, Affairs grew yet worse: for then the grand Enemy of the Church did in
greater abundance; and with more security sow his tares. Hence it was that not
only those, who are justly branded for Arch-Hereticks, and Schismatics; but
even those who persisted Orthodox in the main Principles of Christianity were
drawn into, neither few nor inconsiderable Mistakes.

. 3. I Am sure Papias Bishop of Hierapolis was a Man, both in respect of his
Antiquity and Authority, among the primitive Christians, little inferior to
Ignatius: 'twas he notwithstanding who either greedily embraced, or first of
all hatched the gross Fancy of the Saints their corporal Kingdom for a thousand
years after the Resurrection. Moreover (says Eusebius Lib. 3. Cap. 39. (...)
etc.
speaking of Papias) the same Writer alleges something as from unwritten
Tradition, viz. some strange Parables and Doctrines of our Savior, and some
other fabulous things; and, amongst the rest, he says that after the
Resurrection, there shall be a thousand years, wherein Christ shall reign on
Earth bodily. But to me he seems through misunderstanding of the Apostle's
Discourse, to have taken what was spoken mysteriously, in a quite other sense
from its true meaning. For he was os a very weak Judgment; as his Writings
sufficiently declare. He was notwithstanding the Author of this Opinion to the
most part of the following Ecclesiastical Writers, for they looked only to his
Antiquity as Irenaeus, and whosoever else favored his Opinion. We see here a
Man of no little Antiquity and Repute drawing the greatest Lights of the
Church, and consequently the rest of the Christians to a Doctrine destitute of
all countenance from the Word of God.

. 4. Another Conceit no less Ancient but more wild, was that of the Angels
their carnal Knowledge of Women. This was hugged by Justin Martyr Apolog. ad
Senatum. (...) etc.
who lived in the same Century with, yea, and not many years after Ignatius.
The Angels (says he) transgressing their Order, by carnal Copulation with
Women, fell from their primitive State, and begot Children who are now called
Devils. He was followed notwithstanding by Irenaeus and Athenagoras, the most
famous Writers of their Age; as also the stream of these that flourished in the
succeeding Centuries, Irenaeus also with a great many others held, that the
beatifick Vision is not enjoyed until the day of Judgment. Now beyond
peradventure such Leaders as these, had the most part of the Churches at that
time for their Fellows and Followers in these Opinions.

. 5. And seeing both such Pillars, and the rest that leaned on them were ready
to swerve in Matters of Speculation, or Opinion, they were no less capable of
straying in things belonging to Practice; for there is no more security promised
to the Church from the one than the other. Neither did the closs Vicinity to
the times of the Apostles, preserve the Churches from evident Lapses of this
nature. Was not the mixing of the Sacramental Wine with water, a matter of
Practice, and altogether destitute of warrant from Scripture, in which we hear
of nothing but the Fruit of the Vine drunken by Communicants. And yet Justin
Martyr Apolog. ad Antoninum pium. (...) etc.
informs us that the mixing of the Sacramental Wine with water was the Practice
of his time.

. 6. Another Instance of the most early Declension of the primitive Church in
Matters of the same kind, viz. the external Rites, and Ecclesiastic
Ceremonies, was their observation of Easter; concerning which the Controversies
first arose between Polycarp Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 4. Cap. 14. (...). etc.
Et Lib. 5. Cap. 23. (...). etc.
, and the Churches of the East on the one hand, and Anicetus and the western
Churches on the other. Polycarp alleged John the Evangelist, whose Disciple he
had been, for the Author of his Opinion: but Anicetus and the Romans pretended
the Authority of Peter and Paul for the quite contrary Doctrine.

I have oftentimes much admired how either of these Parties, if we consider
either Sincerity, or Vicinity to the Apostles, were liable to any Mistake of
this kind; I believe scarce any Man now living shall be able to give any
rational account of the Cause thereof; yet that one of them was mistaken, and
that the Apostles did not keep up a perpetual observation of contrary Practices
one to another, is to me, and to as many as truly acknowledge the Scriptures,
among the things of highest certainty; and if either of them strayed, if
sufficiently serves our turn, and is an ocular Demonstration that not only the
clearest Lights, and nearest to the Apostles might relinguish some part of the
Apostolic Purity, and fall into Rites and Customs never countenanced by the
Apostles; but also be accompanied by no small part of the Church therein.

. 7. Yea I dare avouch and sustain, that both Parties equally swerved from the
Truth, seeing both of them had equal Means to have informed themselves, and
were alike nigh to the Apostles; so that many were certainly alive of both
Parties who had been conversant with them: hence there is no reason to believe
either of the Parties, that ever the Apostle enjoined or allowed the
observation of Anniversary, weekly or monthly times either in the same time
with, or so near to the Judaical, (and then buried) Ceremonies; excepting the
Sabbath only, the observation whereof had been expressly enjoined in a clear and
Moral Precept. Neither, in this Assertion, shall we remain alone, but be
supported by the suffrages, of the choicest of the Ancients. No less Irenaeus
in Eusebius intimats, while he tells us, Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24.
(...) etc.
that this Difference did not arise first in his Age but long before in the
time of their Forefathers, who (as is probable) being negligent in their
Government, delivered to their Posterity a Custom, which had only crept in
through Simplicity and ^gnorance. And Socrates, a grave and solid Author, averrs
Socrates Lib. 5. Cap. 22. (...), etc.
that, neither more Ancient nor Later who inclined to follow these Jewish
Rites, had any cause to raise so great Contention. And that the keeping of
Easter and such Holy Days were altogether Legal, the observation whereof is not
at all enjoined in the Gospel: for (continues Socrates) they did not consider
that, after the Jewish Religion was changed into that of the Chrstians, the
strick observation of Moses Law, and the shaddows of future things were wholly
abolished, which by a most sure proof may be thus evinced. For by no Law of
Christ is it granted to Christians to observe Jewish Customs; yea the Apostle
did expressly forbid it, not only rejecting Circumcision; but admonishing
moreover that about Feast Days there should be no Contention, wherefore in
writing to the Galatians he thus speaks, tell me ye who desire to be under the
Law, do ye not hear the Law? And after he had discoursed a little concerning
these Matters, he shows the Jews to be under Bondage, but that those who had
followed Christ Jesus were called unto Liberty: he Exhorts furthermore that
Days, Months or Years, in no ways be observed. Moreover, writing to the
Collossians, he clearly asserts that such observations are but a mere Shadow.
Wherefore, says the Apostle, let no Man judge you in Meat or Drink, or in
respect of an Holy Day, of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a
shadow of things to come. But in the Epistle to the Hebrews, confirming the
same matter he thus speaks. For the Priesthood being changed, there is also a
necessity of the change of the Law: surely the Apostles and the Evangelists did
never impose a Yoke upon these that became obedient to the Doctrine of Faith,
but Easter and other days were left to the choice and equity of those who in
such days had received the Benefits: wherefore, seeing Men love Holy Days,
because they bring them some respite of their Labors, diverse Men in diverse
places following their particular Inclinations, did, according to certain
Custom, celebrate the memory of our Savior's Passions: for neither our
Savior, nor his Apostles did by any Law ordain that it should be observed;
neither did the Gospels nor the Apostles threaten us with a Mulct, Punishment,
or Curse, as the Law of Moses was wont to do to the Jews.

This and much more are we taught by Socrates; from all which it is most clear
that in this Dispute concerning the Celebration of Easter, both Parties were
equally culpable, as building upon a false Supposition, viz. that Christ and
his Apostles had appointed some of these Days anniversarily to be kept, which
yet never came into their mind And here it is most observable how, even in these
ost early times they heaped Falsehood upon Falsehood and supported one Forgery
with another: the Fable of Peter's being at Rome and conjuring of Simon Magus
there, was even then beginning to obtain; whereof the Romans made their
Advantage, and began to ascribe to him some Head-ship over the rest; and then
averred that he had appointed them, not only to celebrate Easter, but also had
determined the particular day of its Celebration, and enjoined them to keep it
on the fifteenth and not on the fourteenth day of the Month as did the Eastern
Churches: Now that they might be even with the Romans, and meet with them after
their own Fashion and arts, the Asians invented the like Legends of the Apostle
John, who, as they alleged, died at Ephesus and enjoined them to keep Easter,
but by no means on the fifteenth but on the fourteenth day of the Month, and
the better to set off the Fable, Polycrates of Ephesus, in his Letter to
Victor, harangues in the Praises of John, that thereby he might prefer him to
Peter, and sticks not to assert that John was a Priest, and wore a Highpriests
Golden Crown or Breast Plate Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. (...).
And yet, as is acknowledged, John was not at all of the Priestly Race, far
less was he the High Priest, to whom only of all the Priests, such a Crown was
peculiar. Therefore Valesius In notis ad Eusebii locum.
imagines that the first Christian Priests, as he speaks, wore such a Crown for
a Sign of Honor in imitation of the Jews. As if the Christians of these times
had ever dreamed of retaining the very marrow of Judaisme which was then
abolished by the coming of Christ the substance. But this Antichristian dottage
being so gross to be dejested by any real Protestant, the learned Le Moyn Varia
sacra. Vol. 2. Page 30.
says that Polycrates spoke metaphorically of John' s supereminent Knowledge
and Gifts. But if this be true, with how great caution are these Ancients to be
read, without which we shall be led into the belief of the greatest falshhoods.
In the mean while I see no ground for this gloss in Polycrates his words,
either as they are related by Eusebius or by Hierome and Rufine. And Epiphanius
Haeresi 29. Nazara^rum (...) etc.
gives another such golden Crown to James, which is no less true than that he
was Diocesan Bishop of Jerusalem. The same says a Ms. Author, cited by
Valesius Ubi supra. Quem quidem B. Marcum juxta ritum carnalis Sacrificii
pontificalis apicis petalum etc.
of Mark the Evangelist, viz. that Mark was of the Priestly Race, and according
to the Custom of the carnal Sacrifice, carried publicly a Golden Crown as the
Badge of his Priestly Dignity. There is indeed nothing more certian than that
the primitive Doctors who are ordinarily known by the name of Orthodox Fathers,
stuck with a due preciseness to the great and capital Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, without any swerving therefrom: but it is no less
demonstrable, as we have now made evident, that the same Leaders, and these
next the Apostles of greatest Antiquity, in many other things strayed
exceedingly from the true Apostolic Simplicity.

. 8. Nothing was more frequent to them than, relying upon their Vicinity to the
Apostles, to neglect a more accurate search of the Scriptures, relate things
otherways than they were transacted, allege the Apostles for Practices to
which they never gave Patrociny, which, beside what we have said already, may
be sufficiently vouched from the Relation of Hegesippus in Eusebius Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 23. (...).
The Administration (says he) was undertaken by James the Lord's Brother
(together with the rest of the Apostles) who from the time of Christ even unto
our Age is surnamed Just, for there were many others of that Name beside, but
as for him he was sanctified from the Womb, neither did he ever drink Wine or
strong Drink, and did altogether abstain from the Flesh of any living Creature,
neither ever came there a Razour on his Head, nor did he ever use to anoint or
wash, and he only of all Men had free liberty to enter into the innermost
Sanctuary of the Temple; for he was not wont to wear a woollen but a linen
Garment: he used to enter alone into the Temple, and with bended knees to pray
for the People. And in the sequel of this discourse he tells us, that in the
Martyrdom of this James, he was both thrown from the pinnacle of the Temple,
and also beaten to Death with a Fuller's Club: a certain Priest one of the Sons
of Rechab mentioned in Jeremiah, exhorting the People to milder Counsels, and
that all this was done in a tumultuous way, without the least appearance of any
judicial Process against this Martyr. But this Relation of Hegesippus is not
only contrare the Holy Scripture, where we are assured that the High Priest
(alone) entered into the Holy of Holies, and that the Rechabites were not of the
Priestly Race, and to Josephus who informs us Ant. judaie. Lib. 20. Cap. 8.
(...)*
that James being sisted before the High-Priest's Council, and by a kind of
judicial Process condemned, was stoned to Death: but also a most insulfe
Rapsody, savouring more of a Legendary than a primitive Doctor. Yet the Author
thereof lived contemporary with Justin Martyr, a few years only below the
Apostles.

. 9. But of this enough, and indeed with me it had been highly Sacrilegious to
have said so much, but buried in a perpetual silence the Escapes of these whose
memory is otherways to me more precious than the ashes of Mausolus to his
Artemisia; and in fragrancy far surpassing the choicest of Oriental Spices; did
not the injustice and importunity of these who prefer the Escapes, yea and
Extravagancies of Men, and the blemishes of these great Lights, yet but terrene
Lights, to the unspotted Beams of the Father of all Lights, compel me hereto.
And herein I Am a true Son of the primitive Church, whose Doctors have taught
me, that when the Dictats of God and these of Men, whosoever they be, interfer,
and through humane Corruption are set in Competition, I ought to hold to the
first; and in comparison herewith, despise the latter.

. 10. Add hereto, that seeing Antichristianism the Mystery of Iniquity was
working even in the Apostles days, seeing this Defection was mysteriously
promoted, and seeing, as experience has proved, it arrived at its hight, and
Antichrist was brought to his Throne by the exorbitant elevation of Clergymen,
it is much less to be wondered at, if the most frequent Escapes and Lapses of the
Primitive, and otherways Orthodox, Fathers chanced to be of this nature, and
tend to the establishing an unwarrantable Supremacy and Dignity, which only
these, who were of such Repute in the Church were capable to effect. And in all
this I have said nothing but what has been asserted by the most approved
Divines especially in their Writings against the Romanists. Yea the most
judicious and learned Bishop Usher De Christianarum Ecclesiarum successione et
statu. Page 19. Etsi enim qui proxime Apostolis successerunt, Pietate cum
primis and Sanctitate excelluisse negari non potest: certum tamen est, neque
eorum qui praecesserunt, virtutem assecutos, neque ita simplicem, ut Magistri
eorum, orationem consecutos esse, quemadmodum recte a Nicephoro notatum est.
is of the same mind: Although (says he) it be undeniable that the first
Successors of the Apostles excelled in Piety and Holiness, it is certain
notwithstanding that they neither attained to the Virtue nor simplicity of
Doctrine that we in their Ancestors and Teachers as is well observed by
Nicephorus. And now judge if D. M's. Romish Querie, whether the Ecclesiastical
Government could be changed from Parity to Prelacy (as is pretended) in those
early Ages of the Church, especially since some Apostles and several
Apostolical Men survived the Period, sixth by some Presbyterians, (but no
Presbyterian did ever yield that this Change was made during the Life of any of
the Apostles) for the beginning of this (pretended) Change; and if the Change
was in it self impossible, then Prelacy must needs be acknowledged Apostolical.
I therefore turn my Assertion into a Conclusion, and from what is said with
confidence Infer, that the Antiquity even of the true Ignatius was not able to
secure him from all Lapses and Mistakes, and that in his time some Churches,
not only might, but actually were itching after several Novelties.

Section IV.
The third Hypothesis; that there is no real Disagreement, but a true Concord
betwixt the Doctrine of Ignatius and that of the present Presbyterians.
I Now come to the third Hypothesis, and assert that Ignatius is not so clear
and positive in the Matter of Episcopacy, as to denude Presbyterians of all
rational Defense, should they acquiesce in his Judgment, and therein join with
their Antagonists who still appeal to his Determination. For all he speaks of
Presbyters as distinguished from Bishops may well be mean'd of these who are
called Ruling Elders, and that there was such an Office in the primitive Church
is made evident by what is commonly brought from Origin, Tertullian, Optatus,
the African Code, and Augustine, frequently distinguishing them from preaching
Presbyters. And Purpurius expressly terms them Ecclesiasticos Viros,
Ecclesiastic Men: In vain therefore object Petavius and others that these were
only Churchwardens not properly Ecclesiastics. And indeed the Ancients not
only tell us there was such an Office, but also plainly assert that, through
pride and haughtiness of the Church Doctors, this Custom was abolished, as
Ambrose, or rather Hilary sufficiently witnesses. The Synagogue (says he Com.
In. Ep. prior. ad Tim. Cap. 5. Vnde and Synagoga and postea Ecclesia seniores
habuit quorum sine Consilio nihil agebatur in Ecclesia. Quod qua negligentia
obsoleverit, nescio, nisi forte Doctorum desidia, aut magis superbia dum soli
volunt aliquid videri.
) and afterward the Church, had Elders, without whose Counsel nothing was to be
done in the Church; which, by what negligence was abolished, I know not, except
perchance it were through the sloth, or rather the pride of the Church-Doctors,
while they desired to carry all the esteem their alone.

. 2. Doctor Field tells us Field on the Church. Book 5. Cap. 26.
That these were not Lay Elders. Neither, as they themselves well know, do we
so term them: but did as the Ancients reckon them among the Ecclesiastics.

And we assert, that these very Lay Elders (as he calls them) are understood by
Hilary. For first, this Practice of the Christian Church is by Hilary deduced
from the Synagogue, wherein there were Elders distinct from the Doctors or
Pastors. Secondly, He attributes to the Elders, as their Office, only the Power
of Consulting and Deciding, as being Assessors to the Doctors in the management
of Church Affairs, without intimating ought of their Power to dispense the Word
and Sacraments. Thirdly, He expressly distinguishes them from all Doctors or
Teachers of the Church, and therefore excludes them from all Power of
Preaching, or Administration of the Sacraments. But Doctor Field says that,
Ambrose by the name of Teachers, whose sloth and pride he condemns in this
place, might fitly understand the Bishop, seeing none but Bishops have Power to
preach in their own Right, and others but only by Permission from them. But
this Answer supposes that the time was when Bishop, Teacher and Doctor, were
reciprocal Terms, and that whoever had the Charge of never so small a Flock was
the Bishop thereof: for who can believe, that ever any received the Charge of a
Flock, to whom he was only to preach, and dispense the Sacraments as a
Journey-man to another? Lastly, When Hilary speaks in the preterit Tense that
the Church had such, tells that their Office consisted in being Assessors to
the Teachers, and says that the use of these was laid aside, he clearly
intimats that the Elders he speaks of, were well nigh abolished, and then
scarce in Being Which by no means can be said of the preaching Presbyters. For
let Bishops be not only as proud as Dr. Field would have them, but even as
Lucifer himself, yet most certain it is that long after Hilarie's time, the
Bishops in all weighty Affairs used, at least, to consult the Presbyters, and
that both then and still afterward, preaching Presbyters were existent. But
herein I will not enlarge. See their Glosses of both Scriptures and Fathers,
whereby we vouch this Matter removed, to name no others, by Didoclavius Alt*
Dam. Page 917. and sequentes.
, to which I find nothing replied. This clear Proof that there were in the
primitive Church other Elders, distinct from those preaching Presbyters, who in
the time of the Apostles, not much distant from that of Ignatius, were
dignified with the name of Bishop, furnishes us with an Answer sufficient
alone to solve whatsoever they can deduce from these Epistles. Their only
Argument is that Ignatius distinguishes between Bishop and Presbyter, why then
by Bishop may we not understand a Pastor of one Congregation, and under the
name of Presbyter a Ruling Elder? They can only repone that Ignatius mentions
but one Bishop of any City he wrote to, which yet required more than one
Pastor. But one Man may be called the Bishop or Pastor of such a place, although
he be placed in a College; where a Plurality equally participats of the
pastoral Charge and Honor: and that this Answer may please them the better, I
shall give them Ignatius for my Patron herein; who, writing to the Romans,
expressly terms himself (...) etc.
Bishop of Syria, to whose Charge, even our Adversaries being Judges, Antioch
(only) one City thereof, was committed. It Is moreover certain and granted by
our Adversaries, that there was even in one City frequently a Plurality of
Bishops. But though 'twere yielded that neither Scripture nor Antiquity favor
these Ruling Elders, and therefore that these Ignatian Presbyters must be
something else, we are yet where we were.

. 3. Our inquiry is after a Diocesan Bishop, we are sent to Ignatius to find
him, but all, after the strickest search, we meet with, is only a Bishop or
Pastor of one single Congregation as these ensuing Places proclaim.

Let none (says he Ep. ad Smyrnaeos. (...) -- (...) etc.
do any of these things that ought to be practiced in the Church without the
Bishop, let that Worship be counted Lawful that is performed by him; or which
he (at least) has permitted, wheresoever the Bishop is, there let also the
Multitude be present, even as where Christ is, there is also the Church: it is
not lawful either to Baptize or Celebrate the Lord's Supper without the
Bishop, but whatsoever he allows, that is acceptahle to God, that whatsoever
is done may be established. From which Passage it is evident that Ignatius
supposes and allows one of these Bishops to each particular Flock or
Congregation; without whose Presence the Word and Sacraments were not to be
dispensed: and although he adds that in some Case his Allowance or Approbation
did warrant the practicing thereof; yet I Am sure none can Infer any thing
therefrom except that at some rare times, when the Bishop happened to be absent
from his particular Flock (which uses to fall out to every particular Pastor)
another approved by him might, until his return to his Congregation, discharge
his Office. And again Ad Polycarpum -- (...).
Let there be (says he) frequent Gatherings of your selves together or
Congregations. Inquire thou (speaking to Polycarp Bishop of Smyrna) or seek
after every Man by his Name, neglect neither servants nor handmaids. From
whence it is clear, that this Ignatian Bishop was particularly to be acquainted
with, and have particular Inspection of every one who was under his Charge;
which I Am sure cannot be easily performed by a Diocesan Bishop; but is proper
only to a Pastor of a particular Congregation: or who can forbear to conclude
as much from another Passage of the same Author, where he says Ad Ephesios.
(...) etc.
Whosoever is not within the Altar is deprived of the Bread of God, for if the
Prayers of one or two have so much efficacy, of how much weight must these be
that are put up by the Bishop and the whole Church. Sure I am, the genius and
air of this Passage, proclaims Ignatius speaking of such a Bishop or Pastor, as
is under a Tie reciprocal between him and one particular Flock or Congregation.
And again Ibidem. (...) etc.
In obedience to the Bishop, break-Bread, which is the Medicine of Immortality.
Neither is he a greater Friend to Diocesan Prelacy, while he admonishes the
Church of Philadelphia in these words Ad Philadelphicos. (...) etc.
Children of the Light and of the Truth, fly Divisions and Corrupt Doctrines,
and wherever the Pastor (viz. the Bishop) is, thither you as Sheep follow him.
And again Ibidem. (...) etc.
One Flesh of our Lord Jesus Christ, and one Cup in the Union of his Blood, one
Altar and one Bishop. Add to all this, that Ignatius every where in these
Epistles, speaks to, and of the Bishop; as a correlative of, and with respect
unto the People or Flock, and not Presbyters or inferior Pastors, as the
proper Object of his Episcopal Office. Seeing then all the Pastors of any
Church he writes to, might equally be termed Bishop or Pastor of such a place;
seeing whatsoever he says to or of Bishops, has a particular reference to the
Flock or People; and seeing, finally, so many things spoken by Ignatius of
these Bishops, can agree only to Congregational Pastors; I conclude, that by
these Ignatian Bishops, not Diocesan Prelates, but Pastors of particular Flocks,
not only may but of necessity must be understood. And it is further observable
that Preaching, Visiting of particular Persons and the rest of the Pastoral
Work is either enjoined unto, or clearly intimated to belong to the Bishop
only, but nothing to the Presbyters, save sitting in Council with him. Now if
our Opposites insist on their contrary Argument from the largeness of the
Cities, and from this that Ignatius still speaks but of one Bishop therein, and
hence conclude that he must be Diocesan; the result of all must be a sharper
Conflict between Ignatius and himself, and so a fuller proof of the
spuriousness of these Epistles, it being evident from what is adduc'd that this
Bishop was only a Pastor of a single Congregation, yea so evident that it has
puzl'd the learn'dest of our Opposites.

. 4. Of this mind is Joseph Mede. Proof for Churches in the second Century.
Pages 28, 29.
For speaking of these Ignatian Epistles, It should seem (says he) that in
these first times before Dioceses were divided into those lesser and
subordinate Churches, we now call Parishes, and Presbyters assigned to them)
they had not only one Altar in one Church, or Dominicum, but one Altar to a
Church, taking Church for the Company or Corporation of the Faithful, united
under one Bishop or Pastor; and that was in the City and Place where the Bishop
had his See and Residence: like as the Jews had but one Altar and one Temple
for the whole Nation united under one High Priest. And yet, as the Jews had
their Synagogues, so perhaps might they have more Oratories than one, though
their Altar were but one; there namely where the Bishop was. On Sunday (says
Justin Martyr) all that live in Towns or in the Country meet together in one
Place; namely, as he there tells us, to celebrate and participate the Holy
Eucharist. Why was this, but because they had not many places to celebrate in?
And unless this were so, whence came it else that a schismatical Bishop was
said to set up another Altar; and that a Bishop and an Altar are made
Correlatives? See St. Cyprian Ep. 40. 72. 73. Et de unitate Ecclesiae. And thus
perhaps is Ignatius also to be understood in that forequoted Passage of his,
(...) etc. Where it is clear that Mr. Mede well perceived the thing we now plead
for in Ignatius, viz. that this Bishop was only the Pastor of a single Flock.
Indeed fear to offend his Friends, or something else, made him say so little as
he could, and something that he ought not to have said while he would parallel
this Altar with that of the Jews: yet he is express enough that all subject to
the Bishop met in one place for Participation of the Sacraments, and
consequently for hearing of the Word; and moreover really acknowledges that
Dioceses then were only what Parishes are now, and if so, though they had other
Oratories it is nothing to the purpose of our Opposits, which yet his ( perhaps)
proves him afraid to assert. For he knew well enough, that, seeing, as he
grants, all under his Charge took their Communion with the Bishop at his
Church, which, as every one knows, was then Celebrated (at least) every Lord's
day, any other Oratories for public Worship had been altogether unnecessary;
with which superfluities the Church in these early and tempestuous days was not
at all acquainted. In vain therefore Dr. Maurice, Defense of Diocesan
Episcopacy. Page 37. and 38.
that he may at once abuse both Mede and Ignatius, tells us that Altar in the
primitive sense signified not only the Communion Table but the whole Place
where the Chair of the Bishop and the Seats of the Presbyters were placed: and
in this sense there was but one Altar in one Diocese, as there is now but one
Consistory, as is clear from Ignatius and Usher. And to be in one Altar, which
is Ignatius his Phrase is only to be in Communion with the Bishop. And this Dr.
Maurice would have to be Mede's meaning thereof. But the falsehood of this is
not only evident from Ignatius, who all along (as we have seen) reciprocats his
Bishop with the Pastor of a particular Flock, but also from Mede's express
words, as we have already observed from them. I pass as scarce good sense Dr.
Maurice his saying that Altar not only signified the Communion Table, but the
whole place of the Bishop's Chair etc. The Dispute not being what place or
thing in a Church, Altar signified, but if thereby in Ignatius one or more
places for public Worship be meaned: yea this my sense of Ignatius, Doctor
Wake Genuine Epistles of the Apostolic Fathers. Pages 183, 184.
seems to grant, while he says, speaking of these Ignatian times, that none
officiated but either the Bishop himself or he who was appointed or allowed by
him, and that they had in every such Place of their Assembling, one Table, or
Altar at which they performed this Service. We have heard already Mede rightly
observing out of Ignatius, that the Altar or Communion Table was (only) at the
Bishop's Residence, and where he officiated. And we see from Dr. Wake that in
every place of solemn Worship they had an Altar or Communion Table. The
Conclusion then is, which we also already heard Mede acknowledging, that there
were then no fewer Bishops than Places of public Worship, which is the Truth,
and what we conclude from Ignatius.

And to these add the words of one who is neither unskillfull in these Matters,
nor yet Partial in favors of Presbytry. In the beginning (says he Dr. Burnet
on the 1. and 2. of the Apost. can. Page 51.
) the Bishops whole Charge was called (...), and by the strain of Ignatius his
Epistles, especially that to Smyrna, it would appear, that there was but one
Church, at least but one Place, where there was one Altar and Communion in each
of these Parishes, for he says, there was one Bishop, one Church and one
Altar. And now judge of the symphony of this Assertion, with the Principles of
the Author, or how he could averr Confer. Page 314.
that if these Epistles be Genuine the Cause of Presbytry will be undone. But
of all things most strange and unaccountable is Dr. Pearson's Conduct in the
Dispute, who with indefatigable pains and vast learning wrote his Defense of
Ignatius to the end (as he pretends) he might well nigh infallibly establish a
Diocesan Bishop; and yet has proved so far from hitting the white at which he
ultimately levelled, that on supposition of the sufficiency of his Vindiciae,
he most sufficiently demonstrats the Identity of Bishop and parochial Pastor
during the time of Ignatius, and thus inavoidably ruins what he most earnestly
intended to repair. And now behold the vast Fabric and Engine wherewith they
threaten the utter Ruin of Presbytry turning upon and shattering to pieces
their Dio cesan Hierarchy. -- Nec enim Lex justior ulla,
Quam necis Artifices art perire sua.


Section V.
The Objections they pretend to bring from Scripture against the Doctrine now
deduced from Ignatius, removed.
ANd indeed Ignatius is encompast with so thick a Cloud of Witnesses, who, not
only deny all support to, but give most evident Depositions against the
Diocesan Prelat, that his Testimony in favors thereof should be a firm
demonstration of the Bastardy of these Epistles. The time of the Apostles was
not far above that of Ignatius. Now, if we consult these, we shall not only
find our Adversaries destitute of their Suffrages, but also overwhelmed with
their plain Testimonies against the Hierarchy.

It Is true they allege several things out of the Apostolic Writings, for
establishing their Cause; as that Timothy and Titus, as also the Angels of the
Asiatick Caeurches were Diocesan Bishops. The grounds wherein they establish
the Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus, are, that they are enjoined to Ordain
Elders which in after Ages was the peculiar Province of Diocesan Bishops; and
that in the Postscr^pts of these Epistles they are both called Bishops But
their later Topic is by the profound silence of the ancient Commentaries and
many other tokens of Forgery and Novelty so baffled that Prelacy's present
Agents, and amongst others D. M, are so wise as to suppress it. And yet D. M.
Pages 106. 107.
adventures to conclude Timothy his being made Bishop of Ephesus from Acts 20.
3, 4, 5. (which Inference few, I think, beside the Author can gather) compared
with 1 Timothy 1. 3. I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus -- that thou
might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine. From which even though it
be compared with the other Scripture, any Man in his Wit would much rather,
with Chrysostom, infer the very contrary, and conclude that Timothy's stay at
Ephesus was only temporary, to expede the Business there mentioned but not to
fix therein. But, says he Page 108.
1 Timothy 3. 14. 15. These things I write unto thee etc. plainly insinuat his
particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus. But the many Scriptures informing
us of Timothy's almost perpetual absence from Ephesus; persuade that there was
no such Relation, neither does this place in the least insinuat it, but only
that Timothy if not sent for was to stay till Paul's return, wherefore he begs
the Question while Page 107.
he tells us that after he was in a particular manner established Bishop of the
Church of Ephesus he might wait upon Paul. Moreover this was an odd Attendance
that scarce ever suffered Timothy to stay with his Flock, and this shift, too
like that of the Romanists, who, in Answer to the Argument from
Scripture-silence against Peter's being Bishop of Rome, tell us that he was
frequently abroad. But here we have not only Scripture-silence but Scripture
Testimony, showing Timothy's almost perpetual absence from Ephesus. He essays
also Page 108.
to bring Timothy's Episcopal Power and particular Relation to Ephesus from 1 Timothy 5. 9. 1 Timothy 2. 1. and 1 Timothy 5. 21. And that this was not temporary or
transient, but successive and perpetual, he would prove Pages 109.
from 1 Timothy 6. 13. 20. and 2 Timothy 2. 2. and adds that his Adversaries grant
that the Power he pleads for to Bishops was exercised by Timothy. But as for
the particular Relation he speaks of, he should have proved it, seeing he knows
it will not be granted, except he bring more than the bare recital of the
places from which his fancy collects it, and without such a particular Relation
the Power Timothy exercised, be what it will, makes nothing for his purpose:
seeing it might be lodged in him alone as an Evangelist, and thus most of his
postulata Pages 109, 110.
prove useless. Yet I will handle them particularly, of which the first two
are, that the Power which Timothy exercised was in it self lawful, and that he
practiced it in Ephesus. And it is true none denies it, but what then, until he
first prove Timothy's particular Relation to the Church of Ephesus. The third
and fourth are, that it was committed to him alone, and not to a College of
Presbyters acting among themselves in Parity. And that there is no mention of
any spiritual Power lodged in a College of Presbyters to which Timothy was
accountable. But Willet, an approved Divine of the Church of England, shall
answer for us; Neither (says he Syn. pap. contr. 5. Quest. 3.
) can it be gathered by these words of the Apostle, lay Hands suddenly upon no
Man etc. That Timothy had this sole Power in himself, for the Apostle would not
give that to him which he did not take to himself, who associated unto him the
rest of the Presbytry in Ordaining of Timothy. I add that there is no less
mention of a spiritual Power in a College of Presbyters etc. than of Timothy's
being fixed Bishop of Ephesus. Hence his 5. postulatum (viz. That the great and
most eminent Branches of the Episcopal Power were lodged in Timothy' s Person,
the ordination of such as were admitted unto the sacred Function, the care of
Widows, the Censuring of Elders, and his autoritative preventing of Heresies)
becomes unserviceable. His VI is, that this Authority was not in it self of
temporary duration, transient, or extraordinary, but such as the constant
Necessities of the Church do make necessary in all Ages; for he was commanded
to commit it unto faithful Men, such as should be able to teach others, and if
there be nothing in it extraordinary, why do they say that in the discharging
of an ordinary trust, there was need of an extraordinary Officer.

But First he corrupts the Apostles words 2 Timothy 2. 2. substituting ( it) in
stead of ( them) that thereby he may force the Text to speak of a Power equal
to that of Timothy, which was to be derived unto succeeding Teachers, when yet
it plainly speaks of the Transmission of the Doctrine or things Timothy had
heard, and others were to teach; but nothing of an equality of Timothy's Power
to be derived in solidum to every subsequent Bishop or Teacher. Now except this
be proved, D. M. says nothing. Yea Hammond In locum.
expressly contradicts him, Appoint them (says he) as Bishops under thee.
Moreover, Christ committed the things Paul here speaks of to his Apostles; yet
will D. M. say their Power was equal to Christ's?

Secondly, In this his last postulatum there appears a strange kind of
reasoning viz. the Things or Actions wherein Timothy and Titus were employed,
are perpetual and ordinary; therefore they were not extraordinary Officers:
just as if one would Reason: It Is ordinary for a skillfull Physician to relieve
a Febricitant; therefore our Savior relieving Peter's Wife's Mother, was no
extraordinary Physician. For their Method and Way of performing these Actions
was extraordinary and temporary, they having no special Power over, or Relation
to, any one particular Congregation; but such a Power and Relation as equally
were extended over all the places whither they were sent. Moreover others of
their Actions, and these which were properly Evangelistick, were extraordinary:
such as that of Planting the first Christian Churches.

Lastly, I appeal to all Protestants, if his ascribing to every Bishop a Power
of authorative preventing of Heresies (i. e. a Power of making Canons that lean
only on the Bishop's own Will, and which he is not obliged to prove from
Scripture, otherwise every Minister of Christ has a Power and Authority, by
public preaching and reasoning from the Word of God, to prevent and overthrow
Heresies: and so D. M. speaks not to the purpose) has not a rank savor of
what is no better than the grossest of Popery. The Romanists give such an
authoritative Power to one Pope, but from a persuasion of his Infallibility:
this Author will have it unto every single Bishop, though, as yet, he has not
adventured to ascribe to each of 'em such a Privilege, and to explain, if need
were, what he means by this authoritative preventing of Heresies.

. 2. Look but on page 95 et seq. and you shall see him make every Bishop an
Apostle in the strickest sense, and priviledg'd with no less Power over the
Church Officers and People in his Diocese than an Apostle ever had or could
exercise: viz. a Power to Govern the Churches, to give Rules and Directions, to
inflict Censures, to communicate his Authority to others, to hear Complaints, to
decide Controversies -- to Confer the Holy Ghost -- viz. the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, that must needs attend the authoritative Ministry of holy Things; and
therefore that the Office of an Apostle is altogether ordinary and permanent.
The Apostolical Office (says he) being essentially no other than this, the
ordinary Necessities of the Church require that it should continue till the
second coming of our Savior. But the extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
the Power of Miracles, of Languages -- were only extriasick Advantages, -- and
not peculiar to the Apostles. And to affirm otherwise; and say that the proper
Apostolic Office is now ceased, he makes proper to Presbyterians and
Socinians. But so far is he from speaking Truth here, that the ceasing of the
proper Apostolic Office and Power is asserted by the Body of Protestants, even
Episcopal no less than Presbyterian, in opposition to the Jesuits his Masters,
who, as he does to his Diocesan Bishop, arrogate an Apostolic Office and Power
to their Pope. Spanhem F. Dissert. 3. Numb. 25. Etseq.
a fervent Apologist of the Hierarchicks, assigns many Characters of the
Apostolate as an extraordinary Calling either immediate or equivalent thereto,
Infallibility of Doctrine, transcendent Efficacy and energy in Preaching,
admirable success therein, the Gift of Tongues, and of working Miracles: all
which things, although some of 'em might have been in some measure in others,
were (says he) in a more Divine and Eminent manner in the Apostles. And he
affirms that every one who was endued with a true and proper Apostolic Power,
had, and could give such visible Proofs and ocular Demonstrations thereof: and
then concludes against the Pope; thus, Numb. 37. Eat nunc de rupe turpeia
Pontifex, and cum Apostolis loquatur Linguis Sp. S. exlo visibiliter arcessat,
virtutes similes edat, magnalia eadem obsignet, ac venerabimur in eo
Apostolatus Apicem!
let the Pope now descend from the Capitol, let him, as did the Apostles,
declare that he has the Gift of Tongues Divinely infused, let him bring visibly
the Gifts of the Holy Ghost from Heaven, let him work like the Apostles such
illustrious Miracles, and then we shall yield that he has Apostolic Authority:
and so shall we to the Diocesans when they adduce these Proofs of their
Apostleship. He asserts Numb. 34.
that they are much deceived who would bring the Apostles down to the Order of
particular Bishops; and demonstrats against Hammond, that they were not at all
called Apostles on the account that they were Bishops, and consequently that
Apostle and Bishop are quite different things. Numb. 17.
In short the very Sum and Substance of Spanhemius his Disputation is nothing
save an Approbation and Confirmation of that common Sentiment of Protestants
expressed by Beza In Epist. ad Ephesios. Cap. 4. ver. 11. Constitutis ergo his
hoc quoque munus necessario fuit sublatum: itaque tyrannica hodie vox est in
Ecclesia sese Apostolum ex Successione profiteri.
The Churches (says he) being once constitute, this Office of the Apostle-ship
was of necessity taken away: he is a Tyranne therefore who does now profess
himself an Apostle in the Church by Succession. And by this one Observation,
viz. that wherever the proper Apostolic Power was, they could give ocular and
undeniable Proofs and Demonstrations thereof, the Protestants for ever silence
and baffle the Jesuits and their Progeny D. M. and such Companions ascribing a
Power properly Apostolic to their Roman Antichrist and their Diocesan Prelates,
and fully remove all their Quibbles on this Theme, as Dr. Scot's Quirk, the
Substance whereof is, there is no mention in Scripture of the taking away of
this Apostolic Office; and therefore it yet remains. But I forgot that for the
permanency of a Power properly Apostolic D. M. cites Mat. 28. 20. And lo I am
with you always, even unto the end of the World. As if, not to mention
Protestants, Vide, inter alios, Marloratum in locum.
even the more ingenuous Romanists, as Lyra, did not understand this place, of
Christ's assistance given to all Doctors of the Church without any
Discrimination. Moreover all his Exceptions and pretended Instances to the
contrary are impertinent, and severals of 'em false in matter of Fact, as for
Example, nor is it necessary (says D. M.) to make up an Apostle that he be
immediately called to the Apostolate by our Savior; for Matthias -- was not
immediately ordained by our Savior, but by the Apostles. But Spanhemius Numb.
27. De Matthia sort, id est divina voce, qualiter in distributione terrae, in
segregatione Hirci etc.
tells these Jesuits that the Lot that fell upon Matthias was really the voice
of God, no less than was that of the Division of Canaan, of the Scapegoat etc.
And indeed, as I said, that the Office and Power properly Apostolic is long
since ceased, is the common Doctine of Protestants; as Calvine Vide Instit.
Lib. 4. Cap. 3.
. None (says Sadeel Et nemo sane, nisi plane sit (...), Apostolatum
confuderit. -- dico igitur immediate eligi and vocari a Deo ad praedicandum
Evangelium, esse essentiale Ministerio Apostolatus.
against Turrian the Jesuit) but he who is an Ignoramus in Divinity will
confound an Apostle with a Bishop -- I assert therefore that God's immediate
calling and choosing to preach the Gospel is essential to the Office of an
Apostle. But these, say you, were Presbyterians. I deny't not; however, they
were then pleading the common Cause of Protestants, and were never opposed
herein by any save down-fight Papists only, till that now we have to do with
real Jesuits, who yet mask themselves, and will not acknowledge the name. In
the mean while I do not think they will say Spanhemius Fill. is a Presbyterian,
nor yet Nilus' Bishop of Thessalonica who says De primatu Papae. Lib. 2. Page
30, 31. (...).
the Pope is not an Apostle, the Apostles did not ordain other Apostles, but
only Doctors and Teachers. Of this mind is also Willet Page 145.
. Bellarmine [saith Whitaker De pontif. Romano. Page 61. Qua igitur in re -- in
Apostolatu videtur dicere Bellarminus -- At Apostolicam potestatem nemo habere
potest, nisi qui vere ac pro^rie Apostolus est etc.
) seems to say the Pope succeeds Peter in his Apostle-ship -- but none can have
Apostolic Power but he who is properly and truly an Apostle; for the Power and
Office of an Apostle constitute an Apostle. But that the Pope is neither truly
nor properly an Apostle is proved by these Arguments whereby Paul proves his
Apostle-ship, as, that he was not called by Men etc. Gal. 1. 1, and 12. and
Ephesians. 3. 3. and 5. 1 Cor. 9. 1. Although (says Sutlivius De pontif. Romans Pages
175, 176. Quare etiam olim Episcopi R. Petro successerint in Doctrina, and
externa Cathedra, non tamen in Apostolatu, etsi successerunt, at posteriores
Pontifices nec etc,
) the ancient Bishop of Rome succeeded Peter in Doctrine and the Chair, yet
they succeeded him not in his Apostle-ship, but the latter Bishops in neither
etc. And Lightfoot Vol. 1. Page 787.
a renowned Divine of the Church of England, proves that the Apostle-ship was
an Order for ever unimitable in the Church. The Apostles (says the same Author
Page 745.
) could not ordain as Apostle by Imposition of Hands, as they could ordain
Elders; but they are forced to use a Divine Lot, which was as the immediate
Hand of Christ imposed on him that was to be ordained: that Opinion took little
notice of this circumstance, that has placed Bishops in the Place of the
Apostles, by a common and successive Ordination. Dr. Barrow, whose Works are
published by Bishop Tillotson, and therefore are to be looked on as his, is
copious on this Subject. Apostles also (says he Of the Pope's Supremacy. Page
78.
) did Govern in an absolute manner, according to Discretion, as being guided by
infallible assistance, to the which they might on occasion appeal, and affirm,
it has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us. -- Neither did the Apostles
pretend to communicate it. They did indeed appoint standing Pastors and Teachers
in each Church; they did assume fellow Laborers or Assistents in the Work of
Preaching and Governance; but they did not constitute Apostles, equal to
themselves in Authority, Privileges or Gifts, for who knows not (says St.
Austine) that Principate of Apostle-ship to be preferred before any Episcopacy?
And the Bishops (says Bellarmine) have no part of the true Apostolical
Authority. And now judge of the Spirit of these Men, who are glad most falsely
to brand these famous Bishops, and others the most eminent Doctors of that
Persuasion as being guilty of the most abominable Crime of Socinianism,
providing they can thereby bespatter and make odious the Presbyterians. Judge
also of D. M's Query Page 158.
whether the Apostolical Power, as to it is permanent, necessary, and essential
Branches, was not in its nature Perpetual and Successive; and by them
transmitted in solidum, as they received it from our blessed Savior to single
Successors in particular Sees, and not to a College of Presbytsrs in the
modern Notion? As to the last part of his Query and his Presbyters in the
modern Notion, I know none such if 't be not these of the Hierarchicks their
half Ministers, for which there is no ground in Scripture. And accordingly it is
certain that the Apostles left the managing of the Church to neither Bishops
nor Presbyters in his sense, both of them being Chimera's but to Colleges of
Bishops who are also Presbyters, both being one in Scripture and during the
Apostolic age. But though we should grant them all the Query seeks, supposing,
which all the Ancients affirm, the equality of all Bishops who, at the
beginning, were reciprocated with Congregations, he is yet but where he was, and
has really done nothing for the establishing of his Hierarchy. Judge lastly, of
that doughty Argument of the Papists Alphonsus de Castro adversus haereses.
Fol. 102. Bellarm. de Clericis. Cap. 14.
and our Hierarchicks for Prelacy: to wit, that Bishops succeed to the Apostles
and Presbyters to the 70 Disciples: which has been generally reckoned, by
Protestants, among Rome's dotages, and as such refuted in their Popish
Controversies; and, to name no others, by Iunius Tom. 2. Col. 1209.
and Willet Synops. papism. Page 236.
who answers that not only Bishops, but all faithful Pastors are the Apostles
Successors: and that, even according to the Pope's Decrees, not Bishop, but
Priests, succeed the Apostles; and Deacons, not Presbyters, succeed the 70
Disciples. And now, to go on with D. M. and his Fellows, all their cavilling to
make Timothy and Titus Hierarchick Bishops, is but the product of a late Popish
Dream. For the Fathers, when they so called them, or the Apostles, mean'd not
of Bishops in this sense.

. 3. Wherefore Willet Ibidem.
Answers that it is most like Timothy had the Place and Calling of an
Evangelist: and that the Calling of Evangelists and Bishops which were Pastors
was diverse. This Answer which so approved a Divine of the Church of England
gave the Papists, D. M. Page 111.
calls a ridiculous subterfuge. For (says he) the Work of an Evangelist has
nothing in it opposite to, or inconsistent with, the Dignity of a Bishop etc. A
most disingenuous tergiversation and sliding from the Office of the opponent or
probant to that of the defendent, seeing this was one of his special
Scripture-Arguments whereby to establish his Hierarchy; and it is sure that if
Timothy and Titus might do what they did under another Notion and Capacity than
that of a Diocesan Prelate, his Argument goes to wrack. As does also his
perversion of 2 Timothy 4 5. for he insinuats that from Timothy's being injoined
to do the Work of an Evangelist, it will no more follow that he deserved the
Name than Daniel's saying Chapter 8. 27. that he did the King's Work, will prove
him a King. But had he ever considered the rest of the Epistle, the context of
the place, and the Signification and Notation of the Word Evangelist, he had
clearly seen that the Apostle so adapts this Work of an Evangelist to Timothy,
that the Name and Character properly belongs unto him. He adds Page 112.
That any who now convert Jews or Pagans are as properly Evangelists as any so
called in the primitive Church; and thus insinuats that Evangelists, such as
Timothy and Titus, were no extraordinary Officers, which, except a few
Novelists wedded to their Fancies, is condemned by all Men.

. 4. And that there was such a Function by which some in the days of the
Apostles were raised far above the rank of ordinar Pastors or Doctors, and
placed in the very next degree to the Apostles themselves, whose Office was
mostly ambulatory, going from Church to Church in the exercise thereof, is in
part intimated by Sedulius and Theodoret and others upon Ephesians. 4. 11. but more
fully by Eusebius Lib. 3. Cap. 37. (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- (...) -- (...)
etc.
who informs us that even after the Death of the Apostles diverse remained who
were in a far higher rank than the rest of their Successors, who being ( says
he) the admirable and divine Disciples of so great Men built up the Churches
the Apostles had founded, promoving the preaching of the Gospel, and sowing
Seed of the Kingdom of Heaven far and wide through the whole World: for many of
these Disciples that were yet living, whose Minds the Divine Word had inflammed
with a vehement desire of Wisdom, fullfilling our Savior's Command and
dividing their Goods among the Poor and thus leaving their Country, exercised
the Office of Evangelists among these who had not yet heard the Doctrine of
Faith by most diligent preaching of the Gospel and furnishing their Hearers
with the Holy Scriptures: these, so soon as in any remot and barbarous Country
they had laid the Foundations of Faith and ordained Pastors, and had committed
to these Pastors the care of this New Plantation, being content therewith and
accompanied by the Grace and Power of God hast'ned to other Countries; for even
to that time the Divine Power of God's Spirit wrought Miracles by these Men, so
that at the first hearing of the Gospel some whole Peoples readily embraced the
Christian Religion. Behold Reader how plainly and fully Eusebius relates the
thing we plead for viz. that those Officers were altogether extraordinary
unfixed and temporary.

. 5. Wretch'dly therefore does D. M. Page 111.
castrat this full and plain discourse, while he only says that an Evangelist,
in the Notion of Eusebius, was a Person that preached the Gospel to those that
had not heard of it or resisted it; and thus dissembles the whole matter in
question which Eusebius clearly determines.

And according to this Relation of Eusebius, 2 Timothy 4. 5. he is enjoined to
do the Work of an Evangelist, and never made a long stay at one place for even
after the time of his pretended Ordination to the Bishopric, we find him not
rarely with the Apostle Paul as his Attendant or Fellow Labourer: which not
only his joint Superscriptions to the second Epistle to the Corinthians and
these to the Philippians, Colossians, both his Epistles to the Thessalonians,
and to Philemon: but also the long Journeys and Peregrinations wherein we find
Timothy still employed, irrefragably make manifest: for after he is supposed to
have been Bishop of Ephesus, he was accompanying Paul in his Voyages Acts 20.
4. and was with him Prisoner at Rome as is probable from Philippians 1. and 1.
Heb. 13. 23. as also frequently employed in long Voyages to several Churches,
and that in Businesses which could not be expeded in a day as is evident 1 Cor.
4. 17. 1 Cor. 16. 10. Philip. 2. 19. Heb. 13. 23. 2 Timothy 4. 21. So that if he
was Bishop of Ephesus he will prove a sufficient Pattern for non-residence. Most
of which things may be supposed of Titus, whose frequent long Journeys are
mentioned by the same Apostle. Yea they have just as good ground in 2 Timothy 4.
10. to fix Titus his Episcopal Chair in Dalmatia, which was the Fancy of
Aquinas In locum. Titus etiam missus ab eo abiit in Dalmatiam, ubi finaliter
fuisse Episcopus dicitur.
and others as, they can ever show for their dream of its being among the
Cretians. And indeed the very Phrase from which they gather the Prelacy of
Titus (as we have already observed of Timothy) gives real ground to conclude
the contrary: For this Cause (says he) I left thee in Crete that thou
should set in Order the things that are wanting and ordain Elders. From
which place any ingenuous Man shall be compelled to infer, that Titus was only
left there to supply some present want, and to return again, much rather than
that he was the fixed Archbishop of Crete.

. 6. It Is amazing then that in defiance of so clear Antiquity, yea and so clear
and full Scripture evidence, some dare to transform Timothy and Titus unto
ordinary and fixed Officers; why? they see that among the ordinary and fixed
Church Officers; they cannot find what they covet, the Scriptures making
Bishop, Pastor, and Presbyter one and the same, but yielding no place to their
Diocesan Bishop, a Lord and Ruler over other Bishops or Pastors. They are
compelled therefore, in imitation of the Romanists, who degrade the Apostle to
find the Bishop of Rome and Antioch, just so to handle the Evangelists that
Peter be not alone, but may find other degraded Companions if he shall by
chance, in his Journey from one of his Sees to another, visit Crete or Ephesus.

. 7. But more strange is that most precarious Assertion of D. M. Page 112.
that Philip the Evangelist had no Power of Ordination. But it is yet more
admirable how, to establish Timothy a Bishop, he can adduce Page 107.
the eleventh Act of the Council of Chalcedon: surely, had he read the learned
Stillingfleet Irem. Pages 302, 303.
who has for ever baffled them in this their Allegation, he had blushed at the
very mentioning thereof. And we learn from Hierome Pro^em. in Tit. Scribit ad
Titum etc.
that Titus, after he had given some Instruction to the Churches of Cret^, was
to return again to the Apostles, and to be succeeded by Artemas or Tychicus,
for comforting of these Churches in the absence of the Apostle. Judge Reader if
Hierome thought Titus was fixed Archbishop of Crete. It Is questionable (says
Chrysostom Hom. 1. in 1 Timothy (...).
) if the Apostle had then constituted Timothy Bishop there: for he says, that
thou might charge some that they teach no other Doctrine. Thus he, without a
word more for solution of this his Doubt. Judge therefore if, from the very
Scripture, whereon (alone) they would found Timothy's being Bishop of Ephesus,
he really concludes not the quite contrary Doctrine. It Is doubtful (says a
most earnest Prelatist, Salmeron the Jesuit Disp. 1. in 1 Timothy Dubium est an
Episcopus fuerit Ephesinus etc.
; if Timothy was Bishop of Ephesus, for although he preached and ordained some to
the Ministry there, it follows not that he was the Bishop of that place, for
Paul preached also there above two years, and absolved the Penitents, and yet
he was no Bishop. Add that now and then the Apostle called him away unto
himself and sent him from Rome to the Hebrews with his Epistle. And in the
second Epistle he commands him to come to him shortly. Timothy was also an
Evangelist of that Order Ephesians. 4. He gave some Apostles etc. So that Dorotheus
says in his Synopsis, that Timothy preached through all Grecee but he stayed at
Ephesus not to be Bishop, but that in the constitute Church of Ephesus he might
oppose the false Apostles etc. It appears therefore that he was more than a
Bishop, although for a time he preached in that City as a Pastor and ordained
some to the Ministry. Hence it is that some call him Bishop of Ephesus. And to
conclude this matter, the celebrated Stilling fleet Iren. Page 340.
ingenuously grants that Timothy and Titus were no fixed Bishops or Pastors but
Evangelists, notwithstanding [saith he] all the opposition made against it, as
will appear to any who will take an impartial survey of the Arguments on both
sides.

. 8. As for the Apocalyptick Angels, though, with Beza, we should affirm that by
one of 'em one single Moderator is mean'd, we yield them nothing, but, e
contra, cut the sinews of their Argument. With this D. M. Page 117.
ingages not; only he calls the Alterableness of the Moderator, which Beza
holds as defensible, ridiculous, which is said without proof, and though it were
so, touches not the marrow of our Answer. But they shall find their Foundation
yet weaker for such a structure, so soon as they shall with attention read over
the contexts of the place now in Controversy. The seven Stars which are the
seven Angels are said to be held in God's right hand; whereby, without
peradventure, is signified the great care our Lord had of the Pastors of these
Flocks, in order to the promoting of the great Gospel-Design, the gaining of
Souls to himself. But Bishops, I mean Diocesans, as such, and distinct from
other Pastors, are not at all Dispensers of the Word and Sacraments, by whom
mostly this Gospel-design is effected.

Moreover, how few should they be, to whom this care was extended, and how
small comfort should the bulk of the Laborers in the Word and Doctrine be able
to reap from the Scripture; which otherways is one of the most refreshing
Cordials to the weary and fainting Laborers of Christ's Vineyard. And if we
consult the Epistles to these Churches, how many things shall we find therein
that argue, beyond scruple, that the Spirit is speaking to the collective
Bodies of Church Officers and not to one Man only. Shall we believe that for
the sin of one Diocesan Bishop, who, as such, was scarce so much as a Preacher
of the Gospel, all the Candlesticks of the Gospel were to be removed from the
whole Church, and the Light thereof extinguished: a grievous Punishment, and
too universal, providing the Diocesan only were to be charged with Defection.
Yea have we not much better reason, to judge that this declining, and deserting
of their first Love, imputed to the Ephesian Angel, had crept into, at least,
the far greater part of the Church Officers; and so the sin charged upon them,
and the punishment threatened shall have a far greater correspondency. Moreover
the trial of false Teachers, for which the same Ephesian Angel is commended, is
not the Work of any one Church Officer, but of the Ecclesiastical Senate, which
therefore must be the Angel, who upon this account is here commended. D. M.
yields that the Heavenly Admonitions first addressed to these Angels were also
communicated to the Churches but by the interposal of their Angels. But, were
this as certain as, from what is now said, it appear^ precarious, yea and
uncredible; yet this Angel or Bishop might be only a Praeses or Moderator, so
his Argument is not at all relieved. Who (continues he) cannot be called a
College of Angels but one single Angel etc. Which is a most flat begging of
the Question. And though (says he) there be Instructions in these Epistles, in
which, besides others, the Angels are particularly admonished, yet they are no
less adress'd to single Angels than the Epistle to the Philippians is to that
Church, Though St. Paul uses particular Compellations Chapter 4. verse 2. 3. Where he
perverts the state of the Question which is not, If in any Epistle there may be
Instructions that concern some beside these to whom they are chiefly directed?
But if what is here said to the Angel can agree to any one Man? And beside what
is instanced, to what one Man in the World can that agree which is promised to
the Philadelphian Angel? viz. That the Heretics were to come and Worship
before his Feet. Such a promise indeed is made to the Church, Isai. 60. 14. but
to one mere Man no where.

. 9 From all which it is evident that by the Name of Angels, not particular Men,
but at least the Ecclesiastic Senats are designed which is not unfrequent in
Scripture, as Mal. 2. 7. where it is said that the Priests lips should keep
knowledge, from whose mouth the Law was to be sought, the reason of which is
subjoined, that he was the Messenger or Angel etc. as the Seventy have it. I
know from the Passage Dr. Hammond, on the Revelation, attempts to conclude the
quite contrary, alleging that in this place the High Priest only is to be
understood, but without any ground of his alledgiance: this his Assertion
further supposes, that the High Priest alone was the Cabine of Knowledge, and
the Peoples Teacher from whom the Law was to be learned; quite contrary to 2 Chronicles. 17. 8, 9. where we learn that amongst the rest of the Teachers sent
through the Kingdom by Jehoshaphat, were Elishamma and Jehoram Priests.
Moreover the 4, 5, and 6. verses of the same second of Malachy, where under the
name of Levi in the singular Number all the Levites are undeniably to be
understood, and what is said of Levi as of one Man is certainly mean'd of a
Multitude; evince that under the name of Priest in the following verse, we must
understand a Plurality.

. 10. But the 24. verse of the second Chapter, Unto you I say and to the rest
of Thyatira puts this beyond Debate. But Hammond excepts, that in the Ancient
Greek Mss. And particularly that at St. James (...) is left out, and the words
read To you the rest or To the rest of you in Thyatira. But be it so, yet I
think these will not serve to discredit the Vulgar, and universally received
Greek Copy in which this particle is found. Yea it is found in so many Greek
Copies, and these of so good Note, that I doubt if any of all these who during
eight or nine Score of years, translated or expounded this Place, has ommitted
it; and although some Copies of the Vulgar Latin want it; yet there be no few
that retain it; and amongst other two Mss. in the Library of Glasgow. And
Aretas or rather Andreas who lived in the fifth Century; above, as I believe,
the age of most of the Mss. now in the World, I except not that at St. James's
notwithstanding of what is fabled to the contrary, retains this Particle as a
part of the then uncontroverted Copy. And after him Beda: to which we may yet
add the ablest of the Romanists, as Dionysius Carthusians, Lyra the Glossa
interlinearis, and a Lapide, no Friends to Presbytry.

. 11. But D. M. Page 117.
tells us that these words in the 24 v. But unto you I say, etc. cannot be
applied so properly to the Angel of the Church of Thyatira as to these
mentioned in the end of the 23 verse, the other Churches of Asia. Which, (
says he) because they are mentioned in the Speech directed to the Angel of the
Church of Thyatria the immediate transition from him to them is easy.

But except we force the place nothing of this kind can be thence collected,
there being nothing in this Epistle spoken to or of the other Churches except
the mere mentioning thereof, the more to hold forth the greatness and
conspicuousness of the Punishment denunced against the Strayers in Thyatira.
Yea the latter part of the 24 verse, And to the rest in Thyatira proclaims that
the former part of the verse is to be understood of the same People of Thyatira
likewise. In a word his gloss is so uncouth and strained that you cannot easily
tell what to make of it. And it is, at least, no more odd than his Conduct all
along.

. 12. And to instance, in the present Theme, he would fain ridicule Salmasius
for affirming that, under the names of the Angels, the Churches themselves or
the more pure and Angel-like parts thereof are to be understood. According to
Salmasius his Iterpretation (inferrs D. M.) the seven Stars must needs be the
seven Churches of the seven Churches. As if such Phrases were not frequent
enough in Authors, and yet not justly liable to any such Inference; or as if
the more holy and spiritual part of the Church were the whole visible Church:
for except D. M. so affirm, the Author of this Gloss cannot be accused of
nonsense; who yet is not Salmasius, for he only learned it from Aretas, or
Andraeas, and other Fathers, and defended it against the Jesuit Petavius, whom
D. M. would patronize against both Protestants and Fathers.

The second of the Homilies ascribed to Augustine Et Angeli earum ibidem non
debent intelligi, nisi aut Episoopi aut praepositi Ecclesiarum. -- Nam quia
etiam Angelus nuncius interpraetatur, quicunque aut Episcopus aut Presbyter aut
etiam Laicus frequenter de Deo loquitur, and quomodo ad Vitam eternam perveniat
merito Angelus Dei dicitur.
in Apocalypsin informs us that under the name of Angel not only Bishops but
other Church-Rulers are likewise understood. And again, seeing Angel signifies
a Messenger; whosoever, whether Bishop, Presbyter or Laick frequently speaks
of God, and declares how we may obtain eternal Life, deservedly gets the name
of an Angel of God. And Aretas Comment. in Apocalypse. Cap. 3. (...).
says, he calls the Church it self the Angel. And Primasius In Cap. 1. Apoc.
says by these Angels of the Church are to be understood the Guides and
Rectors of the People, who ruling in particular Churches, Preach the Word of
Life to all Men: for the name of Angel signifies a Messenger. And In. Cap. 2.
again both Church and Angel is comprehended under the Person of the Angel. And
thus their main Scripture-Argument even the Fathers being Judges goes to ruin.

. 13. Yea the more sagacious of our Adversaries well perceive that neither this
Scripture, nor any other, supports their Doctrine: Wherefore Petavius never
attempts to bring his Proofs from Scripture, but only from Ecclesiastic
Traditions. Add hereto the words of Dr. Burnet Confer. Page 310.
As for the Notion (says he) of the distinct Offices of Bishop and Presbyter,
I confess, it is not so clear to me: and therefore since I look upon the
Sacramental Actions, as the highest of sacred Performances; I cannot but
acknowledge these who are empowered for them, must be of the highest Office in
the Church. So I do not allege a Bishop to be a distinct Office from a
Presbyter; but a different degree in the same Office, to whom for Order and
Unities sake, the chief inspection and care of Ecclesiastical Matters ought to
be referred, and who shall have Authority to curb the Insolences of some
factious and turbulent Spirits. His Work should be to feed the Flock by the
Word and Sacraments, as well as other Presbyters; and especially to try and
ordain Entrants, and to Oversee, Direct, and Admonish such as bear Office. And
I more willingly incline to believe Bishops and Presbyters, to be the several
degrees of the same Office, since the names of Bishop and Presbyter, are used
for the same thing in Scripture; and are also used promiscuously by the Writers
of the two first Centuries. Where he plainly contradicts Dr. Pearson, who, in
favor of his Ignatius, largely pleads for the accurat distinction of Bishop
and Presbyter in the second Century, denies Bishop and Presbyter to be distinct
Orders; and finally acknowledges, that in the chiefest parts of the Ministerial
Function they are equal: and so really denudes the Bishop of all the degree he
left him. But more clearly elsewhere, I acknowledged ( says he Confer. Page
331.
) Bishop and Presbyter, to be one and the same Office; and so I plead for no
New Office-Bearers in the Church. Next, in our second Conference, the Power
given to Churchmen was proved to be double. The first Branch of it, is their
Authority to publish the Gospel, to manage the Worship, and to dispense the
Sacraments. And this is all that is of Divine-Right in the Ministry, in which
Bishops and Presbyters are equal sharers, both being vested with this Power.
But beside this, the Church claims a Power of Jurisdiction, of making Rules for
Discipline, and of appointing and executing the same; all which is indeed
suitable to the common Laws of Societies, and to the general Rules of
Scripture, but has no positive Warrant from any Scripture-Precept. And all
these Constitutions of Churches into Synods and the Canons of Discipline,
taking their rise from the Divisions of the World into the several Provinces,
and beginning in the end of the second, and beginning of the third Century, do
clearly show they can be derived from no Divine Original; and so were, as to
their particular Form, but of humane Constitution: therefore as to the
management of this Jurisdiction, it is in the Churches Power to cast it in what
mould she will. A Presbyter (acknowledges even Cornelius a Lapide In Philip. 1.
1.
) is equal to a Bishop in the chiefest Order, which is the Order of the
Priesthood.

. 14. To which add the Judgment of Dr. Hammond a Man so distempered with
extreme Passion for the Hierarchy, that he makes On Rev. 4. compared with his
Notes on Acts 11.
him that sat on the Throne Rev. 4. God the Father, and the four and twenty
Elders with their Golden Crowns, an Image and Representation of the
Metropolitan Bishop of Jerusalem, and the four and twenty Bishops of Judaea in
Council, for Golden Crowns or Mitres he makes the Characters of the Episcopal
Dignity. Yet even he asserts (on Acts 11. 30. and Philip. 1. 1.) that the Title
of Presbyter in Scripture times belonged principally if not only to Bishops:
There being (says he) no evidence that any of that second Order were then
instituted but Bishops (only) and Deacons. This he at large confirms, and so
really overthrows Prelacy when he would fainest establish it, joining with the
Presbyterians in their grand Antiprelatick Principle; viz. that simple
Presbyter (as the Hierarchicks phrase it) without Power of Ordination or
Government, or a distinction between Bishop and preaching Presbyter, is a mere
stranger, and without all Foundation in the Holy Scriptures. From all which
it is clear that these Bishops or (which is all one) preaching Presbyters, in
Scriptures, and during the Apostolic age, were nothing save Pastors of
particular Congregations.

Section VI.
Our meaning of Ignatius confirmed from the Writings of the Apostles, his
immediate Ancestors
MOreover nothing can be more clear for the Idenity of Bishop and preaching
Presbyter, than that known Scripture Acts 20. 17, 28. They Answer, that the
Bishops of Asia, not the Pastors of Ephesus, were, by Paul, sent for, which
some would support from the 18 ver. From the first day that I came into Asia
etc. But since, as is clear chapter 19. verse 10. from his coming into Asia, he had
been most in Ephesus, he might truly say so much though the Ephesians only had
been present; but suppose he spoke to others beside, we are at no loss; the
Question is, if he gave not, though amongst others, the Title of Overseers or
Bishops to these he sent for? verse 17. And if these were not the Elders of
Ephesus? They yet object the words of Irenaeus viz. That Paul called together
to Miletum the Bishops and Presbyters of Ephesus and the neighboring Towns.
But as for his seeming here to distinguish Bishops from Presbyters, this
Scripture where they get both Names, and which Iraeneus had then in his view,
and his frequent promiscuous using of these Names, persuade me that he only
respected the 17 and 28 verses, and so took Bishop and Presbyter Synonimically
for one and the same. His adding of the neighbor Towns to Ephesus might flow
from his inadvertency whereat no attentive Reader of Irenaeus Lib. 2. Cap. 4.
will marvel, and yet this is as likely to have crept into the Version, for the
Original of Iraeneus we have not, because these Elders their belonging to
Ephesus alone is not only so clear from the 17 verse, that the repeating of the
word Ephesus would really prove a redundancy, wherefore the Syriack omits it in
the former part of the verse and expresses it in the latter, and called for the
Elders of the Church of Ephesus: but also all the Ancients either affirm, as
Hierome, or suppose that these Elders belonged only to Ephesus, which even Dr.
Maurice Pages 31, 32.
yields against Dr. Hammond and says, that then, properly speaking, there might
not be a Bishop amongst them all, for they are Presbyters belonging not to
several Congregations; but to one Church and might have a Bishop. But not only
the promiscuous attributing to them the Names Bishop and Presbyter, their
being, and that without any insinuation of their Subjection to a superior
Bishop, enjoined by the Apostle to Oversee and feed the Flock; and finally the
very Repetition of this Fiction of their Hierarchy in the Apostolic Age
sufficiently refute it. Who (continues he) the Ancients thought was Timothy.
And thus all resolves into the fictitious Episcopacy of Timothy, already
overthrown. Now it is observable how they contradict one another, and by halfs
acknowledge to be false all they plead for: for some, as Dr. Maurice,
perceiving that the Ancients affirm and the Scriptures proclaim all these
Elders to belong to the Church or City of Ephesus, acknowledge these could be
no Diocesan Bishops. Others as Dr. Hammond (in locum and alibi) and Petavius
Apud Wall. Mess. Page 96.
seeing that these are not only dignified with the name of Bishop but entrusted
with the care of the Flock, and that without Paul' s mentioning of any
superior Bishop; when, if ever, there was ground to have mentioned him; yield
that, of necessity, these Elders must be Bishops or more than simple
Presbyters. Whence is all this Contradiction and Confusion of Tongues? but from
the force of Truth before which Men must either bow or break, and be compelled,
though after never so much interpolation and disguise, to express what they would
fainest conceal. The matter is, their Diocesan Bishop, their simple Presbyter,
their distinction between Bishop and Presbyter are mere Antiscriptural
Figments, in the sustaining of which against this and the like Scriptures, they
are obliged to confront one another, and in the throng of their blunderings
entirely yield the Controversy.

. 2. The same line of confusion runs along their Answer to Philip. 1. 1. with
the Bishops and Deacons etc. whence it is clear that there were in one City many
Bishops who were no other thing than Presbyters, and that these were no
distinct Orders, the Deacons being immediately subjoined, these were the Bishops
of the several Cities of Macedonia under Philippi the Metropolis (says Dr.
Hammond in locum) it is denied by Dr. Maurice Page 27.
I could never find reason (says he) to believe them any other thing than
Presbyters. Philippi was a Metropolis because a Colonie; says Dr. Hammond: but
that this will not follow is acknowledged by Dr. Maurice. Thus they are still
by the ears. But says Dr. Hammond, the Apostle might retain the Episcopal
Power in his own hands, and though absent might exercise it by Letters: but they
can give no ground why the like may not be said of the Apostle in reference to
the rest of the Churches, and so Timothy and Titus shall be dethroned and our
Adversaries, endeavoring to Answer one of our Arguments, loss two of their
own, yea all of them: for it being no less presumable that John would keep the
Episcopal Power over the Churches of Asia in his own hand then that Paul kept
that of Philippi, there shall be no ground nor color to Metamorphose the
Apocalyptick Angels into Diocesan Bishops? Or it is possible (continues Dr. H.)
that then the Bishop's Chair was vacant. But if so and a Diocesan so necessary
as they pretend, without peradventure the Apostle had not only mentioned it.
but also spent some part of his Epistle in directing and giving them Rules in
order to their choice of a fit Successor. Or the Bishop (says he) might be
absent, and Epaphroditus by the Ancients judged Bishop of Philippi appears to
have been then with Paul. But this Dream of Epaphroditus his being Bishop of
Philippi, the Doctor in that very place Page 636.
condemns and overthrows, and so frees us of further trouble about it.

. 3. Yea in none of these Answers does Dr. H. rest, but, as is said, in this
pretext that Philippi was a Metropolis over many subject Bishops, leaning
mainly on Acts 16. 12. whose Arguments were examined by Dr. Stillingfleet Ir.
Page 369. Et seq.
and Mr. Clerkson. Prim. Episc. Page 7. Et seq.
Dr. Maurice, though a grand Enemy to Hammond's grand Principle, undertakes
notwithstanding the defense of some of these Arguments against the latter, but
medles not with the former, and says that Beza' s Manuscript has (...) and
not (...) as has also the Syriack and Arabic. But OEcumenius and Theophilact,
and even Chrysostom, yea and the received Greek Copy which Translators,
generally follow, read (...)not (...). But seeing, as the learned Stillingfleet
demonstrats, Philippi was not then a Metropolis in the Civil sense which is the
Foundation of all their Structure, it is impossible that it can be called by
Luke (...) or first in respect of Dignity; but only either must be mean'd as
Luke may well be understood that it was the first Colony they met with coming
from Samothrace, or in respect of Situation it being scarce within the Bounds
of the proper Macedonia, but on the Thracian side of the River Strymon the
Boundary between Thrace and Macedonia, yet it might be nearer to the proper
Macedonia than was Neapolis, and therefore is rather to be reckoned a part of
that Country than Neapolis could be: wherefore on both, at least, certainly on
one of these accounts, appears the nullity of Dr. Maurice his Answer, while he
says that not Philippi but Neapolis was the first in Situation. Of the same
kidney is his saying that Philippi might be more considerable in Luke' s time
than in the time of P. Aemilius: seeing this is a mean begging of the Question:
for he brings nothing from any Records which a Matter of this kind requires, to
make in the least probable the growth of Philippi between the time of Aemilius
and Luke: and Chrysostom Homil. 35. In Act. Apost. (...).
speaking of Luke's time, tells us that it was no great City. Moreover Dr.
Stilling fleet, ex abundanti, clearly shows through the several periods of time
that Philippi was of no greater Dignity in the time of Luke than in the time of
P. Aemilius. Dr. Maurice adds as a proof of Philippi's Metropolitan-ship, in
Luke's time that the Bishop of Philippi is mentioned as Metropolitan in
Liberatus, the Council of Ephesus, Sedulius, and in an old Notitia. To which I
Answer with Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. Page 361.
in the like Case: But what validity there is in such Subscriptions, or
Allegations in the latter end of the fourth, or the time of the fifth Century
to prove a Metropolis: in the first, let any-one judge that does but consider
how common a thing it was to alter Metropoles, especially after the new
Disposition of the Roman Impire by Constantine. Yea Carolus a sancto Paulo who
was most versant in these Matters, and with him Dr. Stillingfleet, believe that
for the first six Centuries Philippi was no Metropolis.

. 4. But I will not enlarge in overthrowing a Fancy so wild and gross. But in
the end of the second Century, (says Dr. Burnet, Conferences. Pages 307, 308.
) the Churches were framed in another mould from the Division of the Empire:
and the Bishops of the Cities did, according to the several Divisions of the
Empire, associat in Synods with the chief Bishop of that Division or Province,
who was called the Metropolitan, from the Dignity of the City, where he was
Bishop. And hence sprang Provincial Synods, and the Superiorities, and
Precedencies of Bishoprics. You see how the chiefest of Prelatists disown and
disclaim this Metropolitan Fiction: but none more fully than Dr. Stillingfleet
who has nervously baffled all their Pretenses, prevented whatsoever Dr. Maurice
advanced (for I speak not of Mr. Clerkson who has also sufficiently done it)
and finally, more particularly, ruined all their Pretexts for Philippi's
Metropolitan-ship, either in a Civil or Ecclesiastic sense, during the first
Century or Apostolic age. Judge therefore of Dr. Maurice his Candor, which
minds me of another piece of his Legerdemain to evite the force of Philippians
1. 1. For if (says he Page 27.
) in Mr. Clerkson' s Opinion, the Bishops mentioned Philip. 1. 1. be no other
than Presbyters, then this place is impertinently alleged, since many
Presbyters are by all sides acknowledged to have belonged to one Church, but if
he speak of Bishops in the common Ecclesiastical sense, and then conclude from
this Passage that there were many in the Church of Philippi, his Opinion is as
singular as that of Dr. Hammond which he endeavors to refute, for my part I
must profess I am not concerned in this Dispute; and I could never find reason
to believe them any other thing, than Presbyters -- Page 30.
Or were these Bishops only Presbyters ruling the Church of Philippi, with
common and equal Authority? Then our Author must give up the Question, and in
stead of making many Bishops, must own that there was none at all there, but
Presbyters only, if he thus contend he will abuse his Reader with the ambiguity
of a word, which he takes in one sense, and the Church in another. That many
Presbyters might belong to one Congregation, none ever denied; that many
Bishops in the allowed and Ecclesiastical sense of the word, had the oversight
of one City, sounds strange and incredible to the ancient Christians. Where he
sleely supposes as granted that Bishops in Philip. 1. 1. must either be
understood of their simple Presbyters or of Diocesan Bishops, and then equipps
his horned Argument no other ways than if he had professedly declined all
Dispute, till once his Adversary had, out of kindness, yielded the Question,
which is only about the Scriptural and Apostolic sense of the word and notion
of the Office of a Bishop, if that, and the Office of a preaching Presbyter be
not in Scripture one and the same, and consequently if these at Philippi were
not Scriptural Bishops no less than they were Presbyters? Now that he concerned
not himself in this Dispute, nor was in earnest in it. I deny not: his slippery
dealings make it but too, too apparent: his simple intimation that these were
only their simple Presbyters, I pass, having already blown off all their
noticeable Depravations of Philip. 1. 1. I have yet met with; and observe that
he, following the Romanists, insinuats that we cannot understand the
Scripture's meaning, until we have their Churches Commentary. His ambiguous
and unhandsome conduct is no less apparent in these his Phrases ( common
Ecclesiastical sense -- which he takes in one sense, and the Church in another)
For either he may mean that the Church, when she speaks of Bishops who were in
after times, understands, by this Name, only Diocesans; and so touches not in
the least (contrary to what he insinuats) the Churches received sense of this
Text, nor what Notion she had of Scriptural-Bishops: Or his sense may be that,
when she speaks of Apostolic and Scriptural Bishops, she then still means
Diocesans and Rulers over their simple Presbyters, and this he must mean if he
speak to the Purpose. And then I inquire what Church was of this mind? Surely
neither Primitive nor reformed Churches, I except not that of England, whose
greatest Lights we have already heard disclaiming all Divine Right of Diocesan
Episcopacy, and identifying Bishop and Presbyter. Yea many, even of the
Romanists, are forced to confess so much; There are Catholics (says the
Jesuit Justinianus In Philip. 1. 1. Haeserunt in eodem Luto nonnulli Catholici.
) who have stuck in the mud of Aerianism. The Church then he means must be only
a few factious Novelists, who, in despite of both Divine and Humane Records,
and the common Sentiment of Christians, dare to obtrude on the World, as a
Fundamental of Religion, their private and wild Fancies. Neither is it strange
that so few embrace this conceit of denying the Scripture-Identity of Bishop
and Presbyter.

. 5. For beside these Scriptures now adduc'd let them but look unto 1 Timothy 1.
3. where they shall find a transition from Bishop to Deacons without any
mention of intermediant Presbyters, and consequently the Identity of these
Offices. Bellarmine De Clericis. Cap. 15.
Answers that the Apostle gives a general Instruction to the Clergy, and that
under the name of Bishops and Presbyters all the superior Clergy is
comprehended. But seeing they make a Distinction of these Offices so necessary,
it was requisite they had been handled in particular, and not hudl'd up in a
general, seeing no where in Scripture there is any more particular Distinction
of Bishop and preaching Presbyter assigned: but Bellarmine's main Answer to
this and all such Scriptures is, that the Names Bishop and Presbyter were then
common to both Orders: which Answer all the Hierarchicks and more particularly
D. M. borrow from the Jesuit. But I answer and argue with Junius against
Bellarmine Tom. 2. Col. 1211.
that seeing the Names were then common, and a real community of Names imports
a community of things which by these names are signified; it necessarily then
follows that, as the Names were then common, so were the Offices designed by
these Names. But to see the Reformed conquering, and the Jesuits foiled some
are much pained: and in special D. M. who spends about 17 pages Page 22. Et seq.
for the support of Bellarmine's Answer: the substance whereof, and of his
first three Queries Pages 157, 158.
is, that Still in the Pentateuch the High Priest is named by the same
Appellative (without any distinction of Order or Jurisdiction) that the other
Priests were named by: and the title of a Priest was promiscuously applied,
without any distinction or marks of Eminence to the High Priest as well as to
the Subordinat. And, The Apostles retained the Phraseology of the Jews who
spoke of Priests and Levites as two distinct Orders, without mentioning the
High Priest. And, When the Ancients Dichotomiz'd the Clergy, they in other
places plainly reckon up three distinct Orders of Bishop, Presbyter, and
Deacon. But is there never in all the Scriptures any Title, Distinction, or
Marks of Eminence given to one Priest, which were not communicable to all of
'em? Got ever all of 'em promiscuously the Title of High Priest, or such
distinctive Appellations? Did the Apostles so retian the Phraseology of the
Jews, as that they sometimes make a Bipartite and sometimes a Tripartite
Division of ordinary Church Officers, and give to any one ordinary Pastor,
sometimes at least, a distinguishing Title and Marks of Eminence which are at
no time communicable to all ordinary Pastors promiscuously? As to the Ancients
their sometimes Dichotomizing, sometimes Trichotomizing the Clergy; it is most
certain that in their Dichotomies they eyed the prime primitive Church, and in
their Trichotomies their own times. But Christ says D. M.) is called an
Apostle and a Bishop, the Apostles, Presbyters and Deacons. But was Christ so
called an Apostle that he had no other peculiar titles or marks of Eminence, or
that on the other hand the name Christ was given promiscuously to all Apostles
or ever given to any of 'em? Lastly, was the Apellation of Apostle equally
communicable to all Presbyters or ordinary Pastors, as to the twelve and some
few else extraordinary Officers? All which he must swallow, else he gives no
relief to his Friend Bellarmine. We Argue, that seeing to no ordinary Pastor is
given any peculiar Appellation, Character, or Description, but what is equally
common to all, there must be an Equality and Parity amongst all of 'em; and
this they can never get over. Moreover among the Evangelists, yea and among the
Apostles, Officers superior to ordinary Pastors, the reformed Churches being
Judges, there was a complete Parity as was also among the Deacons their
Inferiors: notwithstanding of all which the Hierarchicks must plead for
certain Stories of Pre-eminence among the ordinary Pastors; in favors; whereof
ne gry quidem they can bring from the Word of God the only Rule of Faith and
Doctrine.

. 6. Add hereto Tit. chap. 1. where we not only find the Apostle using
indifferently and promiscuously the two words Bishop and Elder, but also he
alleges the necessity of fit Qualifications in the one, to prove that the
same are required in the other; the Presbyters that were to be Ordained must be
blameless etc. because a Bishop must be so: wherein either we have an ocular
Demonstration of the Identity of these two Officers, or else (which I abhor to
think) the Apostles reasoning is more pitiful than the most equivocant
Paralogism; their being not so much as a nominal Connection betwixt the
Antecedent and Consequent; and no less ridiculous than if one should reason
that every Captain of a single Company must be able to guide and manage a whole
Army, because such Qualifications are required in a General. Now, seeing these
Scriptures already vindicated, to name no others, evidently declare that there
was no such thing as a Diocesan Bishop, that there is a complete Identity of
Bishop and preaching Presbyter, and consequently a Parity of all ordinary
Pastors, they of necessity condemn the Hierarchick and Diocesan Imparity: for
I Am persuaded these who allege that they find in Scripture a Distinction
between these Offices, will judge that they may with reason enough conclude the
Divine Right of Episcopacy. Hence judge of D. M's fifth Query page 158.
where and in what places of Scripture the superiority and jurisdiction of one
Priest above another is forbidden? And if it be not plainly forbidden, then the
Fancy of a Jus Divinum in favors of Presbytry (such as is exclusive of all
other Forms of Ecclesiastical Government) is groundless and Chimerical.

From all which I conclude that if the Ignatian Bishop and Presbyter most be
understood in the Notion of our Adversaries, he then quite crosses the
Apostles, and so his Doctrine is stark naught, or (which is a far more
charitable Sentiment) his Epistles have suffered no small interpolation.

Section VII.
The grand Objection, taken from the Commentaries of the Ancients, removed.
BUT the Fathers, as our Adversaries pretend, glossing on these Texts, went
quite cross to our Doctrine, To the Bishops and Deacons (says Chrysostom On
Philip. 1. 1.
) What means that? What? was there a Plurality of Bishops in one City? Not at
all: for at that time the Name was yet common, so that a Bishop was also named
a Deacon, that is a Servant. And adds, that both Timothy and Titus were
Bishops. Of the same mind (say they) were Hilary, Epiphanius, Theodoret,
OEcumenius and others: which harmonius Consent of Ancients cannot but be the
true meaning of the places in Controversy. But as these, and such Fathers
confess, and their Works proclaim, they were, like others, subject to humane
Weakness and Corruption, fell into compliance with the growing Errors, into
immoderat heat, prevarication and self-repugnancy, and negligence to search for
the Scriptures their meaning. How loudly sounded the debate concerning
rebaptizing between Stephen and Cyprian, which ^ore almost the whole body of
Christians into a pair of Factions? With what heat was it prosecuted? And,
which is most lamentable, how pitifully was the truth on both hands deserted?
For although it be commonly believed that Stephen only held the truth, and
Cyprian and his failed, yet Stephen and the Romans did no less betray it: On
the other extreme, while they asserted the sufficiency of Baptism, although
administered by the grossest Heretics and capital Enemies of the Fundamentals
of Christianity. How great, both before and after that time, were the Contests
about Easter? How scandalous were the Contests between Chrysostom, Epiphanius
and Theophilus: and between Hierome and Ruffine. Not to name others, in all
which it is apparent how little they believed one another, and how much many of
'em prevaricated in favors of their particular Fancies.

. 2. But their Contradictions to one another are less to be admired when we
clearly perceive that one and the self same Author, either out of negligence or
some other weakness, has given us quite contrary Doctrines. Justine Martyr,
which Sculte^ observes Medull. Theol. Patrum. Vol. 1. Lib. 1. Cap. 17.
, in one place ascribes the whole Work of Regeneration to free Grace, and in
another destroys what he had builded; and places free Will in the room
thereof. And Clemens Alexandrinus, as the same Scultet observes Lib. 5. Cap. 13.
following Justine Martyr delivers the like inconsistencies about the same
Theme: he sometimes ascribes our Salvation wholly to Faith, and again tells us
that we may purchase it with the Treasure of our Works.

. 3. Of the same kind are their polemick Discourses, wherein their study was
much more directed to bespatte their Antagonists, and alure the vulgar Auditor,
than solidly to support the Truth. I shall never believe that Optatus Contra
Parmenianum. Lib. 3.
believed himself, when he maintained that all the Menaces uttered in the Old
Testament against Tire and her King had for their Object Parmenianus the
schismatical Bishop of the Donatists, who lived at Carthage, that had once been
a Tyrian Colony, but in the time of Parmenianus was inhabited by Romans who had
either quite extirpated or expelled thence the whole Race of the Tyrians. With
no less lightness, but more danger did Justine Martyr Apologia ad Antonium pium
Imp. (...).
long before Optatus, endeavor to persuade the Gentiles, that all Mankind were
Partakers of Christ, because they were Partakers of Reason, and Christ is
called (...) which also signifies Reason. Where we see that Justine leans only
on a pitiful Equivocation, the deceit of which could not be unknown to him who
natively spoke Greek. Neither were Origenes, Methodius, and others, as Hierome
witnesses, more solid in their Writings. Yea Hierome himself distinguishes
between Progymnasticks and Dogmaticks, alleging that in the former of these a
Disputant has liberty to muster up many Arguments in which he has no
confidence.

. 4. To these we may add both their Homilies and Expositions wherein it is not
easily determined when they spoke their own minds, or when they gave us only
Transcripts of others, to believe and defend which they held themselves but
little obliged. Yea Hierome oftener than once tells us that it was the common
Practice of the Writers of these times to give the Expositions of others, and
yet conceal the names of the Authors, and so involve the Reader, and make him
take for their judgment the things they never believed.

. 5. If we search into the causes of so strange dealing, we have heard out of
Hierome that one of 'em was mere sloth and neglect. See much more to this
purpose in Dallaeus de usu Patrum. Another Cause, why they both spoke, wrote
and practiced otherways than they knew could be warranted by Scripture, was
their unjustifiable Compliance with both Jews and Pagans; good perhaps
intentionally being out of design the better to Proselyte them, but eventually
proved as unhappy as its Practice was unwarrantable, and destitute of Scripture
ground. Hence their Deacons were named Levites, their Bishops Priests and
Highpriests, the Lord's Table the Altar, and the Lord's Supper a Sacrifice,
and at length Diocesan Bishops and Archbishops were instituted in imitation of
the Lombard. Lib. 4. Distinctione 24. M.
Pagan Flamines and Protoflamines. Another Cause thereof, which especially
takes place in their Homiles and Expositions, was the multitude of Alterations
and Corruptions well grown before any of these Homilies and Commentaries we now
enjoy were extant, these were too deeply rooted to be opposed; and therefore
they believed themselves under a kind of necessity to accommodat their Comments
and Declamations thereto, at least, so to temper and compose them that they
should not thwart therewith. Of this sort of Conduct, we have a clear instance
in Augustine, who sometimes commends and praises several unscriptural
Ceremonies: But Epist. 118.
elsewhere speaking his Mind more freely disapproves them as both unwrantable
and burdensome. He indeed there intimats that some things commonly observed
throw the World though they were not written yet might be kept as having come
from the Apostles or general Councils; such as was the Observation of the
Lord's Passion, Resurrection and Ascension. But even this, as is most probable,
he yielded out of humane Weakness and Fear to oppose the then prevailing
Innovations: for, the needlesness of such preterscriptural Observations he
evidently declares elsewhere De Doctrina Christiana. Lib. 2. Cap. 9.
saying that all things which belong either to Faith and Manners are plainly
contained in Scripture. From all which is clear, that we cannot at all be sure
if the Fathers, Commenting on the places in hand, either knew their true
meaning, or if they did, sincerely gave us what themselves believed.

. 6. And that in their Explications of these Texts, we have not their genuine
Sentiments, is to me evident. First, because they gave such Reasons of their
Exposition as the greatest Prelatists count stark naught. Thus Bellarmine De
Clericis. C^p. 15.
rejects and overturns the Grounds of every one of these Expositors in
particular, except these of Chrysostom only, who yet has nothing of any
moment above the rest: for Chrysostom exponing Philip. 1. 1. alleges only in
defense of his Exposition that the sole Title and Name of Bishop was common to
both Orders: but this is refused by Dr. Hammond and others, and, as we shall
hear, by Chrysostom himself. But the Jesuit intending to retain that
Exposition, thought himself obliged to embrace some of their Defenses, whereas
in truth they themselves never believed them to be solid, but only the growing
Corruptions being too strong to be opposed, and some of 'em having got an
Episcopacy which was then creeping in, and which they, depending on the
Churches Authority, thought they might retain, they believed that for the
fashion they might so gloss the Scriptures whereby Episcopacy is wounded that
the People should not perceive the unwarrantableness thereof. Secondly, The
main ground common to all these Expositions why they expone any of these Texts
as if they condemned not a Diocesan Bishop, is a sufficient evidence that they
were far from being in earnest in their Glosses, for they still allege that
there behoved to be a Bishop above these Bishops in Philippi whom Paul salutes,
because there might not be Plurality of Bishops in one City. This Practice
indeed was for the most part current in this time, though not universal, as we
learn from De heresi Miletiana.
Epiphanius, informing us that even in these times there used to be a Plurality
of Bishops in one City. Yet quite contrary to this Text which they either
carelessly or timourously shuffl'd. They judged (says Dr. Stillingfleet Iren.
Page 317.
) the Practice of the Apostles by that of their own times; as is evident by
Theodoret and the rest of the Greek Commentators, assigning that as the reason
why the Presbyters spoken of in the Epistles to Timothy and Titus, were not
Bishops in the sense of their Age, because their could be but one Bishop in a
City. And Petavius apud Wall. Mess. page 6. and 114.
grants that many true Bishops were sometimes at once in one City. And Apud
Salmas. apparat. ad libros de primatu. Page 23.
although the Episcopal Order be of Divine Right, yet at's not of Divine Right
that there should be only one Bishop in one City, this was only brought in by
the Authority of the Church and Councils, and accordingly Hierome and Ambrose
are to be understood. By what Law (says Episcopacy asserted. Page 132.
J. Tailor) speaking of Philippi and that not as a Metropolis) may there not be
more Bishops than one in a proper sense in one Diocese? Where it is not
unpleasant to hear so great a Prelatist by one Interrogation overthrowing the
whole Episcopal Cause, and propugning the main Plea of the Presbyterians viz.
that in Philippi alone there were many who had not only the power of dispensing
the Word and Sacraments, but also of Ordination and Jurisdiction, and were
every way Bishops in a proper sense. Thirdly, Some of these Expositors proclaim
what we allege for (...), -- etc.
OEcumenius who, like the rest intimats, as if in Philippi there had been a
Bishop superior to the plurality of Bishops saluted by the Apostle. Yet on Acts
20. and 17. gives this Paraphrase. Because many are ignorant of the Manner
especially of the New Testament, whereby Bishops are called Presbyters and
Presbyters Bishops. This much may be observed both from this place and from the
Epistle to Titus and to the Philippians, and 1. to Timothy. From this place
therefore of the Acts we may arrive at the certainty of this Matter. For thus
it is written, from Miletus he sent and called the Elders of the Church, it is
not said the Bishops. And afterward he subjoins, over which the Holy Ghost
has made you Bishops to Feed or Rule the Church: and from the Epistle to
Titus, that thou might appoint Elders in every City, as I ordained thee: and
from the Epistle to the Philippians, to all that are at Philippi with Bishops
and Deacons: and, as I believe, the same may be gathered from the frist to
Timothy: If any Man (says he) desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a
good Work; a Bishop therefore should be blameless. And shortly after, let not a
Widow be taken into the number under threescore years (which the Transcriber of
OEcumenius has out of negligence inserted from the 5. Chap. and 9. ver. in
stead of the 8. verse of the 3. Likewise let the Deacons be grave etc.) For
this is the Church Canon directing what manner of Man such an one viz. the
Deacon ought to be. Thus far OEcumenius, and not a word more to this purpose,
where, having really proposed the now much tossed Question, mustres up four of
the chief Places from which the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter is commonly
inferred, and directs us to learn the Solution of this Doubt therefrom. Hence
it is certain that OEcumenius, no less than Hierome and Aerius of old, and
Presbyterians now, believed the Scriptural Identity of Bishop and Presbyter,
seeing, he having brought up these Scriptures, which, even in the Judgment of
our Adversaries, creat to the Hierarchicks a vexatious Scruple, and pungent
Objection, is so far from glossing them, as thereby to leave any room for a
Diocesan Bishop, that he plainly informs us, that these Scriptures only suffice
to dissolve all our Scruples and period the Dispute. It Is evident then that
OEcumenius, commenting on Philip. 1. 1. or wherever he seems to say nothing
against a superiority of Diocesans, spoke only out of compliance with the
Custom of his time, or some such weakness. Neither is the matter less clear of
Theodoret, who, although he ascribes an Episcopal Dispensation over the
Philippians to Epaphroditus, yet even then he looks on him as no ordinary or
fixed Officer, which is really yielded by Petavius Apud Wall. Mess. Page 80.
and is plain from Theodoret himself In priorem Ep. ad Tim. Cap. 3.
The Apostle (says he) calls a Presbyter a Bishop, as we showed when we
expon'd the Epistle to the Philippians. Which may be also learned from this
Place. For after the Precepts proper to Bishops, he describes the things that
agree to Deacons, omitting the Presbyters. But, as I said, of old they called
the same Men both Bishops and Presbyters, but these who are now called Bishops
they then called Apostles: But afterward the name of Apostle was left to the
real Apostles: And the name Bishop given to these that were of old called
Apostles. Thus Epaphroditus was the Apostle of the Philippians -- Thus was
Titus the Apostle of the Cretians, Timothy of the Asians, Thus the Apostles and
Presbyters at Jerusalem write to the Antiochians. And on 1 Cor. 12. 28. --
first Apostles -- The Apostle says not God has sent only Twelve Apostles but
also the Seventy. And these who also received the like Grace. For Paul himself
after his Calling was of the same Order, and Barnabas and many others. And
again he calls Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians. Where it is clear as
the Sun, that Theodoret, by these his Bishops or Apostles, understands only the
real Apostles themselves together with Timothy and Titus and other such
Evangelists and extraordinary Officers, who never had any fixed Station. And
this was well perceived by the Jesuit Medina, who therefore really yields
Theodoret with Hierome, Aerius, Augustine etc. to the Presbyterians, and warmly
recented by Petavius, who, besides many other places, spends at once near a De
Hierarchia Ecclesiastica. Lib. 2. Cap. 1.
whole Chapter to prove Theodoret a self repugnant blunderer. Hence it is clear
that they cannot rent Theodoret from us, until ( Tullus-like) they first rent
him from himself. Wherever therefore these Ancients so spoke as that they
seemed not to oppose the Divine Right of Episcopacy; it is clear they did so out
of carelessness, or unwarrantable Compliance, but mostly, as may be gathered
from the handling Aerius met with, out of fear least they had derived on their
Heads the hate of much of the then degenerating Church, and secularizing Clergy.

Section VIII.
More clear Testimonies of the primitive Doctors against the Divine Right of
Diocesan Episcopacy, and for the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter produced and
vindicated.
THE Bishop (says Ambrose In Epist. ad Ephesians. Cap. 4.
or rather Hilary, the ancientest Commentator save some Fragments of Origin,
now extant) because he opens the hidden sense of the Scriptures, is said to.
Prophecy, chiefly because he dispenses the words of future hope. Behold the
very Idea the Ancients still retained of a Bishop, and yet it is nothing but the
real Notion of every true Pastor or Dispenser of the Word and Sacraments. Which
Order may now be that of the Presbyters. For in the Bishop are all Orders; for
he is the first Priest that is the Prince of Priests, and Prophet, and
Evangelist. And whatsoever else is for fullfilling the Office of the Church and
Service of the Faithful. And, The Apostle calls Timothy a Presbyter whom he
had instituted a Bishop, for the first Presbyters were called Bishops; so that
one Dying the next succeeded. And lastly, in Egypt the Presbyters ordain in
the Bishop's absence; where we see what he means by the Prince of Priests, and
that with him a Bishop was nothing but the first either in Age or in respect of
Ordination amongst the College of Presbyters without any other Pre-eminence or
Power over the rest but what these respects gave them. Which, I Am sure, exceeds
not the Dignity of a Moderator of a Synod or Presbyter. But because the
following Presbyters were not found worthy of the first place this way was
changed by a Council that none by his being first in order, but by his desert
might be made a Bishop, and that by the Votes of many Priests, least an
unworthy Man should rashly usurp the Office to the offense of many. There were
born Priests under the Law of the Race of Aaron the Levite, but now all are
Priests according to the Apostle Peter; and therefore Priests may be chosen out
of the People. And on 1 to Timothy 3. But after the Bishop he straight way
subjoins the Ordination of a Deacon, and why? But because of Bishop and
Presbyter there is but one Ordination for both of them are Priests, but the
Bishop is first, so that every Bishop is a Presbyter not every Presbyter a
Bishop, for he is the Bishop who is first among the Presbyters. Finally the
Apostle shows that Timothy was ordained a Presbyter, but because he had no
other Presbyter before him he was a Bishop. And from thence he shows how
Timothy can Ordain a Bishop for 'twas not lawful for the Inferior to Ordain a
Superior.

. 2. Hence appears the perverseness of Bellarmine De Clericis. C^p. 15.
affirming that Hilary says only there was no need of a new Election, but
denies not (says he) the necessity of a Consecration or Episcopal Ordination.
A flat Contradiction of Hilary's express saying that there is but one Ordination
of both Bishop and Presbyter, and that even Timothy was of no higher Order than
that of a Presbyter, whose whole primacy consisted in his mere being the first
Presbyter in respect of age or time of his Ordination as Hilary has taught us:
And so, as he does also all-along through the forecited Passages, explains fully
his calling the Bishop Prince of Priests, which the Cardinal also objects, and
shows that thereby we are to understand only such a Dignity as either mere
priority of Ordination or Seniority yields. Thus Hierome also understands this
Title, who Catal. Scriptor.
calls Peter Prince of the Apostles, and yet asserts Tom. 2. Fol. 12. -- Aetati
delatum est quia Petrus senior erat.
that any Priority Peter had was given to his Age only, which in that very
place he makes as good as nothing. Informing us that the Church was equally
founded on all the Apostles, and that the rest no less than Peter received the
Keys. Take but another place of Hilary, By Angels ( says he In 1. ad Cor. 11.
10.
the Apostle means the Bishops as we learn in the Revelation of John, who being
Men are challenged for not reproving the people, or commended for their Virtues
-- And because Sin entered by the Woman she ought to have this token that in the
Church, for the reverence to the Bishop, her head ought not to be free but
covered with a vail; and she has not power to speak because the Bishop
represents Christ's person; she ought therefore because of the Original of
Transgression appear subject before the Bishop as before the Judge because he
is the Lord's Vicegerent. Here we see that, according to Hilary, there was a
Bishop over every Congregation, and in every place of public Worship
frequented by Men and Women, and that the Apocalyptick Angels were only such
Congregational Pastors. From which we may well gather that when any in these
early times had the name Bishop more peculiarly given them, yet the Primacy
could be but only of Order, and nominal which is fitly illustrated by the
Athenian Archons.

Petavius therefore De Hierarchia Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 12.
to shield his Cause from so deadly blows, does his outmost to discredit these
Commentaries, and make their Author some obscure fellow: and to prove they
belong not to Hilary the Luciferian, he brings two passages thereof that show
their Author to have been of the Roman Communion which Hilary deserted. But
might he not have been of that Communion when he wrote the commentaries, and
yet deserted it afterward? This the Jesuit attempts not to disprove. But
whosoever this Author was, or by whatsoever name known, neither are we hurt nor
the Hierarchicks helped thereby; his Authority is unquestionably great, being
cited by the Councils of Paris and Ayx Apud Blondellum.
no mean Conventicles under the name of Ambrose: afterward the learned, as
Bellarmine De scrip. Eccles.
and the Divines of Lovain In Scholis ad Cap. 4. Lib. 4. Augustini contra duas
Epistolas Pelagiani.
gave these Commentaries to Hilarie a Roman Deacon and stout Opposer of the
Arrians; the Foundation of which Opinion is strong: For Augustine oftener than
once attributes these Commentaries to Hilarie.

And it is likely that Petavius knew that the Authority of this Writer was not
to be shaken with all his Cavills, but only at that time he had found nothing
else to say, wherefore he afterward In appendice ad Hierarchiam. Lib. 2. Cap.
1.
excogitats more Quibbles to darken and deprave this Author; and chiefly
strives to make Hilary speak nothing for the Right of Seniority, and against
the Election of a Successor to any deceasing Bishop. He says therefore that
when Hilary tells us, that one dying, the next or following succeeded, we must
not understand it in respect of Years or Ordination, but any of 'em indefinitly
taken, who was notwithstanding afterward to be elected by the Clergy, but all
the Presbyters in time becoming unworthie of the Episcopal Honor the Method
was altered, and another not out of the College of Presbyters, but out of some
other Order according to their desert was admitted unto that Office. To support
which Gloss, he brings Hierome's saying that the Presbyters of Alexandria named
one elected from among themselves, Bishop, as if Hierome were not speaking of
Alexandria alone, and to instance therein, that Prelacy came not soon to any
growth; or as if Hierome and Hilary could not agree in its being of humane
Original, and yet differ in the circumstances of its rise. The rest of his
prolix Discourse on this Theme is only a train of mere Cavills and Clouds too
thin and airy to feed a very Chamaeleon, all which are quite dissolved and
disappear if we but look into one small parcel of Hilary's words, where he
tells us that after the Method was altered then the Bishop whose desert raised
him was constitute by the Judgment or Votes of many Priests or Presbyters: For
this Clause being of design inserted by Hilarie to show the Opposition between
the latter and the former Method of coming to the Primacy, proclaims that as
after the Change, Suffrages and Election were used, so before this Change,
there had been no such Custom. With this the Jesuit darrs not engage nor with
Hilary's making the Ordination of both Bishop and Presbyter, the same, his
making Timothy only a Presbyter, his placing all the Essence or Constitutive of
a Bishop in being the first Presbyter of the College, his giving a Bishop to
every Congregation, etc. These I say, he never adventures once in the least to
handle; wherefore surely he was conscious to himself that he spent both Pains
and Brains for the sole production of a bulkish nothing.

3. To Hilary I add Chrysostom (which Theoplylact his real Epitomator
transcribes) After (says he In prior. Epist. ad Tim. homilia 11ma, (...) etc.
the Apostle had discoursed concerning the Bishops, and described them,
declaring what they ought to have, and from what they ought to abstain;
omitting the order of Presbyters he descends to the Deacons; and why so? But
because between Bishop and Presbyter in a manner there is no difference, seeing
that also to the Presbyters the Care or Government the Church is committed, and
whatsoever he said of Bishops agrees also to the Presbyters, in Ordination
alone they are Superior, and they seem to have this only more than the
others. Where he clearly overthrows all their Distinction between Bishop and
Presbyter; notwithstanding that to some he may seem to give the Power of
Ordination to Bishops above Presbyters. For First, The words are most capable
of another Translation. Thus only in the Matter of Ordination they have got up
or set themselves above them. Secondly, Of the Power of Ordination, it is being
proper to Bishops, he speaks most doubtfully (...) they seem etc. (says he).
Thirdly, Had he believed that the Power of Ordination by Divine Right belonged
to Bishops above Presbyters, he had never said that there is notwithstanding in
a manner nothing between them: surely Epiphanius thought the Power of
Ordination made a most large and notable Difference. Once again I shall with
our Adversaries suppose that Chrysostom allows that Power of Ordination by
Divine Appointment was appropriated to Bishops they cannot with reason deny,
but that, in all other things to a hair, he asserts the Equality, yea the
Identity of Presbyters with Bishops. Now will they stand to Chrysostom herein?
Surely they will not; for thus they should be obliged to let go all the
Prerogatives and Privileges Bishops both claim and exerce over their Pastors,
all their Power Paramount of Governing the Church and her Pastors, all their
exorbitant Wealth, Grandeur, Pomp, and Splendour, and, in a word, whatsoever
renders to them the Hierarchy amiable or desirable, and so should be really
reduced to the condition of an ordinary Parish-pastor. And were things so,
little, I Am sure, would they care or stickel for upholding of any Distinction
between these Officers: hence let them blush any more to pretend to
Chrysostom's Patrociny: seeing all they can, with the least color plead for,
being given, not granted, he really subverts their Cause, and levells their
Diocesan Prelat with a parochial Pastor.

. 4. Bellarmine De Clericis. Cap. 15. 10.
Answers that Chrysostom and others, while they say that only in Ordination a
Bishop is above a Presbyter, speak only of such things which no way agree to
Presbyters for Jurisdiction and Confirmation may be performed by Presbyters by
virtue of Commission from the Bishop. But thus he really makes Chrysostom
contradict himself: Chrysostom said they differed nothing save in Ordination;
Bellarmine compells him to say that they have another Difference no less
conspicuous than is between the King and his Commissioner, who can do many
regal Acts, being warranted by him thereto. Does such a Power lodged in the
Bishop, which agrees to none of the Presbyters, make no Distinction between him
and them? Or rather, does it not make up the far greater and more conspicuous
part of the prelatical Eminency above the rest of the Clergy? Add hereto
Chrysostom's Books of the Priesthood, wherein, although he expressly professes
he was to treat of the Office of a Bishop, yet in these Books there is nothing
but what concerns a congregational Pastor, nothing but what concerns public
prayer, dispensing of the Word and Sacraments, and such Duties that terminat on
the People alone, but not a word of the Duties of the Bishop or Prelat over
inferior congregational Pastors as their Object which is a sure Demonstration
that, with Chrysostom, Bishop, Priest, and Pastor were Synonymous Terms.

. 5. To these add Pelagius a grand Heretic indeed, but never branded as such
for ought he said of Church Government, who In Romans 12.
restricts all Church Officers to Priest and Deacon. And In 1 Cor. 1.
asserts that Priest without any Discrimination or Restriction are the
Successors of the Apostles. And In Philip. 1. 1.
Here (says he) by Bishops we understand Presbyters for there could not have
been more Bishops in one City: but we have this Matter also in the Acts of the
Apostles Where it is clear that Pelagius, although, in conformity to the
introduced Custom of distinguishing Bishops from preaching Presbyters, he
endeavored accordingly to expone this place with as little damage thereto as
is possible, deduceth nothwithstanding the Ground of the Difference between
Bishop and Presbyter from the Churches latter Custom of having but one Bishop
in one City, and not from any Scripture-Warrant, and indeed when he brings to
clear his Comment the 20. of the Acts 17. and 28. he plainly intimats that even
when he and others of that Age seem most clearly to hold forth a Difference
betwixt Bishop and preaching Presbyter, they then believed no such thing to
flow from Divine Institution.

And In 1 Timothy 3.
There is a Question (says he) why the Apostle made no mention of Presbyters
but comprehended them under the Name of Bishops, because, (answers he) this is
the second, yea, in a manner, the very same Degree with that of Bishops, as the
Apostle writes in the Epistle to the Philippians; To the Bishops and Deacons:
when yet one City cannot have more Bishops than one: and, in the Acts of the
Apostles, Paul being to go to Jerusalem and having gathered the Elders of the
Church, says, among other things, take heed to the Flock over which the Holy
Ghost has made you Bishops. Hence it is most evident that he believed both
Offices to be, by Scripture-Warrant, one and the same, and not a mere
Communication of Names only. But the thing most observable here, is, that to
prove the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, he brings Philip. 1. and hereby
shows us, that some of the Ancients, from whose accustomed Phrases he departed
not while he exponed it, when they seem to infer from that place, only a
Community of Names, did really believe no such thing, but were persuaded that
Philip. 1. 1. quite overthrows all Distinction betwixt Bishop and preaching
Presbyter. And Sedulius In Tit. 1.
asserts and proves the Identity of Bishops and Presbyters, and concludes from
the Example of the Ephesian Elders or Bishops, that there were many Bishops in
one City, contrary to the Practice of his Age; and that, among the Ancients,
Bishop and Presbyter was one and the same. And Primasius In 1 Timothy 3.
proposes the Question, why the Apostle comes to the Deacons without any
mention of the Presbyters? And Answers in the very words of Pelagius. Thus it is
clear, even these whom the Hierarchicks take for the prime Pillars of Prelacy
being Judges, that there is no Divine Warrant for Diocesan Episcopacy, and that
a Bishop and Presbyter in Scripture in Apostolic times are one and the same.

For (says Epist. 19. 2d Hieronymum.
Augustine, (with whom I begin, though Younger than Hierome, being longer to
insist on the other) though according to these Names of Honor which the Custom
of the Church has now brought in fashion the Office of a Bishop be greater
than that of a Presbyter, yet in many things Augustine is below Hierome; where
we see that the whole Difference was in Expression rather than reality, and
that even that was only by Custom not by Divine Appointment. These words (has
now brought in fashion (answers Bellarmine De Clericis. Cap. 15.
are not opposed to the ancient time of the Church, but to the time before the
Christian Church, so that the sense is, before the times of the Christian
Church these Names Bishop and Presbyter were not Titles of Honor but of Office
and Age, but now they are Names of Honor and Dignity. D. M. follows his Master
Bellarmine in this wretch'd Detortion, Page 81. and seq.
and adds that this was but a mannerly Complement to Augustine. A piece of
immodesty proper to D. M. not arrived at by the Jesuit; Augustine then was
only some frenchisi'd Spark that intended not to speak as he thought: but I
reply with Junius Tom. 2. Col. 1214.
that this their Answer is clean contrary to Augustine' s mind and intention;
for he was not so mad as to compare things so hetrogeneous as were the Rites
and Customs of the Gentiles, and these of the Church: if it be said that he
spoke of the Church of the Jews, where, pray, is there any mention of Bishops
in all the Old Testament, and History of the Jewish Church. I add that if this
had been Augustine's meaning, he had too much drepress'd, and in too unworthy
Terms expressed Christ's Institution to busk a Complement for Hierome. But
Augustine, says D. M. reasons from the Succession of Bishops. This Romish
Cavil is a 1000 times baffled, and by none more sufficiently than by Dr.
Stillingfleet Irenicum. Page 300. and seq.
who shows that from such Reasonings of the Fathers, and their mentioning of
Successions of Bishops, it can never be proved that Bishops were of a higher
Order, or had any other Power over Presbyters, nor that in all places there was
so much as any Difference at all between them, nor that they mean'd ought save
a Succession of Doctrine, and that no less is said of Presbyters.

Lastly, Bishop Jewel Defens. apolog. Pages 122, 123.
advances this very passage of Augustine, and thereby proves the Identity of
Bishop and Priest or Presbyter. And he thus Englishes Augustine's words, The
Office of a Bishop is above the Office of a Priest, not by Authority of the
Scriptures, but after the Names of Honor, which the Custom of the Church has
now obtained.

. 7. Let us ( says Hierome In Epist. ad Titum.
attend diligently to the words of the Apostle saying that thou should
Ordain Elders in every City as I appointed thee, and what kind of Presbyter
ought to be ordained, he declares in the following Discourse; If any (says he)
be blameless, the Husband of one Wife etc. and after, he Inferrs, For a Bishop
must be blameless as the Steward of God; Therefore both Bishop and Presbyter is
one and the same. And before that by Sathan's instigation there were Divisions
about Religion, and it was said in the Churches, I am of Paul, I of Apollo, and
I of Cephas, the Church was governed by a common Council of Presbyters: But
after that whomsoever any had baptized were by them counted their own, not
Christ's, it was Decreed through the whole World that one, Chosen out of the
Presbyters, should be set over the rest to whom all care of the Church should
belong, and the Seeds of Division be removed. But you may think that this is
our Mind and not the Mind of the Scriptures that a Bishop and a Presbyter is
one and the same thing, and that the one is a Name of Age, and the other of
Office. Let them read over the words of the Apostle to the Philippians, where,
as Hierome professedly asserts the Presbyterian Thesis, so he clearly proves it
by the Presbyterian Arguments. And I would fain learn wherein, as touching the
Scriptural Identity of Bishop and Presbyter, he differed from Aerius. They
differed as much (answers Bellarmine De Clericis. Lib. 1. Cap. 15.
as Heaven and Hell. For Hierome still held that a Bishop was greater than a
Presbyter as to the point of Ordination, and that doubtless by Divine Right.
Bellarmine is herein followed only by some of the more impudent of his Brethren
as Bailey the Jesuit and Petavius; and last of all appears their perpetual
shadow D. M. Page 65. and seq.
with whom Hierome is a grand Asserter of the Episcopal Hierarchy, and Aerius a
grand Heretic. But Junius Col. 1212.
answers to both the Jesuits and their Genuine Issue, that Hierome, when he
said, what does the Bishop except Ordination which a Presbyter does not?
understood it only of his oun time. But Bellarmine (says Junius) confounds the
time (as does D. M.) that he more easily may deceive the Simple. We have heard
already that many of the greatest Lights of the Church of England, yea, and of
the Romanists, have exploded this shameful and Jesuitical Attempt of making
Hierome for the Divine Right of Prelacy, or for any Difference between Bishop
and Presbyter. To which add Dr. Stillingfleet. For (says he Irenicum. Page 276.
as to the Matter it self, I believe upon the strickest Enquiry, Medina' s
Judgment will prove true that Hierome, Austine, Ambrose, Sedulius, Primasius,
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophylact, were all of Aerius' s Judgment as to the
Identity of both Name and Order of Bishops and Presbyters in the primitive
Church etc. Of what Church then shall we count D. M. and his Brethren who only
scrape together these most dishonest and a thousand times baffled depravations
and perversions of the Jesuits, and being plumed with the feathers of so
unlucky Birds, can appear without any more shame and blushing than as if they
were the innocent penns of a Dove? But Hierome (subjoins Bellarmine, who is
transcribed by D. M.) acknowledges that the Difference between Bishop and
Presbyter, as also the Princely Prerogatives of Bishops, was introduced by the
very Apostles, when 'twas said, I am of Paul etc. But it is answered by Junius
Tom. 2. Col. 1213.
that the former of these can never be proved from Hierome, and the latter
Hierome denies, while he says, when these whom any baptized were counted their
own etc. Where [saith Junius] Hierome shows that 'twas not when this Evil was
at Corinth only, but when 'twas spread through the whole Churches: And the latter
of these [continues Junius] Paul denies while he reproves this Evil in the
Corinthians, and yet neither in the first nor in the second Epistle makes ever
the least mention of setting up a Bishop over them. They who use this Argument
(says Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. Page 280.
among many other Answers far better than ever such a Cavil deserved) are
greater Strangers to St. Hierome' s Language then they would seem to be, whose
Custom it is, upon incidental Occasions to accommodat the Phrase and Language
of Scripture to them as when he speaks of Chrysostome' s Fall, cecidit Babylon,
cecidit, of the Bishops of Palestine, multi utroque claudicant pede -- All
which Instances (says the Doctor) are produced by Blondel, but have the good
fortune to be passed over without being taken nottice of. And now judge whether
there was more Ignorance or Impudence in D. M's following Query Page 159.
Whether the Opinion of St. Hierome be not disingenuously represented by the
Presbyterians, since he never acknowledged nor affirmed any intervall after the
Death of the Apostles, in which Ecclesiastical Affairs were governed communi
Presbyterorum consilio? Bellarmine objects also (as does his Epe D. M.) that
Hierome says James was made Bishop of Jerusalem, presently after the Death of
our Savior. But both are repelled by Iunius Col. 1213.
who shows that the common reading of that place of Hierome' s Catalogue is
corrupted. And Answers that James was only left while the Apostles went through
the World for the Commodity of that Church, and was never absolutely ordained a
Bishop by the Apostles, for James himself was an Apostle. Of the same Mind is
Salmasius, that James resided not at Jerusalem as one of their Hierarchick
Bishops, but as an Apostle Vide inter alia Wall. Mess. Page 45. Et seq. and Page
193. Et seq.
And yet D. M. Page 138.
is not ashamed to tell his Reader, as the Concession of Salmasius, that we
have a Diocesan Bishop established in the person of St. James the Just, in the
City of Jerusalem. Now that Hierome understood James's Episcopacy in the sense
given by Junius and Salmasius against the Jesuits, is most apparent especially
if we consider how the Ancients used to speak of the Apostles and Apostolic
extraordinary Church Officers in the Style of their own times, and how positive
Hierome was for the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter during the Apostolic age
and first primitive Church.

Add hereto that Hierome (as he shows in his Preamble to Dexter) was altogether
uncertain of much of what he wrote in his Catalogue of Writers, which is yet
more clear from his account of Paul, for the writes that he was a Native of
Gischalis, and during the Wars between the Jews and Romans sted with his
Parents to Tarsus when Gischalis was taken. Which, I Am sure, Hierome, a Man so
well acquaint with the Affairs of the Jews, who had no Wars with the Romans for
many years after the time wherein the Fabler, whom Hierome transcribes,
supposed these Wars to have been commens'd, and Gischalis taken, could never
believe; but only, because he could light on no better, transcribed things as
he found 'em. Which removes, though no more could be said, D. M's Objection from
Hierome's mentioning of Ignatius his Epistles, whereon D. M. with no small
Ostentation insists. He follows also Bellarmine objecting that Hierome makes
Bishops the Apostles Successors. But Junius Replies that Hierome denies not
this to be also the privilege of Presbyters. It Is also objected by Dr. Pearson
Vind. St. Ignat. Part 1. Pages 191, 192.
that Hierome, in his Epistle to Heliodorus, speaks of the Deacons as the third
Order. And seeing this, of all the passages of Hierome produced by the Papists
to involve him in self-repugnancy, is most plausible, take it at full length.
If a Man (says Hierome Epist. ad Heliodorum.
desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good Work: These things we know;
but add what follows, A Bishop then must be blameless etc. and having expressed
the rest of the things which there follow concerning a Bishop, the Apostle uses
no less diligence in setting forth the Duties of the third Degree, saying,
Likewise let the Deacons be grave etc. But passing that he was scarce more than
a Child when he wrote that Epistle, and wrote clearly for the Identity of
Bishop and Presbyter in his riper years, it is certain he pretends no Divine
Warrant for this Tripartition. Yea from the very words they would now detort,
it is most evident that though Hierome, following the Custom of his Age, mentions
a third Degree, he notwithstanding takes both Paul's Bishop and Presbyter for
one and the same thing. Moreover in this same Epistle Hierome makes all who had
the Power of Dispensing the Sacraments, Successor, to the Apostles Absit ut de
his quicquam sinistrum loquar: qui Apostolico gradui succedentes, Christi
corpus sacro ore conficiunt: per quos and nos Christiani sumus etc.
. which the Jesuits and their Supporters appropriat to Bishops: hence they are
baffled with the very places of Hierome they endeavor to abuse.

. 7. But I return to Hierome, Philippi, continues he, is a single Town of
Macedonia, and truly in one City there could not be (called are they as) more
Bishops. But because at that time they called the same Men both Bishops and
Presbyters, therefore he spoke indifferently concerning both Bishops and
Presbyters. From these words (says Petavius Appendice ad Hierarchiam Lib. 2.
Cap. 5.
It can be evidently demonstrated that Hierome believed that Bishops and
Presbyters were not one and the same Order, yea even in the Age of the
Apostles: For had he so believed he had never said that there could not be a
plurality of Bishops in one City, when surely there was a plurality of
Presbyters. As if Jerome's whole discourse, scope, and conclusion, were not
directly opposite to what the Jesuit impudently fathers on him, who in the
words Petavius abuses, only meets with some Wranglers as he elsewere terms
them, who, to elude the proof Jerome brought for the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, from Philippians 1. and 1. absurdly contended that in the City of
Philippi alone there were a multitude of Bishops distinguish,d from, and
superior to other Pastors. But yet this may seem doubtful (continous Jerome)
to some except it be confirmed by another Testimony. It is written in the Acts
of the Apostles that when the Apostle was come to Miletum he sent to Ephesus
and called for the Elders of that Church, to whom, amongst other things, he
said, take heed to your selves and to the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has
made you Bishops to feed the Church of Christ. -- And observe this diligently
how the Apostle calling the Elders of Ephesus, which was but one City
afterward names them Bishops, if any receive the Epistle which under Paul's
Name is written to the Hebrews, there also the care of the Church is equally
divided amongst a plurality. For he writes to the People, Obey your Governors
and be subject to them, for they watch -- And Peter, who received his Name from
the strength of his Faith, says in his Epistle, The Elders which are among you
I exhort who am also an Elder -- We have enlarged on these things that we might
show that among the Ancients Bishops were all one with Presbyters. Hierome then
never, as Petavius and his Followers impudently pretend, thought that there had
happened no alteration, or that Bishops bore greater bulk in his time than they
had done in the Age of the Apostles) but by little and little to the end the
seeds of Schism might be removed, the whole care was devolved upon one;
wherefore as the Presbyters know that by the Custom of the Church they are
subject to their prefect, so let Bishops know that rather by Custom than by
the Truth of Christ's Institution they are greater than Presbyters, and ought
to Rule the Church in common with them, imitating Moses who, when he alone had
Power to Rule the Israelites, chused other Seventy with whom he might judge the
People. Here (say they) is a proof of Superiority of Bishops by Divine Right,
but they should remember that Hierome here undertook to prove the quite
contrary. And it is most injust to fish and search for self-contradictions in
any Author when with ease he may be understood otherways as the Matter is here.
Hierome is arguing a majori ad minus, from Moses his Practice who, though he had
sole Authority by Divine Right, yet shared it with others, to that which ought
to have been done by the Bishops of his time whom only Church Custom not
Christ's Appointment had raised over other Pastors. And indeed they might on
equal grounds infer from John 13. 14. If I then your Lord and Master have
washed your Feet, ye onght also to Wash one another Feet, that every Apostle
yea and every Believer is Lord and Master of the rest.

. 8. And writing to Euagrius I hear (says Hierome) there is one so mad as to
prefer the Deacons to the Presbyters that is to the Bishops. For seeing the
Apostle clearly teaches that Bishops and Presbyters are one and the same, how
can a Server of Tables and Widows, proudly prefer himself to these at whose
Prayers the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood is consecrated: you will
require a Proof, hear a Testimony, Paul and Timothy to all the Saints in
Philippi with the Bishops and Deacons; would you have another Example in the
Acts of of the Apostles, Paul thus speaks to the Presbyters of one Church, Take
heed to your Selves and the whole Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you
Bishops to Rule the Church, etc. And that none may contentiously plead that in
one City there were many Bishops, here also another Testimony wherein it is most
evidently proved that both Presbyter and Bishop were one and the same, and then
produces the 1 to Titus, and 1 to Timothy 4. 8. 14. neglect not -- with the
laying on of the Hands of the Presbytry. And 1 Peter 4 and 1. 2 John 1. 3 John
1. And all these to prove that he had undertaken viz that both Bishop and
Presbyter were one and the same. Now it is most observable that that he inferrs
this Conclusion not only from Scriptures written long after the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, where it is said, I am of Paul etc. but even from the last
Epistle of John the longest Liver of all the Apostles. And therefore no less
notticeable is D. M's extreme stubborness and aversion from Truth, who would
force Hierome to introduce Bishops presently after that Schism mentioned 1 Cor.
1. And accordingly, as his bad Cause obliged him to do with this and the rest
of Hierome's Testimonies, wholly smuther'd it. And indeed all hitherto who have
adventured to graple therewith have been conquered thereby, yea even Bellarmine
himself is compelled to give up the Cause. Hierome endeavors, (says the
Jesuit De Clericis. Cap. 15.
) to conclude the equality of Bishops and Presbyters from the Epistle to Titus,
to the Philippians, and from the Epistles of Peter and John which were written
after the first Epistle to the Corinthians. Neither can the Jesuit find
another way to be even with Hierome, but by arraigning him as fraughted with
self-repugnancy, levity, and instability in this Matter; and all the Arguments
he brings to prove Hierome a Favourer of Episcopacy are only so many fruitless
Attempts to make that appear.

But let us go on with Hierome. But (says he) the reason why after this (viz.
the writing of both the Epistles of John) one was chosen and set over the rest,
was that there might be a remedy of Schism, least every one, drawing the Church
of Christ to himself, should divide it. For in Alexandria from Mark the
Evangelist even to Heraclas and Dionysius the Presbyters still gave to one
elected from amongst themselves, and placed in a higher seat, the Name of
Bishop, as if an Army should creat a General, or the Deacons should choose one
of themselves whom they know to be industrious and name him Archdeacon. On
these words D. M. triumphs, The Custom was (says he) even from the days of
St. Mark the Evangelist that a Presbyter was chosen who Governed the whole
Society: this in the Opinion of St. Hierome cuts off that imaginary Interval,
wherein the Chruch is said to have been Governed by a Parity of Presbyters.
Where he forgeth a Gloss no way contained in the words of Hierome, whose
Example of an Army and Deacons are only adduc'd to show the manner of that
Presbyter or nominat'd Bishop's entrance, and not at all the measure of his
Power over his Colleagues. And that no Power over the rest can be collected from
this place is beyond Scruple clear from Hierome's present Scope, who introduces
this Ancient Alexandrian Practice to clear and prove the Identity of Bishop and
Presbyter, which, according to him, remained in the Church for a while after
the Writings of John, the longest Liver of all the Apostles. Had D. M. perused
Dr. Stillingfleet Irenicum. Pages 273, and 274.
he had taught him that both Election and Ordination of this Alexandrian Bishop
was only performed by his Fellow Presbyters, and that the Original of Hierome'
s exsors potestas, any Power he mentions in Bishops over Presbyters, is by
Hierome attributed not to any Episcopal Institution but to the free choice of
the Presbyters themselves: for what does a Bishop (continues Hierome) except
Ordination, which a Presbyter may not do. Here the Jesuits and their Follower
D. M. dream they find a fine Distinction made by Hierome between Bishop and
Presbyter: but first they must make an unseasonable Antiptosis, and compel
Hierome to speak contrary to the express words of this place which are in the
present Tense, contrary to the scope and design of this Epistle, which is
professedly to show the great Dignity of Presbyters, yea even their Identity
with Bishops, and thereby to reach a sharper reproof to the petulant Deacon.
And contrary, finally, to Hierome's most clear and most frequently repeated
Doctrine of the Scriptural Identity of both Offices. Were it not madness then
to dream, with the Jesuits, that, in these words, Hierome makes any Distinction
between the Scripture- Bishop and Presbyter, who is here only asserting that in
all places ( Rome excepted, where the Presbyters were more depressed and the
Deacons more raised than in other Churches) even then in his time, a Presbyter
was allowed by the Canons and Constitutions of the Churches to do ought that a
Bishop might do, save Ordination alone. This his Design of holding forth the
most great dignity of Presbyters, yea even their equality with Bishops, which
Bellarmine acknowledges that he may the better compesce the Insolency of the
Deacons, Hierome all along this Epistle prosecutes: and having again cited the
Epistles to Timothy and Titus to prove that a Presbyter is contained in, i. e.
is one and the same with a Bishop, otherwise a Deacon is also in a Bishop; and
so Hierome had crossed his own Design by the very Argument wherewith he minded
to compass it, and, having added some other Topics to the same purpose, thus
concludes his Epistle. And that we may know that the Apostolic Traditions are
brought from the Old Testament, that which Aaron and his Sons, and the Levites
were in the Temple, the Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons claim in the Church,

Nunc animis opus Aenaeae, nunc pectore firmo.

All the Jesuits and their Accomplices will presently be about our Ears, But

Solamen nobis Soeios habuisse malorum.

Their Attaques are no less on Hierome than us, wherefore this is one of the
chief places brought by Bellarmine De Clericis. Cap. 15.
to involve Hierome in a maze of self-contradiction, and make him propugn
Prelacy, who is followed by others of the Hierarchicks but chiefly the
Jesuits: And lastly in the rear comes D. M. concluding that the Hierarchy of
the Christian Church is founded upon Apostolic Tradition, and that the
Apostles had the Model of the Temple in their view when they erected this
Platform. But Junius Col. 1213.
Answers that their Conclusion is a non sequitur. For (says he) this
comparison is not particular between each of these particular Officers under
the Old Testament, and these under the New, but in common showing, that as they
are all obliged to serve the Church of the Jews, so all the Church Officers
under the New Testament ought to serve the Christian Church. Moreover,
(continues Junius) though we should give that the Comparison were particular, yet
their Conclusion would not follow, seeing Hierome speaks only of the Church
Polity of his own time, and the Question now is about Hierome's Sentiments of
the Church Government and Polity in the Apostolic Age and first primitive
Church. And that this in Hierome's Mind was not Hierarchick but a mere Parity
of Pastors, Junius already evinced: and Dr. Stillingfleet Irenicum. Page 266.
and seq.
at more length overthrows this their Jesuitical Doctrine, and Demonstrats that
by Apostolical Tradition in Hierome only Ecclesiastic Custom of some
Antiquity is mean'd, and asserts that it is not imaginable that Jerome who had
been proving all along the Superiority of a Presbyter above a Deacon, because
of his Identity with a Bishop in the Apostles times should at the same time say
that a Bishop was above a Presbyter by the Apostles Institution, and so
directly overthrow all he had been saying before. The plain meaning (continues
Dr. Stillingfleet) then of Jerome is no more but this, that as Aaron and his
Sons in the Order of Priesthood were above the Levites under the Law: So the
Bishops and Presbyters in the Order of the Evangelical Priesthood are above the
Deacons under the Gospel. For the Comparison runs not between Aaron and his
Sons under the Law, and Bishops and Presbyters under the Gospel; but between
Aaron and his Sons, as one part of the Comparison under the Law, and the
Levites under them as the other; so under the Gospel, Bishops and Presbyters
make one part of the Comparison, answering to Aaron and his Sons in that
wherein they all agree; viz. the Order of Priesthood; and the other part under
the Gospel is that of Deacons, answering to the Levites under the Law. The
Opposition is not then in the Power of Jurisdiction between Bishops and
Priests, but between the same Power of Order, which is alike both in Bishops
and Presbyters (according to the acknowledgement of all) to the Office of
Deacons which stood in Competition with them -- Hereby we see how unhappyly
those Arguments succeed, which are brought from the Analogy between the
Aaronical Priesthood, to endeavor the setting up of a Jus Divinum of a
parallel Superiority under the Gospel. All which Arguments are taken off by
this one thing we are now upon, viz, that the Orders and Degrees under the
Gospel, were not taken up from Analogy to the Temple. -- Other passages of
Jerome they also study to abuse, but these now handled are the most specious.
But of such Allegat^ons out of Jerome, hear the same Dr. Irenicum. Page 277. Et
seq.
And among all these fifteen Testimonies produced by a learned Writer out of
Jerome for the Superiority of Bishops above Presbyters, I cannot find one that
does found it upon any Divine Right, but only upon the convenience of such an
Order for the Peace and Unity of the Church of God: But granting some passages
may have a more favorable aspect toward the Superiority of Bishops over
Presbyters in his other Writings, I would fain know whether a Man's Judgment
must be taken from occasional and accidental Passages, or from designed and set
Discourses; which is as much as to ask, whether the lively Representation of a
man by picture, may be best taken, when in have of other business he passes by
us, giving only a glance of his countenance, or when he purposely and
designedly sits in order to that end that his countenance may be truly
represented? He adds that Jerome, in his Commentaries, where he expressly
declares not his own mind, transcribes often out of others without setting down
their names etc.

. 9. Most dishonest therefore is the conduct of the Loyolites, and of others of
the Prelatists their Associats in this Matter, but above all men that of D. M.
who, beside all this his foul dealling, following Bailey the Jesuit, has scarce
adventured to lay before his Reader in ^nglish so much as one scrape or
particle of what the Reformed bring from Jerome against the Romanists and such
Hierarchick Advocats; which in D. M. is the most certain product of both
extreme Disingenuity and Diffidence But so great is the power of prejudice that
they stick not to sacrifice both their Credit, and whatsoever else they should
reckon most estimable, to such Dreams, as even most of the Church of England,
yea and of the Romanists either acted by the love of the Truth or compelled by
its Power, had condemned. We have heard how Bishop Jewel, Dr. Morton, the
Bishop of Spalato, and Dr. Stillingfleet, renounce and explode so palpable an
untruth. And Dr. Forbes Irenicum. Page 130.
is of the same Mind, yielding that Hierome is all one with Aerius in this,
that Bishops by Divine Right are not at all Superior to Presbyters. And that
these two are entirely of one and the same Mind, we have heard also granted by
the most learned of the Romanists as Alphonsus de Castro, and Medina, some
whereof acknowledge, that none could be of another Opinion concerning them. And
Benedictus Justinianus and other Romanists are of the same Mind. How then, were
all these Doctors sitting in Council to determine of this very Matter, should
they chastise and brand these most partial and disingenuous Dealers, we have
now to do with? Other Hierarchicks who would not confess so much in plain
Terms, yet sometimes discover both their disingenuity and true Sentiments so
palpably as if they had expressly made the same Confession. Dr. Pearson, though he
says nothing in his own Name, yet Vind. Ignat. Part. 2. Page 22. -- tam multa
de Presbyteratus Autoritate congerit, ut cum eam stabiliat, aeqnalem pene ipsi
Episcopali po^esta^i statuere censeatur.
acknowledges that Hierome has said so much for the Authority of Presbytry,
and endeavored so much to establish it, that he is judged to make it well nigh
equal to the Episcopal Order. And Bellarmine tells us that Hierome was self
repugnant, and knew not what he said. And Petavius, though the most pertinacious
wrangler of all the Society, grants Dog. Theol. Tom. 3. Page (mihi.) 747.
Hieronyn us -- Presbyteros suppares Episcopis facit etc.
that Hierome makes Presbyters well nigh all one with Bishops but not the very
same (says the Jesuit) or entirely their Equals being Inferior in so much as
they want the Power of Ordination. And Page 756. -- regendae Ecclesae potest
^tem externamque Gubernatianem sola consuetudine, non dispositionis Dominicae
Veritate Episcopis tribuit.
that according to Hierome's Mind mere Custom and not the Lord's Appointment
gave to the Bishops above Presbyters any Power they have either in Ruling the
Church, or external Government. And were things brought to this pass, I Am sure
they should make but small account of the sorry remainder Petavius makes Hierome
leave them, as being altogether useless for support of the Pomp and Splendour of
their Hierarchy. To these add the Jesuit Cel^otius who after a thousand
Meanders and serpentine windings to elude and deprave these clear Testimonies
of Hierome, at length, seeing all would not do, rejects them all as the
Forgeries of unlucky Aerian hands never written by Hierome. For which Cellotius
is chastised even by Petavius and others of the Loyolites themselves. Into such
Discord, Confusion and Torment do Men usually throw themselves, so soon as they
obstinatly resolve to wage War with so clear and irradiant Verities. And here
it is observable that in all times, and in all Churches, the Authority of
Hierome has been exceeding great, and above most of the primitive Writers which
came not to pass without a special Divine Providence that he, and in him the
whole primitive Church whose Judgment in these Matters he most clearly
delivers, might remain as an unsuspected and an uncontroverted witness against
some of latter Ages pretendedly Catholic but really Sectarian Novelists. Among
the great Services he did to the Church, two Pieces are more especially
notticeable viz. his most clear asserting and acurat distinguishing the
Canonical Books from the Apocryphal above all who handled or wrote of that
great and most necessary Article: and, which is the Matter in hand, his
Antiprelatick Doctrine of the Identity of Bishop and Presbyter: these not only
Hieronymian, but also truly Catholic Doctrines are with equal fierceness
impugn'd by the Romanists: and I appeal to the impartial Reader if their
Exceptions against this latter be a whit more solid than these which are
advanced against the former, viz. Hierome's Judgment of the Canonical
Scriptures which are to be found collected and learn'dly refuted by Dr. Cousin
Scholast. Hist. Of the Canon of Scripture. Page 74. Et seq.
. And indeed these Sophisters, endeavoring to subvert these Catholic
Doctrines of Hierome, dash only on an Adamantine Rock: for as never any
Articles were better founded, so, notwithstanding of whatsoever practical
Aberrations therefrom were fallen into, none were more universally embraced,
received and handed down: for to speak of the Matter of our present concern,
this Hieronymian Doctrine all following Church Writers ratify and approve; the
bulk of subsequent Commentators, Writers of Offices and of other Treatises, as
Timotheus Lib. 3.
Salvianus, Isidorus Hispalensis De Officiis. Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Et de Originibus.
Lib. 7. Cap. 12.
Amalarius Apud Blandellum. Page 80.
, Rabanus Maurus De constit. cler. Lib. 2. Cap. 6.
, yea, and entire Councils as that 2 of Sevil Can. 7.
which ascribes the whole Difference and S^periority only to Church-Canons and
late Constitutions: and after them Gratian Distinct. 60.
and Lombard Sentent. Lib. 4. Distinct. 24.
, who affirm that in the primitive Church there was only Presbyters and Deacons
and his Expositors, among whom is Aestius Comment. In locum.
who very fairly quites the Scriptures, and tells us that this Superiority is
not very clear from Scripture, which is nothing but a Confession of the Truth
of Hierome's Doctrine forced from this great Prelatist and School-man. Yet adds
Aestius, this may be sufficiently proved another way. To which words Dr.
Stillingfleet occurrs. Ingenuously said (says he Iren. page 294.
) however; but all the difficulty is, how a Jus Divinum should be proved, when
Men leave the Scriptures. But in the recounting and transcribing of such
Confessions or Testimonies, I will not enlarge. And now having rescued the
principal Scriptures, our Antagonists detort in favors of their Distinction
between Bishop and Presbyters, and vindicated some places commonly adduc'd for
the Identity thereof, as also evinced that the most celebrated of the Ancients
did no otherways understand these Scriptures, nor derive the Original of
Prelacy from Divine Institution, I may with confidence conclude that Ignatius
had none before him of the Judgment that he (if we believe the Hierarchicks)
so passionately favored.

Section IX.
The Testimonies of Ignatius's contemporaries disproving what our Adversaries
would force him to speak, and confirming what we have proved to be his mind,
viz. that he cashiers a Diocesan Prelacy.
HAving viewed the Apostolic Writings and dived into their most ancient
Commentators and primitive Doctors, and having found that in the time of the
Apostles the immediate Ancestors of Ignatius there was in the Church no such
thing as a Diocesan Prelate. Let us next look unto what remains of his
Contemporaries or these who lived near Ignatius's time, and we shall have
ground to deduce the same Inference. And first it is observable that these
Writers, such as Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the Corinthians (for the
rest that bear his Name are undoubtedly spurious) Polycarp to the Philippians,
Hermas or Pastor, Justine Martyr, though they, as occasion offers, frequently
mention Pastors, Doctors, Bishops, Presbyters, indifferently taking all of 'em
for on and the same Office, yet of a Diocesan Prelat, or one set over other
Pastors, or over these that had Power of Dispensing the Word and Sacraments, in
all their Writings have not a syllable. Which Argument against a Diocesan
Prelat, though negative, is not to be slighted if we consider these Authors their
closs Vicinity to the Apostles the occasion they had to have mentioned him had
he been then existent, their more than a Pythagorick silence concerning him.
Yea the same kind of negative Argumentation Eusebius uses, while he disproves
and explodes some Writings forged in the Name of John, Andrew, and other
Apostles Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 25.
because (says he) no ancient Ecclesiastic Writers mention these Books. We
shall find moreover that they positively disclaim Diocesan Prelacy. I begin
with Clemens Romanus, who, writing to the Corinthians, commends their former
carriage in these words, Ye walked in the commands of God, and being obedient
to these that had the rule over you, and giving your Elders due honor, ye were
wont to admonish the younger with Moderation, to seek after things that are
honest page 4.
. And again page 98.
Wherefore the Apostles, preaching the Word through the several regions, and
proving by the Spirit the first fruits thereof, ordained Bishops and Deacons
for these who should believe: neither was this a new Ordinance, for many ages
before, it was written concerning Bishops; for so in a certain place says the
Scripture, I will appoint their Bishops in Righteousness and their Deacons in
Faith. And page 102.
Our Apostles by Jesus Christ our Lord knew that there would arise Contention
concerning the Name of a Bishop, and therefore, being endew'd with a perfect
Foreknowledge, they ordained the foresaid Officers, and left unto us
described the particular services of both Ministers and Offices, to the end
that approved Men might succeed in the place of the defunct, and execute their
Office. These therefore who are ordained by them or by other famous men with
the Consent of the whole Church, who blamelesly served the Sheepfold of Christ
with humility and quietness, and without baseness, and who for a long time had
a good Testimony from all: These, I say, cannot be justly thrust out of their
Office: for we commit no light sin if we cast out these from the Bishops Office
who holyly and blamelesly performed it. Blessed are these Presbyters or Pastors
who have perfited their journey and are dead, and who have obtained a
profitable departure: for they are not afrai'd least any thrust them out of
their places into others: For we see that you have cast some from their Charge
which they performed with honor. pag^ 119, 120.
It Is base Beloved, yea very base and unworthy of a Conversation that is in
Christ Jesus, to hear that the most stable and ancient Church of Corinth, for
the sake of one or two should raise sedition against the Presbyters. And page
124.
If I be the Cause of Contention, schism and sedition, I Will depart and be gone
whithersoever ye will, and do what the People shall command, providing only
that the sheepfold of Christ, with the Presbyters appointed over it, may have
peace. And page 132.
And you therefore, who were the Authors of this Division subject your selves
to your Presbyters. Hence Observe First, that he never names, or so much as
insinuats that in Corinth there was any Bishop Superintendent over the rest of
the Pastors. But as the Apostle to the Hebrews had done before him, honors
equally all their Pastors with the Title of (...) these that bear Rule over
them.

Secondly, That, in imitation of the same Apostle Paul, he names only Bishops
and Deacons as the only Orders of Divine Institution, by whom the whole
Gospel-Service was to be performed. Therefore afterward when he names
Presbyters in distinction from the Flock and as Rulers over it, he cannot be
understood (as Petavius and Pearson would force him) to speak of Presbyters
with Relation and Respect only of their Age, but to give them this
Demonstration as a peculiar Designation of a Church-Office; and so the word
Presbyter most of necessity with Clement coincide in its meaning with the word
Bishop, and both of 'em become Synonymous Terms to hold forth but one and the
same thing.

Thirdly, That the Apostles did not, as we find afterward Decreed by the Synod
of Sardica, and admonished by Pope Leo, choose out only the greater Cities, and
neglect and forbear to place Bishops in lesser Villages, that the name of
Bishop hereby might not fall into Contempt, but indifferently and without
distinction of places every where settled them according as there was a
probability they might serve the great end of their calling therein.

Fourthly, That to found the Distinction and number of these Orders, if we
believe Clement, the Apostles had no eye unto the Jewish Church-Polity, so as
to make it a Pattern for that of the Christian, but only to what was prophesied
and foretold by the Prophets concerning a new frame of the New Testament
Church, and thus Clement really contradicts all the Patrons of the Hierarchy,
who would still found their triple Orders on that of the High Priest, Priests
and Levites of the Temple.

Fifthly, That in Corinth it was attempted to throw out a plurality of real
Bishops and cast them from their Charge, and that the Sedition was not moved
against one only but diverse Bishops in that Church. Many other things might be
observed; but these serve sufficiently to prove that there was a plurality of
true Bishops of Corinth, who were in nothing distinguished from Pastors of
particular Flocks, or preaching Presbyters.

. 2. Petavius Appendice ad Hier. Eccles. Lib. 1. Cap. 12.
notwithstanding cannot abide any such Inference from the words of Clement.
Wherefore he scrapes together several things whereby to ward off the force of
these Passages: and alleges that Clemens his silence of the Bishop of Corinth
makes nothing for us. For Pope Siricius (says he) in his Epistle to the Church
of Millain makes no mention of their Bishop, although in that mean time Ambrose
occupied the Chair. But the vast Difference between the Cases and the
Circumstances of the Churches of Corinth and Millain quite nullifies the
Jesuits Instance. The People of Millain jointly both Clergy and Laity had
thrust out Jovinian, few or none of them (for ought we hear) being prosylited
to his Doctrine: wherefore Siricius had nothing to do but show them in General
that he had excommunicated Jovinian with two or three others who had fled to
Rome for Sanctuary. So there was no special Ground or Cause why particular
mention should be made of Ambrose the Bishop, or any other, whether of the
Clergy or Laity, the whole Body thereof, for ought now known, being without any
Schism earnest enough for the expulsion of Jovinian, and only expecting what
the Bishop of Rome which they acknowledged as the first See, and whether
Jovinian had fled, would do in this Matter. Whereas, one the other hand,
Clemens writes to a Church cut in pieces with a Schism in their own Bowels,
infected with Sedition of no small part of the People against their Pastors,
broken with (as appears plain) a division of the very Pastors themselves; and
this grown to such a hight, that some of the Pastors were thrust from their
places, and driven out: now in this Case the Bishop had either the best of it;
and so the seditious part merited a severe, and special reprimand on the
account of their Opposition to, and Separation from their Bishop, and thus he
should certainly have been mentioned: or else he was the Cause of the Division;
or, at least, joined with the injurious, and therefore should have been
particularly reproved or admonished. Clement, it is true, names none: but the
influence which the good or evil Carriage the Bishop had, and could not but
have in such a Matter, had certainly obliged Clement either to mention his name
of give some signification of him, if there had been any Diocesan Bishop
existent in Corinth. Clemens speaks of several Pastors of Flocks, which I think
none will deny, intimats the diversity of their Carriage in that Business, and
gives Directions accordingly. How can it be apprehended that he should pass
over the chief Pastor, and go to the rest without so much as the least
Direction unto him, the least mention of him, yea or the least insinuation that
there was, in Corinth, any such thing. Petavius's next Attempt is on these
words of Clement, Page 98.
where he tells that the Apostles instituted Bishops and Deacons. And the
Jesuit contends, that two distinct Orders are not here mean'd, but that the
word Deacon is only explicative of the former word Bishop, and cites several
places where the word Deacon is taken in a signification of Honor, and applied
to the Apostles and Civil Magistrates: And afterward terms Salmasius
ridiculous, for saying that Clemens named only Bishops and Deacons without
mention of Presbyters. For (says the Jesuit) Presbyters are more frequently
mentioned by Clement than either Bishops or Deacons. But certainly these Orders
are again and again mentioned by Clement without adding any thereto
ordetracting therefrom; when he appears to reckon up all the Church Officers
that are of Divine Institution. And although the word Deacon be sometimes taken
for the Designation of a higher Office. Yet, as Petavius himself Appendice ad
Hierar. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 5. Siquidem Diaconus alias, idque passim, non
proprie, sed appellative sumitur: and tunc fere aliud nomen in gignendi casu
huic adjungitur etc.
else where observes, It is with the addition of such a word or phrase as
guides our Judgment, and gives us to learn that by it is not understood this
lower Order of Church Officers as Romans 13. the Magistrate is called (...) the
Minister of God. But there is no such explicative word or particle in Clement
to alter the common Signification thereof, on which account we are not lightly
to resile therefrom. But that which utterly overthrows the Jesuite's Cause, is
Clement's closs Conformity to the Apostle in his account of Church-Orders, who
1 Timothy 1. 3. beyond all Scruple of any Party, takes these words in the sense we
plead for to Clement, and makes not at all the word Deacon exegetick and
explicative of the word Bishop: but by it designs a distinct Order of
Church Officers from what is signified by the other. For doubtless Clement
Paul's Fellow Laborer took the words in the same signification and meaning,
wherein the Apostle had understood them. And accordingly Clement, for
Confirmation hereof, adduces the words of Isaiah 60. 17. which place, as he
then certainly found it in the Septuagint, contains the words Bishops and
Deacons exactly as Paul expresses and distinguishes Church Officers: and on
this Ground Clement goes when he intimats that the Apostles in their
Institution of Church Officers had an eye to these words of the Prophet. In
vain therefore labors Petavius to disprove the Copy of Isaiah used by Clement,
and brings the Hebrew, Hierome and others taking the word in a different
signification: for thus he has not Salmasius or any other modern Defender of
Presbytry but Clement himself, whom he pretends to vindicate, for his
Adversary: seeing we Dispute not concerning the Greek Copy Clement used, but of
the thing he inferred from these words of Isaiah according to the Copy he then
cited. Neither is it more to the Jesuite's advantage that the word Presbyter is
several times found in Clement. For seeing, as is plain, yea and the Jesuit
himself not only grants but proves, that it frequently there denotes, not a
degree of Age but a Church Officer, it must of necessity be a Term altogether
Synonymous with the word Bishop. For they themselves plead not for the
Equipolency thereof with the word Deacon, wherein Petavius himself shall afford
us no small assistance, who having, but to no purpose (seeing never Man denied
it) showed that with Clement the word Presbyter is sometimes taken
appellatively, to denote old Age but no Church Officer, subjoins these
remarkable words; At other times Clement so uses the word Presbyter as thereby
to signify a certain Function and public Office in the Ministry, and a
certain Dignity in the Church, which he calls an Episcopacy or the Office of a
Bishop. From this plain Testimony of a Man in learning, and love to Prelacy,
second to none that ever undertook its Defense, it is clear, as the Light it
self, that with Clement the word Bishop and the word Presbyter when he takes it
for a Church-Function, are Terms altogether Synonymous. For if (...) Episcopacy
or the Office of a Bishop be competent to Clement's Presbyter, and things as
they ought, receive Denominations from Forms wherewith they are clothed, then
this Presbyter in the Judgment of Clement is really a Bishop, and indeed this
is superlatively clear to any, who, but with an open and unprepossess'd Mind
reads the places of Clement we have already produced. Howbeit the Testimony of
such an Adversary gives no small additional Confirmation to the Truth thereof.
Yea the same Adversary in the same place acknowledges, that even then the Title
of Bishop was also common, and in after times only appropriated to one. And
again, It Is clear (says Petavius) from this place, that there was a Council or
Ecclesiastic Senate ordained by the Apostles at Corinth; whose Dignity and
Office Clemens calls Episcopacy, and the chiefest of the Clergy he names
Presbyters, as also from this which Clement afterward writes. It Is base
Beloved, yea most base etc. And he names the same Presbyters Pastors and
Church Governors of the Christian Sheepsold. And now judge how the Jesuit
after these Concessions could yet say, that it follows not from hence that in
Corinth or at other Cities there was no peculiar Bishop.

. 3. And here again we find D. M. Page 44. Et seq.
at his old filching Trade transcribing Petavius his Perversions of Clement, or
bringing what is no more serviceable to either Cause or Credit: as that Clement
comprehends all the Jewish Clergy under the name of Priests and Levites:
Therefore (Inferrs D. M.) It follows not from Clement his naming only Bishops
and Deacons, that Bishops and Presbyters are not in Clement distinct Offices.
But D. M. should remember that Clement not only Dichotomizes but Trichotomizes
the Jewish Clergy into three Parts. But does he any where so divide the
Christian Clergy? He not only names the two Kinds of Offices, but so names them
as to identifie and take for one and the same Bishop and Presbyter: which
Petavius and D. M. and their Brethren by all means labor to make him
distinguish. But St. Clement (says D. M.) exhorting the Corinthians to order
sets before them the subordination under the Temple-Service, how the
High Priest, Priests, and Levites were distinguished by their proper Service,
and immediately recommends to them, that every one of them should continue in
his proper Order. Now (continues D. M.) when we consider the primitive Method
of reasoning from Jewish precedents, St. Clement had never talked at this rate,
if the Jurisdiction of one over many Priests had been abolished under the New
Testament. But, why does he mutter, for it if he can bring ought for his
purpose he must also Infer from this passage of Clement Pages 94, and 96.
(...) etc.
that as there was a High Priest over all the Jewish Church, so there must be
another High Priest over all Christians. And that all Christians must bring
Oblations and Sacrifices to the Temple at Jerusalem: for from these Topic
does Clement exhort the Corinthians to Harmony. Whether then D. M. be a
Romanist or a Jew may be a Question; for unquestionably his way of reasoning
symbolizes with both of them. The Truth is, nothing can be inferred from this
place of Clement, but that as under the Old Testament every one, whether
Churchman or Laick, was to abide in his own Order without raising Schism or
Confusion, so it ought to be under the New Testament. St. Clement himself
(continues D. M.) distinguishes the (...) from the (...) An express untruth,
and I challenge D. M. and his Accomplices to prove it. Nor can it be (adds D. M.)
an Objection of any weight, that the first who were their Spiritual Governors
are mentioned in the plural number, since this was an Encyclical Epistle
addressed to Corinth as the principal City, and from thence transmitted to its
dependencies etc. By which words, if he speaks sense, he intimats that there
were in the Apostolic age Metropolitan Cities in an Ecclesiastic sense, whose
Bishops according to the Civil Dignity of these Cities were Metropolitan, and
had their numbers of inferior and dependent Bishops. A most nauseous and
hateful Hypothesis of some giddy Papaturiants which, as we have heard, even
the more candide of the Episcopalls, disclaim and explode.

I shall shut up all concerning Clement with the Suffrages of two illustrious
Names, neither whereof, I Am sure, did ever favor Presbytry: I mean Grotius and
Stillingfleet. Had Episcopacy ( says the Doctor Iren. page 279.
) been instituted on the occasion of the Schism at Corinth, certainly of all
places, we should the soonest have heard of a Bishop at Corinth for the
remedying of it; and yet almost of all places, these Heralds that derive the
Succession of Bishops from the Apostles times, are the most plunged whom to six
on at Corinth. And they that can find any one single Bishop at Corinth at the
time when Clemens writ his Epistle to them (about another Schism as great as
the former, which certainly had not been according to their Opinion, if a
Bishop had been there before) must have better Eyes and Judgment, than the
deservedly admired Grotius, who brings this in his Epistle to Bignonius as an
Argument of the undoubted Antiquity of that Epistle, quod nusquam meminit
exsortis etc. that Clement no where mentions, that singular Authority of
Bishops which by Church custom after the Death of Mark at Alexandria, and by
its Example in other places began to be introduced, but Clemens clearly shows
as did the Apostle Paul, that then by the common Council of the Presbyters who
both by Paul, and Clement are called Bishops, the Churches were governed.

. 4. I proceed next to the Vindication of Polycarp. Subject your selves (says
he Epist. ad Philipp.
) to the Presbyters and Deacons as to God and Christ, and, as Virgins, walk
with a pure Conscience, let the Presbyters be simple or innocent, merciful in
all things, turning all Men from their Errors, visiting all who are weak, not
neglecting Widows, Orphans, and those that are Poor, but always providing such
things as are good in the sight of God and Men. Here we learn that the highest
Office then in the Church of Philippi was that of a Presbyter, and that there
was a Plurality to whom the Philippians were to be subjected without the least
mention of a particular Bishop governing those Presbyters. And, which deserves
no overly Consideration, we here see that as, when Clement gives an account of
Church Orders, he named two only, so we have the same number expressed by
Polycarp, but they altered their Denomination of the former Order, and they
whom Clement calls sometimes Bishops, sometimes Presbyters, Polycarp calls
still Presbyters. It Is most observable also, how both Paul and Polycarp subject
the Church of one single City Philippi to a Plurality or Multitude of Pastors,
whom Paul calls Bishops, and Polycarp Presbyters. From all which the Identity
of Bishop and Presbyter most inevitably results.

. 5. And indeed this Passage of Polycarp so much gravells the Hierarchicks,
that Dr. Pearson is driven to his last Legs, and compelled to present us with
a shift unworthy of its Author. Who can prove (says he Vind. Ignat. Part. 2.
Page 168. Sed quis dabit Episcopum Philippensium tunc in vivis fuisse? Quis
praestabit Philippenses etc.
) that the Bishop of Philippi was then alive, who can show us, that the
Philippians asked not Counsel at Polycarp, for this cause, that they then
enjoyed not a Bishop, for thus Polycarp bespeaks them. These things Brethren, I
write not of my self to you concerning righteousness, but you have moved me
thereunto. Thus Pearson, and indeed it is enough here to return the Question
inverted, who is able to prove, if there had been a Bishop in Philippi, that he
was not alive? For seeing he affirms it, he or his Advocats are obliged to
instruct what they say. That which he pretends to from these words of the
Epistle wherein Polycarp says he was moved thereto by the Philippians
themselves, affords him not the least support; there not being therein one
syllable concerning the vacancy of the Bishops Seat or the Church Government
during this Defect; or how to fill the Chair. Of all or any of these nec vol^
nec vestigium, but only (as is evident from Polycarp) they seem to have desired
of him some Direction concerning the blameless walk of any Christian. And
indeed, the Bishop within a very few lines fairly yields the Cause, really
acknowledging that he had said nothing to the purpose. But seeing (says he)
these things are uncertain, we have no certainty from the Discourse of
Polycarp. Well then, it must follow, for ought he knew, that Polycarp knew no
Diocesan Bishop in Philippi, that he had never heard of his Death, seeing
nothing hereof can be gathered from him. And that he had never heard of his
Life or Being, we may well conclude from this, that he devolves the whole
Church Affairs upon a Plurality of Presbyters. But once again; Is it at all
credible, but that if Polycarp had written to the Philippians after the death
of their Bishop and during the vacancy of the Chair, he had comforted them
after this so considerable a Loss, and given them Directions for choosing of a
worthy Successor, especially if [as Pearson would have] they had asked his
counsel concerning this very Matter? Had ever a Pastor like Polycarp neglected
so seasonable an Office? His profound silence therefore of the Death of any
such Bishop in Philippi sufficiently demonstrats that this Dr. Pearson's
Invention was only the product of a desperate Cause, and that there was left
here no door of Escape.

And here let me observe that Philippi is no less fatal to the Episcopals, than
its neighboring plains were to the Pompeians: for they are stung and
confounded with the very first words of Paul to that Church, and, as we have
heard, amongst their other wild shifts, they answer that the Bishop was often
absent. But there was a good number of years between the writing of Paul and
that of Polycarp to the Philippians, and yet we see the Bishop is never come
home; Why taryeth the wheel of his Lordship's Chariot? Has he not sped at
Court? And having supplanted some of the Nobility, made a prey of the Office of
Chancellor or Treasourer, that after so long absence there is no news of his
return? Nor are we ever like to hear any more of him, for now [say they] he is
dead: I had perhaps believed them, were it not impossible for one to die who was
never alive. But enough of this; for such Answers would really tempt one to
think that their Authors studi'd nothing more than to ridicule their oun Cause
and afford Game to their Reader.

. 6. And here I cannot but nottice the ill-grounded vapouring of D. M. who page
49. and seq.
from the inscription of the Epistle ( Polycarp and the Presbyters that are
with him) concludes that he was vested with Episcopal jurisdiction and eminency
amongst these Presbyters. And so much he pretends to bring out of Blondel as as
his forced Confession, which is so far from being true, that it is brought in by
Blondel as an Objection and silly Conjecture of the Episcopals, which he
Apolog. prosent. Hieron. page 14. and seq.
diverse ways overthrows. And indeed never was there a more wretch'd deduction
framed, seeing, as Blondel at large shows, the phrase natively yealds only this
sense viz. Polycarp and the rest of the Presbyters of that Colleage. And thus
D. M. may as well infer Peter's Superiority and Power over the rest of the
Apostles from Acts 2. 37. To Peter and to the rest of the Apostles. Moreover
Blondel demonstrats how, on diverse accounts, Polycarp without any Eminency and
Power over the rest may be particularly nominated rather than others; as,
because he was first in Order and Years. But I insist not herein, but referr to
Blondel who has nervously baffled this their pitiful Coujecture. D. M.
adventures to engage with nothing of what he says, and yet is not ashamed to
bring to the Field so blunted a weapon. I pass also D. M.'s two Arguments for
Polycarp's Diocesan Episcopacy, drawn from the pretended Succession of Diocesan
Bishops in Smyrna, and the Epistles of Ignatius mentioned by Polycarp, having
overthrown both of 'em already, and proceed to the Testimony of Hermas who Lib.
1. Vis. 2.
thus speaks: Thou shall write two Books, thou shall send one to Clement and
one to Graptes, and Clement shall send it to foraign Cities; for to him this is
permitted: and Graptes shall admonish the Widows and Orphans, but thou shall
read it with, or relate it unto the Presbyters in this City who govern the
Church. Where we see that not any one Bishop, but a College of Presbyters
(called, doubtless, afterward by the same Author, Bishops) governed the Church
of one City. Yet D. M. pretends to find here a palpable Evidence of Episcopacy;
For (says he page 53. and seq.
) the sending of the Encyclical Epistle to foraign Cities is insinuated to be
the peculiar Privilege of Clement then Bishop of Rome. But if he conclude from
this place of Hermas that Clement had any Power over these to whom he was to
send that Book or Epistle (as for Clement's being Bishop of Rome it is so far
from being insinuated here, that the quite contary is from this very place most
evident) he may as well infer from Col. 4. 16. that they had Power over the
Laodiceans whither they were to send, and cause to be read the Apostle's Letter.

Secondly, D. M. ascribing to the Bishop of Rome Power over foraign Cities,
erects a Pope rather than a Bishop. But I Will assure him he came not in so
early: for seeing there was undoubtedly one Bishop (at least) in every
particular City so soon as there were any in the World, this place of Hermas
(if it bear D. M's Inference and give a Power to Clement over foraign Cities)
insinuats nothing of a Bishop's Dignity above Presbyters, but of the power of
one Bishop over another or rather of a Pope over other Churches. A falsehood
most unanimously exploded by Cyprian, Jerome, Augustine, and the rest of the
Ancients D. M. seeks also for his Prelacy in these words of Hermas viz. Lib. 2.
Mand. 12.
The Earthly Spirit exalts it self and seeks the first seat. Lib. 3. Simil. 8.
Some contend for Principality and Dignity. But what if Hermas had said that
some contended to get an Empire and Popedom over the whole Church; would D. M.
hence conclude that it was lawful or then practiced in the Church, or when the
Apostles contended who should be the greatest? Had Christ before that time
assured them of the lawfulness of such an Office, and told them, that they were
to have one to be a Prince over the rest? By no Logic therefore can it be
inferred for Hermas his words that a chief Seat or Principality (for both are
one and the same with Hermas) was then either exercised or held lawful. Again,
though both had been then in Custom, no Power of one over the rest can be hence
concluded; seeing the chief Seats are given to the Moderators of Synods and
other Presidents of Assemblies, who have no primacy of Power but only of Order.
And again Lib. 1. Vis. 3.
, The polished and white Stones (says Hermas) are the Apostles, and Bishops,
and Doctors, and Deacons, who walked in the Clemency of God, and exercised the
Office of a Bishop, and taught and served. And, Lib. 3. Simil. 9.
Such are some Bishops, that is Governors of the Churches, and these who have
the Char^e of the Services.

. 7. In both places (says Blondel) he makes only two Degrees that of the
Bishops who governed the Churches, and that of the Deacons who had the charge
of the Services, for it is acknowledged by all that the Doctors are all one with
the Bishops, when they are said to have performed the Office of a Bishop, and
that the Apostles as they are opposed to Bishops, were placed above the whole
Clergy. This (repons D. M.) is Tergiversation with a Witness, and a fraudulent
Trick in Blondel, since Presbyters in the primitive Church are frequently
distinguished by the Name of Doctors: and Blondel's Commentary is a manifest
violence offered to the Text, for Doctors are not said to have performed the
Office of a Bishop but to have taught: and this is very agreeable to their
Character, being so much employed by their respective Bishops in teaching the
Catechumeni; and the natural position of these words will allow of no other
meaning. Which Answer D. M. has learned from the Practice of our late Bishops,
during whose Epoch the Buffund might have hid himself well nigh the whole year
from the Bishop's fury in the Bishop's pulpit, seeing he scarce ever came
thither to play the Doctor or ought else. As for the Ancient and true primitive
Bishops, they perpetually preached or taught (says Le Moyn Varia sacra. Page
34.
Moreover the Fathers generally take Pastor, Bishop, and Doctor for one and the
same as Chrysostom, Theophylact, Theodoret, Sedulius; and after them, Aquinas,
Haymo, Benedictus Justinianus with others on Ephesians. 4. 11. Of the same mind are
Hierome, Augustine and Anselm Apud Corn. a Lapide in Ephesians. 4. 11.
, and the pretended Clemens Romanus cited by Gratian and Benedictus
Justinianus, and the Fathers of the Council of Carthage. Of the same Mind are
the ablest of our Episcopals, as Field, Hammond and Heylen History of
Episcopacy. Part 2. Page 39.
So truly did Blondel say that Bishop and Doctor is universally taken for one
and the same. Neither was ever the Presbyter either in Cyprian or any other
Ancient, called Doctor in opposition to the Bishop but to other Ecclesiastic
Presbyters, who taught not, of whose existence, as was before touched, we have
most sufficient assurance. But D. M. in contradiction to the Apostle would have
a Bishop who is no Teacher or Preacher, like the Droll who said, he met with
Priests who were no Clerks. And seeing with Hermas there are but two Orders of
Churchmen, and Bishops, and praesides Ecclesiarum Church Governors are
reciprocal Terms taken for one and the same: and seeing that his Presbyters are
expressly termed Church Governors; it is most evident that he takes Bishop and
Presbyter for one and the same, and that the word Doctor is purely exegetick or
explicative of the word Bishop, and that both of them, which I Am sure is not
unfrequent in all sorts of Authors, evidently signify one and the same thing.

. 8. I now proceed to Justine Martyr who Apolog. ad Antonium Pium. (...) etc.
thus gives an account of the state of the Churches their particular and weekly
Assemblies for receiving the Word and Sacraments. After this, Bread and Wine
tempered with Water is brought to the Ruler or Governor of the Brethren, which
when he has received, he gives praise and glory to the Parent of all -- The
Deacons give to all present Bread and Wine tempered with Water after they are
Consecrated by Thanksgiving, and carry them to such as are absent. And on
Snnday all who live either in Cities or in the Country come together into one
place -- And when the Reader has ceased, the Governor makes an exhortatory
Sermon -- The voluntary Contribution is laid up with the Governor who
distributes it to the Orphans etc. Where it is not only observable that Justine
following not the pretended Ignatius but the Apostle, Clement, Polycarp,
Hermas, mentions only two Orders of Churchmen, viz. Governors and Deacons,
but also that he gives a (...) or Bishop to every Congregation, and that
Justine's (...) is all one with the Bishop who was then in being is yealded by
the fiercest Hierarchicks, Heylen Hist. of Episcopacy, part 2. page 39.
who yields his whole Plea and says that Justine's President of the
Congregation, or Bishop, ordinarily celebrated the Eucharist and Preached God's
holy Word; and Maurice Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy page 39.
. Well then, it is all one how this ancient Church-Ruler be named, whither
Presbyter, Governor, or Bishop, seeing there was one for every Congregation
that met for receiving the word and Sacraments, the Controversy between us and
the Hierarchicks, which is not about Names but Things, is fully ended if they
stand to Justine's Decision.

. 9. Dr. Maurice would have Justine to be understood as speaking only of the
Diocesan Bishops Church. For (says he) to carry the Bread and Wine to all
absents in their several Duellings, was not convenient nor easy in numerous
Congregations, and they knew not well who were absent. But this Perversion is
too wretch'd and palpable to wheedle any in in his right wit out of Justine's
plain Meaning. Dr. Maurice knew well enough that in these times of such Fervor
and Love among Christians, and such Veneration for the Lord's Supper, they
doubtless most exactly observed the Ordinances, and absented not without
special and weighty Causes. And seeing the Custom of receiving the Elements
at home, when they could not come to Church was then in vigor, and believed to
be their Duty (if these Elements were given to Absents as their proper
Communion, or were only the (...) the last remains of the Custume of the (...)
the Love Feasts, I now dispute not) they took special care to signify their
Absence and Causes thereof, by their Relations or Christian Brethren to their
Deacons, and such as were concerned to know it. Neither, if we consider the
Church Discipline of these times, is it to be doubted that the Deacons had an
exact List of all to whom they were each Lords Day to give the Sacrament, and
consequently by no means could be ignorant who were either absent or present.
Wherefore, though the Deacons had been fewer than they were, they could easily,
though the whole Congregation had been never so numerous, carry the Elements to
these very few whom sickness or other lawful and weighty Reasons had confined
to their Habitations: all which Dr. Maurice well enough perceived; and
therefore he is here no less feeble in his Actings than a man breathing his
last, and advances only such triffles as may make his Friends ashamed and
confirm his Adversaries. Neither do I wonder hereat, seeing he undertook the
Defense of a palpable untruth: for not only speaks Justine of the Christian
Assemblies in common without the least exception, but clearly tells us that he
speaks of the meatings of all the Christians for receiving the Word and
Sacraments, not only in Cities, but in the Country a place too base for the
Cathedral and Diocesan Bishops Chair, and of all such Congregations, as in the
first day of the Week, as the Apostle speaks, made Collections or had Deacons
for that end, which belongs to every Congregation where the Word and Sacraments
are dispensed. Neither is this ought but what we have discovered to be the Mind
of their Ignatius himself, and seconded with the Suffrages of the greatest
Friends to Prelacy.

. 10. Wherefore most vain is D. M's Page 58. Et seq.
Labor to prove that it follows not from Justine that there were then only two
Orders of Churchmen. Seeing Justine giving a Governor or Bishop to every
Congregation, quite overturns Diocesan Episcopacy. And more vain yet is this,
that as, what he undertakes though proved is nothing to his purpose, so the
Reasons he brings prove nothing of what he undertakes. For his first Reason,
viz. That Justine intended only to give a true account of what was ordinarily
performed in the Christian Meetings in opposition to the abominable Stories
propagated against them by their Enemies, so that he had no occasion to reckon
up the several Gradations of the Hterarchy, is equally favorable to Prelatists
and Papists, who may as well use it for a Sanctuary to their Pope as they to
their Prelates. And indeed had there then either been a Pope over all or a
Prelate with Princely Power as D. M. pleads for over a multitude of Churches,
the Christians seeing they were frequently reproached with an intended
Rebellion, had found themselves obliged in a special manner to apologize for
their Princes and absolute Lords, who would have been looked on as little less
than the Emperor's Rivalls and Arch-Promoters and Heads of the supposed
Insurrection. Moreover, which we have already noted, and fully shows the
nullity of D. M's Reason, not only Justine but all the genuine Writings of them
that went before him, mention only, like Justine, these two Orders of
Churchmen.

D. M's second Reason, viz. That the Christians were most shy to publish any
thing relating either to the Mysteries of their Religion or the Constitution of
the Church, more than was absolutely necessary in their own Defense etc. is
another lurking place for Romanists when urged to show the Antiquity of their
Innovations: and indeed if it do any thing, it tends to prove that no Party can
make any Advantage of ought spoken or written by the Fathers; and if so, have
at the Foundation of Diocesan Prelacy, its prime Advocats acknowledging that
no Argument for it can be draun from Scripture, but only from the writings of
the Fathers.

His third Reason is, that as the Offices, so the names of Bishop and Presbyter
were not only known to be distinguished in his days among the Christians (but
he brings no genuine Writer of that Age to prove this, and that it is most
false is already evinced) but even the Heathens knew so much: and cites
Adrian's Epistle to Servianus: but it is highly probable that the Emperor if we
allow him any knowledge of these Affairs, understands under the name of
Presbyters the very same Officers, the very same Men, that he means by the name
Bishops, rather than e contra: see Pray the Letter it self apud Flav. Vopis. in
Saturnino.

. 11. 'Twere easy to show diverse succeeding Fathers to have been of Justine's
Mind and Strangers to Diocesan Episcopacy, ignoring all Discrimination between
Bishop and preaching Presbyter or Pastor. I shall only here with one Chamier
Paustratiae Tom. 2. Lib. 10. Cap. 6. Denique ausim asserere nunquam ab
Epis^opis distingui, nedum separari Presbyteros apud Irenaeum.
against Bellarmine and the rest of the Jesuits, assert against their
Successors and Defenders under whatever Name they be known, that according to
Irenaeus the Churches were committed to the Presbyters, no less than to the
Bishops, that these who are now reckoned Popes, Highpriests, universal
Bishops, are only Presbyters in the Judgment of Irenaeus: and that in him
Presbyters are not so much as once distinguished, and far less separated from
Bishops. From what is said, appears the vanity of D. M's Popish Query. Pages
158, 159.
Whether (all things duly considered) a more evident and universal Tradition
for the Superiority and Jurisdiction of a Bishop above a Presbyter, can be
reasonably demanded; and whether the Argument from universal Tradition, be not
in this Case the most proper and most necessary? And whether the Tradition for
the Superiority of a Bishop above a Presbyter, be not more universal, unanimous
and uncontradicted, in the Primitive Ages, than many other Traditions that are
unquestionably received? What these his other Traditions are, we are not
ignorant. The Doctrine certainly of the morality of the Sabbath, of Baptism,
and of the Holy Trinity, and the like; these they Vide Petavium de Hierarchia
Eccl. Lib. 1. and D. Tailor Episcopacy asserted.
think lean only on Tradition, and that the Institution of their Diocesan
Prelates, Metrapolitans, and Arch-Prelats, and other such Effects and Inventions
of a degenerating and apostatizing Church, are better founded than these most
Scriptural Catholic and necessary Doctrines.

Section X.
Other Observations and Arguments eversive of Diocesan Prelacy.
AND now in the next place, I would gladly learn how they will describe, or
whereon they can found their Romish, or, which is all one, their Hierarchick
Diocesan Bishop. For as Augustine De civitate Dei. Lib. 19. Cap. 19. Exponere
voluit quid sit Episco^patus: quia nomen est operis non honoris etc.
well observes, it is a name of Labor and Travel, not of Honor and Dignity:
and indeed, it imports only Watchfullness, Labor and Care as its most native
and proper Signification; and on this account, only the King gets the name of
Bishop in Hesychius Ad vocem.
as he gets the name of Pastor in Homer Iliad. ^.
. And Hesychius gives it no less to every Watchman. Thus the word Bishop
denotes a vigilant Watchman in Suidas Ad vocem.
where he tells us that some bearing this Name were sent by the Athenians to
observe the Affairs of their subject Cities who were called Watchmen. So is the
same word understood to denote only Care and Labor by Jullius Pollux Lib. 3.
Cap. 21.
whereas, on the other hand, the word Presbyter when taken for a Function or
Office, natively imports Rule and Honor Suidas ad vocem, and Hesychius ad
vocem.
. A Presbyter (acknowledges even Saravia Saravia de diversis gradibus. Cap. 9.
) is a Name of Honor, and was given to the more honorable, and to the
Magistrates among the Jews in the Old Testament, and was thence transferred to
signify the Governors of the Churches of Christ in the New Testament, but
they are called Bishops from their watchful Care which is a Name of Work and
Labor. The name Presbyter (says Dr. Stillingfleet Iren. Pages 285, and 286.
), as the Hebrew ZAKEN though it originally import Age, yet by way of connotation
it has been looked on as a Name both of Dignity and Power among the Jews, in
the times of the Apostles, it is most evident that the Name (...) imported not
only Dignity but Power; the Presbyters among the Jews having Power both of
Judging and Teaching given them by their Semicha or Ordination. Now under the
Gospel the Apostles retaining the Name, and the manner of Ordination, but not
conferring that judiciary Power by it, which was in use among the Jews, to show
the Difference between the Law and the Gospel, it was requisite some other Name
should be given to the Governors of the Church, which should qualify the
importance of the word Presbyters to a sense proper to a Gospel state; which
was the Original of giving the Name (...) to the Governors of the Church under
the Gospel; a Name importing Duty more than Honor, and not a title above
Presbyter, but rather used by way of Diminution and Qualification of the Power
implied in the name of Presbyter etc. The Hierarchicks therefore should act
much more rationally if they turned the Tables, and gave the name of Presbyter
to their Diocesan, and that of the Bishop to their inferior Curats, who
usually do most of the Pastoral Work. In the mean while it is sure from what we
just now learned out of these Authors that during sounder Antiquity, before men
equally abused Names and Things, a Bishop could never be either ane Order or
Degree or any thing else above* a Prsbyter.

But from Names if we pass to things, and look into Scripture and sounder
Antiquity, we shall find the ancient Bishop so different from the present
Diocesan, that the very Idea's and notions of the two are diametrically
opposite one to another. The Apostles themselves Acts 6. 2, 4. following the
Commandment of their Master, found it their Duty so assiduously to labor in
Preaching and Prayer that they thought it unreasonable to be diverted even by
the Distribution of the Collections, and Care of the Poor, which otherwise was
a Work both lawful and pious. And to Timothy, who, if we believe the
Hierarchicks, was ane Archbishop of a vast Diocese, it is enjoined as his
proper Task to Preach the Word, to be instant in season and out of season, to
reprove, to rebuke, exhort with all Long-suffering and Doctrine. I need not
here multiply Texts; read and read over again the whole New Testament, and you
shall find that the Exercise of Prayer, Dispensing the Word and Sacraments was
the main Duty and perpetual Employment of every Pastor or Minister of Christ.
Look, on the other hand, to the bulk of the Hierarchick Lord-Bishops, they have
a quite different Work and Exercice, and if any of 'em happen to spend some
time in the Ministerial Duties how are they commonly gazed on and depredicated
as Men of extraordinary Condescension, superlatively stuping to a piece of
Service far below the Episcopal Grandeur and unusual to the Order? Are they not
then quite another thing than the Apostolic and Scripturall Bishops?

This Apostolic Example the Conscientious Primitive Bishops or Pastors clossly
followed; not so much as once dreaming that any who was ordained a Minister of
the Gospel, and entrusted with a Flock, might on whatsoever pretext neglect to
exercise himself perpetually in Prayer and Dispensing the Word and Sacraments.
This they judged his constant Employment, and this was the Practice of all the
sincere Bishops even after the Distinction of Degrees was introduced, as
appears in the weekly and sometimes the daily Homilies and Lectures of
Chrysostom and Augustine which are yet extant. And it is already observed how
Hilary makes the Bishop a sedulous Dispenser of the Words of suture Life. And
indeed all the Hierarchick Grandeur and Domination whereby a Bishop was
entirely Metamorphosed into a quite other thing than what he had once been,
could never notwithstanding obliterate and blot out of thinking Men's Minds the
true Scriptural Notion and Idea thereof. The Episcopal Dignity consists in
Teaching (says Balsamon In Can. Apost. 58. (...).
). And the fourth Council of Carthage decrees that a Bishop shall not be
employed in caring for his household Affairs, but shall wholly occupy himself in
Reading and Praying, and Preaching the Word Caranza summa Con. folio 118. Can.
20.
.

. 12. 'Twere endless to allege all that may be produced to this purpose;
neither could any Man who ever seriously read the Bible have any other Notion
of a true Bishop than what is common to every Pastor of a Congregation; seeing
the Apostle's Description of a Bishop 1 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. agrees equally to
all of them. And here it is observable, that still where Bishops are spoken of
in Scripture, not only is the Work and Office which is enjoined them, that of
Teaching and Feeding, but also the Name is correlative to the Flock, and not to
a Company of Clergymen, as Acts 20. 28. Take heed to your selves, and to all
the Flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers or Bishops (...) to
Feed the Church of God. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the Flock of God which is among you,
taking the oversight thereof or Bishoping it (...); and accordingly, as we have
oftener than once demonstrated, over every particular Congregation there was a
Bishop.

This Assertion may be strongly confirmed from the undoubted Practice of the
Church in the fourth Century, even when she was fallen into no small Declension
from the Primitive Purity. For the Council of Sardica Decrees Can. 6. (...).
that a Bishop may not be placed in a Village or small Town where one Presbyter
may suffice. Dr. Maurice Page 67.
says that this Canon is justified by the Arrians their great multiplication of
Bishops to strengthen their Party. But the Council it self assigns a quite
different Ground that moved them to make this Decree, viz. that the Name and
Authority of a Bishop fall not into Contempt. Where we see the Design of
abolishing the Primitive and Apostolic Custom of giving a Bishop
indifferently to every Congregation, whether in City or in Country, was the
Introduction of a secular Pomp and Grandeur into the Church, which finally
resolved into a Papal Slavery. However, this Sardican Canon had not so good
effect, but that, about twenty years after, a new Sanction thereto was found
needful: for the Council of Laodicea Can. 56.(...) etc.
Decrees that it shall not be lawful to place Bishops in little Villages or
Country Places, but only Visitors, and that the Bishops who were already
placed in these little Villages and Country Places, should for the future do
nothing without the knowledge of the Bishop of the City.

Mark, how a pace the mild and fraternal Church Regimen is turned into a
Worldly Domination and Dignity to pave the way for a papal Tyranny. These rural
Bishops or Countrey-parish Pastors (for they can be called nothing else) whom
Dr. Beverige On the 56 or 57 Canon of Laodicea. Ergo ante hoc (...) etiam
revera Episcopi constituti sunt.
acknowledges for real and true Bishops, were also assaulted, and the
subjecting and inslaving of them to the Prelates and Clergy in the greater
Cities, designed by other Councils as that of Ancyrum Can. 13.
, and of Neocesaria Can. 14.
, and of Antioch Can. 10.
, there they are called Chorepiscopi i. e. Country Bishops. And it has been
disputed if these were real and true Bishops. But the same Dr. Beverige not
only yields, but at large pleads for the Affirmative On the 13 Canon of the
Council of Ancyrum. Quibus etiam conficere non dubit amus veteros
Chorepiscopos, -- revera Episcopos fuisse -- Enimvero cum Episcopi in
Civitatibus solum antiquitus ordinati fuerint etc.
. He pretends in the mean while that anciently Bishops were ordained in Cities
only, many whereof had according to the model of the Empire, such ample
Territories that 'twas impossible for the Bishop of the City his alone to visit
and sufficiently to guide them, and so it seemed needful for such Bishops to
have, according to the amplitude of their Bishoprics, one or two Coajutors in
some Region without the City, who might disburden them of some parts of the
Episcopal Function, which could not be done but by some consecrated Bishops.
Hence 'twas that some of these great Bishops Ordained, in some part of their
large Provinces, these Bishops, but with this provision, that these without
their leave should do nothing of moment, seeing these Regions also belonged to
the Care of the City Bishop, which we learn, (continues he) from the tenth
Canon of the Council of Antioch, where it is expressly Decreed, that no Country
Bishop Ordain Presbyter or Deacon without the Bishop of the City, to which, he
and his Region is subject. But indeed there is no such thing, to be learned from
that Canon, it only says (...).
that the Chorepiscopus and his Region was subject to the City (as they really
were in a Civil Sense) not to the Bishop of the City: and tho they had said so
it is no proof of his Conclusion, seeing they usually pretended Antiquity for
the greatest Innovations. How far either in, or nigh to the Time of the
Apostles the Church was from giving to the Bishop such a Princely Dignity as he
pretends, or from allowing him to do the Work proper to himself by substitute
Vassals, none acquainted with what remains of these Ancient times can be
ignorant, and is already oftener then once evinced. And now I Am sorry to find a
Protestant of sense and Learning lean on that shameful and most exploded
Falsehood, viz. that the Apostles took the Government of the Empire for their
Pattern of Church Government; and darring to publish such gross Falsehoods
whereof even the more ingenuous Romanists are ashamed.

The Ecclesiastical Degrees (says Suave History of the Council of Trent. Page
216. Et seq.
) were not Originally Instituted as Dignities, Preheminencies, Rewards, or
Honors, as now they are, and have been, many hundred years, but with
Ministry, and Charges, otherwise called by St. Paul, Works, and those that
exercise them, are called by Christ our Lord in the Gospel, Workmen; and
therefore no Man could then enter into cogitation to absent himself from the
Execution thereof in his own Person: and if any one (which seldom happend)
retired from the Work, 'twas not thought reasonable, he should have either
Title or Profit. And though the Ministeries were of two sorts, some Anciently
called, as now they are, with care of Souls: others of temporal things, for the
sustenance and service of the Poor and Sick, as were the Deaconries, and other
inferior Works, all held themselves equally bound to that Service, in Person;
neither did any think of a substitute, but for a short time, and for great
Impediments, much less to take another Charge, which might hinder that.

. 13. Bnd now to go on, these Country Bishops or Pastors could not yet by all
these Councils be Un-bishoped. And therefore Pope Damasus must next fall on
them, and authoratively define Caranza Fol. 100. etc.
that they were stark naught in the Church, their Institution wicked and
contrary to the holy Canons. And thus he acted suitably to his purpose, seeing
the enslaving the lesser and Country Churches to the Domination of these of the
greater Cities made fair way for subjecting all to Rome, which on many Accounts
was greater than any of the rest. He also hereby gratified and much obliged the
Bishops of these great Cities who were desirous of nothing, more than of
Domination, and accordingly they even at these times were giving him their
mutual help for raising of the Papal Throne, yea before the time of Damasus
this same Council of Sardica, which thought it too vile and base for a Bishop
to Dwell out of a great City, Decreed also Can. 3. (...) etc.
That if any Bishop thought he was injured in any Cause by his Comprovincials
and ordinary Judges, it should in this Case be lawful for him to appeal to the
Bishop of Rome. Let us honor (say they) the Memory of St. Peter, that either
these who examined the Matter or other neighboring Bishops write to Julius
Bishop of Rome, and if he think it fit then let the Matter be tried and judged
again, and let him appoint Judges for the Purpose, but if he approve of what is
already done, and think not fit to call it into Question, then the things
already done shall be accounted firm and stable. Thus these Fathers, many
whereof otherwise were excellent Men, the first, I think, that ever gave such
Deference and Authority to the Pope, 'twas not therefore incongruous that both
of these Decrees should proceed from one and the same Council.

Hence it is to be noted, that the Tympany of these times had not only exerted
it self in separating the things God had conjoined, and in an holygarchick
Confinement of the Power God had given equally to all Pastors, unto a few whom
they named Bishops, a Name also equally belonging to all Christ's Ministers;
but also in subjecting of the Presbyters, yea and even the Bishops of the
Country to the very Presbyters of the City Neocesar. Can. 13. and Ancyrum.
Can. 13.
but much more the Bishops or Pastors of the Country to the Bishops of the
Cities, and these again to the Bishops of the greater Metropolitan Cities, and
so on till at length (not to name the rest of the higher and lower roundles of
this Hierarchick Ladder) all centred in Rome.

Yet in these very times it was notwithstanding firmly rooted in Men's Minds
that whosoever dispensed the Word and Sacraments, and had a Flock or
Congregation was a true Bishop, as I have made out to be the mind of Hilary,
and many others of the fourth and fifth Centuries. Moreover Optatus asserts
Lib. 3.
that Preaching or Exponing is the proper Province of a Bishop. But, to
proceed, these Chorepiscopi, or Country Bishops of Parish Pastors were in the
third Century called absolutely Bishops at the Country Places or Villages; so
speaks the Council of Antioch, He (say these Fathers) i. e. Paulus Samosatenus
Eusebius Lib. 7. Cap. 30. (...) etc.
suborned the Bishops of the neighboring Country Villages and Towns, as also
Presbyters his Flatterers to praise him in their Homilies. Dr. Maurice page 77.
answers that it appears not hence that these were Parish Bishops for
Chorepiscopi had many Congregations. As if these who dwelt not only in greater
Towns, but also in the very Country Villages which were near to Antioch, and
near to one another, and that even where the far greater part of the
Inhabitants were not of their Flocks, yea were not at all Christians, could be
by any in their Wit judged to be any thing else save Parish Bishops or Pastors.
But let us hear one of the learn'dest of our Adversaries determining the
Controversy. Dr. Burnet's Observations on the first and second Canons commoaly
ascribed to the Apostles, page 47, 48, and 49.
That (says he) which next occurrs to be considered is, in what places
Bishoprics were founded, and Bishops settled. We find in all Cities where the
Gospel was planted, and Churches constituted, that Bishops were also Ordained.
Among the Jews, wherever there were an hundred and twenty of them together,
there did they erect a Synagogue, and a lesser Sanhedrin the Court of twenty
three Judges. Compare to this Acts 1. 15. where the number of those that
constituted the first Christian Church, is the same. So it is like wherever
there was a competent number of Christians together, that a Church was there
settled. Yet in some Villages there were Churches and Bishops; so there was a
Bishop in Bethany: and St. Paul tells of the Church of Cenchrea, which was the
Port of Corinth. It is true, some think that the Church of Corinth met there.
Which Opinion he irrefragably Refutes, and then proceeds, saying, Therefore
it is probable that the Church of Cenchrea was distinct from Corinth: and since
they had Phebe for their Deaconness, it is not to be doubted but they had Both
Bishops and Deacons. From the several Cities the Gospel was dilated and
propagated to the places round about. But in some Countries we find the
Bishoprics very thick set. They were pretty throng in Asrick, for at a
Conference which Augustine and the Bishops of that Province had with the
Donatists, there were of Bishops two hundred eighty six present, and one
hundred and twenty absent, and sixty Sees were then Vacant, which make in all
four hundred sixty and six: there were also two hundred and seventy nine of the
Donatists Bishops.

Thus he. And now, not to multiply Testimonies in so confessed and plain a
Matter, it is most certain that, at least, for upwards of the three first
Centuries, you shall not meet with the meanest Dorp, or country place where
there was a Church or Congregation to hear the Word, and receive the
Sacraments, but it had also its proper Bishop, I averr no Example to the
contrary either has yet, no not by Dr. Maurice or any other, been, or can be
brought from the gennine Monuments of these times. Yea even from the spurious
Writings of Impostures the greatest Adorers of the Hierarchy, good proofs of
this Truth may be adduced; For the thirty eight of the Canons ascribed to the
Apostles, gives the care of the Ecclesiastic Goods to the Bishop, as Justine
Martyr gives to his (...) who, as we have seen already, was purely a Parish
Pastor. And the 39 (...)
Canon says, Let the Presbyters and Deacons attempt nothing without the
Bishop, for to him the Lord's People is committed, and for their Souls he must
give an Account. Now I demand of all Men brooking either Conscience or Candor
if Souls could be committed to any save him, who was their ordinary Feeder and
Instructor. And the Pseudo-Dionysius clearly intimats, that wherever either
Baptism or the Lord's Supper was administrat'd, a Bishop was there, and was the
Dispenser thereof. The High Priest (says he De Hierarchia Eccles. Cap. 2.
(...) etc.
) that is the Bishop, preaches to all Men the true Gospel, every one that
desires to Partake of these Heavenly Things, coming to one of the learned in
these Mysteries, desires to be led to the High Priest -- and he brings him to
the High Priest, who receiving him with gladness as a Sheep on his shoulders --
praises the bountiful prinple, by which all are called who are called at all
-- The High Priest dips him thrice. The High Priest Cap. 3. (...) etc.
himself having made a holy Prayer at the Divine Altar and beginning to Offer,
goes round about the whole Chore -- and the High Priest praising the Holy
Divine Actions, sacrifices the most Divine Thing -- and taking and delivering
the Divine Communion he ends with a Holy Thanksgiving. Do (...) etc.
nothing (says the Pseudo-Ignatius to Hero a Deacon of Antioch) without the
Bishops for they are Priests, thou their Deacon: they Baptize, Sacrifice or
Dispense the Lord's Supper, impose Hands: thou serves them as St. Stephen in
Jerusalem administered to James and the Elders. From which place it is most
evident, that all Pastors or Priests (as the Author speaks) are true Bishops,
that on the account of such things as are common to all Pastors, they receive
the prime Episcopal Honor and Deference, that there was a College of true
Bishops in the single City of Antioch, and accordingly that the rest of the
Elders with James at Jerusalem were really true Bishops no less than he. I
don't say that Bishops and Congregations were reciprocal everywhere in the
fourth or fifth Century when these Impostors wrote, only being to personat
Apostolic Men, they saw themselves obliged to mix into their Legends some
shreds of true Antiquity. The stuff they invented themselves was of a far
different and contrary Metal, and far from being so conform and like to the
Apostolic and prime Primitive Church.

. 14 And here it is to be added, that as every Bishop had once, which continued
in very many places for a good space, one Congregation only, so all Bishops
whatsoever are of the same Dignity, and Equal with one another. For Cyprian (
Mihi) Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
calls all Bishops Colleagues, adding, we force none, we give Laws to none,
seeing every Governor in the Administration of the Church, has Power to do
according to his own Will, for which he is to give God an Acconnt. And, In
sententiis Episcoporum de Haereticis baptizandis. Page 334.
for none of us is a Bishop of Bishops, or by a Tyrannical Power can force his
Colleagues to Obedience etc. And Hierome Epist. 85.
says, wheresoever Bishops be, at Rome or Eugubium, Constantinople, Rhegium,
Alexandria or Tanis, they are all of the same Dignity and Priesthood, Riches
and Poverty make not a Bishop either higher or lower, they are all the
Successors of the Apostles. Which is also Augustine's Mind, and must be granted
by all who acknowledge the Equality of the Apostles, and that Bishops were
their Successors.

Now the Truth of these two Things, viz. the allowableness of a Bishop to every
Congregation, yea the primitive Reciprocalness of a Bishop and a Congregation,
and the Equality of Bishops among themselves being supposed, which indeed is
undoubtable to all the Ingenuous, their whole Hierarchy turns to nothing.

And now I hope that which some pretend to be a mighty Prejudice, viz. that
Episcopacy still de facto has been, and from the earliest times of Christianity
we hear of Bishops, is many ways removed, and that by this time it has clearly
appeared, that either profound Ignorance, Osscitancy, or the masly beam of
Interest in Men's Eyes has been the true Source of this Prejudice.

Moreover, suppose that it could not be easily told when this Corruption, which
is like the Tares sown during the sleeping of the Husbandman, crept into the
Church: Can they tell when all other Corruptions made their first Entry? As for
Example, can they give a distinct account when the use of Oil in Baptism,
whereof Tertullian De Baptismo. Cap. 7. Exinde egressi de lavacro perunguimur
benedicta unctione de pristina Disciplina, qua ungui oleo decorum in
sacerdotium solebant.
speaks as of a thing constantly practiced among Christians, came first in
Fashion? The like I may say of Exorcization, and many other things altogether
uncertain as to their Beginning, and yet by all Lovers of the Truth of
Christianity to be Corruptions, whereof see store in Chamier's Panstratia Tom.
4. Lib. 5. Cap. 16.
.

Secondly, I trust also that by the foregoing Discourses, the Weapon the
Papists and other Hierarchicks use against the Reformed Churches to prove that
they have no Ministers, because of the want of a Succession of Bishops, is
sufficiently blunted.

And this minds me of an Objection I was assaulted with from a Gentleman of
that Persuasion, 'twas that these Episcopal Men who ordained our Pastors, gave
them the Power of Ordination neither in express Terms, nor yet intentionally;
Ergo not at all. I Repon'd, that though they did not give it them intention
Operantis, yet notwithstanding intention Operis: in so much as they ordained
the Ministers of the Gospel, all whom we sustain to be true Bishops. I add,
this is to a hair like Becan Compen. Manualis Cap. 12. Paragr. 11.
the Jebusites arguing against Luther's Call to be a Protestant-Minister,
Luther (says he) had no lawful Calling to the Ministry he exercised after his
Defection, for then he began to oppugn the Catholic Church, abolish Feasts,
Monastic Vows, and Prayers for the Dead, these things he could not do by the
Power which he had received in the Catholic Church, for the Bishop who
ordained him, gave him no Power for the Destruction of the Church.

. 15. But there yet remains a great Prejudice, and no wonder, for it comes from
a great City, Rome (say they) and other such vast Cities, which certainly
contained many Congregations, have been always ruled by their particular
Bishops as the Catalogues yet extant evinc^ But though 'twere so, seeing it is at
least, no less certain, that in other places Bishops and Congregations were
Reciprocal, we are even with them, and their Argument quite evanishes, and
Antiquity allows us to give a Bishop to every Congregation, no less than it
warrands their giving a multitude of Parishes to any one Bishop. And Dr.
Maurice page 449.
acknowledges, he never yet heard of any Man who made it essential to a Bishop
to have many Congregations under him. And he is so far in the right herein that,
during prime Antiquity, 'twas never so much as dreamed, that 'twas either
essential or any way requisite for a Bishop to have a plurality of
Congregations. It Is not (says he page 451.
) the being Pastor of one or many Congregations that makes one a Bishop; but
the Order. There are (says Saravia Exam. Tract. de triplici Episcopatuum
Genere page 16.
and have been Bishoprics so small that their Bishops had only one or two
Presbyters; for we measure not a Bishopric by the number of the Clergy or by
the amplitude of the City or Diocese, the magnitude of Riches, but by the
Authority of the Episcopal Degree, although the Bishopric be included in one
small Parish alone. And some of the most Episcopal amongst them acknowledge
that any of our Ministers though they have but one Parish, want nothing to make
them Bishops but only the Episcopal Consecration, whereby they at once yield
the whole Plea, destroy their Hierarchy, and withal discover their
preterscriptural, and therefore antiscriptural Superstition.

And now seeing there is all the warrant and allowance that either can be
desired or thought on that a Bishop and a Pastor of one single Flock or
Congregation is one and the same, and that every Congregation may have its own
proper Bishop, their Plea for the Distinction between Bishop and preaching
Presbyter, though its Ground were no less solid than it is naught and slippery,
becomes really of no subserviency at all to their Hierarchick Cause, and so on
this account is truly exhausted (for providing the Pastor of any Parish or
Congregation be constantly employed in Preaching and Edifying the People, we
shall not envy him others, so far as is requisite, to assist him, the People
may be instructed the better) Don't therefore Dr. Maurice Preface to his
Defense of Diocesan Episcopacy.
and the Men of that stamp, while they pretend that though there be allowed to
every Congregation its proper Bishop, yet there is a most different and
momentuous Controversy behind, about the Distinction between Bishop and
Presbyter, seek, as the Proverb is, a Knot in the Rush, and triffle with a
witness?

Give them moreover out of sole kindness, that the Sea Doctor Scot's Christian
Life. Vol. 2. Chap. 7. and D. M. Page 98. Et seq.
Apostolic Power and Office is permanent and to be transmitted to all Bishops,
yet on Supposition of these Truths, viz. that every Congregation had, yea or
may have its proper Bishop, and that all Bishops are equal, they shall be
compelled to desert the whole of their Plea, and acknowledge the sure
Foundation and Lawfullness of what they call Presbyterian Parity.

Secondly, Eusebius Hist. Eccles. Lib. 3. Cap. 8. (...) etc.
plainly says that it cannot be known who were the Successors of the Apostles
to feed the Churches they had planted, save what is to be collected from the
words of the Apostles, and so break the Chain at the Top, where it should be
strongest, and shows that their best twisted Cords become Ropes of Sand, to
which, as we already noticed, the learn'dest of their own Writers subscribe.

Thirdly, To come to Rome in particular, although 'twas the Head of the World,
and indeed the Head and Fountain from whence all the Hierarchicks draw their
best support, no Man of Reason, whoever looked into the diverse, yea and
contrary Accounts given by the Ancients of the first pretended Successors of
Peter; can ever infer that the Romans had, in these early times of
Christianity, one peculiar Diocesan Bishop over the rest of the Pastors: yea
indeed Cletus, Clemens, Linus, all whom, if you compare the best Accounts they
have, you shall find to have been at one and the same time Bishops of Rome, and
Successors of Peter, are a good evidence that he had no singular Successor at
all. This was so made out by the Protestant Writers, that for ought I know the
Romanists were despairing of any plausible Answer, although I doubt not, but they
take Heart, since some among the Protestants Pearson suis posthumis and Dodwell.
have used prodigious Endeavors to gratify them, and reconcile real
Contradictions, and fix the singular Successors of Peter. I can scarce light on
any of the Books they cite, and yet I Am at no great loss. For, 4 ly, It Is
certain that Peter was never at Rome, which at once dispatches the grand Plea
of all the Hierarchicks. The whole stream of Writers Arnobius. Lib. 2.
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. Lib. 2. Cap. 14. Epiphanius. Tom. 2. Page 59.
Philastrius. Hieronymus Cat Script. Augustinus Tom. 6. Page 6. Sulpitius
severus Lib. 2. and others.
who record Peter's Voyage thither either relate or suppose that his Errand was
to oppose Simon Magus, so that the Truth of both these Relations must stand or
fall together. But Simon Magus, (if we belive Origenes Contra Celsum Lib. 1.
) was never there. Simon (says he) the Smaritan and Majician endeavored by
Sorcery to destroy some, and I belive deceived many with his delusions. But now
throw all the World you shall scarce find thirty who follow him, and I perhaps
have called them more than they are. Indeed there are some few in Palestine,
but in the rest of the Regions of the World his very Name is not heard off,
although he mainly desired that his Fame might be spread abroad, and if perhaps
there be any report of him at all, it is only to be learned from the Acts of the
Apostles. And Time, which often has discovered things commonly taken for Truth
to be altoger False, has verified the words of Origenes: For the Statue which
gave the occasion of the fixion is now found to be the Image an old Sabin King
or fictitious Deity called by the Romans Semo Sangus, Sancus or Sanctus Dionys.
Halicar. Lib. 4. Ovidius Fast. Lib. 6. Livius Dec. 1. Lib. 8. Augustinus de
civitate Dei. Lib. 13. Cap. 19.
which Justine Martyr, throw his unskilfulness of the Latin Tongue, and a
Cheat put upon him by some Samaritans, took for Simon Magus as is acknowledged
even by the learned Romanist Annot, in Eusebius. Lib. 2. Cap. 13.
Valesius. The Inscription of this statue is Semoni Sango Deo Fidio. Now
according to the Genius of the Age the fraud prevailed, and Simon Magus must be
brought to Rome, made to effect monstrous Prodigies; and therefore Simon Peter
his old Adversary must also be sent thither to Conjure and Baffle him a second
time. And this is the prime Source of Peter's imaginary Journey to Rome, and
his fictitious Roman Episcopacy, and the whole Papal Structure. For, as Simon
Magus his coming to Rome is mentioned by none before Justine, and by him only
on this false Ground, so Peter's Journey thither is before that time mentioned
by none, save Papias, if he may be said to mention it, for if at all, he does
it very obscurely Eusebius lib. 2. cap. 15.
. And though he had been never so positive in this Matter, it is of small
Consequence, for, as Eusebius already told us, (though elsewhere lib. 3. cap. 36.
he forgets himself) he was of so little Wit, so fabulous and given to believe
everything he heard, that his Testimony merits little or no Credit. Irenaeus
indeed says that Papias was a hearer of the Apostles, and himself also intimats
so much, but again clearly denies it while he says Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 39.
(...) etc.
that he used, when he met with any: who had been acquainted with the Elders,
to enquire what Andrew, Peter, Philip, Thomas, James, John, Matthew and the
rest of Christ's Disciples had been wont to say. And this he intimats had been
his Practice only, when he was a young Man, and so gives us clearly to
understand that when he wrote, there was not one of the Hearers of the Apostles
alive. So far was Papias from being their Disciple. 'Twas he also who gives out
that Mark wrote not his Gospel by Divine Inspiration, but only by the help of
his Memory. 'Twas he also who was the Father of the carnal and gross Chiliasts,
and the first who abused the Scriptures, turning them all to Allegories, and
had not so much as the knowledge to distinguish Philip the Apostle from Philip
the Evangelist. The same Papias is the first Author of the report of Peter's
Journey to Rome (providing it may be said that he reports it at all) which
mistake, as Eusebius intimates Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 15.
, flowed from his misunderstanding of 1 Pet. 5. 13. The Church that is at
Babylon etc. And seeing that by Babylon in the Apocalypse Room is mean'd, he and
many of these times, through their want of skill to distinguish between the
Prophetic Mystic, and Epistolick plain Phrase and Style, concluded that in
Peter also Room is to be understood. But this Gloss is so foreign and absurd
that even the most learned of the Romanists, as Petrus de Marca Bishop of Paris
de Concordia Sacerd. and Imp. tom. 2. page 174.
acknowledges that these Words of Peter are not to be understood of Rome, but
of the eastern Babylon, where (says the Bishop) Peter was settled hereditary
Patiark. Some indeed understand them of a City bearing that name in Egypt, and
this Spanhemius F. and Dr. Pearson Posth^m. de Success. Romans Pontif, Dissert.
1. cap. 8.
prefer to the Assyrian Babylon: the former because the old Chaldean Babylon
was then desolate, the letter for this that after Anilaeus a chief man among
the Jews in these parts had injured the Inhabitans, many of them were cut off
and the rest driven from Babylon, who fled to Ctesiphon, the most part whereof
notwithstanding in a combination made against them by the Assyrians and Greeks
were either cut off or expelled. Therefore he concludes that though Peter was the
Apostle of the Circumcision, yet he could expect no harvest of the Jews in
these parts. Now, as to the ground Spanhemius goes on, it seems sufficient to
prove that it could not be the old Chaldean Babylon: For it is certain from
Scripture, and Plinius witnesses lib. 6. cap. 26. Caetero in solitudinem
rediit, exhausta vicinitate Seleuciae.
that 'twas then reduced to a solitude. It seems therefore to be mean'd of the
Principal City of the Parthian Impire which succeeded to Babylon in name no less
then in honor as is clear from that in Lucan lib. 1.
, Cumque superba foret Babylon spolianda Trophaeis
Ausoniis. --


If this their chief City was Ctesiphon or Seleucia, may be a doubt Plinius
ibid. Ctesiphontem -- condidere Parthi quod nunc est caput Regni.
calls Ctesiphon the Head of the Parthian Kingdom. But Strabo seems to be more
clear in this matter, and to give light to Pliny, Tacitus, Herodianus, Am.
Marcellinus, or otherwise to lay open the ground of their mistake. Seleucia
(says he) lib. 16. (...) etc.
a City by the bank of Tigris, as Babylon was of old, is now the Metropolis of
Assyria, near it there is a great Village Ctesiphon wherein the Parthian Kings
used to winter, sparing Seleucia that it might not be spoiled by the warlike
Scythians (by whom I understand their Auxiliary or guard Soldiers who were
rude and ready to Mutany, and therefore were not brought within their Chief and
Treasure City) this Village is now arrived at even the power and greatness of a
City. Where, as is evident, he so much prefers Seleucia to Ctesiphon that he
makes the former the chief City of the Impire. Moreover Crassus when he
designed the conquest of Parthia and the possession of the Kings treasures
being asked by the Messengers of Orodes King of Parthia why he broke the peace
made with Pompey and Sylla, said he would answer them at Seleucia Florus lib.
3. cap. 11. -- Seleucia se responsurum esse respondit.
proudly insinuating that he would subdue and spoil their chief City. And this
City expressly gets the name Babylon by Stephanus ad vocem Babylon. (...).
, and he confounds it with the old Babylon. Hence it appears that Seleucia was
the chief City of the Parthian Impire, and commonly then got the name of
Babylon, and that the very place of old Chaldean Babylon was not then known,
for they were certainly in distant places; therefore, if Josephus seem to
mention another Babylon distant from the chief City of the Parthians this is
rather to be understood of the Country Babylonia then of the old Chaldean
Babylon which then was ruined now though the Jews for a time might be compelled
to leave that principal City of Parthia they might notwithstanding soon after
be permited to return no less then these who were expelled Rome by Claudius,
got Liberty shortly to come thither again. This Dr. Pearson allows and
therefore cannot deny the probability of the other However this be, nothing is
more certain then that by Babylon, which Peter mentions, the literal proper and
well known Babylon, which was then the chief City of Parthia Seleucia, must be
meaned, otherwise the dispersion to which he writes had neither known where he
was nor what Church saluted them, which is quite contrary to the Apostles
Intention there. For at that time the Apocalypse was not written, and yet on
this most false Supposition viz. that by Babylon Peter understands Rome, was
his Journey thither founded and so must prove no less false in the matter of
fact, and with it his Episcopacy and that of the earliest Popes his pretended
Successors seeing all lean on his Journey thither. And 'its with no less
confidence and concord averred and delivered then is either his, or his
pretended Successors their Episcopacy, or ought else Subsequent to this his
falsely supposed Voyage. And indeed the evidence of this our Assertion is so
strong that it compelled even the learned Romanists themselves to acknowledge
the Truth thereof, as J. Bapt. Mantuanus, Michael Caefenas, Marsilius
Patavinus, Joh. Aventinus, Joh. Lelandus, Car. Molinaeus, who are Cited by
Spanhemius F. in his Golden Dissertation on that Subject Page 22.


In the mean while I cannot but wonder how this otherways accurat and learned
Antiquary page 146.
finds an Egyptian Babylon in that distick of Martial Lib. 14. Epigr. 15.
. Haec tibi Memphitis Tellus dat munera, victa est
Pectine Niliaco jam Babylonis acus.
The Egyptian slay gives Tapistry more fine
Than ever Babylon could sue or spin.


Where the Poet only preferrs the Aegyptain woven Cloth to the finest
needle work of the old Chaldaean Babylon; But, as it is most apparent, no more
here either expesses or insinuats that there is a place named Babylon in
Egypt, then Lib. 8. Ep. 28.
where he comends a Gown bestowed on him by Parthenius a gentleman of
Domitius's Chamber in this distick, Non ego praetulerim Babylonica picta superbe
Texta, semiramia quae variantur acu.
It far excells the rich Embroideries
Of Babylon built by Semiramis.


Moreover Clemens Romanus speaking of the Death of Peter and Paul, intimates
that he knew sufficiently where and by whom Paul was killed with other such
Circumstances of his Death, but insinuats that he had no such knowledge of any
such Circumstances of the Death of Peter. And it is colligible from Jerome in
23. Mat.
that both Peter and Paul were not killed by the Romans but by the Jews, in, or
not far from Palaestine.

'Twere easy to discover the Forgerie and Falsehood of their other Catalogues
of Bishops pretended to have been in the like great Cities, as for example that
of the Bishops of Jerusalem whereof they fain Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap.
1. (...). Eusebius. hist. Eccles. lib. 3. cap. 32. and lib. 4. cap. 5.
that the Apostles made James Bishop, and that on a ground to base and carnal,
viz. because he was the Son of Joseph, and so related to Christ whom the
Apostle Paul knew not according to the flesh. 2 Cor. 5. 16. and then make him
and his pretended successor Simeon to continue Bishops of that See from a
little after the death of our Savior to, I know not what year of Trajanus,
between which time and Adrian Trajanus's immediate successor his rebulding of
Jerusalem, they give to that Church thirteen Bishops, to all of whom little
more than twenty years can be assingn'd; yea some three or four of these are
crammed into one year Eusebius. Chronic.
and yet we hear of none of these thirteen who died a violent death, but which
yet more fully discovers the Forgery all along from the destruction of the City
by Titus, until 'twas rebuilt by Adrian there was no Inhabitant there, no
place for my L. Bishop's grace, nothing whereon to exercise the Episcopal power
save rubbish and desolation. Iren. page 301.
In none of the Churches (says Dr. Stilling fleet) most spoken of is the
succession so clear as is necessary. For at Jerusalem it seems somewhat strange
how fifteen Bishops of the Circumcision should be crowded into so narrow a room
as they are, so that many of them could not have above two years time to rule
in the Church. And it would bear an inquiry where the seat of the Bishops of
Jerusalem was from the time of the destruction of the City by Titus, ( when the
walls were laid even with the ground by Musonius) till the time of Adrian.

I shall yet in the last place adduce a few passages, and I entreat my Reader
seriously to weigh them and from whom they came, for I am sure they will give
great light and satisfaction to all the truly conscientious and disinterested.

The sixth Anathematism (says a Romanist Suavis Hist. of the Council of Trent
page 743.
) was much noted in Germany; in which an Article of Faith was made of
HIERARCHY, which word and signification thereof is aliene, not to say contrary
to the holy Scrsptures: and though 'twas somewhat anciently invented, yet the
Author is not known, and in case he were, yet he is an Hyperbolicall Writer,
not imitated in the use of that Word, nor of others of his Invention, by any of
the Ancients: and following the Style of Christ our Lord, and the Holy
Apostles, and primitive Church, it ought to be named, not Hierarchy, but
Hierodiaconia, or Hierodoulia. And Dr. Heylen, who Hist. of Episcopacy, part 2.
page 39.
like to Balaam blessing Israel when he would fainest have cursed them, uses to
establish a Presbyterian Parity of Pastors while he is most desirous to destroy
it, makes the Bishop in Justine Martyr' s time all one with the President of
the Congregation and ordinary Preacher of God's Word and Celebrator of the
Eucharist therein. And pleads that in Tertullian's mind Baptism was a work most
proper to the Bishop in regard of his Episcopacy or particular Office. And the
Doctor contends out of Tertullian that in his time Christians received the
Eucharist only from the Bishop's hands part 2 page 96, 97.
, and so there were no fewer Bishops than Congregations who met for hearing of
the Word and Celebration of the Sacraments. What show of reason can be given
(says Dr. Stilling-fleet Iren. page 257.
why the Apostles should slight the Constitution of the Jewish Synagogues,
which had no dependence on the Jewish Hierarchy, and subsisted not by any
Command of the Ceremonial Law? The Work of the Synagogue not belonging to the
Priests as such, but as Persons qualified for instructing others. And page 264,
265.
We are to take nottice, that the Rulers of the Church under the Gospel do not
properly succeed the Priests and Levites under the Law, whose Office was
Ceremonial, and who were not admitted by any solemn Ordination into their
Function. -- It is then a common Mistake to think that the Ministers of the
Gospel succeeded by way of Correspondence and Analogy to the Priests under the
Law; which Mistake has been the Foundation and Original of many Errors. For
when in the primitive Church, the name of Priests came to be attributed to
Gospell-Ministers from a fair Compliance (as was thought then) of the
Christians only to the name used both among Jews and Gentiles: in process of
time, corruptions increasing in the Church, those names that were used by the
Christians by way of Analogy and Accommodation, brought in the things
themselves primarily intended by these names: so by the metaphorical names of
Priests and Altars, at last came up the Sacrifice of the Mass; without which,
they thought the names of Priests and Altars were insignificant. This M^stake
we see run all along through the Writers of the Church, as soon as the name
Priests was applied to the Elders of the Church, that they derived their
Succession from the Priests of Aaro^'s Order. In short he still contends that
the model of Governing the Christian Church was an exact imitation of that of
the Synagogues, which were no other thing than the particular parish Churches
among the Jews, and in every one of which there was a a Bishop parallel to him
who, in the Apocalypse, is the Angel of the Church.

And Dr. Lightfoot is of the same mind; The Apostle (says he) Vol. 1. page 308.
calls the Minister Epis^opus, from the common and known title of the CHAZAN
or Overseer in the Synagogue. And Vol. 2. page 133.
Besides these there was the public Minister of the Synagogue who prayed
publicly and took care about reading the Law, and sometimes preached if there
were not some other to discharge this Office. This person was called SHELIACH
TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church, and CHAZAN HAKENESETH the Chazan or Bishop of
the Congregation. The Aruch gives the reason of the name: The Chazan (says he)
is SHELIACH TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church (or the public Minister) and the
Targum renders the word ROVEH by the word HOSE one that oversees. For it is
incumbent on him to oversee how the Reader reads and whom he may call cut to
read in the Law. The public Minister of the Synagogue himself read not the Law
publicly but every Sabbath he called out seven of the synagogue (on other days
fewer) whom he judged fit to read. He stood by him that read, with great care
observing that he read nothing either falsely, or improperly and calling him
back and correcting him, if he had failed in any thing, and hence he was called
CHAZAN that is (...) i. e. Bishop or Overseer. Certainly the signification of
the word Bishop and Angel of the Church had been determined with less noise if
recourse had been made to the proper fountains and men had not vainly disputed
about the signification of words taken I know not whence. The service and
worship of the Temple being abolished as being Ceremonial, God transplanted the
worship and public adoration of God used in the synagogues, which was moral,
into the Christian Church: to wit, the public Ministry, public prayers,
reading God's Word, and preaching etc. Hence the names of the Ministers of the
Gospel were the very same, the Angel of the Church, the Bishop which belonged
to the Ministers in the synagogues. There were also three Deacons or Almoners
on whom was the care of the poor etc. Among the Jews (says Dr. Burnet Observe.
on the 1 Can. page 2.
he who was the chief of the synagogue was called CHAZAN HAKENSETH the Bishop
of the Congregation and SHELIACH TSIBBOR the Angel of the Church. And the
Christian Church being modelled as near the form of the synagogue as they could
be, as they retained many of the Rites so the form of the government was
continued, and the names remained the same, And Obs. on the 2 Can. page 83.
In the synagogues there was first one, that was called the Bishop of the
Congregation. Next, the three Orderers, and Judges of every thing about the
synagogue who were called TSEKENIM, and by the Greeks (...) or (...) that is
Elders. These ordered and determined every thing that concerned the synagogues
or the persons in it. Next them, were the three PARNASSIN or Deacons, whose
charge was to gather the Collections of the rich, and to distribute them to the
poor.

All the Presbyters (says the Learned Le Moyne V^ria Sacra tom. 2. page 35.
Nam non omnes Presbyteri onus concionandi and Verbum Dei enarrandi in se
recipiebant etc.
) took not on them the burden of preaching and exponing the scriptures, some
were taken up in serving at the administration of the Sacraments searching into
scandals, visiting the sick, strengthening the weak, and providing for the
Churches profit, but the business of preaching belonged only to the Apostles
the Bishops and the first Presbyters. Hence in times of the ancient Church the
Bishops perpetually preached which the inferior Presbyters did not except they
were admitted thereto by the Bishops and chief Presbyters.

Most memorable to this purpose are the words of the learned Jesuit Sirmundus
apud Le Moyne page 36, ibid. Verbam Dei, soli olim in Ecclesia praedicabant
Episcopi, quarum proprie id Munus erat. Post etiam id Presbyteris, sed non uno
apud omnes tempore permissum etc.
Anciently (says he) the Bishops only and no others preached the word of God
for this was their proper province and work 'twas afterward, though not alike
soon every where, allowed to the Presbyters to preach: this was soonest begun
in the East, as is clear from the practice of Pierius, Chrysostom, and others
who preached while they were only Presbyters.

And now judge, though nothing else had been adduced but what is just now brought
from these profoundly learned and most unsuspected Arbiters, if the Regimen and
Way of the true primitive Church was not according to the Gospel Humility and
Simplicity, most opposite to a terrene Domination, Prelaticall Grandor and
Power over other Pastors, and the vanity of preterscripturall and superstitious
Ceremonies? if she then enjoyed not Bishops or Pastors, Ruling Elders and
Deacons? if then, whosoever had power to dispense the Word and Sacraments with
the Charge of any particular Flock or Congregation, was not reciprocally one
and the same with a Bishop, and finally, if the primitive Way was not entirely
one with that of our Church of Scotland, and others of the reformed Churches,
which is now known by the name of Presbytry?

Hence it is carefully to be noted how odd and grievous Alterations were made
both as to the use of Terms and in the Offices they had primitively signified
in Scripture. In, yea even after the Apostolic Age we find that the word
Bishop, wherever it holds forth an ordinary Church Officer, always signifying
a Labourer in the Word and Doctrine, and Dispenser of the Srcraments, Pastor of
a Flock or Congregation. We find also the Word Presbyter taken as its
equivalent denoting this very thing: elsewhere (as is now made evident) the
word Presbyter signifies no Pastor of a Flock, but only one who was to assist
him in Ruling and Guidance thereof; some also of this latter kind of Presbyters
designing the Ministry, there being then few or no Theological Schools, were
trained up for the Office under the Inspection of Bishops or Parochial Pastors,
and accordingly whiles assisted them therein. But this was only accidental to
the Office of a ruling Presbyter. Afterward there was a new kind of Church
Office invented whose chief work was not to feed any Flock or Congregation and
yet was reputed the Pastor of many Flocks which was a complete Contradiction.
His Province was mainly to rule and domineer over a multitude of both Pastors
and Flocks, him they called the Bishop. Another Office epually new and unknown
to Scripture and prime Antiquity was a kind of semipastor or half Minister who
was to do all the Ministerial Work, and yet was so far from having any
Pastoral Power that on the contrary he was only the subject and substitute of
another, and him they called the Presbyter: As for the other sort of Presbyters
they came in time to be well nigh entirely abolished and forgotten. The like
Chrysostom On the 6 of the Acts hom. 14.
observes of the Deacons, saying that in his time such Deacons as the Apostles
ordained were not in the Church. Hence it is not strange if the Ancients, while
sometimes they violent the Scriptures to make them favor what in their oun
times was obtaining, and at other times while, either out of design and
freedom, or casually they light on the true Meaning of the Scriptures, speak
most perplexedly of Bishops and Presbyters, and afford no small ground of
Wrangling and Disputation to all that are exercised in this Controversy.

In the mean while such Immutation was not made in a day, 'twas sloe and
apparently plausible like the weed which at lenth you may see that it is groun
up, yet its act of growing ye shall never perceive. This Alteration, as even
Spanhemius F. Introduct. ad Hist. Nov. Test. Page 166.
no enemy to the Hierarchy, observes, began first in great Cities, and beside
the general occasions or rather pretexts for it, which we already noted, there
was this color more peculiar to great Cities; in Rome, for example, tho there
were Christians sufficient to make up several ordinary Congregations, yet at
some special times all or most of these used to meet at one place, and
accordingly were accounted but one Church. This might occasion the making of a
(...) or one particular Moderator among the Pastors who got some primacy of
Order, and at these more solemn meetings of the People appeared and spoke most
and in time got the appropriation of the name Bishop: all this was
notwithstanding only a mere prostasy: he must nixt have a power over his
Colleagues in the City: the Bishops, the parochial Pastors of the Country and
lesser Cities are next to be invaded.

This Fermentation, which had small beginnings and still grew until all was
soured, suelled especially and was most operative in a time of peace, whereof
in the third Century they had a good space, even from the Death of Valerian
until Dioclesian's Persecution. The Emperors themselves (says Eusebius Hist.
Eccles. Lib. 8. Cap. 1. -- (...).
then so much favored them that they not only gave them Liberty of the public
Exercise of their Religion, but also made some of them their Chamberlains and
Governors of Provinces. In this time the alteration of both Government and
Worship was certainly not a little promoved. For nothing then reigned among the
Christians but contention and ambition. They were not content (continous he)
with the former Edifices but builded large Churches from the foundation -- But
when through too much liberty we fell into sloth and negligence, when every one
began to envy and backbite another, when we managed as 'twere an intestine war
amongst our selves with Words as with Swords, Pastors against Pastors, and
People against People, being dashed one on another, exercised flrife and
tumult, when deceit and Guile had grown to the highest pitch of wickedness --
When being void of all sense we did not so much as once think how to please
God; yea rather on the other hand impiously we imagined that human Affairs are
not at all guided by Divine Providence, we daily added Crimes to Crimes when
our Pastors having despised the Rule of Religion strove mutually with one
another, studying nothing more then how to outdoe one another in strife,
threatening Emulation, Hatred, and mutual Enmity, proudly usurping
Principalities or Prelacys as so many places of Tyrannical Domination.

To this time doubtless did the Nicene Fathers look in their (...) Ancient
Customs that they mention, which will be denied by none who remember that even
things of a very late date Vide sis Clementis Epist. Page 112. and Iren ^ verba
ap^d Eusebium hist. Eccles. Lib. 5. Cap. 24. and Optatum Milevitanum Lib. 1.
used then to be called ancient, and, which is yet more, they were wont to
pretend Apostolic Authority and Tradition for every one of their Innovations.
For this their Pride and Superstition and such Vices God sent a long and most
grievous Persecution, after which it might have been reasonably thought they
would have returned to the Humility and Simplicity of the Gospel, and
Apostolic Age. But so far were they from this that the Gangren began faster
than ever to consume the Vitals of Chrsitianity, and having got a Christian
Emperor to indulge and enrich them they quickened their Pace, and in the
gadiness of Pride and giddiness of Superstition, extravaging without bounds in
this Declension they piece and piece laid aside the Scripture, and in the model
of their Government and Worship eyed and followed three patterns, the Jewish
Policy, Ceremonies, and Temple, where there was one High Priest, the
magnificent and splendid Government of the Roman Empire, over which there was
one Head, one Emperor. And lastly, the way of the Roman Pagan Priests in which
there was also at Rome a Pontifex Maximus or High Priest over all the many
Degrees of Priests in the Empire, and so in process of time it came to pass
that he who by his first Institution was designed to be a Pastor of a Flock or
Congregation, and to imitate the Apostolic Simplicity and Humility, turned to
be the great Antichrist, the son of Perdition. and grand Emissary and
Lieutennant of the red Dragon, and these who were ordained to be his
Fellow-Pastors and Ministers of the Gospel became his Underlings and Slaves in
that Apostasy, and being martial'd into a thousand Ranks and Orders proved so
many Squadrons of hellish Locusts, so that scarce in any part of the Creation
of God was there ever a more sad and direful Depravation, if it were not when
our first Parents fell into the Cloutches of the old Serpent, or when the Sons
of God became his greatest Enemies, and those morning Stars, the beautiful
Angels turned into infernal Firebrands, black and abominable Devils.

Most observable notwithstanding, yea and adorable is Divine Providence in
this, that even in the growth and increase of this black Apostasy, the Church
in Opinion and Doctrine, at least, still held fast the great, and capital
Articles of Christianity, as the sufficiency of the Canonical Books of
Scripture, the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, of free Grace, of Justification by
Faith in Christ's Blood etc. Their great sin lay not in the Defect but in the
Excess, by superadding to these golden Foundations a heap of hay and stuble,
the wild Fancies of Apostatising Brains; And in process of time equalizing, yea
and preferring them to these Divine and most necessary Truths comprehended in
the Books of the Old and New Testament. Then it was when, though they still
acknowledged the Identity of Bishop and preaching Presbyter, or Pastor of a
Congregation, they must, among'st the rest of their novell Foppereis, raise one
Bishop, or High Priest (as they spoke) over a number of other Pastors, and
Churches, whose Ordination and Consecration must be accompanied with a dale of
Alloy suitable to this their humane and unwarrantable Institution: He must have
a Cudgel put in his hand, to signify his Rule and Authority over the People,
and a Ring to signify his Pontifical Honor, and the hidden Mysiereis
wherewithal he is entrusted Isidorus de Officiis lib. 2. cap. 6.
The Bishop being consecrated, shaven, and anointed, it was his proper Work and
Office to erect and consecrate Churches, to make their Chrism or Holy Oil; For
the Art of Besmearing was pretty early in the Church, no later at least than
their Diocesan, and therewith to anoint the forehead, Eyes, and Ears of the
Baptized, to receive the Penitents, and perform such greasy businesses about
them. These and the like Actions were reserved as the special Ornament and
Badges of the High-Priest's Honor Vide Con. Hispalense 2. Can. 7. apud
Carranzam fol. 269. and Isidorum de Originib. lib. 7. cap. 12. and de Officiis
Ecclesiasticis lib. 2. cap. 7. and Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Cler. lib. 1.
cap. 6*
. And indeed hitherto they acted congruouly, for 'twas but meet, that their own
Antichristian Inventions, the Institution whereof never came into God's mind,
should be appropriated to their own Church Officer whom God never appointed,
Caetera convenient sed non levis error in uno est.

For they debased and polluted God's Ordinance, I mean the Ordination of
Pastors which they threw in among their Trash, and left likewise to their
Bishop or High Priest as a part of his peculiar Province (Superstitionists
sometimes for such Fooleries deprave the Scripture, which Dr. Lightfoot one of
the learned est of the Church-of- England Divines, observes and baffles, Here
(says he) on Acts 8. 17.
Episcopacy thinks it has an undeniable Argument for Proof of its Hierarchy,
and of the strange Rite of Confirmation etc.) And this is very like another
Practice for Antiquity also not a white lower than their Diocesan, they made
another fixed Church Officer whom they called an Exorcist. His Office was to
dispossess and cast out Devils Vide Isidorum de originib. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. and
Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Clericorum Lib. 1. Cap. 10.
. Now surely such an ordinary Church Officer was never appointed by God, and
therefore, it is most likely that some of those Exorcists needed some to have
casten the Devils out of themselves, or at least, to have given them a a round
doze of Hellebore, no less, then did any of the (...) their Patients. But
seeing they made such a Church Officer, and the dispossessing of Devils was
among'st the greatest and most miraculous Works that ever was practiced even by
the greatest Apostles. It may be thought that this Exorcist was one of their
highest Church Officers, a Metropolitan certainly, Archbishop or Patriarch,
but he was none of these, yea he was no Bishop, no Presbyter, no Deacon, no
Subdeacon, yea not so much as an Acolyth, that is a Candle-carier, for they
used in fair-day-light and Sunshine to light Candles in the Church to obey and
fulfill (as they said) that Scripture, John 1. 9. That was the true Light,
which lighteneth every Man that comes into the World Vide Isidorum de
originib. Lib. 7. Cap. 12. Rabanum Maurum de Institut. Lib. 1. Cap. 9.
. This Exorcist was yet a degree lower than their Candle-Carier, and therefore
was placed in the very rear and tail of all their Clergy. So dangerous, yea and
unaccountable were many of their Actings, but especially in the matter of
Church-Office-bearing.

Moreover I appeal to all the judicious and conscientious if out of a
conscientious desire of conforming to the primitive Church, our Adversareis
make such a horride noise, bussle and Schism for their Hierarchy. For, suppose
it to be as true as I hope by this time to all the unbyassed it is manifested to
be false, that in all points they could vouch their Hierarchy to be warranted
by the true primitive Church and the Government of the one entirely like that
of the other, yet do they not desert her in many other things? Did the
primitive Church use Organs in Divine Worship? Were they not first introduced
in the seventh Century by Pope Vitalian Platina in Vitaliano and Volater. apud
Onuphrium in Chronographia.
And yet it is doubtful if they were so soon received: For Aquinas dislikes
and condemns them Secunda secundae Quest. 91. Articul. 2.
. Or where, pray, in the true primitive Church shall they find the Surplice,
Corner-Cap and Tippet? Or where, to name no more, shall they find the Bishop
allowed to involve himself in secular cares; Civil and State Offices or
Employments? Some used indeed, when they pleased, the Christian Emperor
allowing it, to make the Bishops Arbiters of their private Debates, but to all
the good Bishops, as Augustine In Psalmum 118.
complains, this was a most weighty Grievance. But in more early times even
this was not permitted, for Cyprian Lib. 1 Ep. 9. -- Cum singuli divino
sacerdotio honorati and cuncti in clericali Ministerio constituti non nisi
altari and sacrificiis deservire, and precibus atque orationibus vacare
debeant. Scriptum est enim etc.
condemns as altogether unlawful that any Churchman should be so much as a
testamentary Tutor to any Pupil. And mark the ground he goes on, For (says he)
whosoever are honored with the Divine Priesthood or have a place in the
Clergy ought only to serve at the Altar, and spend their time in Prayer and
Supplication. For, it is written, no Man that warreth intangleth himself with
the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him who has chosen him to be a
soldier. Th^^ is such a clear and inevitable Condemnation of the Practice of
the Hierarchicks, that the Learned Annotators, Pamelius, and the Bishop of
Oxford, finding nothing wherewith to elude it, skipp it over with deep silence.
And now judge if Cyprian was of one mind with the Bishop of Five Churches, who
will have the meaning of Paul's words cited by Cyprian to be Hist. of the
Council of Trent. page 490.
that every Christian ought to abstain from those things which are repugnant to
Christian Profession, which are sins only; and will not have the Apostle to
speak any thing of Churchmen in particular, or if Cyprian would have expon'd
the sixth of the Canons ascribed to the Apostles as does Heylyn, who Histor. of
Episcop. part 2. page 25.
makes the Canon only to mean that Bishops or inferior Clergymen might not be
Consuls, Praetors, Generals, or undergo such public Offices in the State of
Rome, as were most sought for and esteemed by the Gentiles there. Heylen is
here somewhat intricat, and his cause required it. However the sum of his drift
is, that the exercising of these or the like Offices is allowed to any Pastor
by the Canon. Now, although 'tallowed it not when the Empire was Pagan, and he
would prove something of this kind from 1 Cor. 6. where he must count all
Magistrates through the Christian World, Pagans and Unbelievers, for otherways
none shall ever prove from this Scripture, so much as the lawfullness of a
Bishop or Pastors, judging and determining any difference between any two that
referr themselves to his Arbitration. And though he should prove it, pray what is
this to part. 2. pages 22, 23.
part. 2. page 376. 377.
the exercising the Office of Consul, General, Praetor, Chancellor, Treasurer
or the like pieces of such temporal Power and Grandor? Judge moreover, were
there no more but Paul his words to Timothy, 1. 4, 13, 14, 15. And 2 Timothy 4. 2,
5. If there be Leisure left any Pastor to be either Consul, General, or ought
else of this nature: and consequently if all the shifts they use on this head
be not sufficiently overthrown by these Scriptures only. But I had almost
forgotten to notice how they torment themselves that they may torment and
detort Cyprian, For Saravia says, that the Canon Cyprian speaks off was but
particular and provincial only for the Church of Carthage. But Heylen refutes
Saravia his comment and says Cyprian spoke so, because the Church was then
almost destitute and unprovided of Presbyters. As if Cyprian had not spoken of
Chruch-men absolutely and without the least intimation of any such restriction,
and grounded his saying on a Scripture which, whatsoever it speaks of
Churchmen, confessedly says it of the mall, be they many or few or in
whatsoever time and place they live. Moreover it is most certain that in Matthew
20. 25, 26, 27, 28. The Princes of the Gentiles etc. And Mark 10. 42, 43, 44,
45. And Luke 22. 25, 26, 27. All Pastors of Flocks are prohibited to exercise
Dominion, secular and state Dignity, and a parity of the Apostles amongst
themselves, and in them a parity of all ordinary Pastors or Ministers of the
Gospel among themselves is enjoined. D. M. Page 16 and seq.
pretends to engage with the latter part of this Inference, but first he
mis-states the question as if from these Texts we pleaded for a perfect
equality of all the Officers of Christ's house without distinction between
extraordinary and ordinary Ministers, or between Pastors and other Officers,
and so his saying that the Apostles exercised Jurisdiction over other
Ecclesiastics, whether true or false, is nothing to the purpose. But says D.
M. Our blessed Savior supposes degrees of Subordination amongst his own
Disciples as well as other societies, and therefore he directs the
Ecclesiastics who would climb up to the highest places in the Church, to take
other methods then these that are most usual amongst the Grandees of the World:
He that deserved preferment in the Church was to be the servant of all. Which
answer he steals from the Jesuit Bellarmine De Pontifice Lib. 5. Cap. 10.
who answers that Christ only directs ecclesiastic Princes, and teaches that
as such they ought to rule their subjects, not as do Kings and Lords, but as
Fathers and Pastors, To whom Junius replies Tom. 2. Col. 875, 876.
that all this is quite contrary to both Christ's words and scope, The sons of
Zebedie (says he) desired a Dominion, this Christ rejects and refuses to give
them; again the falsehood of this answer is demonstrated positively by Christ's
following words, who in stead of this Dominion which they desired, enjoins them
a humble Ministry and Service. Wherefore there is a clear opposition between
Dominion and Ministry, the former belonging the World, the latter to the
Church. Bishops are not (says Bellarmine) here forbidden to exercise a
dominion like that of godly Kings, but only like that of Tyrranical Kings who
know not God. We deny (replies Junius) that there is any such restriction,
neither can it be proved. And accordingly Junius refutes and bafles all the
Sophistry that Bellarmine, and, after him, our Prelatists ordinarily bring to
prove that only tyrrany and not all sort of principality or superiority is by
our Savior in these Texts, prohibited. And with Junius joins the whole stream
of Protestant Writers. But our Savior (says D. M.) did that himself among
them, which he now commanded them to do to one another, and therefore the doing
of this toward one another in obedience to the command now under
consideration, could not infer a Parity, unless that they blasphemously infer
that Christ and his Apostles were equal: For our Savior recomends what he
enjoins from his own constant and visible practice among them, viz, that he
himself who was their Lord and Master, was their sevant, and therefore, it
becomes the greatest among them, in imitation of him, to be modest, calm, and
humble, toward all their subordinate Brethren. A sturdy argument forsooth, as
if our most blessed Master to quell his Disciples their ambition of aspiring to
a pre-eminence over one another, and to render them more content with a humble
and brotherly parity, could not adduce and urge his own most holy and meek
example of his most wonderful condescending to take upon him the form of a
Servant, and do the works of a Servant among his Apostles, and that so humbly,
as if he had been only their Companion and nothing above them: but he must
anon be concluded to degrade and throw down himself into a mere equality with
his Disciples. Can any in the exercise of his wit make such a Collection?
Neither can better befall him: for, as is his constant practice this wretched
Paralogism he also borrows from another Jebusite Cornelius a Lapide, who at the
same rate depraves this Text of Matthew to save from a mortal blow Peter's
fictitious Primacy. But in the next place, which is little better, D. M. turns
Jew on our hand: Let it be further considered (says he) that the Hierarchy and
Subordination of Priests was established by Divine Authority in the Jewish
Church, and if our Savior had pulled down that ancient Polity, and commanded
an equality among the Presbyters of the New Testament, he would not have stated
the Opposition between his own Disciples and the Lords of the Gentiles, but
rather between the Priests of the Mosaic Economy and the Disciples of the New
Testament. And agian, fearing least his J^daism and also his self-repugnancy
should not have otherways been apparent enough, We do not (says he page 27.
) now plead, as some ignorant People may pretend, that there ought to be a
Bishop above Presbyters, because that there was a High Priest among the Jews,
but rather thus, that the Hierarchy that obtained in the Patriarchal and Jewish
Economy was never abrogated in the new. Well then, is there on Earth a visible
High Priest over the whole Church the Levitical Orders, Rites, and
Temple-service, the very things wherein the Jewish Hierarchy consisted, and
shadows of Christ to come, now allowable. But to come to his cavil, and quiet
this child of Ignorance, D. M. should know that beside the Disciples ambition
to get up over one another, according to the carnal apprehension they then
entertained of Christ kingdom (wherein our Hierarchick Lord Bishops are the
Apostles successors indeed, and all Hierarchicks, men of Apostolic principles)
they looked also for a great, worldly, and civil power and dominion, which was
not at all comprehended in the Jewish Priesthood, nor was then possessed by any
of the Priests; and so our Lord's stateing the opposition between his Disciples
and the Lords of the Gentiles, is by far more apt for his purpose than if he
had stated it between them and the Priests of the old Economy, which had been
altogether lame, and done scarce the half of his bussiness. In a word, the
Romishness and Falsehood of all these his Cavills is manifest, were there no
more, from this only, that if they do any thing, they make for the defense of
that new Romish Doctrine of Peter's Supremacy, which both the Fathers, and all
sound Protestants, not only Presbyterians, but also Episcopals, yea some that
otherwise deserve not the name of Protestants, as Dr. Heylen Hist. of
Episcopacy part 1 page 15. and seq.
, explode, and prove that there was a complete Equality and Parity amongst the
Apostles: And they deduce their Conclusion especially from this text of
Matthew's Gospel and its parallels. And indeed if there be, as doubtless there
are, any places of Scripture fit to prove it, these texts deservedly hold the
first place. The Author of the Opus imperfectum, thought by some to be
Chrysostom, says, on this place of Matthew, Quicunque autem desiderat
primatum in terra, inveniet confusionem in coelo, Whosoever desires a primacy
on Earth, shall find Confusion in Heaven. Now suppose the truth of these words,
and compare them with the words of the Apostle 1 Timothy 3. 1. If a man desires
the Office of a Bishop, he desires a good work. And it is clear the Office of a
Bishop is quite another thing than a Primacy; for to desire the former is
lawful and laudable, but to desire the latter is dangerous and damnable: and
so much by the way, for I love not to transcribe the labors of others See if
you please for example Rectius Instruendum.
. And so angry is D. M. at New Opinions, and for their sake at every thing
that is New, that he scarce ever advances any Argument, Vindication, or Defense,
but what is so frequently and soundly baffled, so bare and worn, as to vy even
with the old ancient Garments of the Gibeonites. These Texts, as I said,
prohibit also all Pastors of Flocks to exercise Dominion, Secular or State
Dignities, which is irrefragably made out by our Writers against Bellarmine de
Pontifice, and other Romanists. However (...) either the Possession or Hope of
such Emoluments and Dignities, as also the glistering gayetie of gorgious and
theatrick Ceremonies, close men's mouths, and keep them from acknowledging the
Truth, for which even a Pagan Persius Satyra secunda.
may come in to reprove them, O curvae interris animae, and coelestium inanes!
Quid juvat hoc templis nostros immittere mores?
Et bona Dijs ex hac scelerata ducere pulpa.
Dull earthy minds who know no heavenly thing,
What profits it into the Church to bring
Our own Inventions? or to dream that we
Can with Lust's fuel please the Deity.
Dicite Pontifices, in sancto quid facit aurum?
Speak out your minds ye Priests and do not lie,
Can gold your holy places sanctify?


It Is an old saying that the Church brought forth Riches, but the Daugter
devoured the Mother, who when she had wooden Cups she had golden Priests, but
afterward she got golden Cups and wooden Priests. Even their Pseudo-Clement
Epist. ad Jacobum fratrem Domini.
is prolix on this subject, exhorting the Bishop to be dis-engaged of all
worldly cares and affairs, and perpetually employed in Preaching and Prayer,
and the like Ministerial duties. And indeed all Pastors of Flocks would
carefully abstain from secular and state Offices, and every thing else that may
abstract them from their Charges and Flocks, least their (...) procure them
Functius's reward. But if our Hierarchicks will not hear our blessed Lord and
his Apostles, if they will not hear the genuine writtings of the Ancients, nor
yet these spurious pieces whose Authros were otherwise sufficiently
Hierarchick and Ceremonious, I think they might listen to the Bishop af Aiace,
for he was a Member of the Council of Trent: John Baptista Bernard (says Suave
hist. of the Council of Trent page 489.
) Bishop of Aiace, who, the he believed that residencie was de jure Divino, yet
thought it not fit to speak of that question, delivered a singular speech,
saying that, not aiming to establish one Opinion more then another, but only so
to enforce residency, as that it may be really executed, he thought it vain to
declare from whence the obligation came, or whatsoever else and that it was
sufficient only to remove the cause of Absence; which is, that Bishops do busy
themselves in the courts of Princes, and in the affairs of the World, being
Judges, Chanchellours Secretaries, Counselors, Treasurers, and there are but
few Offices of state into which some Bishop has not insinuate himself. This is
forbidden by St. Paul, who thought it necessary that a Soldier of the Church
should abstain from secular Employments. Let God's command be executed, and
them forbidden to take any Charge, Office, or Degree, ordinary or
extraordinary, in the affairs of the World; and then their being no cause for
them to remain at Court, they will go to their residencie, of their own accord,
without Command or Penalty, and will not have any occasion to depart from
thence. In conclusion he desired that the Council could constitute, that it
should not be lawful for Bishops or others, who have care of souls, to
exercise any secular Office or Charge.

But all this was in vain, for that Synagogue of Satan was deaf like the
Adder, and the Bishop of Five Churches who harang'd to the contrary and eluded
or neglected all his reasons telling the Council withal, that if Aiace were
followed their Church would anon become base and contemptible, was heard with
applause of the the whole Conventicle (though not without a self-contradiction as
the Historian observes) so that this ingenuous and Christian Discourse was
slighted and contemned. Neither can I find much ground to expect any fairer
treatment from men of a Tridentine Spirit, whose strenth lies mostly in mean
sophistry, and unmanly snatching at colors and shaddous, disimulation of the
unsoundness of their Cause, banter and Hectoring, noise and ill founded claims
to Antiquity. From these I may look for unkind handling indeed; but withal
have some assurance to meet with better dealling from all the Admirers and
Students of most true and only unspotted Antiquity, the sacred Scripturers,
whom God has quickened by his Precepts, who know that serious and assiduous
Meditation in God's Law and keeping his Precepts will make them understand more
than even the Ancients, and therefore rejoice in the Way of his Testimonies as
much as in all Riches, and esteem the Words of his Mouth more than their
necessary food, to whom these are the Joy and Rejoyceing of their heart. These,
I am somewhat confident, will not be much displeased with what I have said. My
Antagonist, if any happen, or I Am exceedingly mistaken, will be of quite
different Qualities, I can sincerely affirm that I have not willingly or
wittingly injured the Truth, or any man's person, and that the Love of sacred
Verity moved me to publish these papers. Others, doubtless, of suitable
Abilities may soon advance things of far greater worth than what can come from
we whose mite is so mean and inconsiderable, and who, beside the other
disadvantages that environ me, according to the good Pleasure of him that does
all things well, from the very womb have labored under the want of that noble
Sense of SEEING, and so am obliged to read with the Eyes and write with the
Hands of others. Yet though I be deprived of the sweet Light and pleasure of
beholding the Sun, it little moves me, if so be I may see the infinitely more
precious Light of the most glorious and dear SON of Righteousness, and be
illuminated and enlyven'd with that all healling Virtue which is in his Wings.

FINIS.

