REBELLIO DEBELLATA, ET SCOTIA REDIVIVA: OR The Downfall of Rebellion, and
Scotlands Resurrection,

As it was Represented in Two SERMONS: The one at ECCLES last of May, the other
preached at JEDBVRGH June 27. 1660. Being both days set apart for Solemn
Rejoicing and Public Thanksgiving, for the happy Restoration of the KINGS
most excellent Majesty to the exereise of His Royal Power.

By JO. JAMESON Minister at ECCLES.

-- (...)

EPicharmus. Psalm. 7.16. His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.

Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known by the judgment he executes, the wicked is
snared in the work of his own hands.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, Anno Dom. 1661.

To the Right HONORABLE And Noble Lord, JAMES Earl of Home, Lord Coldinghame,
etc.
My Lord,
THe Congregations of Eccles and Jedburgh for their constant Affection and
Loyalty to the King, have been very eminent in their suffering, (as is well
known to most that knows them) and both of them, through the happy return of
the Kings Sacred Majesty, being fred from the fear of all such barbarous
violence and cruelty in time coming, and having deep impressions on their
spirits of the superlative advantage, that does redound to all the Kings
Dominions thereby, did go about the duty of Public Thanksgiving with much
cheerfulness of heart. Having; as Pastor to the one, and upon invitation
(through the seeknesse of their Minister) to the other, delivered a word of
Congratulation, in the days set apart for that Work: This most wonderful and
unexpected Revolution, restoring His Majesty so peaceably to the Thrones of His
Royal Ancestors, after such earth-shaking intervals of time, after both His
unparalelled and all good Subjects their long continued sufferings, being a
matter of such profitable and universal influence, and so signal a token of
Gods special mercy, as to these three Kingdoms in general; so to each Shire,
City, Brugh, Incorporation, Paroch, Village, Family, Person (whither of high or
low degree) in particular, and that not only in this present, but in all
subsequent and succeeding generations; I found my self bound in conscience,
according to the small measure of gifts dispensed unto ^^e, to lay before them
that which I thought both concerned them as good Christians and Loyal Subjects,
which now the importunity of several of them constrains me to make public,
and expose to the censure of these critical times.

My Noble Lord, as your Lordship knows me to be none of the most
presumptuous, so am I sufficiently convinced of my own weakness, and thereupon
very sensible how much need I have to take Sanctuary under the umbradge of some
Noble Patron; and hence it is from a long series of experiences, which I have
had of your Lordships respects in the blackest and most dismal of times (as
all others likewise who were in a suffering condition for their duty to God,
and loyalty to their King) I am encouraged (since Epistling is come in custom)
in all humility, to offer unto your Lordship those ensuing Sermons: that coming
abroad under the conduct of so Great and Honorable a Name, they may find the
better acceptance amongst all candid and loyal persons: which as your
Lordships many favors and reiterated obligations, may justly challenge from my
hands as a debt, so also do I tender with all dutiful and humble respect. Your
Lordship has the testimony of a constant friend to your Mother Church, in the
day of her trouble and affliction: and indeed, had you not stood in the way to
men's designs, the Church of God in our bounds had been drowned in a Sea of
Confusion, and Speat of Cruelty, and this is a great badge of Honor, far beyond
that of Nobility of Blood, and all the short lived Trophies of time. Although
this storm be over, it is the expectation of all good men, that your Lordships
care and tender affection shall notwithstanding continue, which will encourage
them to be earnest supplicants to God for long lasting and continual prosperity
to your House: the pouring down of the riches of His blessing on your Self,
Honorable Lady, and all the Hopeful and Noble Stems of your Ancient Family:
that you and they may be still crowned with bays of Honor here, and eternity
of Happiness hereafter, which shall ever be the fervent prayer of

My Lord Your Lordships humble servant in the Lord, JO JAMESON.
Edinburgh, Jan. 26. 1661.
REBELLIO DEBELLATA, OR The Downfall of Rebellion.
Isa. 1.25. I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and
take-away all thy tin.

26. I will restore thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as at the
beginning.


WHen personal Reformation and National Restoration meet together, the
encounter is much like Jacobs with Joseph, attended with reciprocal joy and
mutual advantage, as Joseph fed Jacob, and Jacob blessed Joseph; so the
Restoration of Civil Government, proves a Bulwark to Piety, and Holiness a
wreath of blessings to restored Government: You have these two twisted together
in this Text by way of promise, I wish they tryste together in these times in
our performance. In the Verses preceding, the Prophet has levelled many sharp
threatenings at Judah, in these two, to the remnant that shall escape from the
execution of these terrible woes denounced there, he presents a cordial of
singular value, that thereby he may resuscitate their languishing spirits,
hopeless of any deliverance, and estranged to all comfort. If you would
consider the words seriously, it will appear they contian a gracious revolution
of Divine Providence: the sun of their prosperity, which had been long under a
sad eclipse, arises here with beautiful and refreshing rays, elevating their
joy to the highest pitch, I Will turn my hand upon thee, etc. And you may take
them asunder in these two: 1. An happy change. 2. The happy consequences of the
change; or if you will, an happy change, and the happy parts and branches
thereof. The happy change, I Will turn my hand upon thee: We have seen many
vicissitudes and unhappy changes of late, making our ears to tingle, and our
hearts to tremble, which has discovered to us many hollow-hearted changelings:
Now both this Text and Time gives us occasion to hear and treat of (Rara avis
in terris) a blessed and happy change, a change though some never expected, yet
many longed earnestly to behold, and now by the goodness of our God, have
gotten occasion with the Psalmist, Psalm. 126. ver. 3. to cry out, The Lord has
done great things for us, whereof we are glad. If the Quere be moved, what is
meant by hand? It is answered, the Prophet speaks (...) after the manner of
men, yet it is to be undrstood (...) according as it will quadrate and agree
with the perfection of God; for God has no hands, nor feet, as the
Anthropomorphits fondly did imagine: so that by (hand) is understood the power
of God, in the exercise of which Organ and Instrument, the power of man both
does appear, and is represented. Gods power and hand in Scripture, sometimes is
taken for His punitive Justice, 1 Samuel 6.5. Job 13.21. Sometimes it is taken
for his preserving Mercy and delivering power from evil, Isa. 11.11. It is this
last acceptance here it goes under, As if God had said, I will put no longer
out my power to punish you for your sins, but will turn it into another channel
for thy Restoration and building up: Which affords to us this Doctrine.

God does not always keep his Church in the furnace of affliction, but
allows them times of Release and Deliverance: He does not always chide says
the Psalmist, nor keep his anger for ever, Psalm. 103. ver. 9. He is not worse
to his Saints, nor he willed them to be to their servants, He commanded to
grant unto them their years of Jubilee, and can it be possible that he will deny
unto his Church her times of Joy, He has given to her times of Jubilee and
solemn Manumission from her Oppressors, changing her ashes unto beauty, and
making the bones broken to rejoice, Psalm. 51.8. What was Christ's lote in his
death, is the Churches in this life, he carried his cross a while, and then he
was eased by Simon of Serene: The Church may be under a heavy burden of
calamity, but he will not let it rest upon her lote, lest his people put forth
their hand unto iniquity; which stream if we should follow up to its source, we
will find it billowing out from the fountain of Gods love, and no product of
the Churches merit: It is upon this score we are to reckon all the favors that
we have of late received in this Church and Kingdom, yea, the Church Triumphant
as to her glorious seize, speaks in no other language, and hereupon we
ought to go out to meet the Lord with praise, who has compassed us about with
songs of deliverance, Psalm. 32.7. And since he comes out to us with changed
dispensations of providence, let us meet him with changed dispositions of
heart; have we not good reason so to do, since the three bitter cups, 1. Of
astonishment and desolation: 2. The cup of fury: 3. The cup of trembling,
mentioned, Ezekiel. 23.33. Isa. 51.17. which we have been drinking of these many
years, are changed unto three joyful cups, the cup of Blessing, the cup of
Consolation, the cup of Salvation, used frequently among the Jews, and this day
put morally in our hands: 1. The cup of Blessing, 1 Cor. 10.16. which was used
by the Jews at their solemn Feasts, so called, because of these Blessings and
Thanksgivings annexed. We have this put in our hands this day, having in our
Kings return received many Blessings, and so there is required much Blessing
and Thanksgiving from us, which if we pay, we make use of this cup: let us not
forget thus to drink liberally, for there is no fear of excess thereby. The
second cup was the cup of Consolation, used by friends in time of mourning,
Jer. 16. 7. to moderate their sorrow, and refresh their spirits, and this also
is presented to us in the return of our gracious King; for, was not loyal and
faithful hearts mourning for three dead Kingdoms, the death of a pious and wise
King, and the affliction of his Royal Successor? now here they have all
consolation, both as to the resurrection of three Kingdoms, the condign
punishment of unparalelled parricids, and the following glory and happiness to
his present Majesty. The third cup is the cup of Salvation, Psalm. 116.13. The
Ancients after signal deliverances, used first to offer Sacrifices, and
thereafter to have solemn Feasts, at which they rejoiced in God, and moderatly
(but yet cheerfully) made use of the creatures: after which they had a cup,
which every one lifted up as they drank, and this was called the cup of
Salvation; for hereby they testified how highly their hearts were lifted up to
God in the sense of their deliverance from their enemies, and the miseries
under which by them they were born down: This also is given to us this day; for
we have received salvation from our enemies, deliverance from our oppressors,
and so have good reason morally to lift up our hearts to God in the sense of
his goodness, as they did this cup ceremonially, even with spiritual
rejoyceing in his Name.

Thus we have shortly spoke to the change, now we come to the branches, or if
you will, the effects thereof: The first is, I will purely purge away all thy
dross, and take away all thy tin: The second is, And I will restore thy
Judges as at the first, etc. The first holds out the malum ablatum, the evil
that is removed: The second, the bonum collatum, the good that is restored. For
the first, It holds out the evil that is to be removed, what this was, it
will not be amiss that we make some enquiry; Some think it only to be the
grown of prosanity and looseness of life, and the creeping in of Idolatry and
Hypocrifie, expressed here by the names of (dross) and (tin) others think
the evil thus expressed, includes with these sins, the unlawful, wicked and
usurped Power lifted up over them; the time of which may fitly be referred to
the days that Senacherib came up against Judah, 2 King. 18.13. who took many
of their fenced cities; or else to the time of Achaz (for Isaiah prophesied in
the reign of both these Kings) when the Kingdom was under the feet of the Kings
of Israel and Edom, 2 Chronicles. 28. These forementioned sins being the effects of
the bad Government of these unfaithful Rulers, following als naturally
thereupon, as the inferior Spears do the motion of the first mover: The Dutch
Notes favors this interpretation, and Vrsin upon the place has also a hint
thereat, which I incline to follow, thinking it a spiritual thrift to join
such Interpretations as do not jusle one with another, and shall accordingly
handle the words, but shall first speak to the removing of the usurping
external, and then to the removing of the usurping internal power.

For the first, The removing of the external usurping power, I will purely
purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tin: Here be three things
wrapped up, 1. What is to be removed, Thy dross and all thy tin, these two
expressions point at two several kinds of their present Rulers: The first of
which decyphering such who had neither title nor qualification for that office,
some of their off-scourings who did associat with the Invaders, or else some of
these who did invade and wanted sails for such a bottom as they embarked into,
these were simply unprofitable, and als useless for the Commonwealth, as
dross to a Goldsmiths. The second delineateth another kind and generation of
them who had accomplishment and parts, but no just title to the office of
Magistracy, their qualification giving to them a show, but their cruelty and
oppression both in attaining and retaining the same, making them to differ als
far from the true Magistrate, as Tin from Silver and Gold: these are
comparatively unprofitable, and more burdensome in their little finger, then
the righteous Ruler in his loins. Whence these two Propositions may be
gathered: First, Sometimes the basest of men climb up to the exercise of
Government: Secondly, Such sort of Rulers are most unprofitable to a Kingdom.

1. Sometimes the basest of men climb up to the exercise of Government; did not
Abimelech that Bramble, come to be Lord and Lawgiver to all his Brethren, Judge.
9? And Zimri that King-killing monster (though his time of enjoyment thereof
was short) to the Throne of his Master? Athenion, a man of no great extract,
arriveth at the Government of the famous City of Athens: Jack Cade had no worse
success, who associating with Birds of his own feather, proves like the
Dragon in the Revel. with this difference, that whilst the one draws Stars
from Heaven with his tail, the other draws his associats to be stars in the
heaven of Magistracy, Yesterday, Mushromes and Pieces of most useless dross,
from the filthy dunghill of obscurity and baseness, though they proved but
meteors and of no long continuance. And it is no wonder it falls thus out, if
you will look unto the ladder by which they mount up to this pinnacle: the
first step of which is a great pretense for the liberty of the Subject, raising
Hew and Cry as if some had stolen this from the people, whereas none but
themselves have such a design: This great Thief and Mountybank imitateth the
pity Thief his younger Brother, who cutteth his neighbors purse, and then
cries out with the first, hold the Thief; bewitching so the people, that with
Esops Dog, they grip at the shadow of Liberty, and lets the substance slip:
many people being so fick of a feverish credulity, that they promise to
themselves in new Magistrates, mountains of commodity, dreaming in their
change, to fall on such a Master as the King of Moroco promises to be to his
Subject, one that will do justice to all men, make the Sun to shine, and the
Clouds to rain, and the Earth to prove fruitful.

The second step is, The winding of themselves (as the Serpent did himself into
Paradise) into such a degree of Military command, as may fit them for some
State prodigy, and the moulding of all Affairs, according to the pattern of
their own pleasure: The Spirit of God gives the Sword to those that have the
right to judge, most clearly in Scripture; but they think the right to judge,
belongs to these who have the Sword, coercive and punitive power, they make
the constituent the Spirit of God the consequent of Magistracy, but this is not
the first lie that they have given to the Spirit of God.

The third step is, Making use of that Sword-power, to the impoverishing of all
their enemies, chastising them by this rod of Iron, thereby eating up like a
moath their Estates, and as a Horse-leach souking out the blood and vitals of
their Fortunes, do cruelly make them transgressors for a word, and put their
tongues in the stocks, and their persons in prison, that they may captivate
their spirits to despondency, or by breaking their hearts, cause them to mend
their pace to eternity.

The fourth step is, The secret underminding of the honor and credit of those,
whose study it was to stand in the way of their rebellious projects; as Absalom
did with his Royal Father: and if these be so blameless, as they can have no
true and just ground to render them odious from, by a devote artifice, they can
charge them with crimes (as being enemies to Religion and the power of
Godliness) of which themselves are guilty in an eminent manner.

The fifth step of this ladder is, The making use of some Spiritual Heralds
(so Adonijah did with Abiathar the Priest, 1 King. 1.7.) to denounce wrath and
judgment against all the opposits: And like Achabs false prophets, prophefie
success and honor to them, sending their rebellions designs abroad to the
acquaintance of the vulgar, under the impresse of Divine Authority, these not
being so foreseeing as to remember omne malum incipit in nomine domini, that
all wicked designs are covered under the fair pretenses of Godliness. And if
these usurping heads intend the extension of that power, to procure among
those, they are to invade some of the same Coat to pull a coal from the Altar;
to put both Church and State in a fire, that so they may eat the fruits of that
maxim of Machiavil, divide and impera, divide and reign.

The sixth step is perjury, Looking upon Oaths and Vows as pias frauds, holy
ingines, and these like a sleep-pillow they put under peoples heads to lull
them fast asleep, that they may neither see their projects, nor fear their
power, of which they make as frequent use, as the thief of his artificial
lantern, by which he beholds others, and passes unseen himself.

The seventh step is, Blasphemy against the Kings Majesty; for having
blasphemed the Name of God, it follows, that they blaspheme the King, Gods
Vicegerent: These two like Simeon and Levi, marches together in others hands;
it seems they have no purpose (though out of no respect to him) that Jude
should be a false prophet, who foretells, ver. 8. That in the latter times,
there shall be a generation who delight to speak evil of Dignities: But though
Jude fortelleth this, yet he approves it not: for the same Spirit Jude spoke
by, Prove. 24.21. joyneth these two together, Fear God and honor the King: And,
Exodus 22.28. It is expressly forbidden, Thou shall not revile the Gods, (that is
the Magistrate) nor curse the ruler of thy people, and avouched to be a high
contempt of Gods self, 1 Samuel 8 7.

The last step is blood, Even the blood of Kings, King-killing, which in all
ages has been looked upon (except among the Jesuits) as the highest of
villainies; this they can go about and perpetrate with the boldest countenance
that ever any thing was acted. The light of nature taught the heathen, that
bloodshedding was a great pollution, (...), pollute not thy hands with blood,
much more the shedding of the blood of Kings, is of that nature. Xiphilinus
determines, it was not competent for Subjects to judge them, (...), it is to
God alone the judging of Princes belong: far less is it for Subjects to kill
them, Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis.

Use 1. We may behold, hence, that it is no wonder that such come up unto the
batlements of Government, since they climb by such a stair: men that will
extinguish the light of conscience within, and draw a skryne betwixt it and any
light, the sun of Divine Truth in Gods Word does communicate from without,
being like the unjust Judge, Luke 18. neither fearing God nor reverencing man:
what great things of time may they not reach and attain unto.

Use 2. It is als little wonder to see them fall trimbling down, like Phaeton
in the fable, kicked out of the Chair of that Chariot they were driving, and
made a ludibry and mocking-stock to all the world about, For thy violence
against thy brother Jacob, shame shall cover thee, and thou shall be cut off
for ever, Obad. 10.

Use 3. Beware of meddling with things too high for thee; Solomon's counsel is
good, meddle not with these that are given to change. These will be Gods on
earth: and while they are climbing to taste of this forbidden fruit, they are
falling down to the society of the devils in hell, they are externally
ascending, but spiritually descending: they must have esteem among men, and in
the mean while, they loss their esteem with God. This climbing (to their small
satisfaction) makes them climb another ladder where they reap neither the
fruit of honor nor profit.

Prop. 2. Invaders and Usurpers of Magistracy, are unprofitable for the
Commonwealth, no better then dross and time to the Goldsmith, of which he can
make no Jewel nor precious Vessel; whither these be both without Title and
Parts, or have Parts and want Title: a Gold-ring can never be made of tin,
more nor of dross: What profit had Shechem by Abimelech, Judge. 9.57. And all
the evil of the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them
came the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal: no, they are so far from being
profitable, that they are a very burden, proving like an unfaithful steward to
his master, squizing his tennants without pity or compassion; or like to
Pharaohs Taskmasters, whose oppression imbittered the lives of the children of
Israel, yea more, they are a very plague, and one of these terrible plagues the
Lord smote Egypt with, Psalm. 105.34. He sent locusts and caterpillars that
destroyed all the herbs, and eat up all the fruits of the land: Indeed such
are locusts to that Kingdom they bring under their power: they and their
supporters destroying all the fruits of the land, their purses being as empty
of Money, as their persons are of worth, the people to make them up, must pull
themselves down, and is not this to be unprofitable in a singular manner?

The reasons of this are: First, These are men utterly void of a public
spirit, having their own greatness, not the peoples good before their eyes,
and it is impossible that it can be otherwise* when this is made the mark at
which all their endeavors are levelled.

Secondly, Such are without all sympathic and fellow-feeling of peoples
distress and miseries, not being the kindly parent, Pater Patriae, but like
the unnatural Mother in Solomon's time, cruel as Tigars, and so their
administrations cannot not but be very far from bringing in any profit to a
Kingdom.

Thirdly, It comes to pass on this account, because they are void of
conscience; for they resolve to throw this aside, as the main remora to great
atchievments, and least their impiety should become palpable, they do it
neatly, even under the pretense of a most tender conscience.

Fourthly, They are thus unprofitable, because they are men void of all honor;
he that makes proprium commodum supremam legem, his own advantage the Supreme
Law, can never be a man of honorable principles; and one that acts not from
such, will never be instrumental to do good to a Kingdom.

Lastly, All their supporters are of the same stamp; for it may be said of them
as God said of the makers and worshippers of Idols, That they who make them be
like unto them, and so are all they that trust in them: Hence both great and
small of them become birds of prey.

Use 1. Here is a true character of these that ravish Magistracy, and as by a
glass their complexion is represented; however, they promise great things to
the deluded people, and flatters them with a hope of heaven upon earth, under
the shadow of their power; yet they are like Joah to Amasa, kissing and
embracing, that they may the more covertly cut them off; doing as those who
manage young horses, soberly and wisely handle them, till once they be in the
sadle, and then they ride them as they please, and make them give obedience to
their cruel commands, or else to resolve to be overwhelmed in utter ruin.

Use 2. How good reason have we to bless God, Psalm. 14. ver. last, who has
freed us of this woeful generation, that as we read of some Cats, who have been
found standing over children, with their mouths to theirs, souking thence their
breath, were standing over all degrees of people in this Land! and if God had
not in time prevented them, they had made us a most miserable people; no, they
had cut us off from having a Name among the Nations; and so much the higher
should our rejoyceing arise, that we see in their filthy advantage and unjust
gain, they have met with signal disappointment, it proving as the airly dew:
and the sweetness and contentment which they found in our ruins, nothing but
(...) a false sweetness, many of them vomiting up their morsels, which cruelly
and greedily they had devoured.

3. Let us pray to God to bless him and them who were the instruments in Gods
hand of this happy Revolution: that man of Valor who lately commanded in this
Land, and those of our Nobles, Gentry and Pastors, that animated and encouraged
him unto the work, being unto him (under many sad discouragements he met with)
as Aaron and Hur to Moses, holding up his heart as those did Moses his hands.
The good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, be toward them all; for they have
sweeped to the door of these Kingdoms, the dross and tin of Usurpers: it
was God that guided them in every step, for they walked in the midst of
hazards. The Jewish Rabbis have a fancy, that the misreading one letter in the
words, Ein Kadosh Caihovah, Beth, to wit, for Caph in JEHOVAH, destroys the
world. Truly the misplacing one step of him and them, had destroyed the whole
world of our comfort: that Lord who guided them then, guide them all still!
till, as they have brought these Lands to the enjoying of peace and prosperity,
they themselves may be brought to the enjoying of eternal felicity.

The second thing in the words, is, The remover, He who purges out the dross
and the tin from among them: Its (I) that is God, it is He that lays the
Axe of Judgment to the root of the Bramble; no less (...) Omnipotency, and
there is no let to the doing thereof, when Omnipotency is streached out.

The third thing, is, The manner how this is done, that is expressed in the
words purely purge; and because the word Tsarash, translated to purge,
signifies to melt or burn out: I incline to think that the Allusion here, is
made to the purging by fire, it being a word proper to Goldsmiths, and that the
Nown is included in the Verb, I will purge with fire purely; or as it is in the
Marginals of some Bibles, I will purge you according to pureness, which
seems to be pureness of fire, and in this I follow the English Annotations
on the place. If the Quere be moved, What is meant by this fire? I answer, It
is Gods indignation and anger which is very fitly represented by, and resembled
to fire upon many accounts; but especially, because of its penetrating nature,
Hos. 8.14. and because of its destroying nature, Prove. 30.16. For as fire
penetrateth and runs through the Metal in a searching way, and destroys
that which is combustible when it seazeth upon the same, so can Gods anger
pierce in unto the strongest combinations, and also destroy them. Then you have
here first the manner of removing of these as to man, which is with difficulty
and hardship; for the removing of dross by melting, is no easy task. And,
secondly, the manner as to God, and that is by the fire of His anger. Hence
from these two, the removing and the manner of the removing of these evils thus
explained to you: I offer these three Observations.

1. It is very difficult to get the dross of Usurpation purged out of a Land.
2. For as difficult as it is, God can perform it. 3. God in his performing
hereof, pulls down Usurpers in his indignation and anger.
Obs. 1. It is a very difficult work the purgeing out of Usurpation from a
Kingdom: What blood was shed? what pains was spent? what time past ere
Abimelech was brought down from his greatness? And wrs the overturning of
Athaliah any easier task? Did she not keep the Chair six years in despite of
all the Loyal and Royal Party of Judah?

The reasons why this is so hard a task, and men meet with such difficulties
therein: Are first, the general impenitency of all sorts and degrees of people,
they taking the boldness to sin with a high hand against God, and wilfully
refusing to turn from the evil of their way; God does in justice continue upon
people the yoke of Usurpation; because they will not take upon them the yoke of
his subjection.

The second reason is from the cruelty of Usurpers, they doing with all men of
power and parts that will not bow down to worship their Dagon, as the
Patriarchs did with Joseph; banishing, selling, imprisoning them: yea worse,
beheading them, lest one time or another, they might have watched an
opportunity to bring in the Government to run in its right and old channel.

The third reason is from their falsenesse. Matchavel, no, the devil himself is
hardly more a cheat, then some Usurpers have been, having such a faculty of
bewitching simple ones, to the belief of their Saintship, by a devote deb^uchng
of themselves (to peoples apprehension) and taking upon them the guilt of much
sin; for which they declared themselves (as indeed they had reason) not worthy
the name of Christians, that their grossest facts being thus tinctured with
such extraordinary professions of humility and holiness, were swallowed down
by people without any further enquiry; so that they cheated the people in
telling unto them the very truth.

Fourthly, This comes to pass through the treachery of many, who becoming
eyes to the Usurpers, as to the discovery of any designs against them, were
made use of by them as so many Beagles, to hunt out and discover all these who
had any inclination to overturn their power, keeping them into a chain of Gold;
and as they had information, sending them abroad to all Comers, to all
Countries, yea, even to the Family of the righteous Heir: A man's enemies, says
our Savior, may be these of his own house.

Fifthly, Because of the baseness of the Rich, and those on whom God has
bestowed great things, who make their worldly concernments and Estates their
God, laying down this base principle to stand with all, and fall with none, so
that with Issachar, they couch under the burden of Usurpation, and rather then
they should undergo any hardship, they will suffer Religion to loss its
splendour, the King his Crown, their Country her Honor.

Lastly, Because of the diligence of Upstarts, who in their Countries ruin,
purchased to themselves great Means and Estates: who that they may not loss
that which they have most unlawfully got, diligently take all ways, and use
all means, per fas and nefas, to support the Bramble, under whose shroude they
have so well prospered.

Use 1. This informs us why these three Kingdoms have these many years
groaned under Usurpation, it being so hard and difficult a work to pull it
down, since there was so much of impenitency in the Nations, so great cruelty
and d^ep cunning in the Usurpers, so much treachery among the poor, such
baseness of spirit among the Rich, such diligence among Mushromes, produced by
the influence of that prodigious Comet, that was Gods Attila to these Lands of
late; we have far better reason to admire that our deliverance was so soon
obtained, than that it was so long deferred.

Use 2. Hence we may see what sense we should have of our deliverance; the
greater difficulty that has been therein, the greater degree of sense thereof
should be unto us: The sharpness of the pangs that the mother has in
childe-birth, makes her when she is delivered from torment, the more highly to
account, and thankfully to remember of her coming back to her wonted health:
Exquisit has been the pangs of these three Kingdoms, especially of this, in
the attempting that which now we enjoy; The child having been brought to the
birth, and there being no strength to bring forth, which calls unto us, to
value the same at the highest rate.

Obs. 2. Though Usurpation be not easily pulled down, yet the hand of
Omnipotency can dash it in pieces: Shall the Lion roar, and the beasts of the
Forests not trimble? Asserteth not God this for his prerogative, to pull down
one, and set up another? Has not He in His hand a full cup, whereof He can
make the mightiest drink? Though thou mount up with the Eagles, and build thy
nest with the Stars, yet I will bring thee down, says the Lord, Obad. 1.4. How
soon can he turn the wheel of Providence upside down, and take the greatest
Anakim of policy, in the thicket of his own projects: and when he would hide
himself from God and Man under the shade of his own contrivances, the Lord can
bring him out as he did Adam, conscious of his wickedness, and make him fall
into the ditch he has dug for others, Psalm. 7.15. His mischief returning
upon his own head, and his violent dealing on his own pate.

Use 1. For reproof, How justly may I challenge an unbelieving generation, who
expunged this truth out of their Creed? many being amongst us like Jorams
favorite, on whose shoulder he did lean, when the lepers brought the good news
to Samaria of the flying of the Syrians, 2 King. 7.17. supposing this Babel of
unrighteousness could never be pulled down, which made them both so forgetful
of their duty to the King, and so forward in devoting themselves to the
Usurpers, becoming an Echo to all their unjust commands, and the instruments of
many of their barbarous cruelties, cleaving as fast to them as these
shepherds, who first found out the Loadstone did to the rock thereof: never
thinking there would be a day of reckoning before men, and putting far of the
great reckoning before the Tribunal of God.

Use 2. Let us exalt the Name of him whose right hand is a hand of power, and
does whatsoever he will, both in the heavens and in the earth: This day is a
day of Thanksgiving and Praise, and when every point we meet with do give us
occasion to enter upon the duty of the Day, we were much to blame if we should
be deficient herein. We have good reason to bless the God of Israel, that has
confirmed to us this Truth, which was almost, as many other Truths (in these
Truth loathing times) perished as to peoples acknowledging thereof: And in
doing of this, as he proclaimed to Moses all his holy Attributes in passing by
before him; so to us most evidently two of them, his Wisdom and Justice; his
Wisdom, in that he has made their fall so like to the fall of Herod, Act. 12.
who was eaten up with worms that came out of his own bowels; for by the
vermin of the Army, through the prowess of their General, bred in the bowels
of their politic contrivances, are they eaten up and overthrown. His Justice,
that made that Army whom they had Instrumented in the oppressing, ruinating,
murdering of many, turn upon themselves, as the Elephants did of old in many
Battles, upon their own, and overturn them utterly. This calls both for our
Admiration and our Adoration.

Obs. 3. God in performing hereof, pulls down Usurpers in his anger and
indignation, Jud. 9.53. Thus Jeroboam, who revolted from the house of David,
his posterity is rooted out, and not one to piss against the wall is left
undestroyed, 1 King. 15.29. And Zimri who killed his Master, had not long
peace, till the vengeance of the Lord seized on him. God is angry with such
wicked ones every day, Psalm. 7.11. Although providence do seem to dandle them,
carrying them up in the arms of success for a time; yet even then the Lord
his anger is against them, but it is like a mine of Powder, the Train burning
some hours in secret before it come to the height, and then breaking out to the
astonishment of beholders.

And his anger in pulling down of them, appears in these several particulars.

First, In the publikenesse thereof, it is in the view and observation of all
the Kingdoms and Nations about: these Usurpers being brought upon a Theater
before them, and they fitting, as it were, on benches looking on, God having
called them as in Joel 3.12. He calls upon the nations to gather themselves,
for that he is to cast down the mighty (so is it in the old Translation) and to
sit himself as Judge.

Secondly, His anger in their fall appears in the non-expectednesse thereof,
when with Herod, they are soaring upon the wings of applause, and in popular
acclamations, called and accounted pity Gods; and they supposing to have good
ground of promising to themselves, that their mountain shall stand strong: even
then it is, that he can and does, throw both the horse and his rider into the
sea of confusion, and utter ruin, Exodus 15.1.

Thirdly, It appears from the shamefulnesse of their fall; for it is not
ordinary and common, but to the lowest step of indignity and disgrace, and that
without regrate or pity; yea, with the joy and rejoyceing of all that are not
partakers of their guiltiness, the Lord throwing shameful spewing on all their
evil purchased glory, Hab. 2.16.

Fourthly, It appears in the terriblenesse thereof, their fall carrying with
Them all their supporters and props, root and branch, puteth them in Adonijahs
and his fellow-conspirators their posture, 1 King. 1. to flee here and there,
not knowing where to lay their head; it coming upon them like another day of
Judgment, that they know not where to get a mountain under whose shadow they
may lurk, and hide themselves from the stroke their impious courses has
deserved.

Lastly, Gods anger appears in the concomitants of this fall, which is
searching out and bringing to light the hidden windings of their sinful ways,
by pulling off that mask, that before did palliate their villainies, under which
they have long walked; beside the candle God lights in their own bosoms,
their awakened consciences, which mustereth up before them all their rebellious
and sinful acts of violence and oppression: The Lord lights another candle,
His own wise providence, which strangely brings to remembrance, and presents
to the eye of the world, that which they thought in their policy to have
buried in forgetfulness, even their hidden things of dishonesty and
disloyalty, Hab. 2.17. The violence of Lebanon shall cover thee, It being as
impossible for them to cover their violence, as it was for Lebanon to cover
hers.

Use. Behold here a Scheme of the late tumbling down of that Babel, which was
founded on blood, and builded with blasphemies; has not the Lord, as with a
Sunbeam, written His displeasure upon the builders, and discovered his anger
in their ruin? so public is it, that the eyes of the nations are fixed
thereon with admiration; so unexpected, that immediately before (as before the
breaking of day, the night falls darkest) the worst of evils were imminent,
both State concussions and Church confusions, and these who did first shape
that Monster- commonwealth, were ready to set it upon a surer foundation then
before; so shameful, that he who assumed to himself the Title of Highness, is
thrown down to the Abyss of Lowness: and that RVMP which was the water of
which this Ice did Coagulate, and in which it Thawed again, is now quite
exhaled by the Beams of the Royal Sun: So terrible, that their potent Allies
abroad, dare not make mention of their Names, but with Apologies in their
mouths: and their supporters at home are flying, being pursued with their own
evil consciences out of this world by posterns of their own making: Whilst
others are justly to be hailed to the Gallows to expiat their villainies with
the best of their blood: And so powerful is the searching that attends on
it, that you may discover them by their countenances, their countenances being
als false to their consciences, as their consciences had been to their King and
Country: As the day it discovers the thief, so our Deliverance does these,
and calls aloud, Behold the man that made not God, but lies his refuge. If we
shall search how this ruin came upon them, we must cast an eye both upon the
fuel of Gods wrath among them, and upon the friends that appeared for us. The
fuel amongst them was their own sins, none being so great enemies to their
standing as themselves, like Jeroboam who founded the greatness of his family
by his policy, and ruined the same by his provocations; the sins that kindled
the Lords anger against these sons of Belial, and hailed down vengeance on
their heads, Were, first, Their pouring out, as water on the ground, the Royal
Blood of the Lords Anointed Quo nulla dudum splendidior, malo illuxit orbi,
lampas, and in polo non sidus ullum puriore lumine coelicolis renidet.
, without regard to his Sacred Person, brinding him in the noontide of the day,
most barbarously to the place of Execution, before the Gates of his own Palace,
and in the view of his Subjects, separated the Head of the Head of three
Kingdoms from his Shoulders; a fact without all parallel, and to be remembered
with continual lamentation, as to his loss, and with everlasting detestation
of their horrid cruelty, this cried aloud: Woe to him that builds a town with
blood, Hab. 2.12. The Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man, psalm. 5.6.
Secondly, The banishment of the Royal Family, by which they were kept long
under the pressour of many afflictions, others impudently and insolently
possessing that which was their Birthright: This cried aloud for vengeance in
the words of Hab. 2.6.11. Woe to him that increases that which is not his, and
inlargeth his desire as hell: For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the
beam out of the timber shall answer it:

Exurge vindex, and rubente
Sacrilegos jaculare dextra.
And no wonder the voice hereof was loud, since their sufferings were so
singular. Thirdly, The wrongs done to Religion spoke in the same dealect, and
was a part of that fuel, for Bethel was become Bethaven: the Trojan horse of
Toleration having entered the Ghurch of England, with an Amsterdam in the Belly
thereof: and that at length it might be brought to this Land, like the Altar of
Damascus: Was there not exotic forms of Government molded above, to make a
gap for that Belgic Monster here? so that Religion mourning, cried out with
the Church, Lam. 1.4. The ways of Zion do mourn, because none come to the
solemn feasts: all her gates are desolate: her priests sigh, her virgins are
afflicted, and she is in bitterness. Fourthly, The Tribunal Seats of Justice
cried against them; Novices, and Children as to such employments, being left to
Administer Justice; Drymen and Swordmen were turned into Judges, a strange
kind of Metamorphosis! They did suppose that their Sword had a kind of
Omnipotency, like the fiery tounges to the Apostles, bringing immediate
qualification. I never heard of, nor saw any of our Learned Lawyers (who for
the well of the people were necessitate to plead) before them, but it put me in
mind of some Pilgrims, saying over their Matins, to the Lady of Loretto; for
they understood no more what was spoke unto them, nor that statue there, what
is uttered by the Pilgrims: So our Laws were wrested, not only through
affection to their followers, but also through Ignorance how to execute the
same. Fifthly, Many impoverished and born down family by unjust Forfeiture,
Imprisonment, Sequestration, and their inhancing all Traffic to themselves,
cried to God, That for the oppression of the poor, and the fighs of the
prisoners, he would arise Lastly, The blond of many of all Degrees, shed not
only in War, but in Peace and in cold blood, cruelly as well as unjustly:
Tutlfield.
the burying of several persons before their breath expired, and selling others
as Slaves, all these called for vengeance and for fire to come out from Shechem
against Abimelech, and from Abimelech to destroy Shechem. These were the fuel
amongst them of Gods indignation, the friends appearing for us to speak a word
for the oppressed, were Gods Mercy, His Faithfulness, and His Justice; His
Mercy pleaded for pity, His Faithfulness for accomplishment of His promise,
His Justice for vindication of His people; His Mercy stirred Him up to help,
His Faithfulness to make haste, His Justice to avenge: so that you see clearly
here, the representation of that Catastrophe, and deserved ruin of these
bloody Traitors, both as to its manner and motives.

Use 2. How may honest-hearted upright men, sit down and bless God that they
have been kept in bad times, from meddling with these Monsters! such have yet
kept (though, it may be, they have loosed much) a very precious jewel, that
these who have gained most in these times, never took pains to possess, a good
conscience, which is better nor all the others rich seize: and besides
that, much honor, and now they may hope to reap the fruits of their integrity
and faithfulness.

Use 3. We may hereby see that it is not so easy as every one does imagine, to
read the Book of Providence: Though Usurpers may have a fair Gaile of success,
filling all their Sails for a while; yet the fire of Gods wrath may seize on
their Ship at last, and stop the course of their Domination, it is then evil
arguing from Providence. God in the depth of His Wisdom by His Providence in
this late change, has defeat all arguments therefrom, by which they
endeavored to prove the equity of their unparalleled rebellion and cruelty.

Thus we have spoke to the removal of the unlawful external power: We come now
to speak of the removing of the internal and infernal power of sin, which
follows as naturally one the other, as the shadow does on the body; for in
point of policy, Usurpers connive at sin for keeping up of themselves, though
that power leans on a weak reed that has such supporters. Concerning this we
shall speka to two things; First, Of the thing purged out: Secondly, Of the
manner of its out-purging. First, Of the thing purged out, it is dross and
tin, where you may behold the nature of all sin in the general. Secondly, Of
one sin in particular.

First, Of all sin in the general, it is unprofitable, this is set out by the
title given to it, (dross) which is simply unprofitable, and (tinn) which is
unprofitable comparatively in regard of Silver or Gold. Hence take this
Doctrine.

Doct. Sin, it is an upofitable thing, Romans 6.21. Matthew. 7.16. Do men gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? no more can the grapes of any spiritual
comfort, or the figs of true contentment be gathered off the thistles and
thorns of sin; and if we will either look to its contrary or consequences, we
will perceive it a truth unquestionable.

It Is contrary: the thing, that is directly contrary to sin, is Godliness:
these two are als far opposite to one another, as good is to evil, and Godliness
of its nature being gainful, 1 Timothy 6.6. sin must not be any ways
advantageous: I know there be some like Gehazi and Demas, that intertaineth an
Atheistical conceat, that a holy walking with God spoileth profit: Concerning
whom, I find a Reverend Divine say, such has stroke hands with the devil, upon
the terms which our Savior refused, Luke 4.6. But, I say, upon less nor the
hundred part of these terms, yea the truth is, sinful walking, utterly
spoileth honest and lawful profit.

Secondly, Behold the consequences, First, Shame, Romans 6.21. Jer. 31.19. If the
condition of a person be such, as he cannot profit his Benefactor factor in any
thing, yet he ought to be sure that he perturb him in nothing; he that does
otherwise, cannot but be ashamed to look him on the face. God he is thus to us,
but we perturbing him in every thing, cannot but he ashamed in end: Thus Adam
made a poor game of it, in eating of the forbidden fruit, he found himself
naked, and was ashamed to look his Lord and Benefactor on the face; If that sin
be profitable, that produces no better fruits, judge ye.

The second consequence is Death, Romans 7.22. What a death? Eternal death; he
that has wrought all the week in drudgery, and receives at the end of the
week his wages, paid in the black coin of death, has made but a very sorry
bargain; but he that has lived all his life in sin, has his wages paid In a
blacker coin nor bodily, even in eternal death: so that they are worse than mad
that are not convinced of the unprofitablnesse of sin.

Use 1. We may see hence that the world is in a great mistake: If ye tell the
drunkard, the unclean person, the covetous man this truth, they will not
receive it, nor evidence so much Christianity, as to give it entertainment but
for one day; the reason is, he looks through carnal perspectives, which
presents all sin green and pleasant, and richly laden with the fruits of
advantage; which mistake is cured by its contrary, looking to sin with a
spiritual eye, and weighing and pondering the same in the balance of the
Sanctuary: this whosoever does, shall be taught the thoughts and language of
Paul, Romans 6.21.

Use 2. Is sin so unprofitable then? (Sirs) this affords me an earand to your
souls, and it is this: to exhort, entreat, beg and obtest you by the mercies of
God, and the loves of Christ, to forsake sin: Are you children, to be chasing
shaddows? fools, to believe all to be gold that glisters? Or, are you men of
understanding, ad majora nati, born to greater things, than with Dionysius, to
be catching Flees? As you would not have these joyful days, this golden age of
much contentment to loure upon us, and prove as one said of the Summer of this
same Country, that it was hot, but short: let us all beware of this
unprofitable thing, sin: Have these in former generations who have made the
greatest purchase of this stuff, been the most happy and prosperous men in
their Estates? Or has not God drawn them out as in a map into his most wise
Providence, in exempla aliorum, to be Beakens unto others? making them to lie
down with their bones full of the sins of their youth, their consciences
turning unto a hell of terrors, and all the mountains of Riches and
preferments acquired by them, melting away as the untimely birth, or the Snow
before the Sun: Then I beseech you, be no worse than John's Auditors, Matthew. 3.
who were forwarned to fly from the wrath to come.

Having spoken to the nature of all sin in general: now we come to speak of the
nature of one in particular, which is hypocrifie, represented here
metaphorically by tin, and it characterizeth this sin very exactly: For
tin, it has (when it is well refined) a very shyning quality, which gives
some resemblance of Silver: and hypocrifie it has the same property, a
glistering show, and thereby does not a little resemble holiness: Hence this
Doctrine may be gathered.

Doct. Hypocrisy is a deceiving sin, it shines as it were holiness; but it
is as far from it, as the one Pole is from the other, it is nothing but sin
under the mantle of Piety: and therefore Christ calls Hypocrites, painted
walls, whited tombs, it is a dunghill of impiety under the luster of piety: So
the Ancient shot very near the mark that did call it a subtle evil, a secret
poison, a lurking venom, the paint of virtue, and the moth of sanctity. For
there nothing gives holiness a greater blow, than unholinesse under the
pretense of holiness: this is, to have the form of Godliness, without the
power thereof. The devil in other sins, is but in his country apparel, here he
is in his neatest and court dress, he dresseth up other sins in a Wooden, but
this in a Silver dish. Concerning this sin, these two are to be enquired after.
1. Where it is learned? 2. Who are the Scholars?

First, Where it is learned? even at the devils university, the great master,
being an old practizer thereof from the beginning, having such nimblenesse in
acting it, as he can transform himself into an angel of light: this is one of
the devils black Arts that he teaches here, and as his image and
superscription is thereupon, so it seals upon the Students thereof, the very
same, and at their reckoning with the great Judge, these that are under this
stamp, will be rendered up to its owner.

The second is, Who are the great Students in this School, and the best
proficients? Indeed it is very throng, and many are taking pains to make
progress; but these who carry away the Laurel of greatest proficiency, are the
Pseudo-Christian, and the Pseudo-Politician, the false Christian, and the false
Statesman.

The false Christian, to cover his other sins, in doing which, he discovers
them more to God, making them to appear in a crimson color: The covetous man,
to cover his covetousness, he makes use of it as a cloak, 1 Thessalonians. 2.5. The
unclean persons, to cover their uncleanness as the Antinomians and Libertines,
turning the Grace of God into wantonness: The treacherous man to cover his
treachery; so Judas took the Sacrament of the Passover, before he betrayed his
Master.

2. The false Politician (for the true Statesman hates it as the cheat of a
Rogue) he profits much in this Art, and uses it as a cloak to cover his
rebellion, imitating Absalom, who when he intended to usurp the Crown of his
Father, pretended to go to Hebron to perform a vow, 2 Samuel 15.7. And Jehu, who
designing to snatch the Scepter of Israel, puts on and boasts of broad
phylacteries of zeal for God; and if the people he purposes to instrument, be
fanatic, he can pray with them, and if need be, preach also, Nam nemo cautius
malus est, quam qui absconditur sub appellatione pietatis. 2. To cover their
bloody oppression, 1 King. 21.9. Jezabel and Achab calls a fast, that under
the color thereof, they may out Naboth of his Vineyard; and if one fast be not
sufficient, his purpose not being to oppress one person, or family, but a
nation, or many nations, the fast must be frequent, yea, monthly, that people
may be amuzed, as well as God is evidently abused by their sophistical
devotion. 3. To cover his persecution with some pretense of honesty or
holiness; so Herod must take John's life because of his oath, an oath being an
act of Religion, he wrappeth up this his cruelty in the specious pretention of
piety.

Use 1. Is hypocrisy so deceiving a sin? The counterfeit of Virtue? The Ape of
Religion? Then hypocrites, they must be counterfeit Saints, the Apes of
Holy-men; yet they do not resemble them so much, but a discerning eye may rid
the marches betwixt them, by these following marks. First, The hypocrite
mustereth out all his good deeds to vain ostentation, Matthew. 6.1. like the Ape,
ever carrying her young in her arms, to make the world believe, he is near to
the border of perfection, when indeed, his life is a Folio Book of Errataes or
Errors; but the Godly man walks humbly and modestly all his days: thinking
with Paul, he is to be reckoned among the least of Saints. Secondly, The
hypocrite is always prying into the faults and escapes of his neighbor, and
(as Ulysses lifted up the Plough over the child thrown in before him) they
make their observation pass their own follies and failings, Matths. 7.3. Luke
18.11. but the Godly man's discoveries, are most at home: he knows there is
within himself a terra incognita, an unknown land, and thither he takes
frequent voyages, that he may not always be unacquainted with himself.
Thirdly, His conscience is very touchy and tender as to the mint and anise of
some civil questions, although the word of God does most clearly determine
them; but as to harder mettalled matters, his conscience is nothing inferior
to the stomach of the Ostrich, he can swallow rebellion without any scruple, so
being this piece of iron be gilded: whereas the Godly and orderly Christian,
starts not debates in civil concernments; nor can he endure but his conscience
should be in an exact parallel to the Scriptures, and so classeth rebellion
with the sin of witchcraft. Fourthly, The hypocrite, though he pretends he
valueth not the world, but that Christ is all in all to him, yet he is so great
an Idolizer thereof, that he seems to be of the opinion of old Hermes, that
the visible world is the Image of the invisible: and it is upon this account he
pays his adoration thereto; but the Godly man is like the Church in the
Revel. with the Moon (the Emblem of the world) under his feet, trading on it
as the most unconstant of vanities. Lastly, Hypocrites are cruel, Psalm. 35.16.
both in their judgment and in their practice: as they condemn all that are not
of their judgment; so if it lay in their power, with one stroke they would cut
off the heads of them all: and yet though they be Nero's, they must be called
Cato's: Falsis very imaginibus cuncta evertere moliuntur: but the Godly is
merciful and lends, measuring his affairs with justice, and is far from their
blasphemy, to think Christ was in a mistake when he prohibited us to judge
according to the outward appearance.

Use 2. Bless God who in his just Providence is apulling off the vizard of
hypocrisy from men's faces, and all these disguises of Religion, In which the
rough horns of their private designs was wrapped up. Men of late were only
valued to be of worth and parts, according to their dissimulation or
hypocrisy: had a man any favor to the Usurpers, and therewith a show of
Godliness, according to his profession, Civil, Sacred or Military? he was fit
for any Trust; these two would have qualified him sufficiently: Learning,
Judgment, Ingenuity, Loyal-courage, were esteemed scandalous: If any flash of
wit had escaped a man, he had been in hazard of loosing his reputation: Have we
not reason then to bless God for freeing us from such a miserable thraldom.

Having spoke to the thing purged out (sin and hypocrisy) We shall next enter
upon the manner how it is done. First, In regard of God, and these two things
will fall to be examined.

1. By what he does it? Next, In what extent he does it? By what? It is by
fire; for as I have said, the word Tsaraph is a word proper to Goldsmiths,
signifying melting, and this cannot be without fire, and so the Nown is
included in the Verb. Now fire here as it relates to sin and hypocrisy, can
be no other but the energie and efficacious working of Gods own Spirit, He will
baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire, Matthew. 3.11. His Spirit is
called the spirit of burning, Isa. 4.4. The Spirit of God working in us, has a
great resemblance with the operation of fire, and therefore it discovers the
various and manifold effects of His Spirit in our Renovation, which is the
Christians spiritual refining from his dross and tin. Secondly, In what
extent does he it? He does it in a full extent, All thy tin. Which (All)
supposes another (All) for if all our tin be to be purged, then all our
dross also, Gods Spirit will not be pleased though all our hypocrisy be
removed, if gross and palpable sins be permitted to remain unmortified, and
this is done in the progress of our Sanctification.

2. The manner in regard of man, is couched in the word, purge or melt, and
that hint^^h at its difficulty as to him, that it is not easily performed, but
as hard as to have dross separate by fire from the metal: And here I present
you these three Observations.

First, There is an universal removing of sin in our Renovation and
Sanctification. Secondly, There be various and manifold effects shown by Gods
Spirit in his removal of sin. Thirdly, This removing of sin in our Renovation
and Sanctification, is not an easy, but a difficult work. 1. There is an
universal removing of sin in our Sanctification and Renovation, not only of the
grosser sins, but of our most spiritual sins; not only of sins in our life, but
sins in our heart; not only of prophanity, but hypocrisy; and not only one
branch, but every branch, both of profanity and hypocrisy, are removed. First,
As to there blot and stain, Ezekiel. 36.25. 1 Cor. 6.11. Secondly, As to our
delight unto them, Psalm. 1.2. Thirdly, As to their dominion over us, Psalm. 19.
ver. last, and Romans 6.12. Yet this removal is not so universal as to remove
sin, according to its being: that remains and will, so long as we are upon
earth.

Use. Let us follow this way for our personal reformation, laboring to be
renewed in the spirit of the mind, and to become holy, as our Lord is holy, in
all manner of conversation; for there is no pesonal Reformation acceptable,
without personal Renovation, this is only true and sincere: And it is such a
Reformation that these happy times calls for at our hands. Is God reforming
all outwardly that has been out of order in these Kingdoms? Let us Answer this
by setting a work Spiritual Reformation in our selves: who offers a false
personal reformation to God, understands not the nature of that benefit God
actually bestows on us. These many years by gone, we have had a false Head of
the body politic, Bloody Usurpers: There has been a false Representative of
these Kingdoms, contrary to Law and Reason: a Juncto of all the three Kingdoms
gathered together: There has been a false Bench of Justice, as to the
Constitution thereof: And in some sense, there has been a false dispensation
of Gospel Ordinances, by Soldiers and other Laymen, who were not called, as
was Aaron, and of such Stuff as had not God for its Author: There was also a
false Reformation of peoples lives by a pretended Holiness, these were all
like the Time, a degenerate Time, and degenerate Customs. Now we have got the
true Head of the Body politic, our Dear and Dread Sovereign the Kings Sacred
Majesty: hopes of a true Representative, a Parliament according to the Laws of
the Land: and of a true and upright Bench of Justice: the true way of
dispensing Gospel Ordinances, liberate from Usurpation. Let then our Personal
Reformation be true also, by being truly Reformed, which can be no other
ways, than by being renewed in the spirit of the mind, and walking in new
obedience and holiness before God.

Doct. 2. Manifold are the effects of Gods Spirit in our Renovation: fire has
not more several effects, than has the Spirit of God in this work: Bernard
reduces them to three: says he, Datur Spiritus ut doceat, moveat, moneat, The
Spirit is given to teach, to move our hearts, and to admonish: By which three
the Christians soul is made to share of three notable benefits. First, He
receives thereby splendorem, that is, the light of Divine Knowledge; for as
fire brings outward light, so this brings inward. Secondly, Fervorem the
quikening of his dead affections to a holy zeal for God; for as fire is
accompanied with heat, so is the Spirit of God in its operation. Thirdly,
Timorem, Many times fire produceeth this affect of fear, through peoples
inadvertancy: But that holy fear the Christian partaketh of, is a genuine
proper effect of the work of Gods Spirit, by which he stands in awe to sin
against God, Psalm. 4.4. If we should follow out the effects hereof, according
to its similitude unto fire, we would find many more besides these, as
Preparation; for as fire prepares meat for our bodies, so the Spirit prepares
the Word to the nourishment of our souls. Secondly, Purging as fire of metal,
so this purges out the dross of sin. Thirdly, Assimulation, turning to its own
nature man, as fire to the nature thereof things conbustible. Fourthly, Comfort
beingias refreshing to our souls in adversity, as fire is to our bodies, when
the season through cold is most unpleasant; but we shall not insist in persuing
this point any further, but break off therefrom in this following use.

Use. Let us seek the Spirit of Grace to dwell unto us, that we may share of
these happy effects; for as there is no beginning of Renovation without him,
Joh. 3.5. nor progress, Romans 8.14. neither consummation, Romans 8.11. so there
is no acceptable gratulation and rejoicing in God. If we do go about this duty,
and in a right manner, it must be in his strength: this is the fire that must
kindle the sacrifice of our praises, as Vesta's sire when it was extinguished,
behoved to be kindled from heaven, by the assistance and help of a Beam from
the Sun; so must the fire of our gratulatory devotion this day, by a beam from
the Spirit of Sanctification, be blown up unto a holy and religious flame.

Doct. 3. This removing of sin in our Sanctification and Renovation, is not an
easy, but a very difficult work: therefore Christ calls it a plucking out of
the eyes, and cutting off the hand. These following Considerations will make
the Doctrine evident.

First, There is against it Armies of opposition: nature in its strength does
stand in the way thereof, mustering up man's inclinations, Genesis 6.5. man's will,
Joh. 5.40. his affections, 1 Pet. 1.13. the devil is against it, who is a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. the world also marching
out with flying colors against the same: In the lust of the eye, the lust of
the flesh, and the pride of life.

Secondly, It cannot but be difficult in regard of the exact conformity
required to the Pattern, which is the Image of God: no garb of Holiness being
approven in the Court of Heaven, but looked upon as an Antic dress, and quite
out of fashion, that answers not to this, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

Thirdly, The greatness and large extent of this work, asserteth the
difficulty not to be small; for it is no less than the turning upside down of
a whole world, even the Microcosme and little world of man: And if the greater
World, as to the turning upside down of the Worship thereinto, created such
pains to the Apostles: no question, this change in the trampling under foot our
lusts and vile affections, which has commanded over our heads, cannot but be
attended with some share of trouble.

Use. Though it be difficult this work of Renovation and Sanctification, yet we
must not despond, and through overwhelming thoughts of discouragement give it
over, but more seriously set our selves to work thereinto, What is difficult to
man, is easy to God: humane difficulties, yea impossibilities, are conquerable
by Omnipotency, we will not give over a worldly business for difficulties, and
shall we be so base, as to lay aside an heavenly upon this score: It is a
heavenly violence that takes heaven, a violent and painful combat with our
corruptions, a violent and constant wrestling by prayer in the Mediator Christ,
with our Creator. The necessity. of it, Heb. 12.14. The honor of it, Ephesians.
4.24. The effects of it: First self-denial, Luke 9.23. Secondly, Shunning of
sin, Romans 6.13. The happy reward thereof, Ephesians. 5.27. 2 Cor. 3.18. are all
encouragements very great and singular, which jointly pondered, will weigh down
the discouragement of the works difficulty: There is great necessity for the
earnest urging of this; for what will outward prosperity, outward joy and
rejoicing, the Resurrection of your civil Interests avail, without this: Will
your immunities, and privileges, or freedom, afford you contentment, in
proportion to your expectation, if you be not Gods freemen? If your souls be
yet in bonds, what will the stopping of the carrear of usurping domination, and
the dashing of these hell-hatched designs do? If the Usurper sin exercise
domination, and command in your souls, giving the designs of Satan still a
freedom? Let this be pondered by you in the Balance of the Sanctuary, least
your laughter and joy tend to, and end in bitter mourning, let the yoke of the
internal usurper with that of the external be broke in pieces. The Lord give us
strength so to do, Amen.

FINIS.
SCOTIA REDIVIVA, OR SCOTLANDS Resurrection. SERMON II.

Psalm. 30.11. Thou have turned my mourning unto joy, thou have loosed my sack,
and girded me with gladness.

Verse. 12. Therefore shall my tongue praise thee and not cease: O Lord my God,
I will give thanks unto thee for ever.

Psalm. 18.47. It is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.

Psalm. 54.7. For he has delivered me out of all trouble, and my eye has seen
his desire upon my enemies.

Tu velut eximium post tristia nubila tandem
Sidus ades; Tu bella fugas, pacemque reducis,
Tu leges and jura novas. Te praeside, rerum
Grata redit facies, Certusque renascitur ordo, etc.
Utere jure tuo quicquid rectumve piumve
Esse putas servare jube: nos vero, volentes
Omnia suscipimus: libertas maxima nobis
Tam placido parere viro.
Guntherus, lib. 8. v. 535. Alta cernens non deficio,
Virtus onerata triumphat.
EDINBVRGH, Printed by a Society of Stationers, Anno Dom. 1661.

SCOTIA REDIVIVA, OR Scotlands Resurrection. SERMON II.
Isa. 1.26. I will restere thy Judges as at first, and thy Counselors as at
the beginning.


WE have spoke of the malum ablatum, We come now to the bonum collatum: I will
restore thy Judges as at first, etc. As in the Verse preceding, you have the
extirpation of Usurpers; so here ye have the Restoration of the Lawful
Magistrate faithfully promised: In which promise you have somewhat imported,
and somewhat reported.

First, Somewhat imported, and that is, the decay of Lawful Magistracy in
Judah, the wonted Glory and Honor due thereto, being under cloud: the time of
which darkness being then, when Senacherib came up against Hezekiah, taking
all the fenced Cities of Judah: Or else in the time of Achaz when the Kingdom
was under the feet of the Kings of Israel and Edom, and under the Philistines,
2 Chronicles. 28. who did possess and rule over the Cities of the low Countries,
giving Law to them at their pleasure.

Doct. The Lawful and Supreme Magistrate may have his due Glory and Greatness
for a time eclipsed, so was it with Achaz, the Philistines ruling in many
places of his Dominions: Yea, what is more strange, so was it with Hezekiah, a
good and a gracious King, Senacherib overrunneth all, Isa. 36. But what is
strangest, David was not only a gracious Prince to his people, but a man
according to Gods own heart, and yet his greatness is brought under cloud in a
sudden, 2 Samuel 15.

The reason why the Lord permits this, is, That he may punish people for
their contempt of Lawful Authority: Israel was not sensible of their felicity
and prosperous days under their Religious and Gracious King, David, but
wearying of his reign, and itching after a new Governor, therefore he suffers
Absalom to usurp the Throne, that he might punish their ingratitude to God for
so good a King, and the disloyalty of their hearts to so gracious a Master.

A second reason is, For punishing of Magistrates for the abuse of their power;
for though God has exempted Kings as his Vicegerents from the punishment of
men, yet he keeps this prerogative for himself: And therefore though God
promised the continuance of the Kingdom to David's posterity, yet he reserved
the Authority of chastising of them for their sins.

A third reason is, That he may fit and prepare Kings for the great matters he
has to employ them into, doing like a wise Architector, who digs lowest when
and where he minds to build highest, humbling these most whom he intends to
exalt to the upmost pitch of eminency: David must not come to the Crown God had
given him right to, at first, but must reign some years at Hebron, before he
get the Throne and Crown of Israel, 2 Samuel 5.5.

Fourthly, That people may be the more convinced of their advantage they have
by a Lawful Authority, and their prosperous condition under the same, after
they have tasted of the bloody and bitter effects of Usurpation, and may behold
the Lords superlative goodness to them, in restoring of the same again.

Lastly, That he may instruct Princes, of whom it is they hold their Crowns,
and upon whose Good Will their Soveraignity does depend: The Lord does by this
as in a Table, draw before their eyes and face in great Capital Letters, that
it is by him that Kings reign, and Princes decree justice.

Use 1. Behold here what will be the case of Loyal Subjects: May their Master
be brought down from his Greatness and Glory, it cannot fare well with them
the members of the Body, must sympathize with the Head: their condition we have
pinselled out in that of David's Loyal Subjects and faithful Servsnts, 2 Samuel
15.23. Their enjoyments will be imbittered to them, and their spirits under a
cloud of discontent, living in the world as Jonathan and Achimaz, when they
were hid in the well of Bethuram, 2 Samuel 17.20, 21. in a shade of obscurity,
with such a darkness of sorrow upon their spirits, as that which was upon the
face of the deep, in the first day of the Creation: This has been the carriage
and condition of many thousands in this Land, but the fury of the enemy hurried
them from their retirement, chasing them from mountain to mountain, and from
corner to corner:

Use 2. What then will the carriage of Traitors be, when as their condition
through the eclipse of the Lawful Magistrate will be prosperous, his fall being
the rise of such, and the harvest in which they reap the reward of their
baseness? Questionless, such will be blown up in a timpynie of pride, and
will speak presumptuous things, and like Owls in the night, come abroad boldly
looking big upon all. We have seen such a generation as these, and such a
carriage as this with our eyes; and there was a fourfold Owl or Noctambulo, who
these years bypast came abroad, and walked in pride. First, The Soldier
Noctambulo or night Owl, who was the Gentleman Usher to the rest; he under
pretense of Liberty, brought all men in thraldom; and for the defense of an
upstart Commonwealth, brought all the Country unto utter poverty, these as the
froges with which Pharaoh and his Country was smitten, swarmed both in City and
Country, in our Fields and in our Houses. The second Owl or Noctambulo, was
the Schismatic, who under the pretense of Piety, both intitling and intailing
to themselves the name of true Christians, made a gape both in the Civil, to
let in and keep up the Usurper: And also in the Ecclesiastical Government, to
throw it down, and to make way for Liberty of Conscience. The third Owl that
comes abroad in this night time, was the Sectarian, a Nactambulo, who under
high pretentions of Religion, invadeth the Doctrine, as the other had done the
Discipline of the Church: And that he might do it with the greater success, he
must cry up their Diana of Usurpation, and defame the Lords Deputy and
Vicegerent. The last Owl or Nactambulo, was the Mammonist, who to keep his
riches, did loss his conscience, coming abroad to Court the Fox under the
pretense of necessity, fathering the same upon providence, as if this had
called him to fall down to worship the Beast, that he might save his Estate and
Means, Quamvis nemo a Deo angustiatur ad peccandum. These were the Birds that
waited on the Bird of prey in the night time of our misery.

Having spoke to that which is imported, We come next to what is reported: And
it is the bringing the Lawful and Ancient Magistracy, the Royal Power of Judah
to the wonted pitch of Luster, Glory and Extent: I will restore your Judges as
at the first. Here be three things worthy of our searching after: First, A
favor. Secondly, The mould in which the favor is cast. Thirdly, The Moulder
or great Artist that shapes this favor after that fashion. First, The favor,
and it is twofold, a principal one or masterpiece, I will restore your Judges
as at the first, etc. The second is subordinate and very useful, though it be
not of that degree with the first, And your Counselors as at the beginning:
Which you may take asunder in these three, A twofold object, and one act: We
shall begin with the object, The first of which is (thy Judges) The word in the
first Language is Shephtaich, which is often used for the Inferior, yet
frequently also (as is evident from the Book of Judges) for the Supreme
Magistrate: I find most of the Interpreters take it in this sense here: And
because judging is one of the most eminent acts of Magistracy, the Supreme
Magistrate borrows his denomination therefrom: And indeed, it is no
disparagement for Kings to be stilled so, when God who is the King of Kings
takes this Epithet, Psalm. 75.7. But here it may be objected, that it cannot
be well applied to the Magistrate of Judah who was a single person, because the
word is in the Plural Number. Answ. The Prophet is not looking to one King
personally, but to a Series of them, a Succession of Kings, and this makes him
speak of them in the Plural Number: I will give you a Line of Kings such as ye
had before, with the Glory and Extent due to them, yet this was not promised
absolutely, but conditionally if they walked like his people, which they not
doing, his promise was not binding.

The second object is Counselors: Which I find some understand of the
Inferior Magistrate: Indeed, the Restoration of the Superior, uses to raise
up the Inferior Magistrate, and the latter is a consequent of the former,
these two are chained together. Others by Counselors understand these (to
which I incline) who are assisting to the Supreme Authority by their counsels,
of which we read, 1 Chronicles. 27.32. 2 Chronicles. 25.16.

For the act, it is restoring, it is Shub in the Original, and it signifies to
return, make rest, quiet and restore; and it looks to both these objects, as
well Judges as Counselors, to the first principally, and to the other
seondarly.

The second thing in the words, is, The mould according to which the favor is
cast: And it is twofold as the favor it self is. And the first is, (as at the
first) Some I find to expound this, as to the first way of their Magistrates,
which was by Judges; but that Government was neither so pleasant, profitable
nor honorable, as the Government by Kings, and so would not be the right Base
to build their comfort upon. The latter Interpreters leaves those of this
Judgment: I think one of these two must be the intent of Gods Spirit: As at
the first, to look to David and Solomon, I will raise you up Kings such as they
were, Godly and Wise Kings, such as these were of old: Or else, as at the
first, may refer to the Regal Authority; I will give you Kings with such an
extent of their Royal Power, as they were wont to have before Invasion, not
only exercised in some few Cities in the Land of Judah, but streached out over
all Judah, and the Dominions belonging thereto.

For the mould of the Counselors, as at the beginning, I think it may refer
either to the first foundation of that Kingly Government, in that Line of the
Family of David, who indeed were Wise, Prudent and Vigilant Men: Or to some
Wise Counselors, who had been with these Kings at their entry to their Reign,
and were removed by death, through want of whose counsel their Affairs had not
been so prosperous as of before.

The last particular, is, The moulder of both these, the Author of this double
Restoration, both of the matter and manner of it, which is God, a work fit for
such a Hand, and a Hand fit for such a work: Hence I shall present you with
these following Doctrines.

First, That it is a great mercy for a people to have their righteous King
restored, after long eclipse of his Greatness. Secondly, This Mercy is
heightened when a people receives such a King, surrounded with prudent and
pious Counselors.Thirdly, That it is God alone who raises and restores
fallen and lapsed Magistrates. Fourthly, It is the same God who restores to
their wonted Honors and Privileges, Noble, Wise and Faithful Counselors.

As to the first, That it is a great Mercy to have a Righteous King restored,
after the long Eclipse of his Greatness: The Lord would not have promised this
to Judah at so remarkable a time, as this in Hezekiah or Achaz his thraldom,
if it had not been of singular eminency. David's Restoration after Absolon his
unnatural conspiracy, and the change of Athaliah her Usurpation unto Joash his
happy inauguration, makes the point evident: But besides all this, what the
Word of God attributes to Kings, does plainly imply this truth; for in
Scripture they are entitled, the Light of Israel, the Breath of our Nostrils,
and the shadow under which we rest: To have our eyes restored after
depravation of them, our breath after we have been almost stiffled, or a
refreshing shade in the scorching heat of Summer, or in the time of a
tempestuous rain, are without all peradventure, very refreshing and comfortable
to these houses of dust: even so is the restitution of a Righteous Prince unto
a people, chained unto a heavy bondage, and justly compared with light to the
eyes, breath to the nostrils, and a shelter against all their persecuters.

The reason hereof, is, Because such (Just and Righteous Kings) are the only
fittest for the Government of Kingdoms: And that in a fourfold respect.

First, In regard of extraction, people being upon that consideration more
ready to yield unto them cheerful obedience, whereas otherwise they are very
like to vex and grudge at others, who presum to set themselves up to lord it
over these to whom they are scarce equals; But the Son, Righteous Heir and
immediate Successor of a King, is cordially embraced with cheerfulness and
delight of all the people, unless it be by some few Traitors, who are the bane
of people, and the reproach of Kingdoms.

Secondly, In regard of Parts, being descended from a Princely Stem, Parents
acquainted with, and inured unto such employments as attends Magistracy: Nec
imbellem feroces progenerant aquilae columbam, The valiant and courageous Eagle
does not beget a silly and simple Dove. Besides that, from their very Cradle
they are bred to what is most suitable to such high and eminent Administrations.

Thirdly, In regard of their indubitable Interest and Right as from God, so
likewise from man. Hence it is, that such for the most part, set before them
the advantage of the people, rather than that of their own, resembling in this,
the prudence of wise and tenderhearted Parents, for as much as they usually
moderate and temper their Government, according to the condition and exigence
of the Governed.

Fourthly, Because of the Execution of the Law; for by such, the Laws will be
fully, duly and faithfully execute: according to that of Cicero, Vere dici
potest Magistratum esse legem loquentem, legem autem esse mutum Magistratum:
That is, the Magistrate may be truly said to be the Law speaking, and the Law
to be the Magistrate silent; But when an Usurper gets into the Throne, he is
not the Law speaking, but in this case the Law is Tougne-tyed; for if the Laws
were suffered to speak, they would command him to the door.

Use 1. What a great Mercy has this Land got, in the restoring of our King to
the Thrones of his Ancestors, to all the Glory and Rights of his Fathers, and
the due extent of his Greatness. The word in the Original, Shub, here
translated Restore, has five significations, each whereof represents the
matter under a distinct notion, and will help us to look upon this favor in
its due latitude. First, It signifies to Return, 1 Samuel 26.25. And indeed in
this signification, we may behold Mercy that we see him again with our eyes,
after so many dangers at Home, so many hazards abroad by tedious Travels,
dangerous Sickness, and perverse Enemies, after so many Temptations there to
desert, and provocations here to relinguish his Religion, in that he is
returned to us his Subjects in the safety both of his Person and Profession, is
a great Mercy. Secondly, It signifies to Restore, and so it is Translated
here: Had he been but all these years in his Travels, his returning in safety
had been matter of great joy; but it is not a simple Returning, but a
Restoring, he is restored to his Crowns, his Kingdoms, his Revenues, and to all
his Jura Regalia, after he had been so many years most unjustly and inhumanely
outted of them, Is not this a signal Mercy! Thirdly, It signifies to Give, 1 Samuel 6.3. And the Translation would not be wide of the scope of Gods Spirit, if
it should run thus, I will give Judges as at the first, etc. Indeed in this
sense we have got our King again, he is a free gist from God, and his restoring
an act of free Grace, and not of merit on our part: But upon the contrary, the
sins of these Lands cried for continuance of bondage, and increase of Brick,
rather then any ease or deliverance by his Majesty's Restoration, and in this
God has in part fulfilled, Hos. 14.4. I will love them freely, His mercy and
goodness herein being most free. Fourthly, The word signifies to Answer,
Numb. 22.8. And this also displayeth yet a further degree of Mercy; For his
Return is an Answer, And to what? Even to the Prayers of both the Kings, and
all their Loyal Subjects: To the late King his Devote, his Divine Supplications
which ye may read in his (...): to his present Majesty's prayers, That God
would subdue his people under him, and scatter the people who delight in War:
To the prayers of all his Loyal Subjects, many thousands within these three
Kingdoms daily supplicating the Throne of Grace, both a part by themselves,
and jointly with others in private Fasts for this: Which since God has brought
to pass, we ought to look upon it as a most gracious and comfortable return of
prayer, both to our Kings and to us. Lastly, It signifies to Dwell and Rest,
Psalm. 23.6. Numb. 10.36. As it were, says Buxtorf, derived from Jashav, this
being the signification, the Translation would run, I will make your Judges to
rest or dwell as at first, etc. This I hope shall be the lot of his Majesty;
His coming home being not only a Restoration, but a long, prosperous and
peaceable settlement of him on his Throne, in despite of all his enemies, and
most desperate unfriends; that as heretofore he has been tossed by the ways
of Affliction, in a rouch and dangerous Ocean of Rebellion; so likewise in time
coming, we may hope that he shall Live and Reign in Peace, since the pillars of
his Throne are Religion and Righteousness, which are the strong Supporters of
Royal Sovereignty and Greatness.

But to look upon it yet a little further, which way soever you cast your eyes,
you shall find a Beam of Mercy breaking out therefrom: Look to the King
himself, and the Royal Family, their tossings abroad, their troubles at home,
and the tumults of the people against his Majesty, Had he not reason to say,
The floods have lifted up their voice, the floods have lifted up their voice:
The floods of popular Insurrection, the voice of unnatural Rebellion, that god
has delivered him from all these, and let him see that the Lord on high is
mightier then many waters, having so stilled these clamours, that they dare not
utter now one syllable of that which of late they belched ont most insolently,
and liberally, and has capacitated him to command Justice to have her course,
against these Monsters of men, and reproach of Christianity, who most
barbarously murdered his Royal Father: and further, has given him liberty to
go to the House of God, and solemnly Worship the God of his Fathers, after that
way which the people among whom he has so long sojourned, counted Heresy: O
how much of mercy is here! redounding to his Majesty.

Look to the Church, and you shall see a Beam of Mercy breaking out likewise to
her? What was our Church these many years bygone? Was it not like to become an
Africa of monstroseties: he was thought a Christian of no account, that had not
his Religion of a new cut. Changes of Religion was become as ordinary, as
fashions in Apparel; but now we have so careful a nursing Father, Isa. 60.16.
that as he is by his place, custos utriusque tabulae; So we trust with good
Jehoshaphat, he will cause teach the Law of the Lord his God, throughout all
his Dominions, not merely upon a politic account, because (as says
Lactantius) Religio and timor Dei solus est qui hominum inter se custodit
societatem, but upon a divine, Because (as Isa. 49.23.) Kings are required to
be Nursing Fathers to the Church and Gods Ministers for our good, as well
Sacred as Civil.

Thirdly, Look upon the Public and Common Interest of the Kingdoms, and
behold a new Ray of Mercy appear: The Ancient fundamental model of Government
being altered, the Door of Division and Bloody War was opened, every year of
late affording to us a new form of Government, Government being as unconstant as
to its form, as the Moon, and as to the Management thereof, like to a young
Heretrix, every year ravished by the strongest Sword, both which portended our
utter ruin, For a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand. And here also
was opened a door to confusion, Justice and Equity were like to the Levite and
his Concubine at Gibeah, who could get no lodging. That then the Ancient
Government is settled upon its right basis, shuteth the door upon all these
Confusions.

Fourthly, Look to the private Interest of persons: Was not there designs like
the earth to Corah, Dathan and Abiram, in regard of men's Patrimonies and
Portions, ready to swallow them up with a great pretense of Liberty to the
Subject, and indeed they brought about a Liberty to him; But judge you what
that was, Even to deliver up to them with his own hand, that which otherwise
they would have violently taken away; so that men were cheated in their
Estates, and complemented to utter ruin and misery: Does not here then a Beam
of Mercy clearly break out? that men may challenge for their own, what is
justly theirs, and sit quietly under their own figtree. All this we owe to his
Majesty's happy Restoration, so that in him all public Interests are wrapped
up, as well Religious and Civil, as of every private man in particular; not
only as to restitution, but also as to preservation. When news came to Rome of
Germanicus his desperate sickness (says Suetonius) it struke them all to the
heart; but so soon as the contrary report arrived of his recovery, all people
run to the Capitol, Men Women and Children, and filled the City with
Acclamations of joy, crying out, Salva Civitas, salva Patria, salvus
Germanicus. The certainty of his Majesty's happy return, gives us occasion of
the like joyful Acclamations, and hereupon may we truly say, Salva Civitas,
salva Patria, yea more, salva Ecclesia, salvus Carolus, the City is safe, the
Country is safe, the Church is safe, King Charles is safe.

Use 2. This serves to reprove such, who what ever they say, look upon our
Kings Restoration as no Mercy: And however, I disapprove their judgment with
abhorrency, yet I must commend their wit (if not their astonishment) which
command them silence; for in this, they prudently imitate the silly Crans, who
flying over Mount Taurus, takes each of them a Peeble-stone in his mouth to
withhold their chattering, lest the Eagles should hear and make prey of them:
remembering as might seem what was said to King Philip, Domine Philippe ubique
sane ades, and undequaque vides, omniaque auscult as apud Atheninses vero
Potissimum. Philip our Lord, thou art every where present, thou sees every
where, and hears all things, but most especially among the Atheniens, which
with little alteration, may be as well applied to most of Kings; so that it
were far better for them, together with the Arms of that Bloody Commonwealth,
(now falling to the ground) to pull down and reject their base Antimonarchical
principles, and bury them in the Rubbish of their fallen Babel.

Doct. 2. The surrounding of a restored King with pious and prudent
Counselors, is a great mercy; for this tends both to the prosperity of the
King, and the felicity of his Kingdom: This promise in these words makes the
truth manifest, and the wisest Monarchs we read of in holy Scripture, have
studied to have such about them: David had his Hushai, and Solomon his Old,
Wise, Sage Statesmen, who gave good counsel to Rehoboam, had he been so happy
as to have followed it, 1 King. 12.6. Ahasuerus had seven who Ezra 7.14. are
called his Counselors: And Esther 1.14. you have all their names mentioned,
Great Affairs require deep consultations, Vnius men's non est capax tantae
molis, (says Tacitus) And therefore it is, that Kings have both their public
and private Councels, which they call together, propter ardua Regni, for to
assist them in hard and difficult Points and Occurrencies in Government.

Doct. 3. It is God alone who raises and restores a fallen and lapsed
Magistrate: It was he that brought David back again over Jordan, and restored
Mannasseh to his Throne, Nebuchadnezzar to his wonted greatness, By me Kings
reign, and Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8.15. For confirmation hereof, take
these following reasons.

First, He, and He alone, has right so to do: God is Judge, Psalm. 75.7. And to
him it was that David went for redress in his banishment, Psalm. 3.3. For thou,
O Lord, art the lifter up of my head, the protecting and defending of banished
Princes, (which the Emperor thinks to be his privilege) this God does
perform upon an unquestionable title, Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs to the
Lord.

Secondly, As he has the Right, so he has the Power: A man may have the
Right, but not the Power to execute the same: Aliud jus ad rem, atqui aliud jus
in re: It is not so with God, the right he has, is accompanied with power, to
put the same in execution: As, Psalm. 7.10. My defense is of God who saves the
upright in heart: And hence he is called, The mighty God, the Almighty: When
his Vicegerent is stripped naked of Moasts and Armies, he can raise up Armies
for his Service, or send the Spirit of Division amongst the Enemies of his
Adversaries.

Thirdly, He has not only Power, but Valor: Valor is required to so high an
Achievement as this, otherwise both Right and power may fail in accomplishing
their destinate end, This Attribute the Lord asks to be his own, Exodus 15.3.
The Lord is a man of War, Jehovah is his Name: He is the tenth Worthy that
never fled in Batttel, and all the other nine that Histories mention, come far,
far short of him in this.

Fourthly, As he has Right, Power, and Valor, so likewise has he good
Conduct, he is both Vigilant, Diligent, and Prudent, Dux autem esto, qui tum ea
quae ante ipsum, tum quae a tergo sunt prospiciat: Says one, He only is fit to
be a General, who can see round about him, that is, who has prowess and skill
to lead and conduct his Army, and God is eminently such a one; He can order all
things so fitly for the work, as is wonderful to think upon, find out the
materials and join them (like so many pieces of timber in some Elaborate
Artifice, by a wise and cunning Mechanic) in the Art of His Holy and Wise
Providence; He has such intelligence of his enemy, as he exactly knows what
is a doing in his Camp, 2 King. 6.8. He can go unto his enemies Camp, as David
and Abishai to Abners, taking Saul's Spear, and can either snatch the weapons
out of the hands of his enemies, or so blunt them as they cannot hurt; yea, he
can go unto the enemies hearts, and as the rivers of water turn their
rebellious projects into the channels of loyalty and obedience.

Use 1. This Doctrine (as the hand of a Dyal) points at the Author of this
happy Revolution, wherewith we are blessed: that is our gracious and good God
who has restored our King, and set him upon the Throns of his Fathers, by
which he has manifested much both of Wisdom, and Goodness: of Wisdom, in
that he has endued him with such rare Virtues, both Christian and Princely,
that they have been as a Loadstone to draw his peoples hearts unto him. Of his
Goodness, which he has most signally discovered, in making the people so
universally to eye, and truly to admire, those shyning Virtues in his Royal
Person, that even in the lowest ebb of his Majesty's Affairs, and greatest
Eclipse of his Greatness, no object could interpose it self, betwixt their
thoughts and him, to areast them from admiring his richly adorned Person,
although denuded of all that Stately Pomp and Magnifick Acutriment that usually
accompany princes. As for the Virtues and Graces wherewith the Lord endued him
the most singular and eminent, amongst them are these.

First, Holiness, where of in all his Travels abroad, the Protestant Churches
were earnest and serious beholders, and now are unanimous witnesses in giving
testimony thereof. And has not he made good this at his return, in
accomplishing David's promise in his affliction (which doubtless he made his
own) Psalm. 43.4. Giving thanks to God, even the God of his joy and gladness,
for the Lords remembering of him in the day of his low condition: as he had
during that time been much in supplication for the same, so he has solemnly
dedicated his Government to the most High, by a severe, yet just act against
profannesse, like David, Psalm. 101.3. He will set no wicked thing before his
eyes, hating the works of these who fall away to sin. This is now the incense
he burns, which smells sweetly in Gods nostrils.

The second Virtue is, Constancy in adhering to the Reformed Religion, by which
he stands, not only a mirror to all his own Subjects at home, but also to
all Protestant Princes, and Professors thereof abroad, like an immovable rock
amidst the waves of reiterated assaults, which his greatest Adversaries and
most severe Censurers (the Changlings of the Times) had never been able to have
withstood; but certainly would, if they could have found out a way, have
hazarded their interest in the Crown of Glory, rather then not to have had one
pull at these three Crowns of his, if they could have pretended the least
interest in them, although they should have sweamed to them, through a Sea of
Christian blood; but he choosed with Moses to wave all worldly advantages
rather, then by the change of his Religion to hazard eternal Glory.

His third Christian Virtue, is, Patience under the cross, wherein he shined
most splendidly; for howbeit he was born the Heir of three Mighty Kingdoms, of
so Royal and Ancient Extraction, that the Christian World is not able to afford
his parallel, and had education suitable to his birth, being brought up in
Scarlet with all that tenderness faithful Subjects could pay to so hopeful a
Prince, under whose shadow the succeeding Generation might hope to inherit her
earthly happiness; yet behold how humbly he takes up, and with what patience
he sustaineth the cross, so that Jobs patience and David's humility were never
so nighly matched by any, as by himself.

These are his Christian. Follows his Princely Virtues, Spes certa quiet is
and salutis perfecta in gubernatore sapientia: puppis, cujus Magister ad clavi
regimen intellectus dote praeparatur, ubi que stationem, ubique portum habet in
fluctibus Ennodius.
among which his Wisdom does merit to be reckoned in the first place; of which
he has so large a portion, that this Kingdom dureing the short time of his
amongst us, did behold his deportment with such pleasure and delight, as that
they looked upon it as a morning, which should be seconded with a noontide of a
happy and peaceable Government: nothing short of that of his Royal
Grandfather, the wisest (if without arrogance we may speak it) of Christian
Princes: neither was this only our judgment of him, for whilst he sojourned
amongst Forrainers, he was looked upon as a Pattern to their ablest Statists, in
their greatest transactions; of a most stayed and solid judgment, which is an
induement exceeding well becoming so great a personage, and very necessary to a
Prince: for Omnibus animalibus, facilius est, quam hominibus, imperare: It is
more easy to exerce dominion over all other creatures, then to govern man.

The second is, Magnanimity, With what undaunted courage has he born the
revilings of his enemies? therein he was nothing inferior to Augustus or
Tiberius the greatest Emperors on earth; wherein he chused for himself the
best of Paterns, the example of the King of Saints now in Heaven, who most
magnanimously despised all the contempt and reproaches of base, perverse, and
treacherous men, Isa. 53.3.5. and forward.

The third Princely Virtue is his Clemency, In which Virtue Kings resemble much
their Maker (and it is no disparagement for them so to do) who glories to be
slow to anger, and ready to forgive; and in this there no King in the world
comes so near to God, as his Majesty's self; which was most resplendent in the
time of his affliction, by the frequent offers of Acts of Indemnity to his
Enemies: And of late also, he being so ready to forgive Enemies, that none was
more forward to petition, nor he free and ready to grant pardon: Like unto
Marcus Barbaricus Duke of Venice, who being questioned why he was so slow to
punish injuries, answered, Boni principis est non se ulcisci de inimicis, sed
sufficit ut se ulcisci posse declaret. A good King will not delight so much in
avenging of himself on his Enemies, as in declaring and making notare to the
world, that he can and may be avenged upon them.

The last is his Valor, Wherein no Prince in Christendom can outvy him, which
having been often put to the Test, both at Home and Abroad was found current
coin; for it proved Ariadnes thread to himself and his friends many times, when
they knew not what to say or do, Ad fremitus habuit qui corda invicta Leonis.
He had always the heart of a Lion when he was in the labyrinth of greatest
hazards. Seneca his definition of a King (Rex est qui metuit nihil. A King is
one who fears nothing) is the very portrait of the Kings Majesty; which is a
happy Omen of our following prosperity and peace: For, says Ardobrandinus,
imperii tutela fidissima fortitudo: Fortitude is the best guardian of
Government.

It was the great Wisdom of God that adorned his Royal Person with so many
choice Virtues, and made them shine in such luster in him, who was a Prince
born to so many troubles; for had he been no better furnished then ordinary
Princes are, he could not have been observed and remarked by people under such
a dark cloud. 2. The Lords goodness appears in turning all peoples hearts
and eyes toward him: as his Wisdom fitted the Object for the Organ, his Person
for their observation, so his Goodness disposed the Organs for observing and
beholding the object; for though his Christian and Moral Virtues were strong
Loadstones, yet many peoples eyes were purblind through fear, and others blind
through faction, which, till God cured them by a collyrium and eye salve of his
own compounding, were unfit to discern. But when these scales were removed they
(with the rest of his Loyal Subjects) beheld him as a heaven (though upon
earth) richly bespangled with many fixed Stars of Grace and Virtue; the
influence; of which produced (before they were aware) a mine of Loyalty in
their breasts. It seems his Royal Father did forsee this; for in his thoughts
to the Prince of Wales he asserteth, That the Mountains of congealed Faction
shall by the sunshine of Gods Mercy, and the splendour of his Virtues, be thawed
and dissipated.

But his Wisdom and his Goodness appears yet further, in that it was done so
wonderfully, the means by which the same were performed having no aptness for,
yea, much averseness from, that happy Work: and truly to me it seems the
just parallel of Christ's curing the blind man with laying upon his eyes clay
and spittle, which were ready to hinder, but no ways apt to help the fight:
That Army that did the work, had as real an antipathy therewith, in the very
same time they were ignorantly doing it, as at any time before; so that God in
this wonderfully fulfilled Sampsons riddle, bringing meat out of the eater, and
sweetness out of the strong, the meat of Peace, and the sweetness of Truth,
and in this God gave a dash to the foolish opinion, concerning Religious
qualification of Armies, and proclaims himself to be JEHOVAH, whose right
hand does terrible things.

Secondly, His Wisdom and his Goodness appears in the peaceable carrying
through thereof, without the roaring of Canons, the devastation of Countries,
the razing of Cities, the effusion of Blood, to all which he having been
provoked by unparallelled injuries done to his Royal Father, his own Person,
Authority and Family: that this Epidemick madness should have been cured
without phlebotomie and strong purgatives, shows a twisting together, both of
Gods Goodness and Wisdom in the dispensation, and is a Prognostic (it being
so like the building of Solomon's Temple) that he shall be another Solomon, Who,
because not a man of blood, was fitted for the building of the House of the
Lord his God.

Thirdly, His Goodness and Wisdom appears in that it was so unexpected,
after so many disappointments, so many designs blown up, so many assayes
frustrate, when so many adventures had proven as the morning cloud, that few
exp^c^ed any to have the Spirit and Courage to give it an other hazard: Even
then ((...), God unexpectedly appearing) did the Good and Wise Hand of
Providence begin to work, when all men had given over to think of our coming
out from misery, and his return to the dignity of his Ancestors: (...) Homer.
But the things which are impossible with men, are possible with God, Luke 18.27.

Use 2. As the first use pointed at the Author of the Deliverance, so this at
the duty of the Delivered. And first, it discovers the duty of the King, and
it is thankfulness to his God that has done all these things for him: to him
are his Vows to be performed, Psalm. 65.1. Would to God his Subjects made as
good use of the Mercy, as our Gracious Sovereign does. Secondly, It discovers
the duty of the Subjects whose it is to rejoice in God, since he is the doer
hereof, and not with a common and ordinary joy, for this is not a common and
ordinary mercy. I would have you for elevating of this affection, and putting
it rightly in tune, take these three Directions. First, Let your joy be
suitable, though it cannot be proportionable, to the nature of the favor.
People that have been some years at Sea, and have met with strange Tempests,
and cross Tides, and have been every day in jeopardy of their Lives, once come
to their hoped-for Harbor, how exceedingly do they rejoice and delight
therein? because it puts them out of fear of being swallowed up with the
swelling surges of the unmerciful Ocean. We have been tossed these many years
past, in a worse and more dangerous Sea, then ever Ship did sail upon, the
wind Euroclydon having vexed us, and that in the midst of Rocks and contrary
Tides, from which dangers, in his Majesty's Restoration, we have obtained
deliverance; so that the prayer of his late Majesty, in his counsel to his Son
( My Prayer (says he) to God Almighty, is, that whatever comes of me, who am
wrapped up in my own innocence and his Grace, that he would be pleased to make
you an Anchor or Harbor rather to these tossed and weather-beaten Kingdoms)
has been heard in heaven: for indeed he is the Harbor these Kingdoms have
happily at length arrived at, and thereby injoyeth immunity from death,
threatenings, dangers, and well may it be called as that place Paul sailed by,
Act. 27.28. the fair havens, and not only so, but the sure havens also, for
none else could have afforded us such safety. Have we not reason then to
rejoice in the God of our Salvation, and cry out, Unto thee, O Lord, do we give
thanks, for that thy Name is near thy wondrous works declare, and* joyfully to
shout aloud, GOD SAVE THE KING, since in him, by the Goodness and Wisdom of
God; we are saved.

Direct. 2. As our Joy would be suitable, so it would be spotless, a virgin
pure joy, far from the pollution of excess: I shall give you these following
Preservatives against the infection of this sin

First, The very Heathens have called and accounted it a madness, Pythagoras,
who was an Heathen Philosopher, calls it voluntaria insania, a voluntary
madness; If heathens then that wanted the light of the Word from without, and
the light of a renewed conscience from within, who weighed all things but in the
scales of reason, and accordingly judged of them, did so look upon this sin;
what should Christians do, who, beside reason, have the light of Gods Word, and
the dictats of a renewed conscience, to direct them? I pray you go not mad both
against Reason, Scripture and Conscience: A threefold cord is not easily
broken, says Solomon, a threefold agravation of sin, is a threefold cord
binding the guilt upon men, What speaks this to you, but to stear of this
Rock?

Secondly, Consider, You are Subjects to the King of Kings, as well as to your
Dear and Dread Sovereign the Kings Majesty; for in this, as you will testify
nothing of your Loyalty to your Sovereign on Earth; so hereby you shall
declare much disloyalty to your Sovereign in Heaven: As you cannot hereby
demonstrate your selves good Subjects; for the greatest Traitor may symbolize
in this with you, and go as far as he that is strongest to wrestle in these
shameful Olympicks; so you evidently proclaim you are not good Christians: Let
the remembrance hereof be a bridle to your desires, lest your exultation be
turned to a provocation.

The third Preservative is, To remember for what end God has wrought this
Deliverance of us, and has restored our King to his Subjects; is it not, that
we may live a godly and peaceable life under him? sure it is; and we cannot
live a godly life, if we live sensually like beasts, God has not delivered us
that we should abuse his creatures, mispend time, and beast our selves, Hab.
2.15, 16.

Direct. 3. Let this our joy be constant, not a flash, like the sudden motion
of lightning in the Air, but a continued and lasting rejoicing, the spirits and
life that runs in the veins and arteries of all the duties we owe to our
King, making us to perform them constantly, joyfully, and cheerfully. They must
not be presented, as some Ancients complained the benefits they received were,
viscata beneficia, benefits that hing to the fingers of those who give them
like Bird-lime: but let our duties be the offerings of free hearts: If it
happen that his Majesty's Affairs should call from us for some of our means,
let us answer cheerfully and give with joy; Some years ago, gladly would we
have had the occasion of doing it.

Doct. last, It is the Lord that raises Kings, and restores to their wonted
Honors and Privileges, Noble, Wise and Faithful Counselors. It was Gods
wise Providence brought Joseph to Pharaoh, and Moredcai to Ahasuerus, and holy
and wise Daniel to Darius, it is the Lords hand that brings out from under
the cloud of restraint and violence, to their wonted Honor and Privileges,
the Councels and Representatives of Kingdoms.

Use 1. This again gives us matter of praise, that God having restored our
King as at first, so he is in a way of restoring our Counselors as at the
beginning, setting over us men of our own Nation and Blood, men of Honor,
Prudence, and Conscience ( Tales sunt praesidia Regni, non exercitus non The
sauri; Such, not Treasures nor Armies, are the strength and defense of a
Kingdom) to sit at the Helm of Affairs, and sweept away the Strangers that
abode in the Cities of our Solemnities, as Cobwebs in our neatest Rooms,
staining all our Glory, the product of the poisonous Spiders that had creept in
unto the Palaces of our King, and also restoring our Public Councels, the High
Courts of Parliament in these Kingdoms to their wonted and ancient Privileges:
Those many years by past, the Parliaments of these Kingdoms have been very
Monsters, an omnigadarum of the three Kingdoms, without Head and Shoulders, a
model not heard of before amongst us: and the fundamental mould of Parliaments,
according to the Laws of the respective Kingdoms, has been quite out of
fashion; yea, Courts of that kind have been like the Samaritan betwixt
Jerusalem and Jericho, lying deadly wounded, or rather like Lazarus, in the
absence of his Lord and Master, both dead and buried. Now the Lord is preparing
for their Resurrection, and as he did to Lazarus, kindly inviteth them in the
presence of our King, and the countenance of his Royal Authority, to arise and
come out from the grave of violence in which they have been long imprisoned.
The Lord make them, and the whole Land with them, to remember both their
Deliverer and Deliverance, that what Diogenes held for an unquestionble truth
(there was nothing so soon forgot as a benefit received) may be found a lie
both as to them and us.

Use last, Let us pray, since God is restoring our Counselors as at the
beginning, that he would give them also Wisdom and the fear of His Name, that
the King may be happy in their Councels, as they are happy in a Gracious and
most Wise King. And since God is giving to Caesar what is Cesars, and to them
what is theirs, that both may give to God what is Gods: the fresh remembrance
of Usurpation on themselves, warning them not to incroach upon him: That all
these who have sown in tears may reap in joy: That our King may be established
for ever upon the Throns of his Royal Ancestors: for which I shall (and I hope,
without hazard of accusation I may) turn the promise made to David, Psalm.
89.20. in a prayer for him; O Lord, as thou have found King Charles thy
Servant, and with holy oil have anointed him, so let thy hand hold him fast:
and thy arm strengthen him. Let never his enemies be able to oppress him; nor
the son of wickedness any more to hurt him: but smite down his foes before his
face, and plague them that hate him. Let thy truth and mercy be with him, and
in thy Name exalt his horn: So be it, even so be it, O Lord. To this Lord, who
is able to perform all these, even to our God, who has restored our Judges as
at first, and our Counselors as at the beginning, and has purged out the
tin and the dross of Usurpers, be praise, glory and honor, for now and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Epist. p. 2. l. 5. r. sickness. line last, for ever, read also.

Page 12. line 3, 4. for Prove. 24, 21. read, 1 Pet. 2.17. p. 20. l. 12. for
debauching, r. demeaning. p. 26. l. 25. r. concomitant, p. 34. l. 26. he
looks, r. they look. p. 38. l. 16. their r. his. p. 43. l. 8. unto, r. into,
p. 45. l. 17. r. inadvertency, p. 46. l. 9. unto, r. in, p. 47. l. ult. has,
r. have, p. 53. l. 5. r. restore, p. 57. l. 11. r. timpany p. 66. l. 19. of, r.
off, p. 78. l. 15. her, r. their. p. 85. l. 20. r. death-threatning, p. 88. l.
7. del. Kings. p. 89. l. 6. r. omnigatherum.


