Mr. James Ianeway's LEGACY TO HIS FRIENDS, Containing Twenty Seven Famous
Instances of Gods Providence in and about Sea Dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of Several that were Eyewitnesses to many of them.

Whereunto is Added a Sermon on the same Subject.

Go up now, look toward the Sea; and he went up and looked, and said, there is
nothing; and he said, Go up seven times: And at the seventh time he said,
behold, there arises a little Cloud, etc. 1 King. 18. 44. Come and Hear all ye
that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul, Psalm. 66. 16.
London, Printed for Dorman Newman, at the Kings Arms in the Poultry, 1674.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
THe Author of this Treatise, now put into thine Hands, needs none of my
Praises; he being lately gone, to make one in Consort with that Heavenly Chore
above, his Works praise him in the Gate; only I could not but lend my hand a
little, being desired to give it a lift into the World; and tell thee the
Author was a man of Designs for God, and more of them he had in his Heart and
Head, then his Lord and Master (whose he was, and whom he served) did give him
time to Finish; that his Master might be Honored, and souls Edified, he tried
several Ways, and that with several sorts of persons; leaving no stone
unturned, no means unattempted, that the Work of the Lord might Prosper in his
hand. One while he designs sinners might be helped in getting Acquaintance
with God, Witness that Excellent Treatise of his.
and that Saints might improve their Best Friend in the Worst of Times; and to
that end he appears in the world, to drive on a good Acquaintance betwixt
Christ and Souls. And another while, feeling warm Compassions and Affections
bubbling up in his Soul to poor Young Converts, Death Unstung, T. Mousley T.
Savage
he carries on a design of strengthening their weak hands, by appearing once
again upon the Stage, in printing the Comfortable Death of a Young Convert. And
another while he had a design of preventing the ripening sins of youth;
witness his bowelly and tenderhearted Sermon upon the occasion of the Penitent
Murderer, in which he Cautions poor enticed Young men to take heed of the
Baits, that the great Angler for Souls, lays before them. But lest this man of
Designs for God, should miss his great aim, he shoots lower, that he might
hit his Mark, he stoops, and sweetly condescends, to send Tokens to Children,
to bespeak their Hearts betimes for Christ, his Master; he labors to Teach the
Children to cry Hosanna to his Lord: And now in the last place, he casts about
to meet with Seafaring Men, whose Souls he always had bleeding and melting
bowels for. Oh how would he Weep, Pray, Mourn, Sigh over them; entreat them
Affectionately, beseech them importunately, that they would not forget the God
of their Mercies and Deliverances; nor the Mercies and Deliverances of their
God. Upon this Occasion of Sea-mens receiving the greatest Deliverances of any
men in the World from God, and so soon playing the Old Israelites with Gods
Wonders (viz.) soon forgetting his Works.

Some Friends speaking to him upon this subject, and Acquainting him with a
Taste of some Memorable Passages of Providence, he readily upon desire, sets
his hand to this work of Collecting several Famous Deliverances from Friends;
and took pains to get their Papers into his hands, but had not time to pollish
and adorn them in his sweet and taking Style, as he did other things. These lay
upon his hand above a Year and a half, still waiting for more Observable
Providence to come to his Cognizance: But here thou have them as they are, if
thou have an Heart to improve them, to thy further strengthening of thy Faith
in future Straits: Whether at Sea or Land, here thou may see the Lord setting
his Right Foot upon the Sea. Here thou may see the Lords Royalty and
Sovereignty extending it self to the great Deeps. Here thou may see the Winds
and Seas obeying of him. Here thou may see the Lord giving a literal Com^ent
on that Text, When thou go through the Waters, I will be with thee. Here
thou may see Hopeless, and Helpless men, in their greatest Distress at their
wits end, saved and delivered by the great God: which is enough, one would
think, to make any Reader cry out with the Psalmist, O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of Men.

Here thou may see the prevailing Power of Prayer, the Wonder-working Power
of God, the unspeakable Bowels and tender Mercies of God, to poor Perishing,
Sinking, Drowning, Starving, dying Men; that thou may Pray to this God more,
Love this God better, and dread to sin against him, who is the God of such
Miraculous Salvations and Deliverances. And that this Treatise may promote that
work in thy Soul, is the Desire of

Thy Cordial Soul-Friend, John Ryther.
Wapping 14 Apr. 1674.
There are these Books of Mr. James Ianeway'es, printed for Dorman Newman at
the Kings Arms in the Poultry.
HEaven upon Earth, or the best Friend in the worst of times; The 3d Edition
enlarged.

2. Death Unstung: A Sermon Preached at the Funeral of Thomas Mousley an
Apothecary: With a brief Narrative of his Life and Death; also the manner of
God's dealings with him, after his Conversion.

3. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Tho. Savage.

4. Tokens for Children: the first and second Part.

5. Mr. James Janeway 's Legacy, etc.

REMARKABLE SEA DELIVERANCES.
ONe Major Gibbons, a man well known in new England, a Gentleman of good
education, good parts, and of good Conversation, (as the Author has been
credibly informed by them that knew him) was bound upon a voyage to Sea,
himself being Supra Cargo with such commoditys as those parts of America does
afford, after going out from Boston several days, by hard weather, and contrary
winds, the Ships company were much distressed, and through the Continuance of
the Contrary winds, Provisions now begin to fail them; and O how feeble does
Spirits grow, when Bread, the Staff of life taileth! now Hunger becomes more
dreadful to them, then the every moment threatening Billows of the devouring
Ocean; and they that one while feared drowning, now fears Starving; they are
brought to the last meal in the Barrel, and the last oil in the Cruse, and say
as she did, We will Eat this little that is left, and dye: and now when they
thought they had eaten the last, what conflicts must they needs have within
themselves? who knew not where to have another morsel to fortify the tired and
spent Spirits with the constant toil, and hard labor: how they look one up
one another, as men already under a Sentence of death; and by one another
looks, Strike terror to one another Hearts; They look on every side, (as David
says) I looked on my right hand, Psalm. 142 4, 5.
but there was no man that would know me; Refuge failed me; or perished from
me. They look downward, they seeing nothing but the Belly of destruction
opening for them; they look upward, the only, and last refuge, and remedy, in
this deplorable estate was out of the depths, they cried to the Lord.

But though they look out of the Ship, as Noah did out of his Ark, upon the
waters, and send forth the Dove of Prayer, that winged Messenger, to Heaven,
yet she brings no Olive branch, no Answer; the waters assuage not; the winds
calm not, they are like the Prophets Servant, when he bid him go up now; and
look toward the Sea, 1 Kings 8. 43.
and he went up and looked and said, there is nothing; and this strikes them
into doleful and dismal Lamentations; out of which Lamentations, at last
Springs up a tragical and sorrowful Motion. The Motion is, that which the
Mariners, in Ionahs Vessel, put in execution, Jonah 1. 7.
Come let us cast Lots, etc. only with this difference, they cast Lots to find
out the delinquent; and these, which of them, should dye first, to be a
Sacrifice for ravenous Hunger to feed upon: Concluding, as he in that case, It
is expedient for us that one man should dye for the People, John. 11. 50.
and that the whole Ships Company perrish not. Life being sweet, Skin for Skin,
and all a man has will he give for his life, they at last bring it through
many a sad debate, to a result they cast the Lot, th disposing of which is of
the Lord, one of the Company is arrested by the Lot; here, here, is the
Condemned Prisoner: O but where is the Executioner to be found to act his
office upon a poor Innocent? is it not death to them now, to think who shall
act this bloody part in the Tragedy? But before they fall upon their
involuntary Execution, Major Gibbons calls them to Prayer, considering, that in
the Mount, the Lord is often seen, and that many times our extremity proves
Gods opportunity; he also asks the poor man if he was willing to dye; but O
what a hard Question is that to Answer! He replys, if it might preserve the
rest of the lives, he could be the more willing; to which he has this Answer:
All events are in the hands of God, we must not dispute them, to Prayer they
go: and, O sure these Prayers must melt hearts of Adamant! and Behold, while
they are at it, God does send a visible commentary upon that Scripture: Then
shall thou call, and the Lord shall Answer; Esaias 58. 9.
thou shall Cry, and he shall say here I am: For while they were calling, God
was Answering; there leaps a mighty Fish into the Boat; and as it is of the
Whale: swallowed up Jonah, God prepared a Fish, for the Lord here prepared, or
provided a Fish, that a poor creature might not be swallowed up: but O what joy
was here at such a token for good! not only it at present releiving and
refreshing their hunger, which no Question made them quick Cooks; but when they
look upon the Finger of God in it, sending it as an answer to prayer, they
conclude it an happy Omen of their deliverance, and a pledge of approaching
mercy: but alas, it is not long before their hearts grow faint again, their
Countenances pale, their Spirits sink now as low as they were lifted up high;
and now the poor Seamen are like their Ship, one while mounted up in the hopes
to Heaven, and another while they are sunk down again in despair as low as
hell; they know not now of another cake, another Morsel, they are reduced to
their former exigency, which brings them to a resolve to steer in this strait,
their old course; to Lotts they go again the Second time, only they have such
an honor for the Providence of God, they will not put him into condemnation,
that God has acquitted; the Lot now falls upon another person, and O now they
receive the old trouble, and intestine Combats, how they shall find in their
Hearts, to punish one, that never had offended any of them; and while one
thinks of it, says he, Alas poor man, what has he done to deserve this
sentence? another cries, Will not this blood cleave to my Conscience another
day? though I went to this expe-expedition a Prest-Souldier? another says, for
his part he sees no way but death, therefore he cannot take away life, when he
sees not any life can be preserved by it: but they are called again to look
upward, before they put the Knife to the Throat of this Sacrifice, and they
remember the last encouragement to put life into the almost dead-mens Prayers;
they pray now with a pledge in their hands, and are ready to tell God, the last
time he gave them a Pawn, an Earnest; and O it is not vain to seek the Lord!
for lo, while they are seeking to him, he is sending to them; as the Prayers
fly to Heaven, Mercy is dispatched upon the wings from Heaven.

O turn aside, and see this great sight, while they are praying. Behold a
second Answer from above; A great Bird lights and fixes her self upon the Mast,
which one in the Company espies, and up he goes, and there she stands until he
took her with his hand by the wing, and brought her down to the Company; and O
what life from the dead is this to them a second time! Sure they will hearken
to the voice of the second Sign, if not to the voice of the first; and now that
which they hoped by the first Providence (viz.) that it was a forerunner of
the complete deliverance; Now they are by this second confirmed in the Faith,
and now they begin to think (as I can easily imagine) if God will save them out
of this distress, O what manner of persons they will become! what manner of
lives they will live! what Sacrifices of Thanksgiving will they offer up to
God! but while they are thus thinking they have no visible hopes, but that it
must be a third Miracle that brings them out of this their miserable condition;
they have the same disappointments upon them still, only now they divert their
Hunger all they can, by telling of, and remembering the Loaves, (as I may say)
their experiences in this extremity of theirs, and comforting themselves, that
if they come to a third strait, it would (they hoped) be an outlet from their
present misery and calamity: They are reduced the third time to the former
course and strait, to cast Lotts; and when they were to go to the heart-aking
work, to put him to death, upon whom the Lot fell, they go to their Old
Friend, in a day of Adversity, (to God) by hearty and humble Prayer: And O now
they do, as the Prophets man at the Seaside, look again and again, but alas
Master they cry, there is nothing. Prayer is done, concluded, nothing appears;
O but as the Prophets Man looked seven times, so says this good man Major
Gibbons, look again, as Jonah, I will look again toward his Holy Temple (says
he to one of the Company) Go up to the top, and see what you can espy; and at
last he makes a Sail, (viz.) espys a Ship; this puts new life into all their
spirits; they bear up with the Vessel, they Man their Boat, they desire in the
manner of perishing, humble Suppliants to Board them, which they are Admitted;
the Vessel proves a French Vessel, yea, a French Pyrate; Major Gibbons
Petitions him for a little Bread to sustain their lives, who had been several
days wishing for death, but could not find it in their Extremity, and take the
Ship and Cargo. So sweet is life, that all that a man has will he give for his
life; and now behold, God draws forth to these Poor Perishing men his best Wine
to the last, nay, turns the Water of Affliction into the Wine of Consolation.
The Commander of the Vessel knows the Major, and replys readily and cheerfully,
Major Gibbons, not one hair of your head shall perish, nor any of your Ships
Company, if it lie in my power either to supply you, or preserve you. O the
Wisdom of God that has ways we know not of, to Relieve in the greatest
straits, and cause himself to be seen in the Mount. The Commander of this
French Pyrat was one some years before that Major Gibbons had shown signal
Kindness to, when his life was in danger at Boston in New England. Thus the
Lord appeared a God, hearing Prayers in Extremitys, which appearances are not
to be forgotten in succeeding Generations. O that men would praise the Lord for
his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Children of men.

Secondly: About the year 1636. there arising a storm and tempest of troubles
in the Church of Scotland, five Ministers, eminent for Piety, Learning, and the
Honorable success in the Ministry, were so hard born under by a prevailing
Party imposing upon their Consciences, that they were forced to Embarque
themselves for America; three of their names were Mr. Levinston, Mr.
Mackleland, and Mr. Blaire, with two more whom my Author could not call to mind.

These good men Sailed half the Channel over, about 500. Leagues, where they
met with great distress of weather, which broke off the Rudder of their Ship,
and occasioned a desperate leak to spring in her, which exposed them to eminent
danger; but they in this distress endeavor to hang on their Rudder again, but
often were they frustrated in their attempt to a total despair of effecting it.
They also labored with the like unsuccessfulness to find out and stop the
leak; this poor Ships Crew had labored also by pumping, to keep the Ship above
water, until all their few hands were feeble, and all their hearts faint; so
that as so many dispairing persons of life, they cease all endeavors, and
yield themselves to death, expecting every moment to be Entombed in the belly
of the devouring deeps; during the time of this their great distress, the
Ministers kept on their course, as at other times of Worship, ( viz.) the
reading of a Chapter in course, and taking observations from it, with Prayer
and Preaching, which they did by turns; at the crisis of this deplorable case,
it fell to be the Lot of Mr. Mackleland to perform this Exercise, a man
Austeer in his life, reserved in his speech, and of great Piety, who was often
observed to let fall many remarkable Prophetical Expressions of future events;
the Chapter that at that time came to be read in course by him, was the 32 of
Exodus, which he had read all along (until he came to the 12th. verse.) where he
made a full stop; the verses run thus.

And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Lord, why does thy Wrath wax
hot against thy people, which thou have brought out of the Land of Egypt with
great Power, and a mighty hand? Wherefore should the Egyptians say, for
mischief did he bring them out to slay them in the Mountains, and to consume
them from the face of the Earth? Turn from thy severe Wrath, and repent of
this Evil against thy People. -- upon the reading of these verses over again,
he declared to them the Case, which Moses was here interceeding for, compared
with his Expostulation in the 12 verse, did parallel the case, and considering
the happy event of that Argument, which Moses used (mentioned in the 14 verse,
which runs thus:) and the Lord Repented of the Evil which he brought to do
unto his People -- he could not but comfortably hope, that they might have the
same Effect: Nay he goes further, and his Spirit raised into a peremptory
prediction, that he durst assure them from his great Lord and Master, that not
one hair of their heads should fall to the ground; after this he went to
Prayer, urging God with the same Argument, and then rose up comfortably
assuring his stedfastness in believing the same; he advises the Seamen and the
Company in the Ship to refresh themselves by taking some meat, the long fasting
and hard labor having much infeebled them. Then he encouraged them to make
another Attempt to fasten the Rudder, without which they could not possible
make toward any point for shore. He after advised them to clear the ship as
well as they could from water by pumping, which they did happily Effect, the
Leak being stopped providentially of it self -- whether it was some noak of a
plank started by the destress of weather which occasioned the Leak, and by the
surges of the Sea, clapped into the place again, or what it was, else could not
be known. But however this looks like life from the dead to these poor men who
had received but a little before a sentence of Death in themselves, that they
might trust in him who raises the Dead. Soon after this, God who had heard in
Heaven great Tears and Prayers, Commands the Wind, Tack about to the West, and
to blow so strong a gale that they were forced to bear up before it, and it
continued so long, that it brought them back to the North of Ireland, where
they continued some time; although but short, they were very instrumental in
the Converting of many souls, which seed-plot remains to this day; and soon
after they passed into Scotland. This Relation was given by several Ministers
of the North of Ireland: also the Reader may take notice, the Author of that
Book called the fullfilling of the Scriptures, Fullfilling of the Scriptures.
page 487.
mentiones this remarkable Providence, though not so largely with these two
additional, but very considerable circumstances; first, That a poor Seaman was
made the instrument to preserve the same Vessel, by fastening the Rudder, whose
company they had all shunned, others having given it over. Secondly: Several
Passengers being Aboard, who shipped themselves for America, upon only external
accounts, expecting a fat soil, and outward advantage in that place, and not
as the others upon the account of Conscience, to enjoy the purity of
Ordinances; they did all dye upon the Sea save one, being five in number. And
who is so blind, as cannot see here the outstretched Arm of an Omnipotent God,
commanding deliverance for his poor distressed, persecuted, praying, believing
Servants, and also for all them that Sailed with them? O who would not Pray at
Sea, and trust in him who raises the dead in the saddest of their Extremities
and distress! and speaks forth much of the power and goodness of God, calling
upon all to trust in him, let the dangers and straits be never so great.

3. A Vessel of ours about the year 1636. being at Newfound Land a Fishing,
being somewhat of the latest in the year, until the Ice came in great flakes;
and being ready to hoise Sail for the return home, they sent out in the Boat
six of the men to weigh their Anchor; but while they were about it, a sad
Providence prevents them, a great flake of Ice interposes between them and
their ship, and carries them adrift, so that by all means that they and the
ship could use, they could not recover their Vessel again, whereby they were
exposed to an inevitable ruin, neither having Food, nor any other Accommodation
to keep them warm; they having continued thus three days and three nights, they
began to be Hunger-starved, and accounting themselves all dead men, they began
to consult one with another what course to take; they at last, though with
great regret and grief, they resolve one of them must dye to become Food for
the rest; each person begged to have it his Lot to dye first, to be freed from
that torment that they languished under; so that they were forced to determine
it by Lot: He upon whom the Lot fell, desired to go to the end of the Boat,
there to recommend his soul to God by Prayer, before he dyed; the rest being in
a deep Agony upon apprehension of shedding the blood of one of their Comerades:
But while they were sat together, lamenting and imploring God's favor to
prevent such a fact according to that they wished and desired: The person
separated by Lot for death, dyed upon the place where he was praying, which in
their deplorable Condition occasioned great Joy to the rest, that hereby they
were not forced against their wills to take his life; so looking upon this as a
good Omen, they proceeded to satisfy their Hungers upon the dead body: the
Boat was still A-drift, not frozen up; so that by that time, their Food was
spent, they were brought ashore many Leagues to the Norward of New England,
where the five landed alive, where the poor Barbarians did commiserate them,
and help them as they could; three of them dyed with the distress they had been
in, the other two made a shift to get to New England, and so at last, by a good
hand of God upon them, came to their Habitations in the West of England, having
both lost their heels with the extremity of the cold in the Boat. This Relation
my Author had from one of these two Seamen, with whom he came afterward a
Passenger from Ireland, to whom he showed his heels so lost.

4. A small Vessel, about 45 Tun, the Masters name Phillip Hangare, coming upon
the Coast of New England, they suddenly sprang a leak, and so foundred: There
were in this poor miscarrying Vessel 18 Seamen and Passengers; 12 of the men
got into the Longboat, and as that was suddenly brought to their minds in this
surprise, they threw into their Boat also some small matters of Provisions, but
they were wholly without fire: These 12 men at that time of the year about
Michaelmas, (and as Paul said in his Voyage, Sailing was become dangerous)
Sailed five hundred Leagues, and were to a Miracle preserved all that time in
this small Boat, five weeks; but it pleased the Lord, who appears in our
straits most, to send them great relief, by causing some flying Fish to fall
into the Boat, which they eat raw, and were unto them more acceptable than the
greatest rarities and dainties at another time; God's Providence now proving
the Caterer, they caught a Shark, and that Ravenous Fish that uses to prey
upon men, now becomes a prey to these poor distressed Creatures; but they were
glad of food in the want of fire, and have an heat in their Stomachs, to eat
that raw, and digest at this time what would have made them sick at other
times; but alas, another want they had, was drink as well as fire, but they
were forced to open the belly of this Shark, and suck his blood for drink; at
last, that God who has a desire to the work of his own hands, gives them hopes
to release them out of this insupportable misery, by letting them come to a
discovery of Land in the West Indies; but alas, they were so weak, that when
they came ashore, one or two of them dyed; but most of them lived to declare
the works of the Lord. Mr. Gedney of New England.
This the Author had from one of the 12 that were thus miraculously preserved,
but since cast away at Sea.

5. Captain Jonas Clark, of New England, going for Virginia, the Vessel was
Cast away in a strange amazing manner, about two hours before day, among the
Indians where the Ship-wrackt men lay ashore in great fear; but three days
after they thought to get their ship off again; to which end the Master, with
some others, went into the boat, they came threescore Fathom from the shore,
where there arose a great Sea, and broke in upon them; but the second Sea came
and turned the boat up; four men under water, all were drowned, but Captain
Clark, who was kept under water by one of the men, until his breath was gone,
but then God appeared, and set him at liberty from him in a most Miraculous
way, and enabled him to swim to the shore; they that were alive now, were in
great straits and perplexities, not knowing what to do, but yet some of their
eyes were up to God; at last they Unanimously resolve to Travel, and when they
had Traveled one night, and part of a day, meeting with many Suamps and thick
places, so that all hope failed them of going along; so they stood still as
(wayfaring men) astonished, not knowing what course to take; and though before
they were afraid of any Indians, now they were glad to pray to to the Lord for
the sight of an Indian, which in this extremity and perplexity, within half an
hour the Lord was pleased to grant: The Indian was all alone, which was
observable also; when they got to him, they asked the way to the English, and
they did persuade him by entreaty to go along with them, but within one hours
time, he carried them to a Town of the Indians, which did sadly fright and
amaze them; but they still looked up to the Lord to help and save them; but at
last they got to the English, and so were preserved.

This Relation the Author had from Captain Clarks own hand, a person of known
Godliness and Integrity.

6. The last Providence called to mind a strange and stupendous passage of a
Godly Gentlewoman, who in the first breaking forth of the Rebellion in Ireland,
was forced to fly for her life, with some other persons in her Company;
especially three Children, one of them upon her Breast: But alas, these poor
trembling Travelers had not gone long before they were striped Naked by the
Irish, who to admiration spared their lives; but passing on to the foot of a
River, others met them, and would have cast them into the River; but this Godly
Woman not being dismayed, asked a little liberty to Pray, and as she lay on
frozen ground Naked, she got a little resolution not to go on her own feet to
so unjust a death; upon which having called her, upon her resolution, they
dragged her by the heels along the ground, with the rest of the Company; she
turns upon them, and on her knees says, You should I am sure be Christians, and
men I see you are; in taking away our miserable lives you do us a pleasure; but
know, as we never wronged you, nor yours, you must dye also your selves, and
one day give an account of this Cruelty to the Judge of Heaven and Earth.
Suddenly upon which, An extraordinary thing, they being the greatest
instruments of Cruelty in that Rebellion.
an Irish Priest says, Let us not take their lives, but we will put them in
this Island of the Lake; a Boat being at the River, all the eight Naked and
without Meat, are turned into that Island, where after four days staying, some
of the Company dyed with Hunger and Cold, but not this Woman, nor any of her
Children; a day after, the two Boys found the Hyde of a Beast which had been
killed at the root of a Tree, which they and the Mother endeavored to cast
over them; then lying upon the Snow, the next day a little Boat goes by, to
whom she calls for God's sake to take her out; but they refused, being Irish;
she desired a little Bread, but they said they had none; she begs a Coal of
Fire, which she obtained, for she had some fuel in the Boat, and thus with
some fallen Chips, made a fire; and the Boys taking a piece of the Hyde, laid
it upon the Coals, and began to gnaw the Leather; but alas, without an
extraordinary Divine support, what could this do? Thus they lived ten days
without any visible supplies, and that good Woman professed it was by Faith and
Joy in God she lived; nor had she any Bread but Ice and Snow, nor any Drink but
Water, but she thought God put more substance in it, and found it as it were
clammy. The next day a Boat carried her out to the side of the Band-water,
where yet she had been lost, but that she could not suffer to see her Children
dye in her sight; and therefore (though the two Boys were young, and so
Starved, that they had no strength) she pressed them to go out of her sight,
under pretense of seeking some fire; the poor Children had not gone far until
they saw two or three great Dogs eating a man who had been killed; the
Children were afraid the Dogs (who needed not fear any thing but to live in
such a Condition) and one of them came running, and leaped upon one of the
Children, without doing him the least hurt, and would run a little before, and
then tarry until the Children come up, and so led them on where an House whence
Smoke appeared, which was an Irish man's, Protected by the English in Antrum, by
which means they were marvellously pleased, and the Mother sent for, and
succored by a party from Antrum. Although this Providence be not a
Sea-deliverance, yet it is a remarkable preservation from danger by Water and
Hunger, at Land.

7. In the first settling of the Bohemia Islands off the Cape of Florida, about
the year 1642. there were at that present great troubles in the Burmoudas, one
Captain Sale who had been Governor the year before, comes for London, and
here informing some of his Acquaintance, and Persons of Worth and Estate, how
things then stood, they undertake for him, and got him a Ship, and all things
necessary for the discovery of these Islands which he had informed them of, so
they proceeded to Burmoudas, where they took in several Passengers, Captain
Sale being Chief, and Captain Lane and his Family which came from London with
him as his Assistant in the management of the Design, so they in pursuit of
the Voyage, came to an Island called Cicatra, he lay down in the Platts, where
they could not at present find an Harbor. So they sent out their Shallop upon
a discovery, which upon Return informed them of a better place to Ride in. --
But sending out the Shallop again upon a discovery, before she Returned, there
arose a dreadful Storm that carried her immediately upon the Rocks, and staved
her with very much difficulty, most of the People were saved and some
Provisions. Then were they Reduced to very great straits formidable to flesh
and blood, a Barren Island, no inhabitants, no likelihood of Releif, little
Provisions left; in this great strait most of them resolved to travel up to the
wester end of the Island and there to abide. (Captain Lane and his Family, and
his Son who was his Leiutenant) theye Rsolved to seek for some kind of
Provisions, and so stayed on the Island. But Captain Sale and one Mr. Bounly
who had been Master of the Ship, and some other Seamen, and one Mr. Shadwel;
in all eight, Resolved to go to Virginia, and took what Provisions they could
get, which was one Shark; but before they made to the Land they were in very
great wants; For from this Island from whence they departed to Virginia, was
three hundred Leagues: in their now great Extremity, Providence cared for
them, so that they got another Shark, and were glad to eat him Raw. They were a
11 days going to Virginia, and the Boat a very little one, that they could
scarcely Steer in her for fear of danger. Yet the Lord in this deep Distress,
made his Arm bare for their Salvation, and brought them safe to a place called
Nuse-mum, to one Mr. Richard Brunkets House, where they were curtiously
Entertained; and after the Relation upon what account they were put to these
Hardships and Necessities, Captain Sale had a Vessel provided laden with
necessaries, to go for Cicatra, to Relieve those they had left there in such
Distress, and they arrived there. And O now what Comfort must this be, after
such long wishing and gradual Dying, to see that there was now Hopes of Life
brought to them; but several of them were starved to Death before their
Arrival. Captain Lane is now sent to fetch some Provisions who had been in
unspeakable Extremity. He came down in a little Boat, his Son also the
Lieutenant, and two Servants, but when they had gotten in their Provision, and
going home with hopes of a new Life; Behold, the stupendous providence of God,
all of a sudden Death creeps in and Arrests them. For in a narrow place where
the Tide runs swiftly, the Boat is sunk, all are drowned but one man, who
carried the desolate Widow the sad Tidings! what an unwelcome Messenger this
was you may easily conjecture; about three months after arrived a Vessel to
them (the master of her my Author,) and so Mrs. Lane, her Son and Daughter,
Maid Servant and Man Servant, where all brought up about forty miles, where
they were entertained by my Author for six weeks, and gave an account of some
notable passages of Gods Providence in preserving them. Worthy never to be
forgotten! Her Husband and the men went out to see what they could get for Food
every Day, and they had for the most part just for the Day, and she told my
Author that she as a tender hearted Mother would lay something by for her
younger Children; but she observed that the next Day they never got any thing.

And thus Providence trained them up in the School of Faith; but further she
gave an account of one Remarkable thing, In the last day of the week, upon a
time it proved a very stormy Day, and they being abroad a hunting for some
support could get nothing. The Husband and Son comes home very much troubled,
and the men that was gone into the Woods they could get nothing; and they being
very much troubled, one took up a Resolution not to come home, knowing their
Captain would not suffer them to go and hunt on the Lords Day; on the other
hand they thought he would wonder what was become of them, and fear lest evil
had befallen them; so they alter their Resolution to come home, but empty of
any Relief; this very Evening before the Sabbath in this perplexety of
thoughts, there flys over their Heads three gray Geese; a wonder it was for
such Geese that were never seen before nor after. O says she to her Husband,
that we had some of them against to morrow! observing they lighted in a
Bottom, she aquaints her Husband, he says they have no shot left. O says she,
here is a Porrenger, melt it or cut it into pieces, which he did for
expedition, and charged his Piece, and at the first shot killed them all, --
These things, and many more my Author had from her own Mouth, after her
mervellous Preservation. O that men would Praise the Lord, for his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men!

8. We have a very wonderful Deliverance recorded, an honest poor man in
Maulden in Essex, one Gregory Crove, who with his man and boy, was in his Boat
going to fetch Fullers-Earth; but by the way meeting with a Storm, his Boat was
driven upon a banck of sand, and their sunk; the men were glad to hang upon
the Mast, but poor Crove seeing his New Testament in the water, which he prized
highly, caught it up, and took it into his Bosom; the tide being gone, they
were left upon the sand, at lest ten miles from land; now in this great
Distress they made their Prayers to the Lord, that he would send some means of
Deliverance: For now within half an hour it would be flood, but in this little
time before flood they found a Chest wherein was five pounds six Shillings
eight pence, but honest Crove cast it into the Sea again saying, If the Lord
will please to save our lives he will provide us a little food; and so they
went again up the Mast, where they to Admiration hung by the Arms and Legs,
for ten hours together; in which the Boy was so weary, and beaten with the
Waves that he fell off, and was drowned; now their fears increase upon them,
and knows not what to do. But Crove advises his man to cut down the Mast, and
when the flood comes again, to sit upon it, and so, says he, it may please God
to drive us to some Ship; this Council was taken, they commit themselves to God
upon this Mast, and thus continued Tuesday Night, Wednesday, and Wednesday
Night; in which time the man was so tired out with Hunger, Watching, and Cold,
that he dyed; now was Crow left alone in this sad and deplorable Condition, who
prayed now the more earnestly for some Succor and Relief, but durst not Sleep,
lest the Sea should beat him off the Mast; and when this distressed miserable
object was almost spent, his flesh sodden with Sea water, and his eyes almost
closed up with the Salt, now in his Extremity the Lord makes it his
opportunity, and steps in by his Providence, presents a Ship going for Antwerp:
(observe here the Finger of God:) The Wind not being favorable was driven out
of the way, and espying something a far off in the Sea, but supposeing it to be
some Fisher-boy steered from it. Crove seeing this, held up his Cap and shake
it over his head, whereby at length they were moved to go to him, and so they
took him in; when he came into the Ship, being half dead, careful of his New
Testament, he plucked it out of his Bosom and gave it to some to dry. They in
the Ship were careful of him, and with great difficulty recovered him, Fox's
Book of Martyrs.
and carried him with them to Antwerp, where the fame of his being miraculously
delivered, drew many to see him, and relieve him with necessaries.

9. A Ship of Holland being driven against her will, came to a Place called
Zembla where the Pole is elevated Seventy Six degrees; they among many delays,
and great dangers, they scarce reached the Aurange-Islands; for now they were
set fast in a Consolidated body of continued Ice, which threatened them every
moment; at last being reduced to their ultimate hope, they resolve to return
the same way they came, but now they find the Ship quite frozen up, not far
from shore, and now they think they should winter in Zembla and wait for a
better Season, wherefore taking out Boards and Plancks, they built for
themselves, and their Stuff, a poor shelter and by a good Providence, the Tide
had thrown up a good quantity of Timber, they not knowing from whence it came,
it proved a great advantage to them during their abode; here they had
continnall fights with Bears, which sometimes were driven away with making
great out-crys, other whiles with Shot; they found their flesh unwholesome for
food. (For in this place the Maritine wild Beasts, are the food to the wild
Beasts of the land) the fat of the Bears they made use of to burn for lights
in the night; these poor creatures were at last, after all other Human
Benefits, left by the Sun, in this Barren Country, and left amongst none but
wild Beasts: The vast Mountains of Snow, with great difficulty they remove,
lest the Habitation should be overwhelmed, and if at any time they went forth,
their jaws were so benumed they could scarce recover their former heat; now
the Bears in the dark, being dull of sight did not venture out to disturb
them, but multitudes of Foxes, which they took in Traps, and made of them both
Victuals and Raiment; and yet after all these dangers and difficultys God
preserved them, This Grorius in his Annalls of the neitherlands, gives an
account of at large.
though indeed some of them dyed, they were 12 of them: The chief of them was
one Jacob Hamskerk, who returned afterward to Amsterdam.

10. In the year 1616 a flemming named Pickman, well known in England and
Holland, for the art he had in getting out of the Sea, the great Guns of that
Spanish Fleet, that was forced upon the Coast of Ireland and Scotland, in the
year 1588. coming from Dronthem in Norway, laden with Boards, was overtaken by
a Calm, during which, the current of the Sea, carried him in a Rock or a little
Island toward the extremity of Scotland, where he was in some danger of being
cast away; to avoid a wrack, he commanded some of his men to go into the
shallop, and to tow of the Ship: these having done so, would needs go upon a
certain Rock to seek for eggs, but as soon as they were got up into it, they
espied a man, whence they imagine there were others lay there about, and that
he had made an Escape thither to avoid some Pirates which might Surprise their
Ship, so that they made all the have they could to the Shallop, and returned to
the Ship; but the Calm continuing, and the current of the Sea driving the
Vessel against the Island, they were forced to get into the Longboat and Tow
her off again; the man they saw before, was in the mean time come to the brink
of the Island, and made signs to them with his hands, entreating them to come
nearer; and falling on his Knees, and joining his Hands together, he begged
Relief from them; at last coming near the Island, they saw something more like a
Ghost than a living Person, a body stark Naked, black, hairy, of a meager and
deformed Countenance, hollow and distorted Eyes, which raised such Compassion
in them, that they proffered to take him into their Boat; at last with some
difficulty they took him in; they found upon the Island no Grass nor Trees,
nothing for Food, nor any shelter, but the ruins of a boat, wherewith he had
made himself an Hut, under which he might be covered from Rain and injuries of
the Weather; when they came to ask him who he was, and how he came into that
un-inhabited place, he replied to them he was an English Man, and that a year
before he was to go from England to Dublin in Ireland in the Passage-Boat, and
that they were taken by a French-Pyrate, who by a Storm that immediately arose,
was forced to let go the Passage-Boat; left us to the mercy of the Waves, which
carried us between Ireland and Scotland into the main Sea, expecting to be cast
away every minute, as at last we were: For the Bark being split against the
Rock, where you took me in, I escaped with one of my Comrades into the Island,
in a more wretched condition than if swallowed up by the Sea; who had been
delivered out of the Extremities we were in for want of meat and drink; of some
of the boards of our Boat we made a Hutt you saw, and we took some Sea-mews
which we set a drying in the Wind and Sun, and so eat them raw; we found also
in the crevices of the Rock, by the Seaside, some Eggs: Thus were we kept from
starving; but what we thought most insupportable, was Thirst; for there was no
Water, but what fell from Heaven; we lived thus six weeks, comforting one
another, and finding some ease in our common misfortune, till that being left
alone, it began to grow insupportable to me; for one day, awaking in the
morning, and missing my Comrade, I fell into such a Despair, that I had some
thought of casting my self headlong, and so put a final period to that
Affliction, whereof I had but endured the one half while I had a Friend
suffering with me: I know not what became of him, but I am of that opinion that
he fell into the Sea, seeking for Eggs; I left with him my Knife, with which we
killed the Sea-Doggs, and the Mews, upon which we lived; so I was forced to get
out of my Hut a great Nail, which I made a shift to sharpen upon the Rock, that
it served me for a Knife: I was also forced to lade a little slake, with a
little Sea-dogg fat, and put it out of a crevice of my Hut, and so got some
Mews to keep me from starving: I lived in this condition and solitude Eleaven
Months, and was resolved to end my days in it, when God sent you to deliver me
out of the greatest misery that ever man was in, Amlasaders Travels you find
this Passage.
and this Seaman after this misery and miraculous preservation, lived to
return to England.

A Remarkable Providence of God in wonderfully preserving of Eleaven or
Thirteen poor distressed men's lives.

11. In the year 68. a Ketch Sailed from Salom in New England for the
Barbados; and when they came into the Latitude of 35. it began to look like
foul weather, so they took in their Top-sail, and because it was toward night,
they struck down the Main sail, and Rafed it; and all this time there was but a
little wind (which was remarkable, if the ensuing story be observed) but still
it looked like bad weather; so they sent up one to Tallow the Mast, and made no
great have to set Sail; the man at the Top thinks he sees some black thing
float upon the Sea, and looking upon it very fixtly, he conceives it to be a
Boat, and so calls to the men below, so they hastened to hoise Sail and make
toward it; and when they came to them, there was a Longboat with a 11 or 13
men, (my Author could not absolutely remember the just number) which poor
distressed Creatures, had been bound for Virginia; and the ship in which they
were, proved very Leaky, and so exceedingly increased, that in a very little
time, she was ready to sink; so all hands hastened to get out the boat, but the
Master stepped into the Cabin to fetch a Compass, and took some Canvas, a
Sayl-needle and twine which he thought might be useful to them in their Need
and Extremity; but while this poor industrious man was endeavoring to be
useful to some other men's lives, he was in danger to lose his own; for the boat
was put off, and the ship sinking, so he cries to them in this distress, if they
would leave him, and let him there Perish; so they came back, and took him in;
they had in their boat a Capstone-bar, which they made use of for a Mast, and
the piece of Canvas for a Sail, and so Sailed before the wind, and had no kind
of Food; and now comes dreadful and inexpressible distress upon them, making
them wish for death it self to give them a deliverance, now all hopes of Relief
failed them; thus they continued five days, some grew Lame, others Feeble, and
all much disheartened by despair of Life; and now upon the 6th. day, they had
concluded to cast Lotts for their lives, who should dye to preserve others; and
they put their Resolution into Execution, and that poor Creature, upon whom the
Lot fell, begs for time; but alas, what will a Reprieve be in this case, where
there is no hope of Relief; but O what difficult work is it to dye? what a
strait was here? Live he could not, and Dye he could not; well, a little time
is deferred, and behold a wonder-working God appears now for him, and for them
all; before night, they espied this Ketch, which raised them all to Admiration;
but they had fears in this distress, that the Ketch did not see them; but when
they perceived the Ketch made to them, O what a new life did it put into these
dying men; so they all got safe Aboard: And see here the goodness of God: In
one hour after there arose a most dreadful Storm which continued for forty
hours, and all of them safely Arrived at Barbados.

The Masters name of the Ketch was Thomas Woodberry of Salom. This the Author
had from a very known person for Integrity and Godliness, now living at Salom.

12. In the year 1606. in the Wars betwixt the Netherlands and the Spaniards,
upon the Spanish Ocean, fell out this observable and remarkable action, taken
notice of by Grotius, in his Annals of the Low Country Wars. Admiral Hauteen
being sent to interrupt the Spanish Fleet, coming from America and the Indies,
he had with him four and twenty Vessels; but of these, six were beaten back by
Tempests; soon after Frasciardo, with eight great Gallions, having a prosperous
Gale, fell upon them unprovided, and ere they were aware; but the Galleys that
were with him, not being driven by the Wind, kept by the shore; but one of them
being grappled with a ship of Zealand, that was next the Admiral, so affrighted
the rest, that as soon as they saw it, they in the very beginning of the Night,
Retreated with all have. Hauteen thus left by his Companions, being a man of an
Undaunted spirit, for two whole days did not leave off the Fight, though most
of his men were in that time lost; but with his torn ship, casting off all
fear of danger, protracted the Victory; but after he saw no hopes of Relief,
and that the Waves poured in upon him, that none of them might come alive into
the Enemies hands, at once they Unanimously agreed upon a Resolute and Terrible
action: For kneeling down upon their Knees, they like dying, but desperate men,
beg of God, that he would please to pardon in that they sought to shun the
Mockeries and Cruelties of the Spaniards, by that sad and lamentable death; so
they set fire to the Gunpowder, by which blow threescore men were killed, two
half dead, lived a little while, being taken by the Spaniards with wonder,
beholding their dreadful Countenances, and their words, with their strange
Resolution and Obstinacy in death.

33. In the year 1607. about the time when the Plantations of Virginia began to
be a little settled by King James, some Britains went to Guyana, but a
dangerous Sedition arose in the Voyage, and the ship being lost, part of the
Company remained in the Island, where continually vexing the Barbarians with
their unkind usage, they at last were set upon by War, as Enemies; by force of
which, and the want of Victuals, they committed themselves to the Sea in a boat
made only of an hollowed Tree; there these poor distressed Creatures were
tossed with continual Tempests, betwixt Despair and Hope of life; but at last
they were droven upon the Rocks, after great misery endured by them in their
little boat for ten days together; and now their danger was not lessened, for
here they must fall into the hands of the Spaniard, who for all pardoned them,
in regard they came not to those parts of their own accord, but by the stress
of weather. Thus were these poor distressed men saved and preserved, when all
hope of being saved was taken away.

14. The Phoenix Frigot, in the time when Captain Whetston Commanded her, and
Mr. May was Master, being Commanded to carry some persons of Quality from Rye
to Deep in France; the Captain and several of the Gentlemen that belonged to
the Frigot was Ashore; the Captain sends the Longboat Aboard, and Ordered the
Frigot to weigh and come to sail, and stand too and fro off in the Bay, and he
would come out in his Pinnis; and the Gentlemen that was with him, were namely,
Sunebank Giles his Chyrurgion, Mr. Goodwin his Chaplain, Mr. Perkins his
Barbar, and Gentleman, Mr. Richards, and some three more Gentlemen Reformadoes,
Abraham Car Coxswain, and about 12 Seamen for his Crew, that set out of Rye,
and crossed the Bay to meet the Frigot under Sail; and when come near, being a
good way ahead, waved to the Frigot to keep her way, and not to come a playse
for her, which she did with a fresh Top-sail Gail of Wind, till come up with
the Pinnis, and then the Coxen would a-laid her Aboard of the Larboard-side;
but the Captain supposing himself far enough Ahead, Commanded him to shout
Ahead of her, and lay her A-board of the Starboard-side, which assuming to do,
the ship giving a saw, and having fersh way, the Pinnis was not past, but the
Cot-water of the ship cut the Pinnis in the middle, and run right over, that
she lay in a moment of time in a 100 pieces, and all the men floating for their
lives; in the intrim of which time, with a cry, they gave a leap, in which
leap, the Captain caught hold on the Railes of the Head, Mr. Richards on the
Captains heels, Mr. Giles the Chyrurgion on Richards heels, Mr. Goodwin on
Giles's heels, and some other person on his; so that with that spring, or leap,
no less than 4 or 5 providentially caught about one the others heels or middle,
as Boys when at playing Truss; and in hoysting in the Captain, they preserved 4
or 5 more with him; the Coxen sank down, and brought some of the Tallow of the
Loward part of the ship on his Clothes, and came up again at the Stern, where
was taken up the Seamen, some by swiming, others by the assistance of the Oar
and pieces of the boat, by Gods blessing kept them from drowning, till the
Longboat took them all up, except the Captains Barber, Mr. Perkins, whom it
seems had sunk, its thought his last time; but Providence so ordered it, that
the man in the main having the hand Lead, there fell a chrockle in the dipsey
Line, and in that very intrim, the Lead fell in the very place where the Barber
was sunk, and the chinckle of the Line fell about the Barbers Fingers, hitcht
about his Ring, and so Providentially fastened it self, so that as the man in
the Scenes haleing up his Lead, found it to come heavier than it use to do;
admiring, at last up comes the Barber fastened in the chinckle by his Ring,
which the Spectators amazed at, immediately took hold of him, and pulled him
into the Frigot, but his Eyes fixed, and Teeth set, and little apperance of
life; but by the blessing of God on the immediate means used, and care of him,
he soon came to himself, and recovered so, that notwithstanding this shroad
disaster which might have proved Fatal to all, or most of them, yet there was
not one man of them all miscarryed, but was recovered to their health again, as
Monuments of Gods mercy. For truth of this, many of the men are alive at this
day; the Chyrurgion now Living in Grays-Inn-Lane; and at the very intrim of
time, I was then Aboard the said Frigot, and was not only an Eye-Spectator, but
an instrument to help preserving of some of them, and therefore may Aver it to
be Truth.

Ezekiel Fog.

15 About ten Years ago in the Island of Barbbados: There did arrive one Mr.
John Blackleach (from new England) a very honest man, who gave account that in
his then Voyage, his Son being Master of the Vessel, and himself Merchant,
their men at Sea did Muttiny, at which occasion he and his Son was forced to
stand on their Guard for some time, casting his care on the Lord: But whilst
under this trouble; being in the Long Reach in or near the Latitude of
Barbados, they all did see a great Ship which stood toward them; and while
they were Looking on her to see how fast she Came toward them (she being
pretty near) vanished away, which struck the men with great fear, and made them
humble themselves to the Good old Man, and Desired his Prayers for them.

16. In the month of November, 1669 the Ship Prosperous of Bristol, sailed from
thence, being bound for Galloway in Ireland, but was forced into Bruts-Bay in
Cornwall, where the Ship brake in pieces, six persons being Drowned, others
wonderfully cast on Shore and bruised: amongst the Rest John Denny (a Skinner
of Bristol) was Cast a Shore by a great Sea: being much bruised and almost
Dead: and was by some stripped naked and laid amongst the other dead folk that
were taken up, being only covered with some Straw or Rubbish. But by
Providence, an old Man Loking on the Dead People, did perceive some Life in the
said Denny: and the Lord opened his heart that he stripped himself of his own
Shirt and some Clothes, and put on him, and took him from amongst the Dead:
through his Labor and Love, by Gods blessing, the said Denny is now well and
lives at Bristol. This my Author had from John Denny's own mouth.

17. In the Year 1671. I being at Boston in New England, I often went to see an
Acquaintance of mine one Abraham Darby, a sober honest man a Master of a
Vessel, who relates the following Story which he attesteth to be Truth. That
That some few Years ago he the said Darby being master of a small Ketch, was
bound from Barbados to Virginia, he having an Irish Woman a Servant on Board
to be Delivered in Virginia, but she was a vile person, and having often
offended, at last was punished, for which she said they should not carry her to
Virginia, though the Wind was very fair and carried them in sounding of the
Capps of Virginia: That they had bent one Cable to the Anckor thinking soon to
get in; but she still said they should not, then the Wind sprang up of a sudden
in a mere fret, which forced them many days off, and their Provisions near
spent (it being if I mistake not in March) then the Wind came fair again a
fresh Gaile, and they before it in hopes to gain their passage; but on a sudden
there came a great Sea that cast the Vessel on her side (she having but little
beside Ballace in her) that her goods and things in hold shifteth. But it
pleased God they clapped the Helm a weather, and she wore, and all hands as could
in the hold brought her to wrights, and the Wind continued fair till they came
near the place, that it took them short before; and then took them as before,
that they were forced off again for many Days; having then but two or three
pieces of Beese and no Bread, nor (I think) above a gallon of fresh Water: But
after some time the Wind came fair, they making Sail to get back, it being
fine weather, there came a great Sea and laid her down again, and carried her
Mast away, and a part of the Partners that hold the Mast, that as she lay on
one side, the Sea rushed in to her; but the Master with his Bed and Rug stopped
the force, till it pleased God they had shifted the things in the hold and
brought her to rights again, (now these poor Souls were left as a Wrack in the
Ocean, and neither Victuals nor Drink, but strong Water and Sugar, to help
them) but finding a Spar or Oars, in the hold, made shift to get out a small
Sail (I had like to have omitted, that whilst they had any Food, they would
have given this wicked Woman a part, but she would not Eat any thing) then it
pleased God to send a fine Gale, and they got on the Cost of New England, and
sounding, found about forty Fathom Water, and very calm; then they chopped to an
Ancker there, and that Night got two or three Fish, wherewith they Refreshed
there selves (but the Woman would not Eat) but could get no more; and finding a
fine Gail, weighed Ancker, and thought to have got within Cape-Cod, not being
far of; but the Wind came fresh against them, and drove them off again to Sea,
and then it was calm; and about that time the Woman had fasted about 21. Days,
and yet could Curse and Damn; and say she should not go Ashore; but that
Night the Master and some others being on the Deck, spied a great black Thing
Rise out of the Sea, to their thinking, much bigger than the Ketch, the Sea
being Light all about, and the Woman in the Hold made a great Noise; and when
she had given a great Screach or Groan, This Great black Thing Vanished, the
water seeming like Fire all round, and made a great Sea and Noise: and when the
men came to their selves, they looking for the Woman, found her Dead; and after
they had flung her over Board, they had a brave Wind and Weather and got safe
to Plimmouth in New England.

18. At new England in the year 1671. I spoke with John Grafting, of Salem, and
others of good repute, who told me not long before, the said Grafting suffered
Ship wrack amongst the Leward Islands, (the name of the place I forget) the
Ship or Ketch being broken to pieces, himself and mate, and one or two were
cast with the Sea a shore amongst the Rocks most wonderfully, not knowing of
each other, tell by providence they met amongst the Rocks, it being an Island
without Inhabitants (if I mistake not,) and they bruised; yet the Lord provided
for them in a wonderful manner, and not only there, but in their getting of
that place, and bringing them safe to their Friends and Relations in Salem, in
New- England; where praises was returned to the Lord, who wonderfully preserves
the Children of men I hope this ere long will be enlarged from the party
himself.

19. I being near acquainted with one Ieffery Howard, a Mariner, who is a man
of good repute, he told me as follows; That about Twelve or Fourteen years
since, he was coming through the City of Salisbury, he was looking on the
Street Rivers, and spies something move on the water; but looking earnestly saw
it to have Life, stepts in and got it out, and found it to be a man child, only
inrapt as it came into the world from its mother: and it was put to nurse, and
now is become a fine Youth.

20. At Bristoll, a place well known, not many years agon a man fell into the
River, near about the marsh, and not being seen, was carried down with the tide
someway, and I think, could not swim, but lay as dead on the water driving with
the tide, but by providence, some being in the meadow going to work or coming
from the Lymekils: Being by the water side playing with a Spannel, saw something
floating, flung in things to make the dog fetch it; and the dog accordingly
took hold of the man by the clothes, and brought him a shore; and finding some
symptoms of Life, took care of him; and he came to Life, and dwells in New-
Bristol. This I had from the Spectators.

21. In the year 1671 one Mr. Savage, Master of the Sociate Ketch bound from
Bristol to Boston in New- England, met on the coast of N E. the Ship called the
George of Bristol, being in distress, spoke with them; the ship having sprang a
leak, their men tired and spent with Pumping; the Master and all his Company
went on Board the Ketch with speed, and soon after the ship sunk.

This I had from Mr. Savage and other Passengers with him, who affirmed it to
be truth.

David Fogg, Bristol Merchants

22. Captain John Trankmore, Commander of a Ship belonging to Apsom, near
Exetor; in one of his Voyages of late years, being at Sea in a dark night, and
foul weather, fell foul of another ship unexpectedly; then not knowing what
each other was, but a Sea parting them again; in the intrim, Captain Trankmores
ship, shipped a great Sea which washed the said Trankmore overboard; and another
Sea, cast, or hove him into the other ship, which fell out to be an
Englishman, bound for Plymouth: Thus in the dark, the Wind and Sea parts the
said ship, that without having knowledge of each other, Captain Trankmore
concluding that his own ship was foundred, and all his men Lost, and God had
wrought a wonder of mercy in his Preservation; but so it fell out, that one
Samuel Snytal, who was his Apprentice, had obtained such knowledge of the Art
of Navigation, and his Master being gone, as they supposed drowned, being
washed overboard, was necessitated to improve his skill, and by Gods blessing,
he carried the ship safe home to Apsom, where Arriving; although had made a
good Voyaye, yet the sorrow for the loss of the Master, eat up all the Comforts
and Smiles of a Prosperous Voyage, otherwise would have made; but so Providence
ordered, that about the same time, or three or four days after, the other ship
Arrives safe in Plymouth; where the said Trankmore Landed, very sorrowful and
dejected, having (as he supposed) lost his ship (wherein was deeply concerned
as an Adventurer himself and all his Men) was in the Morning walking on the
Hope at Plymouth very Dejectedly, he Providentially meets with one of his
Executors, or Apsom Neighbors, who looks him in the Face with Astonishment,
knowing him well, and yet believing the Report of his being dead, or lost, in
amaze Salutes him with these Expressions; What, Captain Tankmore? who replies,
A poor Captain; having lost my Ship richly Laden, and after a good Voyage, with
all my men, not a soul saved but my self. Whom by a Miracle God wrought
Salvation for men (as before Recited) giving the Gentleman his Neighbor an
account of the Providence toward him; which after a little pause, his Friend
embraces him, and with admiring of the Providence, bids him be of good heart,
for his ship and all his Company was well and safe Arrived at Apsom; for his
Man Samuel Snytal had brought her safe home, and all the sorrow and cry there
was for the loss of him. Which reply, struck the said Trankmore in as much
amaze on the other hand, being almost Credilous of truth, till his Friend
possitively affirming it, and then consulting his own Mercy, saw, and was made
sensible there was no mercy too great for God to work, and from them took
heart, recovering himself, went home rejoyceing, where found his expectation
answered, and a welcome gives to all persons with him concerned.

For the truth, I have heard it acknowed by Captain Trankmore's own mouth, at
my House in Bristol; and farther, the same Snytal was my Predecessors Son, and
I have heard his Mother-in-law speak of it to several, and has affirmed it to
me for a truth.

23. The Bristol Frigot, when Captain Fenn was Commander, being in the Straits
in Chase of Captain Popoctiene, a Spanish Knight of Malto, whom that time our
Squadren took and brought Prisoner to the Tower; in pursuit of which Chase, the
Wind began to rise, the Captain Commands presently to get the Top-gallant sails
abroad; and the Yards being not then Aloaft, three men run up presently, where
one stood on the top of the Shroud, under the main Top-mast-cross-trees, a
second stood a top of the Cross-trees, and the other stood by the
Top-gallant-mast on the Cape, at the main Topmast head; all expediting their
work in getting the Top-gallant-sail abroad; at which time the wind freshen'd,
and carried our Maintop-mast by the board; in which disaster, the man that was
lower-most, and least in danger, fell overboard, and was drowned; and the
other two which was in greatest danger, one of their names was Roger Dennis,
under the denomination of a Quaker, instead of being bruised, and their bones
broaken all to pieces, which the eye of Reason could not otherwise imagine by
such a fall; they both fell forward upon the Bunt of the Main-course, and one
catches hold of the main Buntlines, and the other of the Leech-lines, and
slack of a bowling, and so both comes down to the Deck, and neither of them in
the least prejudiced.

For the truth of this, my Author was then Aboard the said Frigot, and was an
eyewitness of this Providence.

24. An Account of two ships bound for New Foundland, from some part in the
West of England, whom by distress of Weather, lost Company; some days after,
being fair weather, one of the ships sprang a leak, and foundred in the Sea,
where every Soul perished, except one Old Man, who had lasht himself on the
main Hatch, and committed himself to the mercy of the Sea and God's Providence,
where he was floating three days and three nights; in which time, about the
middle of the second day, the Devil assuming a Mare-maid, starts up before him,
and bids him be of good heart, for, if he would but make a Contract with him,
he would engage a deliverance for him in 24 hours; the Old Man being sensible
it was the Devil, and doubtless, having been a proving of his heart to God, as
the Circumstance of Providence he was under, more immediately called for, found
in himself a renewed strength put into him, inabling him to hold up his head,
and looking the Tempter in the Face; Replies, Ah Satan, if thou can prophesy
deliverance for me; know, my God, in whom I trust, will deliver me without thy
help; but however, know, I will not comply to thy wiles, therefore avoid Satan,
avoid; so immedately he Vanished, and appeared no more to him: But so it fell
out, the other ship being at that time in the same parallel or Latitude, that
night the Cabben-Boy dreams a dream, that such a ship their Confort was
foundred, and every Soul lost, except such an Old Man, nameing his name, who
was saved on a piece of a ship, and floating in the Sea; which dream, the Boy
in the Morning, confidently tells it to the Company and his Master; at last,
the Boy began to show more Confidence, affirming it, as if it must be true;
insomuch, received some checks from his Master; but however, at last, the Boy
grew so restless, that he, running up from one Mast to another, sometimes at
Fore-top-masthead, and then on the Main-top-masthead, looking abroad, that at
last, crying out aloud; Allow there, I see him, I see him under our Lee-bow;
thus confidently affirming it, some of the men stepped up, and spied something at
a distance no bigger than a Crow to appearance, floating, which advised the
Master it, who presently commanded the Helm to be born up, and stood a-way to
it; and when come near, found it the Old Man as the Boy said; so they hoyst out
their Boat, and took him in, who then was speechless, and almost spent; but by
the care of the Master and the Chyrurgion, and God's Blessing, recovered, and
gave a verbal account of his misfortune, and yet wonderful deliverance;
together with Satan's Temptation as before recited; which ship, in due time
Arrived safe at her Port in New Foundland, where this man was well Landed
ashore.

For Confirmation I had this, and heard it related at my Father's House in
Salom in New England, by Mr. John Blackledge a Merchant, who is a person of a
sober life and in fellowship there, who then came from New Foundland, and did
affirm that he spoke with the man himself, whom God wrought this wonderful
deliverance for, he being then at New Foundland, when the said ship Arrived
there, and the man went first ashore.

25. Anno Christi. 1630. May the first, the Muscovy Merchants of London, sent a
ship called the Salutation of London for Green-land, which arrived there in
safety the eleventh of June following, together with two other Ships, all which
were commanded by Captain William Goodler. The Ship wherein the Captain was,
stayed at Bell-sound; This of the Salutation at the Foreland: And the Captain
meeting with store of Whales, quickly made a great Voyage, and so sent for the
Salutation to take in part of his Train-Oyl: By the way as they went to him,
meetting with cross Winds, the Master set eight of his men on Shore to kill
some Venison, in a place where there used to be good store. These men taking
with them a brace of Dogs, a Snaphance, two Lances, and a Tinder-box, went on
shore, and that day, they laid Fourteen good Deer upon the ground: And then
being weary, and the Night coming on, they betook themselves to rest, intending
the next day to make an end of their hunting, and so to return to their ships:
But the next day proved foggy, and there was much Ice between the shore and the
ship, and the wind coming Southerly, the ship was fain to stand so far off into
the Sea to be clear of the Ice, that they lost the sight of her; and the
weather growing thicker, and thicker, they thought fit to hunt along the shore
to Green-Harbour, and there to stay aboard the ship, till their own ship should
come into the Port.

In this passage they killed eight Deer more, and so having laden their Shallop
with Venison, they kept on their course to Green Harbor: But when they came
thither, they found, to their great astonishment, that the ship was departed.
Being thus frustrated of their expectation, and having but three days to the
uttermost expiration of their limited time, for their departure out of that
Country, they thought it their best course to make all speed possible to
Bell-Sound, to their Captain; and lest delay should prove dangerous, they
lightened their Shallop by lieving their Venifon over board into the Sea: and so
they hasted all they might, and that night gat half way: But the dark Fog
increasing, they were forced to cove in a point of Land till the next day at
Noon: At which time, the weather being clearer, they hasted forward; but having
no Compass to direct their course by, they wandered up and down so long, till
the ships were departed. This filled them with fear and astonishment, knowing
that neither Christian, nor Heathen had ever Inhabited those desolate Climates:
Yea, they had heard that the Merchants had endeavored, with proffers of great
rewards, and of sufficient furniture, and provision of all things necessary, to
hire some to undertake to winter in those parts, but could never meet with that
would adventure their lives to so hazardous an undertaking: They had heard also
that the company of Muscovy Merchants had once procured the reprieve of some
Malefactors condemned to death here in England, unto whom they promised pardon,
together with rewards and provision of Clothes, Victuals, and all other
necessaries, if they would stay one Winter there: But when they came thither,
and took a view of the desolateness of the place, they conceived such horror
and fear in their hearts, chose rather to return for England, and there to
satisfy the Law with the loss of their lives, than to stay in so desolate and
darksom a Country. They remembered also a more terrible Example of nine good and
able men left there formerly by the same Master that had now left them, who all
dyed miserably upon the place; and whose bodies were fearfully disfigured by
the Savage Bears, and Hungry Foxes, which are the only Inhabitants of that
comfortless Country: All which made them, like amazed men, to stand one looking
upon another, every one foreseeing the future calamities both of himself and
of his fellows: and that which much increased their horror, was, their want
of all necessary provision for the life of man, having neither Clothes to keep
them warm, and for shift, nor food to prevent the miseries of cruel famine, nor
a house wherein to shroud themselves from the extremity of cold.

But after a space, knowing that delay in extremities, is the mother of all
danger, they began to conceive hope out of the depth of despair; and therefore
they consulted together of the likeliest course for their preservation in that
place: and resolved upon the opportunity of the next fair weather, to go to
Green Harbor to kill some Venison for part of their winter provision, which
accordingly they did, but found not so many Deer as they expected; yet the
first day they killed seven, and four Bears to boot, which they also intended
to eat: The next day they killed six Deer more, and as they returned, they
killed six more: and then the weather proving foul, and cold, they laded their
Shallop with the Deer and Bears; and finding another Shallop left there, as
usually they do from year to year, they laded it with Graves of Whales that had
been boiled there that year; and so dividing themselves into those two
Shallops, they took the first opportunity of returning to Bell-Sound to their
Tent, where they intended to take up their rest for the Winter.

But in their passage, the night coming on, and the wind blowing hard, they
were forced to stay in the midst way at Bottel Cove for that night: There they
fastened their Shallops one to another, and casting out their Anchor, they left
them riding in the Cove.

But here again, for the trial of their patience, and to teach them to rely
more upon God's Providence, than upon any outward means of their own, this
mischance befell them: The wind blowing hard into the Cove, and their Anchor
coming home, their Shallop sunk into the Sea, and so wet all their Provision,
and some of it they found swimming up and down by the shore: The sight hereof,
wonderfully troubled them, to see the best part of their Provision, the only
hope of their lives under God, in danger either utterly to be lost, or to be
spoiled by the Seawater, for which they had taken such pains, and run so many
adventures in the getting of it: and in this their misery, they saw but one
remedy, and that was a desperate one, viz. to run into the highwrote Sea to
their Shallops to save the remainder of their Provisions, now ready to be
washed away by the billows: This they did, and by main force drew the Shallops
to the shore; then they went along by the Seaside to gather up such of their
Provisions as was swimming up and down: and when the weather proved fair, they
went on to Bell-sound: where being arrived, they took out their provision, and
viewed the great Tent which was built of Timber and Boards, and covered with
Flemish Tiles: The use of it was for the Coopers to work and long in whilst
they made Cask for the putting up of the Traine-Oyle; and they resolved to
build another smaller Tent within that for their Habitations; and accordingly,
taking down a lesser Tent that stood near to it, wherein the Landmen lay whilst
they made their Oil, they fetched their materials from thence, both Boards,
Posts, and Rafters, and from the Chimnies of the Furnaces, they took a thousand
Bricks; they found also four Hogsheads of Lime, which mingled with sand from
the shore, made good mortar; But the weather was groan so extreme cold, that
they were fain to make two fires on both sides, to keep their mortar from
friezing; then they raised a wall of one Brick thickness against the inner
planks of the side of the Tent; but by that they had walled two sides of their
house, their Bricks failed, so that they were forced to build the other two
sides of boards; which being nailed on both sides the posts, they were hollow
between, which they filled up with sand, that made it so tite, that the least
breath of air could not possibly annoy them. The length of their Tent was
twenty foot, and the breadth sixteen; their Chimney was the breadth of a deal
board, and four foot high; they seiled it with boards five or six times double,
that no wind could possible get through: The door they made as close as they
could, and lined it with a bed that they found there, which came over both the
opening and shutting of it: they made no Windows, having no light but what came
through the Chimney: then set they up four Cabins, quartering themselves two
and two in a Cabin; their Beds were the Deerskins dried, which was a warm and
comfortable lodging for them in their distress: their next care was for firing,
and finding seven old Shallops which were unserviceable, they brake them up,
and stowed them over the beams in the great Tent to make it the warmer, and to
keep the Snow from driving through the Tiles into the Tent: and by this time
the cold increasing, and scarce having any day at all, they staved some empty
Cask, and brake two old coolers (wherein they cooled their Oil) providing
whatsoever firing they could without prejudice to the next years Voyage: yet
considering the small quantity of fuel, the extremity of cold, and the long
time of their abode, they husbanded it as thriftily as possibly they could.

Having thus fitted every thing in the best manner they could, on the twelfth
of September, looking out into the Sound, they espied two Sea-horses lying
asleep on a piece of Ice, whereupon, taking up an old harping-iron, they
hastened to them, and first slew the old one, and then the young; and so
bringing them ashore, they flaied them, roasted, and eat them. Not long after
they killed another; but the nights and cold weather increasing on them, and
they viewing their Provision, found it too small by half; whereupon they
stinted themseves to one reasonable meal a day, and agreed to fast Wednesdays
and Fridays, excepting from the Graves or Fritters of the Whale (which was a
very loathsome meat) of which they allowed themselves sufficient for their
present hunger: at which diet they continued about three months.

Having finished what ever they could invent for their preservation; they found
that all their Clothes and Shoes were worn, and torn; to repair which, they
had this new devise; of Rope-yarn they made thread, and of Whale-bones needles
to few their Clothes withal: But October the tenth, the nights being grown very
long, and the cold so violent, that all the Sea was frozen over; and they
having now nothing to exercise their minds upon, were troubled with a thousand
imaginations: Sometimes they bewailed their absence from their Wives and
Children, thinking what grief it would be to them to hear of their miscarriage:
then thought they of their Parents, and what a cutting corrasive it would be to
them to hear of their untimely deaths, etc. and being thus tormented in their
minds with fear, and grief, and pinched in their bodies with hunger, and cold,
the hideous monster of desperation presented his ugliest shape unto them: But
thinking it not best to give way to grief and fear, they doubled their prayers
to Almighty God for strength and patience in their miseries, by whose
assistance, they shook off their former thoughts, and cheared up themselves to
use the best means for their preservation.

Then for the preservation of their Venison, and lengthening of their firing,
they thought best to roast every day half a Deer, and to stow it in Hogsheds,
which accordingly they did, leaving so much raw as would serve to roast every
Sabbath day a quarter, etc. And when this was over, they began again to think
of their ensuing misery, that in case God should give them life, yet they were
to live as Banished men from all Company; and as if their sorrows had been too
little, they presently found an increase of it; for their Whale-Fritters, after
they had been drenched in the Seawater, lying close together, were grown
moldy, and spoiled: and again surveighing their Bear, and Venison, they sound
that it would not afford them five meals a week, whereupon they were fain to
cut off one meal more; so that for three months after, four days in the week
they fed upon the unsavory moldy Whale-Fritters, and the other three they
feasted with Bear and Venison: But besides the want of meat, they now began to
want light, so that all their Meals were Suppers: For, from the fourteenth of
October, to the third of February, they never saw the Sun so much as peep above
the Horizon: But the Moon, when not obscured with Clouds, they always saw
shining as bright as in England: All which darksome time, they could not
certainly tell when it should be day, and when night.

In the beginning of this darkness, they sought some means to preserve light,
and finding a piece of sheet-lead, and some Oil in the Coopers Tent, and
Rope-yarn, they made a Lamp, which they kept continually burning, which was a
great comfort to them in their extremity; yet their wants and miseries were so
many, and great, that sometimes they brake forth into impatient speeches
against the causers of them, but then their Consciences again minded them of
their own evil deserts, and so they took it as a just hand of God for their
former wicked lives; or that God intended to make them examples of his Mercy in
their wonderful deliverance: Humbling themselves therefore under the mighty
hand of God, they prostrated themselves in prayer two or three times a day,
which course they constantly held all the time of their misery.

In the beginning of January, as the days began to leng then, the cold began to
strengthen; which proceeded to that extremity, that it raised blisters on their
flesh as if they had been burnt with fire, and if at any time they touched
Iron, it would stick to their fingers like birdlime: If they went out a doors
to fetch in a little water, it would so pinch them, that they were sore as if
they had been beaten. In the beginning of Winter, with Pick-axes breaking the
Ice daily, they got some water on the Sea shore: but after the tenth of
January, they had none but snow water which they melted with hot Irons, which
was their only Drink till the twentieth of May following.

By the last of January the days were seven or eight hours long, and then
viewing their victuals again, they found that it would not last above six weeks
longer, which made them fear further Famine; but they had recourse to God, who
they knew, could supply them beyond their hopes.

Looking out on a bright day, they saw a great she Bear with her* Cub coming
toward their Tent, whereupon arming themselves with their Lances, they went
forth, and stayed her coming; she soon cast her greedy Eyes upon them, and
hoping to devour them, hasted toward them: But with their Lances they gave her
such an hearty welcome, that she tumbled upon the ground, biting the Snow for
anger: the Cub seeing this, escaped by flight: The weather was so extreme
could, that they were fain presently to retire into the Tent, and having warmed
themselves, they drew in the dead Bear, wherewith they dined merrily; and this
Bear served them twenty days: Only this mischance they had, eating her Liver,
it made their skins peel off; when she was spent, they yet feared that their
Venison would not hold out till he Fleet came out of England; but God sent many
Bears to their Tent, by times, at least forty, whereof they killed seven; One
of which was exceeding great, at least six foot high; so that their Food
increasing, they kept not themselves to such short commons, but often eat two or
three meals a Day, which much increased their strength.

By this, the cheerful days lengthened so fast, that several sorts of Fowl
resorted thither. March 16th one of their Mastiffs went abroad which they never
saw after; upon the coming of the Fowls, the Foxes, which all winter had kept
their Buroughs under the Rocks, came abroad to seek for their livings;
whereupon they set up Traps, which they baited with the skin of these Fowls, by
which means they caught at times fifty Foxes; all which they roasted, and found
to be good meat: then taking the Bearskins, laying the fleshy side upwards, and
making springs of Whale-bone, they caught about sixty Fowls as big as Pigeons.

May the first, the weather began to be pretty warm, so that they went daily
abroad to seek for Provision: but nothing they could find for many days, till
at length they met with abundance of Willocks eggs; of which they carried home
thirty, intending the next day to fetch one thousand more, but the day proved
so cold that they could not stir out of their Tent. The same day there came two
ships of Hull into the Sound, who knowing that some men had been left there the
year before, being very desirous to know whether they were dead or alive, the
Master manned forth a shallop to go as near the shore as they could, and so
over the Ice to the Tent: When these men came near the Tent, they haled them
with the usual word of the Sea, crying Hey: to which one of them in the Tent
answered again Hoe; which sudden answer almost amazed them all: but perceiving
them to be the very men left there, with joyful hearts they embraced one
another, and so coming into the Tent, they showed the Hull-Men the courtesy of
the House, giving them some Venison which was roasted four months before, and a
cup of cold Water, which for novelty sake, they kindly accepted of them.

After a little discourse, these eight men resolved to leave their Tent, and to
go with them to their ship, where they were welcomed after the heartiest and
kindest English manner: and so they staid with them till the London Fleet came,
which was three days after: At which time they went aboard the Admiral, in
which Captain William Goodler was, who made them very welcome, and gave order
that they should have any thing that was in the ship that might do them good:
he gave them Apparel also, to the value of twenty pounds. So that after
fourteen days refreshment, they grew all perfectly well: But when some of them
went to their own Master that had left them there, he fell foul upon them,
calling them Runaways, with other harsh terms far enough from the Civility of
an honest man. Thus they continued in the Fleet until the twentieth of August,
at which time, with joyful hearts, they set sail through the foaming Ocean; and
though sometimes crossed with contrary winds, yet at last they came safely to an
Anchor in the River of Thames: and the Muscovie Merchants dealt very well by
them.

The names of these men, were William Fakely Gunner: Edward Pelham Gunners
Mate, that wrote this story. John Wise, and Robert Good Fellow, Seamen; Thomas
Ayers, Whale-cutter: Henry Bet, Cooper: John Dawns, and Richard Kellet,
Land-men.

26. Greenland, is a Country that lies very far Northward in seventy-seven
Degrees, and forty minutes: Its wonderful Mountainous, which Mountains are all
the year long covered with Ice and Snow. The plains in part are bare in Summer:
But their grows neither Tree nor Herb in it, except Scurvey-grass and Sorrel:
The Sea is as barren as the Land, affording no Fish but Whales, Sea-horses,
Seals, and some few small Fishes.

27. In June 1668. the Peach-tree of London, a small Vessel of the Burden of
about sixty Tuns, Edward Dixon Master, came into the Downs, bound for Guinny
intending there to take in Negroes, and to transport them to the Barbados, and
from thence to come for London, where John Watts, the son of John Watts, of
Elham, in the County of Kent Chyrurgion, shipped himself with the consent of
Richard Watts, public Notary of Deal; little dreading that his Nephew, being
not above eighteen years old, should meet with such a calamitous Accident. The
ship had not been long in the Downs, but a fair gale presenting, they suddenly
hoisted Sail, God's providence seeming to fill their Sails with prosperous
success; the first place they touched at, was the Gold Coast, where they staid
not long, but sailed to old Calabar, in the Bith of Guinny. They entered a
River, called the Cross River into Piratts Island. After they had taken in
their Negroes, and ready to sail, their Anchor being a peek, the Master calls
up the Boatswain and three men more, whereof the relater was one, and commands
them to look out the Copper Bars that were left, and carry them on shore to
try if they could sell them: the Boatswain, with his small Company desired that
they might have Arms with them, not believing the report of some that informed
them they were a harmless, and innocent people: they took with them three
Muskets and a Pistol, and so rowed toward the shore, but not far from it,
unhappily our Match fell into the water, and the ship being fallen down from that
narrow part of the River, nearer the Sea, quite out of our sight, we were
consulting what should be safest for us to do: we were not willing to
precipitate our own Ruin, and were also ashamed to return to our ship before
we had dispatched what we were commanded to: at length the Boatswain commanded
the Relator, John Watts on shore, to the first house to light our Match, which
we recovered out of the water, after it was extinct, which he readily obeyed:
but before he was twenty Rods from the waterside, he was seized on by two
blacks (or rather Tawnymoors) and by them haled above half a mile up into the
Country, and thrown with great violence upon his belly, and so compelled to lie
till they stripped him; and more Company coming to them, they were so eager for
his poor Canvas apparel, that some they tore off, others they cut off, and with
that several pieces of his flesh, to his intolerable pain: with these rags,
they made little Childrens Aprons to cover their Privities; Linen and Woolen
being scarce there. The Boatswain seeing this, John Watts was thus carried
away, was resolved with his other two Companions to have him again, or else to
venture all their lives for him: They arm themselves; but whilst they were
consulting what to do, whether to venture on shore, or not, of a sudden they
were beset with about a dozen men in several Canoes, but they valiantly
maintained their Boat about the space of three hours, for after two of their
three Muskets were discharged, they defended themselves with their Oars, and
Boat-hooks. The Boatswain received a mortal wound in his Groin, and fell down
in the Boat; the other two adventured in the River, endeavoring by swimming to
escape the merciless hands of cruel Infidels; but the Negroes with their swift
Chanoes soon overtook them, and brought them on shore to the place where the
relater was. The Negroes took out the Boatswain out of the ships boat; and
instead of endeavoring at all to preserve life which remained in him,
immediately they robbed him of it; one of them with a keen weapon cutting off
his head before his Companions faces; and then they prepare for their rare
banquet, while he was yet reeking in his blood: they in a barbarous manner
cutting off pieces of flesh from off his Buttocks, and his Thighs, and his
Arms, and Shoulders, and broiled them on the coals, and with a great deal of
impatience, eagerly eat it before their faces, to our great astonishment. About
fourteen days after, one of the Company fell sick, and instead of being
Physicians to cure him, they were his Butchers to murder him. They served him
as they did the Boatswain, cut off his head, and broiled and eat up his flesh,
and rejoiced exceedingly at this rich Banquet. About ten days after, the third
fell sick, whom they served in the same manner.

This was no small cause of sorrow to the Relater; the thoughts of their
Inhumane and Barbarous actions sometimes surrounded him with fears and sorrows,
hourly expecting to taste of the said Cruelty. Death did not seem so terrible to
him, as the violent manner of it; being left now alone, in a strange Country,
destitute of friends or acquaintance, or any thing that might keep up his
Spirits: dye he would fain, but not by the hand of Infidels and barbarous
Monsters. But the great God that is most compassionate in the greatest
extremities had pity on him, and notwithstanding the alteration of the Climate,
and the want of Clothes, and the strangeness of his food, which was only herbs,
he continued in good health, and had time enough to lament this direful
providence. The Natives who were daily expecting another banquet, met with a
disappointment: either their customs, or the overruling power of God would not
suffer them to destroy him; he continuing still in health. Therefore they
resolve to sell him: his Arannia, or Master, was pretty free to discourse him,
which the Relater was capable of, being about three years before in the
West Indies, where he had learned the Tata language, which is easily attained,
being comprehended in a very few words, and all the Negroes speak of it. He
began to discourse his Master, to know the reason of their Cruelty, who told
him that he should rest himself contented, who if he were not sick, should not
have his head cut off. In the Boat, which in the beginning they took with them,
was a Musket saved of the three which was not discharged; which his Master
some time after he had been with him, brought to him to know the use of it: he
endeavored as much as he could to make him apprehend the use of it, but still
they professed their ignorance: but they commanded and threatened him to show the
use of it. The fear of his masters displeasure and their inhumanity, caused him
to shoot it off; but the Negroes, which expected some delightful thing, were
frustrated, and at the sudden noise and flash of fire (which they very much
dread) ran from him, and were greatly affrighted; but quickly after, hearing no
more of that noise, they came up to him again, and commanded him to do the
like: he told them he had not powder, which was the cause of the noise; but
this would not satisfy these Barbarians. He not being able to answer their
expectation, they concluded he was not willing, they proceed to threaten him,
and were about to murder him, had nor his master rescued him. Upon discourse
after with this Aurona, or Master, he began to understand the reason of their
barbarous dealing with him and his Friends, he telling him that naturally the
people were civil and simply honest, but if provoked, full of revenge; and that
this Cruelty was occasioned by some unhandsome action of carrying a Native away
without their leave, about a year before; they resolving, if any came ashore,
they should never go off alive. He had not been above seven weeks in the
Country, but his Master presented him to his King, whose name was E-fn-me, King
of the Burkamores, who immediately gave him to his Daughter, whose name was
Oni-jah, and when the King went abroad, he attended him also as his Page,
throughout the whole Circuit of his Dominions; which was not above twelve
miles, yet boasting extremely of his power and strength, but glorifying
exceedingly that he had a white to attend him, whom he employed to carry his
Bow and Arrows at several places remote from the Seaside; the people would run
away from him for fear, others would fall down and seem to worship him, and use
those actions as they do to their God. Their progress was never so long, but
they could return home at night, but never without a hand some load of a cup of
the Creature. During all the time of the Relaters servitude there, he never
knew him g abroad and come home sober. They drink of the best Palm Wine, and
another sort of strong liquor, called Penrore. The Relator quickly knew how to
humor this profound Prince, and if any of the Natives abused him, upon his
complaint he had redress, as once by striving with a Negroe, his arm was broke,
which by providence, more than skill, was set again. After some months, the
King of Ca-la-nanch, whose name was E-fn-mancha, hearing of this beautiful
white, courted his Neighbor Prince, that he would sell him to him; at length
they struck a bargain, and the Relater was sold for a Cow and a Goat; this King
was a very sober and moderate person, free from treacheries and mischiefs, that
the other was subject unto; and he would often discourse the Relater, and ask
him of his King and Country, and if his Kingdoms and Dominions were as big as
his, which were not above twenty-five miles in length, and fifteen in breadth.
He told him as much as his understanding and years made him capable of, keeping
still in the bounds of modesty, and yet relating as much as possible to the
honor and dignity of his Sovereign; first informing him of the greatness of
one of his Kingdoms, the several Shires and Counties it contained, with number
of its Cities, Towns and Castles, and the strength of each, the infinite
Inhabitants, and valor of his Subjects. One of these Kingdoms was enough to
amaze sufficiently this petty Governor, that he need not to mention any more
of his Majesty's Glory and Dignity. It put him into such a profound
consternation, that he resolved to find out some way to tender his respects to
this mighty Prince, and no way could he find so convenient, as to tell the
Relater, that if he could find but a passage, he would let him go to England,
to tell his Majesty of the great favor and respect he had for him. This did
not a little rejoice our Englishman. Withal the King told him, that he would
send him a Present, which should be two Cabareets or Goats, which they do value
at a very high rate; the King having not above 16 or 18. He tells the King,
that the King of England had many thousands of his Subjects that were under the
degree of Gentlemen, which had a thousand of Sheep a piece; the flesh of which,
they valued at a very much higher rate than Goats. Though our Englishman lived
very handsomely with this E-fn-man-cha, King of the Ca-la-nanch, yet his
desires and his hopes were still for his Native Country: at length he obtained
a promise from his King, that the first English ship that came into the Road,
should have liberty to Release or Purchase him; this very much rejoiced his
heart: now he thought every day a year, till he could hear of, or see some
English ship arrived. Many times when he was alone, his heart would be oppressed
with sighs and sobbings, when he thought of his Relations, and the comfortable
society that they had together; that it should be his sad lot to be captivated
amongst barbarous Infidels. Oftentimes did he walk down to the Seaside,
sometimes with hopes, sometimes with fear, earnestly expecting the wind of Gods
providence to blow in some English Ship thither: his often recourse to the
Seaside was discerned by one Ia-ga, a Wizard, and the chiefest in three or
four Kingdoms there-abouts; they are persons that the Natives give very much
credit to, and on any difficult occasion, run to them for satisfaction. That
famous Delphean Oracle was never had in greater adoration, than the prophetical
speeches of these Morish Wizards. Though they have infinite numbers of them in
every place, yet this Ia-ga had the most renown amongst them; and one day he
comes to him, and very kindly asked him why he so very often frequented that
place; he told him, to see if he could discover any English Vessel to come in
there: but he being not acquainted with his great fame, asked him when he did
believe there would one come in, not that he was willing to give credit to any
of their divinations, but supposing that he thereby should please him and
answer his expectation. Ia-ga immediately told him, that the fifteenth day
after an English Ship should come into the Road. Then he asked him whether that
Ship should carry him away. To this he answered doubtfully, but told him that
he should be offered to the Master of the Ship, and if they could not agree,
but that he should come to shore again, he should not be sold, and that in a
very short time after he should dye for grief. These fifteen days seemed very
long and tedious; many a look did he cast on the Sea with an aching heart: the
fourteenth day he went to the highest hill there-about, but to no purpose, for
he could discover no Ship: next morning he went again two or three times, but
saw none: about two or three hours after came running into E-fn-man cha, some
of the Mores, and told him there was a Canoe coming, so they called our Ships;
at which our Englishman heartily rejoiced, hoping then to be releast
forthwith, yet durst not show his joy for fear of punishment or of death; for
though he lived better now than with his first Master, yet his service was far
worse than the Slaves in Turkey, and their Diet worse than Dogs meat; therefore
had he cause enough of inward joy; the Ship came immediately in, and he highs
away presently to Ia-ga, to know if it were an English Ship, who resolved him
that it was; it happened to be the St. Maloes Merchant, Captain Royden
Commander, who hastened to dispatch his business, took in his Negroes, and was
ready to sail, and our Englishman heard never a word what should become of
him, the King never offering to sell him; this put him on a resolution to
endeavor to make an escape, and to that end had prepared a piece of Timber
which he had drawn near the waterside, on which he intended to paddle to the
Ship, which then lay about a League from the Shore. Just by the Seaside, as he
was about to launch his little floating stick, he espied a great Aligator,
which will devour a man at a mouthful; this made him alter his resolution, and
resolve rather to live with inhumane Infidels, than to throw himself into so
imminent a danger, which would have been little less than self-murder. But the
next day, which I may call a day of Imbile, Almighty God opened the heart of
the King to let the poor English man go: he sent him in a Canoe, placed between
a Negroe's legs, with some others to guide this small vessel, for fear he
should leap over board and swim to the ship. At a distance from the ship he
hailed her in the English Tongue, which was no small cause of admiration to
those on board to hear an English Tongue out of their Canoes: the Negroes gave
him leave to stand up and show himself to the Captain, to whom he gave an
account how four were left there, and only he perserved. It was a pretty while
before they could strike a bargain, though the Captain was resolved not to
leave him behind. Several times the Negroes padled away with their Canoe,
resolving not to part with him; but what with his entreaties and promises, he
persuaded them to the ship again, and they delivered him on board for forty
five Copper Bars and Iron bars; each Copper bar being about the bigness of a
Youths little finger, the Iron bars a little bigger. Now were his joys
completed, he thought himself, as it were, caught up into the third Heavens;
he could hardly persuade himself but it was a Dream or Vision, and that he did
not really see English faces, or embrace English bodies. It was some time
before he could throw himself at the Captains feet, and acknowledge his
infinite cause of joy in himself, and thankfulness to him for his deliverance
from such a severe Captivity; that he that lately was a slave to Infidels, that
worship they know not what, should now see the faces of Christians, and join
with them in worshipping the true God; and to him first he offered up the
sacrifice of hearty thanksgiving, that had sent his Angel to redeem him from so
cruel a bondage. When he came on board, his hair was very long, and his skin
tawny ( Malatto like) having gone naked all the time he was there, and
frequently anointing himself with palm Oil he looked like a Tawny-More; but
immediately the Seamen aboard with Christian-like hearts, apparelled him. The
Master commanded to hoise sail, and having a fair wind, they sailed to
Barbados, where Captain Royden was to tarry some time; but the Relater
earnestly desiring to go to his Native Country, and his Relations, got passage
to the Downs in the Katherine of London, Captain South Commander, which through
Gods goodness in a few weeks arrived in the Downs, where the Relater was put on
shore to his Uncle, Mr. Richard Watts of Deal, his great joy and satisfaction,
who took this relation from his own mouth.

FINIS.
Acts 27. 18, 19, 20. 18. And being exceedingly tossed with a Tempest, the next
day they lightened the Ship.

19. And the third day, we cast out with our own hands, the tackling of the
Ship.

20. And when neither Sun nor Stars appeared, and no small Tempest lay on us,
all hope that we should be saved, was then taken away.


IN this Chapter we have a full Narrative of Paul's Voyage to Rome, in all the
circumstances of it; it seems Paul kept a Journal, and so Recorded this
memorable Voyage for the use of succeeding Generations. 1. We have the occasion
of his Voyage, ( Viz.) Paul being then a Sufferer and a Prisoner, he appeals to
Caesar, and so is sent to Rome, and there bears a faithful Testimony for Jesus
Christ, ( Verse. 1.) 2. We have the Dangers that occurred in the Voyage, and
these are also carefully Commemorated ( verse. 9.) Now much time was spent, and
Sailing was now dangerous, because the Fast was already past: Lev. 16 29.
This was the yearly Fast of the Jews, on which the atonement for all the
people was made by the high Priest, in the holy of holies; which day was the
10. of the 7th Month, which partly agreed with our September and October, in
which time the Sea was not Sailed in, by the Ancients, until the beginning of
March, because of the shortness of the days, and the violence of the Tempests,
they were prone to in those Parts, this is the sense of Interpreters upon the
place. 1. Danger of the Voyage we read of, is this, the winds were contrary,
verse. 4. this is spoken of the Voyage of the Disciples, The winds were
contrary. 2. Danger, there arose not only a contrary wind, but a violent wind,
called an Euroclydon, (verse. 14.) some read it a Whirlwind, but it is meant
of an East Wind, which raises the Sea mightily. 3. The Tempest was so great and
violent upon them, that they were glad to let the Ship drive, ( verse 15.)

3. We have not only the, Danger in this Voyage, but their marvelous
Deliverance and Preservation; for they came off all of them with their lives, (
verse. 44.) the particulars whereof you may see.

In the Text we have three things observable. 1. Their endeavors in this great
distress to preserve themselves. 1. They lightened the Ship; and what was it she
was laden with? it was Wheat, verse. 38. They lightened the Ship, and cast the
Wheat into the Sea; thus did Ionah's Mariners cast out the Wares. Alas, what
are these things, but lumber to lives? if it were Gold, it must go for Life.
Skin for skin and all that a man has will be give for his life. Then what
should a man give for his Soul? what will a man give in exchange for his Soul?
2. Endeavor; they cast out the Tackling of their Ship; any thing they part with
to save their lives, though never so useful to them; even that which was
necessary for their Voyage, they are under a necessity to part with it, for the
preservation of their lives.

2. We have their Dangers as well as Endeavors. 1. It is expressed in the
violence of the Tempest; they were exceedingly tossed with a Tempest. 2. It was
dark weather, neither Sun nor Stars appeared, which used to be great comforts
and helps to poor men at Sea. 3. Their Danger is expressed in this, they were
brought to the brink of the black pit of Despair; all Hope now was taken away.
O what a sad distressed condition was this! their Hope, which is called the
Anchor of the Soul, yea which is the Sheet-Anchor of the Soul, was lost; they
gave all their lives over for gone and lost: And oh, what could now a company
of men do that had lost their Hopes and Hearts? Ezekiel. 37. 11.
could these that had lost their Hopes find their hands? they were now saying,
as the Jews did in their Captivity, Our Hope is lost, we are cut off for our
parts.

3. We have their Deliverance and Preservation, coming in at such a time and
season as this was; now that they are brought to an extremity, God makes it his
opportunity; and now that all hope of being saved is taken away, salvation will
be most seasonable: and now the Angel appears to Paul, and tells him, all their
lives are ensured, only the ship shall be lost.

Observations are these:

1. Dangers and Deliverances are to be carefully recorded and remembered;
therefore Paul takes an account of both, here in this Voyage.

2. Salvations and Deliverances many times are not sent, until persons be left
hopeless in themselves.

I shall speak a little to both these upon this present occasion, that what you
read here, may be remarked and remembered.

1. Dangers and Deliverances are to be carefully recorded and remembered. This
Observation has two parts: 1. Dangers are to be remembered. 2. Deliverances are
to be remembered.

Thus the Lords poor people used to do in all Ages: When Jacob was in danger of
his Brother Esau, you see how he commemorates it, and gives us an exact
narrative of it, and tells us how he feared him: Lord, I fear my Brother Esau.
How often was David in danger by Saul, Psalm. 34. 4.
who was his sworn Enemy? and how many Psalms have we, taking occasion to
remember what danger he was in, and how comfortably he was brought off: I
sought the Lord, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10.
and he heard me; and delivered me out of all my fears. As Paul tells the
Corinthians what danger they were in; they were pressed out of measure, out of
strength, in so much that they despaired of life, etc. And so at Sea as well as
Land, he would have dangers remembered; how that they go up to the Heaven one
while, and sink into the deeps another; their Soul melted because of trouble,
and they at their wits ends, Matthew. 14. 28, 29, 30.
etc. Peter's danger at Sea is recorded, when he began to sink, and cried out,
Master, save me, or I perish: And the Disciples, when they cried out, Carest
thou not that we perish? (Mark 4. 38.) It is observed the Ship now was full,
and now comes salvation and deliverance. Here was their danger recorded, the
Ship was full, and Christ asleep in the hinder part of the Ship.

1. Query is, How Dangers should be remembered?

2. How Deliverances should be remembered?

1. Dangers should be remembered, considering we may come into them again. Many
when dangers are not, they sing to their Souls that song, and delude
themselves, The bitterness of Death is past; they think they are out of one
storm, and they shall never come in such another. Just as persons do with their
Sickness at Land, so many do with their Dangers at Sea, if God bring them off:
O they grow hardened and secure again. But if God has brought home one
dangerous Voyage, we should think, it may be the next will be as dangerous;
Have I escaped one at Sea, one at Land? if I do not improve it, if I do not
walk suitable under it, O how easily can God bring me into another. You never
were in such Dangers, but you may come to the like again, whether at Sea or
Land.

2. Dangers should be remembered with consideration to the greatness of them;
great things should be remembered, a great God, great Mercies, great
Deliverances, great Sins, and great Dangers. How should we think, O what a
Danger was I in at this time by such a Storm at Sea! by such a Sickness ashore
not only my Life in danger, but Lord, was not my Soul in danger? was I fit to
die at such a time? had I gotten an interest in Christ, if I had been cast away
at such a a time? Men think dangers great for their Bodies, but they do not
think them so for their Souls; they think them great for their Ships, for their
Estates, but they do not think them so for their Eternal conditions; O, had not
my Body, Soul, Ship, and all perished together. And was not this a great
danger? thy Souls danger was the greatest danger; had thou been drowned at
such a time, thy Soul had been shipwrackt to all eternity.

3. Dangers should be remembered with consideration to their suddenness; how
many times do they come suddenly upon us? As there is sudden fear, so there is
sudden danger. When the Lord sends the Winds out of his Treasury suddenly, and
threatens men at Sea with sudden destruction, when desolation seems to come as
a Whirlwind, etc. we should think, What if sudden death had come upon me, what
a condition was my poor Soul in? what a dreadful thing would it have been if I
had been surprised on a sudden, and sent into an Eternal condition, in the
twinkling of an eye? I, to be threatened to be swallowed up, only with a formal
God have mercy upon thee in thy mouth; not to have time to pray, repent,
reflect upon thy past life: O what a sad thing is this?

4. We should think of our Dangers with consideration to the frames of hearts;
what frames of heart we were then under. 1. To the frames of our hearts when in
our dangers. 2. The frames of our hearts when brought from under them. 1. The
frames of heart when in and under them: were not you under great fears and
hurries of Soul? it may be, not knowing how it would go with your Souls, if you
had gone off the stage of this life at the present. David when he was in
danger, took especial notice of the frame of his spirit; Innumerable evils have
compassed me about. Psalm. 40. 12, 13.
He was compassed about on every side with danger; and how was it with him
then? Psalm. 57. 7.
he calls to mind, Mine iniquities have taken bold upon me, so that I am not
able to look up. And what then? O see how he prays; Be pleased, O Lord, to
deliver me; O Lord, make haste to help me. Remember what the frames of our
hearts were in our dangers, in reference to our fears; and secondly, what in
reference to our faith; so also did David, when pursued in danger by Saul. My
heart is fixed, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise. We are to
remember our fears under our dangers, that we may be prepared better for future
trials, we are to remember our faith under dangers past, that we may be
encouraged for the time to come in after straits.

2. We are to remember our frames of spirit when God brings us out of our
dangers; how then we were melted with the present sense of the mercy; as those
Israelites, when God brought them out of danger, they believed God, they sang
and gave praise; O what resolutions were there then upon the Soul to be given
up anew to God; to walk before the Lord in the light of the living. Thus also
did David, when brought out of danger; Thy vows are upon me, O God, Psalm. 56.
12, 13.
etc. and at another time, The Lord preserves the simple: I was brought low,
etc. and thou helpedst me. And then what a frame of heart was upon him? Return
unto thy rest, Psalm. 116. 6, 7.
O my Soul, etc. Then he was all for returning to God: O now there was fresh
endearments betwixt the Soul and God. These we are to remember, that we may not
wear totally the sense of them off our spirits.

5. We should remember our dangers, 2 Cor. 11. 26.
with consideration, to the frequency of them; how frequently we were in them.
Paul remembered this, in Perils by Sea often, in Perils by the Heathen, etc. O
how often have we been near Drowning, near Taking, near Sinking, near Dying,
and yet God brought us off; these things we should call to mind often; go out
upon dangerous Voyages, and often come home; the oftener and more frequent our
dangers, the more should we think upon them.

2. We should Remember our Deliverances, but how? 1. We should Remember them,
admiring them; Remember them, so as to admire them; thus did the people of the
Jews in Ezra, Who has given them such deliverance as this? O! they admire it,
and write a Non-such upon the Head of it, 2 Samuel ^
as David admired the goodness of God, when he had spoken of his House to come.
Is this the manner of men, O God? He was in an holy Ecstasy of
Heavenly-admiration; so should you say now; to carry out, and bring home, in
such a dangerous time as this; To hide from Enemies, when sought for in such a
time such a Voyage as this: Oh! who am I? and what is my Fathers house, that be
should bring me hitherto? You should turn the Deliverance on every side, and
admire the goodness of God, the wisdom of God, the mercy of God, the power of
God, the faithfulness of God in it, and say, O Lord, what a Deliverance is
this? what a Voyage is this? God loves to have his Mercies admired by us.

2. We should Remember our Deliverances, to have our Hearts raised up in
gratitude, and thankfulness to God for them; Thus did David, I will pay my Vows
unto the Lord, Psalm. 116. 12, 13, 14.
in presence of all his people: I will take the Cup of Salvation, and call upon
the Name of the Lord. We are to remember to pay our Thank-offerings unto God,
after our Deliverance from God: what, forget such a Deliverance as this? what;
not be thankful for such a Preservation as this?

3. We should Remember our Deliverances, so as to endear our Hearts to God;
Thus we find David, I will love thee, Psalm. 18. 1.
O Lord, I will love the Lord dearly, (so the Heb.) The Lord is my Rock, my
Fortress, and my Deliverer, etc. O! now how should Souls after their
Deliverance, boil, and burn in Love to God! How are we engaged to a Friend
that is at any time but an Instrument in Gods hand to Deliver us? and shall we
be endeared to the Instrument, and not to the Author? O! how was David endeared
to God, when he said, Psalm. 56. ult.
He having Redeemed him, he would walk before the Lord in the Land of the
Living.

4. We should Remember our Deliverances to improve them in a way of acting
Faith, when the next danger and straits comes: Psalm. 42. 6, 7.
I will remember thee from the Land of Jordan, from the Hill Missar. This was
to encourage him from his former Deliverances in his future straits and
exigencies. What, now distrust God, who has delivered in six troubles, and now
shall we give way to unbelief in the seventh. Did not holy David thus? He has
delivered me out of the Paw of the Lion, and out of the Paw of the Bear, and he
will deliver me out of the hand of the uncircumcised Philistine. 1 Timothy 4. 17,
18.
Thus Paul rerembers his Deliverance from Nero. And I was delivered out of the
mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work.

5. We should remember our Deliverances, to be often inculcating, and
imprinting them upon our own hearts alas, when we receive them, they are a
little fresh it may be upon our spirits, but o how soon do they die, because
they are not written upon our hearts; they are not engraven their as a man that
would Remember a thing, be it a Notion, or any Resolution, he will be often
turning it over in his thoughts; alas, if we write our Deliverances, is it not
in the Dust? whereas we should write them in Marble: We should write them them
with a Pen of Iron, and the point of a Diamond.

1. We should Commemorate our Dangers with our Deliverances, because God gives
them to that end. The Lord does not give us our Deliverances to cast them at
our heels, nor brings us out of our Dangers, that we might forget them, as
though we never had been in any of them. God expects that we should faithfully
Register and Record them; therefore it was a great Provocation to the Lord,
that the Children of Israel so soon forgot his works: If you do but forget the
kindness of a Friend, you think it is disingenious; but o then, what is it to
forget that God that has delivered you out of six troubles, and in seven
troubles? God loves and expects his kindness should be kept upon Record.

2. We should Commemorate our Dangers and Deliverances, because it was freely
of his grace to bring us out of the one, and put us under the other; is it not
of his mere mercy that he Rescued and pulled us out of our dangers? might not
we else been swallowed up of them, and may not we all say in this case, as the
Psalmist in that? Psalm. 124. 4, 5.
had it not been the Lord, who was on our side then, the waters had over
whelmed us, the stream had gone over our Soul, then the proud Waves had gone
over our Soul: may not you sing this Song? Who have been so often delivered at
Sea in eminent dangers.
what, and now forget such dangers? and cast behind your backs such
Deliverances. Oh! the freer any favor is, the more it should be remembered;
does God see any thing in us, or in our families, more then others, to bestow
such deliverances for? One man goes to Sea, and he is taken; another goes to
Sea, and he is sunk; another goes to Sea, and he dies the Term of the Voyage;
and why does the Lord preserve you? is not this free grace? not because you are
more Righteous, but because he is more gracious; and should not this be
Remembered?

3. Our Dangers and Deliverances should be remembered, because God has gracious
ends and designs both in the one and the other; What ends has God to bring us
into dangers? 1. He by this has an end and design to quicken up to duty; it
may be there may be some omitted duty, neglected duties often bring men into
great and eminent dangers; it may be a Person is convinced of the duty of
Prayer, but it may be neglected; oh then God will bring into danger to quicken
to duty; oh says God, In their Afflictions they will seek me early. The very
Heathen Mariners called out for Prayer in time of danger. Observe it, that
Persons convinced of duties, either Personal or Domestical, and yet neglected,
God usually whips them to their duties, by one danger, affliction or another.
The Proverb is good, if you would teach a man to pray, send him to Sea. 2. God
by bringing us into dangers, has a design upon us to convince of sin; many
Convictions has come in to the Soul at this door; Dangers have often proved
inlets to Convictions. Oh! what Convictions have many poor Souls lain under
while in Danger, when it may be the Dangers has given them a view of Eternity;
when Dangers has presented Death to the man, and Conscience has cried, Now
thou art sinking, now there is but a step betwixt thee and Eternity, betwixt
thee and another World? Oh then what Convictions has the Soul lain under? and
yet it may be when the Danger is over, the Conviction is over too. Well, though
we may forget all, yet God remembers all. 3. God has a design upon us in our
Dangers, to prepare us for our latter end. The danger thou art in, and has
escaped, calls for to prepare for thy Death, which must certainly come to pass
shortly. God by Dangers would have you prepare for Death: and oh! what a
cutting Consideration will this be when thou come to die? that thou who have
been in so many dangers by Sea and Land, should have no more learned to die,
nor ready to die. Alas, you escaped the last, that you might prepare for the
next. 4. God has a design upon our Graces by bringing us into danger; Danger
is to exert and draw forth Grace. Thus the Disciples Dangers at Sea were to
draw forth their Faith. Faith and Patience comes most visibly upon the stage in
times of most eminent danger. 5. God by bringing us into Dangers, has a design
upon our Souls; he sometimes by danger of drowning the Body, has saved the
Soul, and has caused it to say, Periissem nisi periissem: I had perished, if I
had not perished. Some have escaped shipwreck of Soul by shipwreck of Body; and
shall we forget such Dangers, when God has such gracious designs in them upon
us?

2. He drives on gracious ends and designs in our Deliverances, and shall we
then forget them? etc. 1. He spares us, that we may account his long-suffering
Salvation; he gives, by sparing of us, space to repent; and oh! what a dreadful
thing is it not to remember wherefore we are spared and delivered? He gave her
space to Repent, but she repented not. The Prisoner is Reprieved that he might
sue out his Pardon; Psalm. 56. ult.
and will he forget the end for which he is Reprieved? 2. He delivers, that we
may live to him. Why was David's feet delivered from falling? it was, that he
might walk before the Lord in the light of the living. He gives us our lives,
that we might give them back again to God. Ier. 7. 10.
Men are not delivered from dangers to live to themselves, to live to their
lusts, to drink, and swear, and rant, and roar, as a great many poor wretches
do. That say as they did, We are delivered to do all these abominations. Psalm.
50. 15.
3. God has another end in Deliverance, that we might glorify him, in paying
our Vows to him. I will deliver thee; and what then? when out of trouble never
remember it more, cast it behind thy back; O no; And thou shall glorify me. He
aims at a revenue of glory out of your deliverances. 4. God has another end in
delivering of us; that we might enter into new Engagements, to be more the
Lords; as in times of great dangers, there use to be great engagements betwixt
God and the Soul; so in times of great deliverances, there are great
engagements pass betwixt God and the Soul, new dedications to God; new
deliverances, call for new dedications of the Soul to God; now the Soul should
be set apart for God more than ever. 5. God has another end in delivering of
us, that we might break off our league with sin; thus it was with them, Shall
we break his Commandments, after such great deliverance as this?

APPLICATION.
Is it so, that our Dangers and Deliverances should be remembered by us? then it
is a word of information:

1. Learn we here how acceptable it is to God, that we thankfully congratulate
our Mercies. No Music like a sound of Trumpets off the waters: so O what sweet
Music, does it make in Gods ears, that you thankfully record Sea-Mercies, and
Sea-Deliverances; this is Music of the Waters; this makes melody in Gods ears.
Sea-Prayers and Sea-Praises* come up acceptably before the Lord; he is so
pleased with them, that he has called them Sacrifices: O that men would offer
the Sacrifice of Praise; this is the sound of Trumpets you should carry to Sea
with you, outward bound, and homeward bound.

2. Learn we hence what a great evil it is to lose the remembrance of our
Dangers and Deliverances. What do many Families? what do many Persons with the
Sea-Dangers, with the Sea-Deliverances? do not they write them in the dust? do
not they bury them in the Grave of Oblivion? do not they cast them behind their
backs? do not they trample them under foot? O poor Souls! they little know what
they do. 1. Such Deliverances will have a resurrection in their Consciences one
day; though they bury them now; O they will rise again: and oh! how will they
then dread and terrify a poor Soul? 2. Such Deliverances will another day be
witnesses and evidences against you. Oh! what a cutting testimony will they
give in against the Soul? Have not thou been graciously and wonderfully
delivered in such a Voyage, in such a Storm at Sea, in such a Sickness at
Shore, and yet walked unsuitably under all these? To be cast out by Mercy, O
what a dreadful thing is this! 3. Such deliverances forgotten by us, harden us;
either they soften, or harden. These Providence are like Gods Ordinances in
this respect, they either harden or soften. Oh! what a dreadful thing it is to
be hardened by Deliverances and Preservation, and yet many are. Sentence not
being speedily executed, the hearts of men are fully set in them to do evil. 4.
Such Deliverances will be great aggravations both of man's sin and misery, if
forgotten by them. The goodness of God was the aggravation of the sin of David,
says God, 2 Samuel 12. 8, 9.
When I had done so and so for thee, nay, and I would have done more, wherefore
have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his sight. What,
for you that had such deliverances as these, to break his Commandments; as Ezra
says; O this is an high aggravation! 5. Deliverances and Dangers forgotten will
cause the Lord to pull in his hand in a way of Mercy, will cause God to give up
Persons, and take his Protecting presence from them, take them from the shadow
of his Wings. Souls by forgetting past dangers and deliverances, may put
themselves from under Gods Protection for the future.

Use 2. Is it so that we are to Remember our Sea-Dangers and Deliverances? then
it is a word of Exhortation; be exhorted then to call to mind, and keep in
mind, what God has done for you; and in this Exhortation I address my self to
Seafaring men, whose lives are a course and series of Wonders in their
frequent Salvations and Preservations, (witness this Treatise) as you see the
wonders of God in the Deeps, (viz.) The wonders of his Creation, so do you see
the wonders of his Salvation. How often may Wonderful be Written upon the Head
of Salvations that you are every Voyage receiving from God? you never go out,
and come home, but God works Wonderfully, and appears Wonderfully for you; Is
not he a Wonder-working-God for you every Voyage?

The Exhortation is to call to mind, Ps. 106 13.
and keep in mind, Ps 78. 11.
to Record and Register your Dangers and Deliverances, and not to do as Israel
is said to do, who soon forgot his works. How often does God bring in this sin
of theirs in one Psalm? They forgot his works, and the wonders he had showed
them.

1. Keep them in mind, for they are wonderful Dangers and Deliverances; Psalm.
78. 12, 13.
They are Wonders, these are to be remembered. Marvelous things did he for them,
in the sight of their Fathers, etc. He divided the Sea, and caused them to pass
through, and he made the waters to stand as an heap; and it is brought in again
in that Psalm. Ps. 78 42.
They remembered not his hand, nor the day when God delivered them out of the
hand of the Enemy, etc. And in another place, Psalm. 106. 21, 22.
They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt. Wondrous
works in the Land of Ham. This heightens the sin exceedingly to forget such
great and wonderful Dangers and Deliverances.

1. Your Dangers are Wonderful in this Respect, they are often such as threaten
a sentence of Death to be executed upon you. May it not be said of poor
Seamen, as was of them; For we would not (Brethren) have you ignorant of our
trouble, which came to us in Asia, that we were pressed out of measure, above
strength, insomuch that we despaired of life, 2 Cor 1. 8, 9, 10.
but we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not trust in
our selves, but in him that raises the dead, who delivered us from so great a
Death, and does Deliver. O how many Seafaring men may say thus! Our dangers
have been such, as we have often despaired of life; there has but been a
little betwixt us and Death; nay betwixt us and Eternity; and shall we forget
such Dangers, when we have been so near Death in them? As he said to David, As
the Lord lives, there is but one step betwixt thee and death. O how often have
you been near sinking, near drowning, and yet God has then appeared for you,
with an outstretched Arm, and in the Mount has been seen, and will not you
Remember this?

2. Your Dangers are Wonderful in this Respect, they are sudden and surprising,
they are wonderful sudden; how are you often, all on a sudden, threatened with
nothing but present Death and Destruction! It may be said of Seamen, Job 22.
10.
as of those in Job, Snares compasses them about, and sudden fear troubles
them. It does not only trouble them, but all on a sudden trouble them, before
they know almost where they are (as we say;) We read of some whose Pro. 6. 15.
Calamity shall come suddenly. Suddenly shall he be broken without Remedy. O
how terrible is such a case, or such a danger! and has not God often threatened
to make this your case and condition? O then do not forget such dangers that
have so suddenly looked you in the Face!

3. Your Dangers are Wonderful in this Respect, they are not Dangers in which
your Bodies are concerned only, but they are dangers in which your Souls are
concerned; It is not only the danger of a Ship-wrack'd Vessel, and a
Shipwrack'd Estate, and a Shipwrack'd Body, but a Shipwrack'd Soul. Here is the
great danger, lest thou make a lost Voyage for thy Soul: If thou had died in
such a Storm, or died in the Term of such a Voyage; Oh! what would have become
of thy Soul, Thy precious, thy immortal Soul? Had not thou died in a carnal, in
a Christless state and condition? Had not thy poor Soul perished to all
Eternity, if thou then had miscarried? Was not thou then a stranger altogether
to Christ, and a work of saving Grace upon thy Heart? Had not thou then the
guilt of all thy sins upon the back of thy Soul unpardoned? And o what danger
was this! And will thou forget such dangers?

4. Your Dangers are such at Sea, as none but a God can deliver from; all your
skill cannot; Oh, then is the greatest Artist at his Wits end! The Psalmist
tells us, Ps. 107. 27. The courage of such is set forth Olli Robur, and aes
triplex circa Pectus. Hor. Ver. 26.
the Mariners in their Storms, are at their wits end; (or as some read it) all
their wisdom is swallowed up, they know not what course to Steer, (the Dutch
Annotators carry it,) Now their very Pilots are at a loss; Now all their
courage cannot contribute to their deliverance, though men of the greatest
natural courage and magnanimity in the world: Yet now their hearts melt because
of troubles; as it is said of the Mariners in Ionahs Ship, He that first
ventred into his Ship at Sea, is said to have treble brass about his breast, a
Proverbial speech for a man of courage.
The Mariners were afraid. O now, when Death and Eternity, the Grave and
Judgment to come looks them in the face! Then they are Magor-Missabibs, terror
to themselves, and to all about them; O now, the danger is such, it must be the
only finger of God that can help! I have heard of a Ship in Yarmouth Road, that
in a great Storm, they feared the Anchor would come home, and the Master
discoursing with a Youth in the Ship, that God had begun lately to work some
Convictions upon, O says his Master, if God do but lay a Finger upon one Strand
of the Cable, it will hold; and in the Morning many Ships were lost near them,
and there was but one Strand in the Cable left. O the finger of God only can
sometimes save in dangers. It was a good saying of a godly Commander of a Ship
in eminent dangers, None now but that God that saved the Children of Israel at
the Red Sea, can save us out of this distress; and as soon as he had said it,
the Wind altered, and saved them; And will you forget such dangers as none but
a God can save from?

5. Your dangers at Sea are such as many thousands have perished in; how many
have gone to Sea, that never returned more? that have been swallowed up in the
belly of the great Deeps? How many have perished by the Sword at Sea? how many
by violent Storms? and that God should put a difference betwixt you and others,
and you should forget it, this exceedingly heightens and aggravates the guilt.
How many have lost their lives? how many have lost their limbs? and yet in such
dangers God has brought you off; this is never to be forgotten.

2. Your dangers are not only wonderful, but your deliverances are so too, and
therefore should be remembered. There is never a deliverance, but you may read a
wonder in it; so many deliverances and salvations at Sea, so many wonders. God
saves you in a miraculous way.

1. Is not this a wonder, that persons of such great sins and provocations,
should be persons of such great salvations and preservations? that such as sin
every Voyage, nay, it may be at an high rate sin every Voyage, should be saved
and delivered at such an high rate every Voyage? is not this a wonder, that men
of such sins, should be men of such salvations? that men that sin against these
salvations, should not have these deliverances shorten upon them. Oh what a
wonder is this! We should wonder if a person should be continually disobliging
any of us, and yet we should be still heaping up kindnesses upon him: This made
the Prophet Ezra say, Shall we again break his Commandments, after such
deliverance as this? O do not you provoke the Lord every time that you go out,
and still he delivers you, still he returns you to your Relations, to visit
your habitations in peace! and is not this a wonder?

2. Your deliverances are wonderful, if you consider your deliverances are
great deliverances. We read of such; 1 Chronicles. 11. 14.
And the Lord saved them with a great deliverance; or with a great salvation.
Judge. 15. 18.
Thus said Sampson, Thou have given this great deliverance into the hand of thy
servant. Now any great transactions are remembered and recorded. Your
deliverances are great, if we consider these things; 1. They are commanded
deliverances by the great God; his word of command brings all our deliverances
about, whether at Sea or Land. Which made the Church in distress pray, Psalm.
44. 4.
Thou art my King, O God, command deliverances for Jacob. He commands every
thing tending to deliverance at Sea; in order to deliverance, he commands the
Winds; Psalm. 107. 29.
He makes the storm a calm. He also commands the Seas; he says to the proud
Waves, So far, and no further. You read of a decree set to the Sea, Ier. 5. 22.
that it cannot pass; Though the Waves thereof toss themselves, yet can they
not prevail; though they roar, yet can they not pass over it. Job 38. 8, 11.
It is the great God only that rides Lord Admiral at Sea, to command the Seas
and the Waves thereof. God is said to shut up the Sea with doors, and set bars
upon it. Hithorto shall thou come, and no further; and here shall thy proud
waves be stayed. Xerxes presumed he could tame the Hellespont, for attempting
his Bridge of Boats; but all this was in vain, this is a flower in Gods Crown
alone, to command the Sea. Your deliverances are a fruit and effect of Gods
commanding Power, therefore great. 2. They are great deliverances, as they are
the curious workmanship (as I may call them) of the Attributes of a great God.
Deliverance is said to be wrought for us, Isai. 43. 13, 14.
it is the handy work of God; Genesis 11. 7.
If God will work, Or as some take it of the Trinity, as in the Creation; it is
Gods coming down, when Persons are delivered in eminent dangers. We read of
hands at work under the wings we see not, so the curious works of providence in
our deliverances till they come forth O then how shall we admire them.
who can let? (as the Prophet says.) And he seems to speak it upon the account
of the deliverance of his People; For your sake I have sent down to Babylon,
and have brought down all their Nobles, and the Caldeans, whose cry is in their
ships. In every deliverance there is the excellent work of the Attributes of
God; we may in such a deliverance say, Here is the Power of God, and here is
the Wisdom of God, and here is the Love of God, and here is the Faithfulness of
God, etc. For as God in the confounding of the Languages at Babel, said, Go
too, let us go down, (as if he derected himself to his glorious Attributes,
compassing about his glorious Throne) Come, let us go down. So when God sends
us deliverances in our distresses, he sets his Attributes at work; Go Power, go
Mercy, go Love, go Faithfulness, go and act your respective parts in this
deliverance; and must not this be then an excellent and curious Piece that Gods
Attributes bring forth? 3. They are great deliverances, Ezekiel. 10. 21.
if we consider the great sins and provocations they come over the heads of,
the great unworthiness of the receiver, heightens much the mercy and favor
received; the reason why persons do not greaten their deliverances, is because
they do not greaten their sins, in the deep sense and aggravations of them. O
sueh a Soul would say, as David, Is this the manner of men? O God, is not this
a great deliverance, for such a great sinner to receive? 4. They are great
deliverances, if we consider the time and season of their coming in; as this
deliverance of the Ships Company where Paul was, it was when all hope of being
saved was taken away; and so were many of the deliverances mentioned in this
Treatise. So Peter's Sea-deliverance, when he began to sink, Christ stretches
forth his hand immediately; he was now sinking and going, but see how ready
Christ was to save; Matthew. 14. 28, 29, 30.
He stretched forth his hand and caught Peter. Our sinking time, is Jesus
Christ's saving time. In the Mount is the Lord seen; our extremity is Gods
opportunity; and are not then these great deliverances never to be forgotten?
5. They are great deliverances, if we consider they are not only deliverances
of Bodies, and Ships, and Estates sometimes, but Souls; and where and where the
Ship is lost, and the Estate is lost, yet for the life to be saved, and the
Soul delivered, is a very great Deliverance; a Reprieve when a Prisoner is
under the sentence of Death, is a great Mercy: O when God Reprieves a poor
Prisoner, this is some Deliverance; we read of some Deliverance God gave to
Israel in the days of Shishak; a Reprieve is some Deliverance, but if it end in
suing out the Prisoners Pardon, then it is a great Deliverance. If it be such a
Deliverance in a Storm at Sea, as Hezekiah had from a Sickness at Shore, Is. 38.
Thou have delivered me in love to my Soul, and cast all my sins behind thy
back; This is a double Deliverance, and sure such Deliverances as these are
worth Recording; These are to be written in Marble and not in Dust, with the
Pen of Iron, (as the Prophet says) and not with the point of a Diamond.

3. Your Deliverances are wonderful, if you consider the many thousands that
have perished in less Dangers to an eye of Reason; they are distinguishing
Deliverances, and therefore wonderful has God dealt with all men that go to
Sea as with you. Has not thousands perished by the Sword at Sea in bloody
Engagements? Miscarried at Sea in dreadful and terrible Storms; Has not the
Sea been a Sepulcher for thousands? Are not there Millions of the Dead that the
Sea must one day give up, and yet you Delivered, and yet you spared? O what
distinguishing Mercy is this! And shall this be forgotten by you? Should not
you keep Records of distinguishing Mercy? How many sunk sometimes, and perished
by your sides? How many that went out with you that never Returned? One taken,
and another left; one sunk, and another saved.

4. Your Deliverances are Wonderful, if you consider the way that sometimes God
takes to bring them about; O what strange ways does God take to deliver, when
he has a mind to deliver; sometimes he brings down to the very Gate of the
Grave, he brings to the Doors and Bars of the Sea, and then shuts these doors;
as Job speaks, He brings to the next door to perishing, and then he delivers;
Master save me, or I perish; and then he lends an Arm, witness many of these
deliverances here mentioned. Sometimes he does it by strange means, low and
contemptible, as the poor man that we Read of, Eccles. 9. 15.
that delivered the City, sometimes by unthought of and unexpected means, as he
that Relieved Major Gibbons, as this Story mentions, he was a French Pyrate. As
that Ship I have heard off, that when she sprang a Leak, and they all had like
to have perished, all on a sudden the Leak stopped, and they knew no Reason, but
when they came into the next Port to search her, there was a great Fish had
wrought himself into the Leak, that they were glad to cut him out; was not here
a miraculous deliverance? That Jonah should be swallowed up by the Whale, o
what a miracle was this! and so he was preserved! and how have some been saved
by sudden shifts of Winds when near sinking and perishing? these are to be
remembered to the Lord while you live: Oh! methinks this one Motive should set
on the Exhortation, if I should use no more, to Remember your Dangers and your
Deliverances.

But secondly, another Motive is this, to Remember your Dangers with your
Deliverances; this will in your great distresses and extremities, contribute
some hope to you; to read over your Register, your ancient Records, how good
God has been at such a time, and such a time; how seasonably he stepped in and
delivered in such a strait and such a strait; Oh then says the Soul, why should
I despair, and cast off all hope now? Past Experiences as well as promises are
good food for faith. We read God gave the Leviathan to be meat for his people
in the wilderness, Psalm. 74. 14 which Expositors take to be meat for their
Faith.
has not he appeared and saved in Deaths often before now? for past
experiences are good supports for Hope in present exigencies and extremities;
thus David argues, when at a great strait, Thou have delivered me, and wilt
deliver me; and thus Paul, Thou have delivered me, and wilt deliver me. Haman
found this a good way to Remember the years of the Lords right hand.

3. Remember your Dangers and Deliverances, for God Records them; they are
filled up by God, and he will mind you of them another day if you forget them
now; he keeps his Journals and Records, he has his Book of Remembrance of your
forgotten Mercies as well as your forgotten sins; God will one day read over
all those Deliverances you have forgotten; Oh poor Soul! did not I deliver thee
in such a Danger, in such a Distress, in such a Death, when there was no Hope,
when there was no Help, yet all this have thou forgotten; forgotten thy Mercy,
and forgotten the God of thy Mercy; Oh! will not this sting you to the Heart,
when God shall cause your strangled and murdered Mercies to walk in your
Consciences? when he shall give them a Resurrection there?

4. Motive to Remember your Dangers and Deliverances; the Vows of God are upon
you; Oh! what did you say to God in the day of your distress and calamity?
Lord, if thou will now appear, and be a present help in time of trouble, it
shall never be forgotten, it shall be remembered to the Lord as long as we have
a day to live; but when God brings poor Souls off, many do not only forget
their Vows, but deny them; Jonah 1. 16.
In Ancient times it was usual in eminent dangers, whether at Sea or Land, to
make Vows; We read that Ionahs Mariners they Vowed Vows; David did thus, Psalm.
56. 11.
Thy Vows are upon me, O God! I will render praises unto thee, etc. (and in
another place) I will pay thee my Vows, Psalm. 66. 25. 15.
which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble;
But because this is so ordinary to make Vows at Sea, and brake them a Shore,
let me enlarge a little upon it. 1. Why should you forget your Vows after your
Deliverances? They were not rash Vows, there might have been some excuse, if
you had made them rashly, you might then have had a Plea, for saying it was an
Error; but in times of distress, men are serious, when Death and Eternity is
set before them, and they upon the brink of another world; Eccles. 5. 4, 5.
dare you sinners rashly Vow, in this day of your distress; O no, your
Consciences will bear witness against you, that you were in sober-sadness at
that day. 2. Why should you forget your Vows after your Deliverances, for God
will require payment? Nay, this is not only the Reason why we should not forget
to pay, but why we should not delay to pay; When thou vowest a vow to the Lord
thy God, thou should not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will require
it, yea, will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. Take it
for granted he will do it, yea, Deuteronomy. 23. 21.
he will surely do it. 1. He will require it, so as to call to a payment day,
he will demand it, he will send unto you a Summons to pay the Vows you made to
him in the day of your Distress. Oh! how often is Conscience Gods Officer, that
he sends to you to demand Payment? O says Conscience, Sinner, pay what thou
owe to the God of thy deliverances; is not he a God to whom the Vows must be
performed? 2. He will require it, so as to punish the non-payment; and so
requiring is here taken, and in many other places, the Lord does very often
severely punish Vowbreaking; breaking of Vows does cause God often to destroy
the works of your hands. Say not before the Angel, Eccles. 5. 4, 5.
It was an error, wherefore should God be angry at thy Vows, and destroy the
works of thy hands? Some Expositors refer this to the Priest, before whom the
sin of rash vows was to be contest; others carry it to Christ, the Angel of the
Covenant, who sees through all our subtle excuses and equivocations, and
punishes them. O, God is angry when men go so flatly against their Vows; O then
God is angry, and destroys the work of their hands, viz. disappoints their
endeavors, and denies them success.

Lastly, to forget your deliverances and dangers, is the greatest ingratitude
and unthankfulness in the world; has God given you so many wonderful
deliverances, so many miraculous preservations, to be buried in the grave of
oblivion? will you murder your mercies, and then bury them? It is comconly
said, Murder will out. Murdered Mercies will one day make terrible work, in
walking in your Consciences.

The next Observation is this, That Salvations and Deliverances many times are
not sent until persons be left helpless and hopeless. I shall give you a touch
of this. Now all hope of being saved was taken away, no small tempest lay upon
them; now they were gulft in despair of ever coming off with their lives: Yet
this often is the condition of Nations, Ship-Companies, and Persons, where God
intends to save and deliver* The proofs of the last Observation about Dangers
and Deliverances being recorded and remembered, proves this also. Thus was Peter
saved, the Disciple; saved, when just at sinking.

But why does God stay so long before he sends deliverances and salvations? 1.
Because he delights to draw forth a spirit of prayer; if men will not pray,
when sinking, when drowning, when dying, they will never pray. O see how Jonah
prays in his distress: Jonah 2. 1, 2, 3.
And Jonah prayed to the Lord out of the Fishes belly, and said, I cried by
reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of
Hell cried I, and thou heardst my voice, verse. 7.
etc. When my Soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord; and my Prayer came
in unto thy holy Temple. O Sirs, God loves prayer so well, that he stays with
his deliverances, that we might sue them out by prayer. Psalm. 130. 1.
Out of the Depths have I cried unto thee, says David: Driven to it by deep
and bottomless straits, into which I am plunged. And it seems to be an allusion
to Mariners, in their distresses and dangers of being shipwrackt, crying unto
the Lord. What, will any man perish, and never pray for it! die, and never cry
for it! what, and not say as Peter did, Master, save me, or I perish? What was
it that did draw forth prayer in many of these distressed Ship-Companies (in
this Treatise mentioned) but their dangers and distresses?

2. God does not bring our deliverances and salvations until we be hopeless,
because he will exercise his peoples graces: Therefore the Disciples were not
saved until the ship was full, that their graces might be exercised. O now is a
time for faith and patience to be exerted; there is nothing more pleasing unto
God, then to see how poor Souls exercise their graces, when they are reduced
into extremities; God has a great revenue of glory arising to himself, out of
the exercise of his own grace in the Souls of Believers. O how does Faith act
its part when mercy and deliverance is delayed! It was one of Luther's wonders,
to believe for mercy that was long delayed. It is an high exercise of Faith, to
look up to God long together, and nothing to come. To say with the Prophet
Jonah, Jonah 2. 4, 8.
I will look again toward thy holy Temple. And with the Prophet Isaiah, Isaiah
17.
Though he hide his face from the house of Jacob, I will wait upon him, and
look for him. What though thou be as the Prophets Servant, who went down to the
Sea to look, and he said, Master; 1 Kings 18. latter end.
there is nothing. But what then? does he give over? O no, looks again; and the
seventh look he saw the Cloud. So Faith in its exercise, will look again and
again, and never give over, until it espy the mercy coming upon the wings of
prayer. So might I add of Patience; O how does it act its part while the
deliverance tarries; it quietly waits for the salvation of God; saying, as
David, Psalm. 130. verse. 6.
My Soul waits for the Lord, more than they that watch for the morning. The
Soul of the Believer possesses it self in patience until the mercy come.

3. God does not bring our salvations and deliverances, until we be brought to
an extremity; because they are most prized and welcomed until then. O now
deliverance will be prized: The longer that a mercy tarries, the more welcome
it is when it comes; God loves to make all his mercies welcome to us. O how
welcome is life, to a person under a sentence of death! O how welcome is a
discovery of the love of Christ to a poor Soul, that has long groaned under
the burden of unpardoned guilt. O how welcome was the Prodigals Fathers House,
when he had so long been starving in the Fields, with his Husks, amongst the
Swine!

4. Because God will have all his salvations and deliverances look like his own
hand and arm, his own arm brings salvation with him; he will have the print of
his own hand upon it, that poor sinners may say, This is the finger of God, the
doings of God, and it is mavelous in our eyes. Alas, men would attribute it
to themselves, if salvation did not come in such a way, when all hope of being
saved is taken away. Oh! everything is beautiful in its season; Is not
salvation and deliverance now in season? now they begin to despair, as to
probable or visible hopes. O now God works like himself, now he appears in a
deliverance to be God; which set the Disciples a wondering, Mark 4. 41.
What manner of Man is this, that the Winds and Sea obey him? And at another
time, when he delivered his Disciples at Sea, and calmed the Winds, then they
that were in the Ship worshipped him, saying, Matthew. 14. 32, 33.
Of a truth thou art the Son of God.

5. Because he will by such salvations set off his love to poor Souls: Was not
the love of Christ set off highly, in taking that season to save the ship when
it was full; to save them when they were sinking; Is not that great Love, that
steps forth to save in an Extremity? O what Love was this, to save this Ships
Company, when all hope of being saved was taken away? Love always chooses the
fittest times to appear and evidence it self.

Lastly, Because he will have his deliverances, endearing deliverances to
Souls. O how does such an appearance of God, at such a time, endear the Soul of
the receiver. Therefore says David, I will love the Lord, (or love the Lord
dearly) my Rock and my Deliverer, etc.

But I will proceed to give you also a taste of the Application, and not be
large, because I have been large upon the former, which was mainly intended.

1. Then learn we hence, that God may for gracious ends, known to himself,
delay a mercy or a deliverance, and yet fully intends to give in that mercy.
Jacob may wrestle all night, and yet be put off; but in the break of day the
mercy comes. The Woman of Canaan may cry to Christ for her Daughter, and at
present be put off, yet at last she shall carry it. The believing Soul may not
have the Dove come with an Olive Branch in her mouth until evening. Christ's
manifesting of his love to poor Souls, is called his supping with them; And I
will sup with you: Now supper comes not up till evening.

2. Learn we hence, that Gods timing our deliverances and salvations, is best
for us; his time is the best time. Our time is always ready, (but says Christ)
My time is not yet. If we had our mercies in our time, we should not see that
beauty in them; for every thing is beautiful in its season: and God chooses the
fittest seasons to send them, because he will put a beauty upon them.

3. Learn we hence, that no case is desperate to God, though it be so to man:
One would have thought this a desperate case, in such a storm, lightning the
Ship, the casting out of the Tackling of the Ship, neither Sun nor Stars
appeared, and all hope of being saved taken away; yet all this was but
desperate to them, it was not so to God: now their extremity becomes Gods
opportunity, and he takes this juncture of time to appear in. Thus David, Psalm.
42, 7, 8.
all Gods waves and Gods billows had gone over him; a desperate case! yet God
(then he believes) would command his loving kindness in the daytime, and his
song should be with him in the night. Faith is an excellent grace at a
desperate stand.

4. Learn we hence, that Gods thoughts are not as our thoughts; when we think
of nothing but sinking and perishing, then does God think of saving and
delivering. They thought all hope of being saved was taken away, but God looks
through the storm and Cloud, and comforts them. As the Disciples, when they
thought it had been a Spirit in their Storm that appeared to them; No, Mark 6.
50, 51, 52.
says Christ, be not afraid; be of good cheer, it is I.

Use 2. Is it so, that the salvations and deliverances that many of us have,
are not until we be brought to extremities? then it is a word of exhortation;
1. Then look up to God in the most desperate case, when you know not what to do
in your storms at Sea, in your straits at Land. O then let your eyes be up unto
the Lord; you see how many deliverances have come down in extremities, as
answers to pray. O pray hard; let going to Sea, being in storms at Sea, being
brought to extremities at Sea, learn you then to pray.

FINIS.

