A SERMON PREACHED at the Assizes held in WARWICK. MARCH the Nineteenth, 1682/3.

By SAMUEL JEMMAT M. A. sometimes Fellow of University College OXON. now Vicar
of St. Nicholas's Church in the Borough of WARWICK.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the University, for George
Teonge, Bookseller in Warwick. 1683.

To the Worshipful THOMAS LUCY of CHARLECOTE Esquire, HIGH SHERIFF of the
County of Warwick.
THere are three things, which, if universally conjoined, would certainly make
this Nation happy: The just Awe and Reverence of the Divine Nature: Loyalty to
the King, God's immediate Vicegerent upon Earth: And the due Execution of
Justice, for the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that do well. The
first would make them good Christians; the second would make them good
Subjects; and the third, would either persuade, or force them to be good Men.
In order to the attaining of these ends, I have made it my business, according
to my slender capacity, to evidence that there is a God, who rules over the
highest; and that He is so far graciously pleased to promote the good of Humane
society, as to make Government his own Ordinance; that they, who are Subjects,
are bound to be obedient, and loyal, by God's authority; and that they, who
represent our gracious Sovereign in the high seats of Judicature, are obliged
to fidelity, by the greatest Commands and Encouragements.

SIR, being selected, by Your undeserved favor, to be your Chaplain, at this
remarkable time, I was persuaded, that I could no way better publish the true
sentiments of your Loyal heart, or discharge my Own Duty, than by endeavoring
to instill into the minds of my Auditory these weightier matters of the Royal
Law. If I have, in the least degree, promoted the Honor of God, and the King;
satisfied your Self; confirmed any true Christians in their just sentiments;
and convinced, or confuted any seditious, Anarchical spirits; I have compassed
my end, shall give God the glory, and remain,

Honored SIR, Your most Humble and Faithful Servant, SAMUEL JEMMAT.

2 CHRONICLES. 19.6. And said to the Judges, take heed what ye do; for ye judge not
for man, but for the Lord; who is with you in the Judgment.
IEhoshaphat was one of the best of all the Kings of Judah; it having pleased
the Spirit of God to record it of him, about the beginning of his Reign, 2 Chronicles. 17.3, 4.
that he walked in the first ways of his Father David, and sought not unto
Baalim; but sought to the Lord God of his Fathers, and walked in his
commandments, and not after the doings of Israel. And afterward, toward his
latter end, the same spirit testifies, 2 Chr. 20.32.
that he walked in the way of Asa, his Father, and departed not from it, doing
that which was right in the sight of the Lord.

And on the other side, He only charge him with breaking Leagues with 2 Chr.
18.3.
Ahab, and 2 Chr. 20.3.
Ahaziah, two wicked Kings of Israel, (which, according to humane policy, might
seem agreeable enough with the reasons of State) and for not removing the High
places, 2 Chr. 20.33.
which the people still had recourse unto, having not thoroughly prepared their
hearts to the God of their Fathers.

By all which it is intimated, (though his Predecessors had their failings) yet
He, in the beginning, progress, and end of his reign was highly commendable.
That he had a constant respect unto the holy commandments of God, and made them
the rule of his own life, as well as the Government of his Kingdom. The
consequent whereof was this, that he did more in the reformation both of Civil
and Ecclesiastical affairs, than any that had gone before him, since the days
of David.

The words, which I have read, are part of the charge, which this good King
gave to the Judges commissioned by himself: And therefore, from them, we may
rationally expect to learn some of the main and principal duties, which concern
all those, who live in any degree of Eminency, or Authority, either in Church
or State: and more especially, those that are in office, appertaining to
Justice. This good King, being dead, yet speaks, and that aloud in the words of
the Text: saying to the Judges, take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.

Which words present us with four remarkable, and profitable truths. The two
first of which, ought to be of general influence; and the two latter
principally concern those Sages, which are in Commission. They are these.

they judge not for man, but for the Lord.

He said to the Judges.

take heed what you do.

have the greatest motives in the world, to be faithful in the performance of
their duty; and that, because God is with them in the judgment.

I begin with the first of these, viz.

That the primary source, and original of they judge not for man, but for God.

I am not ignorant, that there were two sorts of Judges, among themselves, in
the days of Jehoshaphat: such as were concerned in Ecclesiastical, and such as
were entrusted only with Civil affairs. The constitution of both is manifest
from verse. 11. of this chapter, where the King declares: Behold, Amariah, the
chief Priest, is over you in all matters of the Lord: and Zebediah, the son of
Ishmael, the Ruler of the house of Judah, for all the King's matters.

Yet do I not think it rational, for any man, so to appropriate Ecclesiastical
affairs to the Lord, as to exclude him from his interest, in those that are
Civil: but have good reason to conclude, that the King speaks to both sorts of
Judges, when he says, ye judge not for man, but for the Lord. That (...),
which he makes use of, verse. 10. by instancing in particular cases,
sufficiently proves what I say. And what cause soever shall come to you, of
your Brethren, that dwell in their cities; between blood, and blood; between
law, and commandment; statutes, and judgments; ye shall even warn them, that
they trespass not against the Lord. Those criminal causes, between blood and
blood, were certainly Civil, as well as those, which related to the statutes,
and judgments, were Ecclesiastical: and yet, the offenders, in both cases, are
warned not to trespass against the Lord. Which plainly discovers God's interest
in Judgment, be it of what kind or nature soever: whether it be Civil, or
whether it be Ecclesiastical, God is the primary source and original of it: And
whatsoever they be, that are entrusted with the executive parts of Judgment,
they judge not for man, but for the Lord.

This, I am sure, is agreeable with the analogy of Scripture, which informs us,
not only, Is. 30.18.
that the Lord is a God of judgment, implying, that it is his nature, or
unalterable property; or that Ps. 33.5. Is. 1.8.
he loves judgment, to denote his affection; or Deuteronomy. 32.4.
that all his ways are judgment, to discover his steadiness, and uniformity in
the exercise of it; or, Ps. 9.16.
that the Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, to show how
remarkable he is for this property; or, that Job 27.33.
the Almighty is excellent in judgment, to demonstrate, how far he transcends
those, that are most critical amongst men: but it also assures us, that the
judgment is Gods; Deuteronomy. 1.17.
to teach us this lesson, that, though the Ministers and Executioners of
Justice, may be varied according to the exigencies of times, and places; yet,
wheresoever Judgment is faithfully done, God is the director, author, and owner
of it.

By that emanation of power from himself, whereby he communicated existence to
the World, and all the Creatures that are therein, He became the absolute
Sovereign of the Universe; and did Himself, at first, exercise this
jurisdiction, which I am speaking of: As appears by his punishing of Cain, for
murdering his Brother, before the Promulgation of any Law to the contrary. And
by his Commissioning Abraham to kill his Son; which made the real intentions of
the Patriarch so to do, an act of Faith, and commendable obedience; which
without that would have been downright murder.

And it is as certain that he did, afterward, devolve this power upon Man, when
he delivered that Law to the sons of Noah, whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed Genesis 9.6.
: which power he cannot be imagined to have committed promiscuously to every
man, who would be glad to be an avenger of blood, (because that would have
given authority to the most notorious murders, and countenanced the vilest
outrages in the world,) but to persons of knowledge, and fidelity, elected,
commissioned, and set apart for that Office. Since which time it is manifest he
has, in all Ages, selected choice persons for the administration of Justice:
has given to some the spirit of Government, and to others the spirit of
Subjection; has given to the Higher Powers the greatest encouragements, they
are capable of, by his Promises, in case of diligent, faithful Obedience; and
has deterred Subjects from injustice, and disobedience, by the great movers of
mankind, viz. Temporal, and Eternal Death.

judge not for Man, but for the Lord? A wicked Baalam could say, Numb. 22.18.
If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond
the word, of the Lord, my God, to do less or more. Nehemiah could say, in the
sincerity and integrity of his heart, Should such a man as I fly? Nehem. 6.11.
And it will well become every person, that is entrusted with Judgment, to take
up the like forms of speech, and say; Should I he faint-hearted, or negligent?
should I be partial, or injust? shall I be drawn aside by any sinister
respects, who judge not for Man, but for the Lord! Sure I am, they have as good
a ground so to do; because God's Commission does not only license them to
execute justice, and judgment, but it lays a necessity upon them, by making it
their Duty.

And, on the other side, how ready to obey,

Yea, how thankful to God should it detriment, though all their counsels be
turned to folly, and all Civil Government to Anarchy, and Confusion: And yet he
is pleased to contrive the good of All, and to fortify Civil Powers by his own
Commission; that Judgment may run down like water, and Righteousness like a
mighty stream. Lord! What is man, that thou art so mindful of him, or the son
of man, that thou do so regard him!

Power, nor Property, nor Compact, nor Grace, but in the great Authority of the
Absolute Sovereign, and most gracious Governer of the whole World. Could it be
founded in Power, Angels would have a right to destroy all Mankind, Children
their aged Parents; nay Thieves themselves would have an undeniable title to
the goods of the Impotent. Could it be founded in Property, it must be possible
to suppose, that Man had a right to Sovereignty, before God gave him a dominion
over the fish of the Sea, and the fowls of the Air, and over every living thing
that moves upon the Earth Genesis 1.28.
; which was long before he backed it with that commandment, Thou shall not
steal. Exodus 20.25.
Could it be founded in Compact, 'twould have been at the pleasure of the
People heretofore, and would be so still, whether they would engage themselves,
or not: and they might have frustrated the great design of the Almighty, by
their refusal. Could it be founded in Grace, there must have been some better
(...), than we now enjoy, whereby to distinguish between the Holy, and the
Vile; or the crafty, hypocritical Pretenders would certainly go away with the
greatest shares of the Earth. But, being founded in the power, and wisdom of
God; and, it being determined, that he is the primary source of Judgment; it
will necessarily follow, That the subordinate Authors of Judgment are not,
merely, the ordinance of Man. They are so indeed, subjective, as the Offices of
Justice are born by Men, not immediately by God himself, not hy Angels, or any
other Creature. They are so objective, as Justice is employed among men, they
being the persons who are to be restrained, or punished by Laws. They are so
(...), finally, as men are the persons, who are to receive the benefits of
Government. But yet, if we consider it (...), properly, and originally, as to
its creation, ordination, and institution; so it is Gods work; and so the
highest Judges upon earth, judge not for Man, but for the Lord. That Is the
first Truth. I come now to the second.

secondary springs and fountains of Justice: Next, and immediately under God,
Judgment flows from them. And therefore the King, in the Text, gives his
Command to the Judges, in these words, He said to the Judges.

It is impossible to conceive what dread and horror would befall Mankind, if
God should take the immediate exercise of Dominion, and execution of Justice
into his own hands. When the whole congregation of the Israelites were sensible
of the terrible Concomitants of God's delivering the Law, it was their
unanimous supplication, that he would be pleased, from thence forwards, to
speak to them by the mediation of his Servants. Exodus 20.19.
Speak thou with us, say they to Moses, and we will hear, but let not God speak
with us, lest we dye.

And it is as impossible to apprehend what confusion would enter into the
world, if God should, in his righteous judgment; deliver up Mankind to Anarchy.

Wherefore, to avoid these unspeakable evils, God has been pleased to make
choice of fit persons to be his own Vicegerents among men. Fit, I say,
because adorned with wisdom from above, and the spirit of Government: yea, the
fittest of all others, because God thinks them so: having said, Prove. 8.15. By
me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By Me, i. e. by my authority, and
appointment, exclusively to all others. By Me Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice, as it may be taken absolutely, the Powers that are being ordained of
God; Romans 13.1.
and as it may be taken with its most desirable additaments, by him they reign
justly, righteously, and happily. This Promotion comes neither from the East,
nor from the West, nor yet from the South; but God is the Judge, he puts
down one, and sets up Ps. 75.6, 7.
another.

These are the persons to whom God has been pleased to give his own Name, Ps.
82.6.
calling them Gods; not only to mind them of the height of their Place, and the
excellence of their Duty, but also to command Reception, and beget Reverence
and Esteem for them among Men.

These he has styled his own Ministers, Romans 13.6.
(...); which is always a title of great Honor, and Public performance; being
never applied to servants, or underlings, but to those who are Eminent, and
Glorious, either by Nature, Office, or both.

To These he has given the character of the Higher Powers Romans 13.1.
: as if he designed, by that very act of his Providence, whereby he called them
to be Rulers, etiher to advance them so far above other men, as to place them
among the Angels; or to abstract so much from their Humanity, as to make them
all Power for the necessary ends of Government.

Into their hands has he put the sword of Justice, and commanded them not to
bear it in vain. Romans 13.4.
As it is a sword, it is designed to cut, and wound, yea and to kill too, when
occasion requires it: and as it is the sword of Justice, it is obliged to spare
the innocent, and turn its edge or point only toward evil doers: and whereas
it is not to be used in vain, Pusillanimity, and fond Pity are, by that
consideration, excluded. It being the natural temper of Justice, to give to
every man his due, without being biassed by the persons interests, relations,
or rewards of malefactors.

Of these He has assured us, that they are his own Ordinances Romans 13.1.2.
to convince all fanatical, and seditious spirits, that the Magistracy was not
originally invented, or ordained by Men; that it is not at man's pleasure to
reject it, when they think fit to withdraw their obedience, or to defend and
maintain themselves against God's ordinance by private conspiracies, or open
resistance, when ever natural strength, or the combination of parties shall
make them able.

Lastly, unto these has He obliged mankind to subject themselves, not only
for wrath, but for Conscience sake; Romans 13.5.
i. e. not only for fear of being cut off by the sword of Justice, but because
God has, by his Command, made it their Duty; and threatened them with eternal
Damnation, if they disobey them.

Hence it is, that Almighty God, speaking of Cyrus, the great Persian Monarch,
says, He is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure. Is. 44.28.
Hence our Savior tells Pilate, the Roman Governer among the Jews, Thou
could have no power against me, except it were given thee from above. Jo.
19.11.
Hence it is recorded, that the people found that the wisdom of God was in
Solomon, to do judgment 1 King. 3.28.
: and the Queen of Sheba, though an Heathen, attributed it to God's love to
Israel, that he had set Solomon over that people, to do judgment, and justice 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
.

The necessary Conclusions which flow from this Doctrine, I take to be these
three.

lawful, and necessary, but a part of the true Christian Religion, to defy,
and abjure the Pope's Supremacy: who takes upon himself (as St. Peter's
Successor) to have the sole power of disposing of all the Kingdoms of the
Earth; to place the Crowns of Emperors upon their heads with his foot, and to
kick them off again when he has done. It being most certain, that they, which
hold immediately from God, are not at all beholding to his Holiness.

That none but God can absolve Subjects

They, to whom he has given his Own Power, are accountable to none but
Himself: And therefore those, must needs be so far from deserving the names of
High-Courts of Justice, in which Gods Vicegerents are sentenced, and condemned;
that they are to be accounted the greatest Violences to Humane Society, and the
Ordinance of God; as also, the greatest usurpations upon Sovereignty, and
Judgment, that the Presbyterians, Jesuits, and the Devil himself could ever
boast of.

proportion to them. Certainly we have as great reason as any Nation under
Heaven, to make an hearty and grateful use of that Exclamation of the Psalmist,
Ps. 144.15.
Happy are the people that are in such a case; yea, blessed are the people who
have the Lord for their God.

That it is highly incumbent upon all Take heed what you do.

Caution, and Care, in such high concerns as they are conversant withal, seem
to me to include these four things.

1. Wisdom, and Knowledge, Prudence, and Experience. 2. Courage, and braveness
of spirit. 3. Vigilance, and Activity. 4. True Christian Piety.
The first will teach them how to take heed. The second will make them dare to
do it at all times, and in all causes. The third will not suffer them to slip
any opportunity, wherein they ought to be cautious. And the last will make them
have respect, both to God and the King.

1. When Caution is thus recommended to the Judges, it is employed, that they
ought to be men of Wisdom, and Knowledge, Prudence, and Experience, i. e. men
of great natural abilities, and skilful in all those Causes which shall come
before them. They ought to have a general knowledge, and comprehension of the
Laws, and still to apply that knowledge to the greatest variety of actions.

Without these, it will be impossible for them to take heed what they do,
notwithstanding they be, of themselves, well-minded, and willing to do justly:
because Ignorance, as forward as it is, can hardly be more impudent, than it is
weak: nor can Folly be more swift to discover its Presumptions, by its
undertakings; than it is to testify its Impotency, by its miscarriages. But
when Prudence and Experience come to be superadded to great natural Abilities,
and acquired Accomplishments, they will certainly prove the most excellent
ingredients out of which, Care, and Caution can be compounded.

2. It is employed hereby, that they should be endued with courage, and
braveness of spirit, without which, Knowledge and Experience will be but
insignificant words, and ineffectual sounds. Which may sufficiently appear,
from the consideration of the persons with whom they have to deal; the high
matters, about which they are conversant; the rebukes and punishments they are
subject too, from those who are above them; the hatred and violence of
inferiors, as well as the obloquies and evil speeches of the multitude:
things, which no man in the world can be able to cope withal, except he be
endued with an extraordinary spirit. Mean souls are naturally unfit for high
employments; because Cowardice will certainly betray men to base and ignoble
actions, 'twill make them afraid of righteousness both in a Legal and
Evangelical sense, because it wears a sword.

3. It Is implied, that they should be men of Vigilance, and Activity;
industrious to discover the Truth in every Cause, and willing to be guided by
it when discovered. Though Justice it self ought to be blind, yet the Ministers
thereof ought to be all eye; because the great Governor of the World, who has
styled them Gods, never made them Omniscient: and though he calls them by his
Own name, to add Veneration to their Authority; yet has he frequently made it
evident to themselves, and the world, that they are but Men, by their Failings.
It is the unparalled excellency of God that He is Omnipresent, i. e. (as the
Schools interpret it) in all places, at all times, by the same indivisible act:
and undoubtedly he expects it from all those, of whom he has said, ye are
Gods, that they should endeavor to assimilate themselves to Himself, by a
Politic Vbiquity. From whence it is evident, that such high Officers are obliged
to testify their Fidelity by their Care, their Conscience by their
Circumspection. Especially, because the lives and fortunes of their Brethren
are frequently put into their hands; and it is possible for them, without such
caution, not only to do unrighteousness in Judgment, but also to become the
veriest Cutthroats and Pick-pockets in the world.

Lastly, it is employed, that they should be endued with true Christian piety;
because that will be sure to make them have respect to the commands, both of
God, and the King: to the commands of God, for his own; to the commands of the
King, for God's sake. It will make them reverence Justice, because God is the
Author, and Archetype thereof; and twill incline them to moderate the rigor
of Justice with lenitives of Mercy, lest they should transgress the rules of
true Christian charity.

You see how necessary it is for them to be cautious, and careful, both from
the nature of the thing it self, and also from the Commands of God, and the
King. To which I may, most justly, superadde the consideration of the Age in
which we live. This calls for the height of Wisdom, the greatest Abilities, the
bravest spirits, the most eminent Activity, and the best grounded Religion.
Because the purest Church, which Christ has this day upon Earth, and the best
of Monarchies, are designed to be subverted and ruined by men of the most
different Principles, and Interests. The Jesuits abroad, and the Fanatics at
home, are closely engaged in undermining both.

The former will own no Allegiance to the King, if it be inconsistent with the
Supremacy of the Pope; nor think the vilest murders or treasons sinful, if
they will but promote their Hierarchy.

And the latter behave themselves as if they were of different interests, both
from the Church, and Kingdom, and it were chiefly incumbent upon them to
balance Prerogative with Property. They therefore study the King's Laws, that
they may be in a capacity to evade his Power; and pretend the Laws of God, to
take away the force of the Laws of the King. They are ready, upon all
occasions, to plead the liberty of the Subject, whenever it may prove a snare
to the Government; and make use of those Franchises and Liberties, which have
been given by the gracious Kings of this Realm to their once loyal Subjects, to
deprive their Successors of their Sovereign Authority. They so well understand
the inclinations of the giddy multitude, as, at most of their Popular
Elections, they design to choose such Representatives of the People, as are
best qualified to restrain the spirit of Princes: as if they were (with the
degenerating Romans) to set up the Tribunes of the People, with this only
design, that they might beard the Consular Dignity. That Is the third Truth.

God is with them in the Judgment.

It Is certain, that Omnipresence is an attribute inseparable from the Divine
nature: they that climb up into Heaven, and they that dig down into Hell; they
that take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the
Sea; and they that cover themselves with the most opacous darkness, can never
get out of the sight or company of the Almighty. And yet God has been pleased
to make the promise of his special presence an act of Grace, and that, whereby
he would encourage his most eminent Servants in the performance of his own
work. Hence we read Psalm. 82.1. God stands in the Congregation of Princes,
He is a Judge among Gods: and in the Text, He is with you in the Judgment.

God is with them, and stands by them; not as an idle Spectator, or unconcerned
Auditor, but as one who gives them their best Commission, will countenance,
maintain, protect, and reward them for their lawful Acts: but will keep a
severe book of remembrance against them, if ever they force Judgment, which
should run as as a pure and mighty stream, to spring up as Hos. 10.4.
hemlock, or Amos 5.7.
wormwood.

My Lords, I don't question, but that You are prepared, and resolved to obey
the King; and to judge, not for man, but for the Lord: and therefore I have
good warrant to declare, that God will be with you in the Judgment.

For which, and all other gracious vouchsafements to Mankind, let us render
unto the Glorious and Eternal Trinity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, the only Wise and True God, all Honor, Obedience, and Adoration,
now, and for ever. Amen.

THE END
ERRATA.
Page 2. l. 7. read making. p. 5. l. 10. r. for the Lord. l. 12. r. the Jews.
p. 7. l. 5. r. whosoever. p. 10. l. 2. r. viz. the fear of p. 18. l. 21. r.
men's p. 21. l. 2. r. that Allegiance p. 23. l. 1. r. with them. p. 31. l. 11.
r. Text we read.


