THE WORKS OF GEBER, The Most Famous ARABIAN PRINCE AND PHILOSOPHER

Faithfully Englished By Richard Russel a Lover of Chemistry.

-- Ait iste Libellus:
Magnus quidem non sum, sed inest mihi maxima Virtus.
Licensed

Jan. 28 1677/8 To. L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for N. E. by Thomas James Mathematical Printer to the Kings
most Excellent Majesty, at the Printing-press in Mincing-lane; and are to be
sold by Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St Paul's Churchyard; and other
Booksellers. 1678.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
THe Eminency and Worth of this Author need no Apology, his Works sufficiently
commend Him, who in his Writings, as the present Book clearly shows, used no
Tautologies, Circumlocutions, or fruitless Ambages; but (like a good Master,
intending to inform, not to perplex the Minds of his Disciples) so succinctly
speaks of all Things, as is rarely seen in any other Author. The End, why he
Writ in his Time, was as himself declares, not only to Teach and Direct the
Ingenious, but also to Detect and Enervate the fallacious Descriptions of
Sophisters, whom he pronounces Cursed; saying, he should be accursed also, did
he not discover their Frauds. For a like End was I incited, by a worthy Friend
of mine, to this Translation; that the WORKS of so Ancient and Venerable an
Author (comprising so many and various most needful Preparations) might now at
length be published in the English Tongue; there being at this very Day so many
Persons publicly exposing their Chemical Preparations (as they call them)
which, if such as they are presented to be, or but in some competent measure
correspondent to the specious Titles, with which they are insignized, would
rather commend their Authors, than need to be commended by them. For Chemistry
is a true and real Art, and (when handled by prudent Artists) produces true
and real Effects.

But alas! it is by Experience found,
Our empty Vessels give the greatest sound.
And (which is more to be bewailed) Men that have scarcely seen the First
Entrances of Chemistry, or at most are but Tyro's in that most necessary
(though much abused) Science; account themselves sufficiently accomplished, if
Confident enough to boast after the Rate of Masters; yea, more than good
Masters in that Art dare to do. For every conscientious Man, exercised in
Chemistry, sees Cause enough to lay his Hand upon his Mouth; and yet neglects
not to do what Good he can, without blowing a Trumpet. He that does otherwise,
may very well be suspected: for (according to the usual Proverb) Good Wine
needs no Bush; and every well performed Work commends the Worker thereof. It is
recorded of the famous Painter Apelles, that he, having finished any eminent
Piece, did always expose it to public View, before he durst commend it (as a
perfect Work) to him for whom he made the same. His End in this, as Histories
amply relate, was that he might, from the Mouths of others, hear himself
praised, or dispraised; and thence be able (prudently conjecturing by what he
heard) to correct and amend his own Errors. If Physicians of our Time did, in
imitation of Apelles, expose their Works for the same End, and would upon just
and undeniable Censures, endeavor to amend their Errors; their so frequent
Publications would be highly commendable; but it is otherwise. Yet Charity
forbids me to impute this to Avarice, Fraud, or Ambition (Vices abominable in
all Men, especially in Physicians) but rather to other less injurious Causes,
as Ignorance, and want of certain Experience; in amending which, this Book may
prove very serviceable: because the Ignorant and Inexpert may possibly be
informed thereby, and thence learn true Experiences, by which (if Industrious)
they will in Time be able to Correct their own Errors, as well as if they had
used the Policy of Apelles. But of Covetous; Deceitful, and Ambitious Men,
there is no such Hope. Therefore omitting these, I doubt not, but that to every
Man studious of Verity, the present Work will be highly acceptable: because
herein he will find Instructions sufficient to inform his Judgment, in
preparing Medicines truly Chemical. For this Author (herein excelling others)
has clearly and heartily, though briefly, taught the Methods of purifying all
Metals, Minerals, Salts, Allomes, etc. In which true and perfect Purification,
the Virtue of each Subject (its Vice and Impurity being separated) is rendered
ten-fold more efficacious in Medicinal Use, than the same Subject (without such
Preparation preceding) could have been; as Experience daily proves. But if any
Man object and say, This Author taught these Purifications only in Order to the
great Stone of Philosophers; to him I thus answer: All Philosophers (Ancient
and Modern) unanimously affirm, that Impurity tends to Corruption and Death;
but Purity to Incorruption and Life. Therefore, if they, to amend imperfect
Metals, viz. To heal the Diseases of them, so strictly enjoined the Separation
of Heterogeneals, and Purification of Things Homogenal; how much more* every
faithful Physician ought to labor in purifying the Subjects of Medicine for
the Humane Body (more precious than all Metals) of which these here specified
are no mean Part, I leave to the Judgment of all: And having premised these,
crave the Readers Patience in perusal of the following:

When I had perfected this Translation of GEBER, my Purpose was to have
concealed my Name; as I did in the Translation of Royal and Practical Chemistry
(which being my first Essay in that kind of Learning, I must confess were not
so well performed, as I intend that Book shall be, if a Second Impression
thereof be made in my Time) of Beguinus his Tyrocinium, of Helvetius his Golden
Calf, all made public some years since; together with that of the Triumphant
Chariot of Antimony, with Kirkringius his Notes thereon (though not the small
Piece of Synesius to it annexed) lately published: but finding some too ready,
as the saying is, to thrust their Sickle into another Man's Harvest, I am now at
length enforced here to subjoyn my Name; being resolved henceforth so to do,
whenever any other of the Works (through the favor of God) by me
stranslated, shall come to be exposed to public View. For, besides the large
Volume of the Works of Raymund Lully, now ready for the Press (not to mention
other Pieces on various Subjects, of which I have translated many for private
Persons) I have Englished the greatest Part of the Works of Paracelsus; having
completed two of his three Volumes, and about half the Third: which I intend
to finish (if GOD permit) as Time, Opportunity, or Encouragement shall be
offered. Reader, I could here mention more; but considering that no Man has
any thing that he has not received; and timely remembering that Poetical
Admonition, -- Nullum decet esse superbum;
Qui sic inflatur, deserit omne Bonum:


I here conclude, subscribing my self (as I always desire to be) your real
Friend

May 3d. 1678, From my House at the Star in New Market in Wapping, near the
Dock. Richard Russell.

The Contents.
I. Of the Investigation or Search of Perfection.
OF Things perfecting and corrupting Metallic Bodies Chap. 1. Page 3. Of the
Stone of Philosophers, etc. Chap. 2. Page 5. Of Things helping Preparation, and
of their Cleansing Chap. 3. Page 6. Of Preparing and Meliorating Bodies, in
General Chap. 4. Page 9. Of the Preparation of Tin in Special Chap. 5. Page 21.
Of the Preparation of Saturn or Lead Chap. 6. Page 14. Of the Preparation of
Copper Chap. 7. Page 15. Of the Preparation of Iron Chap. 8. Page 16 Of the
Preparation of Gold Chap. 9 Page 17. Of the Preparation of Silver Chap. 10.
Page 17. Of the Properties of the greater Elixir Chap. 11. Page 18. The
Conclusion of this Book Page 20.
II. Of the Sum of Perfection, Or of the Perfect Magistery. The First Book.
The Preface, dividing this Book into Four Parts. Page 22. Part I.
Of the Division of Impediments Chap. 1. Page 25. Of the Impediments of this
Work, from the part of the Body of the Artificer Chap. 2. Page 26. Of
Impediments from the Part of the Artists Soul, Chap. 3. Page 27. Of External
Impediments, hindering the Work of this Art Chap. 4. Page 29. The Conclusion of
the First Part, containing the Qualifications of the Artificer Chap. 5. Page
30.
Part 2.
OF the true Reasons of Men simply denying Art Chap. 1. Page 34. That it is not
possible, etc. that Art can imitate Nature in all Differencies of Properties of
Actions Chap. 2. Page 39. A Confutation of the Reasons of Men simply denying
Art Chap. 3. Page 42. Diverse Opinions of those who suppose the Art to be Chap.
4. Page 49. Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Sulphur Chap. 5.
Page 51. Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Arsnick Chap. 6.
Page 53. Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Argentvive, etc.
Chap. 7. Page 54. Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Spirits to
be fixed with Bodies, etc. Chap. 8. Page 55. Of the Reasons of Men denying the
Art supposed in White Lead or Tin, etc. Chap. 9. Page 57. Of the Reasons of Men
denying the Art supposed in Black Lead, or Saturn Chap. 10. Page 59. Of the
Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in the Mixtion of hard Bodies, etc.
Chap. 11. Page 60. Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in the
Mixtion of hard Bodies, etc. Chap. 12. Page 61. Of the Reasons of Men denying
the Art supposed in Extraction of the Soul, Chap. 13. Page 62. Of the Reasons
of Men denying the Art supposed in Glass and Gems, etc. Chap. 14. Page 62. Of
the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Middle Minerals, Vegetables,
etc. Chap. 15. Page 63.
Part. 3.
Of the Natural Principles of Metallic Bodies, according to the Opinions, etc.
Chap. 1. Page 65. Of the Natural Principles of Metals, according to the Opinion
of Modern Philosophers, etc. Chap. 2. Page 66. The Division of what are to be
spoken of Sulphur, Arsnick, and Argentvive, etc. Chap. 3. Page 69. Of Sulphur
Chap. 4. Page 69. Of Arsnick Chap. 5. Page 72. Of Argentvive, or Mercury Chap.
6. Page 73. Of the Effects of the Principles of Nature, which are Metallic
Bodies Chap. 7. Page 74. Of Sol, or Gold Chap. 8. Page 75. Of Luna or Silver
Chap. 9. Page 77. Of Saturn, or Lead Chap. 10. Page 78. Of Jupiter, or Tin
Chap. 11. Page 79. Of Venus, or Copper Chap. 12. Page 80. Of Mars, or Iron
Chap. 13. Page 81.
Part. 4.
OF the Division of Things to be spoken, with an Insinuation of Perfection,
etc. Chap. 1. Page 83. Of Sublimation, why invented Chap. 2. 86. What
Sublimation is, and of the Degrees of Fire, etc. Chap. 3. Page 88. Of the Feces
of Metallic Bodies to be added to Spirits in their Sublimation, etc. Chap. 4.
Page 91. Of Covering the Fire in Sublimation, Chap. 5. Page 93. Of Errors about
the Quantity of Feces, and the Disposition of the Furnace, etc. Chap. 6. Page
95. Of what Matter and Form the Sublimatory is to be made Chap. 7. Page 99. Of
Sublimation of Mercury, or Argentv. Chap. 8. Page 102. Of Sublimation of
Marchasite Chap. 9. Page 105. Of the Vessel for subliming Marchasite Chap. 10.
Page 106. Of Sublimation of Magnesia and Tut. Chap. 11. Page 110. Of
Descension, and the way of purifying by Pastils Chap. 12. Page 112. Of
Distillation, its Causes and Kinds, etc. Chap. 13. Page 114. Of Calcination of
Bodies and Spirits: its Causes, etc. Chap. 14. Page 120. Of Solution and its
Cause Chap. 15. Page 126. Of Coagulation and its Causes; diverse ways of
Coagulating Mercury. etc. Chap. 16. Page 129. Of Fixation, and its Cause, etc.
Chap. 17. Page 136. Of Ceration, and its Cause Chap. 18. Page 139.

III. Of the Sum of Perfection, or of the Perfect Magistery. The Second Book.
The Preface dividing the Book into Three Parts. Page 141. Part 1.
THat the Knowledge of Perfection of this Art depends on the Knowledge of the
Nature of Spirits, and Bodies, etc. Chap. 1. Page 142. Of the Nature of Sulphur
and Arsnick Chap. 2. Page 143. Of the Nature of Mercury, or Argentv. Chap. 3.
Page 145. Of the Nature of Marchasite, etc. Chap. 4. Page 148. Of the Nature of
Sol, or Gold Chap. 5. Page 150. Of the Nature of Luna, or Silver Chap. 6. Page
153. Of the Nature of Mars or Iron. Also of the Effects of Sulphur and Mercury,
etc. Chap. 7. Page 154. Of the Nature of Venus or Copper Chap. 8. Page 157. Of
the Nature of Jupiter, or Tin Chap. 9. Page 162. Of the Nature of Saturn, or
Lead Chap. 10. Page 166.
Part 2.
THat of every imperfect Body, and also of Agentvive, the Medicine must
necessarily be twofold, viz. one for the White, the other for the Red Chap. 1.
Page 171. That every of the Imperfect Bodies ought to have its peculiar
Preparation Chap. 2. Page 174. That the Defect of Imperfect Metals ought to be
supplied by Medicine, but their Superfluity removed by Preparation Chap. 3.
Page 176. Of the Preparation of Saturn and Jupiter Chap. 4. Page 179. Of the
Preparation of Venus Chap. 5. Page 183. Of the Preparation of Mars Chap. 6.
Page 184. Of the Mundification or Cleansing of Argentvive Chap. 7. Page 186.
That five different Properties of Perfection necessarily constitute a most
perfect Medicine, etc. Chap. 8. Page 187: Of Preparations to be adhibited to
the Medicine, that it may acquire the due Differencies of Properties Chap. 9.
Page 189. Of the differences of Medicines, etc. Chap. 10. Page 191. Of the
Medicine of the First Order dealbating Venus. Chap. 11. Page 193. Of Medicines
dealbating Mars Chap. 12. Page 197. Of Medicines citrinating (or coloring)
Luna 13. Page 198. Of the difference of the Properties of Medicines of the
Second Order Chap. 14. Page 202. Of a Medicine Lunar and Solar, for imperfect
Bodies Chap. 15. Page 204. Of the Medicine coagulating Argentv. Chap. 16. Page
207. How Ingress is procured in Medicines by Artifice Chap. 17. Page 209. Of
Medicines of the Third Order in General Chap. 18. Page 210. Of the Lunar
Medicine of the Third Ord. Chap. 19. Page 212. Of the Solar Medicine of the
Third Ord. Chap. 20. Page 213
Part 3.
THe Division of what follows Chap. 1. Page 216. Of Cineritium, why some Bodies
abide in it, others not Chap. 2. Page 217. Of the Trial of the Cineritium ( or
Cupel) how it is to be compounded and used Chap. 3. Page 220. Of Cement, why
some Bodies sustain it more, and others less Chap. 4. Page 222. Of the Examen
of Cement, how it is to be compounded and exercised Chap. 5. Page 224. Of
Ignition Chap. 6. Page 226. Of Fusion, or Melting. Chap. 7. Page 227. Of the
Exposition of Bodies over the Vapors of Acute Things Chap. 8. Page 229. Of the
Extinction of Bodies Fire-hot Chap. 9. Page 231: Of the Admixtion of Burning
Sulphur Chap. 10. Page 232. Of Calcination and Reduction Chap. 11. Page 234. Of
the easy Susception of Argentvive Chap. 12. Page 235. A Recapitulation of the
whole Art Chap. 13. Page 235. What Order the Author has observed in treating
of the aforesaid Chap. 14. Page 237.

IV. Of the Invention of Verity, or Perfection.
OF the six Properties of Things from which the Medicine is extracted Chap. 1.
Page 239. Of the seven Properties of the Medicine Chap. 2. Page 241. Of the
Division of the Book into four Particles Chap. 3. Page 243. The First Particle.
Of the Preparation of Middle Minerals Chap. 4: Page 245.
The Second Particle.
Of the Mundification, or Cleansing of Spirits Chap. 5. Page 249. Of the
Preparation of Sulphur Chap. 6. Page 250. Of the Preparation of Arsnick Chap.
7. Page 251. Of the Preparation of Argentvive Chap. 8. Page 252. Of the
Preparation of Marchasite Chap. 9. Page 253. Of the Preparation of Tutia, etc.
Chap. 10. Page 253.
The Third Particle.
How Bodies ought to be prepared Chap. 11. Page 254. Of the Preparation of
Saturn Chap. 12. Page 255. Of the Preparation of Jupiter Chap. 13. Page 255. Of
the Preparation of Mars Chap. 14. Page 258. Of the Preparation of Venus Chap.
15 Page 258.
The Fourth Particle.
Of Medicines Chap. 16. Page 260. Of White Medicines for Jupiter, etc. Chap 17.
Page 261. Of Solar Medicines for Jupiter, etc. Chap. 18. Page 263. Of White
Medicines for Venus, etc. Chap. 19. Page 264. Of Red Medicines for Venus and
Mars Chap. 20. Page 265. Of a Medicine of the Third Order, for the White Chap.
21. Page 266. Of a Solar Medicine of the Third Order Chap. 22. Page 268. Of
Solutive Waters, and Incerative Oils Chap. 23. Page 269.

V. Of Furnaces, etc. with a Recapitulation of the Authors Experiments.
The Preface, dividing the Book into Three Parts. Page 271. Part 1.
Of the Calcinatory Furnace Chap. 1. Page 273 Of the Sublimatory Furnace Chap.
2. Page 274. Of the Distillatory Furnace Chap. 3. Page 275. Of the Descensory
Chap. 4. Page 275. Of the Melting Furnace Chap. 5. Page 276. Of the Dissolving
Furnace Chap. 6. Page 276. Of the Fixatory Furnace, or Athanor Chap. 7. Page
277.
Part. 2.
OF the Preparation of Middle Mineral Spirits Chap. 8. Page 278. Of the
Calcination of Jupit. and Saturn Chap. 9. Page 279. Of the Calcination of Venus
and Mars Chap. 10. Page 280. Of the Calcination of Middle Minerals Chap. 11.
Page 280. Of the Ablutions of Calxes, etc. Chap. 12. Page 281. Of the
Inceration of Calxes, etc. Chap. 13. Page 281. Of the Reduction of Calxes Chap.
14. Page 282. Of the Solutions of Bodies prepared, etc. Chap. 15. Page 283.
Part 3.
Of the Way of Perfecting, according to the Third Order Chap. 16. Page 286. Of
the Regimen of Jupiter and Saturn Chap. 17: Page 288. Of the Regimen of Venus
and Saturn Chap. 18. Page 289. Of the Regimen of Mars Chap. 19. Page 290. Of
the Regimen of Luna Chap. 20. Page 290. Of the Regimen of Mercury Chap. 21.
Page 291. Of the Ferment of Luna for the White Chap. 22. Page 292. Of the
Ferment of Sol for the Red Chap. 23. Page 293. Of Ferment of Ferment upon
Mercury Chap. 24. Page 293. A Recapitulation of the Experiments of the Author
Chap. 25. Page 295. Of Mercurial Sports Chap. 26. Page 299. Of the Citrination
or Coloring of Luna Chap. 27. Page 300.

GEBER, The most Experienced Arabian Prince and Philosopher, OF THE
Investigation or Search OF PERFECTION.
The PREFACE of the AUTHOR, Showing the Reasons why he writ this BOOK.
WE with continued and frequent diligence of Labor, and great Study
equivalent, not without most profound and serious thoughts, etc. expose
publicly to your view, the Investigation of this most noble Science, that the
subsequent Volumns may the better and more clearly be understood by you; and
that being understood, searched into, and found* they may the more easily and
readily be brought to effect. And because, to find out the Reason of Art, is
another thing, than to attempt and prove the subtilties and intrigues of these
things; until by operating, searching, and experiencing, the intended
compleatment be attained: therefore, whatsoever we found out by things declared
(I mean, of things perfecting Art) we have here written according to the
intention of our Mind* Yet, let no man think that we composed this
Investigation before our Book, which is Entitled, The Sum of the Perfection of
the Magistery; in which, whatsoever we saw and handled, we have completely
described, according to the Order of Science; with Experience and certain
Knowledge, which we acquired by our Scrutiny, exercised about the Effects of
Natural and Mineral Things, and the diverse Transmutations apparent in the
Work. And we have explained our Science before composed, with this Comment of
Investigation, which we purposely writ for that end: therefore, by right, this
must precede that, seeing by this Book I am to make Enquiry about the Thing
Perfecting.

CHAP. I.
Of Things Perfecting and Corrupting Metallic Bodies.

THerefore, seeing this Science treats of the Imperfect Bodies of Minerals, and
teaches how to perfect them; we in the first place consider two Things, viz.
Imperfection and Perfection. About these two our Intention is occupied, and of
them we purpose to treat. We compose this Book of Things perfecting and
corrupting (according as we have found by experience) because Contraries set
near each other, are the more manifest.

The Thing which perfects in Minerals, is the substance of Argentvive and
Sulphur proportionably commixt, by long and temperate decoction in the Bowels
of clean, inspissate, and fixed Earth (with conservation of its Radical
Humidity not corrupting) and brought to a solid fusible Substance, with due
Ignition, and rendered Malleable. By the Definition of this Nature perfecting,
we may more easily come to the Knowledge of the Thing corrupting. And this is
that which is to be understood in a contrary Sense, viz. the pure substance of
Sulphur and Argentvive, without due Proportion commixed, or not sufficiently
decocted in the Bowels of unclean, not rightly inspissate nor fixed Earth,
having a Combustible and Corrupting Humidity, and being of a rare and porous
Substance; or having Fusion without due Ignition, or no Fusion, and not
sufficiently Malleable.

The first Definition I find intruded in these two Bodies, viz. in Sol and
Luna, according to the Perfection of each: but the second in these four, viz.
Tin, Lead, Copper and Iron, according to the Imperfection of each. And because
these Imperfect Bodies are not reducible to Sanity and Perfection, unless the
contrary be operated in them; that is, the Manifest be made Occult, and the
Occult be made Manfest: which Operation, or Contrariation, is made by
Preparation, therefore they must be prepared, Superfluities in them removed,
and what is wanting supplied; and so the known Perfection inserted in them. But
Perfect Bodies need not this preparation; yet they need such Preparation, as
that, by which their Parts may be more Subtiliated, and they reduced from their
Corporality to a fixed Spirituality. The intention of which is, of them to make
a Spiritual fixed Body, that is, much more attenuated and subtiliated than it
was before. Of all these Preparations (according to our Investigation) we shall
sufficiently treat in their proper Place in this Book. What shall be (as is
hereafter mentioned) sufficiently prepared, will be fit to make the White or
great Red Elixir with.

CHAP. II.
Of the Stone of Philosophers, that it is one only, for the White, and for the
Red, and from what Things it is extracted. And of the Possibility and Way of
Perfection.

WE find Modern Artists to describe to us one only Stone, both for the White
and for the Red; which we grant to be true: for in every Elixir, that is
prepared, White or Red, there is no other Thing than Argentvive and Sulphur, of
which, one cannot act, nor be, without the other: Therefore it is called, by
Philosophers, one Stone, although it is extracted from many Bodies or Things.
For it would be a foolish and vain thing to think to extract the same from a
Thing, in which it is not, as some infatuated Men have conceited; for it never
was the Intention of Philosophers: yet they speak many things by similitude.
And because all Metallic Bodies are compounded of Argentvive and Sulphur, pure
or impure, by accident, and not innate in their first Nature; therefore, by
convenient Preparation, it is possible to take away such Impurity. For the
Expoliation of Accidents is not impossible: therefore, the end of Preparation
is, to take away Superfluity, and supply the Deficiency in Perfect Bodies. But
Preparation is diversified according to the Diversity of things indigent. For
experience has taught us diverse ways of acting, viz. Calcination,
Sublimation, Descension, Solution, Distillation, Coagulation, Fixation and
Inceration: All which we sufficiently declare in the Sum of the Perfection of
the Magistery. For these are Works helpful in Preparation.

CHAP. III.
Of Things helping the Preparation, and of their Cleansing.

THings helping Preparation, are these, viz. all kinds of Salt, Alloms,
Atraments; also Glass, Borax, and what are of this Nature, and most sharp
Vinegar and Fire.

Cleansing of Common Salt.
Common Salt is cleansed thus: First burn it, and cast it combust into hot
Water to be dissolved; filter the Solution, which congeal by gentle Fire.
Calcine the Congelate for a Day and Night in Moderate Fire, and keep it for use.

Cleansing of Salt-Alkali.
Salt-Alkali is so cleansed as Common-Salt, and it is Sagimen Vitri. First it
is ground, and then the whole dissolved in Common Water hot: afterward Filtred,
Congealed, and Calcined with moderate Fire.

Cleansing of Salt-Gem.
First it is ground, and then proceeded with as with Common-Salt.

Cleansing of Salarmoniac.
Grind it first with the Preparation of Common-Salt cleansed; then let it be
sublimed in an high Body and Head, until it all ascend pure. Afterward
dissolved it upon a Porphiry in the open Air, if you would of it make Water; or
keep the Sublimate sufficiently pure.

Cleansing of other Salts.
There are diverse other kinds of Salt found, which are Prepared and Cleansed,
as above is said.

Cleansing of Alloms.
First of Roch-Allom: Many Things may be Prepared by it, without its Cleansing;
yet it may be Cleansed thus: Put it in an Alembeck, and extract its whole
Humidity, which is of great avail in this Art. The Feces remaining in the
Bottom, may be dissolved upon a Porphiry-Stone, in some Humid Place, or in
Water, which may be thence extracted, and so reserved clean.

Cleansing of Jamenous Allom.
Jamenous Allom is Prepared as the former: but in this Art it is of greater
virtue. There are found yet many other Alloms, all which are Prepared and
Cleansed as above is said.

Cleansing of Atraments.
First of Black Atrament, which is thus Cleansed: First, It must be dissolved
in clean Vinegar, afterward Distilled and Coagulated. Or let it be first
Distilled by Alembeck, and all its Humidity extracted. The Feces Calcined in
this Distillation, must be resolved upon a Porphiry, or dissolved in their own
Water, and then Coagulated. Or that Water (if the Artist so wills) reserved.

Cleansing of Copperas.
Copperas or Vitriol, is Cleansed as Black Atrament; yet Black Atrament has
greater Earthiness than the Green. There are diverse Atraments, and they are
found of diverse Color, which are all Cleansed as the aforesaid.

Of Glass and Boraces.
Glass and Boraces, if made in a due manner, need not Preparation.

The Cleansing of most sharp Vinegars.
Vinegars, of what kind soever, acute and harsh, are Cleansed by Subtiliation;
and their Virtue, or Effect, is Meliorated by Distillation. Of the Cleansing
and Purifying of all the aforesaid, we have now sufficiently spoken: with which
the Imperfect Bodies may be Prepared, Purified, Meliorated, and Subtiliated, by
Fire always duly Mediating.

CHAP. IV.
Of Preparation and Melioration of Bodies in General.

THEY are Prepared and Depurated by the aforesaid, according to the Intention
of Fire in this manner: These imperfect Bodies have superfluous Humidities, and
a combustible Sulphureity, with Blackness generated in them, and corrupting
them: also they have in them an Unclean, Feculent, Combustible, and very Gross
Earthiness, impeding Ingress and Fusion. These, and such as these, are
superfluous in the aforesaid Bodies, which are found to be in them, by our
Experience, and certain and ingenious Investigation. And because these
Superfluities have access to these Bodies accidentally, and not radically; and
the Supoliation of Accidentals is possible; therefore it behooves us, with
Artificial Fire, by the aforesaid cleansed Things, to remove all Superfluous
Accidents, the only Radical Substance of Argentvive and Sulphur remaining.
-This is the entire Preparation, and perfect Depuration of Imperfect Bodies.
The Melioration, Purification and Subtiliation of these (the pure Substance
remaining) are effected many ways, according as the Elixir requires.

Therefore, the way of Preparing and Purifying in General, is this: First, With
Fire proportional, the whole Superfluous and Corrupt Humidity in their Essence
must be elevated; also their subtle and burning Superfluity removed: and this
by Calcination. Afterward, the whole Corrupt Substance of their Superfluous
burning Humidity and Blackness remaining in their Calx, must be corroded with
those aforesaid Cleansed, Corrosive, Acute, or Harsh Things, until the Calx be
White or Red (or colored according to the Nature and Property of the Body) and
clean and pure from all Superfluity or Corruption. These Calxes must be
Cleansed with these Corrosives, by Grinding, Imbibing and Washing. Afterward,
the whole unclean Earthiness, and Combustible and Gross Feculency must be taken
away, and deposited with the aforsaid Cleansed or Pure Things, not having
Metallic Fusion; they being commixed, and well ground together with the
aforesaid Calx, depurated in the aforesaid manner. For these, in the Fusion or
Reduction of the Calx, will retain with themselves the aforesaid Gross and
Unclean Earthiness, the Body remaining pure, Cleansed from all Corrupting
Superfluity; and this by Descending.

The way of Meliorating and Subtiliating the pure Substance of these, is in
General this: First, this Purged and Reduced Body is again Calcined with Fire;
and this by the Mundative helps aforesaid: and then, with such of these as are
Solutive it must be dissolved. For this Water is our Stone, and Argentvive of
Argentvive, and Sulphur of Sulphur, abstracted from the Spiritual Body, and
Subtiliated or Attenuated; which may be Meliorated by comforting the Elemental
Virtues in it, with other prepared Things, that are of the kind of its own
Kind; and by augmenting the Color, Fixion, Weight, Purity, Fusion, and all
other Things which appertain to a perfect Elixir. And this is the way (by us
only found out) of the Preparation, Depuration, Subtiliation and Melioration of
Mineral Bodies in General. Now we pass to the Special or Particular Preparation
of every Imperfect Body, with all its Methods, as also of the Perfect Mineral
Bodies. And first of Jupiter.

CHAP. V.
Of the Preparation of Tin in Special.

JVpiter is manifoldly prepared, yet best in this manner: Put it in an apt
Vessel in a Furnace of Calcination, and under it make Fire sufficient for good
Fusion of the Body; stirring the Liquefied Body with an Iron Spatula full of
holes, and drawing off the Scum that rises, and again stitring the Body, in
that heat of Fire equally enduring, until on the Superficies be gathered
together a good quantity of that Scum or Powder; which take off, and again
continue stirring until the whole Body be reduced to Powder. This Powder sift,
and replace it again in the Furnace, adding Fire, not exceeding the Fire of its
Fusion, and stir it often. Keep it in this Fire of Calcination for a day
Natural, or thereabouts, until its whole Accidental and Superfluous Humidity be
abolished, with its Combustible and Corrupting Sulphur. For the Fire elevates
and consumes every Fugitive and inflamable Substance: then often well wash it
with the aforesaid, viz. with Common-Salt Cleansed, and Allom, and with
Purified and Harsh Vinegar, and dry it at the Sun, or in the Air; and then
again Grind, and Wash, and Dry: and do this time after time, until by the
acuity of the Salts, Alloms, and Vinegar, its whole Humidity, Blackness, and
Uncleanness, shall be consumed, corroded and done away. This being done, add
Glass beaten to Powder, to these aforesaid, and when you shall have impasted
the whole together, then with sufficient Fire make it flow in a Crucible with
an hole in its bottom, set within another, and the pure and clean Body will
descend, the whole earthly and feculent Substance remaining above with the
Glass, and Salts, or Alloms; for in that Body descended and reduced, is an
equal and perfect Proportion of clean Argentvive and white Sulphur not burning;
because Fire and the Corrosives have divided the whole Humidity, and fugitive,
and inflamable, and corrupting Substance and Blackness; and through that
Discensory, by the pasting with Salts, Alloms, and Glass, the whole feculent
earthy Substance is separated, the pure Substance with its Proportion remaining.

Afterward calcine this pure reduced Body again, with pure and clean
Salarmoniac, until it be in weight equal, or thereabout. When it shall be well
and perfectly calcined, then grind the whole well and long upon a
Perphiry-stone, and place it in the open Air, in a cold and humid place; or in
Glass Vessels, in a Furnace of Solution, or in Horse-dung, until the whole be
dissolved; augmenting the Salt if need be. This Water we ought to honor, for
it is what we seek for the White. These may suffice to be spoken of the
Preparation of Tin.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Preparation of Saturn.

LEad is thus prepared, Set it in a like Furnace of Calcination, stirring it,
while in flux, as you did the Tin, until it be converted to a most fine Powder:
Sift this, and again set it in the Fire of its Calcination, as aforesaid, until
its Fugitive and Inflamable Substance be abolished. Afterward take out your
red Calx, which imbibe and grind often, with Common Salt cleansed, and Atrament
purified, and very harsh Vinegar. For the Red you must use these, as you did
for the White, with Common Salt, Jamenous Allom, and Vinegar: Also as of Tin is
said, your Matter must be often imbibed, dried, and ground, until by benefit of
the aforesaid, this said uncleanness be totally removed: then mix Glass with
these aforesaid, and as you did with the Tin cause the pure Body to descend,
that descending it may be reduced. Again, Calcine it with pure Salarmoniac (as
of Jupiter is said) and most subtily grind and dissolve it by the way
aforesaid. For that is the Water of Argentvive and Sulphur proportionally made,
which we use in Composition of the Red Elixir. These of the the Preparation of
Saturn, may suffice.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Preparation of Venus.

VEnus or Copper, is this way prepared: Make a Lay of Common Salt well cleansed
in a Crucible, and upon that put a piece of Copper Plate, and over that a Lay
of Salt, and then more of the Plate; and so continually, until the Vessel be
full: which being covered and firmly luted, place in a Furnace of Calcination,
for one day Natural; then take it out and separate and scrape off what shall be
Calcined; and again Calcine the Plates with New Salt, as before, repeating the
Calcination so often, as until all the Plates shall be consumed, and corroded
by the benefit of the Salt and Fire: for the Salt corrodes the superfluous
Humidity and Combustible Sulphurcity, and the Fire elevates the Fugitive and
Inflamable Substance with due Proportion. Grind this calcined matter to a most
subtle Powder, and wash it with Vinegar; until the Water come from is free
from Blackness. Another time imbibe it with new Salt and Vinegar, and Grind,
and after Contrition (or Grinding) put it in a Calcining Furnace, in an open
Vessel, and let it stand there three days Natural; then take it out and Grind
it very well and subtily, and well and long wash it with Vinegar, until it
shall be cleansed and purged from all Uncleanness. This being done, dry it well
in the Sun, then add to it half its weight of Salarmoniac, well and long
Grinding, until it be an impulpable Substance. Then expose it to the open Air,
or set it in Horse-dung to be dissolved, until whatsoever is there subtle
shall be dissolved; anew adding clean Salarmoniac, if need shall be, until the
whole be made Water. Honor this Water, which we name the Water of fixed
Sulphur, with which the Elixir is tinged to Infinity. These of the Preparation
of Venus.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preparation of Mars.

MArs or Iron, is best prepared thus: Let it be Calcined as Venus, with Common
Salt cleansed, and let it be washed with pure Vinegar; being washed, dry it in
the Sun, and when dried, grind and imbibe it with new Salt and Vinegar, and
then put it in the same Furnace, as of Venus is said, for three days. Honor
this Solution, viz. The Water of fixed Sulphur, wonderfully augmenting the
Color of the Elixir. These may suffice to be spoken of the Preparation of
Imperfect Bodies.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Preparation of Sol.

PErfect Bodies need not Preparation, in relation to their further Perfection,
being perfect; but that they may be more subtiliated, and attenuated, we
adhibit this Preparation to them:

Sol or Gold beaten into thin Plates, and with them and Common Salt very well
prepared, make Lay upon Lay in a Vessel of Calcination, which set into a
Furnace and Calcine well for three days, until the whole be subtily Calcined;
then take it out, grind it well, wash it with Vinegar, and dry it in the Sun,
afterward grind it well with half its weight of cleansed Salarmoniac; then set
it to be dissolved, until the whole (by the benefit of Common Salt and
Ammoniac) be dissolved into a most clear Water. This is the precious Ferment
for the Red Elixir, and the true Body made Spiritual.

CHAP. X.
Of the Preparation of Luna.

LVna or Silver, is subtiliated and attenuated and reduced to Spirituality, in
manner as above is said of Sol. Therefore in all and every part of the Work, do
the same in its Subtiliation, as you did with the Gold. And this Water of Luna
dissolved, is the Ferment for the White Elixir, made Spiritual.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Properties of the Greater Elixir.

WE have now sufficiently determinated the Preparation and Subtiliation of
perfect Bodies, that every Discreet Operator may be enabled to attain his
Intention. Therefore let him attend to the Properties and Ways of Action of the
Composition of the Greater Elixir: For we endeavor to make one Substance, yet
compounded and composed of many; so permanently fixed, that being put upon the
Fire, the Fire cannot injure; and that it may be mixed with Metals in Flux, and
flow with them, and enter with that which in them is of an ingressible
Substance, and be permixed with that, which in them is of a permixable
Substance; and be consolidated with that, which in them is of a consolidate
Substance; and be fixed with that, which in them is of a fixable Substance; and
not be burned by those Things which burn not Gold and Silver; and take away
Consolidations and Weights with due Ignition.

Yet you must not think all this can be effected by Preparation at once, in a
very short Time, as a few Days and Hours; but in respect of other Modern
Physicians, and also in respect of the Operation of Nature, the Verity of the
Work is sooner terminated this way. Whence the Philosopher says, It is a
Medicine requiring a long space of time. Wherefore I tell you, you must
patiently sustain Labor, because the work will be long; and indeed Festination
is from the Devils part: Therefore let him that has not Patience desist from
the Work, for credulity will hinder him making overmuch haste. And every
Natural Action has its determinate Measure and Time, in which it is
terminated, viz. in a greater or lesser space. For this Work Three Things are
necessary, namely, Patience, Length of Time, and Aptness of Instruments; of
which we speak to the Artificer, in the Sum of the Perfection of our Magistery,
in diverse Chapters, wherein he may find them, if he be sufficiently skilled in
our Works. In which, by manifest and open Proof we conclude, that our Stone is
no other than a Foetent (or fruitful) Spirit and Living Water, which we have
named Dry Water, by Natural Proportion cleansed, and united with such Union,
that they can never be absent each from other. To which two must also be added
a third, for abbreviating the Work; that is a perfect Body attenuated.

The Epilogue and Conclusion of the Work.
THerefore from the above premised, the Things are manifest in which the Verity
of the Work is nigh; and we have considered Things perfecting this Work, by our
true Investigation, with certain Experience, whereby we are assured, That all
the Words are true, which are now (by us only) written in our Volumns,
according as we found by Experiment and Reason, related in the same: But those
Things which by our Experience we have operated, seen with our Eyes, and
handled with our Hands, We have writ in the Sum of the Perfection of Our
Magistery. Therefore, let the Sapient Artificer studiously peruse Our Books,
collecting Our dispersed Intention, which We have described in diverse places,
that We might not expose it to Malignant and Ignorant Men; and let him prove
his Collection even unto Knowledge, Studying and Experimenting with the
Instance of Ingenious Labor, till he come to an entire Understanding of the
whole. Let the Artificer exercise himself, and find out this now (in great
Love) proposed Way of Investigation, by Our Consideration; and also acquire a
plenary Knowledge of the Verity of the perfecting and corrupting Matter and
Form. For We in Our Investigation, have considered the Matter and Form of
Perfect Bodies (from the Radix of their Commixtion, unto their Compleatment) to
be pure without any supervenient Corruption. We have also, in a contrary Sense,
considered the Substance of Bodies imperfect and perfect, to be one every
where, Viz. Argentvive and Sulphur; which are pure and clean before their
Commixtion: And by this Consideration, through Our own Exercise, We found the
Corruption of imperfect Bodies, accidentally to have access; and that this gave
a new and corrupted Form: For when We have seen imperfect Bodies by Our
Experience and Ingenuity, prepared and cleansed from all superfluous Corruption
and Fugitive Uncleanness, deliberate and terrestrial, We found them of greater
Clearness and Brightness, or Purity, than Bodies naturally perfect, not
prepared. By which Consideration We came to the perfect and complete end of
this Science, which We have perfectly described in Our Books. Therefore be
Studious in them, and you will find Our whole Science, which We have
abbreviated out of the Books of the Ancients.

The end of this Investigation.
GEBER, The Famous Arabian Prince and Philosopher, Of the Sum of PERFECTION,
OR, OF THE PERFECT MAGISTERY: Two Books.
The First Book.
The PREFACE, Touching the Way of Describing this ART, and of those that are
fit DISCIPLES.
OUr whole Science of Chemistry, which, with a diverse Compilation, out of the
Books of the Ancients, We have abbreviated in our Volumes; We here reduce into
one Sum. And what in other Books written by Us is diminished, that We have
sufficiently made up, in the Writing of this Our Book, and supplied the Defect
of them very briefly. And what was absconded by Us in one Part, that We have
made manifest in the same Part, in this our Volume; that the Compleatment of so
Excellent and Noble a Part of Philosophy, may be apparent to the Wise.

Therefore, Most dear Son, know, that in this Work the whole Operation of Our
Art is sufficiently contained in General Heads, with an Universal Discourse,
without any Diminution. And he, who shall operate according to this Book, he
shall (through God) with Joy find, that he is come to the true end of this Art.
But you must also know, that he, who in himself knows not Natural Principles,
is very remote from our Art; because he has not a true Root, whereon to found
his intention. And he, who knows his Natural Principles, and all Causes of
Minerals, yet has not acquired the true End and Proficiency of this Art; has
a more easy Access to the Principles of this Art, than he who is ignorant in
his Intention of the Method of his Work, and is but a little remote from the
Entrance of Art. But he who knows the Principles of all Things, and the Causes
of Minerals, and the Way of Generation; which consists, according to the
Intention of Nature, is indeed but a very little short of the Compleatment of
the Work; without which our Science cannot be perfect: because Art cannot
imitate Nature in all Works, but imitates her as exactly as it can. Therefore
most dear Son, We discover a Secret to you, Viz. That Artificers err in this,
namely, That they desire to imitate Nature in all Differences of the Properties
of Action. Wherefore labor studiously in Our Volumes, and endeavor to ponder
them very often in your Mind, that you may acquire the true Intention of Our
Words; because in them you may find whereon to establish your own Mind, and by
them know how to escape Errors, and in what you may be able to imitate Nature
in the Artifice of your Work.

The Division of this First Book into Four Parts.
FIrst, We intend briefly to set down all Impediments by which the Artificer is
impeded in his Work, that he cannot reach to the true End: Also, in this Part
we will speak of the Conditions of the Operator of this Art.

Secondly, We will dispute against the Ignorant and Sophisters, who by reason
of their own Ignorance and Unskillfulness in their Search after the Magistery,
and the Proficiency of this Art, damn the Art it self, and contend that it has
no being, or is not. But in this part We set down all their Reasons, and
afterward most evidently confute the same; so that it will be sufficiently
evident to Wise Men, that their Sophismes are void of Truth.

Thirdly, We intend to Discourse of Natural Principles, that are according to
the Intention of Nature; and in that Part We treat of the Way of Generation and
Mixtion of them each with other, in the Work of Nature, and of their Effects,
according to the Opinion of Ancient Philosophers.

Fourthly, We will demonstrate the Principles, which are according to the
Intention of this Our Work; in which We are able to imitate Nature, and the way
of mixing and altering, congruous to Nature, with its Causes, to be reduced to
the Intent of Our Work.

The First Part of this First Book, treating of the Impediments which hinder
the Artists from attaining to the true End of this Art.
CHAP. I.
The Division of Impediments.

THe Impediments incident to this Work, are generally two, viz. Natural
Impotency, and Defect of Necessary Expense, or Occupations and Labors. Yet We
say, Natural Impotency is Manifold; viz. Partly from the Organs of the Artist,
and partly from his Soul. From the Organ of the Artificer, it is also manifold;
for either the Organ is weak, or wholly corrupted. And it is manifold from the
Impotencies of the Soul; either because the Soul is perverted in the Organ
(having nothing of Rectitude, or Reason in it self) as the Soul of a Mad
infatuate Man; or because it is Fantastical, unduly susceptive of the Contrary
of Forms, and suddenly extensive from one Thing knowable, to its opposite, and
from one Will to its opposite likewise.

CHAP. II.
Of the Impediments of this Work, from the Part of the Body of the Artificer.

WE have already generally determined the Impediments of this Work; but now in
this Chapter, We speak in a more special manner, and more plainly declare to
you all those Impediments most fully, yet with brevity. Therefore We say, if
any Man have not his Organs complete, he cannot by himself come to the
Compleatment of this Work; no more than if he were Blind or wanted his Limbs;
because he is not helped by the Members: by meditation of which, as ministering
to Nature, this Art is perfected. And if the Body of the Artificer be weak,
sickly, and feverish; or like the Bodies of Leprous persons, whose Members
fail; or of Men at the last point of Life, or worn out with decrepit old Age;
he cannot attain to the Compleatment of the Art. Therefore the Artist is
hindered in his Intention, by these Natural Impotencies of the Body.

CHAP. III.
Of the Impediments from the part of the Artists Soul.

WE premised one Chapter, in which we absolutely and manifestly declared the
Impediments depending on the part of the Body of the Artificer: It now remains,
that we briefly declare the Impediments from the Part of his Soul, which mostly
hinder the compleatment of this Work. Therefore, we say, he that has not a
Natural Ingenuity, and Soul, searching and subtily scrutinizing Natural
Principles, the Fundamentals of Nature, and Artifices which can follow Nature,
in the properties of her Action, cannot find the true Radix of this most
precious Science. As there are many who have a stiff Neck, void of Ingenuity in
every perscrutation; and who can scarcely understand Common Speech, and
likewise with difficulty learn Works vulgarly Common. Besides these, we also
find many who have a Soul easily opinionating every Fantasy; but what they
believe they have found true, is all Fantastic, deviating from Reason, full
of Error, and remote from Natural Principles: Because their Brain, repleat with
many Fumosities, cannot receive the true Intention of Natural Things. There are
also, besides these, others who have a Soul movable, from Opinion to Opinions,
and from Will to Wills; as those, who suddenly believe a Thing, and will the
same, without any Ground at all of Reason; but a little after that, another
Thing: and do likewise believe another, and will another. And these are so
changeable, that they can scarcely accomplish the least of that they intend;
but rather leave it defective. There are likewise Others, who cannot see any
Truth in Natural Things, no more than Beasts; as if they were Witless, Madmen
and Children. There are Others also who contemn the Science, and think it not
to be; whom in like manner this Science contemns, and repels them from the End
of this most precious Work. And there are Some, who are Slaves, loving Money,
who do affirm this to be an admirable Science, but are are afraid to interposit
the Necessary Charges. Therefore, although they approve it, and according to
Reason seek the same, yet to the Experience of the Work they attain not through
Covetousness of Money: Therefore, this Our Science comes not to them. For how
can he who is ignorant, or negligent in the search of Science, attain easily to
it?

CHAP. IV.
Of External Impediments hindering the Work of this Art.

WE have to two Heads reduced all Impediments retarding the End of this Art,
which all are from Radical Principles according to the Nature of the Artificer
of this most precious Business. Therefore, it concerns Us now at length to
declare the Impediments externally supervenient, and happening by Chances and
Casualties, by which, this most Glorious Work is hindered. We see some subtle
and ingenious Men, skilled in the Works of Nature, and, as far as is possible,
followers of her, in her Principles and Works; in whom also is an Investigation
not Fantastic, in all Things beneath the Lunar Circle, that are regulated by
the Motions and Actions of Nature: Yet these, oppressed with extreme Poverty,
and lying under a Dispensation of Indigency, are compelled to postpone or
neglect this Excellent Magistery. There are many Others besides the abovesaid
Curious Men, detained by the various Cares and Solicitudes of this World,
occupying themselves wholly in Secular Business; from whom this our precious
Science withdraws her self.

Now, from the premised Heads, it is sufficiently manifest what are the
Impediments hindering Men from this Art.

CHAP. V.
The Conclusion of this First Part, containing the Qualifications of the
Artificer.

THerefore, from what is abovesaid, we conclude, that the Artificer of this
Work ought to be well skilled, and perfect in the Sciences of Natural
Philosophy: because, how much Money soever he has, and although he be endowed
with a naturally profound Wit and Desire in this Artifice, yet he cannot attain
his End, unless he has by Learning acquired Natural Philosophy. For the defect
of that which is not acquired by Natural Ingenuity, must be supplied by
Learning. Therefore the Artificer must be helped by most deep Search, and
Natural Industry. For, by reason of his Learning only, how much soever of
Science he has acquired, unless he be also helped by Natural Industry, he will
not be invited to so precious a Banquet. By his Industry, he must amend his
Error in the point, to which he will be ignorant how to apply a Remedy, if he
rely only upon his Learning: so likewise, he may remedy his Error in the
Point, from his Knowledge acquired by Natural Learning, which by Industry only
he cannot avoid; because Art is helped by Ingenuity, and Ingenuity by Art
likewise.

Also it is necessary for him to be of a constant Will in his Work, that he may
not presume to attempt this now, and that another time: because our Art
consists not, nor is perfected in a Multitude of Things. For there is one
Stone, one Medicine, in which the Magistery consists, to which we add not any
extraneous Thing, nor remove we ought; except that in Preparation we take away
Superfluities.

Also he must be diligent in the Work, persisting to the final Consummation
thereof, that he leave not off obruptly; because he can acquire neither
Knowledge nor Profit from a diminished Work; but shall rather reap Desperation
and Damage. It is also expedient he should know the Principles and Principal
Radixes of this Art, which are essential to the Work: because, he that is
ignorant of the Beginnings, cannot find the End. And we show you all those
Principles in a Discourse complete, and sufficiently clear and manifest to wise
Men, according to the exigency of this our Art. It is likewise expedient, the
Artist should be temperate and slow to Anger, least he suddenly (through the
force of Rage) spoil and destroy his Works begun.

Likewise also, he must keep his Money, and not presumptuously distribute it
vainly, least he happen not to find the Art, and be left in Miscry, and in the
Desperation of Poverty; or at least, when (by his Diligent Endeavor) he is
come near to the End of his Magistery, his Money being all spent, he be forced
to leave the End (miserable Man as he is) uncompleated. For they, who in the
Beginning prodigally waste their whole Treasure, when they draw nigh to the
End, have not wherewith to Labor. Whence such Men are twofoldly overwhelmed
with Grief; viz. because they spent their Money in Things unprofitable, and
because they lose the most noble Science which they were in quest of. For you
need not to consume your Goods, seeing you may come to the compleatment of the
Magistery for a small price* if you be not ignorant of the Principles of Art,
and rightly understand what we have declared to you. Therefore, if you waste
your Money, not minding our Admonitions, plain and manifest, written in this
Little Book; inveigh not against Us; but impute what you suffer to your own
Ignorance and Presumption. For this Science agrees not well with a Man poor and
indigent, but is rather inimical and adverse to him.

Nor should the Artist endeavor to find the Sophistical end of his Work, but
be intent on the true Compleatment only; because our Art is reserved in the
Divine Will of God, and is given to, or withheld from, whom he will; who is
Glorious, Sublime, and full of all Justice and Goodness. And perhaps, for the
punishment of your Sophistical Work, he denies you the Art, and lamentably
thrusts you into the By-Path of Error, and from your Error into perpetual
Infelicity and Misery: because he is most miserable and unhappy, to whom (after
the End of his Work and Labor) GOD denies the sight of Truth. For such a Man
is constituted in perpetual Labor, beset with all Misfortune and Infelicity,
loses the Consolation, Joy, and Delight of his whole Time, and consumes his
Life in Grief without Profit. Likewise, the Artist, when he shall be in his
Work, should study to impress in his Mind, all Signs that appear in every
Decoction, and to search out their Causes.

These are the Things necessary for an Artificer fit for our Art; but if any of
these We have declared be wanting in him, he should not approach to our Art.

The Second Part of this First Book: in which are related the Reasons of Men
denying this Art, which are afterward confuted.
A General Division of the Following.
HAving already in one Sum of this little Book comprised all the Impediments of
this Work, and given you a Doctrine sufficient for the Adherency of this Art:
it is now expedient, according to the Intention of our Purpose, to dispute
against Sophisters and Ignorant Men. First* setting down their Reasons,
according as we promised We would do from the Beginning. Lastly, We enervate
all those Reasons so, as it shall be evident to the Wise, that they contain
Nothing of Truth in them.

CHAP. I.
The true Reasons of Men simply denying this Art.

THere are diverse who deny and annihilate this Art. Some simply, others only
supposing it to be. For Some, simply affirming this Art not to be,
Sophistically strengthen their Argument, thus: They say, there are distinct
Species and Diversities of Things, because the Proportions, in Commixtion of
Elements each with other, are diverse and distinct. For an Ass* is diverse in
Species from a Man; because, in his Composition, he had a more diverse
Proportion of Elements. So also it is in all other Diversities of Things,
therefore in Minerals. Wherefore the Proportion of Things Mixable (by which is
acquired the Form and Perfection of the Thing) being unknown, how can we know
both the Mixture, and to form what is to be mixed? But we are ignorant of the
true Proportion of the Elements of the Sol and Luna, therefore we must be
ignorant how to form them.

In like manner, they also otherwise argue, condemning our Magistery. For say
they, although you should know the Proportion of Elements, yet the way of
mixing them together you know not; because Nature Procreates these in Caverns,
in Mines, and in hidden Places; therefore, seeing you know not the Way (or
Method) of their Mixtion, you are also ignorant how to make them. In like fort,
again they argue: Although you should duly know this, yet in the Action of
Mixtion you understand not how to equalize the Agent Heat, by mediation of
which the Thing is so perfected. For Nature has a certain Quantity of Heat, by
which she brings Metals to a Being, the measure of which you know not. Even so
also you know not the Differences of the Agent Causes of Nature; without which,
Nature cannot truly perfect her Intent. Therefore, these being unknown, the
whole Method of performing this Art, will be unknown likewise.

Further, they bring you Reason and Experience: This Science (say they) has
been so long sought by wise Men, that if it were possible to attain to it any
way, they would a thousand times, before now, have been Masters of it. Likewise
also, seeing Philosophers seem to treat of it in their Volumes, yet in them we
find no Truth: it is manifest and probable enough by this, that this Science is
not. So likewise, many Princes and Kings of this World, having infinite
Treasure, and abundance of Philosophers, have desired to attain to this
Science, yet could never reach to the Fruit of this most precious Art. This is
a sufficient Argument, that the Art is frivolous in its probation. Likewise,
even in weak Mixtions of Species, we cannot follow Nature. For we know not how
to form an Ass, and other like Things, the Mixtions of which are weak, and
manifest (as it were) to the Senses. Wherefore also, We must needs be much more
ignorant, how to form the Mixtion of Metals, which is most strong; and which is
also wholly hid from our Senses and Experiences. The Sign of which is the
difficulty of Resolutions of Elements from them.

So also, We see no Ox transformed into a Goat, nor any one Species transmuted
into another, or by any other Artifice so reduced. Therefore, seeing Metals
differ in themselves, can you transform one into another, according to its
Species, or of such a Species make such a Species? This seems to us
sufficiently absurd, and remote from the Verity of Natural Principles. For,
Nature perfects Metals in a thousand Years; but how can you, in your Artifice
of Transmutation, live a thousand years, seeing you are scarely able to extend
your Life to an Hundred? Yet, if to this, it be thus answered, What Nature
cannot perfect in a very long space of time, that we complete in a short space
by our Artifice: For Art can in many Things supply the Defect of Nature. We say
again, That this also is impossible, especially in Metals; seeing they are most
subtle Fumes which need temperate Decoction, that the proper Humidity in them
may, according to Equality, be Inspissate (or Thickened) and not fly from them,
and leave those Bodies deprived of all Humidity, by which they receive
Contusion, or Compression and Extension. Therefore, if you will by your
Artifice abbreviate the Time of Decoction of Nature, in Minerals and Metallic
Bodies, you must needs do this by Excess of Heat; which which will not
adequate, but rather dissipate and destroy the Humidity, dissolving it from
their Bodies. For Temperate Heat only is Spissative of Humidity, and Perfective
of Mixtion, not Heat exceeding.

So likewise, the Being and Perfection are given from the Stars, as the first
Perficients, moving the Nature of Generation and Corruption, to the Being and
not Being of Species. But this is done suddenly, and in an instant, when one or
more Stars, by their Motions, come to a determinate Site in the Firmament, by
which the Being of Perfection is given: for every One thing acquires to it self
a Being, in a moment, from a certain Site of the Stars. And there is not only
one Site, but many, and diverse each from other, as the Effects of them are
diverse. And We cannot know the Diversity and Distinction of these each from
other; because to Us they are unknown and infinite. How then will you supply
the Defect in your Work, being ignorant of the Diversity of Sites of the Stars,
according to the Motion of them? And admit you did know the certain Site of one
or more Stars, by which Perfection is given to Metals, yet you could not
perfect your Work according to your Intent. For there is no Preparation of any
Work, for receiving Form by Artifice, in an instant, but successive. Therefore
Form cannot be given to the Work, the Preparation being not made in an Instant.

Likewise also, in Things Natural, this is the Order, viz. that it is easier to
destroy them than make them. But we can scarcely destroy Gold, how then can We
presume to Fabricate the same?

Therefore, by reason of these Sophistical Reasons, and others less apparent
than these, they conceit they can destroy this Divine Art. All these are the
Persuasions of Sophisters, simply denying the Art to be. But the Reasons of
those who deny Art from Supposition, I will set down in the Subsequent,
together with the Refutations of them. Yet hence We pass to the Refutation of
the Reasons here Posited: first premising our true Intention, in order to the
Compleatment of the Work.

CHAP. II.
That it is not possible, nor ought to be supposed, that Art can imitate Nature
in all Differences of Properties of Action. And certain Instructions touching
the Principles of Metals.

THerefore We say, the Principles, about which Nature imploys her Actions, are
of a most hard and most strong Composition: and they are Sulphur and
Argentvive, as some Philosophers say. Wherefore, being of a most hard and most
strong Composition, they are also of most difficult Resolution; but this is,
that Inspissation (or Thickning) and Induration (or Hardening) of them each with
other, may be in such wise made, that they may suffer Contusion and Extension,
by Malleable Compulsion, and not be broken. By this, no other thing is meant,
than that in Commixtion of them each with other, their Viscous Humidity is
preserved by Successive Decoction in the Mine. Therefore most Dear Son, We give
you this General Rule, viz. that Inspissation of any Humidity cannot be made,
unless first, with the Humidity be made an Exaltation of the Parts most subtle;
and also with the same Humidity, Conservation of the Parts more Gross (if the
Humid in Commixtion exceed the Dry) and a true Mixtion of the Dry and Humid;
that the Humidity may be contempered by the Dryness, and the Dryness by the
Humidity, and both become one Substance, Homogeneal in its Parts, temperate
between hard and soft, and extensive in Contusion. But this is not done, unless
by Diuturnal Mixtion of the viscous Humidity, and subtle Earthiness, through
their least parts, until the Humid become the same with the Dry, and the Dry
with the Humid. And the Resolution of such a subtle Vapor is not suddenly
made, but very leisurely, and in thousands of Years; and that therefore,
because it is the Uniform Substance of the Principles of Nature. For if
Resolution of the superfluous Humidity from them, should suddenly be made
(seeing the Humid differs not from the Dry, by reason of the strong Mixtion,
which they have) the Humidity of the Mixtion would be resolved with the
Dryness, and so the whole vanish into Fume; nor could the Humidity be separated
from the Dryness in Resolution, by reason of the strong Union which they have
each with other.

Of this We see a manifest Experiment in Sublimation of Spirits; for when in
them is made a sudden Resolution by Sublimation, the Humid is not separated
from the Dry, nor the Dry from the Humid, being divided into all the Parts of
their Mixtion; but their whole Substance ascends, or little of the Mixture is
dissolved. Therefore the successive diuturnal and equal Resolution of the
subtle fumous Humidity, is the Cause of the Inspissation of Metals. But this
Inspissation We cannot also make after this manner; therefore in this We cannot
follow Nature, for We cannot imitate Nature in all Differences of Properties of
Action. Wherefore Our Intention is not to follow Nature in the Principles, nor
in the Proportion of mixable Elements, nor in the manner of mixing them each
with other; nor in the equation of inspissating (or thickning) Heat: all these
Things being to Us impossible and wholly unknown. Therefore it now remains,
that We set about refuting the aforementioned Reasons of Sophisters, through
Ignorance denying this most excellent Science.

CHAP. III.
A Confutation of the Reasons of Men simply denying Art.

If they say We know not the Proportion of Elements, and way of Mixing of them
each with other, also the Equation of Heat inspissating Metals; and many other
Causes and consequent Accidents of the Actions of Nature: We grant the same.
Yet by reason of this they do not enervate Our Divine Science, because they are
Things We are neither willing nor able to know, any more than they can reach to
Our Work. But We assume to Our selves another Principle, and another Method of
Generation of Metals, in which We are able to follow Nature.

If they say Philosophers and Princes of this World, have desired this Science
and could not find it, We answer, They lie. For some Princes (though few) and
especially the Ancient and Wise Men found in Our Time, have (as is manifest) by
their Industry, found out this Science; but would never by Word or Writing
discover the same to such Men, because they are unworthy of it. Therefore They
not seeing any to possess this Science, conceive an Error in their Minds, and
thence judge that none have found it.

Further, if they phantastically argue, affirming our Impotency, that we cannot
imitate Nature even in weak Mixtions, as in the Mixtion of an Ass or Ox;
therefore not in the strong: We answer, detecting their manifold Error, that
there is no necessity, from their Way of arguing, for Us to grant that our Art
is not; because they strengthen their Error and Fantasy, from a Like, or from
a Greater to a Less, in which is not contained Necessity, but Contingency; as
in many things. This also we show, by another way, demonstrating, that they
assign no apparent Similitude between a weak Comixtion of Animals, and the firm
and strong Composition of Minerals. For in Animals, and other Living Things, in
which the Composition is weak, there is not a perficient Proportion, nor
Miscibles of Proportion, nor Qualities of Miscibles, nor a Commixtion, which
follows from the Action and Passion of those Things each with other, which is*
from the Aggregation of those first Qualities; but there is (according to the
Opinion of Many) a Soul, which is from the Occult Recesses of Nature, as from a
Quintessence, or from the first Mover. And of this also we speak, according to
the Opinion of many, and know not the Secret thereof. Therefore, we cannot
perform such Things as these, although in them is a weak Mixtion; because we
know not how to infuse the Perfective, which is the Soul. Yet hence it follows,
that the Defect in us, that we cannot compound or make an Ox, or a Goat, is
not from the Part of the Mixtion, but through defect of Infusion of the Soul:
because, as we know how to make a weak and more weak Composition, so we also
know how to make the strong and more strong; imitating the Way and Course of
Nature according to our Artifice. In Metals is lesser Perfection than in
Animals; and the Perfection of them consists more in Proportion and
Composition, than in any thing else. Therefore, seeing in them is less
Perfection, than in the other now mentioned; we can the more freely perfect
these, but the other not so. For the most High and Glorious GOD has
distinguished Perfections each from other, in many Forms. And those Things, in
which the Composition (which is according to Nature) was weak, are by GOD
endued with greater and more noble Perfection, viz. that, which is according to
the Soul: and other things, by him made, of a more firm and more strong
Composition, as Stones and Minerals, are endued with a lesser and more ignoble
Perfection, viz. that which is from the Way of Mixtion. Therefore, hence it is
evident, that the Similitude of these Men is not good: for we are not ignorant
how to form an Ox, or a Goat, in respect of the Composition, but of the
Perfective Form. Because Perfection in an Ox, or in a Goat, is more noble and
more occult, than the Perfection consisting in a Metal.

But if they otherwise argue, That Species is not changed into Species; we
again say, They lie, as they are more accustomed, than to speak truly of these
Things: for Species is changed into Species, in this manner, viz. when the
Individual of one Species is changed into the Individual of another. We see a
Worm, both naturally, and by natural Artifice, to be turned into a Fly, which
differs from it in Species; and a Calfe strangled, to be turned into Bees;
Wheat into Darnel; and a Dog strangled, into Worms; by the putrefaction of
Ebullition. Yet we do not this, but Nature, to whom we administer, does the
same. Likewise also, we alter not Metals, but Nature; for whom, acording to
Art, we prepare that Matter: for she by her self acts, not we; yet we are her
Administrators.

And if they by another Reason thus argue, and strengthen their own
Sophisticate Opinion, saying: Nature perfects Metals in thousands of years, but
you cannot extend your Life so long. We say, that Nature acting on her own
Principles (according to the Opinion of Philosophers) perfects them in
Thousands of Years; but because We cannot follow those Principles, therefore,
whether Nature perfects these in a Thousand Years, or in more or fewer, or in a
moment, their Persuasion determines not. That We cannot imitate Nature in her
Principles, We have already in the precedent Negative Discourse sufficiently
abbreviated, declared, and in a more complete Speech, in the Subsequent will
demonstrate: Yet according to the Opinion of some Wise and Discerning Men,
Nature suddenly perfects her intended Work; viz. in one Day, or in a shorter
Time. Although this should be true, yet We cannot imitate Nature in the
Principles, as We have sufficiently proved, as a Thing most manifest. Therefore
the remainder of this Argument We confess, gra^ting the whole to be certainly
true.

And if they say from the Site of one or more Stars, Perfection is given to
Metals, which Site We know not. To this We answer, We have no necessity to know
this Site, because it is not a Species of Things Generable and Corruptible, but
from the Individuals of it is made Generation and Corruption of something,
every day; whence it is evident that the Site of Stars is every day the
Perfective and Corruptive of one or other Species of Individuals. Therefore it
is not necessary to expect the Site of Stars, yet it would be profitable; but
it is sufficient for Nature only to dispose; for she her self being Wise,
disposes her Work by the convenient Sites of moveable Bodies: Yea, Nature
cannot perform her own Motion without the Motion and Site of Things moveable.
Therefore if you dispose the Artifice of Nature, and consider whatsoever shall
fall in from the Contingents of this Magistery, the Work will be duly perfected
by Nature, under a due Site convenient for it, without any previous
Consideration thereof. For when We see a Worm deduced to a Being from a Dog, or
other putrefiable Animal, We do not immediately consider the Site of the Stars,
but the Dispositions of the surrounding Air, and other Causes (besides that)
perfective of Putrefaction. From such a Consideration We sufficiently know,
Worms to be produced into a Being, according to Nature; for Nature finds out a
Site convenient for her self, although unknown by Us.

Also, If they say Perfection is given in an Instant, and Our Preparation is
not made in an Instant: And hence conclude, That Our Magistery cannot be
completed by Artifice; therefore the Art is not: We say their Heads are
fatuate and void of Humane Reason, and they themselves more like to Beasts than
Men; for they conclude from Premises, having no Affinity with that which is
related.

Therefore this way of arguing (An Ass runs, ergo, Thou art a Goat) signifies
as much as theirs. And that for this Reason, Although Preparation be not made
in an Instant, yet that hinders not, but that the Form or Perfection may be
given in an Instant to the Matter prepared; for Preparation is not Perfection,
but a disposing to receive the Form.

Moreover, If they say that it is easier to destroy Natural Things than to make
them by Artifice, and that we can scarcely destroy Gold, and thence conclude it
to be impossible to make the same. We answer, That so saying they conclude not
of a necessity, by which We are compelled to grant Gold cannot be made: For
seeing it is difficultly destroyed, and more difficultly made; but is not
impossible that it may be made (of which difficulty We assign this Reason, viz.
Because it has a strong Composition, it must needs have a more difficult
Resolution, and therefore is difficultly destroyed;) yet hence they think the
Construction or Making of it impossible, because they know not its Artificial
Destruction, according to the Course of Nature. Perhaps they have by Trial
proved it to be of a strong Composition, but of how strong a Composition have
not tried. Thus most dear Son, We have presented to you, and refuted, the
Fantasies of Sophisters.

Therefore now it is expedient We should, according to Our Promise, pass to
those Things that are to be determined, touching the Reasons of Men denying the
Art, from Things given, or on Supposition. Which being duly examined, We shall
then come to determine those Things, which are Principles of the Intention of
Nature; the Essence of which We shall more sufficiently discourse of in the
following: But after that Determination, We shall also speak of those Things
that are the Principles of Our Magistery. Yet in treating of the First, We make
an universal, but in the following a singular Discourse of every one of the
Principles. But now for the present We first betake Our Selves to the Reasons
of Men denying the Art, from Things given; and their Refutations.

CHAP. IV.
Diverse Opinions of those who suppose the Art to be.

WE find very many Men with a diverse Intention, supposing this Art. Some
indeed affirm that this Art and Magistery is to be found in Spirits, but others
in Bodies; some in Salts, Allomes, Nitres, and Boraces, but others in all
Vegetable Things. And among all the aforesaid, some partly well and partly ill,
others altogether evil, judging of this Divine Magistery, commit that their
Judgment to Posterity. Yet from the multiplicities of their Errors, We have
gathered the Truth, and this has happened to Us, with difficult and laborious
conjectural Wariness, and long and tedious Experience, with the Interposition
of great Charges; for their Error has very often disturbed the Disposition of
Our Mind and Reason, and almost inferred Desperation. Be they therefore
blasphemed to Eternity, because they have left to their Posterity Blasphemies
and a Curse, and by their Error brought the same on Men Philosophising. For
they left not behind them after their Death, Verity, but a Diabolick
Instigation rather; and I shall be accursed if I Correct not the Errors of
those Men, and teach the Truth in this Science, which this True Art rather
requires: For this Magistery needs not a Speech occult, nor wholly manifest.
Therefore We shall treat of it in such Words as may not be hid from the Wise,
but to Men of mean Capacity it Will be most profound, and Fools shall be
absolutely debarred from Entrance therein. Which We intend here in one and the
same Discourse.

But returning to Our Purpose, We say, That those who posite this Art in
Spirits are manifoldly diverse. Some affirm, That the Stone of Philosophers must
necessarily be made of Argentvive; others of Sulphur and of Arsnick in affinity
to it, others of Marchasite; some of Tutia and Magnesia, and not a few of
Salarmoniac. And of those who say it is in Bodies, some will have it in Lead,
others in every of the other Bodies: so likewise some in Glass, some in Gems;
others in the Diversities of Salts, Allomes, Nitres, and Boraces; and some in
every kind of Vegetables: And every one of these Supposers is adverse to the
other, according to his Supposition: and being adverse to these, he believes
himself to be simply adverse to the Art. And for the most part We find either
of these Sects void of Reason.

CHAP. V.
Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Sulphur.

Some supposing to find this Art in Sulphur, employ their whole Labor in
Sulphur, and being ignorant of the Perfection of the Preparation, they leave
the Preparation it self uncompleat; for they conceit that Cleansing and
Purifying only will be a Preparation of Perfection. But this is done by
Sublimation, therefore brought to their Intention, as they think; because they
judge that Sublimation only in Sulphur is the Perfection of its Preparation;
and likewise in its Compeer, viz. Arsnick, they are induced to the like
Judgment. Therefore coming to Projection, which is with Intention of
Alteration, they see that to be burned and vanish, and not long to abide in
Bodies, and those Bodies to be left more unclean than they were before
Projection of their Matter upon them. Now seeing this Delusion in the
Compleatment of their Work, and that in a long time, whereas before they
concluded in their Minds; that this Science was to be found in Sulphur only;
but now having not therein found it, they argue it is impossible to find it in
an other Thing; wherefore, being not found in this or that, they conclude it is
no where to be found.

The Confutation of the precedent Reasons.
TO these We briefly answer and say, that in this they understand little, and
are less Wise; because they suppose Sulphur only to be the Matter of Our Stone.
If this their Supposition were true, yet in the way of Preparation they are
deceived; because they conceit Sublimation only to be sufficient: For they are
like to a Child, who from his first Nativity, unto Old Age, is shut up within
an House, not thinking the Latitude of the World to be extended beyond the
Latitude of his House, or beyond what he can with his Eyes see in the House. So
they, having not employed their Labor in many Stones, could not discern from
which Our Medicine should be extracted, and from which not; from which also
abstaining, they might spare an abundant Labor of their Hands. Therefore, what
Labor would be perfective, or not perfective, they are deservedly ignorant.
But why was their Work defective? We say, because they left the burning
Property and Flight in the Sulphur; both which do not only not perfect, but
also dissipate and destroy.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Arsnick, and their
Refutation.

BUt others judging this Stone must necessarily be found in the same, and in
its Compeer, Arsnick, and more profoundly intent on the Consummation of the
Work, do not only by a Sublimation cleanse the burning Sulphureity, but also
endeavor to remove the Terrestreity, leaving the Flight (or Volatility) in it.
These in like manner, coming to Projection, find a Delusion in it; because
their Medicine adheres not stably in those very Bodies, but successively, and
by little and little vanishes, leaving such a Body in its former Condition.
Hence these also, condemning Art, argue like the former; and to them We answer,
as We did to the First, affirming the Art, and that We know it to be, because
We have seen and touched the Verity thereof.

CHAP. VII.
The Reasons of Men denying Art supposed in Sulphur, Argentvive, Tutia,
Magnesia, Marchasite, and Salarmoniac, with their Re efutation.

OTher some more profoundly see into the Work, and cleanse their Subjects,
taking away both Flight and Adustion; and they make it fixed and earthy, having
no good Fusion in Heat of Fire, but a vitrificatory Fusion only; whence, in
Projection it cannot mix with Bodies. Therefore they also argue, as the first,
and to these We answer, as to the first: Because they left their Work
imperfect, not knowing how to complete it. For the Ingress, which is the
Vltimate Perfective, they knew not how to search out.

In all other Spirits likewise, is the same way of Preparation, except that in
Argentvive and Tutia's, We are excused from greater Labor, than Remotion of
their Adustion; for these have not an adustible and inflamable Sulphureity, but
only Volatility. But Magnesia's, and Marchasites, have every kind of
Sulphureity (Marchasite more, and Magnesia less) yet all have Flight or
Volatility, Argentvive more, and Salarmoniac less; but Sulphur yet less than
its Compeer: and fourthly, Marchasite less than it; fifthly, Magnesia less than
that: and lastly, Tutia least of all. But either of these partaking more or
less of Volatility, some Experimentators, by reason of this Flight, have been
vehemently deceived in the Operations of their Preparations, and in their
Projections likewise. Therefore these also argue and condemn the Art, as
others, supposing it in Sulphur; and to these We answer, as to those supposing
it in Sulphur.

CHAP. VIII.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Spirits, to be fixed together
with Bodies; and their Refutation.

THere are Others also endeavoring to fix Spirits in Bodies, without any other
precedent Preparation: but Delusion perplexing them, has on them likewise
brought Sadness and Desparation; and they are compelled thence to believe, that
this Science is not; and consequently to argue against it. For it is a Cause of
Disturbance and Incredulity in them, that in the Fusion of Bodies, they lose
their Spirits, which cannot adhere to the same Bodies, but fly from the
Asperity of the Fire, the Bodies only remaining therein: because they cannot
bear the Pressure of the Fire's Violence, by reason of Volatility, which is not
removed from them. Likewise, Delusion sometimes happens, because with those
Spirits, Bodies do also fly away; and this is, when the not-fixed Spirits
inseparably adhere to Bodies in their Profundity: because the Sum of the
Volatile overcomes the Sum of the Fixed. Whence also they likewise, as the
first, argue, and we to them likewise, as to the first, answer. Therefore this
turns wholly to their Reproach.

Sons of Learning, if you would convert Bodies, then (We say) if it be possible
to effect this by any Matter, it must necessarily be done by Spirits; but it is
not possible that these Spirits not fixed should profitably adhere to Bodies;
for they fly away, and leave them unclean. Nor can these Spirits, being fixed,
possibly have Ingress, when they are made Earth, which flows not. And when such
Spirits included in Bodies appear fixed, yet they are not; but either recede
from them, they remaining, or both take their flight together. Therefore,
seeing in a Matter more nigh, it is by no means possible to find out this Art,
in a Matter more remote it cannot be found. Ergo, say they, it is no where
found. To these our Answer is this, Whatsoever is knowable in this Art they do
not thoroughly know, therefore do they not thoroughly find out what is, or may be
operated with it. Therefore, the following Deficiency of their Work is the
effect of their own Rashness.

CHAP. IX.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Bodies, and first in White
Lead, that is, Tin or Jupiter, and their Confutation.

SOme posite the Art in Bodies, but when they come to the Work it self, they
are deluded; judging either Lead, viz. the Livid and White (not pure in
Whiteness) to be much assimilated and approximate to the Nature of Sol and
Luna; the Livid is indeed much approximate to Sol, but to Luna little; and the
White much to Luna, but little to Sol. Therefore some of these Men conceiting
Tin or Jupiter to be much like to Luna or Silver (differing only in the harsh
sound, softness, and very swift Liquefaction) believing it easily melted, by
reason of the superfluity of its Humidity; and soft, by reason of the Fugitive
Substance of Argentvive in it, residing in the Parts possessing that harsh
Sound; they Calcine the same, keeping it in such a Fire as it can bear, until
it be White in its Calx, which they afterward attempting to reduce, could not;
therefore judged it impossible to be effected: And some of these could reduce
somewhat from it, and found the same harsh sound, softness, and easy
Liquefaction in that, as before. Therefore they believed this impossible by
this way, and so were induced to Incredulity; thinking the Art of hardening it,
not possible to be found out. But some of these Calcined Tin, and reduced it;
and again, removing the Scoria thereof, with greater force of Fire calcined and
reduced it; and so by often reiterating that Work, they found their Tin
hardened, and without that harsh sound: But because they had not wholly taken
away the swiftness of its Liquefaction, their Mind erred, and they judged it a
thing not possible to attain to that. Wherefore of these, others also, willing
to procure hardness to it, and a Retardation of Liquefaction, with the
Administration of hard Bodies, have fallen into a Delusion, and believed, that
it would break whatsoever hard Bodies was mixed with it; and that in this Work
no Preparation could help them. Therefore when they could neither prepare it
with hard Bodies, nor with Fire; they excused themselves for being so long
delayed in finding out the Art; because they believed it impossible: and
earnestly arguing against the Art, positively affirmed it not to be. Besides
these, some others adding many Medicaments, saw them making no Mutation nor
agreeing with their Tin, but rather corrupting the same, and acting contrary to
their Purpose; therefore they cast away their Books, retorted their Heads, and
affirmed this True and Divine Art to be frivolous. Therefore these Men We
answer, with Our first answer.

CHAP. X.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Black Lead or Saturn.

THe same Delusion they also find in Black Lead, or Saturn; except only that it
breaks not Bodies, and is sooner reduced to a Calx than Jupiter. Yet its Livid
Color they cannot remove, because they are ignorant of that; therefore they
cannot whiten, with good Dealbation; nor could they ever, by their Phantasy, so
stably associate it with stably Bodies, but that it would by strong Expression
of Fire, recede from the Commixtion. And indeed Lead does exceedingly deceive
them (supposing in the Preparation thereof much is sited, and that this Science
can be found in none, but it) because, after two Reductions from its Calx, it
receives no further Hardening, but rather greater Softness, than it had at
first; and in other Differencies likewise, they see it not amended. Therefore
when they, thinking in it to find what is more nigh and better, find it not;
they are compelled to believe and argue that the Science is no other, than a
Delusion; and therefore they offend, as the former.

CHAP. II.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in the Mixtion of Hard Bodies with
Hard, and of Soft with Soft.

BUt others compound hard Bodies with hard, and soft with soft, by reason of
Convenience, would have Bodies to be transmuted each into other, and to
transmute; and that they could not attain to by reason of their Ignorance. For
they, permixing Sol, or Luna, with Venus, or with any other of the Metals,
could not transmute them into Gold or Silver, with firm Transmutation; but they
found every one of them, by the strong Expression of Fire, separated from the
Commixtion, and burnt, or reduced to its former Nature. Yet some of these
Bodies dure in the Commixtion, others not; as is by us sufficiently known.
Therefore, these Delusions, supervenient through Ignorance, make such Men to
despair of the Art, and argue it is not in being.

CHAP. XII.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed, in the Mixtion of Hard Bodies
with Soft, and of Perfect Bodies with the Imperfect.

OThers, more intimately and profoundly searching, have thought and been
persuaded, they could find out a way of causing Hard Bodies united with Soft,
firmly to endure, and Imperfect Bodies united with the Perfect, to be reduced
to Perfection; and that generally they would be transmuted each into other, and
transmute with firm transmutation. Therefore they would find out the Affinity
and Similitude of them, both by Medicines, and by the Administration of Fire,
attenuating the Gross; as Venus and Mars, and inspissating the Subtle; as is
Jupiter, and its like. And some of them, believing they could complete this
Administration, were deluded in the Commixtion of these Hard Bodies, with the
Soft, either because the one made the other altogether frangible; or else the
Soft was not at all altered by the Hard, or the Hard in no wise altered, by the
Soft. Thus they, not finding out the Convenience, did therefore deny the Art to
be.

CHAP. XIII.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed, in Extraction of the Soul, or in
the Regiment of Fire.

BUT Others, yet more intimately and more profoundly inspecting, would alter
Bodies with Extraction of their Soul, and with the Extracted Soul all other
things likewise. Yet the Experience of those Men could not reach to that, but
they were deluded in their Intention; and accordingly judged the Art not
possible to be found out. And Others, endeavoring to perfect Bodies by Fire
only, were deluded in their Opinion; because they knew not how to attain to
that. And these accordingly think the Art not to be. All which we answer, as
the first.

CHAP. XIV.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed, in Glass and Gems, and their
Refutation.

THEY who posite this Art in Glass and Gems, have found, that Alteration cannot
be made in Bodies, by Gems and Glass; because, what has not Ingress, alters
not. But indeed, neither Glass nor Gems have Ingress, therefore alter not. And
when they endeavored to unite the Glass with them (which is difficult to be
done) they missed of their Purpose; because they made their Bodies also Glass:
and by reason of this, they concluded this Error to fall upon the whole Art,
and so argue that it is not. To whom we answer, they operated not in due
Matter; therefore unduly determining, they cannot but condemn this Art
according to their own Errors.

CHAP. XV.
The Reasons of Men denying the Art supposed in Middle Minerals, or Vegetables,
or in the Commixtion of any other Things.

THere are Others, supposing the Art to be found in Salts and Alloms, Nitres
and Boraces; who may indeed in these make Trial, but (as we judge) not find it
in them. Therefore, although they should, by their Experience, find some small
Vtility of Transmutation, viz. by Dissolving, Coagulating, and Coacting; yet
that does not enervate this Divine Art, which is both necessary and known.
Nevertheless, it is possible, that in all these Things they may find some
Alteration; but that is very remote, and exceeding Laborious; and in all other
Growing Things, it is proved to be more Laborious to such Supposers.

Therefore they, who possessed this Art in all Vegetables, do indeed determine
what is possible, but not to them; who shall first fail in their Labor, before
the Work labored can possibly be perfected. Wherefore, if such Men find not
the Art by their Labors, it must not be argued, that the Art cannot by any
Labors be found out. All the beforementioned Erroneous Persons determined one
Matter of theirs to be the only Matter, and supposed there was no other Matter
besides that; and these now do indeed condemn all the other.

But there are many Others, and those almost infinite, who ignorantly, and
without knowledge, make a Composition of all, or of some of these Things, in a
diverse Proportion; and their Error is extended even to Infinity, according to
the Infinite Diversity of the Proportion of things mixable, and the Infinite
Diversity of miscible Matters. And in both these Infinities they infinitely
err; sometimes through Superaboundance, and sometimes through Diminution: yet
in these, Correction is possible. And we, without prolixity, or tediousness of
Words, resolve to insist upon these Infinities, where we briefly treat of the
Universal Science, by which they will be able evidently to amend the Infinity
of their Errors, and correct them. But at this time, we must first discuss
Natural Principles according to their Causes (as we told you before) and by a
Commemoration of them.

The third Part of this First Book; Of Natural Principles, and their Effect.
CHAP. I.
Of the Natural Principles of Metalick Bodies, according to the Opinion of the
Ancients.

WE now signify to you, that (according to the Opinion of the Ancients, who
were of our Sect, studious of Art) Natural Principles in the Work of Nature
are, a Fetent Spirit, and Living Water, which is also named Dry Water. These We
grant, and thus define the Fetent Spirit. It is white in Occulto, and Red and
Black of either side, in the Magistery of this Work; but, in Manifesto, of
either side, tending to Redness. Therefore, in a brief, and also a simply
complete, and sufficient Speech, We declare the Generation, and way of
Generation of each of these. Yet We must so far enlarge and dilate our
Discourse, as to deliver a peculiar Chapter of each singular Natural Principle.
In general We now say, that every one of these is of a most strong Composition,
and uniform Substance; and that, because the Earthy parts in them, are through
their least particles united with the Airy, Watery, and Fiery; so that in
Resolution no one of them can be separated, but each with all and every one is
dissolved, by reason of the strong Union, which they have each with other, in
their least particles; and that leisurely, in the Mineral Bowels of the Earth,
by Heat condensed, multiplied, and (according to the due Course of Nature)
equalized to the Exigency of their Essence, according to the Opinion of certain
Ancient Philosophers.

CHAP. II.
Of the Natural Principles of Metals, according to the Opinion of Modern
Philosophers, and of the Author.

BUt others say otherwise, That Argentvive in its Nature was not the Principle,
but altered, and converted into its Earth, and Sulphur likewise altered and
changed into Earth. Whence they say, that in the Intention of Nature, the
Principle was other, than a foetent Spirit, and fugitive Spirit. And the
Reason, that moved them hereunto, was this, viz. because, in the Silver Mines,
or in the Mines of other Metals, they found not any thing that is Argentvive in
its Nature, or any thing that is Sulphur likewise; but they found each of them
separated in its proper Mine, in its own Nature. And they also affirm this for
another Reason, viz. because there is no transition (as they say) from Contrary
to Contrary, unless by a Middle Disposition. Therefore, seeing it so is, they
are compelled to confess and believe that there is no Transition (or Passing)
from the Softness of Argentvive, to the hardness of any Metal, unless by a
Disposition, which is between the Hardness and Softness of them. But in the
Mines they find not any thing, in which this Middle Disposition may be salved;
therefore they are compelled hence to believe, that Argentvive and Sulphur, in
their Nature, are not the Principles according to the Intention of Nature: but
another Thing, which follows from the Alteration of their Essences, in the Root
of Nature, into an Earthy Substance. And this is the Way, by which each of them
is turned into an Earthy Nature; and from these two Earthy Natures, a most thin
Fume is resolved, by Heat multiplied in the Bowels of the Earth; and this
Duplicate Fume is the immediate Matter of Metals.

This Fume, when it shall be Decocted by the temperate Heat of the Mine, is
converted into the Nature of a certain Earth; therefore it receives a certain
Fixation, which afterward the Water (flowing through the Bowels of the Minera,
and Spongiosity of the Earth) dissolves, and is uniformly united to it, with a
natural and firm Union. Therefore, so opining, they thus said, That the Water
flowing through the Passages of the Earth, finds a Substance dissolvible from
the Substance of the Earth in the Bowels thereof, and dissolves the same, and
is uniformly with it united, until the Substance also of the Earth in the Mines
is dissolved, and the flowing dissolving Water and it become one with Natural
Union. And to such a Mixtion come all the Elements, according to a due natural
Proportion, and are mixed through their least Parts, until they make an Uniform
Mixtion. And this Mixtion, by successive Decoction in the Mine, is thickened,
hardened, and made a Metal. And indeed, these Men, although they be nigh the
Truth, yet they do not conjecture the very Truth.

CHAP. III.
The Division of what are to be spoken, touching the Three Principles, viz.
Sulphur, Arsenick, and Argentvive.

NOW, having finished our Universal Discourse of the Natural Principles of
Metals; it remains, that we here give a peculiar Chapter to each one of the
Principles. Therefore, seeing they are Three, viz. Sulphur, Arsenick, and
Argentvive; the first shall be of Sulphur, the second of Arsenick, and the
third of Argentvive. Afterward, of every of the Metals, which are the Effects
of these Principles, we give a peculiar Chapter, according to what it is from
the Work of Nature. This being done, we, descending to those Things which are
the Fundamentals of this Magistery, and to their Operations, will assign the
Causes of all these.

CHAP. IV.
Of Sulphur.

THerefore we say, that Sulphur is a fatness of the Earth, by temperate
Decoction in the Mine of the Earth thickened, until it be hardened and made dry;
and when it is hardened, it is called Sulphur. Indeed Sulphur has an Homogeneal
and most strong Composition, and is of an Uniform Substance in its natural
parts, because it is Homogeneal. Therefore, its Oil is not taken from it, as
from other things having Oil by Distillation. Wherefore they, who strive to
calcine it, not losing any thing of the Substance of that with which it should
be cured, do labor in vain; because it cannot be calcined, unless by great
Industry, and with loss of much of the Substance thereof. For of an hundred
Parts, you shall scarcely reserve three to your self after Calcination.
Likewise, it cannot be fixed, unless it be first calcined; yet it may be mixed,
and its flight in some measure retarded, and its Adustion repressed; and being
commixed, may more easily be calcined. Therefore, he who endeavors to extract
our Work from it, by preparing it by it self, he shall not obtain his end;
because it must be perfected with Mixtion, and without that the Magistery would
be prolonged even to Desperation. Yet with its Compeer a Tincture is made, and
it gives complete Weight to every of the Metals, and cleanses and illustrates
them: and it is perfected with our Magistery, without which it performs none of
these things, but rather corrupts and blackens. Therefore use it not without
this Magistery.

Also, he who in Preparation knows how to commix, and unite it amicably with
Bodies, knows one of the Greatest Secrets of Nature, and one way of Perfection:
for there are many Ways to one Effect, and one Intent. And whatsoever Body is
calcined with it, undoubtedly receives weight; yea, Copper from it assumes the
Effigies of Sol. Also Mercury is associated with it, and by Sublimation becomes
Vsifar (or Cinnabar.) Lastly, All Bodies, except Sol and Jupiter, are easily
calcined with it; but Sol most difficultly. And Argentvive is not coagulated
with it into Gold or Silver (in which is profit) by a mean Artifice, as some
fatuate Philosophers have thought. And further we say, that whatsoever Bodies
have less Humidity, they are more easily calcined by Sulphur, than those which
have much. Through the most High GOD, it illuminates every Body; because it is
Light, Allom, and Tincture. Also, it is most difficultly dissolved, because it
has not salsuginous, but oleginous Parts, which are not easily dissolved into
Water. But what are easily, or difficultly dissolved into Water, we shall
plainly enough demonstrate in the Chapter of Solution. It is indeed sublimed,
because it is Spirit. And if it be mixed with Venus, and united to it, it
becomes a wonderful Violet Color. With Mercury also it may be mixed, and of
them is made by Decoction a Celestial and delightful Color: Yet, let no Man
think that Sulphur can by it self complete the Work of Alchimy. For it would be
no less than Vanity to think this, as we shall very sufficiently prove in the
following. But let the Gross and Lucid be chosen. These may suffice to be
spoken of Sulphur.

CHAP. V.
Of Arsenick.

IT now remains that we at present speak of Arsenick. We say it is of a subtle
Matter, and like to Sulphur; therefore it needs not be otherwise defined than
Sulphur. But it is diversified from Sulphur in this, viz. because it is easily
a Tincture of Whiteness, but of Redness most difficultly: and Sulphur, of
Whiteness most difficultly: but of Redness easily. Of Sulphur and Arsenick
there is a twofold Kind, viz. Citrine and Red, which are profitable to this
Art; but the many other Kinds not so. Arsenick is fixed as Sulphur; but the
Sublimation of either is best from the Calx of Metals. Yet Sulphur and Arsenick
are not the perfective Matter of this Work: for they are not complete to
Perfection; yet they may be an help to Perfection in the Case. But the Lucid
and Scaly, and Scissile must be taken.

CHAP. VI.
Of Argentvive, or Mercury.

ARgentvive, which also is called Mercury by the Ancients, is a viscous Water
in the Bowels of the Earth, by most temperate Heat united, in a total Union
through its least parts, with the substance of white subtle Earth, until the
Humid be contempered by the Dry, and the Dry by the Humid, equally. Therefore
it easily runs upon a plain Superficies, by reason of its Watery Humidity; but
it adheres not, although it has a viscous Humidity, by reason of the Dryness
of that which contemperates it, and permits it not to adhere. It is also (as
some say) the Matter of Metals with Sulphur. And it easily adheres to three
Minerals, viz. to Saturn, and Jupiter, and Sol, but to Luna more difficultly.
To Venus more difficultly than to Luna; but to Mars in no wise, unless by
Artifice. Therefore hence you may collect a very great Secret. For it is
amicable, and pleasing to Metals, and the Medium of conjoyning Tinctures; and
nothing is submerged in Argentvive, unless it be Sol. Yet Jupiter and Saturn,
Luna and Venus, are dissolved by it, and mixed; and without it, none of the
Metals can be gilded. It is fixed, and it is a Tincture of Redness of most
exuberant Refection, and fulgid Splendour; and then it recedes not from the
Commixtion, until it is in its own Nature. Yet it is not our Medicine in its
Nature; but it can sometimes likewise help in the Case.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Effects of the Principles of Nature, which are Metallic Bodies.

WE now speak of Metallic Bodies, which are the Effects of these Principles of
Nature. These are Six in number, viz. Gold, Silver, Lead, Tin, Copper, and
Iron. Therefore we say, a Metal is a Mineral fu^^ble Body, extensible with all
Dimensions under the Hammer. But a Metal is (as we said) of a dense Substance,
and of most strong and firm Composition. And Metals have great affinity each
with other, yet the perfect perfects not the diminished, by its Commixtion. For
if Gold be mixed in fusion with Lead, this Lead becomes not Gold, but vanishes
from the Mixtion, and is burnt; the Gold in the mean while stands the Trial. So
likewise, in instancing the other, it falls according to the Common Course.
But, according to our Magistery, the Perfect helps the Imperfect; and the
Imperfect, in our Magistery, by it self is Perfected, without the
Administration of any Extraneous Thing. And through GOD, they alter each other,
and are altered; and they perfect each other, and are perfected: and one only
by it self is perfected without the help of another.

CHAP. VIII.
Of Sol, or Gold.

WE have already given you, in a General Chapter. the Sum of the Intention of
Metals; and here we now intend to make a special Declaration of each one. And
first of Gold. We say, Gold is a Metallic Body, Citrine, ponderous, mute,
fulgid, equally digested in the Bowels of the Earth, and very long washed with
Mineral Water; under the Hammer extensible, fusible, and sustaining the Trial
of the Cupel, and Cement. According to this Definition, you may conclude, that
nothing is true Gold, unless it has all the Causes and Differencies of the
Definition of Gold. Yet, whatsoever Metal is radically Citrine, and brings to
Equality, and cleanses, it makes Gold of every kind of Metals. Therefore, we
consider by the Work of Nature, and discern, that Copper may be changed into
Gold by Artifice. For we see in Copper Mines, a certain Water which flows out,
and carries with it thin Scales of Copper, which (by a continual and long
continued Course) it washes and cleanses. But after such Water cease to
flow, we find these thin Scales with the dry Sand, in three years time to be
digested with the Heat of the Sun; and among these Scales the purest Gold is
found. Therefore, We judge, those Scales were cleansed by the benefit of the
Water, but were equally digested by heat of the Sun, in the Dryness of the
Sand, and so brought to Equality. Wherefore, imitating Nature, as far as we
can, we likewise alter; yet in this we cannot follow Nature.

Also Gold is of Metals the most precious, and it is the Tincture of Redness;
because it ringeth and transforms every Body. It is calcined and dissolved
without profit, and is a Medicine rejoicing, and conserving the Body in Youth.
It is most easily broken with Mercury, and by the Odor of Lead. There is not
any Body that in act more agrees with it in Substance than Jupiter and Luna:
but in Weight, Deafeness, and Putrescibility, Saturn, in Color Venus; in
Potency indeed Venus is more next Luna than Jupiter, and then Saturn: but
lastly Mars. And this one of the Secrets of Nature. Likewise Spirits are
commixed with it, and by it fixed, but not without very great Ingenuity, which
comes not to an Artificer of a stiff neck.

CHAP. IX.
Of Luna, or Silver.

HAving premised the Chapter of Sol, We come now to speak of Luna, by a common
name called Silver. Therefore, We say, Silver is a Metallic Body, White with
pure Whiteness, Clean, Hard, Sounding, very durable in the Cupel, extensible
under the Hammer, and fusible. And it is the Tincture of Whiteness, and hardens
Tin by Artifice, and converts it to it self; and it is mixed with Sol, and
breaks not; but in the Examination it perseveres not without Artifice. He who
knows how more to subtiliate it, and after subtiliation, to inspissate and fix
it associated with Gold; it remains with it in the Test, and will in no wise
forsake it. Being put over the fume of acute Things, as of Vinegar,
Salarmoniac, etc. it will be of a wonderful Celestine Color. And it is a noble
Body, but wants of the Nobility of Gold; and its Minera is found determinate:
but it often has a Minera confused with other Bodies, and that Silver is not
so noble. It is likewise dissolved, and calcined with great Labor, and no
Profit.

CHAP. X.
Of Saturn, or Lead.

OF Lead we likewise treat, and say, Lead is a Metallic Body, livid, earthy,
ponderous, mute, partaking of a little Whiteness, with much paleness, refusing
the Cineritium and Cement, easily in all its dimensions with small Compression
extensible, and readily fusible, without Ignition. Yet some foolish Men
conceit, and say, that Lead in its own Nature is much approximated to Gold. But
because they are stiff-necked, and void of all Reason, they cannot conceive of
the Truth of Things most subtle, as it is in it self, but judge of them
according to Sense. And because they see it ponderous, and mute, and not to
putrify they believe it to be much nigh in Property to Sol; but this is wholly
erroneous, as by the following shall be by us manifestly proved at large. Also
Lead has much of an Earthy Substance, therefore it is washed, and by a
Lavament turned into Tin. Hence it is manifest that Tin is more assimilated to
the Perfect. Lead is in like manner burnt, and made Minium; and it is put over
the Vapors of Vinegar, and made Ceruss. And although it is not much
approximate to Perfection, yet of it, by our Artifice, we easily make Silver;
and it keeps not its proper weight in Transmutation, but is changed into a new
weight: All this it acquires in our Magistery. Lead also is the Trial of Silver
in the Cupel, the Causes of which We give.

CHAP. XI.
Of Jupiter, or Tin.

THerefore, not omitting to discourse of Jupiter, We signify to the Sons of
Learning, that Tin is a Metallic Body, white, not pure, livid, and sounding
little, partaking of little Earthiness; possessing in its Root Harshness,
Softness, and swiftness of Liquefaction, without Ignition, and not abiding the
Cupel, or Cement, but Extensible under the Hammer. Therefore, Jupiter, among
Bodies diminished from Perfection, is in the Radix of its Nature of Affinity to
the more Perfect, viz. to Sol and Luna; more to Luna, but less to Sol, as shall
be clearly declared in the following. Jupiter, because it receives much
Whiteness from the Radix of its Generation, therefore it whitens all Bodies not
White; yet its vice is, that it breaks every Body, but Saturn, and most pure
Sol. And Jupiter adheres much to Sol and Luna, and therefore does not easily
recede from them, by Examen (or Trial of Cupel.) In the Magistery of this Art,
it receives a Tincture of Redness, and that shines in it with inestimable
Brightness. It is hardened and cleansed more easily than Saturn. And he who
knows how to take away its Vice of breaking, will suddenly reap the fruit of
his Labor with joy. For it agrees with Sol and Luna, and will never be
separated from them.

CHAP. XII.
Of Venus, or Copper.

OUR intended Discourse now is of Venus, or Copper. It is a Metallic Body,
livid, partaking of a dusky Redness ignible (or sustaining Ignition) fusible,
extensible under the Hammer, but refusing the Cupel, and Cement. Therefore
Venus (as is declared) in the profundity of its Substance, pretends to the
Color and Essence of Gold, and it is hammered being heat red hot, as Silver
and Gold is. Therefore, hence you may learn a Secret: for it is the Medium of
Sol and Luna, and easily comes to convert its Nature to either; and it is of
good Conversion, and of little Labor. It agrees very well with Tutia, which
citrinizeth (or Colors) it with good Yellowness; and hence you may reap
profit. For we are excused by it, from the Labor of Induration (or Hardening)
and Ignition of it. Therefore take it, before all other Imperfect Bodies, in
the Lesser and Middle Work, but not in the Greater. Yet this has a Vice beyond
Jupiter, viz. that it easily waxes Livid, and receives Infection from sharp
and acute things; and to eradicate that, is not an easy, but a profound Art.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Mars, or Iron.

BUT the Declaration of Mars, and the whole Secret thereof, is from the Work of
Nature; because it is a Metallic Body, very livid, a little red, pertaking of
Whiteness, not pure, sustaining Ignition, fusible with no right fusion, under
the Hammer extensible, and sounding much. But Mars is hard to be handled, by
reason of the Impotency of its fusion, which if it be made to flow by a
Medicine changing its Nature, is conjoined to Sol and Luna, and not separated
by Examen, without great Industry: but if prepared, it is conjoined, and not
separated by any Artifice, if the Nature of that Fixation be not changed by it,
the Uncleanness only of the Mars being removed. Therefore it is a Tincture of
Redness easily, but difficultly of Whiteness. And when it is conjoined, it is
not altered, nor does it change the Color of the Commixtion, but augments it
in Quantity.

Therefore, among all Bodies, Jupiter is more splendidly and more clearly, more
brightly and more perfectly transformed into a Solar, or Lunar Body. But the
Work of it is of long Labor, though easy to be handled. Next to Jupiter is
Venus chosen, of more difficult handling, but of shorter Labor than Jupiter.
Next after Venus, Saturn has a diminished Perfection in Transmutation, is
easy to be handled, but of most tedious labor. Yet Mars, among all the
Bodies, is of least Perfection in Transmutation, to be handled most difficult,
and of exceeding long Labor. Therefore, whatsoever, Bodies are more remote
from swiftness of Liquefaction, they are found of more difficult handling in
the Work of Transmutation. Of this kind are Venus and Mars; but what more,
more; and what are most remote, most. Also those Bodies which partake of
greater Lividness and Infection of the Earth, are likewise found to be of
greater Labor, and less Perfection.

But whatsoever Diversities of Perfections were a little before determined by
Us, are found in the Artifice of the Lesser, or Middle Work; yet in the Greater
Work all Bodies are of one Perfection, but not all of one handling or labor.
It remains yet to be known, what Facility and Difficulty of handling, and what
Brevity and Length of Labor, are found radically in the Nature of Bodies.
Therefore have We here in a true Discourse described the Natural Principles of
those Bodies, which are according to the Intention of Nature; and have likewise
in several Chapters truly expounded what We determined of those Bodies; and
that, according to the Opinion of those Men, who could discern the Occult
Things of Nature; and according to our own Judgment also, who attained to the
Knowledge thereof by incessant Labor. But now, according as We promised, it is
expedient to supply the defect of this Art in setting down all the Principles
of this Magistery, in the last Part of this our First Book; and to demonstrate
the Perfection we have seen, with its Causes, according to the Exigency thereof.

The Fourth Part of this First Book, touching the Artificial Principles of this
Art.
CHAP. I.
The Division of Things to be spoken of in this Part, with an Insinuation of
Perfection to be treated of in the Second Book.

THere are two Things that are to be determined, viz. the Principles of this
Magistery, and the Perfection of the same. The Principles of this Art are the
Ways or Methods of its Operations, to which the Artist applies himself in the
Work of this Magistery. These Ways are indeed diverse in themselves. For one Way
is Sublimation, and Descension another; and Distillation is also one Way,
Calcination another, Solution another, and Coagulation another: but the seventh
Way is Fixation, and the eighth Ceration. Of all which We purpose to give
singular Declarations.

Perfection consists of those Things, and from the Considerations of those by
which it is attained; and from the Consideration of things helping; and from
the Consideration of that thing which lastly perfects; and that by which it is
known, whether the Magistery was in Perfection or not. The Consideration of
those Things, by which We come to the Comple^tment of the Work, is the
Consideration of the Substance manifest, and of manifest Colors, and of the
Weight in every of those Bodies to be changed, and of those Bodies that are not
changed from the Radix of their Nature, without that Artifice; and the
Consideration of those likewise, in the Radix of their Nature, with the
Artifice; and the Consideration of the Principles of Bodies, according to their
Profound, Occult, and Manifest; and according to their Nature without Artifice,
and likewise with Artifice. For, if Bodies, and their Principles, be not known
in the Profound and Manifest of their Nature, with Artifice, and without, what
is superfluous, and what is diminished in them cannot be known; and our not
knowing these would of necessity hinder us from ever attaining to the
Perfection of their Transmutation.

The Consideration of Things helping Perfection, is the Consideration of the
Natures of those Things, which we see adhere to Bodies without Artifice, and to
make mutation. And these are Marchasite, Magnesia, Tutia, Antimony, and Lapis
Lazuli (or the Lazure Stone.) And the Consideration of those, which without
adherency cleanse Bodies, and they are Salt, and Alloms, Nitres and Boraces,
and which are of their Nature: and the Consideration of Vitrification,
cleansing by a like Nature.

But the Consideration of the Thing that perfects, is the Consideration of
Choosing the pure Substance of Argentvive; and it is the Matter, which from the
Matter of that took beginning, and of that was created. This Matter is not
Argentvive in its Nature, nor in its whole Substance, but it is part of it: nor
is it now, but when the Stone is made. For that illustrates and conserves from
Adustion, which is a signification of Perfection.

Lastly, The Consideration of the Thing, by which it is known, whether the
Magistery be in Perfection, or not; in the Consideration of the Cupel, Cement,
Ignition, of exposing it upon the Vapors of acute Things, Extinction,
Commixtion of Sulphur burning Bodies, of Reduction after Calcination, and
Susception of Argentvive. All which, with the former, we shall here following
declare, with their Causes, and with easy Experiences; by which you may
manifestly know, that our Discourses have not erred. And these Experiments will
be well known to you.

CHAP. II.
Of Sublimation, why invented.

THerefore, prosecuting our purpose, We speak of Sublimation. The Cause of the
Invention of which, was, because our Ancestors could not, nor can We, nor shall
they who come after Us, find any thing that can be united with Bodies, but
Spirits only; or any Thing, that can contain in it self the Nature of Body and
Spirit; and We see these, cast upon Bodies (without Mundation, or cleansing of
them) either not to give perfect Colors, or totally to corrupt, burn, blacken,
and defile. And this, according to the Diversity of the same Spirits. For some
are burning, as Sulphur and Arsenick, and Marchasite; and these indeed totally
corrupt. Others burn not, as every kind of Tutia; yet these give imperfect
Colors, and that they do for a twofold Cause. One is, because the adustive
unctuosity of Sulphur (of the property of which it is) which is easily
inflamed, and by Inflammation blackned, and consequently blackens, is not
removed or taken away from them. But the other Cause is Earthiness, which
likewise is not separated from them. For in these, in which a perfect Color is
not given, Earthiness is a Cause making it livid. Also Adustion may create a
livid Color.

Therefore, We were constrained to cleanse these from their burning Vnctuosity,
and from the Earthy Superfluity, which they all have. And this We could effect
by no Magistery, but by Sublimation only. For, when the Fire elevates, it
always elevates the more subtle parts; therefore it stirs not the more Gross.
Hence it is manifest, that Spirits are cleansed from their Earthiness by
Sublimation; which Terrestriety impeded Ingress, and also gave an impure
Color. But being sublimed, as Experience makes sufficiently manifest to your
Sight, they are freed from that Impurity. For you see them more splendid, and
more pervious, and more easily to enter and penetrate the Density of Bodies,
and not to impress a foul Color, as before. Also that Adustion may be taken
away by Sublimation, is manifest by Experiment: for Arsnick, which before its
Sublimation was evil, and prone to Adustion, after its Sublimation suffers not
it self to be inflamed, but only recedes without Inflammation; and the same you
may find in Sulphur, if you will make Trial. And because, in no other Things,
than in Spirits, We saw Adherency to Bodies with Alteration, We could have no
other Cause to be excused from them, but were necessarily constrained to
prepare the same, for their purification, which is made by Sublimation.
Therefore there was a necessary Cause of the Invention of this Sublimation; the
whole Order of which We purpose to declare without Diminution.

CHAP. III.
What Sublimation is, and of the Degrees of Fire in it to be observed.

Wherefore We say, Sublimation is the Elevation of a dry Thing by Fire, with
adherency to its Vessel. But Sublimation is diversely made, according to the
Diversity of Spirits to be sublimed. For the Sublimation of some is made with
strong Ignition, of others with moderate, and of some with a remiss heat of
Fire. Therefore, when Arsnick or Sulphur are to be sublimed, their Sublimation
must necessarily be made by remiss Fire: because they having their most subtle
parts uniformly conjoined with the Gross, their whole Substance would ascend
without any Purification; yea, blackned and combust. Therefore, that the
Artificer may separate the unclean Earthy Substance, he has a necessity to
find out the Dispositions of two Kinds, viz. the Proportion of the Fire, and
Mundification with commixtion of the Feces: because Commixtion with the Feces,
comprehends the Gross Parts, and holds them depressed in the bottom of the
Sublimatory, not suffering them to ascend.

Whence also it is necessary, that the Artificer should apply to his
Sublimation a threefold Degree of Fire: One proportionate in such wise, that by
it may ascend only* the Altered, and more Clean, and more Lucid; until by this
he manifestly see, that they are cleansed from their Earthy Feculency. The
other Degree is, that what is of the pure Essence of them remaining in the
Feces, may be sublimed with greater force of Fire, viz. with Ignition of the
Bottom of the Vessel, and of the Feces therein, which may be seen with the Eye.
The third Degree of Fire is, that unto the Sublimate without the Feces, a most
weak Fire be administered, so that scarcely any thing of it may ascend, but that
only which is the most subtle part thereof, and which in our Work is of no
value; because it is a thing, by Mediation of which, Adustion is made in
Sulphurs.

Therefore, the whole Intention of Sublimation is, that the Earthiness of the
Sublimate being removed by a due administration of Fire, and likewise the most
subtle and fumous part of it, which brings Adustion, with Corruption, being
cast away, to Us may be left that Part, which consists in Equality, which makes
simple fusion upon the Fire, and without any Adustion flying from the Fire,
without Inflammation thereof. That what is most subtle is Adustive, is proved
by most evident Arguments. For Fire converts to its own Nature, every of those
things, which is of affinity to it; because it is of affinity to every
adustible Thing, and to the subtle adustible, it is of greater affinity; and
yet more of affinity to what is more subtle: therefore also most of affinity
to what is most subtle. Likewise, the same is proved by Experience, because
Sulphur or Arsenick not sublimed, is most swiftly inflamed; but of the two,
Sulphur more easily. Yet either, being sublimed, is not directly inflamed, but
flies away, and is extenuated without inflammation; yet with a precedent Fusion.
By these therefore it is manifest that our Discourse is most true.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Feces of Metallic Bodies, to Be added to Spirits in their Sublimation;
and of the Quantity and Quality of them.

BUT the Probation of the Administration of Feces, with their Proportion, is,
that such Matter be chosen, with which the Spirits to be sublimed may best
agree, and wherewith they may the more profoundly be mixed: because that
Matter, with which they are more united, is more potent in Retension of the
Feces of Spirits to be sublimed, than that, with which they are not so united.
The Probation of this, is rational enough, and manifest. But the Probation,
that the Addition of Feces is necessary, is, because Sulphur, or Arsnick to be
sublimed, if they be not conjoined with the Feces of some fixed Thing, would
necessarily ascend with their whole Substance, not cleansed. And they, who are
exercised in Sublimation, do by Experience know, We say true. Also the
Probation, that the Administration of such Feces is necessary (with which
Things to be sublimed may agree, and be united intimately) is, because, if the
Feces be not permitted with them through their least parts, then the same
happens, as if they had not Feces, viz. their whole Essence ascends without any
Cleansing, as they ascend with their whole Substance, without Feces: therefore
the same must likewise happen, in things sublimed from Feces, with which they
are not united.

He that has seen and known this, knows it to be true by Experience; because,
when he sublimed from a Thing extraneous to the Nature of Bodies, he sublimed
in vain; so that he found them in no wise purified after their Ascension. But
when he sublimed with the Calx of any Body, then he sublimed well, and could
with facility perfectly cleanse. Therefore, the Intention of Feces is, that
they be administered of the Calxes of Metals: for in them the Work of
Sublimation, is easy, but in other Things most difficult. Therefore, there is
not any thing, that may be substituted in their stead. Yet we say not, that
Sublimation is impossible without the Calxes of Bodies; but that it is most
difficult, and of long tedious Labor, and delay even to Desperation.
Nevertheless, in this there is some benefit; because, what is sublimed without
Feces, or without the Calxes of Bodies, is of greater Quantity, but with Feces
of lesser. And further, what is calcined with the Calxes of Bodies, is of least
Quantity, but of easiest and most speedy Labor. But that which much excuses
Us from using the Feces of Bodies, is every kind of Salt prepared, and of
things like to it in Nature. And to Us it is also possible to make Sublimation
with them of a great Quantity; because Separation of things to be sublimed,
from the Feces, is easily made by Solution of the Salts; which happens not in
other Things.

But the Proportion of Feces is, that it be equal to the Quantity of Things to
be sublimed. For in this, even a rude Artificer cannot err. But an Artist of
mean skill may put of Feces half the weight of Things to be sublimed, and that
will be sufficient for him, if careful, not to err in his Work: because to him
that is well exercised and expert, the least part of Feces is sufficient. For
the less the Quantity of Feces is, of so much the more and greater Exuberation,
the Sublimate must needs be; provided, that according to the Substraction of
Feces, a Substraction of Fire proportional thereunto be made. Because in a
small Quantity a small Fire serves for Perfection, in a great, a great; and in
a greater Quantity, a greater Fire is required.

CHAP. V.
Of Governing the Fire in Sublimation.

BUT because Fire is not a Thing which can be measured, therefore it happens,
that Error is often committed in it, when the Operator is not well skilled; as
well by reason of the Diversity of Furnaces, and of Woods to be burned, as of
Vessels, and the Coaptation (or well joining) of them: about all which, it is
expedient the Artist should be intently solicitous. Wherefore we give you a
Common Rule: First, it is expedient to remove, from things to be sublimed, the
Wateriness only, with a very small Fire; which being removed, if any thing
ascend by it, then in the beginning this Fire must not be augmented, that the
most subtle part may (by this most weak Fire) be separated, and put aside,
which is the Cause of Adustion. But when little or nothing shall ascend (which
you may prove by putting a little Cotton-weik into the hole on the top of the
Alembeck) augment the Fire under it: and of how great vigor your Fire should
be, the Cotton-weik will show. For if little of the Sublimate come forth with
it, or it be clean; it argues your fire is small, therefore must be increased:
but if much and unclean, then it is too great, and must be made less.
Therefore, when you find the Sublimate to come forth with the Weik clean, and
much, the Proportion of your Fire is then found. And whether your Sublimate
arise clean, or unclean, is known by the aforesaid Sign. For according to the
Quantity of Cleanness, or Uncleanness of the Sublimate, which the Artist shall
discern to adhere to his Cotton, he may conclude of the necessary proportion of
his Fire in the whole Sublimation. And by this means he will find out the
Rectification of the Fire, without any Fallacy.

Yet the way of Feces is better, viz. to taste Scales of Iron, or Copper
calcined. And these indeed, by reason of the Privation of evil Humidity, do
easily imbibe Sulphur, or Arsnick, and unite them with themselves. But the
Method of this, the well experienced only know.

CHAP. VI.
Of Errors about the Quantity of Feces, and the Disposition of the Furnace in
subliming Sulphur and Arsnick, also of building the Furnace, and of choosing
Woods.

THerefore it is expedient We should rectify the Judgment of the Artificer in
all Things, wherein he may happen to Err through Ignorance, in Sublimation of
these two Spirits. In order to which, We first say, that if he put in many
Feces, and does not proportionally augment the Fire, nothing of the Matter to
be sublimed will ascend. But how he should know that, is already sufficiently
declared. And if he put in a small Quantity of Feces, or none of the Calx of
Bodies, then (if he find not his Proportion of Fire) what is sublimed will
ascend with its whole Substance. Of knowing this likewise I showed a sufficient
way.

So in like manner, by reason of the Furnace he may happen to Err. For a great
Furnace gives a great Heat of Fire, and a small Furnace small; if the Woods for
Fuel, and Ventholes for Air, be also proportionate. Therefore if he put a
great Quantity of Matter to be sublimed in a small Furnace, he shall not be
able to give sufficient Fire of Elevation: and if a small Quantity in a great
Furnace, he will exterminate the Sublimation by excess of Heat. So likewise, a
thick Furnace gives a condensate and strong Fire; but a thin Furnace, a rare
and weak Fire: in both which he may likewise Err. So also, a Furnace with
large Ventholes, gives both a clear and strong Fire; but with narrow and small
Ventholes, a weak Fire. So if the distance of space, between the Furnace and
Vessel set in, be large, the Furnace then gives a great Fire; but if small, a
less. In all which the Artist may exceedingly Err.

Therefore, the Rectification of these Errors is, that the Artist build his
Furnace, according to the Intention of such a Fire, as he should have, Viz.
Thick, with free Ventholes, and with a good distance of the Vessel from the
sides of the Furnace, if he intend to have a great Fire: but if a mean Fire, in
all these Things he must find a mean Proportion; and if a weak Fire, the same
Proportion in them. All these Proportions, We will teach you to find, with the
true Preparation, and determinate Experience. Therefore, if you would elevate a
great Quantity of Matter to be Sublimed; first be provided with a Sublimatory
of such a Capacity, that it may contain your Matter to be elevated the height
of one hands breadth above the Bottom. To this, fit your Furnace so, as the
Aludel (or Sublimatory) may be received into it, with the distance of two
Fingers round about the Walls, or sides of the Furnace; which being made, to it
also make ten Ventholes in one Proportion, equally distant, that there may be
one Equality of Fire to all Parts thereof. Then set a Bar of Iron into the
Furnace transverse, and fastened at each end to the sides of the Furnace; which
Bar must be distant from the Bottom of the Furnace, as far as to the Extension
of one Hand with its Thumb, and about the thickness of one Finger above it,
must the Sublimatory be firmly placed; and enclosed round about to the Furnace,
which the following Description demonstrates. But then consider whether your
Furnace can well and freely discharge it self of the Fumosities, and the Flame
can freely pass through the whole Furnace, in the Circuit of the Aludel; if so,
it is well proportionate; if not, it is not so. Then you must open its
Ventholes, and if by that means it be mended, it is well indeed: if not, then
it must necessarily be altered; because the distance of the Vessel from the
sides of the Furnace, is too small. Therefore pare off the sides of the Walls,
and enlarge the distance, and then try it. And so continue reiterating (if need
be) the enlarging of the Ventholes, and paring the Sides, until it can freely
quit it self of the Smoke, and the Flame be Lucid round about the Aludel, and
the Smoke very freely pass out by the Vents.

This is an Experiment (sufficient for any Quantity to be Sublimed) of the
Invention of Magnitude of the Furnace, and of Dilating the Ventholes thereof,
and of the Distance of the Vessel from the Walls of the same. But the Invention
of Thickness of the Furnace is (if you intend a great Fire) that the same be
equal to the extension of one hands breadth, with its Thumb; but if a moderate
Fire be intended, then the Thickness must be to one hands breadth; and if a
lesser Fire, it must be formed to the Thickness of two Fingers.

Likewise Proportion is to be taken from Woods, for solid Woods give a strong
Fire, spongious a weak, and Dry Woods give a great Fire, and soon terminable.
Green Woods give a little and long lasting Fire, and Solid Woods likewise a
very durable Fire; but Spongy Woods a Fire easily terminable. Therefore with
Consideration of the Distance of the Aludel, and of the Magnitude and Smallness
of the Ventholes, and Thickness and Thinness of the Furnace, and Diversity of
Woods premised, the Diversities of all Fires come to be found out, with their
true Experience. But from the greater or lesser Closure of the Ventholes, or of
the Door of the Furnace, by which the Woods are put in, and by the Addition and
Substraction of them, the determinate space of Time of Duration of the Fire
comes to be found out, viz. So that (as by a determinate Science) it is known
how long the Fire of each, in its degree, can dure in Equality. This
Investigation is very profitable and necessary for you; because by it you will
be eased of much of your Labor. Therefore exercise your self therein, and in
all Things by Us here now lately mentioned; for he who exercises himself
herein, learns; but he that does not so, learns not.

CHAP. VII.
Of what Matter, and in what Form the Vessel Aludel (or Sublimatory) is to be
made.

BUt the Intention of the Vessel Aludel is, that that it be made of thick
Glass; for other Matter is not sufficient, unless it be thick; and of like
Substance with Glass. Because Glass only, and its like (wanting Pores) is able
to retain Spirits from Flight, and that they be not exterminated by the Fire;
but no other Matter is fit: because through the Pores of them the Spirits are
gradually diminished, and vanish. Nor are Metals serviceable in this Case,
because Spirits (by reason of their Amity and Convenience) penetrate them, and
are united therewith; wherefore, passing through them they vanish, as is
manifestly proved, by what are determined by Us. And it is found necessarily,
and by Experience, that this We have said is true. Therefore We are not by any
Thing excused, from taking Glass in the Composition of the Aludel. In order to
which,

Let a round Glass Vessel, or Concha, be made, with a flat round Bottom, and in
the middle of the Sides thereof a Zone, or Girdle of Glass surrounding the
same; This Description is hard to be understood.
and above that Girdle cause a round Wall to be made, equidistant from the Wall
of the Concha, to the Grossitude of the Cover of the said Concha; so that in
this Distance the Wall of the Cover may freely fall without pressure. But the
Height of this Wall (above the Girdle) must be according to the Measure of the
Height of the Wall of the Concha, or little more or less. This being done, let
two Covers (or Heads) be made equal to the Measure of this Concavity of the two
Walls; the length of both Covers must be equal and of one Span, and the Figure
of them one also; viz. Pyramidal; in the superior part of which Covers, two
equal Holes, one in the one, and another in the other, should be made so, as
that an Hens Feather may commodiously be put in; as a little after will be more
clearly expressed. Therefore the Intention of this Vessel Concha, is, that its
Cover may be moved at the pleasure of the Artist, and that the Juncture might
be Ingenious, so that through it (without any Luting) no Egress might be made
for the Spirits. But he that can better contrive this Vessel, may so do,
notwithstanding our Description.

Yet in this We have a special Intention, viz. That the interior Concha, with
its Sides, should enter half way within its Cover. For seeing it is the
Property of Fumes to Ascend, not to Descend, by this We find the Spirits not to
have Exit for Consumption; and by reason of this, it excels the other Ways,
which by Our Intention We acquired. And by trial of this, the Artist will see
that We have given a true Estimate hereof. Also, the Intention is, that the
Head of the Aludel should be often emptied, least part of what is Sublimed (the
Quantity elevated being overmuch) fall down again to the Bottom, and so the
Time of Subliming, by this reiteration, be prolonged. Likewise, another
Intention is, that what Ascends up in the form of Powder nigh the Hole of the
Head of the Aludel, be always kept apart, from that which is found to have
ascended fused and dense in small Lumps, porous and clear at the Bottom
thereof, with adherency to the Sides of the Vessel; because this is known to
have less of Adustion, than what is found to ascend nigh to the Hole of the
Head. This is by the Superior proved manifestly, by Reason and Experience. But
the Probation of the Goodness and Perfection of Sublimation, is already
declared, viz. That it be found clear, and lucid, and not burnt with
Inflammation.

Therefore this is the Perfection of the Intentions of Subliming Sulphur, and
Arsnick. And if it be not so found, the Work must be repeated, with
Consideration of all its Intentions, till the Sublimate be found Perfect, as is
said.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Sublimation of Mercury and Argentvive.

NOw We will determine the whole Intention of Sublimation of Argentvive. This
Work is completed, when its Terrestreity is highly purified, and its Aquosity
wholly removed. For We are excused from the labor of removing its Adustion,
because it has none. Therefore We say, that the Ingenuity of seperating its
superfluous Earth, is to mix it with Things wherewith it has not affinity, and
often to reiterate the Sublimation of it from them. Of this kind, is Talk, and
the Calx of Egg-shells, and of White Marble. Likewise also Glass most subtily
beaten, and every kind of Salt prepared. For by these it is cleansed, but by
other Things, having affinity with it (unless they be Bodies of Perfection) it
is rather corrupted; because all such Things have a Sulphureity, which,
ascending with it in Sublimation, corrupt it. And this you find true by
Experience, because, when you sublime it from Tin or Lead, you find it (after
Sublimation) infected with Blackness. Therefore its Sublimation is better made
by those Things, which agree not with it; but it would be better, by Things,
with which it does agree, if they had not Sulphureity. Wherefore, this
Sublimation is better made from Calx than from all other Things; because that
agrees little with it, and has not Sulphureity.

But the way of removing its superfluous Aquosity, is, that when it is mixed
with Calxes, from which it is to be sublimed, it be well ground and commixed
with them by Imbibition, until nothing of it appear, and afterward the
Wateriness of Imbibition removed by a most gentle heat of Fire; which receding,
the Aquosity of Argentvive recedes with it. Yet the Fire must be so very
gentle, as that by it the whole Substance of Argentvive ascend not. Therefore
from the manifold Reiteration of Imbibition, with Contrition and gentle
Assation, its greater Aquosity is abolished; the residue of which is removed by
repeating the Sublimation often. And when you see it most White, excelling Snow
in its Whiteness, and to adhere (as it were dead) to the Sides of the Vessel;
then again reiterate its Sublimation, without the Feces; because part of it
adheres fixed with the Feces, and can never by any kind of Ingenuity be
separated from them. Or afterward, fix part of it; as shall expressly be taught
you in the following: And when you have fixed it, then reiterate Sublimation of
the Part remaining, that it may be likewise fixed.

Being fixed, reserve it; but first prove it upon Fire. If it flow well, then
you have administered sufficient Sublimation, but if not, add to it some small
part of Argentvive sublimed, and reiterate the Sublimation, till your end be
answered; for if it has a lucid and most white Color, and be porous, than you
have well sublimed it, if not, not. Therefore in the Preparation of it made by
Sublimation be not negligent; because such as its Mundation (or cleansing)
shall be, such will be its Perfection, in projection of it upon any of the
imperfect Bodies, and upon its own Body unprepared. Yet here note, that Some
have by it formed Iron, others Lead; some Copper, and others Tin. Which
happened to them, through negligence of Preparation; sometimes of it alone,
sometimes of Sulphur, or of its Compeer, mixed with it. But if you shall by
Subliming directly cleanse and perfect this Subject, it will be a firm and
perfect Tincture of Whiteness, the like of which is not.

CHAP. IX.
Of Sublimation of Marchasite.

THerefore, the sum of the Intention of Sublimation of Argentvive, being
sufficiently declared, We now come to the Sublimation of Marchasite; of which
there are two ways. One is performed without Ignition, the other with Ignition;
and that is, because it has a twofold Substance: viz. One Sulphur, pure in its
nature; the other Argentvive, mortified. The first is profitable, as Sulphur;
the second profitable, as Argentvive mortified, and moderately prepared
Therefore We take this last, because by it We are excused from the former
Argentvive, and the labor of mortifying it.

The entire Way of Sublimation of this Subject is, that it be ground to Powder,
and put into an Aludel, and its Sulphur Sublimed without Ignition; always, and
that very often, removing what is Sublimed, for the aforesaid Reason; and
afterward augmenting the force of Fire, unto Ignition of the Aludel. And the
first Sublimation of Marchasite must be made in a Vessel of Sublimation, and so
long continued, as until the Sulphur be separated; the Process being
successively, and orderly continued, until it is manifest, that what was in it
of Sulphur, be all passed out. Which may be proved by these manifest
Experiments. For when its whole Sulphur shall be elevated, you will see the
Color thereof changed into most White, mixed with a very clear, pleasant, and
Coelestine Color: Also you will otherwise prove this, because what shall be of
the Nature of Sulphur will burn and give a Flame, as Sulphur. But what shall be
secondly Sublimed, after that Sublimate, will neither be inflamed, nor show any
Properties of Sulphur, but of Argentvive mortified in the Reiteration of
Sublimation.

CHAP. X.
Of the Vessel, in which Marchasite may rightly be Sublimed.

THerefore We collect that, by its way of Sublimation, which is thus: A most
solid and well cocted Earthen Vessel, must be made to the length of half the
Stature of a Man, but in breadth Diametrically, no more than that the Hand may
commodiously enter. The Bottom of this Vessel (which must be made so, as it may
be separated and conjoined) must be made after the similitude of a plain Dish
or Porrenger very deep; viz. from the superior Orifice to the Bottom, the depth
of one Hands length, with its Fingers. And from that Place, or moveable Bottom
to the Head, the Vessel must be very accurately Glazed within, with very thick
Vitrification. And upon the Head of the Vessel must be fitted an Alembeck with
a wide nose or beak: For in such a Vessel That is best sublimed. Therefore the
Bottom must be conjoined with its Vessel, with very firm and tenacious Luting,
and the Marchasite spread upon (or within) that Bottom; and then the Alembeck
set upon the Superior Part: and so placed in a Furnace, of which the property
is to give a strong Fire, viz. of Fusion of Silver, or Copper, which in the Sum
of our Work, where we shall declare the Diversities of all Instruments, We
sufficiently describe to you. And this being done, you must surround the top of
your Furnace with an Hoop or Ring of Iron flat, having a hole in its middle,
proportionate to the Magnitude of the Vessel; that the Vessel may stand fast
within it. Then lute the Junctures in the Circuit of the Vessel and the
Furnace, least the Fire passing out there, be an hindrance to the adherency of
your Sublimation, leaving only four small Windows, or Doors, that may be opened
and shut in the Flat-Ring or Hoop aforesaid, through which Coals may be put in
round about the Sides of the Furnace. Likewise four other holes must be left
under them, and between their Spaces, for the putting in of Coals; and six or
eight lesser holes, proportionate to the Magnitude of the little Finger, which
must never be shut; that by them the Fire may commodiously free it self from
Fumosities. Let these last Holes be in the Juncture of the Furnace, with the
aforesaid Hoop.

But that Furnace is of great Ignition, the Sides of which are to the height of
two Cubits; and in the midst whereof is a round Grate or Wheel bored full of
very many small holes close together, and strongly annexed to the Furnace with
Luting. The Superior part of these holes must be closer, or smaller above, but
wider or more open beneath, that Ashes or Coals may the more freely fall from
them, and the Grate be left continually open for the more free Reception of the
Air. For the free and ample admission of the Air through the Inferior Holes, is
one Cause of great Ignition by the Furnace. Therefore be exercised therein, and
you will find out the Secret. But the Cause of so great Length of the Vessel,
is, that a great part of it may stand up, and be extended beyond the Fire, and
be kept cool, that the Fumes of the Sublimate ascending may find a Place of
cooling, and adhere; and not find a way of Flight, and be exterminated. This he
well knows, who has sublimed in short Sublimatories, wherein he found nothing
of the Sublimate; because, by reason of the Shortness of his Vessel, the Fire
was equal in heat through the whole of the same. Therefore, the Matter to be
sublimed, always stood converted into the Substance of Fume, and could not any
where adhere, but gradually vanish through the Pores of the Vessel.

Wherefore, in subliming all Things, the Vessel must the greater part of it be
extended high above the Fire, that the same extended Part may serve for a
Refrigeratory. But the Cause of Vitrification, or Glazing the Vessel, is, that
the ascending Fumes, in the place of their Ascension, may not find the Sides of
the Aludel porous, and penetrating them, take their Flight. Therefore the Place
of their Ascension is vitrified, that the Way of their Flight may be stopped.
But the Bottom of the Vessel is not Glazed, because it stands in the Fire,
which would melt its Vitrification; and that melting, both the Bottom it self,
and Matter to be sublimed, would also be melted, and turned into Glass. For the
Property of Glass is to overcome all Things, and convert them to it self.
Therefore, all these Things, and their Causes, being considered, Let your Fire
be continued under the Vessel, until you be assured by infallible Experience,
the whole is ascended. The Experiment of this is, the putting in a Rod of Earth
well burned (having a small hole in the end, reaching almost to the middle
thereof, and answering to the quantity of the little Finger) nigh the Matter of
which the Sublimation is made. And if any thing ascending adhere to the hole,
the Whole is not sublimed; but if not, then the Sublimation is ended. By this
same Exercise, in all Things to be sublimed, you may be assured of the End of
your Work.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Sublimation of Magnesia and Tutia: Also of Imperfect Bodies, and of the
Addition of Matter elevating them.

THe Intention of the Sublimation of Magnesia and Tutia, is the same with the
Intention of the last Sublimation of Marchasite. For all these cannot be
sublimed without Ignition. Therefore they all have one Intention, with the same
Causes, and the same Experiences; and that has one General Order. Because it
necessarily happens, that whatsoever are sublimed with Ignition, must be
sublimed without Feces; for in themselves they have enough, yea, too much
Feces: the sign of which is the difficulty of their Sublimation.

Likewise all Bodies diminished from Perfection, are sublimed in the same
Order, and no difference of diversity is, unless that in Bodies the Fire of
Sublimation must be more vehement than in Magnesia, Marchasite, and Tutia. And
so likewise, Bodies, in their Sublimations, are not diversified, except that
some need the adjunction of something else to elevate them; others not. But
there is one special Consideration, by Experience found good in the Sublimation
of Bodies; and that is, that no great Quantity of the Body to be sublimed, be
at once put into the Bottom of the Vessel; because a great abundance of Matter
impedes Sublimation. Also the Bottom of the Sublimatory should be flat, not
concave; that the Body equally and thinly spread upon the Bottom, may equally
and much be elevated in all its Parts.

Bodies needing the Admixtion of Matters elevating, are Venus and Mars, by
reason of the slowness of their Fusion. Therefore Venus needs Tutia, and Mars
Arsnick; and with these they are easily elevated, because they mostly agree
with them. Wherefore after Consideration of them, let Sublimation be made as in
Tutia, and in things like to it in Sublimation; and let their Sublimation be
disposed in the same Order, with its Causes and Experiences.

CHAP. XII.
Of Descension, and the way of Purifying by Pastills.

THe Intentions of Sublimation, with all their Causes, being already declared,
it remains, that We now show the way of Descension, with its Causes, and
determinate and complete Order likewise. For there was a threefold Cause of its
Invention. One, that when any Matter is included in that Vessel, which is
called a Chemical Descensory, after its Fusion it may descend through the Hole
thereof, and by its Descent We be assured that it has admitted Fluxing.
Another Cause, that weak Bodies may by ^t be preserved from Combustion, after
Reduction from their Calxes. For when We attempt to reduce weak Bodies from
their Calxes, We cannot reduce all their whole Substance at one time.
Therefore, if that Part, which is first reduced into Body, should expect the
Reduction of the whole, a great Quantity of it would vanish by the Fire.
Wherefore it was necessarily devised, that one part, so soon as reduced, might
be taken from the Fire. And this is done by a Descensory. The third Cause of
the Invention of it, was the Depuration of Bodies from every thing extraneous.
For the Body descends in Flux clean, and leaves every thing that is extraneous
in the Concavity thereof.

Therefore Descension being invented for these three necessary Causes, We will
now determine the Method of it, with its Instrument first denoted with its
Causes. In order to which, We say, that the Form of it must be such, as its
Bottom may be pointed, and the Sides of it without Roughness, equally
terminating into the aforesaid Acuity, or Point of the Bottom; and its Cover
(if it need any) must be made in the likeness of a plain or flat Dish, and well
fitted to it; and the Vessel with its Cover must be made of good and firm
Earth, not easily cracking in the Fire. Then put in the Matter, which you would
have to descend, upon round Rods made of like Earth, and so placed as they may
be more nigh the Top than Bottom of the Vessel. Then covering the Vessel and
luting the Juncture, set it within a Fire of Coals, and blow it until the whole
Matter descend into a subjacent Vessel. Yet (if the Matter be of difficult
Fusion) it may be put upon a Table plain, or of small Concavity, from which it
may easily descend, by inclining the Head of the Descensory, when it is in
Flux. For by this Bodies are purified.

But they are better purified by Pastills, which way of Purification is the
same with the way of Purifying of the Descensory. Therefore by it We are
excused from that: For it holds the Feces of Bodies, as a Descensory and
better; therefore We declare the Way of it. We take a Body, of which the
Intention is to be cleansed, and that We reduce to most fine Grains, or
Filings, or into a Calx (which is more perfect) and mix with it some other
Calx, of which the Intention is not to be melted; and then We make the Body to
flow. For We by that, often repeated, find Bodies to be cleansed, but not with
perfect Mundification, which We know to be Perfection; yet with a profitable
Mundification, that Bodies capable of Perfection, may the better and more
perfectly be by it transformed: For there is to be an Administration preceding
that Transformation; but every Administration shall sufficienly be declared to
you in the following. Here We only give you a Description of the Descensory.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Distilation and its Causes, and of Three kinds of the same. viz, by
Alembeck, by a Descensory, and by Filter.

THerefore, following Our Purpose, it is convenient. We should speak of
Distillation, with its Causes; Distillation is an Elevation of aqueous Vapors
in their Vessel. And Distillation is diversified. For some Distillations are by
Fire, and some without Fire. Those made by Fire are of two kinds; one, which is
by Elevation into the Alembeck; and the other by Chemical Descensory, by
mediation of which the Oil of Vegetables is extracted.

The Cause why Distillation was invented, and the general Cause of the
Invention of every Distillation, is the Purification of Liquid Matter from its
turbulent Feces, and Cons^rvation of it from Putrefaction. For We see a Thing
Distilled (by what kind soever of Distillation) to be rendered more Pure, and to
be better preserved from Putrefaction. But the special Cause of that
Distillation, which is made by ascent into the Alembeck, is the desire of
acquiring Water Pure without Earth. The Experience of which is, that We see
Water so Distilled, to have no Feculency. The Cause of the Invention of Pure
Water, was the Imbibition of Spirits, and of clean Medicines. As for Example,
When We need Imbibition, We must have pure Water, which leaves no Feces after
its Resolution; by which Feculency, Our Medicines and cleansed Spirits might be
infected and corrupted. But the Cause of that Invention, which is made by
Descent, was the Extraction of Oil pure in its Nature; because by Ascent, Oil
cannot be had in its Combustible Nature. And such an Inquisition also was, that
the Color which is permixed with its Substance, might be had; for this may be
helpful in the Case. But Distillation, which is made by Filter, is performed
without Fire; and the Cause of its Invention was Clearness of the Water only.

Now We will show you the Methods of Distillations, with their Causes.
Therefore of that which is made by Ascent, there is a twofold Way or Method.
For one is performed in an Earthen Pan full of Ashes; but the other with Water
in its Vessel, with Hay or Wool, orderly so disposed, that the Cucurbit, or
Distillatory Alembeck, may not be broken before the Work be brought to
Perfection. That which is made by Ashes, is performed with a greater, stronger,
and more acute Fire; but what is made by Water, with a mild and equal Fire. For
Water admits not the Acuity of Ignition, as Ashes does. Therefore, by that
Distillation, which is made in Ashes, Colors, and the more gross Parts of the
Earth, are wont to be elevated; but by that which is made in Water, the Parts
more subtle, and without Color, and more approaching to the Nature of simple
Wateriness, are usally elevated. Therefore more subtle Separation is made by
Distillation in Water, than by Distilling in Ashes. This he knows to be true,
who when he had Distilled Oil by Ashes, received his Oil scarcely altered into
the Recipient; but willing to separate the Parts thereof, was by necessity
forced to Distill it by Water. And then by reiterating that Labor, he
separated the Oil into its Elemental Parts; so that from a most red Oil, he
extracted a most white and most serene Water, the whole Redness thereof
remaining in the Bottom of the Vessel.

Therefore by this Magistery, We must necessarily come to the determinate
Separation of all the Elements, of every Vegetable Thing, and of that which
from the Vegetable proceeds to a Being, and of every like Thing: but by that,
which is made by Descent, We may attain the Oil of every Thing determinately,
viz. of all Vegetables, and of their Like: and by that, which is made by
Filter, We acquire the Clearness of every Liquorous Thing. Yet all these Things
are known, even to Men knowing little or nothing; but if any Man knows them
not, he knows nothing of this Magistery. Therefore let him practice in the
Exercise and he will find it out.

The Disposition of that which is made by Ashes, is, that a strong Earthen-Pan
be taken and fitted to the Furnace, like to the aforesaid Furnace of
Sublimation, with the same Distance from the Sides of the Furnace, and with
like Ventholes; upon the Bottom of which Pan sifted Ashes must be put to the
thickness of one Finger, and upon the Ashes the Vessel of Distillation set, and
covered round about with the same, almost as high as to the Neck of the
Alembeck. This being done, put in the Matter, which you intend shall be
Distilled. Lastly, Cover the Vessel with its Alembeck, the Neck of which must
enclose the Neck of the inferior Cucurbit, even up to the curved Channel of the
Alembeck, least what is to be Distilled should fly away; and lute the Alembeck
firmly with its Cucurbit, and give Fire to it, until it begin to Distill. But
the Alembeck and its Cucurbit, must be both of Glass. And the Fire must be
increased according to the Exigency of the Distillation, until it be found, by
urging the Fire, that all which should be Distilled is Distilled off.

The Disposition of the second Intention of Distillation, which is made by
Water, is like to this, in the Vessel and Alembeck: yet it differs in this,
viz. That in this, must be taken an Iron or Brass Pan, and that fitted to the
Furnace, as is said. Afterward, upon the Bottom of the Pan, within must be
laid a Bed of Hay, or Wool, or other such like Matter, to the thickness of
three Fingers, that the Cucurbit may not be broken; and with the same Hay, or
like Things, the Cucurbit must be covered round about, almost as high as to the
Neck of the Alembeck; and upon them many small Sprigs, or Sticks spread, and
upon the Sticks weighty Stones laid, which with their weight may depress the
Hay, or other like Matter, with the Cucurbit and Alembeck, and firmly and
steddily hold them depressed upon the Bottom of the Pan, that they be not
moved, or raised by the Water; and that stirring be the Cause of breaking the
Glass, and Destruction of the Matter to be Distilled. Afterward, upon the Hay
and Sticks depressed with the Stones, pour Water until the Pan be full. This
being done, put Fire under and Distill, until all be Distilled off.

The Disposition of that, which is made by Descent, is, that a Glass Descensory
be made, with its Cover, and that put in which is to be Distilled, and then the
Cover luted on; and Fire made upon the Top, or over it: for its Distillation
descends.

The Disposition of that, which is made by Filter, is, that the Liquor to be
Distilled be put into a Stone Concha, and the wider part of the Filter put into
the said Liquor, even to the Bottom of the Concha, but the narrower part of it
hang out over the Orifice of the said Vessel. And under that end of the Filter
must be set another Vessel for receiving the Distillation. Therefore, when the
Filter begins to Distill, the Water with which it was moistened will first
Distill off; which ceasing, the Liquor to be Distilled succeeds. Which Liquor
if it be not as yet serene, it must so often be put into the Concha again, and
re-distilled, as until it be Distilled most serene.

But all these Operations, which are easy, need no great Probation; therefore
I am willing to pass that over in Silence. This is the Description of all the
Vessels of every Distillation, here now completed by Us.

CHAP. IV.
Of Calcination, as well of Bodies as of Spirits, with its Causes and Methods.

AFter the Narration of Distillation, We proceed to Discourse of Calcination.
Calcination is the Pulverization of a Thing by Fire, through Privation of the
Humidity consolidating the Parts. The Cause of the Invention of it is, that the
adustive, corrupting and defiling Sulphureity, may be abolished by Fire. Yet it
is diversified, according to the Diversity of Things to be Calcined. For Bodies
are Calcined, and Spirits are Calcined; yea, other Things also extraneous from
the nature of these; yet with a diverse Intention. And seeing there are
imperfect Bodies of two kinds; viz. Hard, as Venus and Mars, and Soft, as
Jupiter and Saturn; all which are Calcined: there was a necessity of Calcining
them with a diverse Intention, viz. General and Special. They are all Calcined
with one general Intention; which is, that their corrupting and defiling
Sulphureity may be abolished by Fire. For so every adustive Sulphureity, which
could not be removed without Calcination, is burnt away from every thing
whatsoever. And because the Body it self is solid, and by reason of that
solidity, the occult Sulphureity concealed within the Continuity of the
Substance of Argentvive, is defended from Adustion: therefore it was necessary
to separate the Continuity thereof, that the Fire freely comeing to every of
its least Parts, might burn the Sulphureity from it, and the Continuity of
Argentvive in the Body, not defend it.

Likewise, the common Intention in it, is Depuration of the Earthiness: For it
is found, that Bodies are cleansed by reiterated Calcination and Reduction; as
We shall show in the following.

Special Calcination is of soft Bodies, and with these two Intentions, that
through it there may be an Intention of hardening and firing; which is attained
to by an Ignitious Repetition of Calcination upon them; of which it is
expedient We should Discourse, in the following Treatise. For We find that they
are manifestly hardened by that Ingenuity.

But the Cause of the Invention of the Calcination of Spirits, is, that they
may the better be fixed, and be the more easily dissolved into Water. Because
every kind of Things Calcined is more fixed than the not Calcined, and of
easier Solution; and because the Parts of the Calcinate more subtiliated by
Fire, are more easily mixed with Waters, and turned into Water. And this you
will find so to be, if you be experienced. The Calcination of other Things, is
subservient to the Exigency of the Preparation of Spirits and Bodies; of which
Preparation We shall speak more at large in the following. But any of these
Things, or such as these, is not of Perfecti^n.

Therefore the way or Method of Calcination is diverse, by reason of the
Diversity of things to be calcined. For Bodies are otherwise calcined, than
Spiri^^ or other Things. And Bodies diverse each from other, are likewise
diversely calcined. For soft Bodies have one General way, according to the
Intention of Calcination, viz. that both may be calcined by Fire only; and by
the Acuity of Salt prepared or not prepared, both likewise. Therefore, the
first Calcination by Fire only, is thus prepared: You must have a Vessel of
Iron or Earth, formed after the similitude of a Porringer, the structure of
which must be very firm, and fitted to the Furnace of Calcination, in such
wise, that under it the Coals may be cast in and blowed. These being thus
ordered, you must cast in Lead or Tin into your Vessel, which must be firmly
set upon a Trivet of Iron, or on three Stone-Columes, and likewise surely
fastened to the Walls of its Furnace, with three or four Stones set in stiff
between the Furnace-sides and the Vessel, that it may not be stirred. The
Figure of the Furnace must be the same with the Form of the Furnace of great
Ignition, of which mention is made above, and shall more fully be declared in
the Following. Therefore in that Furnace kindle Fire under your Vessel of
Sublimation, sufficient for Fusion of the Body to be calcined. And when the
Body shall, by heat of Fire, contract a Black skin upon it, gather that off
from it by a Slice, or other fit Instrument of Iron or Stone, that will not
permit it self to be burnt to the Infection of the Calx. This drawing off, or
taking off the Skin, must so long be continued, as until the whole Body be
converted to Powder. If it be Saturn, a greater Fire must be administered, until
the Calx be changed into a Color most yellow or red. If it be Jupiter, it must
likewise be exposed and continued in the Fire, until the Calx be changed into
complete Whiteness.

Yet in this We would have the Artificer to be well advised, that Saturn is
easily reduced from its Calx; but Jupiter most difficulty. Therefore, let him
be careful, that he err not in exposing Saturn, after its first Pulverization
to too great a Fire, and so reduce the Calx into Body, before it is perfected.
For he needs Temperance of Fire, and that leisurely augmented by degrees, with
Caution, until it be confirmed in its Calx; proving not so easily reducible,
that a greater Fire may be administered to it, for completely perfecting its
Calx. Likewise, he must be careful, that he err not in Jupiter, by reason of
its difficult Reduction; so, that when he intends to reduce its Calx, he find
it not reduced, but in its former condition, or turned into Glass; and thence
he conclude its Reduction impossible. For We say, if a great Fire be not
administered, in the Reduction of Tin, it reduces not; and if a great Fire be
administered, it does not necessarily happen, that it shall be reduced; but it is
possible it may be converted to Glass. And that is, because Jupiter, in the
profundity of its Nature, has the fugitive Substance of Argentvive included:
which, if kept long in Fire, flies away, and leaves the Body deprived of
Humidity; so that it is found more apt for Vitrification, than to be converted
to the Fusion of a Metallic Body. For every Thing deprived of its proper
Humidity, gives no other than a Vitrificatory Fusion. Whence it necessarily
follows, that the Artist must hasten to reduce it swiftly, with the speedy
force of a violent Fire: for otherwise it is no^ reduced. Therefore let him
practice therein, and he will come to the Knowledge thereof.

The way of Calcination of these two Bodies, which is performed by the Acuity
of Salt, is, that Quantity after Quantity of Salt be very often cast upon them
in their Fusion, and permixed by much agitation with a Rod of Iron over the
Fire, until by mixtion of the Salt they be turned into Ashes. And afterward, by
the same way of Perfection, the Calxes of them are perfected, with their
Considerations. But in this also there is difference in the Calcination of
these two Bodies. For Lead, with the first labors of Calcinatitn, is more
easily converted to Powder than Tin; yet the Calx of it is not more easily
perfected, than the Calx of Tin. The Cause of this Diversity is, because Saturn
has a more fixed Humidity than Jupiter.

Of Venus and Mars, the way of Calcination is one; yet diverse from the former,
by reason of the difficulty of their Liquefaction. And it is this, either of
these Bodies reduced into Plates, must be heat red hot, but not melted. For, by
reason of the great Quantity of Earthiness in them, and the large Measure they
have of adustive and flying Sulphureity, they are easily this way deduced into
Calx. And that therefore is, because by reason of much Earthiness, mixed with
the Substance of Argentvive, the due continuation of Argentvive is disturbed.
Therefore Porosity is caused i^ them, through which the Sulphureity passing may
fly away; and the Fire, by that Means having access to it, burn and elevate the
same. Whence it comes to pass, that the Parts are made more rare, and through
Discontinuity of the Rarity converted into Ashes. The Experience of this is
manifest, because Plates of Copper exposed to Ignition, yield a Sulphurous
Flame, and cause pulverizable Scales in their Superficies. And that therefore
is, because from the Parts more nigh, a more easy combustion of Sulphur must
necessarily be made.

But the Form of the Furnace of this Calcination, is the same with the Form of
the Furnace of Distillation, only that this must have one great hole left in
the Crown of it, whence it may free it self from Fumosities. And the Site of
Things to be calcined, must be in the midst of the Furnace, that the Fire may
have free access to them round about. But the Vessel must be of Earth, made in
the form of a Porring^r or deep Dish.

The way of Calcination of Spirits, is, that to them approaching to Fixation be
administered Fire, gradually, and very leisurely increased, that they fly not,
until they be able to sustain the greatest Fire. Their Vessel must be round,
every way closed, and their Furnace the same with this lastly mentioned. With a
like Furnace, and like Vessel, every Thing is likewise calcined. Yet We are
excused from greater Labor, than what must be employed in preventing their
Flight: because other Things (unless Spirits, and what is nigh to the Nature of
Spirits) fly not.

CHAP. XV.
Of Solution, and its Cause.

NOW We intend to speak of Solution. Solution is the Reduction of a Dry Thing
into Water. Therefore, We say, that every Perfection of Solution is completed
with subtle Waters, and especially the acute, and sharp, and saline Waters,
having no Feces; as is Distilled Vinegar, Sour Grapes, Pears of very great
sharpness, Pomegranets, and the like of these distilled.

The Cause of the Invention of this, was the Subtiliation of those Things,
which neither have Fusion nor Ingress; by which was lost the great Vtility of
fixed Spirits, and of those Things which are of their Nature. For every Thing
which is dissolved, must necessarily have the Nature of Salt, or of Allom, or
of their like. And the Nature of them is, that they give Fusion before their
Vitrification. Therefore Spirits dissolved will likewise give like Fusion. And
since they in their own Nature, agree with Bodies, and each with other, Fusion
being acquired, they must by that necessarily penetrate Bodies, and penetrating
transmute the same. But they neither penetrate, nor trasmute, without our
Magistery, which is this, viz. that after Solution and Coagulation of the Body,
to it be administered some one of the Spirits purified, not fixed; and that so
often sublimed from it, as until it remain with it, and give to it a more swift
Fusion, and conserve the same in Fusion from Vitrification. For the Nature of
Spirits is, not to be vitrified, and to preserve the Mixture from
Vitrification, as long as they are in it. Therefore the Spirit, which more
retains the Nature of Spirits, more defends from Vitrification. But a Spirit
only purified, more preserves than a Spirit purified, calcined, and dissolved:
therefore there is a necessity of mixing such a Spirit with the Body. For from
these results good Fusion, and Ingress, and firm Fixation.

But We are able to prove, by the Works of Nature, that Things only holding the
Nature of Salts, Alloms, and the like, are Soluble. For considering, We find in
all her Works no other things to be dissolved, but them. Therefore, whatsoever
are dissolved, they must necessarily be dissolved by their Nature. Yet, because
We see all Things truly calcined, to be dissolved, by Reiteration of
Calcination, and Solution; therefore, We by that prove, that all Calcinates
approach to the Nature of Salts, and Alloms, therefore must necessarily be
themselves attended with those properties. But the way of Solution is twofold,
viz by hot Dung, and by boiling or hot Water. Of both which there is one
Intention, and one Effect.

The Way of Dissolving by Dung, is, that the Calcinate be put into a Glass
Vessel, and upon the same poured of distilled Vinegar, or the like, double its
weight, and the Mouth of the Vessel well closed, that nothing may respire; and
then this Matter, with its Vessels, set in Hot Dung to be dissolved, and the
Solution afterward by Filter separated. But the not dissolved must be again
calcined, and after Calcination again in like manner dissolved, until by
repeating the Labor, the whole be dissolved.

The Way of Dissolving by boiling Water, is more swift, and it is thus: The
calcinate must in like manner be put into its Vessel, with Vinegar poured on it
as before, and the Orifice well closed, that nothing expire; then the Vessel
must be set, buried in Straw, into a Pan full of Water, as in the Way of
Distillation by Water, We before appointed; and afterward Fire kindled under
it, until the Water boil for an hour. This being done, the Solution must be
filtred, and kept apart. But the not dislsolved, again calcined, and again in
the same manner dissolved; until by repeating the Labor, the whole be
dissolved.

CHAP. XVI.
Of Coagulation, and its Causes, and of diverse ways of coagulating Mercury;
and of dissolved Medicines.

COagulation is the Reduction of a Thing Liquid, to a Solid Substance, by
Privation of the Humidity. But there is a twofold Cause of its Invention: one
is, the Induration, or Hardening of Argentvive; the other Cause of Invention is,
the freeing of Medicines dissolved, from the Wateriness with them admixed.
Therefore it is diversified, according to the Multiplicity of things to be
coagulated. For Argentvive needs one Coagulation, but dissolved Medicines
another. Yet there is a twofold Coagulation of Argentvive. One, by washing away
its whole innate Humidity from it: the other, by Inspissation (or thickning) of
its Humidity, until it be hardened. Yet it is a most difficult and laborious
Work to congeal it, even with the profoundness of clear sighted Industry.
Therefore We will declare the whole Ingenuity of its Coagulation.

Some thought the Ingenuity of its Coagulation was to keep it long in a
temperate Fire: who when they supposed they had coagulated it, after removal of
it from the Fire, found the same to flow, as before. By which they were driven
to amazement and wonder, strenuously arguing, that this was not possible to be
effected. But Others, from Natural Principles, supposing that every Humidity
must necessarily by heat of Fire be converted into Dryness, endeavored with
Instancy of Perseverance to continue the Conservation of it in Fire; and by
this Continuation, they at last came to this, viz. that some of these Men
converted it into a White-Stone, Others into a Red, and others into a Citrine
or yellow Stone, which neither had Fusion, nor Ingress: and the Cause of these
Diversities they could not judge of, therefore cast it away.

Others endeavored to coagulate it with Medicines, and this they effected not;
but it proved a Delusion to them; either because they coagulated it not, or
because it was insensibly extenuated; or their Coagulation was not in the form
of any Body, And the Cause of the Diversity of these Things, they knew not.
Others, compounding Artificial Medicines, coagulated it in Projection; but
their Coagulation was not profitable, because they converted it to an imperfect
Body: and the Cause of this likewise could not see. Therefore it is expedient We
should declare the Causes of these Things, that the Artificer may come to the
Magistery of its Coagulation.

Wherefore, as is already sufficiently declared by Us, the Substance of
Argentvive is uniform; wherefore it is not possible, in short space of time, by
keeping it in a constantly continued Fire, to remove the Aquosity thereof.
Therefore too much haste was the Cause of the first Error. And being of a
subtle Substance, it recedes from the Fire; therefore excessive Fire is the
Cause of the Error of those Men from whom it flies. It is easily mixed with
Sulphur, Arsnick, and Marchasite, by reason of Community in their Nature.
Therefore it appears to be coagulated by them; not into the form of a Body, but
of Argentvive mixed with Lead. For these, being fugitive, cannot retain it in
the contest of Fire, until it can attain to the Nature of a Body: but through
the Impression of Fire, they fly with it, therefore that is the Cause of the
Error of those who so coagulate. Likewise, Argentvive has much Humidity united
to it self, which cannot possibly be separated from it, unless by Violence of
Fire warily adhibited, with Conservation of it it in its own Fire. And they, by
augmenting this its own Fire, as far as it can bear, take away the Humidity of
Argentvive, leaving no part sufficient for Metallic Fusion; which being taken
away, it cannot be melted. And this is the Cause of their Error, who coagulate
it into a Stone not fusible.

In like manner, Argentvive has Sulphurous Parts naturally mixed with it; yet
some Argentvive has more, others less, which to remove by Artifice is
impossible. Therefore, seeing it is the property of Sulphur, with Argentvive,
to create a red or citrine Color (according to its Measure) the ablation, or
removal of that being made, the property of Argentvive is by Fire to give a
white Color. This is therefore the Cause of the variety of Colors after its
Coagulation into a Stone. Likewise it has the Earthiness of Sulphur mixed with
it, by which all its Coagulations must necessarily be infected. And this is the
Cause of the Error of those, who coagulate it into a perfect Body. Therefore it
happens, from the Diversity of the Medicines of its Coagulation, that diverse
Bodies are creaated in its Coagulation; and from the diversity of that
likewise, what is to be coagulated. For, if either the Medicine, or that, have
a Sulphur not fixed, the Body created of it must needs be soft. But if fixed,
the Body must necessarily be hard. Also, if White, white; and if Red, red. And
if the Sulphur be remiss from White, or Red, the Body likewise must needs be
remiss; and if Earth, the Body is imperfect, if not, not so. Also every not
fixed Sulphur creates a livid Body; but the fixed, as much as in it lies, not.
And the pure Substance of it creates a pure Body, the not pure, not so.

Also the same Diversity does in like manner happen in Argentvive alone,
without the Commixtion of Sulphur, by reason of the Diversity of Mundification,
and Preparations of it in Medicines. Therefore an Illusion happens from the
part of the Diversity of the Medicines; so that sometimes in the Coagulation of
it, it is made Lead, sometimes Tin, sometimes Copper, and sometimes Iron: which
happens by reason of Impurity. And sometimes Gold or Silver is made thence;
which must needs proceed from Purity, with Consideration of the Colors.

But Argentvive is coagulated by the frequent Precipitation of it with violence
to the forcible Heat of strong Fire. For the Asperity of Fire easily removes it
Aquosity. And this work is best done by a Vessel of a great length, in the
sides of which it may find place to cool and adhere, and (by reason of the
length of the Vessel) to abide, and not fly, until it can be again
precipitated to the Fiery Bottom of the same; which must always stand very hot,
with great Ignition: and the same Precipitation be continued, till it be
totally fixed. It is also coagulated with long and constant Retention in Fire,
in a Glass Vessel with a very long Neck and round Belly; the Orifice of the
Neck being kept open, that the Humidity may vanish thereby. Also it is
coagulated by Medicine convenient for it: and that we will declare to you more
plainly in the following. And here likewise, that we may declare our complete
Intention relating to it, according as We have found by Experience, We say,
that the Medicine of it is that, which most nearly adheres to it in its
profundity; and before its flight is commixed with it throughout its least
parts. Therefore there is a necessity of collecting that from Things convenient
to it, or agreeing with the same. Of this kind are all Bodies, and Sulphur and
Arsnick.

But, because We see not any of the Bodies in its Nature to coagulate it, but
it to fly from them, of how great convenience soever they be; We have therefore
considered, that no Body adheres to it in its inmost parts. Wherefore, that
Medicine must needs be of a more subtle Substance, and more liquid Fusion,
than Metals themselves are. Also, by Spirits, remaining in their Nature, We see
not a Coagulation of it to be made, that is firm and stable; but fugitive and
of much Infection. Which indeed happens, by reason of the flight of Spirits;
but the other, from the Commixtion of the adustible and earthy Substance of
them. Therefore, hence it is manifestly evident, that from whatsoever Thing the
Medicine thereof is extracted, that must necessarily be of a most subtle and
most pure Substance, of its own Nature adhering to it, and of Liquefaction most
easy, and thin as Water; and also be fixed against the violence of Fire. For
this will coagulate it, and convert the same either into a Solar or Lunar
Nature.

Thus we have showed you the Properties of the Medicine, by which you may
attain to it; and this we have determined in a very proper Speech. Therefore
studiously exercise your self thereabout, and you will find it. But that you
may not blame Us, as if We had not sufficiently spoken thereof, We say, that
this Medicine is extracted from Metallic Bodies themselves, with their
Sulphur, or Arsnick prepared: likewise from Sulphur alone, or Arsnick prepared;
and it may be extracted from Bodies only. But from Argentvive alone it is more
easily, and more nearly, and more perfectly found; because Nature more amicably
embraces its proper Nature, and in it more rejoices, than in an extraneous
Nature. And in it is facility of Extraction of the Substance thereof, seeing it
already has a Substance subtle in Act. But the Ways of acquiring this
Medicine are by Sublimation, as is by us sufficiently declared. And the way of
fixing it, is likewise showed in its Chapter. But the way of coagulating Things
dissolved, is by a Glass placed in Ashes up to its Neck, and temperate Fire
administered thereunto, until their Aquosity vanish.

CHAP. XVII.
Of Fixation, and its Causes, and of the diverse ways of fixing Bodies and
Sprits.

FIxation is the convenient disposing a Fugitive Thing, to abide and sustain
the Fire. The Cause of the Invention of this Fixation, is (that every Tincture,
and every Alteration, may be perpetuated in the Thing altered, and not changed.
But it also is diversified according to the Diversity of Things to be fixed;
which are certain Bodies diminished from Perfection, as Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
and Venus: and according to the Diversity of Spirits also, which are Sulphur
and Arsnick in one Degree, and Argentvive in another; but Marchasite, Magnesia,
Tutia, and the like of these, in the third.

Therefore these Bodies diminished from Perfection, are fixed by their
Calcination; because thereby they are freed from their Volatile and corrupting
Sulphureity. And this We have sufficiently declared in the Chapter of
Calcination. But Sulphur and Arsnick are fixed two ways, viz. by Reiteration of
their Sublimation in the Vessel Aludel, until they remain fixed. Therefore,
according to this, the Intention of hastening the Fixation of them, is, that
the Invention of repeating a manifold Sublimation in a short time, be observed
therein; which Reiteration is made by two Aludels, with their two Heads or
Covers, in the following Order, that you may never ease from the Work of
Sublimation, until you have fixed them. Therefore, so soon as they have
ascended in one Vessel, put them into the other; and so do continually, never
suffering them long to abide adhering to the sides of either Vessel; but
constantly keep them in the Elevation of Fire, until the Elevation of them
cease. For, the sooner you can multiply the manifold Repetitions of
Sublimation, the more swiftly and better will you abbreviate the time of its
Fixation. For this Cause, there was a second way of Fixion found out, which is
by precipitating of it sublimed into Heat, that it may constantly abide
therein, until it be fixed. And this is done by a long Glass Vessel, the Bottom
of which (made of Earth, not of Glass, because that would crack) must be
artificially connexed with good Luting; and the ascending Matter, when it
adheres to the Sides of the Vessel, with a Spatula of Iron or Stone, thrust
down to the Heat of the Bottom, and this Precipitation repeated, till the whole
be fixed.

The way of fixing Argentvive. is the same with the way of Fixation of Sulphur
and Arsnick; and these ways differ not, unless that Sulphur and Arsnick cannot
be fixed, if their most thin inflamable Parts, be not separated from them, with
the subtle Artifice of Division, by this ultimate way of Fixation. But
Argentvive has not this Consideration, therefore, in this Method, they need a
more temperate Heat than Argentvive. In like manner they are diversified,
because these must be elevated higher, by reason of their slowness, than
Argentvive; and also because they are fixed in longer time than it. Therefore
they require a longer Vessel for their Fixation than Argentvive.

The Fixation of Marchasite, Magnesia, and Tutia, is, that after the first
Sublimation of them is finished, casting away their Feces, We reiterate their
Sublimation, so often returning what ascends upward, to that which remains
below, of either of them, until they be fixed. The Description of the Vessels
of these, is already given.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Ceration, and its Cause.

CEration is the mollification of an hard Thing, not fusible unto Liquefaction.
Hence it is manifest, that the Cause of the Invention of this, was, that the
Matter which had not Ingress into the Body for Alteration, by reason of
Privation of its Liquefaction, might be mollified so as to flow, and have
Ingress; therefore some thought Ceration was to be made with Liquid Oils and
Waters: but that is erroneous, and wholly remote from the Principles of this
Natural Magistery, and reproved by the manifest Works of Nature. For We find
not in those Metallic Bodies, that Nature has posited an Humidity soon
terminable; but rather long durable, for the necessity of their Fusion and
Mollification; because, if she had insited in them an Humidity soon terminable,
it would necessarily follow, that the Bodies must be totally deprived of it, in
one only Ignition. Whence also it would follow, that every Body could neither
be hammered nor melted, after one Ignition.

Wherefore, imitating the Works of Nature as much as We can, We must
necessarily follow her Way in Cerating. She Cerates in the Radix of fusible
Things, with an Humidity, which is above all Humidities, able to sustain the
Heat of Fire: therefore it is necessarily expedient for Us also, to cerate with
like Humidity: But this Cerative Humidity is no thing better, more possibly,
and more nearty found, than in these, viz. in Sulphur, and in Arsnick, nearly;
but more nearly in Argentvive. Therefore We see not the Humidity of these to
leave their Earth, by reason of the strong Union, which they have in the Work
of the Mixtion of Nature. But in all other Things having Humidity, by
Experience you will find, that the same is separated in Resolution from their
Earthy Substance; and after Separation thereof, that they are deprived of all
Humidity. Yet in the Spirits aforesaid, it is not so. Therefore, there is no
other Thing, by which We may be excused from taking them in the Work of
Ceration.

The way of Ceration by them is, that the Sublimation of them be so often
multiplied upon the Thing to be Cerated, until remaining with their Humidity in
it, they give good Fusion. Yet this cannot be effected, before the perfect
cleansing of them, from every corrupting Thing. But it seems better to me, that
the Oils of these should be first fixed, by Oil of Tartar, and every Ceration,
competent and necessary for this Art, be made with them.

The end of the First Book of GEBER of the Sum of Perfection, or of the Perfect
Magistery.
The Second Book Of the Sum of PERFECTION, OR OF THE PERFECT MAGISTERY.
The AUTHOR'S PREFACE, Dividing this Second Book into Three Parts.
THe Discourse of the Principles of this Magistery being completed, We must
necessarily (according to Our Promise) exactly prosecute the Intent of this
Art, in a Speech convenient and proper thereunto. Which Intent is, a
Consideration of every Thing, by which the Perfection of this Work may more
manifestly be showed. And it is a Consideration of the necessity of Perfection
of the Medicine, viz. How it may be understood from what thing that may best
and more nearly be extracted, for the entire Perfection of the Imperfect. And
it is likewise a Consideration of the Artifices, by which We may know, whether
the Perfection be complete, or not. Therefore these Three being delivered, the
whole Knowledge of Perfection will be described, according to the Exigency of
Our Art.

The First Part of this Second Book, Of the Knowledge of Things, whereby the
possibility and way of Perfection may be understood.
CHAP. I.
That the Knowledge of Perfection of this Art, depends on the Knowledge of the
Nature of Spirits and Bodies, etc.

IT is not possible to know the Transmutations of Bodies, or of Argentvive,
unless the Knowledge of the Nature of them according to their Radixes, be well
impressed in the Mind of the Artist. Therefore We will first notify the
Principles of Bodies, viz. What they are according to their Causes, and what
Good or Evil they contain in themselves. But afterward We will show the Natures
of all those Bodies, with all their Properties, viz. What are the Causes of the
Corruption of them; proving the same by their Experiences.

CHAP. II.
Of the Nature of Sulphur and Arsnick.

THerefore first, inferring the Nature of Spirits, which are the Principles of
those Bodies; We say, that Sulphur and Arsnick are a Fatness of the Earth, as
above is declared; the Experience and manifest Probation of which you may
gather, from its easy Inflammation, and the easy Liquefaction thereof by Heat.
For nothing is inflamed, but what is oleaginous, or melts easily by Heat,
unless it has the Nature thereof. Therefore Sulphur, and its Compeer, have an
inflamable Substance, and Earthy Feculency, the Cause of their Corruption. But
they have a perfecting middle Cause, viz. between this and that. Earthyness in
it is the Cause of Corruption, because it neither has Fusion, nor Ingress: and
the Inflamable Substance likewise; because it neither stands in Fire, nor makes
to stand; and because from every kind of it, it yields Blackness. Therefore
their middle Substance is the Cause of Perfection in them; because by its
Earthyness it is not hindered from Ingress, which is perfected by good Fusion;
and by the Subtility of it, its Impression is not easily removed for Flight.
Yet the Middle Substance of them is not the Cause of Perfection of Bodies, or
of Argentvive, unless it be fixed. Which being not fixed, although its
Impression is not easily removed, yet it is not stably perpetuated. Hence it is
manifest, that the Artist must necessarily divide the Middle Substance thereof.
But some have thought it impossible to divide the same, by reason of its strong
Mixtion. And indeed they opposed their own manifest Works.

For they calcined Sulphur, although not much, so that it had neither Fusion
nor Inflammation. But that must necessarily happen by Division; because Sulphur
remaining in its Natural Commixtion must unavoidably be inflamed and burned.
Therefore by the Division of diverse Substances in it, it is apparent, that (in
the same Artifice) the more inflamable part of it, is separated from the Parts
not inflamable. For if it be possible, by Calcination, to come to the Removal
of all Inflamable Parts in it, they must necessarily confess, from their own
Natural Works, that every Division of Parts is possible to be attained. But
because this depends on most subtle Artifice, they thought it to be impossible.

Therefore, from the above-premised, it is evident, that Sulphur is not of the
Verity of Our Art, but a part thereof. And We have now brought you to the
Knowledge of the Artifice, by which it is possible to come to the Division
thereof. But in Arsnick, because in the Radix of its Minera, by the Action of
Nature, many inflamable parts of it are resolved, therefore the Artifice of its
Separation is easy. Yet that is the Tincture of Whiteness, but Sulphur of
Redness. Therefore it is needful, that great Caution should be used in the
Division of Sulphur.

CHAP. III.
Of the Nature of Mercury, or Argentvive.

IN Argentvive likewise, there is a necessity of removing Superfluities, For it
has Causes of Corruption, viz. An Earthy Substance, and Adustible Wateriness
without Inflammation. Yet some have thought it not to have any superfluous
Earth, and Uncleanness; but what is thought by them is vain. For We see it to
consist of much Lividness, and not of Whiteness. And We likewise see the Black
and Feculent Earth to be separated from it with easy Artifice, by a Lavation,
the Method of which We will show. But because We are by that to acquire a
twofold Perfection, viz. To make a Medicine, and to perfect it; therefore We
must necessarily prepare the same by the Degree of a twofold Mundation; for two
Cleansings of Mercury are necessary. One, by Sublimation for the Medicine, and
this is here showed; and the other, by a Lavament for Coagulation; and that
also shall be showed. For, if We would create Medicine of it, then there is a
necessity to cleanse it from the Feculency of its Earthiness by Sublimation;
least it create a Livid Color in Projection: and also to remove its Fugitive
Wateriness, least it make the whole Medicine Fugitive in Projection; and to
keep safe the middle Substance thereof, for Medicine: Of which the property is
not to be burned, and to defend from Combustion, and not to fly it self; and
also to make fixed. Therefore We prove that to be a Perfective, by many
Experiences. For We see Argentvive more nearly to adhere to Argentvive, and to
be more beloved by the same; but next to it is Gold, and after that Silver.

Wherefore, hence it follows, that Argentvive is more friendly to its own
Nature: but We see other Bodies not to have so great Conformity to it, and
therefore We in very deed find them less to partake of the Nature thereof. And
whatsoever Bodies We see more to defend from Adustion, those We consider to
possess more the Nature of it. Therefore it is manifest, that Argentvive is the
Perfective and Salvative of Adustion, which is the the Vltimate of Perfection.

But the Second Degree of Mundation, is for its Coagulation. And the washing
away of its Earthiness for one Day only, is sufficient for it. The Method of
which Washing is this: Take an Earthen Dish, and into it put your Argentvive,
upon which pour only so much of most strong Vinegar, or any other like Thing,
as will be sufficient to cover it. Then set the Dish over a gentle Fire, that
the whole may be warm and not too hot; and stir it continually with your
Fingers on the Bottom of the Dish, that the Argentvive may be divided in the
likeness of a subtle white Powder, until the whole Vinegar be evaporated, and
the Mercury revived. After you see the Vinegar to come off feculent and black,
cast that away, and wash the Mercury with fresh Vinegar; repeating this
Washing, until you see the Color of its Earthiness to be perfectly changed
into a clear Color, mixed with a white and coelestine Color, which is a sign
of perfect Washing. Therefore when it comes to that, project upon it the
Medicine of Coagulation, and it will be Coagulated into a Solifick, or
Lunifick, according as the Medicine was prepared; the Narration of which We set
down in the following. From what is now mentioned, it is manifest, that
Argentvive is not Perfective in its Nature; but that is, which is produced of
it by Our Artifice. And so likewise is it in Sulphur and its Compeer. Therefore
in these it is not possible Naturally to follow Nature, but by Our Natural
Artifice.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Nature of Marchasite, Magnesia, and Tutia.

BUt there is a necessity We should also treat of other Spirits, viz.
Marchasite, Magnesia, and Tutia, making great Impression in Bodies. Therefore,
what they are, with their Probations, We shall show in the present Chap.
Marchasite has in its Creation a twofold Substance, viz. of Argentvive
mortified and approaching to Fixation, and of burning Sulphur. That it has
Sulphureity We find by manifest Experience: for when it is Sublimed, a manifest
burning sulphurous Substance proceeds from it, and the Sulphureity of it is
likewise found without Sublimation. For if it be put into the Fire, it is no
sooner red hot, but it is inflamed with a Sulphurous Flame, and Burns. Also,
it is sensibly manifested, that it has the Substance of Argentvive; for it
gives to Venus the Whiteness of pure Silver, as also to Argentvive; and We see
it, in its Sublimation to yield a Coelestine Color, and to have a manifest
Metallic Lucidity. All which make the Artist certainly to know, that it
contains in its Radix these Substances.

Also, you may manifestly prove by the same Experiences, that Magnesia has a
more turbid Sulphur, and an Argentvive more earthy and feculent; and that the
same Sulphur is likewise more fixed, and less inflamable: and it is more
approximate to the Nature of Mars. But Tutia is the fume of White Bodies; and
this is evidenced by manifest Probation. For the Fume of the Mixtion of Jupiter
and Venus, adhereing to the Sides of the Forges, or Furnaces of Artificers
Working in those Metals, makes the same Impression as it. And what a Metallic
Fume does not, without the Admixtion of some Body, the same this likewise
effects not. Therefore, seeing this Fume is of White Bodies, the White cannot
Citrinate or Color Bodies, but the Red. For Citrinity or Yellowness, is no
other, than a determinate Proportion of White and Red. Therefore it, by reason
of its Subtility, more penetrates the Profundity of the Body; and consequently
more alters, than its own Body; and more adheres in the Examen with small
Artifice, as is now declared to to you. Wherefore, what Bodies soever are
altered by the Virtue of Argentvive, or of Sulphur, or of the like of these,
must necessarily be altered: because these only communicate in Nature to those
Bodies.

CHAP. V.
Of the Nature of Sol, or Gold.

NOw of Bodies, We will more amply declare the intimate Nature of them. And
first of Sol, but afterward of Luna, and then of all the other, according as
shall be thought expedient, with their Probations, which are acquired by
Experiment.

Sol is created of the most subtle Substance of Argentvive, and of most clear
Fixture; and of a small Substance of Sulphur clean, and of pure Redness, fixed,
clear, and changed from its own Nature, tinging that. And because there happens
a Diversity in the Colurs of that Sulphur, the Citrinity (or Yellowness) of
Gold must needs have a like Diversity. For some is more intense, other less in
Yellowness. That Gold is of the most subtle Substance of Argentvive is most
evident, because Argentvive easily retains it. For Argentvive retains not any
Thing, that is not of its own Nature. And that it has the clear and clean
Substance of that, is manifest by its splendid and radiant Brightness,
manifesting it self not only in the Day, but also in the Night. And that it
has a fixed Substance void of all burning Sulphureity, is evident by every
Operation of it in Fire: for it is neither diminished nor inflamed. And that it
is tinging Sulphur, is manifest by this, viz. that being mixed with Argentvive,
it transforms the same into a Red Color; and being sublimed with strong
Ignition from Bodies, so that the Substance of them ascends, with that it
creates a most Yellow Color. Therefore, it is apparent, that when its Substance
is pure, it creates a pure Color; but when not pure, an impure Color. But he
who requires a sign of the Probation of its Yellowness, wants his Sense;
because that is discerned by sight.

Therefore the most subtle Substance of Argentvive brought to Fixation, and
the purity of the same, and the most subtle Matter of Sulphur, fixed and not
burning, is the whole Essential Matter of Gold. But in it is found a greater
Quantity of Argentvive, than of Sulphur; wherefore Argentvive has greater
Ingress into it. For this cause, whatsoever Bodies you would alter, alter them
according to this Exemplar, that you may deduce them to the Equality thereof.
The way to effect which, We have now given. For Gold having subtle and fixed
Parts, those Parts could in its Creation be much condensed: and this was the
Cause of its great Weight. But, by great Decoction made by Nature, a leisurely
and graduate Resolution of it was made, together with good Inspissation, and
its ultimate Mixtion, that it might melt in the Fire.

From the foregoing it is evident, that a large Quantity of Argentvive is Cause
of Perfection, but much of Sulphur is Cause of Corruption. And Uniformity in
Substance, which through the Mixtion is made in Natural Decoction, is Cause of
Perfection; but Diversity in Substance is Cause of Corruption. And Induration
(or Hardening) and Inspissation, which is made by long and temperate Decoction,
is Cause of Perfection; but the contrary of Corruption. Therefore, if Sulphur
shall not duly fall upon that Argentvive, diverse Corruptions must necessarily
be inferred, according to the Diversity of it. For the Sulphur, which falls
upon it fixed, may not be all adustible, or all adustible and flying, in the
Nature of Sulphur; or flying, and not in the Nature of Sulphur; or hold part of
the flying, and part of the fixed; or in part hold the Nature of Sulphur, and
in part not; or be all clean, or half unclean; or be of much or little
Quantity: of much excelling in the Mixture, or of little Quantity excelled in
it; or neither overcoming, nor overcome; or white, or red, or between both.
Therefore, from all these Diversities, there was a necessity that diverse
Bodies, and the like of these, should be created in Nature. All which
Diversities We intend to speak of with manifest Probations.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Nature of Luna, or Silver.

THerefore, it is now clear from the precedent, that if clean, fixed, red, and
clear Sulphur fall upon the pure Substance of Argentvive (being it self not
excelling, but of small Quantity, and excelled) of it is created pure Gold. But
if the Sulphur be clean, fixed, white and clear, which falls upon the Substance
of Argentvive, pure Silver is made, if in Quantity it exceed not: yet this has
a Purity short of the Purity of Gold, and a more gross Inspissation than Gold
has. The Sign of which, is, that its Parts are not so condensed, as that it
can be equal in Weight to Gold; nor has it so fixed a Substance as that: the
Sign of this is, its Diminution in Fire; and the Sulphur of it, which is
neither fixed, nor incombustible, is the Cause of that Diminution. But it is
not impossible, or improbable, to give Judgment of the same, as fixed and not
fixed, in respect of one Body, or another. For Luna's Sulphureity, compared
with the Sulphureity of Sol, is not fixed and burning; but in respect of the
Sulphur of other Bodies, it is fixed, and not burning.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Nature of Mars, or Iron. Also of the Effects of Sulphur and Mercury;
and of the Causes of Corruption and Perfection.

BUT if fixed earthy Sulphur be commixt with fixed earthy Argentvive, and both
these be not pure, but of a livid Whiteness, the Quantity of the Superancy of
which, is Sulphur highly fixed, of these Iron is made: because the Superancy of
fixed Sulphur prohibits Fusion. Therefore, hence it is manifest, that Sulphur,
by the work of Fixation, more swiftly destroys the easiness of Liquefaction,
than Argentvive. But We see Sulphur not fixed, sooner to melt than Argentvive.
By these is manifested the Cause of Swiftness and Slowness of Fusion in every
Body. For what has more of fixed Sulphur, more slowly admits of Fusion, than
what partakes of burning Sulphur, which more easily and sooner flows: and this
is clearly enough already declared by Us. But that the fixed Sulphur makes
slower Fusion, is evident by this, viz. that it is never fixed, unless it be
calcined, and no Calcinate gives Fusion: therefore in all Things it must impede
the same. That it is not fixed, unless it be calcined, is manifest by the
Experiment of him, who would have fixed the same not calcined: because he
always found it to fly, until it was turned into Earth, the Similitude of which
is of the Nature of Calx.

Yet this happens not in Argentvive; because that may be fixed, without being
turned into Earth, and likewise fixed with Conversion of it into Earth. For by
hastening to its Fixation, which is made by Precipitation, it is fixed, and
turned into Earth. Also, by the successive Sublimation of it often repeated, it
is fixed likewise, and not changed into Earth, but gives Metallic Fusion. This
is manifest to, and proved by Him, who has experienced both Fixations thereof,
even to the Consummation of the Work; by hasty Precipitation, and also by the
slow, with continually repeated Sublimations. For he saw, and found it so, as
he saw it written by Us. And this therefore is, because it has a viscious and
dense Substance: the Sign of which is, the Grinding of it, by imbibition and
mixtion, with other Things. For Viscosity is manifestly perceived in it, by the
much adherency thereof. That it has a dense Substance, he that has but one
eye may manifestly see by its aspect, and by poysing the immense weight
thereof. For it, whilst it is in its own Nature, excels Gold in weight; and it
is of a most strong Composition, as is declared. Therefore, hence it is
manifest, that it may be fixed without Consumption of its Humidity, and without
Conversion of it into Earth. For, by reason of the good adherency of Parts, and
the fortitude of its Mixtion, if the parts of it be in any wise inspissate by
Fire, it permits it self no further to be corrupted, nor suffers it self (by
the ingress of a furious Flame into it) to be elevated into Fume: because it
admits not rarefaction of it self, by reason of its Density, and want of
Adustion; which is made by combustible Sulphureity, which it has not.

Therefore, by what is mentioned, is found (with an indubitate Invention) the
wonderful double Kind of two Secrets, viz. one, the Causes of Corruption of
every of the Metals by Fire; one of which is the Inclusion of a burning
Sulphureity in the profundity of their Substance, diminishing them by
Inflammation, and exterminating also into Fume, with extreme Consumption,
whatsoever Argentvive in them is of good Fixation. But the other is a
multiplication upon them of an exterior Flame penetrating, and resolving them
with it self into Fume, of how great Fixation soever that in them is. A third
Cause of Corruption is rarefaction of them by Calcination: for then the Flame,
or Fire, can penetrate into, and exterminate them. Therefore, if all Causes of
Corruption concur, such Bodies must needs be exceedingly corrupted. But if not
all, the swiftness of Corruption of every Body is remitted, according to the
Remission of them. The second Kind is Goodness, which by it is considered in
Bodies. For seeing Argentvive, for no Causes of Extermination permits it self
to be divided into parts in its Composition (because it either with its whole
Substance recedes from the Fire, or with its whole remains permanent in it) in
it is necessarily observed a Cause of Perfection. Therefore praised be the
glorious and blessed Most High GOD, who created it, and gave to the same a
Substance, and the Properties of a Substance, which are given to none of the
Things in Nature to possess; that this Perfection might be found in it, by a
certain Artifice, as We have found therein with near potency. For it is that
which overcomes Fire, and by Fire is not overcome; but in it amicably rests,
rejoicing therein.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Nature of Venus, or Copper.

WHerefore, returning to our purpose, We say, that if the Sulphur be unclean,
gross, and fixed, as to its greater part; but as to its lesser part not fixed,
red, and livid; in relation to the whole, not overcoming, nor overcome; and
this fall upon gross Argentvive, Copper must necessarily be created thereof.
The Probation of all these is easy, by things given from the Nature of them.
For, when Copper is exposed to Ignition, you may discern a Sulphurous Flame to
arise from it, which is a Sign of Sulphur not fixed. And the loss of the
Quantity of it by Exhalation, through the frequent Combustion thereof,
signifies that it has fixed Sulphur. For from that is caused the slowness of
its Fusion, and Induration (or Hardness) of its Substance, which are Signs of
the Multitude of its fixed Sulphur. And that there is Sulphur red and unclean,
conjoined with unclean Argentvive, is known by Sense; therefore it needs no
other Probation. Therefore, by Experiment, you may attain to the whole Secret.

For you see every Thing, by the Action of Heat changed into Earth, with ease
to be dissolved, and reduced to the Nature of Water. This happens by Reason of
the Subtiliation of the parts by Fire. Therefore a Thing more subtle in its
proper Nature, reduced to this Earthy Nature, is more subtiliated thereby;
because it is more dissolved; so that, what are of a most subtle Nature, are
most and best dissolved and subtiliated. Hence the Cause of the Corruption and
Infection of these two Bodies, viz. of Mars and Venus, is apparent: for it is
by Sulphur of much Quantity fixed; and by not fixed Sulphur, of small Quantity
in Venus, but of less Quantity in Mars. Therefore, when the fixed Sulphur
comes to Fixation by Heat of Fire, its parts are subtiliated; but that part,
which is in the Aptitude of Solution of its Substance, is dissolved. The Sign
of which is the Exposition of these two Bodies to the Vapor of Vinegar: for by
that, the Aluminosity of their Sulphur (created in it by subtiliative Heat)
flowereth in the Superficies of them. And if you put these two Bodies into a
Saline Liquor, many parts of them are easily dissolved by Ebullition. And if
you look into the Minera's of these two, you will find a manifest Substance of
Aluminosity, to distill dissolved from them, and in them to adhere: which
Aluminousness, by the Saline Wateriness, and easy Solution, is changed into
Water. For nothing is found Watery and easily soluble, except Allom, and what
is of its Nature.

But the Blackness in either of these two Bodies, created by Fire, is by reason
of the Sulphur not fixed, which is concluded in them: much indeed in Venus, but
little in Mars, and it approaches nigh to the Nature of fixed Sulphur.
Therefore, it is not possible, that such an Impression should be easily removed
from Mars. Hence it is now evident, that Fusion is made from Sulphur not fixed,
and also Fusion is helped thereby; but F^^^^n is not made from fixed Sulphur,
being rather impeded by the same. There is no necessity to think, that Fusion
is not made, and that Fusion is impeded by fixed Argentvive. This he knows to
be certainly true, who, by no Art of Fusion could make Sulphur to flow, after
its Fixation: but having fixed Argentvive, by frequently repeating the
Sublimation thereof, found it apt to admit good Fusion.

Hence therefore it is manifest, that those Bodies are of greater Perfection,
which contain more of Argentvive; but what contain less, of less Perfection.
Therefore study in all your Works, that Argentvive may excel in the Commixtion.
And if you can perfect by Argentvive only, you will be the Searcher out of a
most precious Perfection; and of the Perfection of that, which overcomes the
Work of Nature. For you may cleanse it most inwardly, to which Mundification
Nature cannot reach. But the Probation of this, viz. that those Bodies, which
contain a greater Quantity of Argentvive, are of greater Perfection, is their
easy Reception of Argentvive. For We see Bodies of Perfection amicably to
embrace Argentvive.

Therefore from the precedent Discourse it is evident, that in Bodies there is a
twofold Sulphureity: One indeed included in the Profundity of Argentvive, in
the beginning of their Mixtion; but the other is supervenient. One of which is
removed with Labor, but the other cannot be possibly taken away by any
Artifice performed by Fire, to which our Operation can congruously and
profitably come; it being so firmly and radically united therein. And this is
proved by Experiment: for We see the adustible Sulphureity to be abolished by
Fire, but the fixed Sulphureity not so. Therefore, when We say, Bodies are
cleansed by Calcination, you must understand that to be meant of the Earthy
Substance, which is not united in the Radix of their Nature. For it is not
possible, by the Art of Fire to cleanse what is united; unless the Medicine of
Argentvive (hiding and contempering that, or separating it from the Mixture)
have access.

Separation of an Earthy Substance from its Compound, which in the root of
Nature is united to a Metal, is thus: Either it is made by Elevation, with
things elevating the Substance of Argentvive, and leaving the Sulphureity, by
reason of its convenience with them, as is Tutia and Marchasite; because they
are Fumes, part of which is a greater Quantity of Argentvive than of Sulphur.
The Experience of this you may see, when you shall join these with Bodies in a
strong and sudden Fusion; for these Spirits in their Flight carry up the Bodies
with them: Therefore you may elevate with them. Or else, by a Lavation with
Commixtion with Argentvive, as We have told you. For Argentvive holds what is
of its own Nature, but casts out what is alien.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Nature of Jupiter, or Tin.

THis Investigation being proposed, following our purpose, We say, That if
Sulphur in the Radix of the Commixtion, shall be participating of small
Fixation, White with Whiteness not pure, not overcoming, but overcome, commixed
with Argentvive partly fixed, and partly not fixed, white and impure; from that
Mixtion Tin must needs follow. The Probation of these you will find by
Preparation. For, when you calcine Tin, you find a Sulphurous stink to arise
from it; which is a sign of Sulphur not fixed. And although it yield no Flame,
you must not therefore think it fixed. For it gives no Flame, not by reason of
Fixation, but by reason of the Superancy of Argentvive in the Commixtion,
preserving from Combustion. Therefore, in Tin is proved a twofold Sulphureity,
and also a twofold Substance of Argentvive. One Sulphureity is less fixed,
because in calcining it casts out a stink as Sulphur. The Experience of the
Mixture is proved by the First. The other is proved to be more fixed, by the
continuation of it in its Calx, in the Fire which it has, and yet it stinks
not. That there is also a twofold Substance of Argentvive in it, whereof one is
not fixed, and the other fixed, is proved; because it makes a crashing noise
before its Calcination, but after it has been thrice calcined, that crashing
is not; the reason of this, is, because the fugitive Substance of its
Argentvive, making that crashing, is flown away. That the fugitive Substance of
Argentvive is a Cause making that Stridor, or crashing, is proved by washing
Lead with Argentvive. For if Lead be washed with Argentvive, and after its
washing melted in Fire not exceeding the Fire of its Fusion, with it will
remain part of the Argentvive, which gives this Stridor to the Lead, and turns
it into Tin. But on the contrary you may consider that also, by the Mutation of
Tin into Lead: For by a manifold Repetition of its Calcination, and the
Administration of Fire convenient for its Reduction, it is turned into Lead:
but especially, when by substraction of its Scoria it is calcined with great
Fire.

Touching the Diversities of these Substances you may be ascertained, by the
Knowledge of Conservation of them in proper Instruments, and in the Measure of
Fire dividing them: to which we have attained with Instance of Labor, and have
seen with certain Assurance, that We judged of the Truth by the same. But
seeing it is expedient, We should inform you what that is, which remains after
the removal from Jupiter, of these two Substances, viz. of Sulphur and
Argentvive, that you may completely know the Composition of Tin, We say, it is
livid, and ponderous as Lead, yet partaking of greater Whiteness, than Lead:
therefore it is most pure Lead. And in it is the Equality of Fixation of the
two Things compounding, viz. of Argentvive and Sulphur; but not Equality of
Quantity; because in the Commixtion, the Argentvive overcomes. The sign of
which is the Easiness of Ingress of Argentvive in its Nature into it.
Therefore, if in it were not a greater Quantity of Argentvive, the same (taken
in its Nature) would not easily adhere to it. Wherefore it adheres not to Mars,
unless with most subtle Ingenuity; nor unto Venus, by reason of the paucity of
Argentvive in it, in its Commixtion. And this is evident, because it adheres to
Mars most difficultly, but to Venus more easily; because that has a greater
abundance of Mercury, than Mars. The sign of this, is the easy Fusion of one,
but most difficult Fusion of the other.

But the Fixion of these two Substances remaining, approaches nigh to firm
Fixation; yet it is not therefore perpetually fixed. And the Probation of this,
is the Calcination of its Body; and after Calcination, the exposing of the same
to most strong Fire. For by that, Division is not made; but the whole Substance
ascends: yet more purified. Therefore We see the burning Sulphur in Tin to be
more easily separated, than the same in Lead. And an Experiment of this you see
by the easy Induration (or hardening) of Tin, its Calcination, and the
Melioration of its Brightness. Whence We have considered, that these corrupting
Properties were not in the Radix of it, but had access to it afterward. And,
because they were not much conjoined to it in the first Commixtion, therefore
they may easily be separated. For this Cause, the Alterations in it are of a
swift Work, viz. its Mundification, Induration, and Fixation. And you may
manifestly consider the Causes of these, by what are above delivered. And
because, after these Operations, viz. Calcination and Reduction, We considered
in its Fume a Citrinity (or Yellowness) which We saw to arise by great
Elevation, and Expression of Fire; by which, being of the Property of Sulphur
calcined, We judged with a true Estimation, in which We were assured, that it
contained in it self much of the Nature of fixed Sulphur.

Therefore they, who would see the Truth in this our Science, let them study
the Investigation of all these Things, with diligence of Labor, until by the
same they find out the Principles of Bodies and Properties of Spirits, with a
certain (not conjectural) Invention; which in this our Volume We have
sufficiently treated of, according to the Exigency of Art.

CHAP. X.
Of the Nature of Saturn, or Lead.

IT now remains, that We come to the Description of Saturn; of which We say it
differ not from Tin, after repeating its Calcination, to the Reduction thereof;
except that it has a more unclean Substance, commixed of the two more gross
Substances, viz. of Sulphur and Argentvive; and that the Sulphur in it is
burning, and more adhesive to the Substance of its own Argentvive; and that it
has more of the Substance of fixed Sulphur to its Composition, than Jupiter
has. The Probations of these We infer by manifest Experiences.

That it is of greater Earthy Feculency than Jupiter, is manifested by the
Sight, and by the Washing of it with Argentvive, in this, viz. That more
Feculency comes from it in the Washing than from Jupiter; and that it takes the
first Degree of Calcination more easily than Tin, which is a Sign of much
Earthiness. For We find Bodies of more Earthiness, of more easy Calcination;
and of less Earthiness of more difficult Calcination. The Probation of this is,
the most difficult Calcination of Gold completely. And because its Foulness is
not rectified, as in Jupiter, by repeated Calcinations, that is a sign of
greater Impurity in its Principles, in its own Nature, than in Tin, in its
Nature.

And that the Quantity of its Combustible Sulphur, is more adhesive to the
Substance of Argentvive in it, than in Tin; is manifest by this, viz. That the
said Quantity is not separated from it in Fume, but it is of a Citrine Color
of much Yellowness, the like of which is remaining below with what is in the
Bottom; which must necessarily be a sign of one of these three Things: either
that it has none, or a very small Quantity of Combustible Sulphur in it; or
that it has much conjoined in the nearness of its Principles, to the Radix of
its Commixtion. But We are assured by the Odor thereof, that it has some
Quantity; and not a little, but much: because that Odor of Sulphureity is not
removed from it in a short time. Therefore We have considered with a
consideration, by which We are assured that burning Sulphur, approaching to the
Nature of fixed not burning Sulphur, is uniformly commixt in the Substance of
Argentvive. Therefore, when the Fume of it ascends, it must necessarily ascend
with the Sulphur not burning, of the Property of which it is, viz. to create
Citrinity.

But that the Quantity of Sulphur not burning is greater in it, than in Tin, is
affirmed by Us most truly; because We see the whole Color of it to be changed
into Citrine, but of Tin into White, in their Calcinations. Therefore in this,
to us is open the Way of finding out the Cause of this Work, by which Jupiter
(in Calcination) is more easily changed into an hard Body than Saturn; but not
sooner into slowness of Liquefaction than Saturn. And that therefore is,
because the Cause of the Hardness of Nature is Sulphur and Argentvive fixed:
but the Cause of Liquefaction is twofold, viz. Argentvive and combustible
Sulphur. One of which, as to Perfection of Fusion, is sufficient in each Degree
thereof; namely, Argentvive, with Ignition, and without Ignition. Therefore,
seeing in Jupiter is a large Quantity of Argentvive not truly fixed, a ready
swiftness of Liquefaction remains in it, and is not easily separated
therefrom. The Cause of Mollification is also twofold, viz. Argentvive, and
Combustible Sulphur. And because the burning Sulphureity is more easily removed
from Jupiter, than from Saturn; therefore, one of the Causes of Softness being
removed from it, it must necessarily be hardened, being calcined. But Saturn,
because it has both the Causes of Softness strongly conjoined, is not easily
hardened.

Yet there is a Diversity in Softness by Argentvive, and in Softness by
Sulphur: because Softness by Sulphur is Cessive, but Softness by Argentvive is
Extensive. And this must necessarily be proved by Sight; seeing We see Bodies
of much Argentvive, to be of much Extension; but Bodies of little, of little.
Therefore Jupiter is more easily and more subtily extended, than Saturn; Saturn
more easily than Venus; Venus, than Mars; Luna more subtily than Jupiter; but
Sol more subtily than Luna. Therefore, it is manifest, that the Cause of
Induration (or Hardening) is fixed Argentvive, or fixed Sulphur. But the Cause
of Softness is opposite. The Cause of Fusion is twofold, viz. Sulphur not
fixed, and Argentvive of whatsoever kind it is. Sulphur not fixed is
necessarily a Cause of Fusion, without Ignition. And you manifestly see the
Experience of this, by Projection of Arsnick upon Bodies difficultly fusible;
for it makes them of easy Fusion, without Ignition. And the Cause of easy
Fusion is likewise Argentvive: but the Cause of Fusion with Ignition, is fixed
Argentvive. Therefore the Cause of Impediment of every Fusion, is fixed Sulphur.

From what is now mentioned, you may collect a very great Secret: Namely, That
seeing Bodies of greatest Perfection are found to contain the greatest Quantity
of Argentvive; Bodies diminished from Perfection, holding more of the Quantity
of Argentvive, must needs be more approximate to the Perfect. Therefore it also
follows, that Bodies of much Sulphureity, are Bodies of much Corruption.
Wherefore, from the above alleged, it is now evident, that Jupiter is mostly
approximated to the Perfect, seeing ir precipitates more of Perfection, but
Saturn less; and Venus yet less, and Mars least of that, on which Perfection
depends. And otherwise they differ in themselves, as to Medicine, completing
and supplying the Defect, and perfectly attenuating the spissitude of Bodies to
their Profundity, and covering the Cloudiness of the same, under a Substance of
splendent Brightness. For the most perfective of Medicine is Venus; but Mars
less; Jupiter yet less; and Saturn least of all. From these therefore, by the
Truth-telling Search of Labor, according to the Diversity of Bodies, diverse
Medicines are found out, by Preparation. For the hard Body, that can endure
Ignition, requires one Medicine; but the soft, that abides not Ignition,
another. That one may be mollified, and attenuated in its Profundity, and in
its Substance equalized; but the other hardened, and its occult Parts
inspissated.

Therefore it concerns Us now, to pass from these to Medicines, with manifest
Experiences, setting down the Causes of diverse Medicines; and what they leave
diminished, and what they deduce to compleatment.

The Second Part of this Second Book, Of Medicines in general, and of the
necessity of Perfection of the Medicine perfecting all imperfect Bodies; and
from what Thing it may best, and more nearly be exttacted.
CHAP. I.
That of every imperfect Body, and also of Argentvive, the Medicine must
necessarily be twofold, viz. One for the White, and the other for the Red: yet
that We are excused from these, by one only most perfect Medicine.

WE prove, that Spirits are more assimilated to Bodies, than any other Thing in
Nature, by this, viz. Because they are more united, and more friendly to
Bodies, than all other Things. Therefore, We accordingly affirm, that these
Alterations of Bodies, in the first Invention, are their true Medicine. And We
have exercised our selves in every kind of Ingenuity, that thereby We might
transform every of the imperfect Bodies, with firm Mutation, into a perfect
Lunar and Solar Body. Wherefore, We find that Medicine for them must
necessarily be created Diverse, according to the diverse Intention of Bodies to
be altered. And since Metals to be altered are of a twofold kind, viz.
Argentvive coagulable in Perfection, and Bodies diminished from Perfection; and
these again manifold, some being hard, sustaining Ignition, but others soft not
abiding the same (the hard are Mars and Venus, the soft Saturn and Jupiter) the
Medicine perfective must likewise be manifold necessarily. For although Mars
and Venus be of one kind, yet they differ in a certain special Property: the
one being not fusible, but the other fusible. Therefore Mars is perfected with
one Medicine, and Venus with another: and indeed the first is totally unclean,
but the other not. Also this partakes of a certain dull Whiteness, but that of
Redness and Greenness: which do likewise impose a necessity of Diversity in the
Medicine.

Also soft Bodies of the other kind, viz. Jupiter, and Saturn, seeing they no
less differ, do necessarily need a diverse Medicine likewise. For this, viz.
Jupiter is clean; but that not. And indeed all these are rendered more mutable,
now made Lunar, than Solar Bodies; therefore the Medicine of each of them must
be twofold. One Citrine, changing into a Citrine Solar Body; the other White,
changing likewise into a White Lunar Body. Therefore, since in every of the
imperfect Bodies is found a twofold Matter, viz. Solar and Lunar; the Medicines
perfecting all Bodies, will in the Sum be Eight. So also Argentvive is
perfected into a Solar and Lunar Body; therefore of the Medicine altering it,
there is a twofold Difference. Wherefore all the Medicines, which We have
invented, with their Totality, for the complete Alteration of every imperfect
Body, will be Ten.

But We were desirous, with constant and continued Labor, and the industry of
great Indagation, to be excused from the Labor of these ten Medicines, by the
benefit of one only Medicine; and with Our long and very laborous Search, We
found, and with certain Experience, made one Medicine, by which the hard was
softened, the soft Body hardened, the fugitive fixed, and the foul illustrated
with splendour ineffable, and beyond Nature. Nevertheless it is here expedient we
should particularly speak of all these Medicines, with their their Causes, and
the manifest Experiences of their Probations. Therefore first We will declare
the Series of the ten Medicines, and accordingly of all Bodies, then of
Argentvive, and lastly proceed to the Medicine of the Magistery perfecting all
Bodies, yet with the Preparation imperfect Bodies need. And least We should be
carped at by the Envious, as delivering an insufficient Treatise of Art, We
first of all here present a Declaration of the Preparations of all the
imperfect Bodies, assigning the Causes of the Necessity of their Inventions, by
which (in our Artifice) they are rendered apt to receive the Medicine of
Perfection, in every Degree of Whiteness and Redness, and to be perfected by
the same. But after these shall be added a sufficient and congruous Narration
of all the Medicines beforementioned.

CHAP. II.
That every of the imperfect Bodies ought to have its peculiar Preparation.

FRom what We have already discoursed, it is apparent that what Nature left
Superfluous, or Deficient in every of those Bodies, that are imperfect, has
been in part declared; but here We intend in a more sufficient Discourse to
complete what We above omitted relating hereunto. Therefore, since it happens,
that the mutable Bodies of Imperfection are of a twofold kind, viz. Soft and
Ignible (or burnable by Fire) as Saturn and Jupiter; and Hard, and not Fusible,
or Fusible with Ignition, as Mars and Venus; the first indeed not Fusible, but
the other Fusible with Ignition: Nature has taught us, necessarily informing,
that according to the Diversity of their Essences, in the Radix of their
Nature, diverse Preparations, according to their Indigency, must be administered
to them. There are two Bodies of Imperfection of one kind, that need to be
transformed, viz. Lead, which is called Black, and by Art Saturn; and Crashing
Lead, which is called White, and in the Sentence of Art, Jupiter; which from
the innate Root of their Nature, are diverse each from other, in the Profundity
of their occult Parts, and likewise in their Manifest. For Saturn is cloudy,
livid, ponderous, and black, without Stridor (or Crashing) totally mute; but
Jupiter white, a little livid, but crashing much, and of moderate Sound,
yielding Brightness. The Differences of which in their Profundity, with their
necessary Causes, We intend to show you with manifest Experiences.

From which Causes of Difference, according to more and less, the well disposed
Artist collects the Order of Preparations. We therefore, according to Order,
first declare the Preparations of Bodies; but afterward of Argentvive
coagulable. Yet first of one kind, viz. Of Softness; and after this, of the
other. And accordingly, the Preparation of Saturn and Jupiter, of the first
kind of Bodies, shall be described first; afterward, the Preparation of the
other shall follow according to their determinate Order. For in the Preparation
of Bodies, nothing of Superfluity is to be removed from their profound Part,
but rather from the manifest.

CHAP. III.
That the Defect of imperfect Metals ought to be supplied by Medicine, but
their Superfluity removed by Preparation.

A manifold Preparation may be adhibited to the Essence of Saturn, and of
Jupiter likewise, according to the Degree of their manifold Approximation to
Perfection, or Elongation from it. Therefore, since of things indeed corrupting
in their Profundity, there is one Thing advenient from the innate Radix of
their Nature, and that is the Earthiness of Sulphureity, and the Impurity of
the Earth of Argentvive, commixed with the essential Nature of them, in the
Beginning of their Creation; and an other Thing supervenient, after the first
Mixtion of them inferring Corruption, and this is a burning Sulphureity of the
first kind, and the Impurity thereof, and a foul Substance of Argentvive;
therefore these are the Things corrupting the Substance of Perfection of Saturn
and Jupiter. One of these it is impossible to remove, by the Medicine of any
Industry, it being of the first Order: but the other may be removed with a
little help. The first indeed seems impossible to be extirpated; because in the
Principles of the proper Nature of Bodies of this kind, the aforesaid were mixed
into a true Essence, and made one true Essence. Therefore, seeing it is not
possible to remove the true Essence of any Thing in Nature, the Thing it self
remaining; it is impossible to separate these Corrupting Things from them.

For this Cause, some Philosophers have thought the Art not possible to be
attained to by This: and We, and indeed other Searchers of this Science, in Our
time, have come to this very State, viz. That We likewise, could by no way of
Ingenious Preparation illustrate Bodies, with compleatment of their Brightness,
but happened, that they were totally infected, and blackned rather. By reason
of this, We also, as well as they, were driven to Amazement, and for a long
space of time lay under the Shade of Desperation. Yet returning to Our Selves,
and being perplexed with the immense Trouble of infinite Thoughts and
Meditations, We considered Bodies diminished from Perfection, to be foul in the
Profundity of their Nature, and nothing fulgid (or purely clean) to be found in
them; because it was not in them according to Nature. For that is not found in
a Thing, which is not in it. Therefore, seeing nothing of Perfection is found
in them, therefore necessarily also, in the same nothing Superfluous remains to
be found, in Separation of the diverse Substances in them, and in the Profundity
of their Nature. Wherefore, by this We found somewhat to be diminished in them,
which must necessarily be completed, by Matter convenient for it, and
completing the Defect.

Diminution in them is, the Paucity of Argentvive, and not right Spissation of
the same. Therefore Compleatment in them will be Multiplication of Argentvive,
good Inspissation, and permanent Fixion. But this is performed by a Medicine
created of that. For this Medicine, when deduced into an Esse from Argentvive,
by the benefit of its Lucidity and Splendour, hides and covers their Cloudiness,
draws forth their Splendour, and converts the same into Brightness. And when
Argentvive, prepared into a Medicine, is cleansed by Our Artifice, reduced to a
most pure, and most bright Substance, and projected upon Bodies diminished from
Perfection, it will illustrate, and by its Fixion perfect them. This Medicine,
We will declare in its due time and place.

Now from the foregoing, it necessarily follows, that a twofold Invention of
Perfection will be necessary; one indeed by the Matter, which seperates the
foul Substance from the Mixture; but the other by a Medicine, which may cover
it with the Splendour of its Brightness, and illustrating adorn the same.
Therefore, since it happens, that nothing superfluous, but rather diminished,
is found in the Profundity of Bodies; and if it be expedient, that what is
Superfluous should absolutely be removed; that, supervenient from the manifest
part of its Nature, must necessarily be both taken away, and removed, with
diverse Preparations; which in the following Discourse We think fit to declare:
first speaking of Jupiter and Saturn, and afterward, of the other, according to
Order.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Preparation of Saturn and Jupiter.

SAturn and Jupiter are prepared, with manifold Preparations, according to the
necessity of greater Approximation to Perfection: viz. By a common and special
way of Preparation. The Common is by manifold Degrees of Approximation to
Perfection. For, there is one Degree of Approximation, viz. Brightness from the
Substance clean. A second is Hardness, with Ignition of its Fusion. And a
third, is Fixation, by removal of its fugitive Substance. Therefore they are
cleansed and made bright threefoldy: either by things mundifying, or by the way
of Calcination and Reduction, or by Solution. So by things purifying, they are
cleansed two ways; either reduced into Calx, or in the Nature of Bodies.
Reduced into Calx they are purified in this manner; either by Salts, or by
Allomes, or by Glass: and the way is thus: When the Body is calcined, then upon
its Calx is poured the Water of Alloms, or of Salts, or Glass is mixed with it,
and it reduced to a Body. Therefore this must so often be reiterated upon these
Bodies, as until they show themselves completely clean. For seeing Salts, and
Allomes, and Glass, are fused with another Fusion, than Bodies; therefore they
are separated from them, and retain with themselves the Earthy Substance, the
Purity of Bodies being only left. Another way of purifying these, is thus:

Let these two Bodies be very subtily filed; and with these Filings, Alloms,
Salts, and Glass mixed, and then reduced into Body. And this Labor repeated so
often, as until they be well cleansed. Also, they are cleansed by a Lavament
with Argentvive, the Way of which We have given. Likewise, these Bodies are
cleansed, by reiteration of their Calcination and Reduction, with sufficient
Fire, until they appear more clean. For, by this Mundification, these Bodies
diminished from Perfection, are freed from a twofold corrupting Substance; one
being inflamable and fugitive, but the other an earthy Feculency. And that
therefore is, because the Fire elevates and consumes every fugitive Substance:
and the same Fire likewise, in the way of Reduction, divides every Substance of
Earth, with its Proportion. This Proportion We have made mention of in Our
other Volume (Entitled Of the Investigation of Perfection) which according to
Order precedes this Book. For in that, We writ whatsoever We had searched out,
according to the Reason of Our own Mind; but here, what We have seen and
handled, We have completely determined, according to the Order of Science.

Also, these Bodies are cleansed by Solution of their Substance (the way of
which We have already declared) and by Reduction of that likewise, which is
dissolved from them. For that Solution reduced, is found more clean and more
perfect, in this same way of Preparation, than in any other kind of Preparation
whatsoever. And no way is comparable to this, except that, which is made by
Sublimation; and therefore this is equivalent to that. There is likewise a
Preparation of them, which is the Induration (or hardening) of their soft
Substance, with Ignition in their Fusion. And it is this: With them the fixed
Substance of Argentvive, or of Sulphur fixed, or of its Compeer, must be mixed
in their Profundity; or they must be mixed with hard and not fusible Things, as
is the Calx of Marchasite and Tutia. For these are united with, and embraced by
them, and harden them so, as they flow not, until they are red hot.

This same is likewise completed by Medicine perfecting; the Narration of
which We intend to give. And another way of Preparation likewise is, by removal
of their fugitive Substance: and this is effected by Conservation of them,
after the first Degree of Calcination, in Fire proportional to them. And
because Order is necessarily required in the ways of Preparations; therefore We
here set down the complete Order of preparing them. First therefore, all their
fugitive and corrupting Adustive Substance, must be cleansed from them; then
their Earthy Superfluity taken away. Afterward they must be dissolved and
reduced, or completely washed with a Lavament of Argentvive. This Order is
profitable and necessary.

Yet the special Preparation of these Bodies, and first of Jupiter, is
manifold. One is by Calcination; and by this its Substance is more hardened:
which happens not to Saturn. Also by Alloms, for these properly harden Jupiter.
Another Preparation is, by Conservation of it in the Fire of its Calcination.
For by this it loses its Stridor (or Crashing) and Fraction of Bodies
likewise; which in the like manner happens not to Saturn: because that has no
Stridor; nor does it break Bodies. And by Reiteration of Calcination, with the
Acuity of Salt, it also loses its Stridor. But secondarily, the special
Preparation of Saturn, is by Calcination with the Acuity of Salt: for by this
it is hardened, and by Talk especially it is deal bated, and by Marchasite and
Tutia likewise. All the ways of these Preparations We have more completely
determined, in Our aforesaid Book, entitled. Of the Investigation of
Perfection; for here in this We have abbreviated the Summaries of them.

CHAP. V.
Of the Preparation of Venus.

THereford, imitating the Order of the premised, We declare the Preparations of
two Bodies likewise. But first of Venus, afterward of Mars. The way of the
Preparation of Venus is manifold. One way is by Elevation, but another is
completed without Elevation. The way by Elevation is, that Tutia be taken,
with which Venus well agrees, and that it be ingeniously united with it. Then
it must be put in its Vessel of Sublimation to be sublimed, and by a most
excelling degree of Fire its more subtle part elevated; which will be found of
most bright Splendour. Or it may be mixed with Sulphur, and then elevated by its
now mentioned way of Elevation. But without Sublimation, it is prepared, either
by cleansing Things, in its Calx, or in its Body; as by Tutia, Salt, and
Allomes, or by a Lavament of Argentvive, the way of which We have given: or
else by Calcination and Reduction of that, which is dissolved into the Nature
of Body; or (as We said) it is cleansed by a Lavament of Argentvive, as all
other Bodies diminished from Perfection are.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Preparation of Mars.

THe Preparations of Mars are likewise manifold. For some are completed by
Sublimation, and some without Sublimation. That which is made by Sublimation,
is with Arsnick, and that in this manner: We endeavor to unite with it Arsnick
not fixed, as profoundly as We can; that in Fusion it may melt with the same.
But afterward it is sublimed in a proper Vessel of Sublimation. And this
Preparation, among all other, is found the best and most perfect. There is also
another Preparation of Mars, by Arsnick sublimed often times from it, until
some Quantity of the Arsnick it self remain. For if this be reduced, it will
flow out white, clean, fusible, and well prepared. There is likewise a third
way of Preparation of the same, by Fusion of it with Lead and Tutia. For from
these it flows clean and white.

But because We seem not to have spoken sufficiently, having before promised We
would determinately speak of the Ingenious Mollification of Hard Bodies, and of
the Induration (or Hardening) of the Soft, by way of Calcination; therefore We
must not omit that, but will first speak of the Soft, and afterward of the
Hard. The way is thus: Argentvive precipitated must be dissolved, and the
calcined Body (which you have intention to harden) dissolved likewise. Both
these Solutions must be mixed together, and the calcined Body mixed with them
by frequent Imbibitions, etc. continually grinding, imbibing, calcining, and
reducing, until it be made hard and fusible with Ignition. The very same may
also completely be effected, with the Calx of Bodies, and Tutia and Marchasite,
calcined, dissolved, and imbibed. And indeed, the more clean these are, so much
the more perfectly do they change.

Even so, hard Bodies are made soft with like Ingenuity; the way is this: They
must be conjoined and sublimed often with Arsnick, and after sublimation of the
Arsnick assated (or calcined) with their due Proportion of Fire; the measure of
which We have declared in our Book of Furnaces. And lastly, they are reduced
with the force of their proper Fire (mentioned in its place) until in Fusion
they wax soft, according to the Exigency of the hardness of the Body. And
indeed all these Alterations are of the first Order, without which our
Magistery is not perfected.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Mundification of Argentvive.

THerefore, it is now necessary completely to declare the Mundification of
Argentvive. In order to which, We say, Argentvive is cleansed two ways; either
by Sublimation, of which We showed the way already; or by a Lavament, of which
the way is this: Pour Argentvive into an Earthen or Stone Dish, and upon it
pour as much Vinegar as is sufficient to cover it. Then set it over a gentle
Fire, and let it heat so far, as you may well hold your fingers in it, and not
more. This being done, stir it about with your Fingers, until it be divided
into most small particles, in the similitude of Powder; and continue stirring
it, until all the Vinegar you put in be wholly consumed. Then wash the
Earthiness remaining with Vinegar, and cast that away: repeating the same
washing so often, as until the Earthiness of the Mercury be changed into a most
perfect Coelestine Color, which is a sign it is perfectly washed. From these,
We must now pass to Medicines.

CHAP. VIII.
That five different Properties of Perfection necessarily constitute a most
perfect Medicine: whence it may be conjectured, from what Things this Medicine
is to be taken.

WE first offer an Universal Discourse, touching Medicines, with their Causes,
and manifest Experiences. We therefore affirm, that unless every Thing
superfluous (either by Medicine or by the way of Preparation) be taken away
from imperfect Bodies; that is to say, if from them be not removed every
superfluous Sulphureity, and every unclean Earthiness, they cannot be purified,
viz. so, as that in Fusion they be not separated from the Commixtion, after
projection of the Medicine altering them. When you have found this, you have
found one of the five Differencies of Perfection. Likewise, if the Medicine do
not illustrate and alter into a White or Citrine Color (according to what your
intent is) which infers a splendent Brightness, and pleasant Lucidity, Bodies
diminished from Perfection are not perfected in an entire Compleatment.
Moreover, if to it you give not Lunar, or Solar Fusion, determinately, the Body
is not alterable in Compleatment; because it abides not in the Trials: but is
altogether separated, and recedes from the Commixtion. But this, more amply
determined by us, is demonstrated in the following, in the Chapter of
Cineritium. Fourthly, if the Medicine be not perpetuated with firm Alteration
of Impression, the Mutation of it avails not, because it is not permanent, but
the Impression vanishes. Lastly, If it give not Weights of Perfection, it
changes not with a firm and true Compleatment of Nature, in which no fraud may
be admitted through the Error of Credulity. For the Weight of Nature is one of
the signs of Perfection.

Therefore, seeing the Differencies of Perfection are five, it is manifest,
that there is a necessity, the Medicine of our Magistery should exhibit these
Differencies in Projection. By this, it is apparent, from what Things our
Medicine should be extracted. For it must be prepared of those Things, which
nearly adjoined to Bodies, readily alter, and amicable adhere to them in their
profundity. Wherefore, We, searching into all other Things, by our
Investigation found not any other Thing more friendly to the Natures of Bodies,
than Argentvive, prepared by this our Work; We clearly discerned it to be the
true Medicine of Alterables in Compleatment, with a true and not moderately
peculiar Alteration.

CHAP. IX.
Of Preparations to be adhibited to the Medicine, that it may acquire the due
Differencies of Properties.

NOW it remains, that We determinately describe the Substance thereof, and the
Differencies of the Properties of the Substance. And seeing We found it not to
change, without the Administration of Alteration of its Nature, We also found
that it ought necessarily to be prepared; because it cannot be mixed in the
profundity of Bodies, without the Method of its Preparation. Which is, that the
Substance of it be made such, as it may be permixed in the profundity, even to
the profundity of the Body alterable, without Separation for ever. But this
cannot be effected, unless it be very much subtiliated, with certain and
determinate Preparation mentioned in the Chapter of Sublimation. Likewise, its
Impression cannot be permanent, unless it be fixed; nor can it illustrate,
unless its most splendid Substance be extracted from it, with the Ingenuity of
its Method, and Way of Operation, by congruous Fire. Also this Medicine cannot
have perfect Fusion, unless great Caution be used in its Fixation, that it may
soften hard Bodies, and harden the soft. For it is only such, when a
sufficiency of its Humidity is preserved, proportionate to the Exigency of that
Fusion which is sought.

Therefore, by the foregoing, it is evident, that such a Preparation should be
administered to it, as by which, of it may be created a most fulgent and purely
clean Substance. Then it must be fixed, but with very great Caution, viz. the
Artificer must be so well skilled in the Administration of Fire, in the Way of
its Fixation, that he may only so far remove the Humidity, as shall be
sufficient for completing perfect Fusion. The way of effecting this, is thus:
If you would by this Medicine mollify Bodies hard of Fusion, in the beginning
of its Creation, a gentle Fire must be adhibited. For gentle Fire is
Conservative of Humidity, and Perfective of Fusion. But if you would have it
harden soft Bodies, its Fire must be vehement. For such Fire is Consumptive of
Humidity, and hindering Fusion. And indeed, it is expedient for every well
minded Artificer, to consider all these Rules. Also, there is a necessity of
many other Considerations of the Weight, with their Causes, and congruous
Order. For the Cause of great Weight is the Subtilety of the Substance of
Bodies, and Uniformity in the Essence. And by this, the parts of them may be so
condensate, as nothing can come between; and the Densation of Parts is the
increase of Weight, and the Perfection thereof.

CHAP. X.
Of the Differencies of Medicines, viz. that some are of the first Order, some
of the second, and others of the third.

THerefore it is evident, that Subtility is necessarily required, as well in
the Preparation of Bodies, as in the Way of perfecting the Medicine by the
Artifices of the Work: because of how much the greater Weight Bodies to be
transmuted are, of so much and greater perfection they are found in our
Investigation by Art. Wherefore, our Discourse of Medicines will be rendered
profitable, if We declare the Differencies of all Medicines. In order to which,
We say, there is necessarily a threefold Difference of Medicines. One is of the
first Order, another of the second, and another of the third.

A Medicine of the first Order, I call every Preparation of Minerals, which
projected upon Bodies diminished from Perfection, impresseth Alteration: which
infers not a sufficient Compleatment, but the altered Body happens to be
changed and corrupted, with the total Evaporation of the Impression of the
Medicine thereof: As is every Sublimation dealbative of Venus, or Mars, which
receives not Fixation. And of this kind is every Additament of the Color of
Sol, and Luna, or of Venus commixed, and set in a Furnace of Cementation, as
Ziniar, and the like. For this changes with a Mutation not durable, but rather
diminishing it self by Exhalation.

A Medicine of the second Order, I call every Preparation, which, when it is
projected upon Bodies diminished from Perfection, alters them, to some
Difference of Compleatment, altogether leaving the other Differencies of
Corruption; as is the Calcination of Bodies, by which all that is fugitive is
burnt away. And of this kind is a Medicine coloring Luna perpetually yellow,
or perpetually dealbating Venus, leaving other Differencies of Corruption in
them.

A Medicine of the third Order I call every Preparation, which, when it comes
to Bodies, with its projection, takes away all Corruption, and perfects them
with the Difference of all Compleatment. But this is one only. And therefore,
by it, We are excused from the Labors of the Invention of ten Medicines of the
second Order.

Therefore the Work of the first Order is called the Lesser,; the Work of the
second, the Middle; but of the third, the Greater Work. And this Difference of
all Medicines is sufficient.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Medicine of the first Order, dealbating Venus.

ACcording to our Promise, We intend to declare the Differencies of all
Medicines of a determinate Order (seeing there is one Medicine of Bodies, and
another of Argentvive: and of Bodies, one is of the first Order, another of the
second, and another of the third; and so of Argentvive likewise) first, of the
first; then of the second; and lastly, of the third Order. And We will in a
complete speech, and congruous Order, first speak of the Medicine of Bodies,
but afterward of Argentvive. Therefore, touching the Medicine of Bodies, of the
first Order, We say, there is one of hard Bodies, another of the soft. Of hard
Bodies, one is of Venus, another of Mars, another of Luna. That of Venus and
Mars is the pure Dealbation of their Substance; but Luna, the Rubification of
it, with Citrinity of a pleasing Brightness. For Rubification with apparent
Brightness is not given to Venus and Mars, by Medicine of the first Order;
because they being totally unclean, are unapt to receive the splendour of
Redness, before they have been prepared with a Preparation inducing Brightness.

Therefore We will first speak of all the Medicines of Venus, and afterward of
Mars, which are comprised in the first Order. There is one Medicine whitening
Venus, by Argentvive, and another by Arsnick. By Argentvive, the Medicine
dealbating it is thus completed. First Argentvive precipitated is dissolved,
then calcined Venus dissolved likewise. Both these Solutions are mixed in one,
and projected upon the Body of Venus, after they are coagulated. This Medicine
whitens and cleanses Venus. Again otherwise: Argentvive and Lithargiry are
dissolved apart, and the Solutions joined together; then a Calcination of the
Body, which is intended to be Whitened, is dissolved likewise, and that
Solution joined with the former, and then coagulated together: this Coagulate
is projected upon the Body, and that is dealbated thereby. Otherwise, a
Quantity of Argentvive is sublimed often from its Body, until part thereof
remain with it, with complete Ignition. Then this Mixture is very often imbibed
and ground with distilled Vinegar, that it may the better be mixed in the
profundity thereof; then it is assated (or moderately calcined) and lastly
fresh Argentvive is in like manner sublimed from it, and the remaining Matter
again imbibed, and moderately calcined as before. And this Work is so often
repeated, as until a large Quantity of the Argentvive reside in it with
complete Ignition. This is a good Dealbation of the first Order. Otherwise:
Argentvive in its proper Nature, is so often sublimed from Argentvive
precipitated, until in it the same is fixed, and admits good Fusion. This fused
Matter is projected upon the Substance of Venus, and that is peculiarly
whitened. Otherwise Luna, and Lithargiry are dissolved apart, and the Solutions
conjoined; and with them the Substance of Venus dealbated. But indeed, Venus is
better whitened, if Argentvive be perpetuated in all the Medicines.

It is whitened by Arsnick sublimed, thus: the Calcinate of Venus is taken, and
upon that is repeated the Sublimation of Arsnick, until it remain therewith,
and whiten it. But if you be not well skilled in the ways of Sublimation,
Arsnick will not persevere in it with any Alteration. Therefore, after the
first Degree of Sublimation, secondarily repeat the Work, after the same
manner, as we taught in the Sublimation of Marchasite. Also Venus is otherwise
Whitened: for if you project Arsnick sublimed upon Luna, and then the whole
upon Venus, it dealbates that peculiarly. Or first mix Lithargiry, or burnt
Lead dissolved, with Luna, and upon these cast Arsnick and project the whole
upon Venus, and so it will be Whitened. And this is a good Dealbation of the
first Order. Or, upon Lithargiry alone dissolved and reduced, project Arsnick
sublimed, and the whole of this upon Venus in flux: for it whitens the same
with a curious Aspect.

Or let Luna and Venus be commixed, and upon them project either of these above
dealbative Medicines: For Luna is more friendly to Arsnick, than to any one of
the Bodies, and therefore takes away Fraction from it: but Saturn secondarily,
and therefore We mix it with them. But otherwise, We melt Arsnick sublimed,
that it may be all in a lump; which being broken, We project piece after piece
upon Venus. We command it to be projected in pieces, rather than in Powder;
because Powder is more easily inflamed, than a lump; and therefore more easily
vanishes, than it, and is consumed before it can fall fiery hot upon the Body.

In like manner the Redness is taken away from Venus, and it is whitened with
Tutia. But because the Dealbation of Tutia suffices not, therefore it only
gives a Citrine Color. Yet every Citrination is of affinity to Whiteness. The
way of this is thus: every kind of Tutia is calcined and dissolved, and Venus
likewise; then both these Solutions are conjoined, and with them the Substance
of Venus is citrinated. If you be well skilled in working with Tutia, you will
find profit. But it is whitened with Marchasite sublimed, as with Sublimate
Argentvive, and the way is the same.

CHAP. XII.
Of Medicines dealbating Mars.

IT remains now, that We declare the Dealbations of Mars, by Medicines proper
to it; which are, as to its Essence, of the first Order, according to which it
has not right Fusion. Therefore it is expedient We should dealbate it with a
Medicine making it to flow. Every dealbative Medicine of Venus and Mars
likewise, is with its preparation of the same Order. But the special fusive of
it, is Arsnick of every kind. Therefore, with which soever it is dealbated and
fused, it is convenient it should be conjoined, and washed with Argentvive,
until all its Impurity be removed, and it be White, and fusible: or else let it
be red hot with vehement Ignition, and upon it Arsnick projected; and when it
shall be in flux, cast a Quantity of Luna thereon. For when that is united with
it, it is not separated therefrom by any easy Artifice.

Or else, let Mars be calcined, and all its Soluble Aluminosity, inferring
Corruption, washed from it, by the way of Solution now mentioned. But
afterward, cause cleansed Arsnick to be sublimed from it, and reiterate that
Sublimation many times, until some part of the Arsnick be fixed therewith.
Then, with a Solution of Lithargiry mix, imbibe, grind, and moderately calcine,
several times; and lastly reduce it with the Fire We taught in the Reduction of
Jupiter from its Calx. For from this it will go forth white, clean and fusible.
Or only with sublimed Arsnick, in its Calx, let it be reduced, and it will flow
out white, clean, and fusible. But it is expedient the Artificer should here
observe the same Caution We gave above of Venus, in Reiteration of Sublimation
of Arsnick (fixing it self in its profundity) from it. Mars is likewise
whitened by Marchasite and Tutia, with the same Ingenuity and Industry We have
declared. Yet the Dealbation, or Cleansing of these is not sufficient.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Medicines citrinating (or coloring) Luna.

THerefore prosecuting the Order of the Premises, We with certain verity
declare the Medicine (citrinating the Substance of Luna) in the Order of the
first kind. This Medicine is that which adheres to the same in its profundity,
and adhering colors, either by its proper Nature, or by the Artifice of this
Magistery. Therefore, We declare that Medicine, which, arising from its own
root, adheres to it. But there are Artifices, by which We make a Thing of every
kind to adhere, with firm Ingress. Yet this Medicine We extract either from
Sulphur, or from Argentvive, or from a Commixtion of both: by Sulphur more
diminishedly, but by Argentvive more perfectly. Also this Medicine is made of
certain Mineral Things, which are not of this kind; as is Vitriol and Copperas,
which also is called Gum of Copper, and Stillacidy (or Distillation) of the
same. Therefore first We will mention all the Methods of Medicines, which arise
from Argentvive; then, those that are from Sulphur, or from a Commixtion of
both; and lastly that Medicine, which is from the Gum of Copper, or the like.

The Method of that, which is made by Argentvive, is this: Take Argentvive
precipitate, viz. mortified and fixed by Precipitation; then put it in a
Furnace of great Ignition, after the manner of Conservation of Calxes, which We
have already taught, until it be red as Vsifur. But if it be not red, take a
part of Argentvive not mortified, and with Sulphur reiterate the Sublimation
thereof. Yet the Sulphur must be cleansed from all Impurity, and the Argentvive
likewise. And after you have twenty times repeated the Sublimation of it upon
the Precipitate, dissolve that with the dissolving sharpness of Waters, and
again calcine and dissolve it, until it be exuberantly sufficient. After this,
dissolve a part of Luna, and when dissolved, mix the Solutions, and Coagulate
them, and project the Coagulate upon Luna in flux. For it will color it much
with a peculiar Citrinity. But if Argentvive in its precipitation be red, the
aforesaid Administration, without Commixtion of any Thing tinging it, is
sufficient for the perfection of its projection.

By Sulphur, Luna is also rubified, but its Rubification is difficult, and
immensly laborious. Luna is likewise citrinated with a Solution of Mars: but
the necessity of this Work induces us first to calcine it, and then to fix,
which is an abundance of Labor. Afterward We administer it with the same
Preparation, and the same Projection, pouring it upon the Substance of Luna.
And yet thence results not a splendid bright Color, but dull and livid, with a
mortiferous Citrinity.

But the way of coloring it, which is made by Vitriol, or Copperas, is thus:
of either of them a certain Quantity, and sublime as much thereof, as can be
sublimed, until with great expression of Fire it be sublimed. After this again
sublime this Sublimate with Fire appropriate to it, that of it part after part
may be fixed, until its greater part is fixed. But afterward, it must be warily
calcined, that a greater Fire may be administered for its Perfection. This being
done, it is dissolved into a most Red Water, that has not its Peer. Then so
operate, as you may give it Ingress into the Lunar Body. These Processes are
sufficiently demonstrated to you, if you be a true Searcher of the perfect
Work, as We have described it. For We, seeing things of this kind profoundly
and amicably to adhere to Luna, have considered (and it is certain) that these
are from its own Radix; and thence it is, that Luna is altered by them. These
Medicines, which We have here inferred, are all of the first Order. Yet there
may be manifold other Methods of these Medicines, salving the Essence of
Pigmental Things, in the Variety of Methods. For the Medicine of Argentvive is
not in this first Order, seeing it is not a Medicine altering Luna with one
only Difference, but altogether in total Compleatment. Others have invented
many Medicines, yet one of these two necessarily happens, viz. either they are
constrained to create the Medicine of the same Things, or of Things having the
same Nature; or else they compound a Medicine, which with its Alteration is
equivalent to that, which it is not, and which neither confers to the Clean,
nor to the Parts of the Clean, until the Mover, in the sublime Mobile of
Nature, rests incorrupt.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Difference of Properties of Medicines of the second Order.

NOW it is time We should pass on to Medicines of the second Order, with a
Discourse truly sufficient according to their Exigency, and manifest
Probations, with true Experience. Therefore, seeing the Medicine of Bodies to
be cleansed is one, but of Argentvive perfectly coagulable another; We will
first of all completely declare the Medicines of Bodies, and afterward the
Medicine of the same Argentvive coagulable into a true Solifick, and Lunifick,
or Solar and Lunar Body.

A Medicine of the second Order is that, which does indeed complete imperfect
Bodies; but with one only difference of Perfection. Yet seeing there are many
Causes of Corruption in every of the imperfect Bodies, viz. in Saturn, a
volatile Sulphureity, flight of its Argentvive (by both which Corruption must
necessarily be induced) and its Terrestreity; therefore the Medicine is made
so, as it can indeed totally remove one of them, or covering it adorn the same;
only leaving all other Causes of Imperfection. Therefore, forasmuch as in
Bodies there is somewhat impermutable, which is innate in their Radix, and
which cannot be taken away by Medicine of the second Order; that Medicine,
which totally removes that from the Mixtion, is not called Medicine of the
second, but of the third and greater Order. And, because We found Superfluities
of things volatile to be removed by the way of Calcination, and the Earthiness
not innate abolished by reiteration of Reduction; therefore, there was a
necessity of inventing a Medicine of the second Order, which might indeed
palliate (or cover) the innate, and mollify the hard, and harden the soft,
viz. in hard and soft Bodies, according to Compleatment, not sophistical; but
perfectly constitute a true Solifick, or Lunifick, of imperfect Bodies.

Therefore, seeing it is manifest, that in Bodies only soft, the swiftness of
Liquefaction cannot be taken away by the ingenious Artifices of this Work, nor
the Impurity innate in the Radix of their Principles removed; the invention of
a Medicine necessarily happened, that in projection could inspissate the
Tenuity of them, and inspissating harden the same to a Sufficiency of Ignition
with their Liquefafaction; and likewise in hard Bodies, attenuate their
Spissitude, and attenuating deduce them to sufficient Velocity of Liquefaction,
with their own property of Ignition; and palliating adorn the Clowdiness of
Bodies of either Kind; and transform the one into White, and the other into
Red, most perfect.

This Medicine is not diversified from a Medicine of the third Order, unless by
the Imperfection of lesser Preparation. And that it is not diversified from it
self, is manifest, in the Projection of diverse Bodies, and its Acceptance of
Pigments; but in the way of Preparation only. For the Medicine inspissating the
Tenuity of soft Bodies, needs one industry of Preparation; but, attenuating the
Spissitude of hard Bodies, another. These indeed need the Method of Consumptive
Fire; but those, the Administration of Conservation of their Humidity.

CHAP. XV.
Of a Medicine Lunar and Solar, for imperfect Bodies.

WE now intend to complete our Universal Discourse of the Medicine of this
second Order, with a certain and true determination. And first We will describe
the Lunar Medicines of all imperfect Bodies, with the Differencies of their
Preparations: afterward the Solar, with their proper Differencies likewise. We
have already proved in our Discourse, that Sulphur is Corruptive of every kind
of Perfection. But Argentvive is Perfective in the Works of Nature, with
complete Regimens. Therefore We also, not changing, but imitating Nature, in
what Works it is possible for Us to follow her; do likewise assume Argentvive
in the Magistery of this Work, for a Medicine of each kind of Perfection, viz.
Lunar and Solar, as well of imperfect Bodies, as of Argentvive Coagulable. But
seeing, according to what We abovementioned, We have said, that there is a
twofold Difference of Medicine; one of Bodies, but the other of Argentvive
truly coagulable; We are hence induced to give a certain Narration of Bodies
first, and afterward of Argentvive.

The Matter, per se, of this Medicine of every kind, is one only; and it is
what is already sufficiently known. Therefore take that, and if you would work
according to the Lunar Order, We promised to show, learn to be expert in
Operating, and prepare That, with the known Ways of this Magistery. The
intention of which is, that you should divide the pure Substance from it, and
fix part thereof; but leave a part for Cerating; and so proceeding through the
whole Magistery, until you complete its desired Fusion. If it suddenly flow in
hard Bodies, it is perfect; but in soft Bodies, the contrary. For this Medicine
projected upon any of the imperfect Bodies, changes it into a perfect Lunar
Body, if the known Preparations have been first adhibited to this Medicine; but
if not, it leaves the same diminished, yet in one only difference of
Perfection, it perfects, as much as depends on the Administration of the Order
of a Medicine of this kind. But according to the third Order, a certain due
Administration not preceding, it perfects in Projection only.

A Solar Medicine (of this second Order) of every of the imperfect Bodies, is
the same Matter, and participates of the same Regimen of Preparation. Yet in
this it differs, viz. that in the greater Subtiliation of Parts, by proper Ways
of Digestion, and in the Commixtion of subtle Sulphur (with the Regimen of
Preparation administered) with addition of the Matter now known. The Regimen of
it, is the Fixation of pure Sulphur, and the Solution thereof, as is known. For
with this the Medicine is tinged, and with it projected upon every of the
Bodies diminished from Perfection, it compleates the same in a Solar
Compleatment, as much as depends on the Preparation of a Medicine of this
second Order; the known and certain Administration of the Body diminished
preceding. Also the same projected upon Luna, perfects it much, in a peculiar
Solar compleatment.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Medicine Coagulating Argentvive.

ACcording to the Order of the Premises, it concerns us, for Compleatment of
the Work, to proceed to the Narration of the Medicine coagulating Argentvive.
Therefore We say it is taken, from such Matter, as the Matter of it self is,
viz. according as is specified in many Chapters of this Work. And that is,
because Argentvive, seeing it is easily fugitive, without any Inflammation, may
suddenly adhere to it, in its profundity, and be conjoined with it through its
least parts, and likewise inspissate, and conserve it in Fire by its own
Fixation; until it be better able to sustain the force of Fire, consuming its
Humidity; and convert it, by the benefit of this in a Moment, into true
Solifick and Lunifick, according to that, for which the Medicine was prepared.

But seeing We find not any Thing more to agree with it, than That, which is of
its own Nature; therefore, by reason of this We judged, that with that the
Medicine thereof might be completed; and We endeavored by Ingenuity to make
the Form of the Medicine agreeable to the same. That is to say, it must be
prepared, in the Method and Way now mentioned, with the instance of long
continued Labor; by which all the subtle, and most pure Substance of it may
be rendered perfectly White in Luna, but intensly Citrine in Sol. Yet this
cannot be completed so, as to create a Citrine Color, without the Mixtion of
a Thing tinging it, which is of its own Nature. But, with this most pure
Substance of Argentvive the Medicine is perfected, by the Ingenuities of the
Work of this Magistery, which most nearly adheres to Argentvive, and is most
easily fluxed, and coagulates it. For it converts it into a true Solifick, and
Lunifick, with preparation of that always preceding.

The grand Question is, from what things this Substance of Argentvive may best
be extracted. To which, We answering say, It must be taken from those Things,
in which it is. But, according to Nature, it is as well in Bodies, as in
Argentvive it self, seeing they are found to be of one Nature. In Bodies more
difficultly, in Argentvive more nigh, but not more perfectly. Therefore, of
what kind soever the Medicine is to be, the Medicine of the precious Stone must
be as well sought in Bodies, as in the Substance of Argentvive.

CHAP. XVII.
How Ingress is procured in Medicines by Artifice.

BUt, because it happens, that a Medicine is sometimes mixed, sometimes not;
therefore We will declare the Way of permixing, viz. how every Thing, or each
peculiar Medicine not entering, may most profoundly acquire Ingress into a Body.
The Way is, by Dissolution of that which enters, and by Dissolution of that
which enters not, and by Commixtion of both Solutions. For it makes every Thing
to be ingressive, of what kind soever it be, that is through its least parts
conjoined with it. Yet this is completed by Solution; and Fusion, in things
not fusible, is completed by the same; therefore, they are the more apt to
have Ingress, and to alter. This is the Cause, why We calcine some things,
which are not of the Nature of these, viz. that they may the better be
dissolved; and they are dissolved, that Bodies may the better receive
Impression from them, and from them likewise, by these, be prepared and
cleansed. Or We give Ingress to these, which are not permitted to enter by
reason of their Spissitude, with manifold reiteration of the Sublimation, of
Spirits not inflamable upon them, viz. of Arsnick, and Argentvive not fixed; or
with manifold Repetition of the Solution of that which has not Ingress.

Yet, a good Caution for giving Ingress to Things impermixable, is that the
Body be dissolved, which you would have to be changed and altered, by these;
and the Things likewise dissolved, which you would have both to enter and to
alter. Nevertheless, Solution cannot be made of all Parts, but of some; with
which this or that Body, not another, must be imbibed time after time. For by
this benefit it has Ingress only into this, or that necessarily; but this does
not necessarily happen in any other Body. Therefore every Thing must needs have
Ingress by these Ways, by the benefit whereof it depends on the Nature of that,
to have ingress (as We said) and to alter, with Commixtion found out. By this
precedent Discourse is completed the Number of ten Medicines, with a
sufficient Tractation of them.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Medicines of the third Order in General.

THerefore now We proceed to the Medicine of the third Order. Of this Order
there is a twofold Medicine, viz. Solar and Lunar. Yet in Essence it is one,
and in one Way of acting; and therefore by our Ancestors, whose Writings We
have read, it is called One only Medicine. Nevertheless there is an additament
of a Citrine Color, made of the most clean Substance of Fixed Sulphur, which
constitutes the Difference between this and that, viz. the Lunar and Solar
Medicine; this containing that Color in it self, but the other not. This Order
is called the third Order of the greater Work: and that, because greater
Sagacity of Industry is required in the Administration thereof, and in the
preparation of its Perfection; also it needs longer labor for Compleatment of
the Verity of the same.

Therefore the Medicine of this Order is not diverse in Essence from the
Medicine of the second Order, unless by the most subtle Degrees of Preparation
in Creation of it, and by the long continued Instance of Labor. All these
Degrees We intend to declare with compleatment of Speech, and exactly show the
Way of Preparation, with its Causes and manifest Experiences; and the many
Degrees also of Ways of Preparation of this third Order. For the Solar Medicine
needs one Way, in complete Preparation of Pigments; but the Lunar another. The
first indeed, with the Administration of Sulphur tinging it; but the second,
not.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Lunar Medicine of the third Order.

FIrst, We will declare the way of Administration of the Lunar Medicine, which
is thus: the known Stone of it, and by the Way of Separation divide its most
pure Substance, and keep it apart. Then fix some of that Part, which is most
pure, leaving the Remainder. And when it shall be fixed, dissolve what is
soluble of it, but what is not soluble, put to be calcined; and again dissolve
the Calcinate, until again what is soluble of it be altogether dissolved.
Continue this Process, until the greater Quantity be dissolved. Then mix all
the Solutions together, and coagulate them. This being done, gently cocting,
keep the Coagulate in a Temperate Fire, until greater Fire may commodiously be
administered for its Perfection. Therefore reiterate all these Orders of
Preparation upon it four times, and lastly calcine it by its own way: for so
administering you have sufficiently governed the most precious Earth of the
Stone. Then by the subtle Way of Ingenuity, conjoyn a Quantity of the part
above reserved, with part of this prepared Earth, through its least particles.
This being done, with Intention of Elevation, sublime it by the aforesaid way
of Sublimation, until the fixed with the not fixed, be totally elevated. Which
if you see not, again add a Quantity of the not fixed Part, until enough be
added for Elevation thereof. Therefore, when it shall be once all elevated,
repeat its Sublimation, until by repetition of this Operation, it be totally
fixed. When it shall be fixed, again imbibe it with Quantity after Quantity of
the not fixed, by the Way to you known, until the whole shall again be
elevated. Then aagain fix it, until it have easy Fusion, with its Ignition.
For this is the Medicine, which transforms every Body diminished from
Perfection, and every Argentvive of what kind soever, into a most perfect Lunar
Body.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Solar Medicine of the third Order.

THE Preparation of this Solar Medicine, is made with the Additament of Sulphur
not burning, by Way of Fixation, and Calcination, perfectly administered with
subtle Industry; and by manifold repetition of Solution, until it be rendered
Clean. For by the perfect Administration of these preceding, its cleansing by
Sublimation will be completed. The Way of this Additament, is thus:

Reiterate the Sublimation of the not fixed part of the Stone, with this said
Sulphur, ingeniously conjoyning them, until they be first elevated together,
and then fixed so, as to abide in the Heat of Fire without ascension. The
oftener this Order of completing the Exuberancy, shall be repeated, the more
will the Exuberancy of this Medicine be multiplied, and the more its Goodness
augmented, and the Augmentation of the Perfection thereof highly multiplied
also, We will here indeed, in a brief, complete, and known Speech (to stop the
envious Clamours of the Impious) declare the whole Compleatment of this
Magistery; which thus take:

The Intention of it is, that by way of Sublimation, the Stone and its
Additament may most perfectly be cleansed; and accordingly by the Way of
Ingenuity, the fugitive fixed in them. Afterward, the Fixed made Volatile, and
the Volatile again fixed. And in this Order is completed the most Precious
Arcanum, which is above every Secret of the Sciences of this World, and is a
Treasure inestimable. Do you dispose your self by Exercise to it, with very
great Instance of Labor, and with continuance of immense Meditation. For by
these you will find it, but without them not. And indeed, in Preparation of the
Stone, the Reiteration of the Goodness of Administration upon this Medicine,
may with Industrious Wariness be so far available, as to enable it to change
Argentvive into an infinite true Solifick, and Lunifick, and not need any thing
more, than its Multiplication.

Now let the High GOD of Nature, blessed and glorious, be praised, who has
revealed to Us the Series of all Medicines, with the Experience of them, which
by the goodness of his Instigation, and by our own incessant Labor, We have
searched out; and have seen with our Eyes, and handled with our Hands, the
Compleatment thereof sought in our Magistery. But if We have concealed this,
let not the Son of Learning wonder, For We have not concealed it from him, but
have delivered it in such a Speech, as it must necessarily be hid from the
evil, and unjust, and the unwise cannot discern it. Therefore, Sons of
Doctrine, search ye, and ye will find this most excellent Gift of GOD reserved
for you only. Ye Sons of Folly, Wickedness, and evil Manners, fly far away from
this Science; because it is inimical and adverse to you, and will precipit you
into the miserable State of Poverty. For this Gift of GOD is absolutely, by the
Judgment of Divine Providence hid from you, and denied you for ever.

Therefore, having inquired into the Ways of all Medicines, We, prosecuting our
intended Purpose, must pass hence to those Things, which make known the
Perfection of this Magistery, with the Causes of its Probations.

The Third and Last Part of this Second Book: Of the Probations of Perfection.
CHAP. I.
The Division of what follows.

OMitting manifest Experiences, of which We make no mention, seeing they are
known and certain to all, viz. of the Weight, Color and Extension under the
Hammer, which are discerned, without any Sagacity of Industry; We with Wariness
make Trial by the Experiences of Artificers, Whether Projection of the
Administration of this Art, be a Compleatment with Verity, inferring the same;
which are Cineritium (or the Test called a Cupel) Cement, Ignition, Fusion;
Exposition over acute Vapor, Probation of Burning Sulphur by Mixtion;
Extinction, Reiteration of Calcination and Reduction, and the easy or
difficult Susception of Argentvive. Therefore We shall first speak of these
according to Order; and afterward, keeping the same Order, proceed to other
things, which We intend (according to promise) to declare with the known Causes
of them.

CHAP. II.
Of Cineritium, why some Bodies abide in it, but others not.

WE come first to speak of Cineritium, with all its manifest Causes, and of the
Way of its Confection. The Solar and Lunar Substance, is only permament in the
Trial of Cineritium. Therefore searching out the true Differencies of the
Substance of these Perfect Bodies, and likewise the Causes of the Cinerition,
We will make Trial, which of the imperfect Bodies more, and which less abide in
the Examen of this Magistery. Yet by Us is already sufficiently declared the
Secret of these two Bodies, in the Profundity of their Substance. And it is
this, viz. that their first Radix was a large Quantity of Argentvive, and the
purest Substance of it; at first most subtle, but afterward inspissate, until
it could admit Fusion with Ignition. Therefore, whatsoever Bodies diminished
from Perfection, have more of Earthiness, they less abide in this Examen; but
what have less, more. Because these do indeed more adhere, by reason of the
subtilety of their Parts, closely permixing and uniting them. So likewise,
Bodies that are of greater Tenuity; or on the contrary, of greater Spissitude,
than those which consist in Perfection; must necessarily be altogether
separated from the Commixtion. For being not of the same Fusion, therefore they
are separated. And indeed, Bodies, which partake of a lesser Quantity of
Argentvive, are more easily separated from the Commixtion.

Therefore, it is evident, that seeing Saturn is of much Earthiness, and
contains a small Quantity of Argentvive, and of an easy Tenuity of
Liquefaction, which are mostly opposite to the Perfection of a Cineritious
Examen; therefore of all the Bodies, by the Artifice of the Cineritium, it
indures least in the Commixtion; yea, it is separated, and vanishes most
speedily. Wherefore, seeing of all Bodies diminished from Perfection it most
gives way and recedes; by that it is more proper for the Examen of our
Magistery; and the reason is, because it sooner takes it flight, and sooner
draws every of the imperfect Bodies with it self from the Mixture. Also, by
reason of this, the greater Quantity of the perfect Body is preserved from the
strong Combustion of the Fire of the Examen; and therefore, by the Trial of
Lead it is less burnt, and more easily purified.

But because the Substance of Jupiter contains more of Argentvive, and partakes
of a lesser Quantity of Earthiness, and of greater Purity, and o^^ more subtle
Substance of it, therefore it is more safe in the Mixtion, than Saturn and
Venus; because it more adheres in the Profundity thereof. And this is the
Cause, why a larger Quantity of the perfect Body is absumed, before Jupiter
conjoined can be separated from the Commixtion. Yet Venus gives Fusion with
Ignition; but because its Fusion is slower, than of a perfect Body, therefore
it is separated from the Commixtion, yet more slowly than Saturn, by reason of
the Ignition of its fusible Substance. But because it contains less of the
Quantity of Argentvive, and is of greater Earthiness, and of a more thick
Substance, therefore it is more easily separated from the Mixtion, than
Jupiter; because Jupiter more adheres in the Profundity, than Venus.

Mars has not Fusion, and therefore is not permixed; which happens, by reason
of Deprivation of Humidity. But if it chance that it is permixed by Vehemence
of Fire; then, because it has not Humidity, by imbibing the Humidity of Sol or
Luna, it is united thereunto through its least parts: therefore, although it
has much Earth, and little Argentvive, and wants Fusion, yet it can by no
slight Artifice be separated from them. Therefore by this the Industry of the
Artificer is dilated, unto the true Rectification of every Body, if he rightly
know the Efficacy of That, which We have writ. But if he phantastically
understand, he knows nothing of the Truth thereof. There are two Bodies of
Perfection abiding this Trial, viz. Sol and Luna, by reason of their good
Composition, which results from their good Mixtion, and the pure Substance of
them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Trial of the Cineritium, (or Cupel) how it is to be compounded, and
used.

NOW We speak of the Way of making it, which is thus: Take sifted Ashes, or
Calx, or Powder of the Bones of Animals burnt, or a Commixtion of all, or of
some of them; moisten these with Water, and make the Mixture firm and solid
with your hand, and in the midst of it, wrought into a round flatish Lump, make
a round and smooth Hollowness, and upon the bottom of it strew a small Quantity
of Glass beaten to Powder. Then permit it to be dried. When dry, put that Metal
into the Hollowness thereof, which you intend to try by this Examen, and put
Coals of Fire upon it, and then with Bellows blow upon the Surface of the
Examinable Body, until it flows. Upon which being in flux cast part after part
of Lead, and blow with a flame of strong Ignition. Whilst you see it agitated
with the Motion of strong Concussion, it is not pure. Therefore wait, until all
the Lead be exhaled. If that be vanished, and yet the Motion cease not, it is
not pure. Therefore again cast Lead upon it, and blow as before, until the Lead
vanish. If it do not yet rest, repeat the casting in of more Lead, and blowing
upon it, until it be still, or quiet, and you see it clean and clear in its
Superficies. This being seen, open the Coals, and dissipate the Fire, and then
pour Water upon the Surface thereof. For you will find it perfectly examined.
If whilst you are blowing this Examen, you cast in Glass, the Body will be the
better and more perfectly purified; because that takes away the Impurities, and
separates them. Yet instead of Glass, Sal, Borax, or a little Allom, may be
cast in. In like manner this Examen of Cineritium may be made in a Crucible of
Earth, if the Fire round about it be blowed, and upon the Surface also of the
Crucible, that the Body to be examined may the sooner flow, and be perfected.

These being sufficiently declared, We now pass to the Examen of Cement, with
its Causes, and manifest and known Experiences.

CHAP. IV.
Of Cement, why some Bodies sustain it more, and others less.

WE have said, that some Bodies more, and others less, are burned by the
Calcination of Fire, viz. they which contain a greater Quantity of burning
Sulphur, more; but they that contain less, less. Therefore, seeing Sol has a
less Quantity of Sulphur, than other Metallic Bodies, it is not (in the midst
of all Mineral Bodies) burnt by Inflammation of Fire. And Luna, next to Sol,
partakes of a less Quantity of Sulphur, than the other four Bodies, yet more
than Sol. Therefore, according to this, it can less bear the Ignition of
Inflammation for a long space of time, than Sol; and by consequence less bear
Things burning by a like Nature, but Venus less than it; because it consists of
more Sulphur, and of greater Earthiness, than Luna; therefore can less bear the
Inflammation of Fire. Jupiter less also than Sol or Luna, because it partakes
of greater Sulphureity and Earthiness, than either of them; yet it is less
burnt by Inflammation, than Venus, but more than Sol and Luna. Saturn in its
Commixtion by Nature, holds more of Earthiness and Sulphureity, than any of
these now mentioned Bodies; therefore it is sooner and more easily inflamed,
than all the said Bodies; and by inflammation it is more swiftly burnt, because
it has Sulphureity more nearly conjoined, and more fixed than Jupiter.

Mars is not burnt by it self, but by Accident. For when it is mixed with
Bodies of much Humidity, it imbibes that Humidity, by reason of its own Want of
the same; and therefore being conjoined, it is neither inflamed nor burned, if
the Bodies, with which it is United, be neither inflamable, nor combustible.
But if combustible Bodies be mixed with it, it necessarily happens (according
to the Nature of their Combustion) that Mars is burnt and inflamed. Therefore,
seeing Cement is constituted of inflamable Things, the necessary Cause of its
Invention is manifest; and it was, that all combustible Things might be burned.
And since there is one only Body incombustible, that alone, or what is prepared
according to the Nature of that, is kept safe in Cement. Yet some abide more,
others less, in Cement: But which abide more, and which less, are known with
their said Causes. Therefore Luna abides Cement more, but Mars less, Jupiter
less than Mars, and Venus less than Jupiter; but Saturn least of all.

CHAP. V.
The Examen of Cement, how it is to be compounded and exercised.

NOW We will declare the Way of Cementing. Seeing it is known to Us, that
Cement is very necessary, in the Examen of Perfection, We say it is compounded
of inflamable Things. Of this kind are all blackening, flying, penetrating, and
burning Things; as is Vitriol, Salarmoniac, Flos Aeris, and the ancient Fictile
Stone, and a very small Quantity (or nothing) of Sulphur, and Mans-Vrine, with
like acute, and penetrating Things. All these are impasted with Virile Urine,
and spread upon thin Plates of that Body, which you intend shall be examined by
this way of Probation. Then the said Plates must be laid upon a Grate of Iron
included in an Earthen Vessel; yet so, as one touch not the other, that the
virtue of the Fire may have free and equal Access to them. Thus the whole must
be kept in Fire, in a strong Earthen Vessel, for the space of three days. But
here, great Caution is required, that the Plates may be kept fire-hot, but not
melt. After the third Day, you will find the Plates cleansed from all Impurity,
if the Body of them was perfect: if not, they will be wholly corrupted, and
burnt in the Calcination.

Some expose Plates of Metal to Calcination, without a composition of Cement,
and they are purified in like manner, if the Body be of Perfection: if not,
they are totally consumed. Yet in this last Examen. they need a longer space of
time, that are thus purified by the only inflammation of Fire, than those that
are examined by the Judgment of Cement.

And seeing the Nature of Luna differs not much from the Nature of Sol,
therefore by a certain necessary way of Administration, it rests with it in the
Trial of Cement. And there is no Separation of Bodies each from other, in these
two kinds of Trial, unless that be occasioned by reason of the Diversity of
Composition of their Substances: because thence results Diversity of Fusion,
and Spissitude and Rarity. Which are indeed the Causes of Separation; because,
by reason of the strong Composition of some, their Substance is not corrupted
by the Substance of the Extraneous Body, seeing a Mixtion of them could not be
made through their least parts. Therefore, in such a Commixtion, they must
necessarily be separated each from other, without the total Corruption of the
Essence of them. Wherefore, the complete Administration of imperfect Bodies, is
discerned, when they are by Ingenuity of Preparation found to be of the same
Fusion, Ignition, and Solidity.

CHAP. VI.
Of Ignition.

IT remains now, that We treat of Ignition. Having declared, that Bodies of
greatest Perfection, with determinate Ignition, are found to receive the Fire,
before Fusion of them; therefore we here say, if our Aim be to find out the
complete Alteration of them, there is a necessity to bring such Bodies to their
Fusion. And before these Bodies of Perfection be fused, to see them admit
Ignition, with inflammation of a pleasing Celestine Color, and this, before
their Ignition comes to the Whiteness of Fire, which the Eye can in no wise
discern.

Therefore, it is manifest, that the perfect Ignition of them is (before Fusion)
with intense Redness, and not with Whiteness, which the Eye cannot behold. For
if the administered Bodies be melted, before they are red hot with Fire, they
are not in Compleatment. And if they be made Fire-hot with labor, and strong
Expression of Fire, their Administration is not true: and this indeed, if it
happen in soft Bodies. Because, the same is only found in Mars. For Ignible
Bodies do not easily in the way of Preparation, admit Ignition; nor fusible
Bodies, the right Fusion, which We find in Bodies perfect according to Nature.
If Bodies administered, in their Ignition yield not Flame of a pleasing
Celestine Color, their Administration is not complete. And if any part of the
Weight, Color, Beauty, Ignition, and the like, be found diminished, by reason
of the Differencies of the Goodness of Preparation, the Indagation of the
Artist was not sufficient. Therefore let him make a new Search, until he find
his Error, with Ways of Operating corresponding to Divine Goodness.

CHAP. VII.
Of Fusion, or Melting.

IN the Narration of Fusion, We shall sufficiently discourse, according to the
Examen of all Bodies by the certain Ignition of them. Therefore We say, that
Fusion with Ignition, is the only Argument of Perfection; yet not with every
kind of Ignition, but with Ignition, in which the Body waxes not altogether
White; and with Ignition, in which is not made a dull paleness of Fire, and in
which the Body is not suddenly melted, or flows not immediately after Ignition.
For when a Body flows with very small pressure of a weak Fire, either ^^^^out
Ignition, or with a palid Ignition; a Body of this Preparation must needs be a
Body of Imperfection: some one of the imperfect Bodies, in diminished Artifice.

And if a Body after Fusion be not suffered presently to cool, and its Ignition
be suddenly turned altogether into Blackness, and by reason of that, loses its
Ignition before it waxes hard, it is not a Body in Compleatment, of what kind
soever it be. But this is to be imputed to softness, and that it is one of the
kinds of imperfect Bodies.

And if the Ignition of a Body, before Fusion thereof, be made with laborious
and violent Expression of strong Fire, and with a Ray of Brightness
inestimable, altogether White and shining; it is not a Body of Perfection, but
a Body of Hardness altered. Also, if after Fusion thereof, and when taken from
the Fire, it be suddenly hardened, that it flow not, the fulgent Ignition
thereof remaining, it is not a Body of Lunar, or Solar Perfection, of what kind
and preparation soever the Body administered was; but comes under the Nature of
the Differencies of Mars.

Therefore, by the abovesaid it is evident, that in fusible Bodies, by the
Experiment of them may be found a threefold Ignition, before Liquefaction of
their Substances, viz. one, Palid; the other, Red and Clear; and the third most
White, shining with a Ray. The first is of soft Bodies; the second, of perfect
Bodies; but the third, of hard Bodies; as is proved by Reason, and Experience.
He that desires to search out the Degree of all these Ignitions, that he may
complete all fusible Bodies, let him consider of the sufficiency complete for
the Perfection of Fusion, and by considering, recollect the difference of all
the signs of the Degree of Fusion, and so indeed he will find; otherwise not.
This is offered to you for an Exemplar, in all manners of Examination by us
determined, and to be determined. And this may suffice to be spoken of Fusion.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Exposition of Bodies over the Vapors of acute Things.

THerefore, prosecuting our intended Discourse, We now declare the Exposition
of Bodies over the Vapors of Acute Things, viz. of Things Sharp, Saline, and
Sower. We see Bodies of Perfection, exposed over the Vapors of the said Acute
Things, either little or nothing at all to flower, or to emit a most pleasant
Celestine Flos. But the purest Gold flowreth not. Yet Luna, or Sol, not pure,
We find to flower, when exposed over the Vapors of Acute Things, and to yield
a most pleasant Celestine Flos; yet that of Sol is more delightful, than that
of Luna. We therefore, by reason of this, imitating Nature, do in like manner
create a Celestine Color in prepared Bodies; which Color is perfected by the
Goodness of Argentvive, as is sufficiently declared by us in the precedent.

Therefore, whatsoever prepared Bodies shall be set over the Vapors of Acute
Things, and not create a Celestine pleasant Color, they exist not in the total
compleatment of Preparation. There are some Bodies, which in the Examen of
Saline Things, flower in their Superficies, with a dull red, or dull citrine
Color mixed with Greenness; of this kind is Mars. Some flower with a dull
Greenness, mixed with a turbid Celestine Color; of this kind is Venus. Some are
found to yield a dull White, and of this kind is Saturn. And some a clear
White, of which kind Jupiter is. Therefore, the most perfect Body flowers
least, or nothing at all; and if it yield any Flos, it is in a long space of
time. And indeed, among Bodies wanting the compleatment of Perfection, Jupiter
most slowly flowreth its Gummosity. Thence, by the Examen of this Magistery, We
consider Jupiter, in the Work of the Greater Order, most nearly approximate to
Perfection. And by this Examen it may be known, in what kind of Temperament,
the Body consists; if you rightly consider the Order of these Things, which we
have declared in this Chapter: but if you know not this, impute that to the
folly of your own Rashness.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Extinction of Bodies Fire-hot.

WE now speak entirely of the Examen of Extinction: of which there is a
manifold Experience, whereby it is known, whether the Magistery consist in
Perfection or not. Therefore, first if the Body ignited (or heat rod-hot) be
extinguished in Liquor, and the Lunar yield not a White Color, and the Solar a
Bright Citrine, but is changed into an Alien Color; the Alteration is not in
compleatment of this Magistery. And if in repeating its Ignition and
Extinction, in the Waters of Salts or Allomes, by whatsoever kind of
Administration created, it yield a Scoria of affinity to Blackness in its
Superficies; or if in the Extinction of it in Sulphurs, and from the
Extinction, with often repeated Ignition, it vanish, or infect it self with a
foul Blackness; or by compulsion of the Hammer breaks it self to pieces; the
Artifice of the Work is fallacious. Or if it, with Cementation of the Mixture
of Salarmoniack, Verdegrease, and Boys-Vrine, or of Things like in Nature, be
exposed to the Fire, and after the Ignition, and Extinction of it (whether
Lunar or Solar) it totally lose its proper Color, or create a Scoria, it is
manifest, that the Body does yet remain in Sophistick Corruption. Yet We give
you one certain General Rule, and that as well in these present, as in the
Examens following; if among the differencies of Perfection the altered Body
shall change any thing of its Weight, or Color, the Artist has not rightly,
but phantastically proceeded in his Work: which is a Thing not profitable, but
destructive rather.

CHAP. X.
Of the Admixtion of burning Sulphur.

LIkewise, by the Mixtion of Sulphur is proved, Whether the Magistery consist
in Perfection, or not. For by our Experience We find, that Sulphur commixed
with Bodies, burns some more, others less: and by our Artifice We have
discerned, that some retire from its combustion, and some not. And hence may be
noted the difference between those Bodies, diminished from Perfection, prepared
in a Sophistical compleatment. Therefore, among all Bodies, of whatsoever kind,
We find Sol not to be burned by Sulphur. The next to this, least burned, is
Jupiter; then Luna; and after that Saturn; but Venus more easily, than all
these; and Mars, by reason of the Oleaginy of Sulphur, is most easily burned.
Hence it is observable, that that Body is more burnt, which is less nigh to the
Nature of the Perfect.

Also by the Diversity of Colors, after combustion of Bodies, it may be known,
in what kind the altered Body, from the Radix of its own Nature, consists;
because, after the Commixtion of Sulphur, Sol gives an intense Citrine, or
clear Red Color; Luna, a black mixed with Celestine; Jupiter, a black Color
mixed with a small Tincture of Redness; Saturn a dull black, mixed with much
Redness, and a livid Color; Venus, from the Commixtion of Sulphur, yields a
black mixed with livid, if much combustion of Sulphur has preceded; but if
little combustion was pre-existent, it shows a most clean and pleasant Violet
Color; but Mars, in every kind of combustion, creates a most black dull Color.

Likewise, in Bodies is observed a Diversity, after their Reduction from the
combustion of Sulphur. Some do indeed return; but others, by the expression of
Fire, with the Sulphur recede from the Reduction, either totally, or the
greater Quantity of them: some into Bodies of their own Nature; others return,
from the combustion, into Bodies other than of their own Nature. Sol and Luna
return, from the combustion of Sulphur, into the Nature of their proper Body;
but Jupiter and Saturn recede. Jupiter recedes totally, or its greater part;
Saturn not totally; yet sometimes a greater, sometimes a lesser part of it, is
destroyed. The Diversity of these is, by reason of the Nature of Things and
Bodies, and by reason of the different Administration of them in the Work of
Preparation. For it happens, that Jupiter is destroyed, by the sudden force of
Fire in Reduction; but both Jupiter and Saturn are preserved by successive and
gentle Reduction. Yet the Reduction of them rather tends to the Nature of an
alien, than of the proper Body. That is to say, the Reduction of Jupiter is
converted into clear Antimony; but of Saturn, into a dull colored Antimony, as
We have found by proper Experience. Venus is diminished, in the Impression of
Fire of Reduction; and this happens more to Mars, than to Venus. Venus in its
Reduction is ponderous, of a dull Citrine Color, and soft, partaking of
Blackness, with Augmentation of the Weight of its Body. Therefore, by these,
may be found out the Nature of all Bodies, that are altered.

CHAP. XI.
Of Calcination, and Reduction.

OF the Examen of the Reiteration of Calcination and Reduction We are now to
speak. Therefore We say, that Bodies are found to be of Perfection, in the
Reiteration of Calcination and Reduction, by their differencies of Goodness, if
they lose nothing of their Color, Weight, Quantity, or Brightness; (of which
great care is to be taken) how much soever the Multiplicity of those Operations
shall be reiterated upon them. Accordingly, if by repeating the Calcination,
and Reduction from the Calxes, of altered Metals of every kind, they lose any
Thing in their differencies of Goodness, it is to be supposed, that the Artist
has sophistically followed his Investigation. Wherefore habituate your self to
these Works, that you may know them.

CHAP. XII.
Of the easy Susception of Argentvive.

IT is now undeniably manifest to you, that Bodies containing the greatest
Quantity of Argentvive, and Bodies of Perfection. Wherefore, it is to be
supposed, that those Bodies are more nigh to Perfection, which more amicably
imbibe Argentvive. The sign of this is, the easy Susception of Argentvive by a
Solar or Lunar Body of Perfection. For this same Reason, if a Body altered do
not easily receive Argentvive into its Substance, it must needs be very remote
from the Compleatment of Perfection.

CHAP. XIII.
A Recapitulation of the whole Art.

HAving handled the Experiences of the Causes of the sufficiency of this
Magistery, according to the Exigency of our proposed Discourse, it remains,
that We should now in one Chapter come to the Compleatment of this whole Divine
Work; and briefly speaking, contract the dispersed Magistery into one Sum, in
general Heads. Therefore We say, the Sum of the whole Intention of the Work is
no other, than that the Stone (known in its Chapters) should be taken, and with
instance of Labor, Sublimation of the first Degree, repeated upon it: for by
this it will be cleansed from corrupting Impurity. And the Perfection of
Sublimation is, the Subtiliation of the Stone by it, until it can come to the
ultimate purity of Subtilety, and lastly be made Volatile. This being done, by
the Way of Fixation it must be fixed, until it can rest in the Asperity of
Fire. Herein consists the Measure of the Second Degree of Preparation. The
Stone is likewise administered in the third, which consists in the ultimate
Compleatment of Preparation; and that is this: You must make the now fixed
Stone, by the ways of Sublimation Volatile, and the Volatile fixed; and the
Fixed, Dissolved; and the Dissolved again Volatile, and the Volatile again
Fixed, until it flow and alter, into Solifick, and Lunifick, with certain
Compleatment.

From the Reiteration of Preparation of this third Degree, results the
Multiplication of the Goodness of Alteration of the Medicine. Therefore, from
the Diversity of the Work repeated upon the Stone, in its Degrees, results the
Diversity of Multiplication of the Goodness of Alteration; so that among
Medicines, some transmute into a true Solifick and Lunifick Body of Perfection,
an hundredfold as much as their own weight is; some two hundredfold; some
three hundredfold; some a thousand-fold, and some to Infinity. Therefore hence
it may be known, whether the Magistery consists in Perfection.

CHAP. XIV.
What Order the Author has observed in treating of the aforesaid.

BUT, that the Envious may not calumniate us, We declare, that We have not
treated of our Science with a continued series of Discourse, but have dispersed
it in diverse Chapters. And this was done; because, if it had been delivered in
a continued Series of Speech, the just Man, as well as him that is evil, might
have usurped it unworthily. Therefore We have concealed it in places, where We
more openly speak; yet not under an Aenigma, but in a plain discourse to the
Artist: and indeed We have described it in such a way of speaking, as is
agreeable to the Will of the Most High, blessed, sublime, and Glorious God, and
our own Mind, who writ the same, as it happened to be recollected, or was
infused by the Grace of his divine Goodness, who gives it to, and withholds it
from, whom he will.

Therefore, let not the Son of Learning despair: for if he seek it, he may find
the same, with the Investigation of the Motion of his proper Nature, not of
Doctrine. Because, he that seeks by the goodness of his Industry finds the
same; but he, who seeks the same following Books only, will very slowly attain
to this most pecious Art. For We published this Art found by Us only, for our
selves only, not for others, although it be most true, and altogether certain.
Therefore, We invite to this Art the Prudent only, and (by Ingenuities taught
by Us) expose to them the way of Investigation. For We writ down the same being
found, together with the Way of its Invention, and the Ingenuities of Methods,
for none, but our selves. Wherefore let the well-minded Artificer exercise
himself by those Precepts, which We have delivered; and he will greatly rejoice
when he has found the Gift of the Most High God. These may suffice to be
spoken, touching the Disquisition of this sublime Art.

The End of the Second Book of Geber, Of the Sum of Perfection, or of the
Perfect Magistery.
GEBER, The Arabian Prince and Philosopher, His Book, Of the INVENTION of
VERITY, OR, PERFECTION,
CHAP. I.
Of the six Properties of Things, from which the Medicine is extracted.

WE have in our Volumes considered, not only by the Secret Properties of
Natural Principles, but also by proper Experience, and the truly certain
Investigation of our Invention, that those Things, from which our Medicine is
extracted, have in themselves these Properties of Qualities, in transmuting
Bodies. First, they have in themselves an Earth most subtle and incombustible,
altogether fixed with its own proper radical Humidity, and apt for fixing.
Secondly, they have an Airy and Fiery Humidity, so uniformly conjoined to that
Earth, that if one be volatile, so is the residue; and the same Humidity abides
the Fire beyond all Humidities, even to the complete Termination of its own
Inspissation, according to the Indigency of its Compleatment, with Permanency
(inseparable from the Earth annexed to it) without Evaporation. Thirdly, The
Disposition of their Natural Humidity is such, that by the benefit of its own
Oleaginy, in all differencies of its Properties, it so unctuously contemperates
the Earth annexed to it, with Conversion of one into the other homogeneally and
equally, with such an Union and Bond of Conjunction of inseparability, that
after the Degree of final Preparation, it gives good Fusion.

Fourthly, This Oleaginy is of so great purity of Essence, and so Artificially
cleansed from every combustible, or burning Thing, that it burns not all
Bodies, with which it is conjoined through their least parts; but preserves
them from Combustion. Fifthly, It has a Tincture in it self so clear and
splended, white or red, clean and incombustible, stable and fixed, that the
Fire cannot prevail against it to change it, nor sulphurous adustive, or acute
corroding Bodies, corrupt and defile the same. Sixthly, The whole Compound,
incerated with its final Compleatment, is of so great Subtilety and Tenuity of
Matter, that after the final Termination of its Decoction, it remains in
Projection, of most thin Fusion like Water; and is of profound Penetration,
unto the ultimate Compleatment of the Body permutable, of how great Fixation
soever it be. And with its Vicinity, or Affinity, it adheres to its own like,
naturally, with inseparable Consolidation against the Impression of Fire; in
that very Hour, with its own Spirituality, reducing Bodies to Volatility.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Seven Properties of the Medicine.

THese being considered, We find by Our Investigation several Properties of
Things necessary and opportune in our Stone; and they are these: Oleaginy,
Tenuity of Matter, Affinity, Radical Humidity, Clearness of Purity, a fixing
Earth, and Tincture.

The first Property of Differencies of the Medicine is Oleaginy, in Projection
giving Universal Fusion, and Aspertion of the Matter. For, the first thing
which is necessary after Projection of the Medicine, is the sudden and
convenient Fusion of the Medicine it self, which is perfected and rendered
viscous with Mineral Oleaginy.

The second Property, is, Tenuity of the Matter, or the Spiritual Substance
thereof, flowing very thin in its Fusion, like Water penetrating to the
profundity of the Body alterable; because immediately after Fusion, the
Ingression thereof is necessary.

The third Property, is Affinity (or Vicinity) between the Elixir, and the Body
to be transmuted, giving adherency in the Obviation and Retention of its like;
because immediately after Ingress of the Medicine, Adherency is convenient and
necessary.

The fourth Property, is Radical Humidity. fiery, congealing, and consolidating
the Parts retained, with Adherency of its own like, with the Union of all
Co-like Parts inseperably for ever; because, after Adherency, Consolidation of
the Parts, with their Radical, viscous, and necessary Humidity, is opportune.

The fifth, is a Mundificative Clearness of Purity, giving evident Splendour, in
the Combustion existent, not burning. For, after Consolidation of the purified
Parts, it is lest to the Actual Fire, to have power of burning all extraneous
Superfluities, not consolidated. Wherefore Purification follows, and is
necessary.

The sixth Property, is a Fixing Earth, temperate, thin, subtle, fixed, and
incombustible, giving permanency of Fixation in the Solution of the Body
adhering with it, standing and persevering against the force of Fire: for
immediately after Purification, Fixation is necessary, and opportune.

The seventh Property, is Tincture, giving a splendid and perfect Color,
White, or intensly Citrine, and Lunification, or Solification of Bodies to be
transmuted; because after Fixation, a splendid Tincture, and Color tinging
another Body, or a Tincture coloring the Matter convertible into true Silver,
or Gold (with all its certain and known differencies) is absolutely necessary.

CHAP. III.
The Division of this Book into four Particles.

ACcording to the Exigency of Art, We have disputed against Men denying Art;
and have discoursed of Natural Principles, which are according to the Intention
of Nature, in the Procreation of Metals; and of Bodies, and their Procreations,
and Preparations; and lastly of the Medicines, and Examinations of the same
Bodies transmuted, whether the Compleatment of them stands in Perfection; all
which has been done by Us, in our Book entitled, The Sum of Perfection, or of
the Perfect Magistery. And there We have written the Way of the Invention of
Art, and our Ingenious Works, which We have seen, and touched: But here, in
this Book, We will treat of the Invention of Perfection, and in a special
manner declare those Things, which are necessary in this our Magistery; and the
Way of Preparing the same, with their weight and measure, and Probation
certain, not conjectural.

Our Intention is to divide this little Book into Four Particles; and in the
First sufficiently to treat of Middle Minerals, and their Preparations; that
they may be aptly disposed in the Extraction of Spirits, and imperfect Bodies:
in the Second, of the Mundifications of Spirits, and entire Preparations of the
same: in the Third, of the diverse Preparations of imperfect Bodies, according
to the Exigency of the Compleatment of the Work: and in the Fourth of all
Medicines especially, for transforming every Body into Sol and Luna, with
Projection, Weight, and Measure, according to the Exigency of Necessity for
Compleatment of the Work.

The First Particle.
CHAP. IV.
Of the Preparation of Middle Minerals.

COmmon Salt is dissolved in clear Fountain Water, and distilled through a
Filter, and afterward congealed in an Earthen Vessel, or in a Vessel of Lead,
or other Metal. Saltpeter is dissolved in Fountain Water, distilled through a
Filter, and congealed in a Vessel of Glass, that it may there be crystalized.
Salt-nitre is so prepared, viz. it is dissolved in clear Fountain Water,
filtred, etc. Salt-Gem is dissolved, etc. as before, and congealed in an
Earthen-glazed Vessel. True Salt-Alkali is made of Zoza (or Soda) dissolved,
filtred, and the Solution boiled away to one third part, and then the Salt, in
a short time settles to the Bottom in Crystals; and so it is prepared. Some do
also make Salt-Alkali, thus: They take lib. 5. of Ashes of Hearts-ease, and
lib. 1. of Quicklime, and by boiling in Water they make a Lixivium, which they
filter and congeal; this labor they reiterate once, and it is prepared.
Salammoniac is made of five parts of Man's Urine, and one part of his Sweat, one
part of Common-Salt, and half a part of the Soot of Woods, these being boiled
together into Consumption of the Humidity, from the remainder sublime a true
and profitable Salammoniac: this again dissolve into Sweat, and sublime it from
Common-Salt once; then it is prepared. Salt of Tartar is made of the calcined
Feces of Wine distilled, the Tartar being dissolved from them, and congealed:
so it is prepared. Salt of Urine is likewise made of the calcined Feces of
Urine distilled, and this is again dissolved in its own Water, and congealed,
so it is prepared; and is of great Emolument and Use.

Many men diversely treat of the Preparations of Salts; but We, by our
Invention, have found, that these Preparations of Salts are more short, more
subtle, and more profitable for our purpose; seeing from all Things truly
calcined, Salts are extracted by Solution, which by the above-alleadged Way
must be prepared. Therefore it suffices Us to pass them by, these being more
useful. Glassy or Roch-Allom has a twofold way of Preparation: one for
washing calcined Bodies, and the other for subliming Spirits. After the first
Way, it is thus prepared: Dissolve it in clear Fountain Water, distill it
through a Filter, and boil it to a third part: this Part put in Glazed Dishes,
and it will settle round about the Sides of the Vessels, and in the Bottom: so
you will have prepared Crystalline Allom. The second Way is this: Boil the
Allom in an Earthen Vessel, until the Humidity vanish, and you find it
spongious, white and light; then is it prepared for Sublimations, and other
diverse Operations. Plumous Allom is dissolved and congealed as the former; and
so it is prepared.

Now, it is expedient to speak of the Preparations of Atraments, seeing that is
a Thing very necessary; because We find a necessary Use of them in Tinctures,
and Ligaments of Spirits, and other Things, which appertain to the Work.
Black-Atrament is dissolved in boiling Water, distilled through a Filter, and
congealed; then it is prepared. Copperas is dissolved in distilled Vinegar,
clarified by filtring, and congealed: so it is clean. Roman Vitrol needs not
any other Preparation, than only (in some cases) to be held in a moderate Fire,
and rubified*

Morever, it is certain, that diverse Things necessary for Us are extracted
from imperfect Bodies; which need Preparation, and are helpful in the Case: and
these are, first Ceruse of Lead, which is thus prepared. Cerusse of Lead must
be washed in distilled Vinegar, then purged from its more gross parts; and that
which flows out thence as Milk, must be congealed in the Sun, and it is
prepared. The Preparation of Spanish White, Tin, and Minium, is after the same
manner. For they must be washed in distilled Urine, and prepared as Cerusse;
then they are fit for use. Verdegreece is dissolved in distilled Vinegar, and
rubified, being exactly congealed with most gentle Heat of Fire; and then it is
prepared and fit for the Work. Crocus of Iron is dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, and clarified by Filter: this Red Water being congealed, yields you a
Crocus fit for your purpose. Aes ustum (or Copper calcined) ground to powder,
and washed with distilled Vinegar, after the same manner as We taught in the
Preparation of Ceruss; will be of use to you. Lithargiry dissolved in distilled
Vinegar, must be clarified and congealed; for so it is well prepared. Yet you
may again dissolve it as other Things above-noted. Also you may use them
dissolved and congealed; and in this is profound Investigation. Antimony is
calcined, dissolved, clarified, congealed, and ground to powder; so it is
prepared. Lapis Lazuli (or the Lazure Stone) is calcined, and when ground to
Powder washed, and it is purified. The Stone Haematitis, is heat red hot, and
often extingushed in Bulls-Gall. Bolearmenac is ground and dissolved as
Cerusse, and then congealed. Cinaber must be sublimed once from Common-Salt,
and so it is prepared. Tutia is dissolved in distilled Vinegar, having been
first calcined, and so it is well prepared.

The Second Particle.
CHAP. V.
Of the Mundifications, or Cleansing of Spirits.

IN the first Particle We sufficiently treated of those things, which (in our
certain Invention) seemed unto Us necessary for the Preparation of Spirits and
Bodies. Here We now intend to enlarge our Discourse, touching the Sublimation,
or Preparation of Spirits of every Species, according to the Indigency of the
Compleatment of our Magistery. But do not you deviate from this Doctrine of our
Invention, which, in profound Meditation, and in Works, We see very necessary
for Us, and most certain. Here We search out the Weights, and the special Way
of preparing and subliming them, with Experience altogether certain: and first
begin with the Preparation of Sulphur, and its Compeer; and so of others in
their Order.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Preparation of Sulphur.

GRind clear and gummose Sulphurvive to a most subtle Powder, which boil in a
Lixivium made of Ashes of Heartsease, and Quicklime, gathering from off the
superficies its oleaginous Combustibility, until it be discerned to be clear.
This being done, stir the whole with a stick, and then warily take off that,
which passes out with the Lixivium, leaving the more gross parts in the
bottom. Permit that Extract to cool a little, and upon it pour a fourth part of
its own Quantity of distilled Vinegar, and then will the whole suddenly be
congealed as Milk. Remove as much of the clear Lixivium as you can; but dry the
residue with gentle Fire, and keep it.

In administration of the Feces, observe this Method. For every one pound of
this prepared Sulphur, take of Scales of Iron well calcined to redness, l^b. 1.
of Roch-Allom also well calcined, lib. 1. and of Common-Salt prepared, half a
pound. Incorporate all these well, by grinding together with Vinegar, that the
whole may be liquid; which then boil, stirring it, until it be all very black.
Then dry, and grind it to a fine Powder, which put into an Aludel with a large
Cover, and let the Cover of the Alembeck have a large and great Zone (or
Girdle) for Conservation of the Spirits elevated: the Aludel it self must be of
the height of one Foot and half, that the Heat may not touch the Zone of the
Alembeck. This being done, sublime as We taught you in our Book, Of the Sum of
Perfection, etc. But gather what shall be dense (or close compact) in the Zone;
and cast away the light pulverizable Flos, which ascends above it, and adheres
to the sides of the Alembeck: for it is combustible, defiled, and defiling.
Keep the dense Matter sublimed, by it self, in a Phial, and coct it upon Ashes
so long, as until its combustive Humidity be gradually exterminated. Then
preserve it clean; for it is perfectly cleansed.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Preparation of Arsnick.

AFter its Compeer Arsnick is beaten to Powder, it must be boiled in Vinegar,
and all its combustible Fatness extracted, and it then dried. Then. of Copper,
calcined, lib. 1. Of Allom calcined a pound, and of Common-Salt prepared as
much as of the Allom. Mix these with your Arsnick prepared. and having ground
all well together, moysten the Mixture with distilled Vinegar (that it may be
liquid) and boil the same, as you did in Sulphur; and then sublime it in an
Aludel (without an Alembeck) of the height of one Foot. Gather what ascends
white, dense, clear, and lucid, and keep it; because it is sufficiently
prepared for the Work.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preparation of Argentvive.

SUblime Argentvive thus:. Of it lib. j. of Vitriol rubified, lib. ij. Of
Roch-Allom calcined, lib. j. of Common Sal, lib. ss. and of Saltpeter one
fourth part. Incorporate all together, and sublime: and gather the White,
Dense, and Ponderous, which shall be found about the Sides of the Vessel, and
keep it, as We have appointed of other Things. But if, in the first
Sublimation, you shall find it turbid, or unclean (which may happen, by reason
of your own Negligence) again sublime it with the same Feces, and reserve it
for use.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Preparation of Marchasite.

SPread Marchasite ground to Powder, a fingers thickness over the Bottom of a
large Aludel, and collect the Sulphur first with gentle Fire. When that is
ascended, take off the Head (or Alembeck) and having applied another, augment
the Fire; then, that which obtains the Place of Argentvive, ascends, as We have
fully described in our Sum of Perfection.

CHAP. X.
Of the Preparation of Tutia, etc.

PUT pulverized Tutia into an Aludel, and with the Administration of great
Ignition sublime it, and it is prepared.

Salammoniac is sublimed from Common-Salt, as in the Praxis of Salts We have
declared to you.

Argentvive is prepared most red, thus:. of Mercury, lib. j. of Vitriol
rubified, lib. ij. and Saltpeter, lib. j. Mortify the Mercury with these, and
then sublime it from Roch-Allom, and Saltpeter, in equal weights. This is a
great Secret of our Invention, which is not to be omitted.

But the Consideration of Feces is to be observed in Sublimation of Sulphur,
and its Compeer: for Sulphur sublimed from the Calx of Copper is more whitened,
than when sublimed from the Calx of Iron. The like is to be judged of Arsnick:
for it is sublimed more red from Iron. These may also be sublimed from Vitriol
and Allom calcined, and permixed with Common-Salt, and Saltpeter, Thus have We
sufficiently treated of the Artifical, not mean Preparations of Spirits.

The third Particle of this Book.
CHAP. XI.
How Bodies ought to be prepared.

OUR third Particle declares the complete Preparation of imperfect Bodies. For
We have found out the Way how they should be prepared, so as to be perfected
(as to the Compleatmen of the first or second Order) by themselves, without
Medicine. This We intend to show; and secondly the Preparation of them for
receiving Medicine, white or red.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Preparation of Saturn.

CAlcine Saturn fluxed with Common-Salt prepared, stirring it continually with
an Iron Spatula, until it be turned to Ashes. Coct it for one Day natural, and
let it be a little fiery-hot, but not much: then completely wash it with Sweet
Water; afterward calcine it for three Days, until it be red within and without.
If you would have it be prepared for the White, imbibe it with the Water of
white Allom, and reduce it with Oil of Tarter, or its Salt. But if for the Red,
imbibe it with Water of Crocus of Iron, and of Verdegreece aforesaid; and
reduce it with Salt of Tartar as before. Reiterate this Labor, as often as
shall be needful.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Preparation of Jupiter.

CAlcine Jupiter as Saturn, and whiten its Calx for three Days, as in Saturn We
said. But see you err not in its Reduction: because that is difficult, unless
it be made in their Furnace, who reduce by Cineritiums, or Cements; then it is
done with ease.

Know you, O Searcher of this our Art, that We have plenarily described in this
Book the Preparations of Reductible Feces: for this whole Book is practical,
compiled with certain Investigation. But in our Sum of Perfection We observed
another style more philosophical; that being Theorical, We, here Theorically
described the whole Art, but in this, that is merely Practical, We have set
down the Praxis of the same completely.

But that the Artist may not err, let him join that Body, which he would
reduce, in equal parts, with that by which he would make Reduction, and
co-unite the divided Calx. Yet in Tinctures there is another Consideration. For
the Matter tinging must be multiplied upon the Matter to be tinged, until the
Tincture appear, which you shall consider in the Body, or Medicine.

After you shall have reduced these two Leads, and found their Color,
Splendor, and all other things according to your own Wish, perhaps they will
want Ignition; therefore, that you may attain your Intentention in that also,
begin thus: Dissolve Tutia calcined, and Tin calcined; mix both Solutions, and
with that Water imbibe the Calx of Tin, time after time, until the Calx has
imbibed an eighth part of the Tutia; then reduce it into Body, and you will
find it to have Ignition, and that well indeed: if not, reiterate the same
Labor, until due Ignition be acquired.

We will set down all Waters dissolutive of Spirits and Bodies, in the End of
this Book; and every one of these according to its own kind: and wonder not,
that We have dispersed the special Things pertinent to this Praxis, in diverse
Volumes, seeing We endeavor to hide the Art from evil Men. With Talk, or
Mercury precipitated (or more profitably) with pure Luna, deduced to this by
calcining and dissolving, We acquire the complete Ignition and Hardness of
these two Bodies, with unutterable splendor. Yet you should here know, that
Speculation only, which is very available in our Sum of Perfection, profits
little in this present Invention; but to grind, to assate, to inhumate, to
calcine, to make to flow, to destroy, to construct, and to cleanse Bodies, are
effectual Works; for with these Keys, you may open the occult Enclosures of our
Arcanum, and without them you shall never be called to the Banquets of this
kind of Rarieties. Destroy without Anger, and you shall complete your Work with
Joy.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Preparation of Mars.

PRepare Mars thus: Grind one pound of the Filings thereof, with half a pound
of Arsnick sublimed. Imbibe the Mixture wixture with the Water of Saltpeter,
and Salt-Alkali, reiterating this Imbibition thrice; then make it flow with
violent Fire, and you will have your Iron white. Repeat this Labor, until it
flow sufficiently, with peculiar Dealbation.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Preparation of Venus.

THE Purgation of Venus is twofold, one for the White, and the other for the
Red. For the White it is thus: Calcine Venus with Fire only, as We showed in
our Sum of Perfection.. Venus thus calcined, grind, 1. lib. of it with four
Ounces of Arsnick sublimed, and imbibe the Mixture three or four times with the
Water of Lithargiry, and reduce the whole with Saltpeter, and Oil of Tartar;
and you will find the Body of Venus white and splendid, fit for receiving its
Medicine.

For the Red, the Preparation of it is thus: Grind one pound of the Filings of
Venus, with four ounces of Sulphur; or Cement Plates of Copper with Sulphur,
and so calcine; and wash the Calcinate with the Water of Salt and Allom, and
then (with Things reducing) reduce into a clean Body apt for the Red Tincture.

There is also a third Preparation of it. Calcine it with Fire only, and then
dissolve a part thereof, and likewise dissolve as much of Tutia calcined; join
both Solutions, and with the same imbibe the remaining part of the Calx of
Venus four or five times. Or you may make this Imbibition with Tutia alone
dissolved; provided that more of the Tutia (than half of the Calx is) be
imbibed in the said Calx. This being done, reduce with Things reducing, and you
will have the Body of Venus clean and splendid; which with a little help may be
brought to an higher State, if you be a true Searcher of the Truth.

There is likewise a fourth Preparation thereof, and that is thus: Of it, by it
self calcined, I mean with Fire only, you may make an Intense Greenness, which
is called the Flos of Copper. Dissolve this Greenness with distilled Vinegar,
and then congeal it; afterward, with Things reducing reduce the Congelate,
which when reduced will be apt for many Things, if your Investigation in like
Works given by Us, has not been too remiss. For We composed this Book, that it
might be Introductory to Our Sum of Perfection; or in the absence of that, be a
final Conclusion of the Whole, for the Compleatment of either Medicine. Because
here We posit the the Practice gradatim, but there the Theory of our
Speculation, disposed of in a way more General, with manifest Demonstrations.

The fourth Particle of this Book.
CHAP. XVI.
Of Medicines.

ACcording to the Order of the Premises, We will (in this our fourth Particle)
again practically speak of the Way of Investigation, compounding every
Medicine, viz. White and Red, according to the Nature and Property of the Body
to be transmuted, or of Mercury it self, with all its pertinencies occult and
manifest. And this, in the Second, or Third Order. For this our Book, being it
self entitled, Of the Invention of Verity, contains nothing that is
Sophistical. Wherefore We will begin to speak first of White Elixirs.

CHAP. XVII.
Of White Medicines for Jupiter, and Saturn.

A White Medicine for Jupiter prepared: of most pure Luna, lib. 1. of Living
Mercury, lib. 8. Amalgamate these together; then wash the Amalgama with
distilled Vinegar, and Common-Salt prepared, until it acquire a Celestine or
Lazure Color. Which being done, extract as much of the Mercury as you can, by
strongly expressing the Mixture through a thick Cloth. Then add of Sublimate
Mercury double the Weight of your Luna, and grind them well together; afterward
coct the Mixture in a Phial firmly closed for one Day and Night, then take out
the Matter, grind it, and again Coct the same; then break the Vessel, and
separate that which is sublimed from the Inferior Reddish Powder. But take
heed of giving too great Fire, for that would cause the whole to flow into one
black Mass. Put the Powder upon a Porphery Stone, and adjoyn to it two parts of
Ammoniac prepared, and one part of Mercury sublimed, grind all very well
together, and imbibe the Mixture with the Water of Salt-Alkali, or the Water of
Saltpeter (if you find not Zoza Salt-Alkali made of Zoda.
, or Zoda) and when imbibed, put it to be distilled with gentle, Fire, by which
Extract the whole Water, so that what remains in the Bottom may be as melted
Pitch: then revert the same Water upon it; and this do thrice, repeating the
same labor. This being done, take out the Matter, grind it upon a Stone, and
dry it very well. Afterward imbibe it with rectified or dried Oil of Eggs; or
with Oil of Salt-Alkali, or Peter, or Tartar, until it flow with ingress; and
project one part upon five of Tin prepared, and it will be Luna perfect in the
second Order, without Error.

Also another Medicine upon Jupiter.. Talk calcined and grind it with as much
as it self is of Salammoniac, and sublime it three or four times; and dissolve
into Water, wherewith imbibe Luna calcined (as you did in the first Medicine)
so often, as until it has drunk in as much as its own Weight is; and give
ingress to it with the Oils aforesaid, and project one part upon ten Parts of
Jupiter prepared, and you will see your Intent completely answered.

A third Medicine of Jupiter is made with one part of Luna dissolved in its own
Water (viz. of the Stillicidy of Copper, and Saltpeter) as in the End is
declared; with which must be adjoined two parts of Talk dissolved or of Tutia
calcined and dissolved: then receiving the Water off by Distillation three or
four times, congeal, and incerate with Arsnick sublimed, until it flow and have
ingress. Of this project one part upon eight parts of Jupiter prepared. If you
would project these Medicines upon Saturn prepared for the White, diminish
Saturn in its three Days, and do as you did in Jupiter.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of Solar Medicines for Jupiter and Saturn.

THE first Solar Medicine is thus made. Calcine Sol, amalgamating first with
Mercury, and as in Luna express the Mercury through a Cloth: then grind it
with twice so much as it self is of Common-Salt prepared, and set the whole
over a gentle Fire, that the remaining Mercury may recede. Extract the Salt
with sweet Water, and dry the Calx, from which sublime as much of Salammoniac,
reverting the sublimed Salt upon it four times; then dissolve it in the Water
of Vitriol, and Peter, and Jamenous Allom, as is taught in the end of this
Book. Likewise dissolve Crocus made of Iron by Calcination, or Copper calcined
Red. Join these Waters in equal parts; draw off the Water by Distillation, and
revert it upon it four times. Lastly, Dry the Matter, and imbibe it with Oil of
Tartar rectified (as in the end of this Book) until it flow as Wax, and tinge
four parts into Gold Obrizon.

The second is made with Sol dissolved (as in the first) and a like quantity of
Greenness made of Copper calcined, and dissolved, being both mixed, and
incerated; by distilling and reiterating, and in the end incerating with
Sulphur prepared, until it flow as Wax, and tinge eight parts of Saturn
splendidly.

The third is made of Gold dissolved, and Sulphur dissolved, and of the
aforesaid Greenness dissolved, and these mixed and prepared (as in the second)
and lastly incerated with the Oil of Hairs prepared, or of Eggs, for the way is
one; and one part of this falls upon ten of Saturn. These Medicines may also be
projected upon Jupiter prepared for the Red, and so it will be a most splendid
persevering Matter, as the finest Work, according to its Degree. For these
Medicines alter in the second Order, as We said.

CHAP. XIX.
Of White Medicines for Venus and Mars.

NOW We come to the Medicines of Venus and Mars; and first We shall speak of
the Medicines of these for the White. of Silver as above calcined, one part,
and grind the same with two parts of Arsnick prepared, and one part of Mercury
precipitate; and imbibe the whole with Water of Saltpeter, Lithargiry, and
Ammoniac, in equal parts, until it has drunk in its own Weight of that Water;
then dry and incerate with White Oil, as in others you have done, until it
flow, and one part fall upon four of Venus or Mars prepared.

A second Medicine is made of Luna calcined, and as much of Jupiter calcined
and dissolved; mix, dry, and incerate with double their quantity of Arsnick
sublimed, until the Medicine flows well.

A Third is made of Luna calcined, as above, and of Arsnick and Sulphur
sublimed and ground with it, and then sublimed with a like quantity of
Salammoniac. This Sublimation repeat thrice, and then project one part upon six
of these Bodies prepared.

CHAP. XX.
Of Red Medicines for Venus and Mars.

A Solar Medicine is thus made. of Tutia, lib. 1. Calcine and dissolve it in
the Water of Vitriol and Peter; then, with that Water imbibe the Calx of Sol,
that it may drink in double its own Weight of the same Water. Afterward by
distillation receive the Water from it, and revert it upon the Calx four times.
Lastly, incerate with the Oil of Hairs, or of Bulls-Gall, and Verdigreese
prepared, and it will be excellent, pure and laudable. But do you direct your
Hands according to our Sayings, otherwise you Study in vain; and in your Heart
receive our Intention (expressed in our Volumes (for so doing you will discern,
that we have made a true search.

CHAP. XXI.
Of a Medicine of the third Order, for the White.

HEnce We ascend to the degree of the third Order, First We will treat of the
Lunar Medicine, as well for perfecting imperfect Bodies, as for Coagulating
Mercury it self into true Luna. Therefore dissolve Luna calcined, in solutive
Water, as before; which being done, coct it in a Phial with a long Neck, the
orifice of which must be left unstopt, for one day only, until a third part of
the Water be consumed. This being effected, set it with its Vessel in a cold
place, and then it converts to small fusible Stones, like Crystal. This is
Silver reduced to our Mercury, fixed and fusible; of which four Ounces; of
White Arsnick prepared, 6 Ounces, and of Sulphur prepared 2 Ounces. Mix all
together, well grinding them with Saltpeter, and Ammoniac. Then put the
Mixture into a Phial with a long Neck, keeping the same in Heat for a Week, and
in that time the Matter will be hard as Pitch. This take out, and again
incerate the third time, and within three days you will find it an Oil in Flux.
When the Vessel is cold break it, and take what you find therein, which will be
in a Lump fixed, and flowing as Wax. This is the first Degree. Again, Take as
much as before of New Matter, and join the same with this Ferment, and do as
before, and consequently a third and fourth time. Thus doing, you will find a
Medicine, which is great and excellent in Goodness: for one part of it falls
upon ten of every Body, or of Mercury, and converts it into true Luna.

Keep this Stone, and considerately ruminate of what We have taught in our
Sum of Perfection, and you will attain to higher Things, For our purpose was
not in one only Volume to demonstrate all Things; but that Book should declare
Book, and expound the same.

CHAP. XXII.
Of a Solar Medicine of the Third Order.

THe Solar Medicine is of Sol dissolved and prepared after the manner of Luna's
Preparation, to which you must add of Sulphur dissolved three Parts, and of
Arsnick one part (as in the end is showed) through all Things doing, as in the
Lunar Chapter; and it will be a Medicine tinging every Body, and Mercury it
self, into true Sol, or better, according to the way now showed.

Read and peruse our Sum of Perfection, and you will find the Method of the
Regimen there prescribed, by which you may tinge to Infinity, if you possess a
sharp and good Wit, and be not moved this way and that way with the diverse
ambiguous Sayings of Philosophers. For they all tend to the one Perfection, by
Us sufficiently described to you. You may make Trial, if you be able; if not
forbear; because you will sustain Loss and reap nothing but Emptiness.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of Solutive Waters and Incerative Oils.

SOn of Doctrine, search out Experiments, and cease not; because in them you
may find Fruit a Thousand-fold. For We writ this Book only for you, which We
are willing to complete with certain Waters and Oils, very necessary in Our
Magistery: With these We shall conclude our Book of the Invention of
Perfection. And first We shall begin with Our Dissolutive Water, of which We
made Mention in Our Sum of Perfection, when We speak of Dissolution with the
Acuity of Waters.

First of Vitriol of Cyprus, lib 1. of Saltpeter, lib. ss. and of Jamenous
Allom one fourth part; extract the Water with Redness of the Alembeck (for it
is very Solutive) and use it in the before alleged Chapters. This is also
made much more acute, if in it you shall dissolve a fourth part of Salammoniac;
because that dissolves Gold, Sulphur, and Silver.

Our other Philosophical Cerative Water, is this: Oil distilled from the
VVhites of Eggs, grind it with half so much of Saltpeter, and of Salammoniac,
equal parts, and it will be very good. Or mix it with Salt-Alcaly, and distill
as before. And the more you reiterate this Labor, the better it incerates. Or,
conjoyn the aforesaid Oil, with Oil of Tartar, and thence distill a White
Incerative Oil.

A Red Incerative Oil is thus made: Oil of the Yolks of Eggs, or of
Humane-Hairs, to which adjoyn as much of Salammoniac, and distill the Mixture;
repeat this Distillation three times, and it will be a most red Incerative Oil.

Oil of Verdigreese is made, when Verdigreese is dissolved in Water of
Salammoniac, and when with the same congealed, the Oil of Eggs is mixed, the
Mixture distilled, and the Distillation thrice repeated. For so operating, you
will have the Oil of Verdigreese apt and profitable for Incerating.

Oil of Gall is made, by extracting an Oil from Gall, as from Humane Hairs;
through all Things doing as in the other.

I do not say, that these can give a Mineral Radical Humidity, as We proved in
Sulphur and Arsnick; but they preserve the Tincture from Combustion, until it
enters, and afterward they fly in augmentation of the Fire, as is elsewhere
declared by Us. Whatsoever Artist shall perfectly and studiously operate,
according to Our Sayings contained in this Our Book; he, after Compleatment of
his Work, will find, that We have truly Searched. And in this, Our Book is
terminated, which is entitled, Of the Invention of Verity, or Perfection.

THE END.
GEBER, The Famous Arabian Prince and Philosopher, His BOOK, Of FURNACES.
The PREFACE, dividing this BOOK into Three Parts.
WE have considered with a Consideration not fantastic, That in Our Volumes
We have amply treated of the whole Art. Yet, that We may not be obnoxious to
the Censure of the Envious, We have Writ this Book of Furnaces, in which We
shall deliver the Manual Practice, in Preparations both of Spirits and of
Bodies; that Artificers may the better attain to the Compleatment of the Work.

Therefore, seeing the ultimate Consideration consists in the Knowledge of
Things more nigh, and in the way of Operating; and Things may be extracted from
Things, by the Regimen of Fire: and for as much as We cannot attain to this,
unless by separating Superfluities from the desired Subject, viz. The
Combustibilities, and Terrestreities of Sulphur, defiling every Body; hence it
is, that We intend First to treat of all the VVayes of Operating; as namely,
what the Furnace is, with its Instruments, which has respect to every Thing to
be prepared, even unto Compleatment of the Work, with the Regimen of Fire
appropriate to it; and what Vessels are fit for the purpose, that the Artist
may with them complete his Operation. Secondly, We will show, what Things are
to be prepared; that he may be able, of Things Simple or Commixt, to generate
Sol, or Luna, with splendor. Thirdly, We will declare those Things, which may
be perfected with Alteratives, and which are naturally altered with Total
Compleatment: and the way of Permixing with due Proportion, and with Medicines
by a long time prepared thereunto.

But at the End and toward the Close of this Book, We will set down a
Recapitulation of all Our Experiments, by which We attained to the Knowledge of
this Verity.

The First Part of this Book, Of the Ways of Operating.
CHAP. I.
Of the Calcinatory Furnace.

LEt the Calcinatory Furnace be made square, in length four foot, and three
foot in breadth, and let the thickness of the Walls be half a foot; after this
manner: Luna, Venus, Mars, or other Things to be calcined, must be put into
Dishes or Pans of most strong Clay, such as of which Crucibles are made, that
they may persist in the Asperity of Fire, even to the total Combustion of the
Thing to be calcined. Calcination is the Treasure of a Thing; be not you weary
of Calcination; but study what We have said in Our Volumes. For Imperfect
Bodies are cleansed by Calcination, and by Reduction of the Calcinate into a
Solid Body, or Mass. Then is Our Medicine projected upon them, and cause given
to you of Joy.

CHAP. II.
Of the Sublimatory Furnace.

LEt your Sublimatory Furnace be made after the manner, as is before completely
taught, in Our Sum of Perfection, touching the Sublimation of Spirits;
according to this Form.

In Sublimation of Sulphur, the Cover of the Sublimatory must be made with a
great and large Concavity within, after the manner of an Alembeck without a
Nose: for otherwise the whole Sublimate may descend to the Bottom of the
Vessel, through too great Heat. Because in the end of the Sublimation, the
Sulphur ascends not, unless with force of Fire, even to Ignition of the Aludel;
and if the Sulphur be not retained in the Concavity above, seeing it easily
flows, it will descend again, by the Sides of the Vessel, to the very Bottom,
and so nothing will be found sublimed; as is known to the Expert.

CHAP. III.
Of the Distillatory Furnace.

THe Distillatory Furnace is the same with the Sublimatory. But Fire must be
administered according to the Exigency of Things to be Distilled. The way of
Distilling, as well of Minerals, as of Vegetables, We have sufficiently
described in Our Sum of Perfection.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Descensory Furnace.

THe Descensory Furnace is made as before described, and it is wonderfully
useful to Us, and to the Melters of Metals by Cineritiums and Cements. For all
Calcined, Combust, Dissolved, and Coagulated Bodies, are reduced by this
Furnace into a Solid Mass. Yea, Cineritiums and Cements, and Tests, or
Crucibles, into which Silver is often Melted, are put into this Furnace, for
recovering the Metal imbibed.

CHAP. V.
Of the Fusory, or Melting Furnace.

THe Fusory Furnace is that, in which all Bodies are easily melted by
themselves; and it is a Furnace much in use among Melters of Metals for Coining
Money: also Aurichalcum is melted in these Furnaces, and tinged with Tutia, or
Calaminaris; as is known to the experienced.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Solutory, or Dissolving Furnace.

THe Dissolutory, or Dissolving Furnace, Is made with a Pan full of Water, with
Iron Instruments, in which other Instruments are Artificially retained, that
they Fall not: these are the Vessels, in which every Dissolution is made. And
this is the Form of the Furnace, and Vessels.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Fixatory Furnace, or Athanor.

THe Fixatory Furnace must be made after the manner of the Furnace of
Calcination; and in it must be set a deep Pan sull of sifted Ashes. But the
Vessel, with the Matter to be fixed, being first firmly sealed, must be placed
in the midst of the Ashes, so that the thickness of the Ashes underneath, and
above in the Circuit of the Vessel, may be answering to the thickness of four
Fingers; or according to that, which you desire to fix: because in fixing one,
a greater Fire is required, than in fixing another. By this Furnace, and by
this Way the Ancient Philosophers attained to the Work of the Magistery; which,
Men truly Philosophizing, is known to be sufficiently demonstrated in Our
Books; and by those especially, who are true Searchers of Verity.

This is the Figure of the Athanor. Yet if any One can more ingeniously invent
the like, let not Our Invention retard him from so doing.

The Second Part of this Book, Of Things to be prepared.
CHAP. VIII.
Of the Preparations of Middle-Mineral Spirits, and Allomes.

IN this Chapter I will declare the Preparations of Spirits, and first of
Mercury: which if you would perfectly sublime, you must add to every pound of
it two pounds and an half of Common Salt, and half a pound of Saltpeter.
Mortify the Mercury wholly, grinding all together with Vinegar, until nothing
of the Mercury appear living in the Mixture; and sublime it, as you know:
because it is profitable.

Red Mercury is thus sublimed, viz. One pound of it is mixed, and perfectly
well ground together, with one pound of Saltpeter, and one pound of Vitriol,
and from them it is sublimed Red and Splendid. But Arsnick is sublimed thus,
viz. From one pound of the Filings of Venus, half a pound of Common Salt, and
one quarter of a pound Of Allom calcined. First mortify these with Vinegar,
stirring them over a Fire, until the whole be blackned; and again, imbibe and
dry, stirring as before; and do this the third time: then sublime the Or White
Matter.
Azymum, and it is profitable.

Sulphur boiled in a Lixivium and dried, is sublimed with the same Feces, as
Arsnick; except that, instead of the Filings of Venus, into the aforesaid
Vessel is put Filings of Mars, or the Scales thereof beaten to Powder.
Salammoniac is sublimed from Common Salt, etc. Tutia and Marchasite are
sublimed, as is declared in Our Sum of Perfection. But Salts, Allomes,
Boraxes, and Vitriols, are prepared as We have sufficiently Writ in Our Book of
Investigation.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Calcination of Jupiter and Saturn.

JVpiter is specially calcined thus: Let a great Test (or calcining Pan) be
placed in a Furnace, and Tin put into it, with as much of Common Salt prepared,
and Roch Allom calcined. When the Metal is in flux, let it be always stirrred
with an Iron Spatula full of Holes, until the whole be turned to Ashes: which
first Sift, and then set them in Fire again, keeping them constantly Fire-hot,
until they be very well whitened; then keep the same for use.

Saturn is calcined after the same manner as Jupiter; but its Calx must be
rubified, as Minium, and so kept.

CHAP. X.
Of the Calcination of Venus and Mars.

VEnus is thus calcined: In the aforesaid Furnace is put either the Filings of
Copper, or it by it self, or with Arsnick pulverized, or with Sulphur, being
anointed with Common Oil, and so it is calcined in three or four Days, with
most strong Fire. Strike what is calcined, that it may fall off from the
Plates, which again calcine: also, when the Calcinate is beaten, re-calcine it,
until it be very well rubified; and so keep it.

Mars being filed is calcined in the aforesaid Furnace, until it is very well
rubified, and become a Powder impalpable, without touch. And it is called
Crocus Martis.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Calcination of middle Minerals.

ALL Atraments, Salts, Allomes, and the kinds of Tutia, are calcined in the
said Calcinatory Furnace, with Tartar and other Things; with Fire moderate or
strong, according to the Exigency of Things to be calcined; as is evident in
Our Book, Of the Investigation of the Perfect Magistery; but all Bodies are
calcined, as in Our Testament.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Ablutions of the Calxes of Combust Bodies.

THe Ablution of all Bodies combust and calcined, is thus made: First you must
have a large Earthen Vessel, full of hot sweet Water. With this wash any Calx
of a Body calcined, stirring it often, that all the Salt and Allom may be
dissolved; then when it has settled, evacuate the Water warily, that none of
the Body pass out with the Lotion. Put the Calcinate again into Hot Water, and
repeat the Labor, as before, until it be perfectly well washed; then keep it.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Incerations of Calxes washed.

INcerations of Calxes washed, are thus made: Dry the washed Calx; afterward
dissolve in distilled Vinegar lib. 2. Of Common Salt, Roch Allom, Salt Gemme,
of each two Ounces. With this Water imbibe Four Ounces of the aforesaid washed,
and dried Calx, until it has drunk in all the said Water, then dry it, and
reserve the same for use.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Reduction of Calxes into a Solid Mass.

REduction of that washed and incerated Calx, is thus made: Wash the incerated
Calx with distilled Urine, until you have extracted all the Salts and Allomes,
with the Filth of the calcined Body; which, being dried, imbibe with Oil of
Tartar, in which dissolve to one pound of the Oil, Two Ounces of Sallammoniac,
and One Ounce of Saltpeter. But of the Calx there must be Four Pound; and such
Imbibition must be made at several times, drying and imbibing. Then lastly dry
it, and cause it to descend in a great Descensory, and reduce into a solid
Mass, the Body purged from Combustible Sulphureity, by virtue of the Fire
calcining; and from foul Terrestreity, which in Reduction retain with
themselves the Feculency of the Earth; the Body being purified from accidental
Impurities, which had access to it in its Minera. But its Foulness innate in
the Radix of its Generation, must be palliated (or illustrated) with a
Medicine, the greater part of which contains in it self the substance of
Argentvive, according to the Exigency of Art, as is by Us often demonstrated in
Our Sum of Perfection.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Solutions of Bodies prepared, and of certain Conjunctions of them, with
certain Proportion, that they may appear with better Brightness after their
Reduction.

BOdies are twofoldly reduced to Perfection, either by the way of Preparation,
and by Commixtion of Perfect Bodies with the Imperfect; or by Medicine prepared
for the purpose. But here We shall declare, why the Perfect perfects the
Imperfect; and also, that the Imperfect is reduced to Perfection, with
Preparations by Us generally demonstrated: and these Preparations in this
Chapter We purpose sufficiently, and in a more special manner to treat of.

First We declare, that the Body cleansed (as is aforesaid) by the way of
Calcination and Reduction, must either be filed, or divided into small Grains,
as is known: For after Fusion, it is by us poured out upon a Table bored full
of small Holes, over cold Water; the Water being strongly stirred while this is
doing. This is Our way of Granulating. This Granulate Body dissolve in Our
Dissolutive Water, which is made of Saltpeter and Vitriol, as to the one half
thereof; or dissolve Filings of the same Body into a Limpid Water; then add to
it of Ferment prepared, to a third part of its own weight: Extract the Water,
and revert it; this do seven times. After it is reduced into Body, prove it by
its Examen, and you will rejoice in this, that you have generated.

But because We have treated of the perfect Administration of Imperfect Bodies,
We will now give the special, true, and certain Rules of every Body: and
beginning first with Jupiter, We say, After you have prepared Jupiter, and
reduced it, dissolve the same in the Acuity of Waters, and to nine parts of
this (dissolved as We said) adjoyn one part of Talk calcined and dissolved,
mixing the clear Waters. This Water rectify by Alembeck, seven times
extracting and reverting. After the last Rectification is made, give to it of
the Water of Saltpeter, imbibing and drying, and reduce it into a clean Body,
sustaining Ignition, and the Cineritum. For if you conjoyn Argentvive,
precipitated and dissolved, as We said, after Reduction you will find a noble
Body, under the aforementioned Proportion.

The Regimen of Saturn is completed, it being prepared and dissolved, with a
third part of its red Ferment also dissolved; which being prepared as before,
you will rejoice to find it so fair a Body.

We, more specially handling the Regimen of Venus, have declared; that you
ought seven times, or oftener, to rectify it, when prepared and dissolved;
distilling off the Water, and reverting them thereon, each time. Which being
coagulate, thence make a most noble Greenness with Salammoniac dissolved in
distilled Vinegar. That Greenness rubifie in a Vessel of Mars, and again
dissolve it; to which Solution adjoyn a third part of prepared and dissolved
Luna; afterward extracting and reverting the Water of Ferment seven times. Then
reduce this into Body, and you will rejoice.

The Regimen of Mars is as of Venus, but by reason of its very great Foulness,
you can expect no good from it.

The Regimen of Luna is thus: Dissolve and coagulate it seven times, or at
least four times. And to it dissolved, adjoyn the fixed rubifying Waters, which
We have declared, and you will find the Body aptly Solar: for it agrees with
Sol, and remains quietly with it. In this, Venus, admirably well purged and
dissolved, may be a great help to you; because a most clean, tinging, and fixed
Sulphur may be extracted from it. And I tell you, that Mercury purified and
fixed, has power to palliate (or illustrate) the Foulness of Imperfect Bodies;
and fixed Sulphur extracted pure from Bodies, to color them with Splendour.
Hence you may collect a great Secret, viz. That Mercury and Sulphur may be
extracted, as well from imperfect Bodies duly prepared, as from the perfect.
For purified Spirits, and middle Minerals, are an Help, and very peculiar, for
deducing the Work to Perfection.

The Third Part, Of Bodies to be perfected, and of Alterative Medicines.
CHAP. XVI.
Of the way of Perfecting, according to the Third Order.

HAving above sufficiently treated of all the ways of perfecting Imperfect
Bodies, in the Second Order, We must now pass on to the Bounds of the Third
Order. But what the Medicines are, and of what kind, both of the second and
third Order, is plainly enough demonstrated in Our Book of the Perfect
Magistery; where we have with a competent and true Demonstration, showed, that
Our Stone is procreated of the Substance of Argentvive: and this We did
sufficiently, as in a speculative Theorical Book. Therefore We intend here
manifestly to unlock the Closure of Art, and it is thus: You must study to
resolve Luna, or Sol, into its own Dry Water, which the Vulgar call Mercury:
and this so, as a Duodenary Proportion (of the Solutive Water) may contain
only a part of the perfect Body. For if with gentle Fire, you well govern
these, you will find (in the space or forty Days) that Body converted into mere
Water. And the sign of its perfect Dissolution, is Blackness appearing on its
Superficies.

But if you endeavor to perfect both Works, the White, and the Red, dissolve
each of the Ferments by it self, and keep it. This is Our Argentvive extracted
from Argentvive, which We intend for Ferment. But the Paste to be fermented, We
extract, in the usual manner, from imperfect Bodies. And of this We give you a
general Rule; which is, that the White Paste is extracted from Jupiter, and
Saturn; but the Red from Venus and Saturn. Yet every Body must be dissolved by
it self in the Ferment.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Regimen of Jupiter and Saturn.

BEcause We intend in this Chapter to demonstrate the Regiment of Jupiter and
Saturn; We first signify, that this Chapter is for the White, and the way is
thus: lib. 1. of most clean Tin, and melt it, to which being in Flux, add
twelve pounds of well cleansed Mercury, stirring the whole, that they may be
mixed. This Mixture put into a Phial having a Neck of a foot in length; which
Phial place in an Athanor, and likewise another Phial with Saturn so prepared;
administering a gentle Fire to them for a Week. In which time you will have a
Paste dissolved, fit to be fermented with the White Ferment, according to the
Proportion, which We shall here following show. Let there be four parts of the
Paste of Jupiter, three parts of Saturn, and one part of the White Ferment.
These, being dissolved, as We said, must be mixed through their least parts,
and set in Putrefaction (after the manner of Our Dissolution of moderate Fire)
for seven Days: this time expired, let them be taken out, well mixed, and their
more liquid Parts expressed through a Cloth. What remains thick, put into a
well sealed Glass, which place in the Athanor, as before, for the time
aforesaid; and so do thrice, until it has imbibed all the Humidity. Then put
your Vessel with its Matter, in the Furnace of Fixation for twelve Days; which
being expired, take it out, and reduce it with Things reducing. And you will
find that, which our Ancestors found not without very great Study, viz. The
Generate generating. The same you may join with Lead in the Cineritium, and you
will find the Body perfect in Whiteness, perpetually generating its like. The
Exposition of which, together with what We have Written thereof, I (with all my
Ancestors) leave to my Successors.

CHAP. XVIII.
Of the Regimen of Venus and Saturn.

OF the Paste of Venus let there be three pounds, of Saturn two, and of Ferment
one. Of these perfectly dissolved, make Commixtion through their least Parts,
which keep in Heat, as in the White is said. Extract the Water, and what
remains in the Cloth, put into a well sealed Glass, for three Weeks. Then take
it out, and render to it a third part of its own reserved Water, and coct, as
in the precedent Chapter; and this do thrice. But when it has imbibed all its
Water, put it in its proper Vessel, and Furnace to be fixed. When fixed, with
Things reducing, reduce it into Body ready to be augmented and tinged.

CHAP. XIX.
Of the Regimen of Mars.

SEeing the Solution of Mars is found very difficult, We shall in the End of
this Book, treat of many Ways, and also set down diverse other Experiments made
by us. Therefore, of the Paste of Mars let there be lib. 2. of Venus lib 4, and
of Saturn also lib. 4. Mix these without Ferment, and coct the Mixture for
seven Days, and you will find the whole Dry. Fix it, and put it, together with
half its weight of Lithargiry beaten to Powder, into a Reductory, and you will
find a Mineral Body very profitable, if you be wise, of which We have often
made mention.

CHAP. XX.
Of the Regimen of Luna.

THe Regimen of Luna is the reducing it from its Minera, to a more noble State:
and this is thus done: Dissolve Luna, and of it take lib. 3, of Venus
dissolved, lib. 4, of Ferment dissolved lib. 1. Conjoyn the Waters, coct them
for seven Days with gentle Fire in a sealed Glass, as in Mars, with their whole
Water; then augment the Fire leisurely for other seven Days, and let it be as
Fire of Sublimation. But for other seven Days give it Fire somewhat more
strong, that the whole Water may be fixed with it. This Powder reduce in a
small Quantity: and if it retain with it self part of the Mercury (which you
will easily perceive, if you know how to calcine) it is well indeed; but if
not, again put it to be fixed, until it be sufficiently fixed. This must be
reduced with Red reducing Things; and then you will find your Luna colored,
transmuted and fixed, which highly esteem. For if you well Study in Our
Volumes, you will find by Our Consideration, upon what Subjects, the true
Searcher ought to ground his Action.

CHAP. XXI.
Of the Regimen of Mercury.

THe Regimen of Mercury is completed two ways, First, You must amalgamate it,
well washed and purified, in the certain Proportion by Us underwritten. In the
second way, you must distill it, and thence make an Aquavitae. For the first
Way the Proportion is this: Of Mercury 48 ounces, of Sol 1 ounce; of Luna 1
ounce, of Venus 1 ounce, and of Saturn 1 ounce. Melt these Bodies; first the
Venus and Luna; secondly, the Sol, thirdly, Saturn. Take all out of the Fire,
having melted them in a large Crucible, and your Mercury in readiness made hot
in another; and when the said Metals begin to harden, pour in the Mercury
leisurely, stirring the Mixture with a Stick, setting it again on the Fire, and
taking it off, until they be all amalgamated with the whole Mercury. This
Amalgama, put to be dissolved for seven Days, extract the Water with a Cloth,
make the Residue volatile, administering Fire of Ignition. This again imbibe
with its whole Water, and put it to be generated; and again to be dried for
forty Days, and you will find a Stone; which put to be fixed, and you will
have a Stone augmentable to Infinity. Therefore keep this Book, even from thy
own Son; because it expounds all Things, which We have Written in diverse Books.

CHAP. XXII.
Of the Ferment of Luna, for the White.

THe Ferment of Luna for the White is made, when Luna is dissolved in its own
Corrosive Water, and this Water boiled away to a third part, and that exposed
to the Air, or set in B. M. or in Dung, for certain Days. For then it will be
Oil of Luna, and Ferment, which keep for the White.

CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Ferment of Sol, for the Red.

THe Ferment of Sol is made, when Gold is dissolved in its own Water, and
decocted and prepared according to the aforesaid Chapter of the Ferment of
Luna. For so, it will be the Ferment of Sol, for the Red, which keep.

CHAP. XXIV.
Of Ferment of Ferment upon Mercury, as well for the White, as for the Red.

THe Composition of Our Medicine, which is called Ferment of Ferment upon
Mercury, is made for the White, after this manner: Take the Ferment of Luna,
which is its Oil, and add to it twice so much of Arsnick sublimed and dissolved
in Water; then to both these add of Mercury dissolved, as much as of the
Arsnick. Mix the Waters, and set them over a Fire for one Day to be
incorporated. Afterward, extract the Water by Alembeck, and revert it; this do
fifteen times, so incerating, and it will be fluid, as fusible Wax. Then add to
it as much Virgins Wax melted, commix them, and project the Mixture upon
Mercury washed, according as shall seem expedient to you. For that resolved is
augmented in virtue and weight.

But if this Ferment of Ferment be made for the Red: Dissolve Sol in its own
Water (all the Compositions of those Waters, and of other Things, are
sufficiently treated of in Our Book, Of the Invention of Perfection; wherefore
We have here omitted them) to one part of that Gold dissolved, add two parts of
Sulphur dissolved in the same Water together with it, and three parts of
Mercury dissolved. Let all these be truly dissolved into most clear Waters,
which being mixed coct for one Day, that they may be fermented; then extract the
Water fifteen times, each time reverting it. Incerate with yellow Virgins Wax;
that is, with half its weight of Oil of Blood, or Oil of Eggs: then project
upon crude Mercury, according as shall seem expedient to you.

Here note, that if you perfect this Medicine, according to the Method We have
taught (in the Third Order of Our Sum of Perfection) of the Congelative
Medicine of Mercury, you will find by Reiteration of the Work, and by
Subtiliation thereof, that one Part tingeth infinite Parts of Mercury into most
high Sol, more noble than any natural Gold.

CHAP. XXV.
A Recapitulation of the Experiments of the Author.

FOr as much as I intended in this Volume to declare all dubious Things, I will
conclude my Book with all the true Experiments, which have been proved and
tried by me. By these true Operations, the new Searcher may perceive the
Verity, or Falsity of diverse Sophistical Receipts, and so not spend his time
unprofitably; and likewise discern what is good, in the Receipts of false
Operators. And first of Spirits only, and afterward consequently of others, as
well of Bodies, as of Spirits, with their Methods We intend to speak. But this
Chapter is divided into two Parts: First We declare the Experiences of the
Ancients proved by Us: Secondly, the Rectifications of them all. Yet, as We
have begun, We must first insist upon those Works which are of Whiteness.

A good Dealbation of Realgar 1, of Argentvive sublimed, 3, ss. of Tartar
calcined, 1. grind and incorporate, and put them in a Phial with a Neck of a
foot in length, and its orifice so wide, as two Fingers may enter: let it be
luted, and set over a Fire, covered with a Cloth. First make a gentle Fire for
a quarter of an hour, afterward augment the Fire underneath, and round about,
until the Furnace be very hot with Ignition. When all is cold, break the
Vessel, and take out what you find Metalline; and make of this a great
Quantity. For I will now show you the way, how this Medicine may be profitably
rectified.

An Art^ficial Dealbation, Upon Tutia, sublime one part of sublimate Mercury,
and two parts of Arsnick sublimed, until it shall have Ingress. This clearly,
and very speciously whitens Venus.

Another Dealbation, Imbibe three parts of Mercury sublimed, and two parts of
Arsnick sublimed, with Lithargiry dissolved, until they become eight parts. To
these eight adjoyn other eight parts of Arsnick sublimed; grind them together,
and flux them with Oil of Tartar, and you will whiten prepared Venus, at
pleasure.

Also another, Grind Metalline Arsnick, with as much of the Calx of Luna, and
imbibe the Mixture with the Water of Salarmoniac, and dry and grind; afterward
dissolve Salt of Tartar in the Water of Saltpeter, with which Oil imbibe the
Medicine, dry it. Repeat this thrice, incerating and drying, and you will
rejoice for this, which We have now related.

Another of Ours, Imbibe Jupiter calcined, washed and dried, so often with
Metalline Arsnick, with half so much of sublimed Mercury, as until it flows,
and enters Venus: for it whitens the same (if first prepared) splendidly.

Also, upon Tutia calcined, dissolved and coagulated, sublime white Arsnick (so
that of the Arsnick be three parts, but of the Tutia one part) reiterating the
Sublimation upon it four times; for it has ingress: with them adjoyn half as
much as the whole is, of Sublimate Mercury; grinding and incerating four times
with the Water of Salammoniac, Peter, and Tartar, of each alike. With this,
when coagulated, cement prepared Plates of Venus, and melt, and you will have a
very beautiful Thing.

Also Another, Grind Venus calcined and incerated; to this add Arsnick
sublimed, and half a part of Mercury sublimed; with which being well ground and
mixed, adjoyn a little of the Water of Ammoniac, incerating upon a Marble;
afterward dry and sublime. Revert the Sublimate upon the Feces, again imbibing,
and so do thrice: the fourth time imbibe with the Water of Peter, and sublime
what can be sublimed. Reiterate this Labor, until it remain fluid in the
Bottom. This, in Copper prepared, will be resplendent with Brightness.

Also, Upon the prepared Calx of Venus, so often sublime Sublimate Arsnick, as
until some part of the Arsnick remain with it in the Asperity of Fire. That,
imbibed with the Water of Peter, and lastly incerated with the Water of Luna;
and Mercury precipitate, and in the end with Oil of Tartar rectified, until it
flows, wonderfully whitens Venus and enters the second Order, if you have
wisely walked in the Valleys of this Art. For I have elsewhere said, that if
you obtain any part of Mercury precipitated, in the Mixture, you will walk more
splendidly; especially, if the White Ferment, dissolved with the Mercury
dissolved, after a certain Fixation of it, be adjoined by the Medium of
Inceration, you will find, that you have walked nigh the way it self.

But, because We have proved, that Jupiter, howsoever prepared, in the whole
first Order, is totally unprofitable, what Magistery soever is followed in its
Preparation; also Saturn and Mars; therefore, in Our Sum of Perfection, We
assigned to it a Medicine of the Third Order; because there, it is most
excellently adorned, as is often proved in Our said Sum of Perfection, and We
have now proved and experienced de facto, infinite ways, Yet We have Written
more apt Things, touching the Dealbation of Venus.

CHAP. XXVI.
Mercurial Sports.

NOw I begin to speak of Mercurial Plays or (Sports) make a Cement of
Lithargiry of Silver, and Salt Alkaly of Zoza (or Soda) put the Cement first
into a Crucible the Thickness of one Finger, upon that put a Globe of the
Amalgamation of Mercury, and Luna, and put on the remainder of the Cement, that
the Globe may be in the midst of the Cement. Dry, Lute, and set the Crucible in
a gentle Fire for half a Day, leisurely augmenting the Fire; and so continue
its leisurely Increase, from the Evening, unto the Dawning of the Day, with
moderate Ignition at last. Then take it out, prove it by Cineritium, and it
will be Luna in weight, and Surdity, and much better in Fixation.

Also, Amalgamate Luna with Mercury, to which adjoyn as much of Saturn, as
there is of the Luna. Put it into such a Crucible, as that three fourths of it
may be empty, pour on it Oil of Sulphur, and coct it unto Consumption of the
Oil: afterward keep it for two Hours in a moderate Fire, and there will be
generated a Stone Black, with a little Redness. This Stone prove by Cineritium,
and you will find your Luna augmented in Weight, Surdity, and Fixation.

Also another, worthy to be thought on, Grind Luna amalgamated with Mercury,
with twice so much Metalline Arsnick; to which adjoyn a ten-fold Proportion of
Amalgamated Venus, viz. of Luna (I suppose Venus) and Arsnick. Grind the whole,
and fix, and reduce into Body, and it shall be well with you.

CHAP. XXVII.
Of the Citrination, or Coloring of Luna.

HAving guided you to the Knowledge of those Dealbations with the Magistery, We
now come to speak of the Citrination of Luna more specially, than We did in Our
Sum of Perfection. Dissolve Our Philosophic Zyniar, deduced from Venus
prepared, in the Water of the Dissolution of Luna; to which adjoyn half so
much, as it self is, of Mercury rubified by Sublimation, and in some sort
fixed, and dissolved; to these, add as much of Luna dissolved, as the Zyniar it
self is: from which, fermented for one day, extract the Water by Distillation,
and revert it; do this ten times. In the end coagulate, and reduce into Body,
and you will rejoice for this Invention.

Otherwise, Dissolve Zyniar and our Crocus prepared with the Sublimation of
Mercury, until it wax Red; adjoyn as much Salammoniac, and sublime it thrice
from that Crocus, which dissolve. The Crocus and Zyniar must be equal, to which
adjoyn as much of Luna dissolved, as there is of both. Do as you did in the
precedent, incerating and reducing: for it is easy.

Also, We will show you another way more easy; of Crocus and Zyniar dissolved,
of each a like Quantity, adjoyn to them as much Gold dissolved. Incerate as
before, in the End coagulate, and give to the Coagulate a fourth part of its
own weight of the Oil of Saltpeter; and project upon so much Luna, and it will
be a Tincture with a Citrine Aspect.

Otherwise and best, Make a Water of Our Zyniar, and of Our said Crocus, and
imbibe the Calxes of Sol and Luna (equal parts) therewith, until they have
drunk in their own weight of it. In the end, incerate with the Oil of Ammoniac,
and Peter, and reduce into a noble Body.

Also, Sublime Ammoniac from Our Greenness, to which then adjoyn Crocus and
Zyniar; from which well commixed sublime the Ammoniac extracted from the
aforesaid, twice or thrice: and in the End dissolve the whole, to which add a
third part of Gold dissolved. Incerate as before, and congeal; then project
upon Sol and Luna, so that of Luna there be two parts, and of Sol one; and it
will be good.

FINIS.
ERRATA'S.
PAge 10. line 5. read Spoliation, p. 13. l. 27. r. Porphiry; p. 16. l. 7. r.
impalpable, p. 54. l. 5. r. Refutation; p. 59. l. 17. r. Stable; p. 60. l. 1.
add and; l. 10. r. compounding; p. 64. l. 1. r. cocting; p. 95. l. 5. r. take;
p. 120. r. Chap. 14. p. 121. l. 17. r. Ingenious; p. 133. l. 27. r. by; p. 140.
l. 4. add in; p. 147. l. 2. dele the; p. 169. l. 30. r. participates; p. 177.
l. 19. add it; p. 241. r. Chap. 2. p. ibid. l. 23. r. Apertion; p. 246. l. 3.
r. unto; l. 6. dele to; p. 256. l. 10. r. there; p. 285. l. 13. r. it.


