A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH, AT THE Mayor's Guild,
JUNE xx. 1693.

By JOHN JEFFERY, M. A. Minister of S. Peter's of Mancroft in Norwich.

LONDON; Printed for James Adamson, at the Angel and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1693.

Imprimatur,

September. 8. 1693. GEO. ROYSE.

To the Right Worshipful Robert Cook Esquire; MAYOR OF The City of Norwich.
SIR,
JUstice is so necessary to Society, and so essential to Religion, that none
can be Safe in this World, or Happy in the next, farther than it prevails in
their Hearts and Lives.

The Dignity and Fitness of the Subject was that which induced me to choose it
for the Occasion; And the same Reason (I believe) made you desire the Sermon
might be printed for your Use.

And as nothing is more agreeable to the Office of a Magistrate, or to the Duty
of a Christian than Justice, so I do most heartily recommend this great Truth
to the serious Consideration of all; and particularly of your self: Adding my
Prayers unto God for you, That he would endow you with all those Gifts, that
are necessary for your Office, and make you faithful in it; which is the most
proper Expression of my Regards to you, who am,

Your Humble Servant, JOHN JEFFERY.

2 Chronicles. xix. 5, 6, 7. And he set Judges in the Land, throughout all the
fenced cities of Judah, city by city. And said to the Judges, Take heed what ye
do; for ye judge not for man but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment.
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of Gifts.


THE Matters of Government and the kinds of Governors, are Military, Civil,
and Ecclesiastical: And the Supreme Powers are supreme in all these Cases.

Accordingly we find in the History of Jehoshaphat (which is contained in Chap.
17, 18, 19, 20. of this Book) how he placed subordinate Governors, of every
kind, throughout his whole Kingdom. There were Garrisons in all those Cities,
which could be fortified: For it was a Time of War, c. 17.1. There were also
Civil Magistrates, in the same Cities, as in the Text. There were also
Ecclesiastical Rulers, which are particularly mentioned concerning Jerusalem,
v. 8. He set Levites and Priests: And the chief Ecclesiastical Governor there
was Amariah, v. 11.

The King himself was supreme; and in him all the Powers (Military, Civil and
Ecclesiastical) did concenter. So it was among the Gentiles and among the Jews:
And there is a Necessity it should be so; for there cannot be two Supremacies
in one Nation Letters of Father Paul, Let. 123
.

But the Text and the occasion confine my Discourse to the Subordinate Civil
Magistrates, which the King placed in every City: And these are called Judges.

The Word Judges is not used so strictly in the Scriptures, as in our Nation:
For there it signifies at large, a Governor; and sometimes the supreme
Governor. Moses, in his Time, was undoubtedly such; and S. Stephen, recounting
the History of him, notes, That the injurious H^brew said unto Moses, Who made
thee a Ruler and a Judge over us Acts 7.27.
? and in Exodus it is, Who made thee a Prince and a Judge Exodus 2.14
? Where Ruler or Prince and Judge are Words of the same import: and S. Stephen
uses the same Words that the LXX do, viz. (...) Ex. 2.14. and Acts 7.27, 35.
. Nor was the Word (...) unknown in this Signification among the Gentiles any
more than among the Jews.

Among the Jews, all the Supreme Governors, from Moses and Joshua to the
Kings, were called Judges; and they had such a Power as the Dictators had among
the Romans, and did such Offices for the Jews, as the Heroes ( Hercules and
Theseus v. Plutarc. in vita These.
and others) did for the Gentiles, viz. delivering them from Violence and
Oppression.

I need not enquire further into the Form of the Jewish Government at that
Time: Or state how far it was, in ordinary Aristocratical, with respect to the
Sanedrim Exodus 18.24, etc.
: or Theocratical with respect to God 1 Samuel 8.7. and 12.12.
, or Monarchical, with respect to the Judges Judge.
: or, how it was mixed of all these. It Is sufficient for my present Purpose,
that by Judges, in Scripture, are meant, at large, Civil Magistrates: That the
Supreme Governor is sometime so called; and that the Subordinate are so called
in the Text; so that the meaning of it is this, That King Jehoshaphat set Civil
Magistrates in every City, and that each City had a Chief, Civil Magistrate of
its own: And that the King charged them to govern righteously in their several
Places.

In the Words we have, I. The Appointment of Civil Magistrates in every City,
by the King. II. The Charge which the King gave unto them concerning their
Office.


I. The Appointment of Civil Magistates in every City, by the King, Jehoshaphat
set judges in the land, throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city.

We have in the Old Testament the History of the Jewish Nation: And that from
the first original and fundamental establishment thereof; so that we know, not
only, what manner the Supreme and Subordinate Magistrates did succeed in
Aftertimes, but also how they were constituted at the beginning.

And as for the Subordinate Magistates, we find that they were at the first
chosen by Moses, the Supreme, and that his Choice was approved by God, At their
coming out of Egypt, Moses was the only Governor, and Jethro observing the
intolerable Encumbrance, gave him counsel, To provide, out of all the people,
able men, such as feared God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and to place
such, over them, to be rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, and rulers
of fifties, and rulers of tens. And let them (says he) judge the people at all
seasons: And it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring unto thee,
but every small matter they shall judge. So it shall be easier for thy self,
and they shall bear the burden with thee. If thou shall do this, and God
command thee so, then thou shall be able to endure; and all the people shall go
unto their place in Peace Exodus 18.13, etc. 24, etc.
.

This Counsel Moses followed, choosing Subordinate Governors under him; and
choosing such Men as were fit to be Governors. The History of this Moses
recounts in his last Speech to the People Deuteronomy. 1.9, etc.
: And the Qualifications of those Men were much the same that Aristotle says
must be in Governors. He that is to govern (says the Philosopher) must have,
1. Love to the People, whom he is to govern. 2. Power sufficient for his
Office. And, 3. Virtue or Honesty and Justice Arist. Pol. l. 5. sect. 89.
. Sufficiency is a necessary Qualification in one who is to govern, and that
Sufficiency consists in Wisdom, Justice and Power.

The reason for this is, because the Administration of Government is a Work of
great Difficulty, and of great Consequence: And because those who do govern are
a Pattern to those who are governed. Governors are public Persons, and cannot
lead private Lives: And therefore they ought so to live, that they may be
exemplary. Themistocles did so, when he came unto the Government, he laid aside
those Liberties that he took before, and behaved himself in all things with a
special Severity Plutarch.
.

And great Reason there was why he should do so; for the People do narrowly
observe, not only the public Justice, but also the common Converversation of
the Magistrate: insomuch that small Things were objected against Pompey the
Great. The grave Philosopher observes, That as a little Wen or Wart in the Face
is more troublesome than far greater Irregularities and Mutilations in other
Parts of the Body; so small Faults in the Life of a Magistrate, are accounted
great ones, through the Opinion, which Mankind have, that Governors are
extraordinary Persons, and such as ought to be free from all Error and Fault
Plutarch. de Reip. ger. praecept.
.

Livius Drusus was sensible of this; and when, after he was made Tribune, a
Carpenter offered him, for five Talents, to alter all those Places in his
House, through which it could be inspected by his Neighbors: The Tribune
answered, That he would give him ten Talents, if he would contrive to lay his
House so open that all the Citizens might see how he lived. Plutarch notes,
That he was a sober and virtuous Man: But adds, That there was no need his
House should be so open, the Citizens would know how he lived, without that
Advantage Plut. Reip. gerend. praecep^
. Because therefore the Interest of great Multitudes depends upon the Virtue
of Governors; and because the Lives of many will be formed by their Example,
it is necessary that Governors should b^ strictly Virtuous.

It Is necessary that Magistrates should be qualified for their Office, and it is
necessary that there should be many subordinate Magistrates; for if one Man
were sufficient for several Offices, yet it were not safe for him to undertake
them Arist. Pol. l. 2.
, but according to Plutarch's Similitude Plutarch. Reip. ger. praecept.
, as the Hand being divided into Fingers, is not thereby made the more
impotent, but is a more complete and artificial Instrument for the use of Man;
so dividing the Parts of Government among many is most Advantageous for the
Society. So Moses did here, and so it has been in all Nations; and what the
Nature of things did require, the Law of God does approve: For in the
Institution of the Sanedrim Numb. 11.16, 17.
, we find that Moses chose Seventy Elders, by the Order of God; and God put the
Spirit of Government upon those whom Moses had chosen, as he promised.

Thus it was at the first erecting of the Jewish Polity, and the same was
observed afterward; for in the Days of Jeh^shaphat, we see he appointed
subordinate Governors (as Moses had done at first) He set Judges in the land,
throughout all the fenced cities of Judah, city by city.

Agreeably the Apostle says 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
, Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake, whether it
be to the King as supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by
him. Subordinate Governors derive their Power from the Supreme, and are
accountable to him. Subordinate Governors are to obey as well as to govern:
And they are directed in their Government by their Obedience. It is an old
Saying, That he who would govern well, must first obey (...). Arist. Pol. l. 7.
sect. 58.
. And Ari^totle quotes it as a Saying in his Time, received by common and long
Consent. But Subordinate and Temporary Governors have this special Advantage
for governing well, That they have obeyed before, that they must obey again,
those who are in the same Places they hold, and they do obey, all the Time,
those who are Supreme.

Government is necessary to Society, and Subordination is necessary to
Government: For as no Society can subsist without Government, so no Government
can subsist without Subordination. And this unavoidable Necessity is a public
Benefit; for as those who govern take care of the public Interest, so it is
expedient there should be those to whom they should give an account Arist. Pol.
l. 6. 40. l. 3.. 53, etc. and l. 2. p. 134, 153 126, and l. 3.. 30. Dan. 6.1,
2. and 1 Samuel 12.1, etc.
: And so it is in all Subordinate Governors.

Thus we see, That particular subordinate Magistrates are necessary: That
Virtue is a necessary Qualification in Magistrates: That the Law is the Rule
(...). Arist Pol. l. 1. c 6.
: And, that the Supreme is the Judge of their Administration. Hitherto we have
seen the Appointment of Subordinate Magistrates, by the King.

II. We have the Charge which the King gave unto those whom he had appointed
Subordinate Magistrates.

The Charge was given by a Religious King: And so there is Power Eccl. 8.4.
, and so there is Equity in it.

But herein I am to consider.

1. The matter of the Admonition, which is contained in the Charge or Speech of
the King: and that Admonition is short and Comprehensive, Take heed what ye do,
and Take heed, and do it.

2. The Reasons for that Admonition, and they are strong, and irresistible, as
we shall see presently.

1. The Matter of the Admonition, which is contained in the Charge or Speech of
the King, and that Admonition is short and comprehensive. Take heed what ye do,
and take heed and do it. The particulars of their Office are not recited, nor
was it necessary they should be recited, to Men who were fit for their Office.
They knew, from the nature of their Office (which was to Govern) and from the
matter of the Laws (according to which they were to Govern) what their Duty
was. In some it was their necessary Duty to do right unto all, and to help them
to right, who stand in need of their help. For this purpose they were furnished
with Power, and qualified with Knowledge, and supposed to be Just.

The general Rule for this Justice is given by Menelaus in Homer (...). Hom.
Il. (...)
Determine equally between both Parties, and not with partiality. (...) Arist.
Eth. L. 5. C. 4.
The Law is supposed to be the Rule of Justice, and Governors are to execute
the Law, and to administer Justice. Therefore Aristotle says, To go unto the
Magistrate, is to go unto Justice. (...) Arist. Eth. L. 5. C. 4.
And among us, some of our Magistrates are called by the Name of Justice. And
Aristotle's reason for his saying, will give a good account, both of the Truth
he affirms, and of the Title we use. For (says he) a Governor ought to be as a
Living Justice. And again Justice is Equity, as also a Judge is. (...). Arist.
Eth. L. 5. C. 4.
Every Man has a right to what by Law is his, and the Force of the Community is
in the hand of the Governors, that by them every Man's right may be secured. By
the Law, Magistrates know what they are to do: By their Power, they can do what
they ought, and by their Conscience and Honor, they are prevailed with to do
right, as by Law they are bound, and as by their Power they are enabled.

No other consideration whatsoever ought to prevail with Magistrates, but that
of Right; and because many other things will put in with them, they must take
heed what they do. Men are influenced by others, and by themselves, and the
Magistrates must needs be Men who are liable to those influences. A Man may be
influenced by others, i. e. by his Friends, or by his Enemies, and a Man may be
influenced by himself, i. e. by his Temper, and by his Passions ( viz. of Love,
Desire, and Joy, or Hatred, Anger, and Sadness.) For the same thing, has not
the same appearance to him who Loves, and to him who Hates; to him who is
Angry, and to him who is not Angry. Arist. Rhet. L. 2. C. 1.. 3.
The methods of Allurement, and Terror, are innumerable; and the subtilties of
them are unsearchable: and therefore a Man who is to do right, had need take
heed what he does; the representations made by our Affections are deceitful,
and the insinuations of them are imperceptible: so that a Man had need take
heed of Himself, as well as of others. A Magistrate is to remember that he is
strictly observed, and that those who observe him, are not under the influences
which he is under.

He that acts in a Political Capacity, must inform himself certainly what is
Right, and must be tenacious of his Purpose to do nothing but what is right. He
must be free from all Ambition and Anger, and must maintain a full Assurance of
Mind; and not yield to Enemies, or to Difficulties. Ye shall not respect
Persons in judgment, but ye shall hear the small as well as the great, ye shall
not be afraid of the face of man Deuteronomy. 1.17.
. He that says unto the wicked, thou art righteous, him shall the people
curse, nations shall abhor him. But to them that rebuke him, shall be delight,
and a good blessing shall come upon him. These things also belong to the wise:
It is not good to have respect of Persons in judgment Prove. 24.24, 25, 23.
. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment: Thou shall not respect the person
of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but in righteousness shall
thou judge thy neighbor Lev. 19.15.
. And as Neglect of the Poor must not pervert Justice, so neither must
Compassion to them do it. Neither shall thou countenance a poor man in his
cause Exodus 23.3.
. In short, the Merits of the Cause, and not the Quality of the Person, must be
considered; for Justice is Sacred and inflexible. A Magistrate must have no
Friendships or Enmities, to the Prejudice of Equity: But he must have the same
Regard to all good Men, and must put the same Restraint upon all those who are
Bad. He is to be for the Punishment of evildoers, and for the praise of them
that do well 1 Pet. 2.14.
. And whosoever is resolved to do right, must take take heed what he does;
because most Cases are made intricate by the Litigants, and without great
Caution, there can be no certain Justice. King Jehoshaphat knew this well: He
knew what Temptations a Magistrate is under, to do Injustice; and how difficult
it is for him to do Justice: And he warned the Magistrates accordingly, Take
heed what ye do.

This is the Admonition which was given unto Subordinate Magistrates, by the
King.

2. The Reasons for that Admonition are strong and irresistible: No Man who
considers them, can be insensible.

Magistrates must take heed what they do.

1. Because they govern for God, by whom they are entrusted, and to whom they
are accountable.

2. Because that God, for whom they govern, is present with them, and an
Observer of them in their Administration of Justice.

3. Because that God, who observes what their Administration of Justice is, is
himself most Just and Righteous.

These are the Arguments which King Jehoshaphat makes use of, in his Speech to
Inferior Magistrates. He might have said to them, Ye have received your Power
from me: I will have an Eye over you, and inform my self certainly what you do:
You shall find me inflexibly Just, to punish all who are unjust, and especially
those Magistrates who are unjust. He might have used these Arguments: And the
matter of them had been true and important. But he did suggest what was less
obvious, yet more considerable, viz. That they acted for God: That God was
present with them: That God is Just, whose Ministers of Justice they are. I
shall lay before you the Arguments of King Jehoshaphat: And the

1st. Argument is, That Magistrates must take heed what they do, and do right,
because they govern for God; from whom they receive their Power, and to whom
they are accountable for the Use of it.

Subordinate Magistrates do not immediately receive their Power from God, but
from the King, as Supreme: And they are not accountable, to God only, but to
their Superiors. But he was a King who told them, Ye judge not for men, but for
the Lord. And Moses said, The judgment is God's. Justice (or doing Right to
every Man) is a Divine Virtue: And the Administration of Justice (or the
helping Men to Right, who suffer Wrong) is a Divine Power. God is the supreme
and universal Governor of the World: And is called, The judge of the whole
earth Genesis 18.25.
. Governors are the Vicegerents of God, and they have his Name: I have said
ye are Gods Psalm. 82.6.
. And our Savior argues from thence, that they are warrantably called Gods,
who have received Power from God Joh. 10.34.
. And S. Paul says, There is no power but of God: The powers that be, are
ordained of God Romans 13.1.
, are placed in that order they are by God himself.

And as they are appointed by God, so they act for him: They judge for the
Lord; not for man, but for the Lord. Subordinate Magistrates do represent the
Supreme, and judge for him: But it was the Wisdom and Piety of a King, to tell
them, There was more than so in their Office; for they executed it for God, and
not for him, i. e. not so much for him, as for God. The Supremacy and the
Subordination are both the Appointment of God, and all Governors are God's
Ministers.

If therefore it be a good Argument to persuade Subordinate Magistrates, To
take heed what they do, because they represent the King, and act for him, it is
a much stronger Argument, that Magistrates represent God, and act for God. The
Administration of Justice is God's Work: And those who administer Justice, do
judge for God. The doing Right unto all is what belongs unto God: And the
Magistrates are, in this, the Ministers of God to us for good Romans 13.4
.

There is an Honor put upon all Magistrates, by the Trust which God reposes in
them: And they are, by their Character, obliged to take care of Justice, which
is the Interest of God in the World.

2. Magistrates must take heed what they do, because that God, for whom they
govern, is present with them, and an Observer of them in their Administration
of Justice: God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges among
the Gods Psalm. 82.1.
; upon which Consideration the Psalmist exhorts them unto Justice. How long
will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? Defend the poor
and fatherless; do justice to the afflicted and needy, deliver the poor and
needy, rid them out of the Hand of the wicked v. 2, 3, 4.
.

Hesiod says the same Truth, and makes use of it to the same purpose; O ye
Kings (says he) remember justice, for God is present among men, and observes
how men tear one another in pieces, by injustice, without regarding God. The
most high God has three thousand divine spirits, who walk about the earth
concealed in darkness (the guardians of mankind) observing the actions of men
and the Administrations of justice.

Justice (says the Poet) is a Virgin born of God, and had in the greatest
Reverence, by all that abide in Heaven; and whenever she suffers an Injury, she
complains unto her Father Hesiod. oper. and dies, v. 246, etc.
(so I translate, with some accommodation of the Poet's Sense, to the
Christians Style) upon which he exhorts those who govern, to do justice,
because God sees all that is done: The Eye of God sees, and the Heart of God
considers all things (...), Hesiod.
.

If a Subordinate Magistrate were to execute his Office in the presence of the
King, he would surely take heed what he did, that he might do right. But we are
sure that every Magistrate executes his Office, in the Presence of God, who is
Lord of Lords and King of Kings. (...) Hesiod. genesis deor. v. 886.
; which we may translate by warranty of the 8 2d. Psalm, Jehovah is the King of
Gods: Or, the Lord is God of Gods Deuteronomy. 10.17.
.

King Solomon speaking concerning the Administration of Justice, says, If thou
see the oppression of the poor, and the violent perverting of judgment and
justice in a province, marvel not at the matter; for he that is higher than the
highest regards; and there be higher than they Eccl. 5.8.
: This reaches not only to the Subordinate, but also to the Supreme, for
verily the Lord is God over all, and judges in the Earth^: All the Judgments
of Men shall be judged over again; and God, who is to do this, sits in the
Judgment with them. This God is invisible, but he is present: And that
Consideration is most powerful to persuade Men to do right

3. Magistrates must take heed what they do, because that God, who observes all
the Administrations of Justice, is himself most just: A God of truth and
without iniquity, just and right is he Deuteronomy. 32.4.
. Far be it from God that he should do wickedness, and from the Almighty, that
he should commit iniquity. For the works of a man shall he render unto him, and
cause every man to find according to hisways Job 34.10, 11.
.

The Punishment of unjust Men is a Vindication of the Just God, and
demonstrates his Providence and his Equity. The Poet represents himself
uncertain whether the Interests of Men, and the Affairs of the World were
governed by a Divine Providence or blind Chance: When he considered the Order,
Magnificence and Stability of Nature, he inclined to belive God the Author of
all things: But when he considered the Adversity of the Righteous, and the
Prosperity of the Wicked, he began to question it: But when one who was
exceedingly wicked, was also remarkably punished, that Event vindicated the
Honor of God, and settled his Opinion of Providence Psalm. 73. Seneca de
Provid. Abstulit hunc tandem Rufini poena tumulium, absolvitque deos. Jam non
ad culmina rerum injustos crevisse queror. Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu
graviore ruant. -- Claud. in Ruf. l. 1.
. That God is Just is manifest from his Nature, and from his Dealings: And
because wicked Men will not fear his Justice they perish by it: their Miseries
and his Vengeance prove the Divine Justice sensibly to themselves and others;
and happy they who timely consider and repent, so as to imitate God, who is the
Judge of all the Earth, and does right.

Did a Subordinate Magistrate know, that the King (whom he represents) was a
Just Man, he would not dare, in his Presence, to do an unjust Act; for
Injustice, with that Circumstance, would be unspeakable Insolence: But for any
to do what is unjust in the Presence of God, is greater Profaneness. Upon this
Consideration it is a piercing Question, Do ye indeed speak Righteousness, O
Congregation! do ye judge uprightly, O ye Sons of Men Psalm. 58.1.
? Those who administer Justice for a just God, must be sure to do it justly,
for God will not endure that his Name and his Authority should be profaned by
Injustice.

Thus I have shown you what Arguments King Jehoshaphat used to persuade those
Subordinate Magistrates, which he placed in the several Cities, To do right;
and he did thus admonish and persuade those whom we have no ground to believe
he suspected; for if he had suspected them, it is likely he would not have made
them Magistrates.

I have hitherto explained the Royal Speech of Jehoshaphat to his Subordinate
Magistrates, and so I may say, you have heard the Word of a King; but that is
not all, for the Word you have heard is greater than that of a King, it is the
Word of God. This Word I shall once more repeat, and then proceed to
Application, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord,
who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon
you, take heed and do it: For there is no iniquity with the Lord your God, nor
respect of persons, nor taking of Gifts.

The Application shall be Advice to all Public Persons.

I. To maintain in their Hearts, a great Veneration of the Divine Justice: And,
II. To Pray unto God to enable them (in their Capacities) to imitate that
Justice.
I. Let all Public Persons maintain in their Hearts a great Veneration of
Divine Justice. Let the Fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: For
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts.

Justice is doing Right unto Men: And that doing Right is doing Benefit; and
those who do it, are Benefactors Luke 22.25.
. But as Men are united in Society, so the Personal Rights of Men are
retrenched, that the Public Rights may be established: And every one gains
more Advantage from Society than he parts with for it Ex quo leges moresque
constituti, tum juris aequa descriptio, certaque vivendi disciplina, per quas
been beateque vivitur, quas res and mansuetado animornm consecuta, and
verecundiae est: Effectumque ut effet vita munitior, atque ut dando, and
accipiendo, mutandisque facultatibus, and commodis, nulla re egeremus. Tull.
Offic. l. 2.
. Besides, Benefit is to be conferred, and Right is to be done unto one Man, in
such sort, that Benefit may be conferred, and Right done to all others (...).
Arist. Pol. l. 3. c. 9. Communis Reipublicae Sponsio.
. Justice is therefore doing Right and Kindness to all; and there is a great
Wisdom necessary for the adjusting those Rights, and a great Power necessary
for the maintaining them.

For this, the Justice of God is venerable, because there is no Partiality or
Respect of Persons with him: But he is equally Just and Good unto all, and his
tender Mercies are over all his Works. He employs the greatest Wisdom and
Power, to maintain Right: And as the Rights of Men are originally from God, so
they are defended by him. The Laws of God oblige every one to do Right to every
one, as he himself does: And as the Dispensations of his Providence, are
Exercises of his Dominion, so by them, God defends the Rights of Men. And most
certain it is, that no Man can do Wrong, but he shall suffer Punishment:
Vengeance belongs unto God, and he will repay it. God does not, perhaps, avenge
so soon as we desire; or in such manner as we desire, because God's Wisdom and
Justice are more perfect than ours: But as the Justice of God is manifested by
his Laws, and by his Judgments, so that manifestation of his Justice is the
Assurance of our Right and Welfare.

This Justice of God we ought to have in the greatest Veneration, by which he
protects the Rights of the Innocent, and punishes the Injuriousness of the
Wicked. All that good, which any of us enjoy, not only comes from God, but is
secured to us, by him: And that we are not deprived (by the Injustice of
others) of any thing we value, is owing unto the Justice of God. It Is not by
our own Wisdom, Power and Friends (whatever we may think) that we either obtain
or keep what is commodious, or necessary for us: But we should lose it through
the greater Subtility and Power of others, if it were not for God -- (...).
Hom. Odyss. 3.
. A Man who well considers the World, must be convinced of this, and he who is
convinced of it, must adore the Justice of God. And may every one so consider
this, as to be possessed with the greatest Veneration of that Justice: For by
such a Persuasion a Man shall honor God, and enjoy himself: Whereas he who
ascribes all to his own Wisdom and Power, must needs be forgetful of God, and
disordered in his Mind: And either be vainly conceited of his own Abilities, or
extremely fearful of others. Nor can a Man possess his Soul long in
Tranquillity, through the Delusions of his Pride: Since God in Justice may let
loose the Malice of others against him, and convince him of his Insufficiency,
by bringing him to Shame. It Is indeed through the interposing of the Justice of
God, (who does Right to every Man) that any Man does enjoy what he has a Right
to, and most adorable is that Justice which maintains Right among Men, where so
many employ all their Power to do Wrong. The Divine Justice does not
effectually hinder all Men, from doing any Wrong: But it does hinder very much
Wrong which would be done: And it also helps them to Right who suffer Wrong.
This Consideration is apt to create a great Veneration of God in us, and ought
to be much thought upon. for that Purpose.

But as this is a proper Subject for the Meditation of all Men, so especially
for the Meditation of those, who have any Share in the Government of Men. Such
are (in a peculiar Sense) the Ministers of God: They are the Istruments that
God uses (in a special manner) for doing Right to Men.

Those who are Governors, ought to reverence Government, as a Divine
Expedient, for the doing of Right: And those who rule over others are to look
upon their Office, as entirely for that End. And a Magistrate, who reverenceth
Justice, as that for which God is adoreable, must needs count Justice a Duty,
for which Man is truly Honorable Omni igitur ratione colenda and retinenda
Justitia est, tum ipsa per se (nam aliter justitia non esset) tum propter
amplificationem honoris and gloriae, Tull. Off. l. 2.
. The Honor of Magistracy, is indeed, its subserviency to Justice: And so
venerable is Justice, that to minister to it, in any degree, is honorable.

I need not say, That Punishments are not the first or chief; much less the
only part of Justice: For they are only accidentally necessary, through the
Violations of Justice. Justice is doing Right and maintaining Right: It Is
employing Wisdom and Power to constrain those to do Right who are unwilling;
and to hinder them from doing Wrong who are disposed to it (as most are,
through Malice or Partiality) Arist. Pol. l. 6. c. 8.
. Now as no Man can be any further Happy or Safe than he can enjoy those Rights
that God has given him, so no Man can keep those Rights that he may enjoy them,
without God. To God's just Government of the World, and to his constant
interposing, for the Defense of Right, we owe all the Good that we enjoy.

This should cause us to magnify God, and to account it a most important
Office, that those are put into, who are to govern any part of the World, under
God, and to be his Instruments to defend the Sacred Rights of Men (...). Arist.
Eth. l. 5.
. This is a Contemplation fit for all Magistrates to entertain themselves with,
every Day, in their Retirements: And so to possess their Souls with the
greatest Veneration of Justice, as the Property and Similitude of God. In the
just Governing of Men there is an Image of the Government of God; and by their
Office Governors resemble God, and are subordinate to him. So far as their
Administration of Government is just, it is doing the Work of God: And for this
a Magistrate ought to Reverence his Office, and himself. And he (that being a
Magistrate) does, for this only, reverence his Office and himself, will do what
shall deserve and gain Reverence, i e. will do Right unto all, according to his
Understanding and Power; and nothing can be more Honorable than such Justice;
for, this Justice is the Glory of God; and for it, God is adored by the whole
World.

II. Let Magistrates pray daily unto God, That (in their Places, and according
to their Offices) as they rule over Men, they may be Just, Ruling in the Fear
of God 2 Samuel, 23.3.
. That no Surprise or Mistake; no Passion or Partiality may hinder them from
doing all Right to all Men.

Such Petitions a Magistrate is to add unto his daily private Devotions: And as
such Petitions (coming from a Soul, that unfeignedly desires to do right) are a
good Sign: So (through God's Help) those Prayers will be a proper means to
enable him to all necessary Justice. For, he who desires heartily, That he may
govern for God's Glory (i. e. for the good of Men) shall not be destitute of
God's Grace. But, as God rules for his own Glory (doing Good to Men) so God
will assist those who beg his Assistance, that they may follow his Example.

And what I have said here, as Advice to All, who are Governors, in general; I
have said to you Two in particular.

To you, Sir, who are this Day to Leave, and to you, Sir, who are this Day to
take the Place of the Chief Magistrate of this City.

You, Sir, that have had Experience of the Venerable Office, of doing Right, in
your Capacity, to the Citizens of this City, may at leisure recollect your
self; and bless God for it, when you remember he has given you the Heart to do
impartial Justice: For doing Justice is a Divine Work.

And you, Sir, who do this Day enter upon this Office, let not the Day pass
away without earnest Prayer unto God, That he would give you a Heart equal to
your Power, of doing impartial Justice, to your Fellow-Citizens. So shall you
reflect upon your Year, at the End of it, and at the End of your Life, with
Satisfaction and Joy.

And for this Grace of Universal Justice, let let us now pray.

Grant, we beseech thee, Almighty God, That the Words which we have heard this
Day, with our outward Ears, concerning the Venerable Nature and absolute
Necessity and great Advantages of Justice, may be so grafted inwardly in the
Hearts of all Men, whose Duty it is to do Right, and of all Governors, whose
Office it is to maintain Right, That they may bring forth in us all the proper
Fruit of Just and Good Living, to the Honor and Praise of thy Name, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is published by the same Author, a small Treatise, entitituled, Religion
the Perfection of Man: In 80.


