A PRACTICAL EXPOSITION OF THE Historical Prophecy OF JONAH: Delivering sundry
brief Notes in a Cursory way concerning the mind of the Holy Ghost in the
several Passages.

Hard things exercise the Reader, Plain things nourish him.

Imprimatur.

June 5. 1665.

LONDON: Printed by L. Miller for John Chandler, Bookseller in Reading. 1666.

To the Right Worshipful my much honored Friend, The Lady Cecilia Knollys, All
Health and Happiness in the Lord.
IT is a very comfortable privilege (good Madam) vouchsafed to sincere and
faithful Christians, that being planted in the house of the Lord, Psalm. 92.14.
they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; when other trees grow doddick
and past fruit-bearing, these trees of Righteousness (by a singular blessing
from God) shall be able to yield the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5 21.
for the honor of God who planted them, and for the good of that Christian
community whereof they are members. They are more in prayer, and more in
magnifying the grace whereby they stand; more in their meditations of God and
the things of God; more in their preparations for death, and for an entrance
into the everlasting Kingdom of Jesus Christ; more in imparting experiences of
the gracious dealings of God with themselves and others, for helping the
troubled spirits of their brethren; more free in Alms-deeds and all good uses,
according to ability; more mortified to the world, and to their passions; more
profitable to the Church in whose prosperity they rejoice, and grieve in the
adversity: and better redeem the time whereof they see so little remaining.

Though they be infested with their infirmities of old age, and with diverse
encumbrances of the world, yet even in old age they mind the doing of good, yea
more good then they were wont to do; as willing to the uttermost (while they
may) to show forth the praises of Him who has called them out of darkness into
his mavelous 1 Pet. 2 9.
light. The recompense of reward draws nearer and nearer, and in little time
will be fully in their possession; therefore for the inch of time that remains
in this tabernacle, they will work as fast as they can, with all faithfulness,
carefulness, and cheerfulness.

And this their privilege stands upon sundry unmovable grounds, as, The
eternal love and counsel of God, who enables them to persevere and be fruitful;
The meritorious intercession and powerful grace of Jesus Christ, John 15.5.
in whom they are as branches in their Vine: The effectual working of Gods
blessed Spirit, who is promised to abide with them for ever: 14.16.
The immortal and incorruptible seed of the word, 1 Pet. 1.13.
whereof they are born again, and cannot perish for ever: The faithful and
steadfast Covenant of grace, Jer. 32.40.
which as it engages God never to depart from them, but do them good, so it
warrants them fresh abilities, that they shall never depart from their God,
together with promises in particular; and diverse helps both to hold out to the
end, and to bring forth fruit still in old age.

This I write (good Madam) to comfort you in this your age, and against the
many infirmities which accompany it. The Lord add unto your days abundantly,
and give you yet to see the peace of his Jerusalem. Many good fruits you have
born already, and we rejoice in seeing them; your love to the House and
Ordinances of God, which sometimes you frequent with danger to your health;
your love to godly Ministers, whom you esteem worthy of double honor; the
religious ordering of your Family; the careful observation of the Lords Day,
which with many is almost out of request; the large provision you make weekly
for poor people, with other good fruits, which will abound to your account in
that great day of Jesus Christ. Phil. 4.17.
Go on (good Madam) and never be weary in well-doing, Gal. 6.9.
in due time you shall reap if you faint not; and (according to the premises)
you shall be sure in this holy way never to faint; for, the way of the Lord is
strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29.
and the whole stream of the Scriptures runs for your encouragement.

At this time I make bold to present your Ladyship with these brief and plain
Meditations, and pray your acceptance, as from one who desires to acknowledge
the grace of God in you, and to help you along to the end of your course with
much joy and assurance, humbly taking my leave in present, and unto death
remaining

Your Ladyships obliged, William Jemmat.

To the Practitioner in Religion.
GOod friend, here I present thee with a few plain and familiar Observations on
the Book of Jonah. Learned and eloquent Discourses, he that is willing, may
find in those great Masters of our Israel, A. Abbot. B. King.
who many years ago wrote on this Prophecy, which yet is rather an History:
And this present endeavor needed not, but to revive those Notions which lie
hid from the most: and plain people will best relish plain and short Discourses.

Yet if we consider the matters herein contained, we shall find some of them
lofty, Hieron. proem. in Jonam.
and fit for deep meditations. Some Hebrew Doctors say, that this Jonah was son
of the widow of Sarepta, whom Eliahs raised from the dead: which if it be true,
we meet with a wonder, both strange, and not exemplified in any other. Here are
three resurrectians for one Saint; first in that he was raised by the Prophet
Eliah; next that he recovered out of the belly of the Whale (wherein he was a
figure of our Saviors resurrection) and last of all, Mat. 12.39.40.
that in the general resurrection he shall come again with his body, and for
ever be with the Lord. It is also a wonder in this Book, that the providence of
our God is so present with his people, and of so large extent among the
creatures, both small and great. It is a wonder that Jonah should so long
subsist in the Whales belly, and at three days end be set on land again, and
do the message which formerly he had so stiffly refused to do. It is a wonder,
that in a little time he reaped more fruit of his Ministry among heathenish
Ninevites, then in a long time he had reaped among Gods own people. It is a
wonder, that after his miraculous deliverance out of the Fish, and after his
holy resolutions to be wholly for the Lord, yet he should be stout and sturdy
about the sparing of Nineve, the Lord bespeaking him very mildely, and he
replying upon the Lord very peevishly.

Christian, there is something to be picked out of these and other passages for
thy edification. Let the brevity of the Notes occasion thee to fall into large
meditations, and applications to thine own soul. And let the plainness of
them, which saves the labor of farther inquiry, occasion thee to deal the more
seriously with thy conscience, that thou may be brought to an entire estate
of faith and obedience. Certainly, Romans 15.4.
as all Scripture is written for our instruction, so this concerning Jonah.

His example gives us fair warning, not to leave known duties, whatever carnal
reasonings may suggest for the neglect of them: Not to sleep or rest secure
after any sin committed, lest a storm from God fall upon us, and endanger our
comfort in God, if not our salvation: Not to be eager for the destruction of
any, though bad enough, and they deserve to be destroyed: Not to favor that
choleric disposition, which we know to rest in some of our breasts, but be
very watchful, and mortify this corruption more and more: Nor to mutter
against any of Gods dealings, either with our selves or others, how cross
soever they seem to be.

On the other side, Jonah's example warns us to shame our selves for errors we
have made, as he here does in writing these things of himself: To submit
patiently (as he does) to those fatherly chastisements, which it pleases God
to afflict us withal: To retain faith in God, even in the depth of our
afflictions, as does he: To vent our faith and faithful desires by hearty and
earnest prayers, and that without ceasing, as did he till he was delivered: To
gather holy vows and purposes, that upon recovery out of any evils we will (by
the assistance of grace) show our selves really thankful for mercies received:
And after all our foolish strivings with his sad dispensations, 1 Samuel 3.18.
we will resolve all into the good pleasure of our God: It is the Lord, let him
do what seems good in his eyes.

Then out of the example of the Ninevites all should learn to believe the
threats of God, and be humbled, and crave the peace with God, and walk with him
ever afterward more obediently and carefully: Rab. in Seder, Olam. Theodorer.
and alii.
Where mark those words (ever afterward) and beware of relapses, or returning
to folly. Histories tell us, how forty years after this sparing of Nineve, yet
the people falling back to their old sins again, were fearfully destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, and their City utterly overthrown, according to
the Prophecy of Nahum, who arose after our Jonah. Beware (Christians) by their
example. Be not as the Dog that returns to his vomit, or as the Sow that was
washed, to the wallowing in the mire. The first estate of Apostates was bad
enough, but their last estate is worse by far.

The Lord uphold us in these sifting and shaking times, wherein many have
turned aside after Satan, that we may hold on constantly in the way of faith
and obedience, not warping aside to the right hand or the left: no nor abating
a whit of our first love, through heaviness of flesh, or deadness of spirit,
or any encumbrances of the world: With which prayer I rest in present,

Thine in our Lord Jesus Christ, WILLIAM JEMMAT.

THE PROPHECY OF JONAH.
JOnah in Hebrew signifies a Dove: Hieron. (...), Mar. 1.10.
and the Lord send upon us the good Spirit which descended on Christ as a Dove,
that we may rightly and fruitfully treat of this Prophecy, which was written
as all other Scripture, for our Instruction and consolation.

Of Jonah we read in two other Scriptures, 2 King. 14.25. Mat. 12.39, 40.
Gath-Hepher was the place of his Birth, and one of the Cities that fell to the
lot of Zebulon: and was so called, to distingush it from Gath Rimmon, and Gath
of the Philistines. Note. Malice blinds.
Where note the falseness of the blind and malicious Pharisee, who said, Out of
Galilee arises no Prophet, Joh. 7.52. Yes, Jonah the Prophet who was of
Gath-Hepher, which was in the Province of Galilee. Malice does many times bl^nd
the eyes, even of understanding men, as the Pharisees generally were. Beware of
malice, as thou would not be misled into damning Errors, fatally and
finally.

Jonah prophesied in the Reign of Jeroboam the second, or of Joash his Father,
it may be of both: Princes that came of Jehu, who rooted out the Family of
Ahab; the Idolaters, but not the Idolatry: for which cause, Israel came into
great affliction, which was very bitter, 2 King. 14.26, 27. There was not any
shut up, nor any left, nor any Helper for Israel.

Note. Idolatry ruins.
Idolatry ever brings mischief to a State or Family, sooner or later: see Chap.
10.31, 32 33. Beware of Idolatry and Idolaters, they are people of Gods Wrath
and Curse; what trials ye may have, ye do not know; Remember and keep your
selves from idols, 1 John 5.21.
and from idolaters.

Now mark two things of Jonah, our Dove.

1. To afflicted Israel he comes with an Olive Branch of of Peace and Comfort,
that the waste shall be restored, which had been taken away, ibid. according to
the word of the Lord God of Israel, Note. Some favor to the worst. Use.
which he spakes by the hand of his servant Jonah. God for a while is very
gracious, and in temporals does much for a wicked people; it may be, by wicked
instruments as Jeroboam was. Admire the passages of his providence, and look
from men to God who works for the good of his Chosen, as, in the ten Tribes
there were some true worshippers, and for their sake some deliverance was
granted.

2. To Nineve he is sent with the mournful Voice of a Dove, proclaiming their
destruction, Yet forty days and Nineve shall be destroyed; but with an intent
in the Master that sent him, to spare the City upon their Repentance and
Amendment. The Lord in wrath remembers mercy, Note. In wrath, mercy.
and sometimes blusters our judgments that sinners may bethink themselves, and
repent, and be saved. Mark his diverse dispensations, and attend the main, which
is, that his patience and goodness should lead you to repentance, Romans 2.4.

Two Notes more. 1.
Out of this Book of Jonah two things may be noted, by the exposition of our
Savior himself. 1. That Jonah was a Type of Christ, in respect of his Death
and Resurrection; as Jonah was three days and three nights in the Whales belly,
and then came to land again; so Christ was held in Death for a while, and the
third day rose again. Nineve are set for an example of Repentance, to you of
after-ages; which if it follow not, ye shall be the more deeply and severely
damned; and why? for a greater then Jonah is here.

Allegorical sense of Scripture we shall ever admit, where warranted by some
glimpse of Scripture; as there are many such to be found through the whole body
of it, Ribera.
(...), Gal. 4.24. The Jesuit needed not to have quarrelled about such sense
of Scriptures: but, under pretense of Allegories, we must not run out into
Fooleries as are many of their Allegories, much less into Errors as some of
them are. Nor does the similitude of things among themselves warrant us to take
every Doctrine which the Fathers collected, but only where the Antecedents and
Consequents give occasion, or some other Text of Scripture; so far the man
spoke rightly: And it is good against the Familists, who turn all (even plain
Scriptures) into Allegories.

Come we now to the Book it self; Contents of this Book.
This Book of Jonah contains many chief points concerning the Knowledge of God,
and the Salvation of man.

1. For God, we may here see and admire his goodness, Ninevites, that they
might repent and be saved; even at that time, when generally he took Israel for
his only, peculiar, chosen people: Possibly a sign of the calling of the
Gentiles, which should follow afterward. And the justice of God, who so
severely revenged the disobedience of his own Servant Jonah; after whom, all
may learn to take heed of turning the grace of God into lasciviousness. And the
power of God, who has all the Creatures, even the rudest, at his own beck and
disposal; the Winds, the Sea, the Fishes, the Herbs and Plants, and all the
Creation. And his providence, who provides both for the punishment and for the
relief of Jonah; and, by both of them, an wholesome instruction for him; to be
ruled by him for time to come, better then before; and for us also, who need
such Discipline.

Jonah could. And, to them that are troubled at the sight of their sin and
danger, there is Mercy in store by Jesus Christ, as there was for Jonah. And
the way is, to believe the Preaching of the word, and repent, and turn from our
evil ways, as did the Ninevites. Here we have also the force of Prayer, the
nature of Fear, the wages of Disobedience, the fruit of Repentance. Here we
have Lots, Vows, singing of Psalms, History strange and wonderful, and a new
kind of Creation, in the Gourd that rose up in a Night; with other profitable
Documents, as God shall bring us to them in order.

Parts.
In the Book we have a first and second calling of Jonah to Preach to the
Ninevites, with the things that followed upon both of them.

In the first Chapter we have the behavior of Jonah, and of the Mariners.

Of Jonah we read these things, 1. the Message given him, v. 1.2. 2 his
declining of the Message, v. 3. 3. the apprehension of him when he was
fugitive, ver. 4. 4. the execution, ver. 15.

The Message is set down, both generally, it was the word of the Lord; and
especially, Jonah must go to Nineve, and cry against it.

Ver. 1.
Now the word of the Lord came unto Jonah. Or, And the word of the Lord came;
that is, to Jonah as well as to the other Prophets. Or, This Message to Nineve
as well as the other Messages to Israel, with all the circumstances here
related. Jonah by his Calling was an ordinary Teacher of Gods people, but now
extraordinarily he is sent to Preach among the Gentiles; the word of the Lord
came to them; and for satisfaction to Gods people, they should be able to make
it appear to the Rulers of the Church; which of late days was utterly
rejected* and all confusion thereby brake in upon us as a mighty flood.

The word of the Lord came unto Jonah; Namely, by Inspiration of the Holy
Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.20, 21. and (...) is ascribed to the whole Scripture, 2 Timothy
3.16. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God. There are diverse ways of
manifestation, but all by one and the same Spirit, (...). Number. 12.6.
Heb. 1.1. God in times past spoke in diverse manners; suppose in a Vision, or
in a Dream; and sometime possibly by an audible Voice. So David tells us, 2 Samuel 23.2. The Spirit of the Lord spoke by me, and his word was in my tongue.
Be assured hence,

The writings of the Prophets are of Divine Authority, Prophets from God wrote
what we see.
the word of the Lord, the Vision of the Lord, the burden of the word of the
Lord: He spoke by the mouth of the holy Prophets from the beginning of the
world, Luke 1.70. and see Chapter 24.25, 44. and 1 Pet. 1.10 11, 12.

Which serves to comfort us concerning our Faith in all The word of the Lord
came unto Jonah, to Amos, to Hosea, and to the rest of the Prophets. We have a
sure word of prophecy, yea more sure then Visions and Oracles, 2. Pet. 1.16,
17, 18, 19. much more then Fancies of men, pretending the Spirit, and craking
of a light in them, which must sway against the written word, Ministers and
all. Blessed be God, who has put a Bridle into their mouths, and restrained
their Fury. For our part, we are sure all is right and straight whatever we
believe according to the Prophets.

Esa. 53.1.
Who has believed our report? Drunkards there be still, as in the Prophets
time, Swearers, Liars, Sabbath Breakers, otherwise wicked. And the same
judgments hang over the heads of our sinners, as the Prophets told their
people. Faith and Repentance are Preached still as they Preached, and namely
Jonah in this Book. Oh the invincible hardness of men's hearts, not to believe
the Prophets and Preachers! What do you think? must we needs go to Nineve, to
Preach and get Converts? If we did, we might speed; but woe be to unbelieving
Christians, whom neither Prophets, nor Apostles, nor Holy men coming with their
Doctrine can work to Repentance! Certainly, seeing they believe not these, they
would not believe though one should rise from the dead, Luke 16. ult.

the word of the Lord, let them be regarded accordingly: As thus,

1. Take pains to know the meaning of the Prophets in their several Prophesies;
There are obscurities in them; but search to understand them more fully and
clearly; Search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.39. Read, Hear, Pray, Confer, Obey, any
thing to get out the hidden treasure; Be both frequent and earnest in searching
out the meaning of places; Dig, Cry, lift up your Voice for understanding;
plain Apostles feed the simple, hard Prophets exercise the more witty and
understanding.

2. Be reverent in all your conversing with the word, whether by Reading or
Hearing. King Eglon stood up to receive Ehuds Message from the Lord. Cornelius
and his Company set themselves in the presence of God, to hear what should be
spoken by Peter. The Congregation of Israel in hearing some Message from God,
bowed their head and worshpped; even so do ye; take heed to the word of
prophecy, give earnest heed to the things that are spoken.

3. Believe all that the Prophets have written; not as the slow of heart, whom
our Savior reproved, or as those nowadays who deserve to be reproved: King
Agrippa, believe thou the Prophets? I wish I could say of every one, I know
thou believe. Certainly, the word does no good, unless it be mingled with
faith in them that hear it; Heb. 4.2.
as Meat, except it be digested; or Physic, except it be kept for a while.
Faith implies knowledge, Consent, and Application.

4. Obey the Voice of the Prophets and Apostles, as being the Voice of the
Lord. When God delivered the Commandments, Israel made account they must obey
all that he said, and promised so to do, and (said he) Oh that there were such
an heart in them! It had been well for them, and it would be well for us, if so
pliant and obedient: Consider our Reading, Hearing, Praying, Conferring, is all
to be referred to obeying; Obeying has the promise, as is said, Blessed are
they that hear the word of God, and keep it; and, Hearers of the Law shall be
blessed in the deed.

5. Be built upon the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20.
Building is, to add Stone to Stone, and Timber to Timber; so you to your Gifts
and Graces: Christians should not only be settled and established in the truth,
but increase daily more and more. This is often required, 1 These. 4.1. and 2
Pet. 3.18. And it is required, that to the best of your skill and power ye
suffer not the Doctrine of the Prophets to be gain-sayed, or corrupted.

6. Honor Jesus Christ, whom all the Prophets pointed at, Act 3.19 Jonah here
is a Figure of his Death and Resurrection; other Prophets tell of the place of
his Birth, of the time of his Coming, of the holiness and glory of his Kingdom,
and the like. Both the Prophets that went before, and the Apostles that
followed after, all cried Hosanna to the Son of David! Let us also who come up
in the Rear, give our Acclamations to honor Jesus Christ, especially in the way
of obedience.

Take heed, let not Christ find honor and obedience among Indians, and lose it
among Christians. Isreal's ingratitude was here upbraided by the Ninevites
Repentance; Rev. 2.5.
And a remove of the Gospel has been long threatened, beware lest at last it be
removed indeed: Jonah must go when God sends him, and so must other good
Ministers.

Ver. 2. Arise, go to Nineve that great City, and cry against it; for their
wickedness is come up before me.
Here is the Prophets special Message, and in it three things, 1. His
excitation to do work for God at Nineve, Arise, go to Nineve that great City,
2. His denunciation of Gods judgment against it, Cry against it. 3. Assignation
of the reason, For their wickedness is come up before me.

Nineve.
Nineve was the chief City of the Assyrians, as London to us English Nineve in
the name of it sounds forth a fair and beautiful City; In Moses time, and long
before, it was a great City, Genesis 10.12. Two places in this Book do intimate
the greatness of it, Chap. 3.3, 4. and 4.11. Histories supply some particulars,
Its greatness. Diod. Sic.
v. c. that it was threescore Miles in compass; that it had Walls exceeding
high and broad, so that three Carts might meet and pass by one another; that
upon the Walls were fifteen hundred goodly Turrets, for Defense and Ornament;
that by continuation of Buildings four Cities were grown into one, as those two
of London and Westminster; that Babylon was a less City by the fourth part, and
yet when part of it was taken by the Persians, Jer. 51.31. Arist pol.
some part knew not of the taking till three days after: That Nineve was eight
years in Building, though ten thousand Workmen were employed at once about it;
that it was head of the first Monarchy for twelve hundred years together, and
so had brought a world of Wealth and people into the City, out of the several
Provinces which were spoiled, and Tributaries to Nineve; as afterward did the
Romans, who if they had been stripped of their stolen Goods, Lactant.
should return to their ancient Cottages and penury.

Now this could not be done without a great deal of Pride, Oppression,
Bloodshed, and other wickedness; Sinfulness.
And it is very likely, that the Citizens grew very Lofty, Luxurious, Filthy,
scarce tolerable one to another: But it is plain, that they were great enemies
to the people of God, Esa. 10.5. O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger. Ye have the
History of Senacherib, and his rage against God and his people; though Ashur
came of Shem, the holy seed, yet he became a spit^ful and a blaspheming enemy,
Genesis 10.22.

Now to this Nineve is Jonah sent as an Herald of Arms, Danger.
to denounce Destruction for their sins: One against many, and a mean one
against the Potentates of the world; An unequal encounter; but the Lord tells
him of it beforehand, that he may know the worst of it, and arm himself
accordingly with faith and courage, to do his Message as he ought, stoutly and
faithfully. Learn, and beforehand cast the cost of Religion; Foreseen darts
are either avoided, or do the less harm.

Summons.
Arise, and cry against it; What the cry was, we see in Chap. 3.4. Yet forty
days, and Nineve shall be overthrown, concealing the rest as the secrets of
God who makes his Servants of his Court, but not of his Counsel. The Lord meant
by this thunder to awake the Ninevites, and bring them to Repentance, and by
them to shame Israel, who after much Preaching remained hard-hearted and
un-reformed; And his usual manner is, to foretell a Plague before he inflicts
it; such is his goodness to his Creatures, and it should work upon people when
they are forewarned, to be also fore-armed: Woe if they be not.

Beware of weariness and cowardice.
Three points come here to be observed for Edification.

That at the call of God we ought to stir up our selves, and settle to our
duty; Arise and go to the great City Nineve. Jonas might even be weary of
Preaching to Samaria and the ten Tribes, where he did so little good; and sit
down as a man discouraged, which we read of Elias and Jeremy: therefore the
Lord here bids him arise, Be not discouraged, nor sit slothful, but do the task
which I appoint thee to do; so to Jeremy, Chap. 1.17. Gird up thy loins, and
speak unto them all that I command thee; And to Ezekiel, Chap. 2.1. Stand upon
thy feet, I will speak to thee, and thou shall speak all my words to the house
of Israel.

Jonas, and how severely he was punished for not discharging his duty. Many a
Minister and Householder is even discouraged to see how little good he does in
his place. Esa. 49.4.
I have labored in vain, said Isaiah; Elias is weary of his life; Jeremy will
speak no more in the name of the Lord.

Here now is occasion to use this word of Excitation, Arise and go to Nineve;
and we should consider, 1. It is the Lord that sets us on work, and requires
our best diligence, 2. The work is his, and not ours originally or Paul Plants,
Apollos Ninevites, and in the seven thousand which had not bowed the knee to
Baal. 4. Whatever the success be, the Christian shall be well rewarded for his
dilgence and faithfulness, Esa. 49.5. Not only he delivers his own soul, but
gets a Crown of Righteousness, and shall shine as the Firmament, and as the
Stars of Heaven; A faithful Ministers reward shall not be according to the
success, but his zealous pains-taking.

Arise every one, and go to his task; None of us but has his Nineve to go
unto; the Magistrate has his Government, and should zealously study a through
Reformation of the place where he governs; the Minister has a charge of Souls,
and must watch over them as one that must give an account; the Parent and
Master has his Family to order in a Christian manner, not only civilly, but
religiously; and every particular person among us has a precious soul to care
for; and it is Nineve, specious and beautiful in the eye of God; why not in
thine also?

The saying was, for provoking of diligence, Spartam quam nactus es, hanc orxa;
so still, look well to thy charge; there is a Province committed to thee, be a
good Steward in thy administration; thy line is fallen in a pleasant place, and
thou have a goodly heritage, a Nineve, Dan. 12.13. 2 Timothy 1.14.
look well to it, Stand in thy lot, keep the good thing committed to thee; Ever
remember whose Voice this is, Arise and g^, and remember the account that is to
be made one day, Luke 16 2. Amos 6.1.
Give an account of thy Stewardship, for thou may be no longer Steward, and
remember the woe to them that live at ease, which kills them, and their
misery comes as an armed man. Reprove sin zealously.


To the next point, It is the duty of Gods Ministers to Go and cry against
Nineve, Cry aloud; lift up thy Voice like a Trumpet, Esa. 58.1. with Chap.
40.6. John Baptist was the Voice of one crying on the wilderness; And the man
of God cried against the Altar in Bethel, 1 King. 13.1, 2. where Note, this
crying is not the Voice of rude men, Raging and Railing as they please; but is
opposed to the speaking of smooth and pleasant things, Esa. 30.10. Jer. 5.31.
Ezekiel. 13.6, 10, 17.
which carnal people desire should be spoken to them; yet it is good for
nothing but to continue their sin, and increase their danger, yea and hasten
the vengeance of God upon them so much the sooner.

ought thus to cry against sinners, 1. Because they are asleep, and need to be
Baal, Cry aloud, it may be he sleeps, 2. Because the cry of their sins goes
up before God, and calls for judgments to be poured upon them; as here, Their
wickedness is come up before me: wicked people need to be saved, as a brand
that is snatched out of the burning, or as one that is ready to fall into the
fire or water, where he should perish certainly.

Zealous Ministers not to be blamed.
and thunder out the judgments of God against them. These do well, and are not
to be blamed for their earnestness; These are the Boanerge^ or Sons of thunder,
which the Scripture speaks of, generally distasted by loose and vain hearers;
but there is no cause; they go not awhit beside their Commission.

Prolepsis.
True, some good Ministers are Barnabies, or Sons of Consolation, and speak more
mildly in their course of Preaching: But 1. There are diversities of Gifts, and
all of the same Spirit; none to be blamed who deals faithfully. 2. The mildest
and most comfortable Preachers use to limit their Consolations to them that
fear God, and have other Notes of grace on them, so separating the precious
from the vile. 3. Gentle Preachers, and with low voices use to denounce the
heavy judgments of God against secure and impenitent sinners. Woe, woe, woe, said
our Savior, of whom it is written that he lifted not up his voice in the
streets, Mat. 12.19. 4. There is a mildness which is condemned in the
Scripture, as when Eli said, It is no good report that I hear of you my Sons;
and he smarted for it; applicable to indulgent Parents and Masters, who in love
of quietness let their young people alone in their sins.

In some places it might be a word of Exhortation, that Ministers may make bold
with sinners.
Jonah must not only cry in Nineve, which had been a great matter, and beside
order, but against it, which was like to bring Hornets about his ears; even so
must we: And yet, in the mean time we should not Preach against our people but
for the greatest good; they may be brought to Repentance, and if it prove
right, to heaven. As for the Hornets that may be raised, we must leave that
care unto God; do our duty, and trust in him; do as Jonas did at his second
sending to Nineve. 1. He took a long journey, it may be a hundred miles. 2. He
cast himself upon the displeasure of a most mighty Monarch, and a most rich
people, 3. At best he could look for no great entertainment, nor so much as to
bear his charges, 4. He footed it up and down the City when he came there, and
might spend much of his strength by traveling and crying all along: Learn we
Ministers and people to settle to difficult, costly, and dangerous duties; Are
they not Gods Commandments? did not he say, Arise and cry?

To the third point; The wickedness of a people does go Wickedness calls for
vengeance.
so did the blood of Abel against Cain, Genesis 4 10. So did the filthiness of the
Sodomites against that City, Chap. 18.21. So the cry of Servants wages
detained, ^ames 5.4. And here the Robbery and Oppression of the Assyrians, who
had made slaughter of many Nations, and spoiled others to enrich themselves,
together with the cries of Widows and Fatherless Children; and their Pride,
Idleness, Filthiness, Enchantments, other sins which were now grown so great,
that the Earth was no longer able to hold the cry, but the Air and Heaven too
did ring of their sinfulness, and, now it was high time for God to take
vengeance.

The Lord sees when the iniquity of a man or people is ripe, and then proceeds
to judgment; as of the Amorites, It is not yet full; but when it is, I will
(...) root them out, Genesis 15.16, Every single sin comes up before God, and
provokes wrath, Psalm. 7.11.
but wickedness much more; He is angry with the wicked every day, but defers to
do execution till the measure of sin be filled up, and then he can forbear no
longer.

He is not slack of his coming, but patient to usward, and waits for our
Repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9. No man's patience can be so exercised as Gods is; yea,
we see too often how even a godly man has some adoo to keep patience on such
and such provocations. Oh the goodness and long-suffering of our God, to whom
our wickedness goes up continually! The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious,
slow to wrath, abundant in goodness and truth!

speaks better things then the blood of Abel, Heb. 12.24. mercy and not
judgment, and this secures both the persons and duties of Believers; though
they deserve a fullness of wrath, yet by the mediation all will be well with
them.

their wickedness gets up before God, and would draw down vengeance upon then,
when they are most jolly and brave in their worldly enjoyments, yet their
extreme danger continues; sin has not lost his voice of crying, as here
against the Ninevites; yea, it cries more because of more light, and more means
of grace; so the men of Nineve shall rise up in judgment with this generation
and condemn it.

Take heed of sin, if not for the foulness (which should England as well as
Nineve; and we have had warning, not only for forty years, but forty and forty,
and more then that, it is now above a hundred years; that the Gospel has been
preached among us with liberty and encouragement; and ye know we have sins
enough to hasten the overthrow; Oaths and other abominations.

Consider and beware; if there were no more mischief in sin but the losing of
the Gospel, it were bad enough; an intolerable loss to have the Candlestick
removed out of his place, or to have your Jonahs sent from Israel to Nineve, or
the righteous taken from the evil to come.

Ver. 3. But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the Lord,
and went down to Joppa, and he found a ship going to Tarshish; so he paid the
Fare thereof, and went down into it to go with them unto Tarshish from the
presence of the Lord.
Here the Prophet declines the Lords message of going to Nineve, by going a
quite contrary way. Why Jonah fled to Tarshish.
His ground he tells us in Chap. 4.2. Namely, a carnal fear, lest he should be
ashamed and accounted a false Prophet, if within forty days Nineve were not
overthrown: A great matter with the proud nature of man, which cannot endure
the least disparagement.

Other reasons Jonah might have for not going to Nineve.

So peter, Act. 1^.
1. The strangeness of the thing. No Prophet had ever been sent to the Gentiles
before Jonah; All of them were sent to the house of Judah or of Israel; and
should Jonah be the first man that should be sent to the sinners, the Gentiles?
God goes beside his ordinary method, and Jonah thinks strange of it.

Ninevites be converted, and Israel not converted? how can things go quite in a
new Road which was never heard of?

Jonah fear what would become of him among a Company of Infidels, who were also
rich and proud, and knew not God? he one, and they many; he a poor man, and
they the Potentates of the world. What should one Lamb do among a thousand
Wolves?

Jonah was to deliver, what likelihood that Nineve should be overthrown within
forty days, seeing no enemy appeared before it, and it had now flourished
twelve hundred years in great prosperity? what wise man would go and publish
impossibilities?

No sound reason at all.
Jonah sinned greatly in flying to Tarsus. 1. He left the Command and calling
of the great God of Heaven, which is the only rule of all Israel wherein his
Tarsus Samaria. 4. He showed little pity to thousands of souls that might
receive benefit by his preaching.

All showing the great corruption of man's nature, even after grace received,
and how watchful we need to be, and keep close to our rule, and to the calling
wherewith we are called; not regarding the crooked rules of humane reason and
wisdom which Jonah too much followed.

He rose up to flee to Tarsus, The chief City of Cilicia, Expos. 1.
St. Paul's Country, a Citizen of no mean City, Act. 21.39. Some say Jonah went
to be a Merchant there another while. But it is not good to fasten more sins to
the good man, then we are sure of. It is most likely, that as a man astonished
he knew not well which way to turn himself.

To flee from the presence of the Lord; twice set down, to Jonah was put unto,
and how much he was troubled with diverse thoughts, haling him this way and that
way, and no way finding rest for the soal of his foot.

From the presence of the Lord; that is, 2. Piscator. Deuteronomy. 10.8. 1 King. 17.1.
Psalm. 73.28.
from the Land of Israel, where the Lord dwelt among his people. Or, from doing
service to the Lord according to his duty; so the phrase signifies sometimes;
the Child Samuel ministered before the Lord; David and Levi shall not want a man
to stand before me, etc. So godly men are said to draw near to God, and, to be
a people near to him. In which respect the wicked are said to go far from him,
namely, in respect of his special presence, and of their own unbelieving
hearts, Heb. 3.12. take heed of the evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God: As for the general presence of God, Jonah could not be so
dull-witted as to think he could flee from that, for he is Omnipresent, he is
not far from any of us; whether should I go from thy presence? etc.

Six brief Notes may hence be collected.

1. The Divinity of the Scripture appears, in that the Divinity of Scripture.
which other Authors use not to do, but tell the good, and leave out the rest.
Jonah and other holy men wrote by another Spirit: And observe it in two things,

1. That they tell of their sins, though it tend to their shame; it makes for
the glory of God in pardoning and restoring them, and therefore they care not
though they lay load upon themselves; so did Jonah here. Moses wrote of his
unbelief and hastiness, David of his Murder and Adultery, Paul how he had been
a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, and injurious. That God may forget, it is good for
us to remember and confess our sins; And the Church receives instruction by the
fall of the Saints, as well as by their good examples, and comfort to them that
have fallen.

2. That they tell of their obscure beginnings. Moses tells how he kept sheep
at the mount Sinai. Amos how he had been an Herdsman, and a gatherer of
Sycomore fruits. Matthew how he had sat at the Receipt of Custom.

No matter how poor and mean a man was at his beginning, if afterward he be
endued with the grace of God, and set upon work to do for his Majesty. Let none
despise a faithful servant of God for former obscurities, or defaults that were
made; Who has despised the day of small things? Zech. 4.10.




Jonah sins, so he confesses his sin, and in writing makes it known to all the
world; Confess sin as Jonah.
and so will all godly men do; there is great difference between such and
others.

willing people, Psalm. 110.3.
who are content to shame themselves so that God may be glorified.

2. The wicked rest in generals, All are sinners; None but the godly descend to
particulars, my Unbelief, my Passion, my Earthliness, my Pride, or other evil;
Jonah and Tarsus, David and Bathsheba, Paul and Persecutor.

3. The wicked want the right Qualifications of Christian Cor. 7.11. He is a
new creature, and makes as much amends as he can.

Those therefore offend greatly, who can be content to err as Jonah and other
holy men, but not to confess and shame themselves as those did; that were a
shame indeed, and goes quite against the hair; it is as death to come to
confession. We are fallen into an Age wherein it is no shame to do evil, but it
is a foul shame to confess and give glory to God; or to say to an offended
Brother, I repent, forgive and let us be at peace, Luke 17.4. Were they ashamed
when they had done wickedly? no, they were not ashamed, neither could they be
ashamed: And this is a plain sign, that men love their sins more then they love
God, their Souls, or their Brethren.

3. Note how a man by leaving his calling does flee Jonah. Leave thy calling,
thou leavest God.
1. The Calling of the Ministry; a Minister that turns to odd employments, or
sits idle at home, or pleases himself merely with his speculations, sins in
so doing; he should go on with Gods plough as he had begun, or else he
offends, Luke 9.62.
and is in danger. 2. Another Calling whatever it be, evey one ought to abide
in the Calling wherein he is Called, 1 Cor. 7.24. Therein abide with God, a
plain proof of the Doctrine; and, Ye serve not men, but the Lord Christ; and,
whatever ye do, do it as to the Lord.

The reason is, because God has appointed every one his particular station and
calling; man is born to labor as the sparks fly upward; In the sweat of thy
brows shall thou eat bread all the days of thy life; no man may walk
disorderly, but work and eat his own bread. God is the God of order, and not of
confusion; and likes not that the order which he has set, should be violated
and confounded.

It is in our way that the Angels are charged to keep us, Psalm. 91.11. So only
he is bound by promise to be with us, and do us good; being otherwise an
Omnipresent God, able and willing, even out of our way to give a common
blessing.

flee from God; that is, to live without some honest Calling or other, wherein
he may spend his time and pains, and advance the common good, or of the Society
wherein he lives. Be warned by Jonah and his stepping aside from the Message he
had to deliver. Know, it is a bootless thing, to think of flying from the Lord;
He fills Heaven and Earth, and can meet thee at every turn, and fetch thee back
to thy task; and if thou belong to him, will do it: It was well for Jonah, that
by a storm and Whale he was brought back to Nineve. Know also, that none but
the special presence of God will prove comfortable to the last; I mean,
spiritual here, and glorious hereafter. He is present with those in Hell, but
in Justice only, and with all his terrors.

Jonah was set upon an evil jorney, and see, he finds a Ship going to Tarsus;
when the heart is set upon wickedness, opportunity will scarce be long wanting.

Take heed, and commit thy way unto the Lord;

5. Of Jonah we may learn a Lesson of Equity; to pay Pay dues.
It is one of the crying sins, by fraud to keep back the hi^e of Laborers who
have reaped down your Fields, Jam. 5.4. So of any sort of workmen, it will be
a great sin in due season not to let them have their pay, or servants their
wages; Their heart is to it, and they need it, and so it should not be detained.

Pay therefore, and do it quickly; Prove. 3.27, 28, 29. Withhold not good from
them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it; Say not
unto thy Neighbor, Go, and come again, and to morrow I will give, when thou
have it by thee; devise not evil against thy Neighbor, seeing he dwells
securely by thee.

Lastly, note in Jonah how willing some men are to part Willing to part with
money for evil.
to flee from the presence of the Lord, to have Christ betrayed to the Jews and
Highpriests, to have it reported abroad that his Disciples came by night and
stole him away. They that can find no money for a pious and charitable use, can
find money enough for gaming, or a Suit of Law. Oh the excuses that shall be
made, and the Allegations that shall be brought to save their Purses! hard
Times, ill Trading, great Taxes, many Children; no end of pleading to keep all
to themselves: But for Pride of Life. Bravery of Apparel, or House-Furniture,
Feeding of Lusts, or maintaining of Quarrels at Law, let the Pieces flee, spare
no cost, they will not be put down by any, they have vowed and will be as good
as their word.

Honor the Lord with thy substance, Prove. 3.9. He looks for his portion out of
all the Wealth he gives thee; namely, in those good uses, which in the word he
has assigned for thee to mind: And he would have us to be rich in good works,
as well as others; or rather in these, then in worldly wealth; And he calls him
a fool, who is rich to himself, and not to God. And there is a cutting phrase,
A man and his money may perish together, as Act. 8. And, the rust of the Silver
and Gold goes up before God, and cries for Vengeance. And, if so for not doing
of good, what will come of doing evil with thy Wealth? It has been seen many a
man could not have been so wicked, nor could be now, if he were not so wealthy;
Jonah could not have fled to Tarsus, if he had had no money to pay the Fare.

Ver. 4. But the Lord sent out a great Wind into the Sea, and there was a
mighty Tempest in the Sea, so that the Ship was like to be broken.
Opposition b^tween God and sinners.
But note these Adversative Particles; Jonah was sent to Nineve, but fled to
Tarsus; Jonah went by Sea to Tarsus, but the Lord sent a Wind and Tempest after
him, to tell him of his offending. There is much thwarting between God and a
sinner; God commands one thing, and the sinner does another; and therefore no
marvel if God proceed contrary to the welfare and comfort of the sinner; and
the sooner the better; Jonah was the dear Child and Minister of God; and in the
end must be saved, notwithstanding his great Imperfections; therefore presently
the Lord sent upon him a great Wind and Tempest, that he was like to be
drowned; and this great danger was the means of putting him into his way again,
that in Conclusion he might be saved; so still, 1 Cor. 11.31, 32. If we would
judge our selves, we should not be judged; but when we are judged, we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world.

As for them that amend not by their afflictions, they shall know it shall be
the worse for them; God will not in vain wear out his Rods upon them; John
5.14. Hos. 4.1.
The worse thing is coming toward them: The Controversy for sin continues, and
will surely burn to the nethermost hell.

More, if a sinner find none of these cross proceedings of God toward him, so
much the worse; Prove. 1.32.
even prosperity undoes such simple ones: Better a great deal that they had
been pursued with Winds and Tempests, and drowned in the bottom of the Sea.

The History of our Text is plain, and needs no Exposition.

Two Points may be observed.

1. How the Providence of God reaches unto all particulars that are done in
the world; Nothing more common Gods providence extends to all.
and mighty tempests thereby, and Ships to be broken: Yet all this is here
ascribed unto God, The Lord sent a great Wind, so in ver. 17. The Lord prepared
a great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Chap. 2.10. The Lord spoke to the fish,
and it Vomited out Jonah upon the dry Land, and Chap. 4.6 The Lord prepared a
gourd, and ver. 7. God prepared a worm to smite and wither the gourd.

So in the Plagues of Egypt, The Lord sent the Frogs, Flies, Lice, Locust^,
Thunder, Darkness, and all the rest. And generally, Amos 3.6. Shall there be
any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it?

And we saw heretofore in the Doctrine of Gods Providence. 1. How it
intermedles in the smallest matters, as the Feeding of Beasts and Ravens, Psalm
147.9. and the falling of Sparrows to the ground, or the hairs of our head,
Mat. 10.29, 30. yea and the color of the hair, Chap. 5.36. 2. How it orders
contingent things; that is, where in man's reason there is no connection between
the cause and the effect; yet ordered by God, and fall out infallibly as Lots,
Prove. 16.33. The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is
of the Lord: And the killing of a man by an Axe, no hatred, only the head
slippeth from the helve; it is said, That God delivers him into the hand of his
Neighbor, Exodus 21.13. The like of foretelling things, whereof there was no
sign among the Creatures.

Reproof.
or carry themselves as those that live under a Providence; but Rage, and
Chafe, and cry out of Fortune, ill Luck, cross Times, I know not what Planets
and mischiefs. Yet the Heathen ascribed the stirring of Winds and Seas to their
Idol-Gods, Aeolus and Neptune; and these Heathens in the Text looked up, every
one to his God, to be saved and delivered from this great danger; and Jonah who
is the Writer, says expressly, The Lord sent out a great wind into the Sea. And
those nowadays who read such Writings, might thereby be enured to better
Thoughts and Language concerning Winds, Tempests, and other sad Accidents.

O Lord, our Lord, how Excellent is thy Name in all the Earth!

When Christ had stilled that great storm upon the Lake, The men marvelled,
saying, What manner of man is this, that even the Winds and Sea obey him? And
it is likely, that the men in the Ship with Jonah came by this Miracle to some
knowledge of the God of Israel; So did Naaman the Syrian, 2 King. 5.15. Behold,
now I know that there is no God in all the Earth, but in Israel. However, we
that have the word to instruct us of God, and to Expound his Providence to us,
should be led by Winds, Seas, and other strange workings of our God, to a due
Admiration of him; that he is wonderful in his power, bidding them do this and
they do it; and in his wisdom so disposing ordinarily so innumerable, and so
rude things, and in his graciousness, doing all for his Elect, though sometime
in seeming Contrarieties as here to Jonah.

Next, diverse duties may be urged by this concurrence Lessons to be learned.


1. To be patient under cross Providence; when It is the Lord, let him do what
pleases him, 1 Samuel 3.18. The creatures could not come if he did not send
them: Shimei could not curse, if he did not bid him curse.

2. To wait with patience if he delay the help which Psalm. 40.1. I waited
patiently for the Lord, and he inclined unto me, and heard my cry; when his
appointed time is come which is the best time, we are sure to be relieved. The
Vision is yet for an appointed; wait and at last it will speak and satisfy.
Remember the saying, Hab. 2 3. Esa 28.16.
He that belives, must not make haste.

3. To pray for seasonable and moderate Weather; Zech. 10.1.
and all other things being at Gods disposal. Ask and ye shall have; Ask the
Lord rain in the time of the latter rain, so the Lord shall make bright clouds,
and give them showers of rain; to every one grass in the Field: But pray still
with resignation to his Will and Wisdom, because he knows best what is fit to
be done; and is able to alter the most settled Weather, that soon all may turn
to the quite contrary. Stars and their Influences must go by his direction; if
the Stars rule men, yet our God rules the Stars.

Psalm 107.24.
These men see the wonders of God in the deep; up to Heaven, down to Hell, and
sometimes are at their wits end; therefore should be remembered by us at Land,
while our selves are in safety. Though we cannot help them, there is one that
can, and him we must pray unto.

Psalm. 107.31. Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his
wonderful works to the Children of men!

Jonah, when Jonah is fled from the Lord: We may thank our selves for sundry
terrible storms, and unseasonable times that come upon us; our foolishness has
so armed the justice of God against us.

Satan can raise winds and tempests.
And take this for a Motive; The Devil and his Instruments can raise turbulent
Winds and Tempests to do us a displeasure. If they have leave from God, we see
in Jobs case what they are able to do: Not that he can create Winds and
Tempests; but ^f there be any in all the world, he can bring them together ^^
and direct them to such an House, or to such and such ^ersons. He is the Prince
of the air, Ephesians. 2.2.
and is perm^tted to do great mischiefs against sinners; yea, and against the
Saints of God, Luke 13.18. Satan had bound a Daughter of Abraham eighteen
years; Others were possessed of Devils, and suffered exceedingly; Others had
their swine Choked in the waters. Our Savior himself was hurried of the Devil
from place to place.

Books have been written De Praestigiis Daemonum. Wierus.
But besides these, there are real storms and mischiefs that are done by wicked
Spirits; whereof two Notes are given. 1. That they are raised on a sudden,
even in the fairest and quietest weather that is. 2. That on a sudden all is
hushed and gone; as if there had been no such commotion at all, with other
Discourses not much to our purpose.

Take heed and fear, not these wicked ones whose power is limited, though their
Malice be unlimited; but God who is the watchman of Israel, Psalm. 121. Psalm.
91.11. Luke 12.4.
and has these Lions in Chains that they can hurt none but as he pleases; I
say unto you fear him. Remember the keeping of us in our way; and, The way of
the Lord is strength to the upright, Proverbs 10.29.

So of the former point.

2. Note how one sinner brings a whole Company in danger; one Jonah, one Achan,
one Colloquintid, mar^d One sinner endangers many.
David numbered the people, and seventy thousand of them dyed of the Plague.

But how can this stand with the Justice and Mercy of God? Answ. How.


1. The Justice of God cannot lightly miss of Objects Israel had sins enough by
which God was offended, and might justly diminish them by the Pestilence; So
had these who Sailed with Jonah, though Jonah had not been among them. Divine
Justice might righteously for sin have laid them in the bottom of the Sea; Who
can say he is righteous, or suffers at any time without sin provoking Gods
anger?

2. The Mercy of God appears in Affliction, as well as v. c. that both Jonah
and his Companions escaped the danger of the Sea, and the Mariners came hereby
to the Knowledge of the true God. It is good for me to be afflicted, that I may
learn thy statutes; Others are in Occulto Coronati, as Tertullian said of some
Confessors who died in Prison; still in good hands, when they are most judged
according to the world.



Number. 16.46.
yet he hurts more another way: He provokes God to anger, and so the Plague
begins in one kind or other. Jonah was an honest man, yea a godly man; he
served the God of the Hebrews, and he paid his Fare when he entered into the
Ship; yet see what a burden he becomes, and how he endangers both the Vessel
and the Goods, and all the Passengers together with himself. In Religion it is
a mere Delusion, to think a bad man can be a good Citizen as to God; he is a
very Pest to Church and State.

Zealous Reformers turn away wrath.
to shame and punish sinners and lessen the number of them, that so wrath may
be turned away. It was high time to cast Jonah overboard, that so possibly
there might be some hope. Israel could not stand before the men of Ai, till
Achan was stoned; when a man is sick of a Pleurisy, there is no rest to be
expected till the corrupt blood be voided away; so here: And a wise Surgeon
must come sometimes with his Causticks, where remember the saying, Foolish pity
marres the City; An idle Governor hastens wrath.

4. If so, be not such a sinner as for thine own sake; so for others to whom
thou art related, and with whom thou art engaged in Society.

1. In Charity to others a man should be Religious, fear and serve God, pray,
keep Sabbaths, do all duty, not only in way of Piety and Charity; that so he
may not hurt, but help his Brethren. This Case of Jonah tells us, that a sinner
though he be but one, yet may wrong many; and other Scriptures tell how one
good man may profit many, and though he be a private man, yet he may be a
public good. Joseph was a Blessing to all Potiphars house, and to all the Land
of Egypt.

All this while we say nothing of Charity to a man's own Soul, which in an holy
way might be saved; or of pleasing God in the way of Holiness, which ought
chiefly to be minded; or of crediting our holy Profession, to which every
Christian ought to be an Ornament. The only comfort is to put all these
together, and carry our work cleaverly before us.

2. Let a Religious man take heed of stepping out of his way, which would
endanger both himself and others, as Jonah here; and David in numbering the
people. He that opens a sluice, may drown many others as well as himself.
Somewhat is the matter, that judgment begins at the House of God, and that the
Righteous shall scarce be saved; saved they shall be, but so as by Fire. And by
this account scarce any strictness can be esteemed too much, I mean in the holy
ways of God.

Ver. 5. Then the Mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god; and
cast forth the Wares that were in the Ship into the Sea, to lighten it of them:
But Jonah was gone down into the side of the Ship, and he lay, and was fast
asleep.
Here be two things. 1. The Prophet by diverse circumstances sets forth the
greatness of the danger whereinto they were brought. 2. He tells of his own
deep security in the mean time. True grace ever notes and confesses its own
Imperfections.

There needs little or no Exposition: But we have four points to be briefly
handled.

Stout sinners, how to be overawed.
Seafaring men who converse much in Dangers and Commotions in the Air, use to
be Fearless men, and altogether desperate in their way; yet at this time we see
how they are afraid, and fall to their Prayers; so still, some are desperate
enough and care for nothing; but in some great judgment of God their spirit
fails them, and they melt away into effeminate passions; so Belshazzar, Dan.
5.5. so Caligula at the hearing of Thunder, so in 2 King. 7.6. A noise in the
Air chased away an Army of the Syrians.

terrible above man; that is, (...). Arist.
beyond the Power and Wisdom of man to withstand them, especially in the
concurrence of those three things; Grievous Judgments, an Awakened Conscience,
and Sin set in order before the guilty Soul: These meeting together make foul
work sometimes with a very stout sinner. Art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance this day, 1 King. 17.18. Act. 24.25.
and to slay my Son? and while Paul discoursed of Temperance, Righteousness,
and Judgment to come, Judge Felix trembled.

True, some under much guilt, and in the midst of terrible Judgments fear
nothing; why? because Conscience is not yet awakened; A sleeping Lion troubles
not: But when this begins to wamble, then the Sea waxes turbulent and
dangerous, Esa. 57.20, 21. The wicked are like the troubled Sea, when it cannot
rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt; there is no peace (says my God) to
the wicked. Sometime the trouble enters in a Plague year, sometime in the loss
of a Dear Friend, sometime in the approach of Death, and sometime in other
amazing occasions. When ever God begins to reckon with a sinner, or any way
hides comfort from him on which he presumed; now begins the Tempest to be black
indeed. A wounded spirit who can bear?

Let none therefore trust to the hardness or bigness of his spirit, but learn
to fear in a right and holy manner. In vain to be hardened against God.
There is a false valor wherewith some set up their sails, and swell above all
reason against God, his word and works; It may be it lasts for a long time,
till Death, or in Death through self-delusion: But this is not the way to
prosper as to God, and for safety to the Soul; At farthest, Job 9.4. Jer. 20.3.
in the day of judgment he shall be Magor-Missabib, fear round about, astonished
and swallowed up of despair.

The only safe way is, to turn all Natural and worldly fear into Spiritual;
that is, to fear God whom by sin we offended; To take sin off the score by
getting into Jesus Christ; To follow the doggings of a guilty Conscience far
enough, namely to get washed in the Fountains of Israel. By temporal judgments
to take warning concerning eternal, and prevent that great mischief; Otherwise,
it is not a little tempest that will serve the turn, or Pestilence, or
Pleurisy, or the like; but in Hell there will be seven times more vengeance,
yea seventy times seven; All present Evils are nothing to this, when God shall
cast both Body and Soul into Hell; therefore say I, Fear him, Luke 12.4, 5.

And if it be the right fear of God, it will teach to depart from evil, as Job,
Joseph, and the Midwives of Egypt, Job 28.28. It will introduce a real
holiness, Psalm. 111.10. It is the beginning of wisd^m; And it will lead the man
along in an holy way toward Perfection, 2 Cor. 7.1. To perfect holiness in the
fear of God.

The worst will pray in great danger.
as these Heathenish Idolaters, they knew there is a God, and that he is to be
called upon, but let him alone till they be brought into this extremity of
danger. Notions of God, and Prayer, and Duty lie asleep in a natural man, till
roused by some extraordinary trouble and amazement, Hos. 5.15. In their
affliction they will seek me early. And here we see, that when they miss of the
true God, they will betake themselves to gods of their own making; Every one to
his god, they will have many gods rather then no god, when reduced into
straights.

Hos. 7.14. They have not cried unto me with their heart, when they howled upon
their beds; they assemble themselves for Corn and Wine, and they rebel against
me; so that, not God is sought for Gods sake, but merely to serve ones own
turn; which when it is done, God shall be let alone till they have more need of
him.

Not the right kind of prayer.
Yet this is usually esteemed Prayer, in death or deadly troubles call upon God,
and it is abundant Devotion, though neither before not afterward; live a
sinner, and die a sinner, yet with a few good words he is sure to go to heaven;
Though he learn not righteousness, nor the Laws and conditions of prayer, Esa.
26.10, 11.

There be numbers that make not one good prayer all their long life; Know not
what it is to ask according to the will of God, which they mind not; Ordinarily
quench and grieve the Spirit, and so cannot pray in the Spirit; Jude ^0.
Never take care to get into Christ, and so cannot pray in the Name of Christ;
Never mind the main matters of Prayer, as about Holiness, Temptation, doing
Duty holily and spiritually, living profitably in their places, advancing Gods
glory and the good of souls: All for a present shift, and to get out of a storm
as well as they can.

Object. What, would you not have us to call upon God in our trouble? is it not
commanded? Answ. 1. It is commanded, and so are many other conditions too Psalm.
50.14. Call upon me in the day of trouble; but it follows, ver. 16. Unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes? 2. There be many
places of Scripture that discard the prayers of the wicked, Prove. 15 8. John 9
31.
they are abomination to the Lord; God hears not sinners, Incense is
abomination. 3. There be many adjuncts of acceptable prayer; v. c. to use the
means of obtaining, to use no indirect means, to stand in a way of capacity for
receiving such and such favors, to use them well afterward, and the like;
which numbers little think of, and so their prayers are not accepted. 4. There
be many days of trouble beside these outward and worldly afflictions; and if
ye will pray ever when ye are in trouble, ye must pray every day, and several
times in the day: why? a godly man every day finds himself troubled with
Temptations, and is never out of danger of the great Tempest, nor of his own
corrupt heart. Paul besought the Lord thrice against the thorn of the flesh,
and approved himself on both sides by the armor of Rigteousness: No part of
our life is void of these dangers; therefore every part of our life must be
fenced with prayers. And one condition of prayer is, it must be constant, Ephesians.
6.18. Col. 4.2.
we must pray with all perseverance, we must continue instant in prayer, etc.

To the third point; There be cases wherein a man's Act. 27.19. They lightened
the ship, and with their own hands they cast out the tackling of it; When the
life comes into question, let it all go; or in times of war, a man fares the
worse because he has something to lose, Ezekiel. 7.19. They shall cast their
Silver into the streets, and their Gold shall be removed: Or in a great fit of
sickness, all the wealth is looked on with an heavy eye. And in death, what is
all the wealth of the world to a man? It is but the more vexation in parting.

Mat. 16.26.
what profit? what recompense? beside those cases of meeting a murderous Thief;
Take my Goods and save my Life. And mark how expressly the way of worldlings is
called folly, Psalm. 49.13. This their way is their folly, with Jer. 17.11. He
that gets riches and not by right, shall leave them in the midst of his
days, and at his end shall be a fool.

Crates, and Thales by buying up the Vineyards in the Country, when he foresaw
a Scarcity, by Philosophy, and made good advantage of it, showed how easily a
Philosopher might get wealth if he minded it. And if such mind it not, why
should Christians mind it so much?

What then, may some say, Answ. 1. There is need to make restitution of Goods
that have been ill-gotten, as did Zacheus. 2 There is need to be free for pious
and charitable uses according to ability, 1 Cor. 16.2. as God has prospered a
man. 3. There is need while we hold these temporals, to hold them with a
moderate mind and affection; not to mind Earthly things, but to have the
conversation in Heaven, Phil. 3.19, 20. not to set the affections on things
below, but things above, Col. 3.1, 2. and our rule is, not to Treasure in
Earth, but in Heaven; Mat. 6.20.
and when we have any riches, to refer them to the right ends they were given
for; as is said, Honor God with thy substance: Prove. 3.9
And still they should be used as encouragements in his service. Ver. 15.
4. There is need above all our getting to labor for the better and enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. to be rich in faith and good works, to get saving wisdom
which is better then Rubies and Diamonds; to have a stock of prayer going in
Heaven; without all question great is the gain of godliness, 1 Timothy 6.6.
though worldlings esteem it not.

Where note, these two Loves do much hinder and waste one another. If a man
earnestly, and as he ought, shall mind the spiritual wealth, it will in great
part take him off from his mudling in the world. Is he not in the prosecution
of better things? A Prince that seeks a Kingdom, will purchase no Cottage. On
the other side, he that eagerly pursues the world, shall either neglect
Religion altogether, or pursue it very indifferently; worldly-mindedness has
been the ma^ring of many an hopeful Professor. Demas embraced the world, 2 Timothy
4.10.
and left the Apostle.

To the fourth point; We are apt to be very secure even

1. Good men, as Jonah, In great danger apt to be secure.
who was very shortly to be cast into the Sea, and yet fast asleep in the side
of the Ship; and David who after his sin with Batsheba lay securely for awhile,
without renewing peace with God, till the Sword was threatened to come against
his house, and never go from it. Only with this difference, the security of a
godly man is neither total nor final: At the worst he has some motions of God
in his heart, and at last he runs to him with full speed, Cant. 5.2 I sleep,
but my heart waketh; And oil is ready in his Lamp, to go forth and meet the
Bridegroom.

2. Carnal and worldly men, These say, Peace and Safety, when sudden
destruction comes upon them unawares, 1 These. 5.3. And the man with gall of
bitterness says he shall have peace, when the smoke of Gods wrath is arising
against him, Deuteronomy. 29. So said they of the old world, till the flood came and
drowned them all; and the men of Sodom, till the fire fell from Heaven and
consumed them. Every natural man sleeps the sleep of death, and he never awakes
till he be dropping into Hell.

A fruit of sin.
and of falling into the everlasting torments of Hell, so it is ready to make
and keep him secure, and altogether insensible of his danger till he know not
what to do with himself. Esa 6.10.
He has a gross heart, eyes to see and not perceive, ears to hear and not
understand; and he has an impenitent heart, Romans 2.5.
whom all the goodness and patience of God cannot lead to repentance; so little
cause there is to be in love with sin as many are, or to refuse the
Exhortations of zealous Ministers.

The mercy of God.
and in due time awakenes us out of our deep and deadly sleep, by giving faith
and repentance. O the rich and invaluable grace of Conversion! how are we bound
unto God, that now we stand up from the dead, Ephesians. 5.14.
and live for ever! We were asleep sometimes; yea, dead in sins and trespasses;
but now Christ has given us the light of Life. It is only of his
discriminating grace, for which we must ever remember to be thankful.

3. Awake unto duty. Christian watchfulness is a duty Be sober, be vigilant,
watch, 1 Pet. 5.1.
for ye know not the hour when the Son of man comes; Mat. 25.13.
and says Christ, what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch, Mar. 13.37. For
Motives, consider how it is made a Note of wisdom, to watch till the Bridegroom
comes, as did the wise Virgins. How the wise as well as the foolish are apt to
slumber and sleep. How the Bridegroom comes in a time when he is least
expected; at midnight. Ver. 5.6.10.12.13.14.19.
How the wise Virgins enter with him into the glorious Bride-chamber. How
others are excluded, though they knock and call for admission. And how hereupon
our Savior infers the Exhortation, Watch therefore, together with another
Parable to the same purpose; There will be a day of reckoning with the Servants
about their Talents and Employments, therefore watch and do duty.

Ver. 6. So the Ship-Master came to him, and said unto him; What meanest thou,
O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that
we perish not.
In every Society of men there must be order. Here in Order in every Society.
there is an Admiral; in an Army, there is a General; in an House, Town, or
Nation, there is a Governor: So in the Church, there ought to be Order and
Government, or else all comes to Confusion. We see what mischief is befallen
since Government ceased, and should see more mischief, if Civil Government
ceased as well as Ecclesiastical. In both it is true, better a bad Government
then no Government. Tyranny is very bad, but Anarchy is far worse, and more
intolerable.

For our Ship-master, he comes to Jonah and reproves him for sleeping. It is
likely, that in this great distress of weather he bestir'd him to the
uttermost, to save the Vessel and all that were in it; sometimes under Deck,
sometimes above, sometimes among the Ropes and Cables, sometimes in the Keel or
sides of the Ship, to see what must be done to that purpose. And here, in the
side of the ship he finds Jonah fast asleep, and rouseth him up, What meanest
thou, O sleeper?

Look to the main chance.
to save the main chance; for the Body, for the present Life, for the onward
Estate; but especially for the Soul and Eternity: So for Church and
Commonwealth, do thy best to save a Barque ready to perish. If Prayers can do
any thing, if Tears, Sighs, Zeal for Reformation, Mourning for the
Abominations, let us not want thy helping-hand. We should not give all for
lost, till there be no Remedy, and we be now sinking. This Ship-Master by his
diligence saved his Vessel, and so may we.

What meanest thou, O sleeper? A secure sinner can have no good meaning with
him. Naturalists mean not well.
I suppose he has no such meaning as to damn himself and his Companions, or to
ruin the Church and State. It is not the thing which he does purposely intend,
yet he may be well asked the question, What meanest thou? It is not yet in his
thoughts and purposes to do any good, either in public or private. In present
he minds nothing but a sinful and sensual enjoyment.

what meanest thou, O sleeper?

Arise, call upon thy God. It is our duty to rouse up secure Rouse up secure
sinners.
that they may escape the great danger wherein they are; as the danger of
losing a Vessel, Life and Goods, so and much more the losing of a precious and
Immortal soul; Exhort, Admonish, Reprove, pull them out of the Fire, save them
with Fear, and use Compassion. As we would call upon a sleeping Master, when
his house is all on Fire; so, and much more should we in soul-dangers.
Consider, our Brethren whom we help now, may help us another time in our
drowsiness and sleepiness. And, none of us but is apt to be sleepy; we are of a
corrupt Nature, and have taken a dram of hellish Opium, so all possible help
will be little enough. Consider, Charity requires helpfulness, and this is a
work of the truest Charity. And why should not eternal danger quicken us, as
well as common danger?

Call upon thy God. Carnal people can wish for a part in All would share in
good prayers.
the Mariners before had cried every one unto his god; Possibly there might be
an hundred Passengers in the ship, and an hundred several gods that were called
upon; yet see how the ship master bespeaks Jonah for his Prayers too, that if
it be possible, they may escape this danger. And possibly, they that never made
good Prayers in all their Lives, yet will beg the Prayers of the godly in their
distress, and God send them a part in all good prayers!

Take heed, Christians, and blunder not along in these distributively, Every
one that calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved; and personallly, when
thou prayest, enter into thy Closet.

The reason is, every one of us has a soul to save, and every one has
personal sins, personal corruptions, personal temptations, wants, afflictions;
and every one that is truly godly, Zech. 12.10.
has the Spirit of grace and supplications poured upon him. And why should
not thou make account to pray for others, as well as that others should pray
for thee? is it not one duty of the Communion of Saints? as Feeding and
Clothing are duties for the good for the Body. No member in the natural Body
but must help his Fellows, and there is the same reason for the Members of the
Mystical Body of Jesus Christ. And, why should any put so great a matter upon
the Adventure, whether others remember him in their prayers or no? every one is
his own nearest Neighbor; And every one shall give account of himself unto
God, Romans 14.12.

Be much in prayer.
and improve his interest at the Throne of Grace, for his own good and the good
of others. There is something in this advice to the ship-master, Call upon thy
God; and in the other, Every one in the Ship cried unto his god, Mic. 4.5. all
people will walk, every one in the Name of his god, and we will walk in the
Name of the Lord our God for ever and ever. Why not we devout in a true way, as
they in a false?

thy God. Jehovah is thy God in a Covenant of grace, bound to thee both by
Promise and Oath; and daily solicited by Jesus Christ to show thee favor
according to thy Prayers and Necessities. Now then make bold with him; every
one may make bold with his own; but Jehovah is thy God, therefore go boldly to
him, and doubt not of acceptance. It is a Miserly trick to have Gold and Silver
in store, and want Provisions of Food and Physic; and it is worse, to have a
loving Lord God to pray unto, and be a stranger to him.

Name of thy God; it is lovely, and invites thee to come to him. As it is a
glorious and terrible Name, Deuteronomy. 28.58. Exodus 34.6.
The Lord thy God, so it is an amiable Name, and may win sinners to seek to
him; The Lord, the Lord merciful and gracious. The Kings of Israel were
accounted merciful Kings, and much more is this King of Israel.

If so be that God will think upon us; Note. 6. Thoughts of love to the godly.
The Lord has thoughts of Love and Peace toward his people, Jer. 29.11. I know
the thoughts of peace that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of
peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end: Namely, out of the counsel
of peace which he had within himself before the foundation of the world, Zech.
6.13. The counsel of peace shall be between them both; that is, Christ's Kingly
and Priestly Office.

Or, it may be a phrase referring to the sense of man. We are apt in great
distress to think that God has forgotten us, and will he be no more gracious;
Psalm. 77.8, 9.
has he shut up his loving kindness in everlasting displeasure? and, if he did
but think upon us, in what a sad case we are, he would certainly arise and do
for us; So these here, Oh that the God of Heaven would think of us for good!
and elsewhere, Ar se O Lord, O Lord, stir up thy strength, hide not thy face,
leave us not, come and save us.

Otherwise, in absolute consideration, the Lord thinks on all men and Affairs
in the world. His providence reaches to all, and to every particular: He sent
this Tempest upon the Mariners, and saw in what distress they were. But their
Prayer is, they would have mercy, that they might well get out of their
distress. He saw the affliction of Israel in Egypt, and meant to bring them out
of it. A means to settle faith.


Now this is good and comfortable for each doubting Christian, who conceits
sometimes in his weakness to be rejected and forsaken of God, but indeed is
not, the Lord at worst thinking of a deliverance or supply, and what is the
best way and time to effect it. A Nurse sees her Ch^ld to be too venturous, and
seems to leave it to it self, but her eye is full upon it; even so does our
God. And though Nurses and Mothers should be unnatural, yet will not the Lord,
Esa. 49.14, 15, 16. Good words to settle the peace of a troubled spirit, but
may also serve our turn in great distresses of the world; Tempests at Sea,
Commotions at Land, troubles in the private Estate, all threatening our Ruin,
and then we begin to question the Love and Providence of God; Judge 6.13.
If the Lord be with us, why is it thus? But check this unbelief; we need not
put it upon this supposition, if so be that God will think upon us; he will
most certainly think, and do, and delever in due time; and in the mean time
support our hearts with comforts of his Spirit; he is a God of ^udgment, Esa.
30.18.
and knows our frame, and when a deliverance will be most seasonable.

Note 7. God able to save in great distress.
Thank upon us, that we perish not. God is able in great distress to keep us
from perishing, and will, if he see it good for us. These heathen Mariners saw,
that if they could get God on their side, they should not perish, though it
were a terrible, boisterons, threatening tempest: And we see in the end, that
they did not perish. So in these days, amidst all our civil Tempests, our Land
has not yet perished; and, so long as God thinks thoughts of peace toward us,
it shall not perish, though winds and storms beat upon our Bark never so
violently.

Psalm. 46, 1, 2, 3. God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble; Therefore will we not fear, though the Earth be removed, and though
the Mountains be carried into the midst of the Sea: Though the waves thereof
roar and be troubled, though the Mountains shake with the swelling thereof. Say
as those that were going into the fiery furnace, Dan. 3.17. Psalm. 42.11.
Our God is able to deliver us. Rate away all unbelief as David did, Why art
thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou so disquieted within me? still trust
in God, who is thy help, and the light of of thy countenance. Mark what our
Savior says, Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also
in me, John 14.1.

Note 8. Carnal ones are all for temporals.
That we perish not. All the care of carnal people is to be delivered from
temporal evils; from Shipwreck, from Pestilence, from Losses and Crosses of
the world; so Pharaoh, Deliver me from this death only; ye may apply it to
every particular Plague which comes and threatens us. Let people escape, and
presently they are as bad as ever; All the care is, to get out of Gods hand for
the present. Israel in want would fain have Bread or Water, and be delivered
from the fiery flying Serpents, or get through the red Sea; but when their turn
was served, presently they were as bad as ever.

Oh no (may some say) we mind our Souls too,

Answ. 1. No doubt but ye have good wishes to that purpose; wicked Balaam would
fain die the death of the Righteous; when people are so far enlightened with
Principles of Religion as our people are, no wonder if they desire to be saved.
Heaven is better then Hell; better be happy when they die, then go to Hell to
be tormented in those flames. 2. That they are but wishes, appears by their
negligence. For temporal deliverance they will take any pains, be at any cost,
use all the Friends they can make, and never be quiet till they be delivered.
We see what these Mariners did, not to perish; they prayed, they cast their
Goods into the Sea, they rowed hard to bring the ship to Land; and so do our
people nowadays for Temporals: But, what diligence do they give to make their
Calling and Election sure? where is the man that works out his Salvation with
fear and trembling? how few are they that set themselves into a serious course
of Religiousness? There needs the most pains to be taken, but very few are
willing take those pains.

Christians, take most pains not to perish everlastingly; Mind spirituals
God has done much to that purpose, and Christ has suffered much. Ye see it
in John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlrsting life. And
ye have the means to believe; namely, the Preaching of the word, Romans 10.17.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; And ye have had rousing
summons in these times to awaken security; winds and storms of State arose very
high, and some Earthquake continue to this very day; A marvel we are not
perished already, and by our sins and security we deserved to perish eternally:
Only there is some respite granted, and matters may be so handled as to escape
the great shipwreck of souls.

Oh for care and wisdom, that our precious souls may not be cast away!

This is the only safety that is worth having, commonly called Salvation; And
those that mind this as they ought, shall never be accounted carnal, but
spiritual, holy, wise unto Salvation. They are of an heavenly extract, and gone
beyond all Naturalists, Mariners, and all Nominal Christians whatsoever. Jonah
saved his soul, and all his Fellow-passengers saved their Lives, and them only
so far as is revealed.

Ver. 7. And they said every one to his Fellow, Come and let us cast lots, that
we may know for whose cause this evil is come upon us; So they cast lots, and
the lot fell upon Jonah.


Parts.
Hereof are two parts. 1. The Mariners enquire of the cause of this great
Tempest; let us cast lots, and they did cast lots. 2. The success of their
Consultation, the lot fell upon Jonah.

Search out the cause of afflictions.
For the former, we learn of the Mariners, in every great affliction to search
and find out the cause, that so we may be humbled and reformed, and the evil
may cease; we may be sure that sin is the cause, and so should fall foul upon
that. And if there be a special token of Gods displeasure, we should pray with
Job, Show me for what thou contendest with me. The Tribes in their quarrel with
filthy Benjamin never thrived, till they fasted and mourned before the Lord,
nor shall we in like cases.

For the lots which these Mariners used to find the cause of their distress
and danger, thus Augustine says; What a lot is.
A lot is such a thing as in the doubts of men does show the will of God: Or, A
lot is an Ordinance of God, whereby we put that unto God which men could not
decide. It is commonly by Divines referred to the third Commandment, as part
of Gods Name which must not be taken in vain. We know a man by his Name, and by
a lot we come to know the mind and will of God in a matter which we cannot know
by our selves, nor by others.

Of a lot I deliver these particulars, Particulars.
that the nature of the Ordinance may be the more manifest.

1. The matter of casting lots must be a weighty and grave which is well worth
the finding, and well becomes the Majesty of the great God to be employed
about, not in every triflle, as in drawing of Cuts; So here, a great tempest
was upon the Mariners, and thereby great danger; a great offense had caused it;
they knew not what the offense was; they desired deliverance; life and all was
in question, and now they go to casting of lots; not as knowing it to be an
Ordinance of God, but only led by the dim Light of Nature, which suggsted this
might be a way to find out the truth, as in the event it proved. So in an Oath,
which is the end of Controversies.

2. This weighty matter must be such as none but God Jonah; and Jonah must tell
what he had done. So in other instances of Scripture, v. c. about Achan and
Jonathan.

3. We read how all the determination of lots is from Prove. 26.33. The lot is
cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord. God is not
wanting to his own Ordinance; but when he is sought by his people, he will be
found of them; this also appears by the same instances, and other of the like
nature.

Prove. 18.18. The lot causes contentions to cease, and parts between the
mighty; as if it be in deliberation, which of these Nobles shall be sent
Ambassador to such a Prince? which of these Warriors shall be put upon such a
sk^rmish, to lead on the men? sundry would have the honor to do the service;
therefore now comes the lot and quiets all parties.



1. Sorts Divisionis; when Houses, or Lands, or other Goods are to be divided
between man and man, about which otherwise contention would arise; so Joshua by
lot divided the Land of Canaan among the Tribes of Israel; so Merchants
sometimes divide their parcels of Wares, and Neighbors divide their Acres of
Ground; Lot-Acres, as Solomon said, The lot causes contentions to cease.

2. Sorts Consultationis; when we advise together what is fit to be done, but
in Conclusion cannot agree because things stand in the Equality of Reason: Here
it is referred to God by lot, and so all parties are contented. So the Church
of Jerusalem by lot chose Matthias to be an Apostle, Act. 1.26. So these
Mariners by lot would know who brought this great Tempest upon them in their
Voyage. Though there might be superstition in their, doing it, yet the thing
for substance was good and lawful.

3. Sorts Divinationis; when wicked men inquire into fortunate and unfortunate
days for a journey that is to be taken, or a business that is to be done; if
they draw a white lot it will be lucky; if black, unlucky; Est. 3.7.
so Haman cast lots for the destruction of the Jews, and, how cross the lucky
days fell out to him, appears by the Feast of Purim; even the blackest days
that ever Haman and his Accomplices met withal.

A sinful abuse of Gods Ordinance; Abuse.
as it is also to turn lots into sports, or to foretell things for gain, as do
the Gypsies; and those that ascribe the issue of lots to Fortune, The Goddess
of Fools; Te facimas fortuna deam, coeloque locamus.
whereas indeed the whole disposition of it is of the Lord; and these three
cases evidently show the truth of the things so ordered; Jonathan, Achan, and
Jonah.

Application of this Doctrine take thus.

1. Note and admire the Providence of God, who orders

2. If it be so, then in casting lots the parties interessed

3. If it be so, be thankful for any good that is received by lot; looking up
to the hand of God who has cast it upon thee, and not upon another. The whole
disposing of it was of the Lord; therefore let him have all the glory. It was
not Luck and Fortune, but God must be acknowledged; Especially when the Lord
himself is the lot and portion of thy soul, as David said, Thou art the lot of
mine inheritance, remember much and often to bless the Lord, as he did, Psalm.
16.5, 6, 7, 8.

Jonah, patient and contented. Say, it is the Lord that has thus disposed of
the business; 1 Samuel 3.18.
it is the Lord, let him do what seems him good; should I desire any thing
which the Lord sees not good for me? or, when he has declared his mind, should
I wriggle, or murmr, or carry my self otherwise then becomes the Child of
God? I will not do it.

Come and let us cast Lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is come
upon us. Note. In great affl^ctions we look at great sins.
It is the Nature of man to think there is some great sin where they see a great
judgment of God. Who did sin, this man or his Parents, that he was born blind?
And those that suffered those great Evils, were accounted greater sinners then
all the Galileans, or all that were in Jerusalem, Luke 13.1, 2, 4. Where Christ
assures us of the contrary, I tell you nay, ^ohn 9.2.
but except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, v. 5. And if these
Mariners had been asked, whether each of them had not deserved this horrible
Tempest to die by it, they would have shrunk at it, and not have confessed.
And, every one would save one; therefore they put off the danger to others:
Otherwise there needed no lots to be cast, but every one confess his
guiltiness, be humbled, reformed, and give satisfaction to his god who was
offended.

what is that to thee? Thy rule is, not to judge, that thou be not judged; and,
judge nothing before the time; and, Mat. 7.1. 1 Cor. 4 5. Romans 14.4.
who art thou that judge another man's servant? and, The greater sinner the
man is, the more he needs thy pity and prayers, not thy censure and disdain.

2. In a common danger let every one recount his own Except ye repent, Luke
13.3.
ye shall all perish; whether ye escape the danger, or no; ye may escape
temporally, and perish eternally. These Mariners did all escape the temporal
evil, better then Jonah: but without hearty and fruitful repentance they
escaped not the eternal vengeance of their sins. Jonah upon his humiliation and
amendment might escape better then they all.

3. This Example tells us, that the sin of a godly man Jonah, to hazard the
casting away of many that were in the ship. What? the Child of God do so and
so? what, one that has received so much light, so many Teachings of the
Spirit, so many checks of Conscience, so many opportunities of glorifying God,
and of giving good example to others? he to flee from God, and cast off duty?
Take heed, ye that fear God, and keep even reckonings with him. Be humbled for
what is past, and watch better hereafter.

And the Lot fell upon Jonah. Wicked men sometimes in this life are discovered,
Jonah; sometimes by the Birds of heaven, Eccles* 10.20.
as the Cranes revealed the murderers of the Poet ^^icus; sometimes by the
Confession and horror of the guilty persons; sometimes by blood ^ssuing afresh
out of a slain body; sometimes a Friend has blabbed forth a bloody business
before he was aware; sometime a Confederate has turned Enemy, and told all the
truth. Diverse ways the Lord has to bring to light the hidden things of
darkness; at farthest, in the day of judgment Eccles. 12.14. 1 Cor. 4.5.

Jonah, to Joppa, and to the ship; yea, the very first motion of his heart in
departing from the living God: All is naked to Jonah, in the message that was
to be delivered at Nineve. And he was glorified in the eyes of these Mariners
by this discovery of Jonah, ver. 10. Jonah made the Lord known to them, and
ver. 14* they said, Thou Lord have done as it pleased thee; and ver. 16. The
men feared the Lord exceedingly; and possibly, some of them were truly
Converted.



Ans. It were very dangerous (without Gods command) in this case to put any to
the casting of lots for his life, except it be certain that diverse well deserve
to die; but the Prince of his grace intends to spare some, by decimating the
Army, or others that have made a Mutiny.

eyes are in every place, Prove. 15 3.
beholding the evil and the good. Yea, the Hypocrisy of idle Professors is
fully discerned by him; and in this life sometimes they are uncased for
Hypocrites as they ever were, falling into some scandalous course, or from the
main truths of the Gospel. But at the last day all secrets will be fully
discovered and punished; Though they dig deep into Hell to hide their counsels
and escape the hand of man, yet the hand of God they shall not escape.

Be wise then, and never go about to cover sin in an undue Away to hide sin.
Esa 30.1.
1. Woe to them that cover with a covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may
add sin to sin; namely, by denying what they have done, by excusing,
defending, or putting it off to others; or by close conveyance; so did Adam in
the Thicket, and with his Fig Leaves: A detestable sin, as Job 31.33. If I
covered my transgression as Adam, by hiding my iniquity in my bosom. 2.
Blessed is the man whose sin is covered, Psalm. 32.1.
namely by justification, under the mantle of Christ's Righteousness, when a
soul takes warning and flees unto him for shelter, and so the evil passes
away; So the godly is said to hide himself from the Plague he fore-sees, namely
under the wings of the Almighty, not from God, but with God; Psalm. 91.1. and
Prove. 22.3.

Ver. 8.9, 10. Then said they unto him, Tell us we pray thee, for whose cause
this evil is upon us; what is thine Occupation? and whence come thou? what is
thy Country? and of what people art thou?

And he said unto them, I am an Hebrew, and I fear the Lord the God of Heaven,
which has made the Sea and the dry Land.

Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why have thou done
this? for the men knew that he had fled from the presence of the Lord, because
he had told them.


Parts.
In these three Verses we have three things to be considered and improved. 1.
The humanity of these Mariners toward guilty Jonah, ver. 8.2. The Confession of
Jonah upon the examination of the Mariners, ver. 9.3. The Mariners reverent
respect of God, and chiding of Jonah, ver. 10.

Jonah was taken tardy by a token from God himself, yet they do not rashly fall
foul upon him, to rail at him, or throw him overboard as some nowadays would
do; but first they question him in many things, that they may find out the
truth to the bottom, and so proceed judiciously in what is to be done, as the
God of Heaven shall will, and declare to be his mind.

Mot. Be gentle to all, even offenders.
Hearken, Christians, and learn humanity of these Heathens. Be not rash and
headlong toward any whom ye conceive to be offenders; Though ye think ye have
reason on your side, yet take heed and question the matter a little farther.
Conjectures and probabilities there be, and it is very likely there is a fault
made; but conjectures are uncertain, and sometimes deceive; and though a thing
be likely to be true, yet it may prove otherwise: If it be true, it is well
done to enquire and find out the whole truth: If false, we avoid he sin and
danger of rash judgment; namely, to be judged of the Lord. However,
deliberation will do well.

Which serves greatly to reprove those that are rash in punishing, Reproof to
the rash, or harsh.
or in passing their Verdict upon persons accused; either through an hasty
spirit, which Solomon says exalts folly, or through intemperate zeal which
exceeds the bounds of discretion. Zealous we ought to be, and it is good to be
always zealously affected; but first be sure it be in a good matter, Gal. 4.18.
And offenders ought to be reproved or punished according to the merit of their
cause; but first be sure both of the fact, and of the manner of doing, and in
what degree of wickedness the offense stands. Jonah shall be punished
sufficiently, but first he shall be questioned in many things; what, who,
whence, what occupation, and of what Country? And we all know how passion is
apt to exceed the measure of Reason and Equity.

Fi^ upon rash and harsh Christians, Especially toward strangers.
who in their suspicions, or upon odd informations, show no moderation to
accused Brethren, but break out suddenly both to condemn and execute all in a
fury; and not only Brethren, but Strangers who should be more pitied. In some
there is an enmity to Forraigners, and if they offend them never so little,
they use them Rigorously, Unjustly, Tyrannically. Yet these Mariners used Jonah
courteously and gently though unknown to every of them, and now designed by God
as guilty unto punishment. A shame to violent and unreasonable Christians, who
profess acquaintance with God.

Mostly where the life is questioned.
But the greatest sin is to be rash and violent in the matter of Life and Death;
Judges, Jurymen, Witnesses, Officers of every sort, should be very tender in
this case, and not rush headlong toward a sentence. Consider the matter,
consult and give sentence, Judge. 19.30. consider of it, take advice, and speak
your mind; when God was going to destroy Sodom, he told Abraham he would first
go down, and see whether they had done altogether according to the cry of their
sins. Now be followers of God as dear Children, says the Apostle; as
otherwise, so in this.

For the second, I observe a twofold confession that Jonah makes. G^n. 18.11.
Ephesians 5.1.
1. Of his Faith, ver. 9. I am an Hebrew, and fear the Lord the God of heaven.
2. Of his Fault, ver 10. He told them how he had fled from the presence of the
Lord.

Jonah makes, it is like that of Paul in the like danger of shipwreck, Act.
27.23. This night there stood by me the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I
serve. The Note to be observed is this: It is the property of a good heart, to
own God however.

Note. Own God however things go.
1. In the midst of all his guiltiness, though he has sinned greatly, as here
Jonah, he had not carried himself as one that feared the God of Heaven; but the
contray, and now he might well be ashamed to say he feared the Go^ of heaven.
But a believing heart knows no sin breaks off the relation between him and his
God; Though it make a great gash, yet the wound is not mortal, and all the
breach will shortly be made up again, as between God and Jonah. Renewing of
Repentance makes all well again.

2. In the visible tokens of Gods displeasure for sin; which at this time lay
heavy upon Jonah, and upon Heman, Psalm. 88.1. A Believer has got his Lesson by
heart, Hab. 3.2.
that in wrath the Lord remembers mercy, and that his anger is but as the
waters of Noah, soon passing away, Esa. 54.7, 8, 9. And he concludes, here is a
dark hour, but the Sun will break forth again; Sorrow may endure for a night,
but joy comes in the morning; why? because of the Covenant and Promises made
to Believers, and will hold at the lowest.

3. In grievous Scourges which the hand of God has laid upon him; as here,
this destroying Tempest upon Jonah; whose stiff and disobedient spirit was
hereby broken, that now he began to relent, and yield to his great Master. And
this is the fruit of Gods fatherly chastisement to the faithful, that they
learn his statutes; and when they are corrected, they are instructed out of his
Law, Psalm. 94.12. This is all the fruit, Esa. 27.9. Jonah now will go and do
his Errand. But this is wanting in the wicked, still stubborn.

4. Among a Company of wicked men, it may be enemies of God and Religion. Jonah
here is amidst a number of Infidels, and see what a profession he makes of his
faith; the true God is avowed, and they led to the acknowledgement of him, and
afterward they offer sacrifice to him. 1 Pet. 3.15. 1 Timothy 6.12, 13.
This also is our duty, Give a reason of the hope that is in thee, witness a
good Confession. And this among other Articles, I believe in the God of Heaven
that made the Sea and dry Land.

Remember, Christians, fear him, as Jonah here professes, and remember what
are the effects of fearing God; and that fear is put for the whole worship of
God. Mal. 3.16. they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another, which may
well be, because no part of his worship may be void of an holy fear and
reverence toward the God of Heaven; serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2.11. Heb.
12 28.
and rejoice with trembling, serve him acceptably with reverence and godly
fear, pray with an awful regard of his great Majesty, tremble at his word;
Phil. 2.12.
And all must work out their salvation with fear and trembling.

Now from Jonahs Confession of his fault before the Mariners, we learn, It must
be the humility and modesty of Christians, Note. Confess faults one to another.
to confess their faults one to another; so is the Commandment, Jam. 5.16.
confess you faults one to another, and pray one for another. Not only confess
to God as in the serious exercises of Repentance, but to men whom it concerns
to know what evil we have done; as here, it behoved Jonah to declare what fault
he had committed, which caused this Tempest; God has pointed him out for a
Malefactor, and he must acknowledge wherein.

So this Confession must be twofold.

1. Public if the offense has been public and scandalous; when the whole
Congregation has been offended, the whole Congregation must receive
satifaction; namely, by an open testifying of shame and sorrow: So the
incestuous Corinthian had punishment inflicted on him by many, 2 Cor. 2.6. so
should our scandalous members be served that by the shame they may be brought
to repentance, and their souls saved; that the Venom of the bad example may be
stopped, and go no farther; that the mouths of Idolaters may be stopped, and they
not occasioned to blaspheme; that others may fear, and not do the like; that
the Plaster may be as wide as the wound; that the love of the Congregation may
be gained to the offender; and their prayers, and a Brotherly converse together.

2. Private if the offense has been private. It shall suffice in such a case
that the party offending acknowledge the fault he has made, and the party
offended ought to accept of his confession, Luke 17.3, 4. Take heed to your
selves; if thy Brother trespass against thee, rebuke him; if he repent, forgive
him. And if he trespass against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a
day come again to thee, saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. So in the
fifth Petition of the Lords Prayer, Forgive us as we forgive; and our Saviors
Exposition, Mat. 6.14, 15. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly
Father will also forgive you; but if ye forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.

Object. It were a shame to come to Confession. Answ. 1. It is a Duty. 2. There
is a Prophecy, that Converts in the New Testament should be ashamed and
confounded for their sins, Ezekiel. 16.61. and 20.43. 3. This prophecy is
fulfilled in Romans 6.21. What fruit had ye in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? 4. There ought to be that humility and modesty in true Christians, as
to take their shame and blame home to them; saying, Dan. 9.7, 8.
To us belongs nothing but shame and confusion of face. 5. We have an example
of Gods own directing of Delinquents to Confession before the party offended,
Job 42.7, 8, ^. Jobs friends had gone awry in rebuking him; and therefore they
must go and humble themselves before him, gain his prayers for them, and so be
fully reconciled to God and him.

Hear, Christians, Jonah to confess your faults one to another; Though it be
against the Hair, and against thy Credit, yet be contented. Go in Gods way,
and that is the course to set all at rights, as here Jonah; though for a while
cast into the Sea, yet after a while he recovered well enough. Numbers learn by
the failings of godly men, to offend and go astray as they did; but learn thou
to confess, and mourn, and amend as they did; there they are set for an
example, and not in the other: Non cadendi exemplum, etc.
That we should not lust after evil things, as they lusted, 1 Cor. 10.6. And
that we should take off the offense that has been given to Children, Servants,
Neighbors, Ministers.

It was a rare example of the worthy Knight, Sir A. Cope.
in prayers with the Family to confess his own personal sins and failings; A
matter of shame, but withal may work much upon the hearers to be like-minded,
and follow the good example, every one in his own private Devotions.

For the third; Then were they exceedingly afraid. They were afraid before
because of the Tempest, and of their true God distinctly; they know him the
cause of this tempest and danger; they see an offender discovered in an
extraordinary manner; they see he is a just God, and bears not with sin in his
own servant, and will see more of him shortly, when he sends a calm at Jonahs
casting forth, and they escape through his mercy.

Note. Stand in awe of Gods judgments.
The more discoveries we have of God in his Mercy and Justice, the more we
should be stricken with fear toward him; fear to offend him, care to please
him, be the better for his tempests and terrible works among us; and by his
cords of Love and Bounty be held the closer to him in Duty, Job 37 23, 24
Touching the Almighty, we cannot find him out; he is excellent in power, and in
judgment, and in plenty of justice; he will not afflict. Men do therefore fear
him, be respects not any that are wise of heart; see also Jer. 5.21, 22, 23,
24.

Dan 5.6.
and ye read in Daniel, How at the sight of the hand writing Belshazzars
countenance was changed, and his thoughts troublod him; so that the joints of
his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. And all the
Sons of Pride the Lord knows to abase. c. 4. 37.


Consider, as stout as thou art, upon a great fit of sickness or some other
stinging cross, thou may be brought to fear exceedingly in spite of thy
heart, as Pashur in Captivity, Jer. 20 4. He became a terror to himself and to
all his Friends; even he that was so lusty, to put Jeremy into the stocks. An
hard-hearted sinner thou art, but have not the strength of Steel, or of Stones.
Beware, when Conscience once awakes, and sin is set in order before thee, Psalm.
50.21.
all thy hardiness will prove but as Stubble when it is put to the Fire.

And think of the terrors of the day of Judgment, a day of darkness, and of
gloominess, when men shall be at their wits ends, even the greatest of sinners,
Rev. 6.16. Better to take thy part of fear here, where it may be improved to
Conversion. Hereafter there will be nothing but torment in thy fear, as 1 John
4.18. fear has torment. Then comes the great mischief which never was feared,
but now shall be felt for ever and ever.

Lastly, for these men's chiding of Jonah, Why have thou done this? and before
ver. 6. What meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, and call upon thy God. Most justly
do they fall under the lashes of men's tongues, who slip their necks from the
obedience they owe to God. Not only Ministers fall foul upon them, but rude and
barbarous men, Jeerers, Mockers, Slanderers, injurious men, wrongly perhaps;
who had Shimei to Curse?

Ver. 11.12. Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the Sea
may be calm unto us? (for the Sea wrought and was Tempestuous.) And he said
unto them, Take me up and cast me forth into the Sea; so shall the Sea be calm
unto you; for I know, that for my sake this great Tempest is upon you.
Parts.
Two things here meet us. 1. How the Mariners advise with Jonah, what is to be
done in this extremity, ver. 11.2. What course Jonah advises them to take for
avoiding the danger, ver. 12. He gives faithful counsel, though it be against
himself as we also ought to do.

Consult with God, and the godly^
inquiring his mind by casting of lots; and now they consult with Jonah, whom
they perceive to be the servant of God, though at this time a bad servant;
wonderful pity and charity, and discretion in both! Oh for care and Conscience
in Christians, to take up this example of honest heathens!

What made these men so gentle.
But whence this their gentleness in treating with Jonah? Answ.

1. No question but it was of Gods over-awing and Jonah. He that restrained
Esau and Laban from speaking or doing evil to Jacob, did restrain these men
also. Moral Virtues are of Gods implanting in the heart Prudence, Meekness,
Quietness of spirit, judiciousness in proceedings; and, even fierce spirits use
to be tamed by storms and other hideous work of God.

2. They take notice of the God of the Hebrews, who Heb. 11 7.
Noah moved with fear, prepared an Ark for saving himself and his Family.

3. As they were moved with Reverence toward the Genesis 20 7. Abimelech must
restore Abraham his Wife; why? For he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee.
Respect is to be had to every one according to his Place and Degree, most to
Gods Messengers.

Note hence, Note. Treat gen^ly with off^nders
with what Gentleness and Humanity we ought to treat with our Christian
Brethren, even when they acknowledge themselves offenders; as these with Jonah.
Titus 3.2. speak evil of no man, no brawlers, but gen la, showing all meekness
unto all men. 2 Timothy 2.24. The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men; not only to the good and kind, but to the froward and
faulty.

1. That in the quietness of our spirits we may the better He that is of an
^asty spirit exalts folly; and, He is as a City without Walls an^ Gates.

2. That a due mean may be observed in the punishment

3. The Delinquents have precious and Immortal souls which should be tenderly
regarded, instructed, wrought to Repentance, fitted to receive the intended
punishment, and so saved; not die before they be fit to die if it be possible.

Oh the price of souls, not to be redeemed but by the blood of Jesus Christ!

Put on gentleness.
Now be persuaded to this Humanity and Gentleness. A man may learn good of any
whoever they be; of the Crane and Swallow, to know and improve the seasons of
grace; of the Mariners, not to be rash or harsh to offenders; yea, of the Devil
himself, who bestirs him the more because he has but a short time, and he
trembles at the judgment to come, which sundry of ours do not.

Ob. Sol.
Say some, This man deserves exemplary punishment; it is a plain case, there is
no doubt to be made. To whom I answer, Jonahs case was plain enough, not only
by the tokens of Gods wrath, but by his own confession; he told them how he had
fled from the presence of the Lord, and he had deserved the worst punishment
that could be inflicted; to be thrown overboard, or to have his brains beat out
with a Batt. But it will be far more fair and clear, proceeding, when himself
shall presently pronounce the sentence, Take me, and cast me forth into the Sea.

Ob. Sol.
Others may say, These are Rake-hells, not awhit like unto the good man Jonah;
he was a Prophet, and worthy of all respect; but these etc! To whom I say,

1. Jonah at this time might seem to these Infidels to be as very a Rake-hell
as any went upon the ground. What knew they whether he were a Prophet, or no?
or what was a Prophet to them? A grievous sinner he was, even by his own
confession.

2. The worse any Delinquent is, the more tenderly he ought to be handled,
pitied, instructed, besought with tears, prayed for, that he may not
desperately cast away his soul; but when he loses a natural Life, he may find
an Eternal.

A great sin therefore it is, and heavily to be admired, that Christians are
grown so harsh toward faulty persons, Jonah? or does God so deal by thee? or if
Christ had been no more meek and patient, where had thy salvation layen?
Remember the Apostles obtestation, 2 Co^. 10 1. I beseech you by the meekn^ss
and gentleness of Christ; and remember Christ's invitation to be like-minded,
Mat. 11.29. learn of me, for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find
rest to your souls.

Only one caution; we must not so be meek and gentle, Caution. So be gentle, as
to use due severity.
as altogether to neglect the punishing of offending Brethren Magistrates bear
not the Sword in vain; and Householders have Authority given them over naughty
Children and Servants, not only to chide and reprove them, but inflict corporal
punishment upon them. It was El es sin and downfall, that he restrained not
his vile Sons; and the overthrow of Laish, that there was no Officer to make
them ashamed.

On the other side, the execution of judgment has appeased the wrath of God,
as we see in the example of Phineas; and of casting Jonah into the Sea, with
those examples, Jos. 7.12. 2 Samuel 21.1.
Isr^el could not stand before the men of Ai till Achan was stoned to death;
The Famine ceased not till the bloody house of Saul was punished for slaying
the Gibeonites: And because Ahab let go a man worthy to die, his life must go
for his life. Execute judgment in the gate, and I will let you dwell in this
place; we fare the better because some justice is done upon offenders, and
should fare better, if more were done

For the latter, Ver. 12. Take me, and cast me forth in to the H^w Jonah would
be cast into the Sea.


Understand this aright; Jonah speaks not this as a desperate man who regards
not his life, or cares not what becomes of him; much less, as one that chooses
death rather then life, or one that would countenance the horr^ble sin of self
murder, expressly forbidden in the Commandment, Thou shall not kill; but thus,
seeing Gods Huy and Cry after him by a storm, and designing o^ him to
punishment by lot, he begins now to appear in his own c^lours; a godly and a
worthy man, and one that truly repents of his great sin in flying to Tarsus*
and reliquishing his Lords work; with two graces that now put themselves forth.

1. He is an Example of Charity to our Neighbor. Rather then those in the ship
should perish for his sake, he is contented to lose his own life as he had
deserved. He was but one, and they many; and why should many be cast away for
one man's fault? Only he will not desperately leap into the Sea, but let them
cast him forth, and he will be contented. Call me forth, namely as a sacrifice
to God which shall redeem the lives of you all.

2. He is an example of patience in undergoing the punishment which his sin had
deserved. He sees that he is found out by God, and that all the Company takes
notice of him as a grand Delinquent, who deserves the severest punishment:
Therefore quietly and patiently he submits to the execution of the Sentence,
which the Lord by lot has past on him. Learn Christians, in all tokens of Gods
displeasure patiently to abide his will; so did David, Psalm. 3^.9. I was dumb,
and not opened my mouth, because thou did it; and Christ when his hour was
come, was as a sheep before the shearer, not opening his mouth.

Jonah; Cast me forth. Methinks he now begins to be an evident Type and Figure
of Christ, Christ willingly dyed for his.
as Christ himself gives the Parallel, Mat. 12.39, 40. As Jonah Voluntary
delivered himself to death for saving the Mariners and Passengers from
drowning; so Christ of his own accord gave himself to the death for saving the
souls of sinners whose persons and causes he had undertaken. I lay down my life
for the sheep; no man takes it away, but I lay it down of my self, Joh. 10.18.

Accordingly he went forth when they came to apprehend him, c. 18.4, 5, 6, 7.
and he forbad Peter in his defense to strike with the sword, ver. 11. More, we
read of an earnest desire to eat the last Passover with his Disciples, Luke
22.15. More, how am I straightned till this my suffering be accompl^shed? c.
12. 50. More, he delighted to suffer the good pleasure of his Father, Psalm.
40.8. with Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.

Only he put not himself unto Death, Yet by the hand of men.
but yielded himself into the hands of others to do it; as here, Jonah into the
hand of the Mariners. And this was done by the determinate counsel of his
Father, Act. 2.23. and 4, 27, 28. So the Passion of Christ was every way a
free will offering, and thereby acceptable to God, and accepted in behalf of
others whom he meant to redeem; for their sake he sanctified himself, that is,
freely set himself apart to work out their Redemption; as Sampson to deliver
Israel from the Philistines.

Which yields instruction unto thankfulness, Magnify Christ in life and death.
that we magnify Jesus Christ who thus freely offered himself to the death,
that we might live by him. We are the Passengers who have escaped the shipwreck
of our souls; and Christ is the only One, by whom we have escaped: Meditate and
strive to be really thankful. And take these Motives:

1. A greater then Jonah is here; a glorious Person who is God as well as man;
of an infinite worth must such a Person needs be; and by the infinite worth of
the Person there is an infinite worth in his sufferings. Christ is as much
above Jonah in value and Dignity, as Jonah was above the meanest Skipper. Such
a Savior and Redeemer we needed, and found; and could find in none but Christ:
Not all the Angels of Heaven, nor men on Earth, that could have saved us from
this shipwreck.

2. Consider thoroughly the greatness of the storm, which thy sin had raised
against thee; not a Tempest of wind and sea, but of the infinite and
everlasting wrath of the great God; Who knows the power of his wrath? None but
Christ, Psalm 90.11.
and the damned, and souls in desertion. Now the greater our danger is, and
rightly apprehended, the more we hold our selves bound to thankfulness; but
rightly apprehended it cannot be without deep and earnest Meditation. Think a
little in what a woeful case these Mariners were during the Tempest; then
compare the infinite waath of the great God, which burns to the nethermost
hell; and all by reason of those pleasant and profitable sins thou so much
doatest upon.

3. Consider the sweet and comfortable calm which Jesus Christ has brought by
his suffering; even all the benefits of justification by faith, Romans 5.1, 2, 3,
4, 5 sin pardoned, person accepted, soul saved, prayer heard, affliction
sanctified, and every mercy received in mercy. And now Satan is disappointed
and disabled in the main: Possibly he may raise great tempests against the
Saints; that is, persecutions smaller or greater, as against Job and his
Children, and Cattle; but in the point of salvation he can do us no hurt at
all; yea, all shall fall out for good in the end, chap. 8.28.

Christians, stir up your selves to a due thankfulnes^; we may hear shortly how
these Mariners upon deliverance offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and made
vows, ver. 16. If they for a temporal, what should we for a spiritual and
eternal deliverance? As the mercy is greater, so must the thankfulness be.

1. We should offer our sacrifice to the Lord, even spiritual sacrifice,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. I mean praise and thanksgiving,
alms, works of Righteousness in our common Calling; prayer, all holy services
of Religion, and suffering if we be called thereunto, as Phil. 2.17. If I be
offered upon the sac^^^^^e and service of your faith, I joy, and rejoice with
you all.

2. We should make vows, and pay them to the Lord our God, Psalm. 76.11. and do
it without any farther delay, Eccles. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it; Especially the vows that were made in affliction, Psalm.
66.13, 14. I will pay thee my vows, which my lips have uttered, and my mouth
had spoken when I was in trouble. Most of all, those that were made in
affliction of spirit, in conversion, or afterward in going to a Sacrament,
Psalm. 116.13, 14. I will pay my vows unto the Lord, now, in the presence of all
his people.

Ver. 13.14. Nevertheless, the men rowed hard to bring it to the Land, but they
could not; for the Sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them.

Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we
beseech thee, Let us not persh for this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent
blood; for thou, Lord, have done as it pleased thee.


Though Jonah had desired them to cast him into the sea, and all should be
well; yet see how loving and tenderhearted the men are to spare his life.
Nevertheless, the men rowed hard, they dug the sea, says the Hebrew; they
took as hard pains as he that goes to ditching and delving: A wonderful matter
in Seamen, and those heathens; but he that gave Joseph favor in the fight of
Potiphar, and the Keeper of the prison, gav^ Jonah favor in the sight of these
Mariners, that though he said, Cast me forth into the sea, yet they rowed hard
to bring the ship to dry land.

Note. Be tender of man's life.
The example teaches us, as far as we can possibly to spare the life of our
Neighbor; life is a precious thing, better then all a man has beside; Skin
for skin, and all that a man has, he will give for his life; it ought
therefore to be preserved and cherished to the uttermost; and if we can do any
thing thereunto, we are bound in conscience to do it. He that said, Thou shall
not kill, meant moreover we should prolong life to the best of our skill and
power.

The Son of man came not to destroy, but to save life, and so should we. The
Lord by his general providence preserves both man and beast, and so should we.
And, a good man is merciful to the life of his beast, much more to his Brother.

What is it then? thy Brother, or Friend, or Child is in danger of his life. 1.
Learn of these Mariners to take pains for saving him; run, ride, send, call in
help, use friends, do all that may be done to keep him alive. By using means we
have seen those to live, whom we thought very likely to die.

2. If there be a plot against the life of any, discover and prevent the
mischief, as did Paul's Sisters Son, Act. 23. much more, if it be levelled
against the lives of many, in bringing a Nation to confusion. As by prayer, so
by prudence, we must put our selves into the breach, and prevent the overthrow.

3. Supply food and raiment, and all that is requisite to keep Nature alive,
not only in Children and near Friends, but in them that are farther off. For
this see Jam. 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Object. He is naught.

Answ. Preserve his humanity, that he may have time to wax better.

4. If he be sick, let him have physic and other cherishing as the occasion
requires. The Syrophenicean woman went to Christ in behalf of her distressed
Daughter, and the Nobleman in behalf of his sick Son, John 4.46.

5. Worldly sorrow causes death; therefore grieve no man over much; vex not,
make him not weary of his life; do rather what may be comfortable, and cheer
his spirits against his affliction; especially with spiritual consolations and
instructions; say, Faint not, nor be weary when thou art corrected, Heb. 12.

Neither should a man grieve himself for losses or crosses, whereby his life
and health may be endangered, as is too usual; and it is a sin: It thrusts God
out of his place, denies his Sovereignty, Impeaches his Providence, prescribes
against his Wisdom, and arrogates to ones self the way and praise of finding
contentment for his life; therefore most justly, in stead of contentment, a man
hastens his own death, and goes the sooner to give account to God for his
impatience and foolishness. Take heed, and be moderate.

They rowed hard to bring the ship to Land, Note. All pains nothing without God.
but they could not.

All man's Industry without Gods leave and blessing avails nothing. Except the
Lord build the house, and keep the City, all that men do will be in vain, Psalm.
127.1, 2. And there be many grounds of it, as Gods displeasure, Man's sin, and
insensibleness of his sin, and of Gods displeasure for crossing him; then Gods
insisting still on his own way, bringing about his own ends, blasting of our
endeavors and hopes, disabling of the creatures, disgracing of man's wisdom,
and intention to bring the sinner to his own bent; as is said, Man lives not by
bread only, Deuteronomy. 8.3.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God.

Tradesmen see how they decay.
Many a man does his true endeavor, and takes faithful pains in his Calling,
and yet can make nothing of it when all is done; rows hard, and yet cannot
bring his Vessel to land; is ready to break, and gives over his Calling. What
is the matter? the Lord has sent a storm upon him, and it cannot be got to
cease; the Sea works still and is tempestuous against him; do what he can he
does no good upon it. Why? the Lord is offended with his earthliness, and
neglect of a religious course: Civil he is, and observes a form of Religion,
and toils enough, and too much; but, he is fugitive from God, therefore is in
great straights.

Here the man might take notice of Gods displeasure against him, and seek to
remove it. Such cross providence is esteemed a judgment, Hab. 2.33. Behold, is
it not of the Lord of hosts, that the people shall labor in the very fire, and
the people shall weary themselves for very vanity? so in Hag. 1.5, 6. Consider
your ways; ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye cloth you, but there is
none warm; and he that earneth wages, earneth wages to put it into a bag with
holes. So nowadays, men make Cloth and cannot sell it; would work, but cannot
provide Wool to set them on work; or, the inferior Cloth-workers must be paid,
but the Master scarce knows how to get bread.

Great straights! one would think, that in this leisure-time men would addict
themselves more to Religion, which in an hurry of businesses used to be too
much neglected. But I doubt much, whether it be so done, or no: I doubt much of
earthly hearts, which as yet are alienated from the life of God; thence this
working sea which continues tempestuous against you.

Oh no, that is not the cause;

Answ. 1. Some of them live upon the quick stock, Mat. 5 ^5
2. For the prosperity of worldings, some of them very wicked, it may be mere
Atheists, there is little comfort in it: It is only of the general providence
of God, whose Sun shines, and Rain falls upon good and bad; And without
repentance there is coming forth against them a tempest which shall lay them in
the bottom of the sea of his fiery indignation. 3. It were good for Tradesmen
in these tempests to think of Gods intention toward them; namely, of
industrious, civil, and well-natured men to make them Religious men, which all
this while they have not been to purpose. See, ye have time enough, only find
hearts, seek God, be religious in earnest, and then the tempest may cease,
there may be a great calm, Clothing may be as quick as ever it was.

Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, we beseech thee, we beseech thee.

Mark how these mariners profit in Religion by little and little. At first they
cried every one to his God, to be delivered in that great distress; but now
they leave their Idol gods, and cry to Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews whom
Jonah had preached to them; they heard his word, and they saw his terrible
works which made them afraid; and now they call on him alone for mercy and
deliverance, and afterward we shall hear more of their piety, ver. 16.

This is the progress of Religion in true Converts, the whole lump be leavened;
or like Corn sown in the field, still growing on; first the blade, then the
ear, after that the full corn in the ear, Mark 4.28. Though their beginning be
but small, yet their latter end increases exceedingly. 2 Pet. 3.18. 1 These.
4.1.
So we are commanded, Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and, As ye have received how ye ought to walk and please God, so
increase more and more.

Phil. 1 6. Col. 2.19. Phil. 1.19.
The reason is, He that begun a good work in them, will finish it to the day of
Christ; it is a Divine conception, the seed of God abides in them; and we read
of increasing with the increase of God and of Christ the Head, whereby all the
body so increases; and of the supply of the spirit, carrying on the work with
power.

Ye may conceive these degrees.

1. The Convert lives in none of his old sins, though pleasant and profitable.
He is cleansed from all his idols, and all his filthiness. These Mariners left
their gods which their Fathers worshipped, and called upon the God of the
Hebrews; so Naaman, Thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt-offering
nor sacrifice unto other gods, but unto the Lord, 2. King. 5.17.

2. A true Convert improves and grows both by the word and works of God; as
these by the preaching of Jonah, and by the dangerous tempest that lay upon
them. Grace turns all into the nourishment of it self; Ordinances, Providence,
Mercies, Afflictions, yea sins too; to be more humble, and stand better upon
the guard, and turn unto God that smites them.

3. A true Convert presently falls upon a course of prayer, so to get more
strength, wisdom, and hold of the love of God; so did Paul presently upon his
conversion, Act. 9.11. behold, he prays. These mariners pray to Jehovah, that
the blood of Jonah may not be laid to their charge; and that with earnestness,
We beseech thee, we beseech thee.

4. A true Convert studies the point of thankfulness for the great mercy of God
in saving his soul; as these, for saving their lives, ver. 16. they offered a
sacrifice unto the lord; and we must come before God with our spiritual
sacrifices, thinking what may be done for his honor; What shall I render to the
Lord for all his benefits toward me? and stirring up all that is within us, not
to forget any of his benefits. Temporal mercies bind not firmly, but spiritual
do.

5 A true Convert binds himself to God by honest and faithful purposes, even
after a mercy received; as these, when the calm had taken them off from their
danger, ver. 16. they made vows. A carnal Christian is full of good words
during his sickness or other danger, but the true Christian is for
^after-times; Esa. 42.
hears for the time to come, prays, partakes of a Sacrament, all to become
better, and to live afterward more carefully and profitably.

Hear, ye that begin to mind Religion,

Let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood.

Even rude and barbarous people have abhorred murder as a grievous sin; as
these Infidels, Note. Murder a heinous sin in the eye of heathens.
and those Barbarians in Act. 28.4, 6. And some for expiation of their murders
have in the guiltiness of their consciences, put themselves voluntarily into
banishment or other sorrows, as it were so many pennances.

The more shame to this cruel and bloody age wherein we live, which sets
nothing by the life of a man; yea of many men; it may be many hundreds and
thousands of men slain in battle; possibly in mere malice or corrupt affection,
possibly for Pay only, so much a week to kill men. No matter whether it be
innocent blood or no, no deprecation of the wrath of God, We beseech thee, we
beseech thee. No making account that they may perish for those men's lives; As
if the Law were not made for murderers; or, as if murderers should ever
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Timothy 1.9. Rev. 21.8.
contrary to the express words of Scripture.

Thou shall not kill; Remember the argument used, in the Image of God created
he man; Remember the threat, He that takes the sword, shall perish by the
sword; Remember the expiation of blood in the time of the Law, and the Cities
of refuge, and how no price might be taken to save the life of a murderer,
Numb, 35.31. And those heathens confess they need Gods mercy for casting Jonah
into the sea, though a guilty person, both by his own confession, and by the
judgment of God who discovered him by lot.

But how then do the Mariners talk of innocent blood?

Answ. It was innocent as to them, or for any quarrel they had to him; but in
respect of God he was not innocent. Jonah had confessed his guiltiness, and
desired them to cast him into the sea; whence that clause in the Verse, For
thou O Lord have done as it pleases thee.

Note. God alone or ders the death of evil doers.
None but the will of God can justify the putting of any to death; He is the
Sovereign Lord of life and death, and provoked by the sins of his people, so as
sometimes he calls for their blood to make some part of satisfaction; And this
he does by the Magistrates, into whose hand he has committed the sword of
justice, and he must not bear the sword in vain; and, He that sheds man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed.

In vain therefore do some talk, Solomon pronounces them equally abominable to
God, who acquit the wicked and condemn the righteous. We know the example of
Saul, who lost his Kingdom because he spared the King of the Amalekites; and of
Ahab, whose life must go for Benhadads life, because he let go a man worthy to
die: Wholesome severity is as necessary as mercy and kindness; that offenders be
punished according to the nature of their wickedness.

Ver. 15. So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the Sea, and the Sea
ceased from her raging.


We have here. Parts.
1. the execution of Gods sentence against Jonah, he was cast into the sea. 2.
the consequent of it, the sea ceased from raging. A plain demonstration of the
case, That the Lord in wrath remembers mercy; and yet strange withal, wrath to
his servant, mercy to the heathen In some case the wicked may fare better then
the godly; innocent heathens fare better then faulty Jonah

For the former of these, though the mariners were Jonah into the sea, yet now
that they see ^he will of God expressly revealed for it, they do it though sore
against their wills.

M^morandum, for many reasons they were unwilling to cast Jonah into the sea:
He had not wronged them in the least, he had paid the Fare, and committed
himself to their Custody; and trust ought not to be deceived; he had professed
his faith in the true God; and such ougbt not to be violated: he had confessed
his fault, and was sorry for it; and what would they have more? he submitted to
the punishment which was to be inflicted, though to the loss of his life. He
prophesied, that upon his punishment all should do well, the tempest should
cease, and so it did.

Yet fain would they save him if they could possibly: Sulcarunt, they made
furrows in the Sea, and rowed hard to bring the ship to dry land.

But now when they consider on the other side, that God has plainly designed
him to drowning in the Sea (thou O Lord, have done as it pleased thee) they
give over their former deliberation, and propension to mercy, and do what the
Lord leads them to do: teaching this,

Note. Do Gods will though against reason.
When we are sure of the will of God for a matter, we must lay aside all
self-thoughts and motions, and set to do what God will have us to do. So
Abraham went to offer up his son Isaac: so Christ offered himself. Not my will,
but thy will be done: so the Martyrs left all, and endured those torments in
the cause of God: joyfully suffered the spoiling of their goods: accepted not
deliverance. Father and all must be forsaken, or we are not fit for Christ. An
offender must be forgiven, though it go quite against the hair. Difficult
duties must be done: and costly: and dangerous.

Jonahs history. And whereas we think our selves very merciful and pitiful in
some cases, Gods mercy is the truest mercy when all is done, as that which
comprehends the soul as well as the body, and the public good as well as a
private interest; not only Jonah, but Nineve, and all Jsrael beside.

Fearfully then do those offend, who in all their Jonahs Mariners, but proceed,
saying, Thou O Lord, have done as it pleased thee. And he is noted for a fool,
who is wise in his own eyes. And there be express commandments to the
contrary, Prove. 3.5, 6, 7.
Be not wise in thine own eyes, lean not to thine own understanding: and
examples of resigning up our wills to the will of God: and our prayer sounds to
that purpose, thy will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven.

Take then the word of exhortation, in those matters Cyprian, In holy matters
there is no room for deliberation Let God be true, and every man a liar. Let
God be obeyed, and every mere man neglected. God ought to be obeyed rather then
you: and do you judge your selves, whether this be not fitting. Such a one is a
friend, and such a one is a friend: but God is a greater, and a better friend.
Jonah was a very good man: but when he fell into the lurch with God, and God
appointed him to punishment, out he must go into the Sea, even with his own
approbation. So of a kind neighbor, a good Child, a profitable Servant:
inflict a fitting punishment.

Only thus. 1. Be sure it be the will of God, Caution.
that he suffer; as these, Thou O Lord, have done as it pleased A man must
execute no judgment, but the judgment of the Lord. The judgment is not yours,
but Gods. Solomon sat on the throne of the Lord. The powers that be, are
ordained of God: and such bear not the sword in vain.

2. Inflict the punishment, because it is the will of God that he suffer, not
to wreak thy own displeasure, or passion of any kind, but, the Lord has
designed him to punishment; and tell him so, that he may see where his offense
lies, and with whom chiefly he has to do; not man but God; the most likely way
to bring him to remorse for his offen^e, and making of peace with God, and
amendment of life for the future: the chief matters which Christians should
aim at in all their discipline.

Search out the will of God.
Lastly, let this stir up all of us to study what is the good and acceptable
will of God concerning us: and that both for the matter to be done, and for the
manner of proceeding. Read, meditate, search the Scriptures, compare one place
with another, any thing to be directed aright, what God would have us to do.
And there is a rule, to enquire of the law at the Priests mouth, Mal. 2.7. for
he is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts: and to have the book of the law still
by us for counsel, Deuteronomy. 17.18. and Josh. 8. David, though he had good
counselors, yet consulted the word, Psalm. 119.24. Thy testimonies are my
delight, and my counselors. He had also the Prophets of the Lord about him to
take advice withal; Gad and Natha^. And the Jews must ever have their Levites
to tell them Gods mind in matters: thou shall not forsake the Levite all the
days of thy l^fe.

It is utterly a fault in Christians, that generally they go on their own head,
and advise not with the word or Ministers for managing an Office* for following
a calling, for ordering a family, for arbitrating of differences between man
and man, or for other particulars: Whence so many unchristian proceedings
animosities, contentions, unjustice and cruelty: or if they hit upon the right,
it is not in obedience to God, and so it is not thank worthy; it may be they
endure the lash of vile tongues, and can have little comfort because they
minded not God in the good they did. It was but habnab, and verily I say unto
you, they have their reward: but David in such contempt can comfort himself
with this, It was before the Lord that I did this and this, 2 Samuel 6.21.
and became vile in thine eyes.

For the latter: upon the casting of Jonah into the Sea, The Sea ceased her
raging: upon the due execution of judgment the wrath of God is pacified. Achan
was stoned, Israel prevailed against the Canaanites as before. We noted this
before: and may note farther concerning afflictions, that they are the Lords
messengers, which when they have done their Errand, shall be called home again.
When the raging Sea had devoured Jonah, presently it ceased from raging.

Note farther how great and present the power of God is in ruling the waters of
the Sea. Note. Gods power to he adored.
Immediately when God has satisfaction, the Sea cease from her raging. As he
set it on raging, so he restraines it from raging any more. So he drowned the
whole world with a Sea of waters: and divided the red Sea, and the River
Jordan. See Psalm. 107.25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30 It might be applied to Eighty
Eight: and was applied to Theodosius in his battle with Infidels, where the
wind and Sea fought for him.

Consider, Mat. 8.27. The Sea is a rude and unwildy body, and yet finds ears
to hear when the Lord has a voice to utter. So had the ^eavers which Christ
rebuked, and other diseases: with other passages of providence. We read of
great matters attributed to the voice of God, Psalm. 29. And those phrases,
Command deliverance for Jacob: Speak the word only, and my Servant shall be
whole: Man that lives not by bread only, but by every word of God.

they feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice unto the Lord, and
made vows. Take heed, and confess a Providence: live by it, submitt to it, do
as one that acknowledges a Providence, and as one that would have it to thee a
sweet and gracious Providence.

Pharaoh will adventure into the midst of the Sea to overtake and destroy
Israel. An implacable Generation of men there are, who will never cease from
sinning till they be in Hell.

But let us a little re-mind our Type.

Note. Christ dying, Gods wrath ceased.
As when Jonah was cast into the Sea, the Sea ceased from raging, so when Christ
endured the cursed death of the Cross, the wrath of God toward the Elect came
to an end; as was said from Heaven, This is my well beloved Son, in whom my
Soul rests. He was made a curse for us, that we might receive the blessing of
Abraham through faith, Gal. 3.13, 14.

This comes from the concurrence of these three Esa. 53.6.
the Lord laid on him the iniquity of us as on the Scapegoat. 3. It was the
agreement of the Father and Son from all eternity, that if the second Person in
Trinity would take flesh and dye for sinners, all the wrath should cease, and
there should be a full and final friendship contracted. So by this Covenant
the wrath of God ceased toward sinners, for whom Christ dyed.

Comfort to believers, against whom Sin had stirred up an Ocean of wrath and
misery, Comfort.
to their Eternal condemnation; infinitely more, and worse danger then ever
Jonah and the Mariners were brought into. Christ has dyed: therefore all the
storm is over, and they may be sure it is over, and take comfort in the
assurance. The Mariners were glad when the Sea ceased from her raging: and so
may they be in the appeasing of Gods wrath. The same debt must not be
discharged both by the surety, end by the principal debtor. Whence it is said,
God is just to forgive us our sins: not merciful only, but just. 1 John 1.9.


Hear, and get a weak faith strengthened. Peruse those grounds of reason in the
reason of the point. Peruse the Covenant of grace and the tenor of it, Believe
and thou shall be saved. Peruse the promises, how free they are as well as
universal, sure and precious: Esa. 55.1. and Rev. 21.6. And how these great
mercies are sealed up in the Sacrament of the Supper: a crucified Savior is
here exhibited, and all for us: therefore conclude, we shall escape. He needed
not to have suffered as for himself: for, what had the righteous man done? no,
To us he was given, and for us he was born.

A good feast is appointed for cherishing the Guests that come to it: and so is
this. Thou come with a weak faith, and in much doubting: yet come, and it
shall be strengthened. Other feasts are not sure to yield a man nourishment:
but this is. If thou beleevest, thou eatest; and if thou eatest, thou shall
live, even for ever, Joh. 6.54. Only come preparedly: Examine, mourn, renew
repentance and covenant, hunger and thirst after righteousness: Blessed are
all such, Mat. 5.6.

When the Jews was to eat his Pascall Lamb, he must prepare him sower Herbs to
eat it withal, intimating to us that Godly sorrow, which Communicants must
bring along with them. And he that comes mournfully, is allowed to go away
joyfully. He that sowes in tears, shall reap in joy. Blessed are they that
mourn: for they shall be comforted. And mark: such are not only permitted, but
commanded to rejoice, Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice,
Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 32.11. rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, be glad and shout for
joy all ye that are upright in heart.

Where still remember the main ground of your joy: the storm of Gods wrath is
over, ever since Christ dyed for his Chosen: by his stripes they are healed:
therefore bid defiance to all hellish Enemies, as Romans 8.34.

Ver. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the Lord, and made vows.


This is the Mariners thankfulness for the great mercy of deliverance: and it
has three Clauses. Parts.
1. For inward worship, they feared the Lord exceedingly: 2. For outward
worship, They offered a sacrifice unto the Lord. These for the present. 3. For
the future they made vows,] bound themselves to the service of the true God.

For the first of these: twice before it was said, that verse. 5. and 10. once
for the storm that was so dangerous to them; another time for that they heard
Jonah tell of the God of the Hebrews to be his master, and that he had declined
his service: And now again they fear exceedingly when the storm is over, Jonah
being cast into the Sea: A sign their fear of God was a work of grace in them:
why? they fear the Lord and his goodness, as Hos. 3.5.

One would have thought it should have been said, That they rejoiced
exceedingly, namely to see the Sea quiet, the danger past, and themselves set
in safety: natural men use to be frolic in such escapes, and pour out their
hearts unto pleasures: it is a matter of ordinary observation: But,

Grace teaches a man not to rest in the works of God which are joyous and
comfortable, to fear him, that is, by a part for the whole, to perform all
worship to him, of Faith, Love, Joy, Desire, Zeal, other gracious affections,
and actions that are suitable. Psalm. 111.10.
So the fear of God is said to be the beginning of wisdom; that is, an
Introduction to all religious affection and behavior: Timor initialis, as the
schools say; neither altogether ingenuous and Child-like as in settled
Christians, nor altogether slavish as in natural men, who are only terrified
with their sins and Gods judgments; Felix for example; but of a mixture of
these, as uses to be in time of conversion; (...), Cl. Alex.
a fear joined with an holy reverence toward the great God, and it continues
ever with a Christian once converted, to bring the work of grace to perfection,
2 Cor. 7.1. perfecting hol^ness in the fear of God.

Such fear (in all likelihood) possessed the hearts of these Mariners; namely,
that now presently, upon the casting of Jonah into the Sea, such a calm
followed: Oh the great Power, and Holiness, and Justice, and Mercy, of the God
of the Hebrews! how is he to be feared above all other Gods! who can do as he
alone! therefore him alone will we fear and serve all our days. So say we at
the end of a great Plague; or of a great fit of sickness: or escaping a danger
by Land or Water, Fire, War, other terrible matters: Oh fear the Lord, ye his
Saints: for there is no want to them that fear him, Psalm. 34.9.

Magor-Missabib, fear round about; Jer. 20 3.
they are ready to dye for fear before the evil comes near them; sometimes more
afraid then hurt; but for God in whose power their breath is, and who can cast
both Body and Soul into Hell, Signs of not fearing God.
him they fear not; though that be the only gracious fear commanded in Luke
12.4, 5.

1. For departing from evil, as did Job, Joseph, and the Egypt: what fear of
God is in those that live in the constant practice of one sin or other,
drunkenness or what ever it be? sin is the greatest enemy that God has, and
yet numbers make a trade of is, according to the humor of each; walk in the way
of the wicked, or sit in the seat of the scornful; though they have been in
great danger of life or estate, yet on they go in a tract of sinning. The
danger is past, and they make account they live to do all their abominations.

2. For the beginning of wisdom; Numbers have no Sapientia dicitur quasi
sapida scientia: but Numbers have no savor of God and Religion: Mercies,
Afflictions, Ordinances, all passages of Providence, have no more savor then
the white of an Egg: no heart to Prayer or other duty, or to accept a good
motion that is made for edification. These Mariners that feared the Lord,
offered him sacrifice: but where are these men's sacrifices? great and precious
mercies are received: but what return do they make in way of thankfulness?

3. For perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord: how does this agree to
those, who fall back from the good way of God, either into Heresy or
Profanesse or Worldly-mindednesse? or those that stand at a stay in Religion? A
round of duties there is, and that is all: the space of many years makes no
difference in their profession, unless it be for the worse: they would be
troubled if they thrived no better in their outward estate; but for the estate
of their Souls, they mind no thriving.

4. For fearing the Lord exceedingly, as did these Mariners: Numbers profess to
fear God, but they fear men more, Losses, Troubles, Dangers, Persecutions:
excessive fear surpriseth them, that they are taken off from duty, Prove. 29.25.
and the way of God; the fear of man is a snare, and catches many unto
Atheism: Or, they fear the Lord, and the gods of the Land, as did the mungrel
Samaritans, 2. King. 17.33.

5. The fear of God has a dash of holy joy with it, as Psalm. 2.11. rejoice
unto him with trembling: fear him as a glorious God, but rejoice in him as a
loving Father, reconciled and tenderly affected in Christ. So the Child fears
his Father, and the wife her Husband. But numbers mind no such relation between
God and them: or care not to have it: or presume to have it, but get no comfort
by it in a dark hour: (...) their fear is an heavy passion of unbes^efe.

Add outward worship to inward. 1 Cor. 6.20.
For the Second: They offered a sacrifice unto the Lord.

Outward worship must be added unto inward. As we must glorify God with the
Spirit, so also with the body: for both are God's, and both are bought with a
price. And the same God made both Soul and body, and deserves to be served with
both, commands and expects it.

What kind of sacrifice these Mariners offered to the Lord, we read not, nor
is it material to know. Only this: they had Learned by tradition of their
neighbors, and by the neighborhood of the Jews, that thank-offerings would do
well in way of gratitude for deliverance: and so did all the Gentiles round
about: therefore so do they.

Note. Express thankfulness in good actions.
Our lesson is: In way of thankfulness for mercies received we must use holy
expressions of Loyalty and duty to our good God: not only fear him, with other
internal virtues as before, but with outward worship and service. Christians
also have their sacrifices of righteousness appointed for them, as was
prophesied Deuteronomy. 33.19.

But what are they? Answ. 1. A man's whole self, with all powers of Soul and
Body, Romans 12.1. Present your selves a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to
God, which is your reasonable service. 2. Holy and hearty prayers, Pro. 15.8.
The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer of the
upright is his delight. 3. Hearty praises, with voice and life, Heb. 13.15. By
Christ let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually. 4. Works of
love to the poor members of Jesus Christ, Ver. 16. With such sacrifices God is
well-pleased. 5. Releif and comfort to good Ministers who need assistance,
Phil. 4.18. An odor of a sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to
God. 6. Suffering in the cause of God, Chapter 2.17. If I be offered upon the
sacrifice of your faith, I joy and rejoice with you all. 7. All parts of the
public or private worship of God, 1 Pet. 2.5. A spiritual Priesthood to offer
up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. 8. All dealings with
men carried in a loving and righteous manner, Psalm. 4.4. Offer the sacrifices
of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord.

Whereby we see that none has cause to say he wants None but may so express.
Levitical sacrifices are ended in Christ; and he is loath to offer sacrifice in
a blind manner, as these Mariners did; and I desire to testify my thankfulness
for escaping such a danger, or receiving such a mercy; but what should I offer?

Answ. He has showed thee O man what he requires, and what he will accept as
a gratuity, Mic. 6.8. and the Map now delivered shows a great Bed-roll of
Christian sacrifices: Peruse, and see if one way or other thou can not offer
a sacrifice to the Lord; only find the Altar of an holy heart, and a sacrifice
will quickly he had; Out of the abundance of the heart will come forth much
good.

A man possibly has not wealth to distribute among the poor, or is not called
to suffer for the truth and way of God; cannot entertain Ministers, cannot
build and endow Hospitals, repair Bridges, do other works of bounty as our
forefathers were wont to do. Shall he therefore be wholly excused of offering
to the Lord? No, the poorest and meanest Christian that is, out of a gracious
heart is able to pray, praise God, live holily, deal righteously, converse to
the Edification one of another: Calves of the lips, spiritual sacrifice, a body
prepared and fitted to do service, and a mind with meditations and affections.

Cursed be the deceiver, who has a male in his flock and sacrifices to the
Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1.14.
or offers the torn, the lame, or the sick, shells of outward service, or old
age that is now able to do nothing for God; or merely good meaning, without
doing what might and ought to be done, as some do flatter themselves; all such
are deceivers, and draw a curse upon themselves instead of a blessing. These
Mariners offered what they could, but so do not these.

they made vows. Not only in the present did these Mariners worship the Lord,
but meant to worship him for time to come, and thereunto bound themselves by
vows; 2 King 5 17.
so Naaman the Syrian, Hereafter I will serve no God but the God of Israel.

out of his hands, but in a little space grow as bad as ever; it may be more
hardened, as iron that has been heated and cold again.

Take heed of dodging with the God of Heaven. To serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life, Luke 1.74, 75. The mercy lasts always,
and so must the duty: and no reason can be alleged for ceasing from that duty.
Go then, and learn what means to hear for the time to come, to pray
continually, Esa. 42, 23.
to receive Sacraments often, even until Christ come.

They made vows. What, we read not, nor matters it. Vows of Christians, what
they are.
But to our purpose;

1. The main matter of Christian Vows is, that we bind our selves to the Lord
in a Covenant that shall Presper said, Seipsum voveas, seipsum reddat; he that
will vow to the Lord, let him devote himself, and render himself to his
Majesty: and David said, Ps. 119.106.
I have sworn that I will keep thy Commandments; not Counsels, but Precepts are
the grounds and bounds of a Christians vows: Therefore not Monkish, nor any
other will worship.

2. The entrance into a lawful vow is at our Baptism, Baptized in the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; that is, dedicated, devoted, set apart for his
service and glory; relinquishing all others, as a good Wife to cleave to her
Husband alone.

3. The vow of Baptism is renewed many times afterward, either at a Sacrament
of the Lords Supper, or in the time of danger; and it ought to be Religiously
remembered and observed, as Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will pay that my vows which my
lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken when I was in trouble. Whether
these Mariners kept their vows, we know not; but are sure that we ought to keep
ours.

Gal. 6.7.
Be not deceived, God is not mocked: All the mocking would return upon thine
own soul, to thy eternal damnation.

Where for better performance, remember that clause, not to put off the paying
of vows, Eccl. 5.4. When thou have vowed a vow to God, defer not to pay. This
delay is it which marres abundance of good purposes and resolutions; while we
think there is time enough, the motion dies, and no good effect follows. A
deceitful heart, a subtle Devil, a flattering or encumbring world, vain or
wicked Companions draw quite another way.

Ver. 17. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah
was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights.


Our Savior calls it a Whale, Mat. 12.40. Jonah was so long in the belly of
the Whale: Whales and other great fishes.
Possibly it is the Leviathan described in Job 41. Or, it may be the Crocodile.
Histories tell of fishes of incredible bigness; and our people have seen the
Grampos, the Sturgeon, the Man-fish, the Mermaide, and other: and Navigators
have seen the Seahorse, the Sea-Bull, and other strange Monsters, and of
strange greatness. All made by God, and are at his beck, and serve to set forth
his praise; see Psalm. 104.24, 25 26.

At the Text it is said, that God prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah.
Here is in wrath mercy: Though God will have his servant cast into the Sea, yet
he will not have him drowned in the Sea. No, he loves him better then so, and
has more work for him to do; which though he declined at first, yet afterward
he shall be willing to do.

Note how the providence of God reaches to the bottom of the Sea, and swayeth
among the fishes. Note. God rules ever, fishes.
He that sent a wind, and thereby a storm, and afterward caused the Sea to
cease from her raging, now sets a fish in readiness to take Jonah to custody,
and then restore him to land again. So he sent the fish to Peter's hook, Mat.
17.27. and a multitude of fishes to the Apostles nets, Luke 5.4, 9. and John
21.3, 8.

Now bless the Lord O my soul, Psalm. 103.12.
in all places of his dominions; Sea, Land, Fire, Air, Clouds, all made by him,
and disposed of by him, and all for the good of his Chosen; as those wondered at
the huge draught of fishes, and says the Text, they knew it was the Lord: none
but the Lord could gather those fishes together. And it follows, Christ
gathered them together, therefore Christ is God; and accordingly he is to be
feared, loved, honored, obeyed in all our course of life. Both Creation and
gubernation are ascribed to him, therefore he is God. He made us,

Ps. 135.6.
Again, it is comfort to the good Subjects of his dominion, that he has to do,
and does what he will both in Heaven and Earth, and in all deep places. When we
travel in waters or occupy businesses in that Element, there he sits and
overrules all. In the great and threatening waves of affliction he orders the
Event for good to the faithful, Psalm. 32.6. Surely in the floods of great
waters they shall not come nigh unto him. Mat. 8.26, 14, 31. Rev. 20.13.
Esa. 43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee. For the
Disciples he rebuked the wind and sea, and there was a great calm. And he took
up sinking Peter into the ship, and one day the sea shall give up her dead.

There is comfort also in the preparations and provisions that the Lord makes
for us both by sea and land^! He that prepared a great fish for Jonah, prepares
for us a multitude of fishes, both small and great; precious for their
usefulness, and pleasant by their variety; Food, Physic, Oil, Bone, abundance
of uses for the enriching of a Nation; whereunto add, that God first taught
the art of making ships for Navigation: so Noah by his instruction, Heb. 11.7.
prepared an Ark for saving himself and his

And if it be so, believe in God for supply of all your wants. In all straights
say as Abraham, God will provide. He that appointed Jonah to be cast into the
sea, prepared a fish to save him from drowning. He that sent a Famine upon
Canaan, sent Joseph before into Egypt for a Caterer; for us also he will
provide what is wanting, and shall be expedient. Believe it, and beware of the
chiding, Why did ye fear because ye brought no bread?

Jonah was in the belly of the fist three days and three nights. Miraculous
preservation of Jonah.


Here is miracle upon miracle: A storm raised, a calm restored, a fish prepared
for safety, a man kept alive in his belly so long and no longer, and then set
on dry land again; wonders! that the fish was so ready for him, that he escaped
crushing between his teeth which stood in great rows as Sawes to knap him
asunder, that the digestive force of the fishes stomach was so long restrained,
that he was not choked wi^h waters and weeds that came about him; that he was
tossed from one side of the fish to another, that all this while he had no way of
free breathing; yet there he was, and there he prayed, and thence he was
delivered: Admirable preservation!

Note the wonderful power of God, Note. And of others.
who in the midst of dangers can preserve his people, even where no hope of
safety appears. Jonah in the Whales belly, Israel amidst the red sea, and in
Jordane, with bread from heaven, water out of a rock; one suit of Apparel to
serve a man for forty years together; The three Jews to breathe and live in an
hot fiery furnace, and come forth again; Daniel to escape well enough in the
den of Lions; Noah in a world of waters and among all sorts of beasts; all came
to him, and the wildest were made tame, so to live with the rest.

Fables, will an Atheist say, who can believe? Against Atheists.
or how can these things be?

Answ. 1. Ask sense and experien^e; how lives the Child in the womb for some
months together, where he neither breathes nor takes nourishment by the mouth?
yet a continual business, as appears in the Birth of Children.

John 20.29.
2. He must needs be a gross Atheist, who will believe no more then he sees.
Blessed is he that has not seen, and yet has believed; Spiritual matters are
as much above sense for perceiving, as they are for worth. The soul is far
better then the body, yet not seen as the body is; and God who is infinitely
better then both.

3. Jesus Christ who is the true and faithful witness, Jonah and his Whale;
that he was three days and three nights in the belly of the fish. And whosoever
shall infringe the truth of Christ in his assertions, shall never find him a
Savior. A Revenger he shall find him, but not a Savior; The wrath of God
abides on him.

Ariou Methimnaeus carried by Dolphins along the sea into his own Country; no
doubt but some glimmering of this History of Jonah; Gualter.
or rather a fable invented by the Devil to obscure this History, that it
should not be credited; as to render the Apostles suspicious, he cried out,
Act. 16.17.
These are the servants of the most High God, who show unto us the way of
salvation.

Expect deliverance when least likely.
Now remember this against times and cases of very great danger; God is the
same, and his power is the same, and his love, and his care, and his truth, and
all his Attributes: and if thou be the same with Jonah in faith and holiness,
thou shall find the same protection and deliverance, so far as shall be good
for thee; I am the Lord, I change not.

Jonah, that God should so take care of me.

Sol.
Answ. 1. The least degree of true faith and holiness is accepted with God, and
shall keep the head above water. Peter was a man of little faith, and yet by
his little faith he was able to walk upon the sea; and if he had held fast his
confidence as he began, he should not have sunk in the least, nor cried out for
help as he did.

2. Though Jonah was a very good man, yet at this time he was very faulty, and
in wrath cast forth into the sea. Hab 3.2.
Only the Lord in wrath remembers mercy toward him, and so he will toward thee.
The gifts and calling of God are without repentance; no unbelief of ours can
make the faith of God of none effect, nor break off the tie between him and a
believing soul.

Oh but my case is very grievous!

Answ. Thy case is not worse then Jonahs case was; Sol.
he was devoured by a Whale, and this devourer was the means of his
preservation: Judge. 14.14.
Out of the eater came meat, and out of the strong came sweetness. Thou say
I see no likely means of my deliverance; no more did Jonah; and yet he is
delivered, even in a way quite contrary. God saves by means, without means,
above means, or against means.

Oh but mine is a tedious affliction, Ob. Sol.
it has lain long upon me, and now what hope remains? Answ. 1. Jonah was in
the Whales belly three days and three nights; no doubt but that he had sad
thoughts all that while what would become of him; he was not concocted by the
Whale, nor ever likely to get to land again; yet at last was restored, and so
may thou be.

2. Lazarus was dead four days, and began to stink, yet was raised up to life
as before. Four days, or four months, or four years are nothing to God who
delivers when he pleases. To us men lingering diseases or other evils are
terrible, but to our God they are as nothing to hinder deliverance.

3. Those that have lien in their graves four or five thousand years, shall be
raised of God as easily as they that were buried the day before: which is made
an Emblem of deliverance that seemed hopeless, Ezekiel. 37. with Hos. 6.1, 2.

4. It has been the case of Gods Children to lie under the burden of
afflictions for sundry years together. Luke 13. Ps. 88.15.
A Daughter of Abraham was bound to Satan eighteen years; Heman from his youth
suffered the terrors of God with a troubled mind. The Church was seventy years
in the captivity of Bab^lon, 430 in Egypt. The ten Tribes (which yet have
promises) are not returned home after 2300 years.

Be quiet therefore, and hope perfectly or to the end: remembering these three
things. 1. Patient waiting must put us in possession of the promises, Psalm.
40.1. I waited patiently for the Lord, and he inclined his ear unto me. And the
old Believers, by faith and patience inherited the premises, Heb. 6.12. 2. Gods
appointed time which is the best time, shall never fail us, Hab. 2.3. The
vision is yet for an appointed time, at last it will speak and not lie. 3 A
thousand years to God are but as one day, nor will he be slack concerning his
promises, 2 Pet. 3.9. And it has been said, Every thing is beautiful in his
own season.

But let us a little look to our Type:

Note. Christ three bays in the house of death
As Jonah three days and three nights was in the belly of this great fish, so
Christ for so long time was in the bowels of the earth: It is a Simile of his
own framing, Mat. 12.40. And the third day he rose again from the dead, 1 Cor.
15.4. and this according to the Scriptures; namely of these Types, of Jonah,
who for three days was given for dead; of Isaac, who in the purpose of his
Father was so long offered up unto God; of Joseph, Samson, David, who were
shadows of Christ, first in suffering, then in recovering: whereunto we may
add those predictions, Psalm. 16 10 Thou will not suffer thy Holy One to see
corruption, and Esa. 53.10, 11, 12. When thou shall make his soul an offering
for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, etc. and his own
predictions, Mat. 17.23. they shall kill him, and the third day he shall be
raised again.

Add these reasons also:

1. Christ so lon. lay in the grave, that it might appear

2 He lay no longer then three days, because the desired that the Holy One of
God might not see corruption, that he might provide for the weak faith of his
Disciples, who began to stag^er; that he might set more fully to do the work of
a Mediator, Fruits of Christ's resurrection.
and might apply to us the great fruits and benefits of his Resurrection; such
as these, 1. Forgiveness of sins, If Christ be not raised, your faith is vain,
ye are yet in your sins; and they who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished.
2. Full justification, Romans 4.25. He rose again 3. Hope to Godward, 1 Pet.
1.3. By the Resurrection of Christ from the dead ye are born again to a l^vely
hope; and ver. 21. ye believe in God who raised him up from the dead, and gave
him glory that your 4. Regeneration to be planted together in the likeness of
his resurrection; we shall also live with him; dead indeed unto sin, but alive
unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom 6.5, 8, 11. See also Ephesians. 2.4, 5,
6. 5. Resurrection of the body, 1 Cor. 15.20, now is Christ risen from the
dead, and become the first fruits of them that sleep; for since by man came
death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead.

All which is matter of great comfort to all true Believers: resurrection was
the first degree of his exaltation, after all that humiliation wherewith he was
humbled: Ascension followed, and session, and intercession, and powerful
application of all his purchase, all for the Elect, and yields them strong
consolation.

Phil. 20.
Only ^et them remember to magnify Christ in life and death, as one that
stouped so low in their behalf; and as one that had power to raise up himself,
which Jonah could not do, John 10.18. I have power to lay down my life, and I
have power to take it up again; and as one that by his resurrection was
mightily declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4 and as one that is now highly
advanced above every Name, Cap 2.9.
so as every knee must bow unto him; and by his resurrection obtained a special
right to us, that we should be wholly his, and for his service chap. 14.9. he
therefore dyed, and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord of quick and
dead.

Which while we study, we shall attain as the benefit of Christ's resurrection,
so also the virtue and power which stands in holiness and heavenly-mindedness,
Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. and Col. 3.1, 2.

CHAP. II.
Ver. 1.2. Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fishes belly: And
said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out
of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice.


THis Chapter contains Jonahs repentance. Parts of the Chapter.
His confession of the fault, and submission to the punishment we have seen
already. And now having got out of the Whales belly, he relates how things had
passed: 1. That he prayed for deliverance, and was heard in prayer, ver. 1.2.
2. That he had hope of deliverance when he was at lowest, ver. 4. and 7.3. That
upon deliverance he promised thanksgiving, verse 9. 4. That at last he was
actually delivered, ver. 10

Or we may conceive his prayer amplified four ways. Amplification of Jonahs
prayer.
1. By the greatness of the danger whereinto he was brought; the fishes belly,
the belly of hell, the deep, the midst of the seas, bottoms of mountains,
weeds, floods and billows. 2. By the anguish or straights arising out of the
danger; I cried to the Lord, I said I am cast out of thy sight, my soul fainted
within me. 3 By the hope he nourished all the while; I will look again toward
thy holy Temple; I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto the^ into
thine holy Temple. 4. By the good speed he found at last; The Lord spoke unto
the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land!

We must begin with Jonahs prayer, and the Audience he found with God, ver. 1.2.

In the first Chapter, ver. 9. he professed to fear the Lord the God of heaven,
which made the sea and the dry land; and now to the same God as the only true
God, he addresseth his prayer: not to Neptune as Heathens were wont to pray nor
yet to true Saints who had traded much in waters; as Noah was saved in the
general flood of waters, or Moses who was drawn out of the waters while an
infant, and led Israel through the red sea, and through Jordan; or Elias who
parted the waters this way and that way: whereby one would think they should
have compassion on them that are in danger by water, according to the carnal
reason of Idolaters in other things.

No, Jonah prays only to the God of heaven who made the sea and the dry land.

God alone is an All-sufficient God, and he alone ought to be called upon.
Prayer is one part of divine worship, whereof it is said, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, and him alone shall thou serve, Mat. 4.10. And it stands with
reason, we must pray to none but one in whom we believe; but we believe in God
only, therefore to God only must we pray, Romans 10.14. how shall they call on
him in whom they believe not?



Note. Pray earnestly.
Jonah prayed and cried to the Lord: This crying notes his fervency in prayer,
and it is twice set down, I cried, I cried, to the same purpose. Christians
ought to be both frequent and fervent in prayer, Romans 12.11, 12. fervent in
spirit, serving the Lord, and continuing instant in prayer, If one prayer will
not fetch a mercy, try what another will do, and let the second be more earnest
then the former, and the third more earnest then that. Paul besought the Lord
thrice, and obtained grace sufficient. Jonah at last got out of the Whales
belly.

that will obtain a mercy. Therefore continue instant in prayer, Col. 4.2.

But I aim at another point, from the consideration of Jonahs prayer, as being
now in a distressed condition. No doubt but in all this time, three days and
three nights, he prayed often and earnestly for the pardon of his great sin;
for deliverance out of the Whales belly, and for the employment he had refused
of going and preaching to Nineve: Oh that God would trust and enable him to do
that service! he would do it with all his heart, if he might be put upon it
again.

Let the point be this: In distress pray
Gods children in their greatest and deepest afflictions should keep their
hearts in a praying frame, to obtain grace and mercy to help in time of need;
we read a prayer of the afflicted when he is overwhelmed and pours out his
complaint before the Lord. Psalm. 102 1. and 130.1. Out of the depths have I
cried unto thee O Lord.

For reasons, thus. 1. There is a Commandment to call upon God in the day of
trouble, Psalm. 50.15. Not only in prosperity but adversity; not only if it be
likely we shall get out of trouble, but against all likelihood; not only if
means be present, but if no means appear likely to be had.

2. There cannot be such a case of sin, unworthiness, Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my Name, he will do it for you. The Father can deny nothing to
the Son, nor to such as plead in his Sons merits.

3. The spirit of grace and supplication is given them always pray, Luke 18.1.
Romans 8.26.
and not wax weary; he helps their infirmities, not knowing what to pray as
they ought the bears up their spirit, to hope to the end; he raises sighs and
groans which cannot be uttered.

4. No affliction whatsoever can break asunder the Jonah at this time wanted
neither sin nor sorrow, nor fear, nor care, what would become of him; yet mark
the word of appropriation, he prayed to the lord his God.

I will blot out thine iniquities, I will scatter them as a mist, I will
forgive their sin and remember it no more. Of sorrow he has said, I will be
with thee in six troubles, and in seven; I will be with thee when thou passest
through the fire, and through the water; and in a word, I will not leave thee,
nor forsake thee.

Psalm. 61.1, 2, 3. so we, We are weak, but he is a strong God: we are helpless,
but he is a friend good enough.

A fault to faint in prayer.
All to reprove our foolishness, who in great afflictions suffer our selves to
be so afraid with amazements, that we neglect the duty of prayer. The heart is
even bound up and so straightned with fear, care and sorrow, that we cannot
lift up a prayer to the God of our life and mercy: yet Jonah prayed out of the
Whales belly, and amidst all those encumbrances. Moses cried to the Lord at the
red sea, when the people so murmured and were discontented. Daniel prayed in
the den of Lions, where every moment he was ready to be devoured; David prayed
in caves, woods, mountains, in all his flight before Saul and Absalom. He
longed to come to the Temple and pray, but could pray out of a Temple as well
as in it: and Jonah here in great distress looked toward the Temple, v. 4. no
whit like those who can never pray but when they stumble into a Church, or when
they are in some hope to receive what they crave.

Ob.
Oh but my case is higher then worldly afflictions: I have many and great sins
upon me, and much guiltiness which puts me out of heart. Sol.
Answ. Jonah at this time had sinned hainously, and might be ashamed to look
God in the face; yet see how he ownes God for his God, and falls to prayer; so
did David, Daniel, Ezra, other Saints; they ever prayed to God as to a God
pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin. Exodus 34.7.
And he is glorified in this act of mercy, as well as in delivering out of
trouble and danger; and more, because it is an act of greater mercy, as he
proclaimed before Moses.

Oh but mine is an amazing evil, Ob. Sol.
and so puzzles me that I cannot pray. Answ. 1. Jonahs, case had as many
amazements as any man's case lightly can have yet was not he puzzled. 2. It is a
sinful infirmity in Saints that they were not able sometime to pray, and to
lift up their heads; and so they have confessed it, Psalm. 77.10. I said it is
my infirmity. And they checked themselves for their unbelief, hastiness,
saying, they were cast out of his presence, and he was angry with their prayer.
Often we read in the Psalms how David upon these distempers fell to prayer
again.

Oh but I am unworthy to pray, Ob. Sol.
or to be heard in prayer. Answ. So was Jonah, and yet he prayed, and was
heard. And the Centurion, who acknowledged his unworthiness, yet had his suit
granted. And Gods Children when they fall upon this work, do not go as worthy
persons, but in Christ they are accounted worthy; and that is all their
pleading. In true and proper speech none but the Lamb is worthy to receive
honor and glory.

Oh could I see any door of hope open to me, Ob. Sol.
I should be encouraged to pray Answ. 1. God is able to open a door, where in
nature and in thy sense there is none at all. 2. Pray, and it shall be opened,
and thou shall see it, as Hagar who saw the we^l of water. Little did Jonah
think that the Whale should vomit him out upon dry land. Little did Israel
think that thy should go on foot through the red sea, or Jordan.

Ob. Sol.
Oh but I am afraid God is angry with me, and will do nothing for such a wretch
as I am. Answ. It is a certain rule, that God is sometimes angry with his
Children, but never hates them; as with Jonah, angry but loved him still. He
ever loves his faithful ones, and in his love he will receive their prayers, as
Jonahs. In Christ their persons are accepted, and in his mediation their
prayers shall prevail.

Jonah did in the Whales belly, and among the weeds, waves, billows,
noysomeness. Think what it is to cry out of the deeps, when the floods of
ungodliness made thee afraid, when the arrows of the Almighty stick fast in
thee, when a plurisie comes or some dangerous disease: Try what an hearty
prayer can do, do not restrain prayer from the Almighty, nor give all for lost:
or if thou have fainted as Jonah, yet pluck up thy spirits, and to it again.

Insignis mutatio, says Mr. Gualter: He that before fled from the presence of
the Lord, does now upon his repentance hang on him, and will not let him go
without a blessing; even so do thou: Amend every error, and mark this notable
change in the Penitent, 2 Cor. 7.11. to sorrow after a godly sort works much
carefulness, and fear, and zeal. Consider for encouragement to prayer, while a
Christian finds an heart, God will find an ear to hear, and do, and save out of
troubles; and still the best is behind. Mark here what follows:

I cried, and he heard me; again, I cried, and thou heardest me.

God hears all good prayers.
why? because he is a God hearing prayer; it is one of his Attributes, because
Jesus Christ appears for them, and is a powerful Mediator with his Father;
because good prayer i^ the breath and voice of his own holy spirit in his
Children; because they cast themelves upon his mercy and faithfulness; because
hell and the world is all against them; because they have an honest purpose to
glorify God with whatsoever mercies they shall receive at his hands, as here
Jonah.

But mark how he hears prayer. 1. In the kind of mercy Jonah to be delivered
out of the Whales belly; we out of sickness, danger, or any adversity. 2. In we
shall have grace sufficient for us, strong consolation of his spirit; hereafter
it shall come, but not yet; our posterity shall fare the better for those
prayers: in the appointed time and manner all the promises of God shall most
certainly be fulfilled.

Now take this as an encouragement to prayer: Ask and Cry as Jonah, and thou
shall be heard as Jonah; every suitor at Court is not sure to speed of his
Petition, but believers are sure to speed, 1 John 5.15. we know that we have
the Petitions that we desired of him. And a beggar will know the door where he
uses to get a good alms.

And if it be so, do not mis-conster Gods delays, as if Jonah got out of the
Whales belly: he prayed the first day, but came not forth till the third. The
woman of Syrophenicia sped at last in her suit, but it was after some repulses.
Every vision of comfort is for an appointed time, but at last it will speak and
not lie.

But mark yet another thing: A godly man receives an We may know it.
he sees in the effect that his prayer is answered, and takes the mercy as the
income of prayer, he heard me (says Jonah) and I am delivered; so David, Psalm.
120.1. In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

^ vast difference then there is in the godly man's receiving of Christ's
purchase, who makes requests for us in heaven: prayer ascends, and grace
descends. Others not so.

Psalm. 85.8. I will hearken what the Lord God will say. Praying is compared to
sowing of seed, and the Husbandman uses now and then to look to his sown
fields. Only mark the last clause there, return not to folly: A godly man must
keep himself a godly man, and do the work of a godly man, or else may miss of
his answer, at least for a time, as here Jonah.

Ver. 3.4, 5, 6. For thou have cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas,
and the floods compassed me about; all thy billows and thy waves passed over
me. Then I said, I am cast out of thy fight; yet I will look again toward thy
holy Temple. The waters compassed me about even to the soul; the depth closed
me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down into the
bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her bars was about me for ever; yet
have thou brought my life from corruption, O Lord my God.


Amplificatio prima.
Here the Prophet amplifies his prayer by the greatness of the danger whereinto
he was brought, the fishes belly, the belly of hell, the deep, the midst of the
seas, bottoms of mountains, weeds, floods and billows. Being escaped out of the
danger, nevertheless he recounteth the danger wherein he had been, as every
godly man also will do. Nature teaches a man to be sensible of present evils,
Note. Recount old sufferings.
troubles and dangers; but grace teaches to mind old ones, as of which he has
a saving use to make, so did Jacob, Genesis 32.10. with my staff I passed over
this Jordan, a poor and desolate man; and David, I followed the Ews great with
young: and Amos tells how he had been an Herdman, and had gathered Sycomore
fruits, chap. 7. Benefits accrewing thereby.


Do so, Christian, now that thou art set in a large place out of thy troubles.
There be these good uses to be made of this recounting former evils.

1. It will keep thee humble, and low in thine own eyes; Deuteronomy. 8.2. Thou shall
remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty years in the
wilderness, to humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thine heart,
whether thou would keep his Commandments or no. It is the great sin of many
a man, that he is lifted up with present prosperity; though sometime he was in
a very low estate, yet now that he is got into a mountain, Psalm 30.6.
he stands cracking as if he should never be moved: And none must mind him of
his old poverty or meanness; he that does, does break the peace, and sometime
it comes to daggers drawing, and much ado there is to be reconciled as friends
should be: Possibly there may be a fault in such twitting a man with his
ancient poverty; but yet a godly man should take it well, so to further his
humility, which it is hard to retain.

2. It will make and keep thee thankful for the comfortable Jacob there
confessed to the glory of God, and as Israel was required to do, Deuteronomy. 8.10
when thou have eaten and art full, thou shall bless the Lord thy God.
Thankfulness is a grace that will wither as soon as any flower in our Garland,
and needs to be thus watered. Remember the terrors of the late wars, so to be
thankful for our present peace. Remember the terrors of thy burning fever
which thou had at such a time, the sleepless nights, tormenting fits of the
Gout, or Stone, public evils that lay upon the Church, or threatened it
shrewdly, as in Queen Mary's time, in eighty eight, in the Gunpowder-plot and
others; whereof we may say as the Psalmist, had not the Lord been on our side,
Ps. 1^4.1, 2.
the proud waves had gone over our soul: blessed be his holy Name for so great
deliverances.

3. It will help to bear up your faith in expectation of God has delivered
from great death, and does deliver, and we trust also he will deliver, 1 Samuel
17.
2 Cor. 1.9, 10. and David, He that delivered me from the Lion and the Bear,
will deliver me also from this uncircumcised Philistine; so one of us, God has
helped when I was as low as this comes to, this is not the first time that I
was in want or danger: I remember such and such a straight, I cannot well be
worse then I was at such a time; and yet it pleased God in mercy to send
seasonable supply or deliverance; therefore in this case also I will not faint,
nor cast away my confidence; Esa. 59.2.
see Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. Gods ear is not heavy, nor his hand shortened, nor is
he weary of bestowing benefits, therefore trust in him still. Still there are
promises and a covenant of grace, and Christ a Mediator for me, and bowels of a
Father, power, faithfulness, wisdom, all divine perfections; therefore fear
nothing;

And note by the way one part of the great gain of godliness. Godliness takes
advantage by every thing to promote the main, which is sanctification and
salvation, that all shall work together for good to them that love God, Rom
8.18.
and are called according to his purpose: Afflictions past and present, yea and
sins too, to be the more humble and more wary for time to come, whence we hear
Jonah telling of his fleeing to Tarsus, and Paul telling how he had been a
Persecutor, etc.

Thou had cast me into the deep.

Gods own Child may be cast into deep and great afflictions; as Jonah, Joseph,
David, Note. Saints sometimes deeply afflicted.
other holy men who without all doubt were very dear unto God; yea his own only
begotten Son the Lord Jesus Christ; he had one Son without sin, but none
without affliction.

And why? though he love them all well, Jonah at this time. And they have their
corruptions, which need to be more mortified, and their graces must be tried
and made more conspicuous, which is not done but in the furnace of affliction:
And the Devils mouth must be stopped, who will be apt to say as against Job,
that they serve God merely for prosperity, who yet was true to God when he was
stripped of all.

Therefore let no godly man misdeem his estate, because Ecc. 9.1.
None can know love or hatred by all that is before him; there be other trials
to know it, but affliction is no trial. And mark how Jonah professes his faith
in God, even now when he thus amplifies his affliction. The best employment
certainly in such a sad condition, is, to find out the sins which occasioned
the breach, and those ends which God aims at. This is our part to look unto,
and let God alone to do his part which will be for good in the end. No Artist
must have his work esteemed by some particular piece of it.

Neither misdeem the estate of others who are so deep Esa 53.3. or as if they
were worse then others, which is expressly censured by our Savior, Luke 13.1,
2, 3, 4. There is such a censorious humor abroad, but ye see by this place how
it is condemned: And ye see how David was wary not to offend this way, Psalm.
73.15. if I say, I will speak thus (condemning the godly because of
afflictions) behold I should offend against the generation of thy children. And
our rule is, to let every one stand or fall to his own Master, and who are thou
that judge another man's servan?

Two things would be minded in these matters of prosperity and adversity.

1. A godly man is never the worse, nor in more danger for all his adversity.
Gold is gold though it be in the fire, Jonah is Jonah though he be in the
Whales belly; only the godly should clear up his evidences at such a time, that
he is indeed a godly man: Recount the old grounds he went upon and former
experiences, and fortify against unbelief, which in hard times is apt to be
stirring; and prepare for greater trials then as yet he has endured, and God
may justly bring him unto: Old tried blades may be put to more hardship then
tender ones shall be.

2. A wicked man is never the better, nor in more safety for all his
prosperity. Dross is dross though it be laid up in a silken bag. The Mariners
escaped the storm, and Jonah was cast into the sea; the only way for some in
prosperity, is, to study this matter of godliness. If thou repent and become a
sincere worshipper, all will do well, both prosperity and adversity: Aug de
civit. Dei, lib. 1.
it much avails not what a man suffers, but who it is that suffers; and in the
likeness of sufferings there is great unlikeness in them that suffer. Oh the
great force of godliness!

Thou had cast me into the deep. It might be objected, the Mariners cast
forth Jonah into the sea; how then does he impute it unto God? Answ. 1. It was
by the appointment of Jehovah, that the Mariners cast Jonah into the sea; God
by lot so designed him to be cast forth. 2. In all the doings of men God has
an overruling hand, not only to permit what they do, but order all to the good
of his Chosen; as for Job, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; and as
in the passion of Christ, all was done according to the determinate will and
counsel of God.

A godly man in all the doings of men against him looks up to the hand of God
appointing the affliction; thou have cast me into the sea; the Lord has bid
Shimei to curse, Note. Look from men to God who afflicts. Amos. 3.6. Esa.
10.5. Reas.
there is no evil in the City but the Lord has done it. Ashur was the rod of
his wrath, and the staff of indignation in his hand. A rod or staff moves not
but by the motion of another; nor the battel-axe.

This the godly man considers, because he is well grounded in the doctrine of
Gods providence, how it reaches to all things, small as well as great, evil as
well as good, particulars as well as the general, contingent as well as natural
and necessary, and voluntary actions as well as fortuitous: and, how the Lord
leaves the evil to the Agents, but reserves the simple act to himself, and
works out his own most holy and righteous ends which they never think of, as
Joseph told his brethren, Ye meant it to evil, but God meant it for good, Genesis
50.20.

Which is utterly against the course of many who look Jonahs mouth against his
Mariners: no, thou have cast me forth, and David was dumb because the Lord did
it, Psalm. 39.9.

Oh but it is mere malice that leads my Adversary to say and do what he does;
Ob. Sol.
but the Mariners were fair conditioned men. Answ. 1. I suppose it was mere
malice that led Shimei to rail at David, yet he espied the hand of God in the
business. And mere covetousness led the Chaldeans and Sabeans to plunder Job as
they did; yet he said, the Lord has taken away. God is still righteous, who
ordains thee a punishment, whatever the instruments be. 2. The more malicious
thine Adversary is, the more testimony of innocence thou have in thine own
bosom, and so an argument of comfort, 2 Cor. 1.12. our rejoicing is this, even
the testimony of our conscience. David took comfort that his enemies persecuted
him without cause, and so may others, John 15.25.

Jonah, but in the affliction there was the determinate counsel of God so
ordering: therefore say, Shall I not drink of the Cup which my Father has put
into my hand? should I spurn against the pricks, either in doing or suffering?

God Note. times some. Gods afraid of utmost wrath.
Out of the belly of hell cried I; that is, out of a deep sense of the wrath
and displeasure of God for my sins; a good soul sometimes apprehends the wrath
of the holy Lord God as due unto him for his sins: The pains of hell get hold
on him, he suffers the terrors of God with a troubled mind. God seems to set
him up as a Butt, against which he will shoot all the envenomed arrows of his.

Jonah here has not only Gods waves and billows passing over his head, thy
billows and thy waves, but (as it were) the devils billows and waves. In the
bottom of the sea he is very near to the place of the damned; only he is not
adjudged thither finally, nor fastened there: so it has been the case of some
deserted souls to conceive ^hey were half in hell already; very firebrarnds,
vessels of wrath, reserved to the judgment of the great day: My God, Psalm. 22.1.
my God, why have thou fors^ken me? why stand thou afar off? etc.

We need the witness of his Spirit together with our spirits, to let us know we
are his Children; (...)
and that our Consciences bear us witness in the holy Ghost, Romans 8.16. and
chap. 9.1.

But what then? Despair twofold.
do godly men fall into despair sometimes? Answ. Despair is either total and
final as in Cain and Judas, or only partial and temporary, as in Heman and some
other godly men. And godly men in their greatest despair can pray for mercy, as
here Jonah out of the Whales belly, which he calls the belly of hell: and they
shall find mercy as he, delivered out of all; yea more, they had some mixture
of comfort while they were in the belly of hell. Jonah remembered God when his
soul fainted in him, verse 7. and even then he would look again toward his holy
Temple, ver. 4.

All for the instruction of godly men, who see by this Take heed, Heb. 10.31. 1
Pet. 4.17.
it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; and judgment
begins at the house of God, who never meant to make fondlings of his own
children.

And if it be so, what will become of the sinner and the wicked? Jonah ^n a
Whales belly, with weeds and noysomness. But what misery will ye think it to be
for ever with devils, in the place where the worm dies not, and the fire goes
not out?

I said, I am cast out of thy sight, and my soul fainted within me.

He that before made nothing of it to flee from the presence of the Lord, now
complains that he is cast out of his sight; and he that before was so hardy as
to go directly against the word of the Lord, now tells how his soul fainted
within him. No courage will hold out with a man which is not well founded in
dependence on God, Peter who relied too much on his own strength, had cause
afterward to weep bittely.

I said I am cast out of thy sight.

no more grea^ous, but has shut up his loving kindness in everlasting
displeasure; and Job said, He counts me for his enemy.

I believe, Lord help my unbelief: Partly by the guiltiness of some sin
hitherto not repented nor pardoned, or the sense of pardon not yet come to his
understanding; Partly by the tenderness of his Conscience, loath to part with so
great a good as the favor of God is; reckoning and saying, In thy presence is
fullness of joy, and the loving kindness of God is better then life, Psalm.
16.11. and 63 3.

So the fool rages and is confident. Prove. 14.16.
Idle and formal Christians get more assurance (such as it is) then they that
take most pains for it. A tenderhearted Christian comes drugling after almost
out of breath, and much ado to keep up his spirit, when the other went before
fearlesly, and holds on in a flaunting fashion, too fine to last always. Our
rule is, to work out our salvation with fear and trembling. Take heed, Phil.
2.12.
there have been those who have puffed or raged in prosperity, and yet have
fainted in adversity,

Let the exhortation be to good and discreet Christians; 2 Pet. 1.10: Heb. 10.
carefully follow the great business of making sure your Calling and Election,
grow up more and more to the full assurance of faith, as in things indifferent,
so about the love of God; let every one be fully persuaded in his own mind:
Romans 14 6.
what is wanting to a weak faith, get it supplied by a conscionable use of the
means of grace, such as the Word, Sacraments, Prayer, Covenant, Promises, all
the grounds of confidence which God has given to work us to strong
consolation, Heb. 6.18. Especially take heed of a scandalous sin, which gasheth
conscience deeply; and of casting thy self out of Gods sight by relinquishing
duty, as here Jonah did: such may thank themselves for their desertions, sad
eclipses and jealousies that arise in them; how should it be otherwise?

My soul fainted within me.

A good soul sometimes has his fainting fits in respect of faith and comfort;
so had Baruch, Jer. 45.3. I fainted in my sighing; so the Church, Lam. 5.17.
for this our heart is faint. And not only for corporal wants and dangers, as
those that fainted for thirst, or for the sword; but for spiritual
considerations, Psalm. 84.2. my soul longs, Amos 8 1^. Ezekiel. 21.7, 15.
yea even faints for the living God, and 119.81. my soul faints for thy
salvation.

The reason is. 1. The greatness or tediousness of an Esa. 57.16 Jonah was
almost spent by lying so long in the Whales belly. 2. Where the guilt of sin
and the wrath of God meet together in a soul, usually it makes foul weather,
that it comes so far as to fainting. Pro. 18.14.
A wounded spirit who can bear? And this is Jonahs case at this time; we may
hear afterward, that he fainted for the heat of the Sun: J^n. 4 8.
but that was nothing to this, where sin intervenes and makes the sorrow far
more intolerable

poor spirit, and ready to faint in the sight of their sins, or fear of Gods
displeasure; some are of a tender spirit, and should be handled tenderly. Rough
speaking or doing would even quite over-set them and bring them to a despairing
faintness. In such cases we should note and be tender, and pour in oil to heal
their wounds; so did Christ, Esa. 50.4. he spoke a word in season to him that
was weary; and it has been said, nothing does so discover a man to be
spiritual, or according to the mind of Christ, as the gentle handling of
another man's wounds.

Help against fainting fits.
As against bodily faintings we get hot waters and other helps, so should we
against these faintings of spirit: As thus;

Ps. 27.13. I had fainted unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord
in the land of the living; as how? because it draws virtue from Christ and from
his intercession, who is a quickening Head: and from the promises and covenant
which also have an enlivening power; and it gives the poor soul a view of
heaven to fetch life again, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17, 18. for which cause we faint not;
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day;
for our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, while we look not at the things which
are seen, but at the things which are not seen; those temporal, these eternal.

2. Wait upon God in the diligent use of his Ordinances: Cant. 2.
these are the flagons which stay a soul that is sick of love to Jesus Christ;
and see Esa. 40.29, 30, 31. he gives power to the faint, and to them that have
no might he increases strength; Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and
the young men shall utterly fa^l: But they that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength, they shall mount up with wings as Eagles; they shall run and
not be weary, and they shall walk and not faint. Christians, ye converse daily
in Ordinances; add diligence and good conscience, and your faintings will wear
off by little and little. No such Cordials as the Word and Sacraments well
improved.

3. Pray and it shall be done. God is he that sends Levit. 26.36. I will send
a faintness into their hearts; and he that wounds must heal again. He that cast
Jonah into the Whales belly, and into the fainting fits, did set all at rights
again.

I will look up again toward thy holy Temple; I remembered the Lord, and my
prayer came in unto thee, unto thine holy Temple.

Here Jonah amplifies his prayer by the hope he nourished amidst his great
danger: he was not without some hope, even when he fainted most, and thought
himself cast out of Gods sight: And all these three days and nights he was well
employed. A good soul at lowest has some working toward God for comfort and
deliverance, and ought to be well employed during the time of his affliction.

Yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple; that is, Heaven.

A good soul from the belly of hell can look toward heaven, as here Jonah. No
distance of place, Note. Out of hell se^^ heaven.
nor lowness of condition can hinder this prospect. Steven amidst the stones
looked up and saw the heaven open, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God.
Moses in Pharaohs wrath and threats saw him that is invisible, and endured all.
Micaiah saw God on a throne, and was hardened against his meeting of wicked Ahab.

the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1.
By faith Abraham saw the day of Christ, and rejoiced. By faith he and the old
Believers embraced the promises. By faith Paul and his fellow Apostles looked
not at things seen which are temporal, but at things not seen which are
eternal: and, They walked by faith, not by sight; that is, spiritual
encouragements, not carnal.

memen^o for a Saint in low condition, whether by sickness or otherwise.
Upward, upward; below all is black and uncomfortable, but upward all is clear
and joyous: Make use of thy faith to carry thee far above all these tumults,
fogs and confusions; why a sword by the side, and not defend against a thief?
why faith in the heart, and not strengthened by it in threatening evils? why as
heartless and comfortless, as he that has no faith to support himself?
Remember how David rated away his unbelief, Psalm. 42.
Why art thou cast down O my soul? and remember how our Savior chode Peter for
fearing, Mat 14 31.
Why did thou doubt, O thou of little faith?

Ob. Sol.
Oh but I have something sticks by me that is of an higher importance; my sins,
which are many and great. Answ. So had Jonah; at this time he had greatly
sinned against God in refusing the service imposed, and said he was cast out of
his sight: but mark the adversative, Yet I will look toward thy holy Temple; he
would not seal his disobedience with unbelief and impenitency, one sin to
another. They say Judas did worse by despairing then in betraying his Master.
And mark the word again; he had conversed with God formerly, and found comfort
while he held on in a course of duty; but now upon this baulk made, the sweet
communion was interrupted: therefore he says, again; so thou, though thy sins
be many and great, yet return; yea though they be relapses, yet again come to
thy God by repentance; there is a promise for healing our backslidings. Hos. 14
4.
Though man will not pardon faults by recidivation, yet God will, Jer. 3 1.
thou have played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the
Lord. And if comfort come not presently, yet look again as Jonah here: at thy
first looking thou may miss of mercy, but look again, it will come at last;
at the last looking rain came according to the prayer of Elias.

When my soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord.

A Believer finds a good remedy against his fainting fits, Note. Remedy against
fainting fits.
to remember the Lord. Where note, First, there is an head-remembrance which
stands chiefly in speculation, as that there is a God, that he is able to help
us in misery, that he sees and knows our estate and can put forth mercy and
power for our relief; If thou will, thou can make me whole. Secondly, there
is an heart-remembrance; when we look upon God as our God and trust in him, and
cast our selves upon his care and love, to do for us according to our need;
whether for soul, body or estate. 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know wh^m I have believed, the desire of our heart is to the rememb^ance of
thy name.

Oh but David remembered God, and was troubled, Ob. Sol.
Psalm. 77.3. Answ. David was now under a temptation, as appears by ver. 10. I
said it is my infirmity. But I say more, there is something in God which may
trouble even a good soul; namely his justice, his displeasure at sin, his
revence for sin, sometimes upon his own children; and these arm his other
Attributes against the soul of a sinner, viz. his holiness, his power, his
wisdom, his sovereignty, his providence and government; all terrible, where the
guilt of sin lies upon the soul; which possibly might be David's case at this
time, mine, or thine.

But let weak believers take this instruction: remember the Lord, and stay your
hearts on him; remember him in that form, and in those relations, as he stands
to a Believer. Remember him as the Lord in covenant, as the Lord thy
righteousness, as the Lord merciful and gracious, as the Lord pardoning
iniquity, transgression and sin, as the Lord that bears a most watchful eye of
care and providence over thy person and estate; that remembers his covenant,
and thy frailty; and knows when a deliverance will be most seasonable: Though a
Mother forget her Child, yet will not I forget thee, says the Lord; yea though
we forget duty as Jonah did at this time, yet will he remember to be gracious.
And though we know not what to do for our own deliverance in any kind, yet he
knows well enough and will do it for us: he knows to deliver the righteous out
of trouble.

My prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy Temple.

Jonahs, Salomons, Hezekiahs, Cornelius, others. The reason is, Christ takes
the prayers and presents them to his and our Father, Rev. 8.3, 4. It is one
chief part of his Priestly Office, intercession as well as satisfaction, and he
will be sure to do it to the uttermost; he appears for us, and makes requests
in our behalf.



My prayer came into thy Temple; and elsewhere, We know we have the Petitions
we ask of him, and he will speak peace to his people. For why? it is his
promise, Ask and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, etc.

Ver. 6.8, 10. Thou have brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.
They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy. But I will sacrifice
unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, etc.


Here the Prophet amplifies his prayer by the effect it had, namely his
deliverance out of that great danger; Parts.
Thou have brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God. And this is
farther illustrated. 1. By the contray in Idolaters, who miss of mercy because
they seek not to the true God, v 8. 2. By the thankfulness he means to show
for the deliverance, v. 9. 3 By the particularizing of the deliverance, and how
it was effected, v. 10.

Thou have brought up my life from corruption, O Lord my God.

There be many in this company that may truly say, God has brought up my life
from corruption: at such a time I was very likely to die, I had one foot in the
grave, I had made my Will and bid farwell to all the world; yet it pleased God
to add more time to, my days; I am yet in the land of the living among old
friends and neighbors; and the time that remains in the flesh, I ought, and
partly have promised to spend in the service of God, better then formerly. But

Whether do I speak those words in way of hearty and Examine whether delivered
in mercy.
have I serious purposes indeed to improve this life of mine for the service
and glory of God? or, do I now think of those vows and purposes, to perform
them effectua^ly? If I do, do I put forth my best and truest endeavors to
bring them into act? when Jonah had escaped his great danger, he went and did
the message though to as great a danger. When Hezekiah had been sick and
recovered, he set to praise the Lord all the days of his life. Now these
examples are written for our instruction to do the like; as bad examples are to
be avoided, so good examples are to be followed.

Whether by general mercy, or special.
And if we do not, the deliverance out of danger will prove only a common mercy
that comes of the general providence of God, whereby he saves man and beast,
and his Sun shines and rain falls on good and bad. True, Jehovah raised thee
out of thy great fit of sickness, or some other mischief; but thou can not
yet say, the Lord my God: and yet that is the only right receiving of mercies,
when one is able to say, Thou have brought up my life from corruption, O Lord
my God. There is a vast difference between these two, Saved by the true God,
and saved by the Lord my God. Consider the word especially in 1 Timothy 4.10. he is
the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe.

And let all fall closely upon this point, to make it sure The Lord my God; My
Lord, and my God, said Thomas; my Redeemer, said Job; he loved me and gave
himself for me. I pray what think ye? is it not great difference to say, A good
sum of Gold and Silver; and, This is my Gold and Silver? even so is it here.
A man may be poor enough, though he see heaps and treasures of money; so in
spiritual treasure. Know the only happiness stands in the appropriation, my
God; Blessed are the people that have the Lord for their God, Psalm. 144.15.

In these Ordinances therefore the main design of Christians should be to make
Christ sure to their souls, and so be able to say, my God, my Savior, my
Redeemer. Him we preach as the chief matter of our pains-taking, and in his
Name we make offers of the favor of God to be thy God, and thine, 2 Cor. 6.1.
and thine; Now receive not the grace of God in vai^; be sure to do this
business, which is the main business to be done; Heb. 12.29.
and if it be not done, this thy God will one day prove a consuming fire, who
though he has brought up thy life from corporal corruption, yet not from
eternal.

But come we now to the illustration from the contrary: Idolaters miss of
mercy, because they seek not the true God; They that observe lying vanities,
forsake their own mercy Jehovah brought up Jonahs life from corruption, Jehovah
heard his prayer and delivered him, of Jehovah is salvation; the true God did
all, but the idol-gods can do none of these things, they are vanities and
teachers of lies, Hab. 2 18.
and will deceive all those that trust in them and call upon them.

But I comprehend under the name of lying vanities. Lying vanities, what.


1. The idols of the Gentiles which the Mariners prayed unto, every one to his
god. Had not Jonahs God delivered Jonah and of the Hebrews, who is also the God
of us Christians.

2. Those carnal reasonings wherewith Jonah was swayed Nineve and flee to
Tarsus, whereof he tells us in chap. 4 2. and now he recants all, professing to
adhere to the true God only. Such carnal reasonings we all have, and are to
exalt high thoughts against the obedience of Christ. 2 Cor. 10.5.
Religion with many is measured by mere policy, credit, multitude, thriving in
the world, and the like; lying vanities all of them as to the soul, and in Gods
matters.

Yet farther, all superstitions are lying vanities; that is, Psalm 40.4. They
turn aside to lies: And all Astrological predictions in Jer. 10.2. And all
forms of Religion in hypocrites, they 11.12. And all good things of this life
in worldlings, who pursue them immoderately Vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
Eccl. 1.2.
And all lusts in profane persons called deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 4.22.
deceivablness of unrighteousness in them that perish, 2 These. 2.10.

Now accordingly as these vanities are observed more or less, what the
observing of them.
so mercy is forsaken. Profane and impenitent persons observe these lying
vanities totally and finally, and so they altogether lose the mercy of God,
having their portion in this life; Psalm. 17.14.
but godly Christians who observe them but a little, and only for a while, do
miss of some mercy they might enjoy; as we see in this terrible balk which
Jonah made.

Why their own mercy.
But why is it called their own mercy? Answ. Because it belonged to them, it was
tendered to them, they might have had it, they should have taken it, and not
let it go for the best advantage in the world. So the Jews are called the
children of the Kingdom; Mat. 8.12.
that is, those that belonged primarily to the Church and favor of God. But
see the like opposition in Luke 16.10, 11, 12.

The words are a doctrine, They that observe lying vanities, forsake their own
mercy. The reason is, mercy is basely undervalued, and vanities preferred
before it. Though it be a precious mercy, a soul saving Mercy, undeserved,
free, rich, the fountain of all good in earth and heaven; though it be renewed
in a costly way of Christ's blood, which is more then the creation of man and
the world; though it be published and offered in the ministry, Take it, it is
your own, be reconciled to God and all shall do well; though God be very
patient after many of your refusals, yet still vanities shall be observed, and
pursued as the chief good: A just forfeit, the Lord will not endure the
disparagement of his mercy; Luke ^4.21.
the King was angry when the Guests would not come to his Supper, saying, Not
one of them that were bidden shall taste of my Supper.

Terror to s^nd Professors.
Which may serve for great terror to many: Oh that they might be convinced of
their great folly, and humbled, and work wisely hereafter for the welfare of
their poor soul!

in the practice; and when the main stroke is to be struck, it is left as no
good bargain; as if the salvation of a soul were not indeed a thing to be stood
upon; never is it weighed well till the day of judgment, when it will be too
late. Christ and his salvation are liked well, and presumed on, but lost for
trifles: and lost with a kind of wilfulness; it is not said here that they lose
mercy, but forsake it.

2. These vanities will one day be seen to be altogether that they cannot
profit nor deliver, because they are vain, 1 Samuel 12 21. Vain to have had
pleasure in this life, or scraped wealth together, or climbed up to honors, or
to have so drudged about the world, as if Religion were no calling for a
Christian. Then they will say, What has pride profited us, or any of the
other? when the soul is lost, and the shame and misery comes, Romans 6.21. Rev.
6, 16.
they will call the mountains to fall upon them, and the hills to cover them:
Oh hide us from the presence of the Lamb.

3. What a confounding lie will it appear, when these Jonah. At that day mercy
will be found to be the portion of good souls only, who love and fear God; and
at that day it will appear to have been limited wi^h certain conditions, which
at present are overlooked, and altogether neglected. These conditions for
receiving mercy were delivered warily by good Preachers, though others could
daube and skin them over. And they were told what a mortal variance there is
between mercy and these lying vanities, but would not lay it to heart.

Oh that now men and women were ashamed, as one day they must be! now it would
be to some purpose; they might be converted and saved, as the Prophecy went of
Converts in the latter days, Ezekiel. 16.63. they shall be ashamed of their
doings; but in that great day it will be too late, it should have been done
beforehand.

Work wisely to find mercy one day.
and do not exchange it for vanities. Ye see it may be forgone and forsaken,
and the way how it comes about; beware of lying vanities; no wise man will let
go his Land for points and counters: and consider withal,

1. This mercy is such a thing, as the worst among us

Luke 1.77, 78
He gives knowledge of salvation to his people by the remission of their sins,
through his tender mercy, or the bowels of his mercy. Now who of us would lose
a dear friend for a few pins or points? Beware of this extreme foolery.

it your mercy, or you could call it your own mercy. Though it be free in
respect of his love so ordering a way of reconciliation, yet it is not free in
respect of Christ and his sufferings. It cost him great drops of blood,
scourges, fears, sorrows, manifold indignities; he found it no easy matter to
procure mercy for sinners. And should it now be prodigally squandred away, and
all for trifles? what, ma^e a great purchase by expending a great sum of
money, and idly forfeit it again?

own mercy and let it go? to have it merited, offered, sealed, applied,
rejoiced in, yet lost when all is done? Heb. 6.5.
to taste of the powers of the world to come, and yet fall away, and lose all
for a little ease, or wealth, or other vanity? what Boy has a bird in his
hand, and lets him fly away in hope to catch him again? Oh who can pity or help
that soul which thrusts away his own mercy?

5. Worldly comforts are not our own in comparison, Riches take them wings, and
fly toward heaven; Prove. 23.5.
Pleasures many time end in pain, Honors go out with a snuff. And at best,
these things give not contentment as they promised. There is a lie in my right
hand, says the Idolater, Esa. 44.20. in my eye, sath the wanton; in my heart
says, the covetous; in my course of life, says the profane, or the hypocrite.

6. If good things be such lying vanities, what shall we fitted for glory.

Lastly, for carnal reasonings, let all godly men take Jonahs example, who was
almost drowned in Gods mercy, when it was perverted to declining of duty. Ye
see how he fared; beware of halting a little, or for a while.

Ver. 9.10. I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving, I will
pay that that I have vowed; salvation is of the Lord. And the Lord spoke unto
the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon the dry land.


Of sacrificing to the Lord we spoke on chap. 1.16. as also of making vows. And
on v. 17. we spoke of the powerful and present providence of God, how it
reaches to all the creatures, even the fishes of the sea. Therefore the less
is to be spoken now.

Note. Difference of godly and ungodly.
But for farther edification note thus: There is much difference between the
purposes of the godly and the wicked in regard of afflictions. 1. The wicked
purpose viz. Jonah was now got out of shipwreck, and says he will sacrifice
and pay vows: but of the Mariners we hear no more. A man hereby may make vows,
but the godly say they will pay their vows. In case of revenge perhaps, or of
some wickedness, a wicked man will do it because he has vowed it, as he says;
but in case of religiousness he will take more leisure; and think of it ten
times or an hundred times, before he will do it once. There is another trial of
your hearts.

I will sacrifice with the voice of thanksgiving.

So David sometimes, I will offer unto th^e bullocks and lamb^, and tell of all
thy wondrous works: Come children, I will tell you what he has done for my
soul; I will not hide his righteousness, and his doings from the great
Congregation; I will praise the Lord among the faithful, and in the assembly.

Note. ^se expressions of thankfulness.
A godly man ought to be thankful for mercies, and to use expressions of his
thankfulness. Indeed the marrow of thankfulness lies in the heart and they are
hypocrites who are all in good words: but where the heart is right, and
inditing a good matter, the tongue may well be allowed to be the pen of a ready
writer; yea, must interpret the mind in way of thankfulness.

Of this see something in Psalm. 37.30, 31. The mouth of the righteous speaks
wisdom, and his tongue talks of judgment. The law of his God is in his
heart; none of his steps shall slide. Ephesians. 4 29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good to the use of edifying, that
it, may minister grace to the hearers. Col. 4.6. Let your speech be always
with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer every
man.

Which serves to reprove the barrenness of good speech that appears in some of
the godly, the voice of thanksgiving when and where it concerns them sometime
to testify their gratitude, or speak to the edification of others. Mat. 12.35.
A fault, and should be mended: A good man out of the treasure of his heart
should bring forth good things; not only actions, but speeches. How else shall
the lips of the righteous feed many? or how shall Idolaters be confronted,
profane persons brow-beaten, or religious friends edified, excited unto the
like thankfulness, provoked to be active as well as our selves? but a mere
dullness must lie upon our spirits, to be very little serviceable in our
generation, or in the place of our abode.

I confess there is too much tattle among some that profess the best things;
either for censoriousness, or running over Town and Country in discourse, such
as it is, and it were well if some talked less, except it were to the purpose,
(...)
for edifying in godliness. Take heed, Christians of both sexes, and remember
this voice of thanksgiving: either hold your peace, or speak things better then
silence; that is, things useful in one kind or other.

I will pay that that I have vowed.

Note. Fulfill gracious promises.
A godly man is careful to do for God as he has promised; as he has engaged by
his word, so he remembers to answer his engagement. Now and then he runs in
debt with God by promising, and is so honest as to pay his debts; as Jonah
here, so David in Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous judgment.

Vow, 76.11. 2. God expects the performance of lawful vows and promises; as
from Jacob, G^^ 5.1. 3. A good soul feels it self bound with a bond to do as he
has said; I have spoken, and cannot go back, Jepihah; see Number. 30.3. 4. As it
feels a bond tying, so it finds a grace enabling, and putting on to the
performance. Believers are a willing people, each of them says; Thy law is
within my heart; Psalm. 110.3, 40, 8.
I will sing and give praise, and offer sacrifice.



thou have vowed. Upon recovery, or escape, or receiving of a child, or
whatever drew forth thy vow, remember and be sure to do it. Jonahs example is
here recorded for thy imitation; Go, and do thou likewise. Luke 10 37.
Thou say thou art honest; now every honest man will pay his debts so far as
he is able; and so will thou if honest indeed.

And it is well known, that the thing vowed is fit to be done: As for example,

1. Thy whole self, dedicated and devoted to God in Baptism; and the vow is
afterward renewed in affliction, or at the Lords Supper, or at a Fast, Neh. 9.
ult. and it is a mercy that thou art engaged to God as one of his family, of
which he takes care, and on which he has settled many high privileges; and
thou expectest all those benefits. But remember, covenants use to be
reciprocal, and bind both parties; so here, If God must be bound, thou must not
be loose.

2. All the obedience which possibly thou can yield unto God; to be loved
with all thy heart, and all thy soul, and all thy mind, and all thy strength.
We place not lawful vows in Counsels, but Precepts; all to be done
conscionably, and in an entire manner, not lust with the heart, etc. And it
will be both thy sincerity and safety, to aim at an universal obedience, Psalm.
119.6. Then shall I not be ashamed when I have respect to all thy Commandments.

What remains but that every one remember his vow, and pay it to the Lord his
God? And if any mean indeed to do it, let us have no more delays as formerly.
When thou have vowed a vow to God, defer not to pay it, Eccl. 5 4. Dely breeds
danger. One place shall conclude this point, Deuteronomy. 23.21, 22, 23. When thou
shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it; for the
Lord thy God will surely require it of thee, and i^ would be sin in thee. That
which is gone out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform, even a free will
offering according as thou have vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou have
promised with thy mouth.

Salvation is of the Lord. Or, Salvation belongs unto the Lord, Note. God the
Author of our salvation.
Psalm. 3.8. Or, He is the God of our salvation, Psalm. 68.19. God is the Author
of salvation to his people.

1. Temporal salvation, as here Jonah; the good man confesses with the voice
of thanksgiving, that this his escape out of the sea and Whale is merely of the
goodness of God; none could do it but God alone, nor for us when we are sick or
otherwise grievously afflicted. God is, and beside him there is no Savior,
Esa. 40.11. namely out of bondage in Egypt, out of the captivity of Babylon,
and other dangers.

2. Spiritual and eternal salvation, as to all the Elect; who were never in a
Whales belly, but in a worse case by far, Heb. 5.9. Christ became the Author of
salvation to them that obey him. Mat. 1.21.
He is Jesus, and saves his people from their sins; from the damnation of their
sins, from the curse of the Law, the wrath of God, and the brimstone of hell.

Jonah, now delivered from death, who blesses God for his deliverance. Psalm.
68.19.
Say thou also, Blessed be the Lord who loadeth us daily with benefits, even
the God of our salvation. 1. They are sweet and precious benefits; health out
of sickness, freedom from prison and other comfortable changes. 2. There is
plenty of them, a load of benefits with great variety, and to our great
contentment. 3. Their continuance, daily benefits, and more every day, and
night, and hour, and moment of our lives. 4. The extent of them, or how far
they reach us; that is, all the people of God, and all the creatures in
general. God is a great Benefactor and Housekeeper, and ought accordingly to
be magnified. Remember, and do. These are ravishing and filling meditations to
them that shall duly consider the course of providence.

But especially to them that are heirs of eternal salvation. Think what it is
to have Christ for a Savior, and what it is to have escaped those hellish
enemies, and damned mischiefs which befall Reprobates: Luke 1.46.
Say with Mary, My soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in God
my Savior; Say as Paul, Ephesians. 1.3.
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed me
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in him; and as Peter, Blessed
be God who according to his abundant mercy has begotten me again unto a lively
hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptible, etc. 1 Pet. 1.3.
These are good forms of thanksgiving: but the matters are infinitely precious,
and highly to be prized.

2. It serves to comfort good and thankful souls; as the rejoiced in God her
Savior. Comfort.
There is comfort in an outward deliverance, such as 88. or 1605. but much more
in a spiritual, from sin and Satan, and all those woeful torments; so the joy
should be heartier, and purer, and enlarged abundantly toward the Author, Psalm.
32.11. Rejoice in the Lord ye righteous, be glad and shout for joy, Phil. 4.4.
all ye that are upright in heart. Not simply the gift, but the Giver, to be
highly magnified; Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. These are
good discriminations from carnal joy, so to look to the benefit, and by it to
the Founder; as David, when he had sung the works of God, concluded, My
meditation of him shall be sweet. Psalm. 104.34.


3. It serves to help our faith in dangers, and against Trust in this God of
salvation, Confidence.
both for soul and body; we may well cast all our care on him, to secure both.
And we need not doubt in the least, though hell raise many storms, and the
world as many, and our own unbelieving hearts cast doubts now and then, yet
fear nothing: he has both devised and wrought salvation for us, and keeps it
safely for us, 1 Pet. 1.5.

Lastly, a soul that has any sad thoughts and cares about salvation, sees
hereby whether to look and turn, and where to speed of salvation; look to
Jehovah who is complete in all his Attributes, Promises, Relations, Ordinance,
Dispensation; especially in Christ the Mediator between God and man, and a most
loving Savior to distressed souls.

The Lord spoke unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon dry land.

The voice of the Lord is powerful and mighty in operation; see Psalm. 29.3.

Note. Gods voice very powerful. 1.
1. This is utteted of the written word of God, Heb. 4.12. In the hand of the
Spirit it is able to convince of a bad estate, to convert, to confirm, to
comfort, to recover out of great falls, and in fine to save a soul; yea, by
hundreds and thousands, Act. 2.

things by the word of his power; Heb. 1.3.
by the word of the Lord the heavens were created, and all the hosts of them:
he sends forth his word, and they are made, and at his word they return to
their dust.

Specially his providence to his Church and Chosen: Thou art our King O God,
Psalm. 44.4.
command deliverance for Jacob. He spoke to Esau and Laban, and they refrained
from Jacob; he spoke to the spirit of Cyrus, and he sent back the captivity of
Judah; he spoke to the fevers in way of rebuke, and they left the sick
persons; Speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. Here he spoke to
the fish, and Jonah came to dry land.

Psalm. 29.9.
Worthily therefore in his Temple does every one speak of his glory, as a most
fit Object of our admiration and adoration. None among the gods is to be
compared to the Lord, none of them is like unto our God: holy and reverend is
his Name; Oh for hearts lifted up in his praises, and ravished with his glories!

All things are possible to him that believes.

So in those main truths of the Gospel.

1. That Christ rose again from the dead the third day, as here did Jonah; the
same God that spoke to the fish, and Jonah got to dry land, did speak to death
and the grave, and Christ got into the land of the living. Remember thy Type,
and how it was answered; As Christ rose again by his own power, so also by the
power of his Father.

2. That we also shall rise again at the last day; Ezekiel. 37.1.
we believe the resurrection of the dead. Why? God will speak to dry bones, and
they shall come bone to bone, and ^ive, and stand up, and be a great army. If
we believe the Scriptures and the power of God, we will never stick to believe
this Article.

3. That collapsed Churches shall be raised again, as there, Judah in
captivity. Apply it to the Churches of Bohemiah, and other now fallen.

4. That distressed consciences shall be relieved in due time: God will speak
peace to his people, and will revive the spirit of the contrite ones.

5. That broken Trades and Estates shall be restored when God pleases; he will
restore the years of the Locust and Caterpillar: Only if we believe and obey,
Esa. 1.19, 20. If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the
land: but if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the
mouth of the Lord has spoken it.

CHAP. III.
Ver. 1.2. And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying,
Arise, and go to Nineve that great City, and Preach unto it the Preaching that
Ibid thee.


OF this Chapter there be four parts. 1. A new order for Jonah to go and preach
at Nineve, ver. 1.2. 2. Jonahs obeying of that order, ver. 3.4 3. The Ninevites
repenting at his preaching, ver. 5.6, 7, 8, 9. 4. The mercy and forbearance of
God upon their repenting, ver. 10.

Note. Penitents restored to their old standing.
For the first of these: Jonah is here restored to his office of a Prophet, from
which he might seem to have fallen, and that most justly; so our Savior
restored ^eter to his office of an Apostle, after the great sin of denying his
Master. Notable examples of Gods goodness in healing and restoring the Penitent
as was said, I will heal their backsliding, I will love them freely, Hos. 14.4.

Jonah and Peter, will restore thee also, and set all at rights between him and
thy soul.

spiritual, to restore a Brother that is fallen, (...).
in the spirit of meekness, Gal. 6.1. The word is, set him in joint again. Care
is taken for the body in that case, and should much more be taken for the soul.

Note. Without exprobration of failings.
But mark the manner of restoring Jonah to his office; the Lord never up raids
him with his base and (...) flying to Tarsus; and how justly he had been served
with the storm and the Whale, but meekly and quietly he sends him upon the old
errand to Nineve, nor did Christ upbraid Peter with his threefold denial, but
gives a threefold admonition, Feed my sheep, Feed my lambs, Feed my sheep, Joh.
21.15. And of other holy simple souls it is said, that when they ask wisdom of
God, he will not upbraid, but give liberally, Jam. 1.5.

Mark this, and imitate. If a child, or servant, or friend Jonah.

There is a base petulancy in man's nature, to insult over Delinquents, and
never have done with shaming them, and ripping up the old faults. So does not
God* and ye should be followers of him as dear Children. I am sure ye would not
have him to remember against you your old offenses, Ephesians. ^.1. Ps. 25.
that your consciences should be set upon the rack for sins of youth, or later
sins: No, but according to the Covenant, I will remember their iniquity no
more; Jer. 31.34.
I will blot out their sins: I will chase away their transgressions as a cloud,
and scatter them as a mist. It will be a sad case, when God comes to set a man's
sins in order before him: Oh the roaring, and breaking of bones and horrible
torture that such do endure!

Take heed; be merciful as your heavenly Father is merciful; and withal,
remember to magnify the love of such a Father, who freely, fully and finally
forgives the sins of his people. We men use to admire and magnify those that
are of a generous and ingenuous disposition in passing by offenses. It is the
glory of a man, says Solomon: and it should yield glory unto God, that he does
so graciously forgive the sins of his people. Note. Ordinances continued to a
people.


Arise and go to Nineve.

This is spoken the second time to Jonah: the Lord sometimes continues his
mercies and ordinances to a people; that they shall have good preachers sent to
them* and the preachers shall go on with their work for the good of that
people; sermons, sacraments, sabbaths, precious liberties shall be afforded
them from time to time. Jonah retains his place, and is set upon the same
office as before: though he had made a fowl fault, and had suffered terribly
for his disobedience, yet he has his commission again renewed to preach to the
Ninevites, as Chap. 1.2, Arise, and go to Nineve that great the same words as
here at the text. 2. Though the the mercy of good preaching was withheld from
Nineve for a while, yet it is again designed for them, Arise, go and preach to
them: so still, Good preaching sometimes is delayed and kept back from a
people, sometimes interrupted in the free passage of the Gospel, yet vouchsafed
and continued where God has a people to gather to himself; as was said to Paul
for his encouragement to preach at Corinth, Speak and hold not thy peace, for I
have much people in this city Act. 18 10.

Glorify God who continues them.
Now let God be glorified, whose kindness and love toward man so evidently
appears; that Magistrates are continued notwithstanding all their failings,
and Ministers notwithstanding all their failing^, and the use of Ordinances
notwithstanding all their failings in point of thankfulness and obedience:
Sabbaths afforded, though little good use made of them: Abundance of good
preaching, though among a glutted and surfetted people: Monthly sacraments,
though many never come at them, others come very seldom, others very
unprepared, and show it too evidently by a foolish and fruitless conversation:
and good Ministers dwell among them, but there be no cases of conscience to
propose, nor comfortable fellowship between them and their people.

There be two things that might break off the course of these Ordinances.

1. The great sins of people, whereby they forfeit them into the hands of God,
and if they be not gross and scandalous sins, yet there is horrible
unfrutfulnesse, and unanswerablenesse to the wonderful mercy of God. Nineve was
not so barren when once they heard good preaching: and in all likelyhoed the
men of Nineve shall rise up in judgment with this generation, and condemn it.
Certainly unfrutful Christians shall suffer heavily, though the good preaching
continue among them. They neglect great salvation: and how should they escape?
and at last it will be said as of the fruitless fig tree, Cut it down; why
should it cumber the ground?

2. The great opposition of the devil and his instruments. Satan hindered Paul
once and again from coming to the Thessalonians: and we see what persecutions
the Jews raised in diverse places to hinder the preaching of the word. Such
malice still there is in Sectaries, and some profane persons.

Go to Nineve, and preach the preaching.

Preaching of the word is ordained of God to bring sinners to repentance, and
so to salvation, as here; Note. Preaching appointed to convert sinners.
at this great city God could have sent an Angel to do this message, but uses
the ministry of man; as also Peter's to Cornelius. Or God could have sent
another Prophet to Nineve, but Jonah must be the man, now well subdued by his
late affliction, and a man famous in Israel, both for good preaching, and for
prophesying good to the ten Tribes, which came to pass. So still, God will
have souls converted by men subject to like passions. It is his pleasure to
have it so, 1 Cor. 1.21. It pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to
save them that believe. It is enjoynd earnestly to be done by men appointed for
the work, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing and his Kingdom: Preach
the word, be instant in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine. It is urged with a woe and a reward, 1 Cor. 9.16,
17. Woe is unto me if I preach not the Gospel: but if I do this thing willingly,
I have a reward. And it is declared by the benefit to good Hearts, Romans 1.16.
It is the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes.

But what is preaching? Ans. It is made up of three things.

It stands in three things,
1. Publication of the word: a Preacher among the Greeks is (...), praeco the
voice of a Crier; alluding After the reading of the Law and the Prophets.

They read the book of the Law, and gave the sense. A thing needful to be done
because of some obscurity, Act. 8.
as the Eunuch said, How can I understand without an interpreter? and Paul was
sent to the Gentiles to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to
light, Act. 26.18.

instruction, exhortation, reprehension, consolation, confutation, and other
occasions of Gods people as their case does require: 1 Cor. 14.3. 2 Timothy 3.16.
Mercy to whom mercy belongs, and judgment to whom judgment. A steward in a
great man's house gives every one his portion: and so does the Minister in the
house of God.

the preachers plea. The world is no changeling, but still accounts it the
foolishness of preaching; even the wise part of the world, where grace is
wanting; Oh a dry and barren ordinance to be so much attended,

Make much of good preaching.
Take heed, Christians, and duly stoop to this Ordinance of God. Remember it is
his Ordinance, and therefore ought to be embraced with reverence and affection,
and improved to the ends and purposes which he has appointed; to get sound
knowledge, to get faith, to be wrought to repentance and conversion, to be able
to pray acceptably, to walk in faith and obedience, and so be accepted of God,
and saved, Romans 10 13, 17. Thence the need of preparation before ye come to
preaching: Eccles. 5.1 Act. 10.33. 1 Pet. ^.1, 2.
Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God: Be all present before God
to hear the things that shall be spoken: Lay aside all naughtiness, and as
newborn babes desire the sincere milk of the word to grow thereby. And thence
the taxing of those that behave not themselves well at preaching, Ezekiel. 33.30,
31, 32. And a blessing on those that hear, Luke 11.28.
so as to believe and obey; Blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep
it. And God esteems it a great mercy, that he sends Preachers among a people;
therefore so should they esteem it; or if they want the mercy, pray for it;
Amos 2.11. and Mat. 19.38.

The preaching that I bid thee.

All of us are bound up within certain laws and conditions in preaching; that
we may not preach at adventure, Note. Preachers limited in preaching.
or what seems good to our selves; and, They that are faithful, hold
themselves close to what the Lord appoints them to preach. I have received of
the Lord that which I have delivered unto you, 1 Cor. 11.23. Faithful Ministers
dare not deliver for doctrins the commandments of men, dare not make sad the
heart of the righteous, nor make glad the heart of the wicked; dare not keep
back any of the counsel of God: dare not corrupt or adulterate the Ordinances;
dare not seek their own things, but the things of Jesus Christ: and generally,
they preach as those that must give an account, and think with themselves, What
good would it do souls to be comforted, unless indeed they repent and believe
the Gospel?

1. A trial of preachers, who are true, and who are false. If they speak not
according to this word, Esa. 8.20.
it is because there is no light in them. Though they pretend visions and
revelations, they are not right. Though they come in a mortified garb, and with
a great show of sanctity, beware of them Though they urge the authority of
Fathers and other Ancients, yet look to your selves. They are deceivers, take
heed of them. The Lord now tryes you, whether ye will cleave fast to the Lord
your God. Still your course must be to the law and to the testimony.

bid us preach thus and thus, then your faith stands not in the authority of
man, but of God. True, ye have such and such lessons by the hands of men, to
direct you what to believe and obey; but first and chiefly ye have them from
God who sets the men on work. Ye have them from God at the second hand. The
Prophets were Preachers of old time; but the word of the Lord came to Jonah,
and to the rest of them. Afterward the Apostles preached, but taught the
nations ta observe and do what God commanded them. Mat. 28.20. 2 Timothy 1.13.
After them the Evangelists and other good Teachers held fast the form of
wholesome words, as they had received them from God. And now adays, whoever
believe and obey according to this word, do follow God himself speaking by his
Ministers; as when an Ambassador follows his instructions, the King his Master
is regarded or neglected. Comfort by a sacrament is Sound comfort, because we
deliver what God delivered to us, or comfort by promises applied, because God
promised, and in Christ all the promises are yea and amen.

Galatians and Thessalonians: Gal. 4.14. 1. These 2 13.
and would be your commendation, People make an ill account when they go to
hear a Sermon, and look no higher then the Preacher: thence they receive so
little good as they do: still remaining secure, impenitent, unbeleeving,
unreformed. The only way to get good by all your hearing, were, to hear as from
the great God of heaven. The preaching is by man, but he delivers what God bids
him to deliver. Therefore fear, attend, believe, obey; be afraid to forget or
neglect the instructions; if ye do, ye despise not man, but God; and who are
we, that ye murmr against us? your murmurings are not against us, but against
the Lord.

Ver. 3.4. So Jonah arose and went unto Nineve according to the word of the
Lord. Now Nineve was an exceeding great City of three days journey. And Jonah
began to enter into the City a days journey, and he cried, and said, Yet forty
days and Nineve shall be overthrown.


Here is Jonahs obedience; the last and truest note of his repentance. Before
we had his confession, his faith, his prayer, his thanks^iving and vowing; but
now we have the perfection of all, his obedience: Now what he promised freely,
he performs faithfully; now he lays aside all his carnal reasonings, and sets
to do according to the word of the Lord. So still, Note. Obedience the highest
act of repentance.
without obedience all other are but shows of repentance. Ahab and Judas are
said to have repented, but no obedience followed; nor others who are
hypocrites: Approve thou thy sincerity by bringing forth fruits meet for
repentance; not leaves, but fruits; Mat. 3 8.
not shows, but substance.

Jonah arose and went unto Nineve.

This is that which he said, chap. 2.9. I will pay that that I have vo^ed He
had vowed (it seems) in the Whales belly, that if he might be delivered, he
would do the message at Nineve whatever it cost him: and now he does the
message indeed. Though the danger were the same, by displeasing a mighty
people; though God were very merciful, and likely to spare Nineve; Note. Do as
well as vow.
though thereby he should be accounted a false Prophet: Yet up he arises, and
hies him to Nineve. Thus he pays what he had vowed. Remember, and do thou
likewise; it is written for thy instruction and imitation. In Baptism thou
renouncedst the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, and wast devoted to the
service of the true God, who is Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. Now at years of
discretion, do as thou have said, pay that that thou have vowed; especially one
that has been dangerously sick, and now recovered or in other great
affliction; remember the vows which thy lips then uttered, as Psalm. 66.13, 14.
I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken
when I was in trouble. Show whether thou have indeed profited in the School of
affliction; whether as Christ, thou have learned obedience by the things thou
sufferedst; or as David, It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I
might learn thy statutes. Do the duty, though it be difficult, costly, or
dangerous; as this to Jonah. Godly sorrow uses to work abundance of gracious
effects, 2 Cor. 7.11. Carefulness, Fear, vehement Desire, Zeal, etc.

Penitents work for God.
And note how it is said here, Jonah did according to the word of the Lord. A
truly-penitent Christian sets himself to work for God according to his word:
However he have declined the service, and turned aside to crooked ways; yet
upon his better bethinking himself, especially upon his smart in one kind or
other, he gets up and falls to his work again: so Jonah, David, Peter, other
Saints whose falls were great; but so was their amendment too, and the
obedience they performed afterward. Why?

1. He hears and acknowledges the voice of God commanding Arise and go to
Nineve. When young Samuel once knew the voice of the Lord, he presently said,
Speak Lord, for thy servant hears; and he did all the message to the
uttermost; So did Paul at his conversion, Lord, 1 Samuel 3.10, 12.
what will thou have me to do? where think, why should not a Convert obey the
word of God, as well as a Whale or a wind? should man be more senseless then
they?

heart of the truly-penitent; as for example, Jonah was a godly man before this
time, though now he failed foully and fearfully, therefore is awakened to his
work, and sets presently to do it. In every true Christian there abides a seed
of God, 1 John 3.9.
which will not suffer him to sin as the wicked does. And such will say, We can
do nothing against the truth, but for the truth; and, We cannot but speak the
things we have heard and seen.

3. The word of the Lord carries Authority with it, David, My heart stands in
awe of thy word. And it has the nature of a rule; to do as the word directs,
so much and no more, and in such manner as it requires, Gal. 6.16. As many as
walk according to this rule, peace and mercy be upon them; And so there is this
force, both in the commanding word of God, and the forbidding word, and
threatening, and promising, and comforting; in all there is an eternal
obligation and equity, and a believer will have a faithful respect to all, as
is enjoined Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command you, observe and do it;
thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

It follows hence, that numbers among us never yet according to his word; some
being grossly disobedient, others partial in their obedience, others slight
others unsettled and unconstant, others timorous and loath to appear where
difficulty or danger appears. Numbers flee from God with Jonah, but few travel
for God with Jonah; yet will make themselves believe they have repented, which
is impossible; (...).
for true repentance is ever a fruitful and effectual repentance: remember the
fruits meet for repentance, Mat. 3.8. and works meet for repentance, Act. 21.20.

And if others will not, yet let true Christians justify upon the work which
the Lord has for them to do; as ye have failed with Jonah, so be quickened and
active with Jonah. Every one knows his fleeing, and wherein he has been
faulty: Now let every one be humbled for his failings, and return unto God in
the same way he went from him.

How to set to do Gods work.
Our Text imports three things, which may set a collapsed Christian upon his
legs again.

Arise and go to Nineve. Up Sampson, the Phlistines be upon thee; Say not, Yet
a little sleep, Augustine.
yet a little slumber, yet a little folding of the hands to sleep. This little
and little will make a great deal at the last. Thy case is bad enough already,
and such delay would make it far worse. He that is not fit for God and duty to
day, will be less fit to morrow. There is more need by double diligence ^o
redeem the time that is lost, and fetch after the work that should have been
done.

Jonah to flee to Tarsus; namely, the great mercy of God to repenting sinners.
What of that? ought not Jonah to have tried therefore to bring the Ninevites to
repentance? If Christ be revealed in thee, yet beware of consulting with flesh
and blood; Gal. 1.16.
and take heed of presuming on mercy; as mercy is not to be straightned, so
neither is it to be enlarged beyond the bounds prescribed of God, nor perverted
to wrong ends; but whereas he is very gracious, he should be feared the more;
even vessels of mercy are not allowed to turn grace into lasciviousness. Psalm.
130.4. Jude 4. 1 Pet. 4.17.
Consider what that means, Judgment begins at the house of God, and the
righteous shall scarce be saved.

Jonah has now unlearned that lesson, and puts on to his work whatever comes
of it. Prove. 26.13.
The fool (or wicked man) says there is a Lion in the way, I shall be
destroyed or damnified if I do this and this duty; I know not what mischief
will come of it. But what says the Spirit? fear not their fear, nor be
dismayed; Luke 12.4.
fear not them that can kill the body, and afterward can do no more: but fear
him who can cast both body and soul into hell; I say unto you, Prove 29 25.
fear him. Solomon says, the fear of man brings a snare; that is, sometimes
enwraps a man in that and that danger, which by faith he might have avoided; as
here Jonah, carnal fear threw him into the depth of the sea.

Now Nineve was an exceeding great City of three days journey; that is such as
a man could not pass in all the streets of it, and deliver a message as Jonah
must do, under so much time allotted.

Of the bigness of this City we spoke on Chap. 1. 2. and how Jonah was told of
it before hand, that he might arm himself with courage accordingly.

And now meth^nks, when he sets upon obedience, it sets forth his courage and
faithfulness, and tends to his high commendation, there being many difficulties
which might hinder or encounter his honest resolution to do the service: As for
instance,

1. In Nineve which was the head of the Assyrian Monarchy, there was a potent
and flourishing people who were Lords of the Eastern world; and how angry would
these be to hear a poor fellow cry out against them, Yet forty days and Nineve
shall be overthrown?

2. In what danger should he be to be torn in pieces among them, or to be
beaten and sent away empty? for so the Jews dealt with diverse of their Prophets
yet the only people of God: and how should heathenish Ninevites be expected to
do better?

3. If the Ninevites should be quiet, yet the good man had a shrewd task to do;
for three days together to trudge up and down in all their streets, and with
such a message as none was likely to give him countenance or entertainment.

4. The message had no likelihood to be performed. Where was any Army to beset
and overthrow Nineve? or, whence should the enemies come? what, should they
drop out of the sky? or, what should be the Engines whereby it should be
vanquished?

Difficulties enough to hinder: Yet on he goes, and does the message.

Note. No difficulties stand before zeal.
Zeal for God will break through all difficulties, and do duty. Jonah had now
got into his heart a burning love, and a strong fear of God; and therefore
falls on his work without forecasting of events, or hardships. So still, Love
is strong as Death; much water cannot quench love; the love of Christ
constrains us, Cant. 8.6. 2 Cor. 5.14.
says the Apostle.

Jer. 9.3. They are not valiant for the truth upon earth. Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is
like a Dove, without heart, without understanding or courage for God.

Jonah; the three Jews that adventured into the fiery furnace; Paul and other
Apostles who amidst many and great persecutions went on with their preaching,
and the Martyrs that followed them: Heb. 11.37.
they were sawn asunder, and diversely afflicted; not nice and delicate of
suffering as nowadays, not afraid of threats, nor ashamed of Christ in an
evil generation; not swayed by carnal wisdom, or self considerations; therefore
one day Christ will not be ashamed of them, but own and honor them, saying,
Well done good and faithful servant; ye have been faithful in a little, now be
rulers over much.

Yet forty days and Nineve shall be overthrown.

This was Jonahs Text, but it is likely he amplified it diverse ways; as for
example, by telling of their great sins which had provoked the God of heaven
against them, as chap. 1.2. Cry against Nineve, for their wickedness is come up
before me. And this God of heaven sent me on this errand, I am his servant, I
come not on my own head; he bade me come and do this message; and because I
declined the service, I was cast into a Whales belly for three days and three
nights together; and now I tell you this of a truth, that ye may repent and be
saved; if not temporally, yet at least spiritually and eternally.

The point to be stood upon is this; Note. Sin overthrows great peoples.
Sin is able to overthrow great Cities or Nations, and that sometimes very
suddenly. Cities, Nineve, Sodom, Jerusalem, Samaria, other Nations; as in the
change of Monarchies, from the Assyrians to the Persians, from them to the
Greeks, and from them to the Romans. Yea, the whole world, first by water, at
last-by fire; Righteousness exalts a Nation, Prove. 14.34.
but sin is a reproach to any people, and out of other Scriptures I might add
a confusion.

Whereby we see in what danger we of England are, and Reading, because a sinful
Nation, A people laden with iniquity, whose wickedness is gone up before God,
and cries for vengeance against us: Suppose there were none but the horrible
sin of Drunkenness, it were enough to overthrow us; but you may add Heresies,
Deceits, other wickednesses. None is safe long, who is so near unto danger; The
judgment of a sinful people lingereth not, 2 Pet. 2.3.
and their damnation slumbreth not.

It were well if the sinners among us would fall to quarrelling even by these
profitable and pleasurable sins which most men think good to maintain to the
utmost. True, God is merciful, and we have found him such of a long time, and
we hope so he will be still; but what little cause have we to expect more
mercy, and longer forbearance? do we not know it should lead us to repentance?
And it is true, we cannot say as Jonah, Yet forty days, and such a sinful place
shall be overthrown; Romans 2.1.
but we can say, Sudden destruction comes upon some unawares, 1 These. 5.3.
Beware; there is no way to escape, but by doing as the Ninevites in the words
following.

Ver. 5.6, 7, 8, 9. So the people of Nineve believed God, and proclaimed a
Fast, and put on Sackcloth from the greatest of them, even to the least of
them. For word came unto the King of Nineve, and he arose from his Throne, and
laid his Robe from him, and covered him with Sackcloth, and sat in ashes. And
he caused it to be proclaimed, etc.


Here we have the Ninevites repenting at the preaching of Jonah, which is first
set down in geneal, ver. 5. and then declared in particulars, in the rest of
the Verses. In general their repentance is set down two ways. 1. By the cause
that moved them, They believed God. 2. By the adjunct signs of it, which are
three, Fasting, Sackcloth, and Ashes.

Note. Diverse examples of repentance.
Note out of the whole, how many examples of repentance we have in this Book; we
saw the Mariners repenting, and turning to God, and we saw Jonah repenting,
with abundant testifications of the truth of it. But these were private acts of
piety, which went little farther then the men themselves. At the Text we have a
public example of King, Lords and Commons, all humbled and reformed: And this
example might go far and near, to do much good among the Nations that were
subject to the large Empire of the Assyrians. People generally think it
concerns them to do as their Rulers and Commanders do.

Oh that all these examples might persuade our people to an effectual
imitation! Wherefore are they recorded but for our instruction, to do the like,
and fare well as they did? especially the example of the Ninevites, both
because Christ proposes it for our imitation, and because he says they shall
be our Judges at the last day, unless we repent: The men of Nineve repented at
the preaching of Jonah, and shall rise in judgment with this generation, Mat.
12^
and condemn it; namely, for not repenting.

But most of all, this example concerns those that are Rulers in Church and
State; that they publicly repent and testify their repentance, as they wish
well to the people committed to their charge. Not only publish Decrees for
humiliation, but themselves join in the duties of humiliation, and more turn
from their own evil ways, and cause others to turn from theirs, Ezekiel. 18.30.
Repent, and turn your selves and others, from all your transgression.

Note more, Note. Most good do^^ where least l^kely.
how Jonah reapes most fruit of his labors where he least expected. He had
preached long to the ten Tribes, and we read of no such repenting; which
without doubt could not choose but grieve and trouble the good man: But now,
where he was averse to preaching to a people, he finds a great crop of
Penitents; so the first shall be last, and the last shall be first; the least
likely are soonest converted. Publicans and Harlots go before the Pharisees
into the Kingdom of Heaven.

Now such examples do hearten us along to preach the Gospel notwithstanding all
discouragements. We sow our seed in the morning, and withhold not our hand in
the evening, because we know not which shall prosper, this or that; and, the
worst that are may be gained to God as soon as any, it may be sooner: Esa.
49.4, 5.
and, Though people be not gathered, yet shall we be glorious in the eye of
God, and our reward is with him.

They believed God.

Note. Penitents look to God in preaching.
They saw and heard Jonah, but they looked higher, to his and their great
Master. A true Penitent looks up to God in the ministry of man. When the
The^alonians were converted, they received Paul's preaching, Not as the word of
man, but as it was in truth, the word of God, 1 Epist. 2.1.3. So the Convert in
1 Cor. 14.25. when the secrets of his heart were made manifest in preaching, he
fell down before the Preachers, and said, God is in you of a truth.

He that hears you, hears me, Luke 10 16. and before the Text, Jonah
preached the preaching which the Lord bad him to deliver.

They beli^ved God: That is.

They believed the threatening which God had denounced against them by Jonah. By
Jonah they understood what manner of God the God of Jonah was; not as the
idol-gods of the Gentiles which did neither good nor hurt: but strong, and
just, and true in his threatenings; and the believing of this was the beginning
of their repentance. They did not only believe Jona^, but the God of Jonah; so
Israel at the red sea, seeing their own escape, and drowning the Egyptians,
They believed the Lord and his servant Moses, Believing of threats works
repentance.
Exodus 14.31.

To believe the threats and thunderings of Gods judgments against sin is a
good means to work sinners to repentance; Such faith is the first bending or
^nclining of the soul toward salvation. The people were awakened by John
Baptists ministry, telling of the Axe laid to the root of the trees, J. Martyr.
to come forth and ask what they should do to be saved, Mat. 3.7, 18. and Luke
3.10, 12, 14. So the Jailer by the terrors set on him, Act. 16.30. And those
that were pricked at the heart, chap. 2.37.

Why? this is the power and efficacy of the word, It is quick and powerful,
Heb. 4.12.
and sharper then any two-edged sword, piercing even to the dividing asunder of
soul and spirit, and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. The same voice of God that commanded the
wind, and sea, and fish in Jonahs case, commands also the guilty consciences of
sinners to stoop to the word, and yield to his directions: Threats come and
shake the soul to pieces: then come promises, and heal the wounds which the
threats had made; and rules of life, to order the Convert according to the mind
and pleasure of God. This is the Divine Nature of the word; our profession is
rightly called Divinity, because there goes with it the Majesty and Authority
of God.

And it serves to condemn those nice and delicate hearers Esa. 30.10.
Prophecy unto us smooth things, Prophecy deceits. Yet the Lord sent Jonah
with an harsh message to Nineve, and the Prophets came with many thundering
pea^es against the drunkards of Ephraim and other sinners: yea, our Savior
doubled and trebled his woes against the secure in his time, Mat. 11. and 23.

And for them that believe not these threats, both Christ, the Prophets, and
Apostles have opened the sad case of all such. First Esaiah complains, Lord,
Chap. 53, 1.
who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? Our
Savior upbraids the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 21 32.
that they bel^eved not when they had heard the preaching of the Baptist. And
the Apostles say, they could not enter because of unbelief; Heb. 3.19. Rev.
21.8.
and, The unbelieving march with the foremost into the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone for ever: and, Give him his portion, as with hypocrites, so
with unbelievers. Yea more, He that believes not, is condemned already.
Unbelief is a damning sin, as well as any gross sin against the Law: and
whereas the Law condemns a sinner potentially, unbelief condemns actually.

What of God is to be believed
Take heed, Christians, and believe your God when he speaks by his Ministers.

by no means clear the guilty. Men may dream what they please, Exodus 34.7.
but one day will find they have a just God to deal withal.

The words of God are pure words, as silver seven times purified in the fire.
As the promises to the godly, so the threats against the wicked, not one falls
to the ground.

Nineve within forty days; yea, within the compass of one day: why not Nineve,
as well as Sodom and neighboring Cities?

4. Believe the wisdom of God; that the only way which he has devised to turn
away threats, is, to be found in Jesus Christ; The wisdom of God, and the power
of God to salvation: there is no salvation in any other; by him wrath is
appeased, and by him comes all saving good to repenting sinners.

Motive to believe threats.
Consider for a Motive to believe the threats of God.

1. This is the only safe way to bid you believe the these, till ye be first
overawed with his threats. The broken heart is the only sacrifice wherein the
Lord delights. Psalm. 51.17. Esa. 61. Mat. 11.28.
Christ came to bind up the brokenhearted; and said, Come all ye that labor
and are heavy-laden, I will give you ease, ye shall have refreshment for your
souls.

2. It is a mercy to be spoken unto by men weak as your Israel said to Moses,
Let not God speak to us lest we dye. Should God come and speak in his storms
and tempests, who among us could abide the terror? Moses at such a sight did
exceedingly quake and tremble. Take heed, and abuse not his goodness to
security, or to harden your hearts.

3. Mark how those two are joined together, Believe 2 Chronicles. 20.20. This (says
he) is the only way to prosper: We have this treasure in earthen vessels; we
are Stewards, and have the dispensing of holy things: and all know, in a great
house there is no receiving of Pay or Diet, but by the allowance of the Steward.

4. How good was it for Nineve to believe God when Jonah? True, they feared,
repented, put on sackcloth, refrained from diet, and cried mightily to God for
mercy; but the sweetness of mercy made amends for all. And so it shall do for
other Penitents.

And put on Sackcloth.

Christians must testify the truth of their repentance by outward tokens of
humility and humiliation. Note. Show repentance by outward tokens.
These were ordinary practices among the Jews in their fasting. Ahab put on
sackcloth, and went softly; and so did others, others rent their clothes,
others stripped off their robes, and sat in the dust.

But because in process of time these forms became mere forms, and were taken
up by hypocrites; therefore Joel bad them rent their hearts, and not their
garments, Joel 2.13.
and turn to the Lord their God; and Esaias at large describes and rejects
their hypocrisy, chap. 58.3. and Zachary tells them they did but fast to
themselves, not to God, chap. 7.3, 7.

Yet thus far the Ceremony will reach us at this day.

1. On days of humiliation no fine nor gaish Apparel should be used, as has
been the fashion of some in these days. An humble heart must appear before the
Lord, as always, so especially on such days in the dress of mourners. No reason
the habit should give the heart the lie, nor the heart the habit. Out of the
abundance of the heart the dress will shape to be either lowly or fantastical.

2. Still there must be a rending of the heart, to bewail those sins which
provoked God to wrath and indignation: yea, though it be a good and holy heart.
Even godly men have an hand in the provocation, and therefore even godly men
should bear their part in the lamentation, to turn wrath away; even David after
those failings did mightily humble himself before his God.

3. Out of that which is spared from the back and belly, allowan^e should be
made to cloth the naked, and feed the hungry, and do works even of corporal
mercy, and of civil righteousness. Esa. 58.6.
Is not this the fast that I have chosen? says the Lord.

Esa. 58.8* 9, 10, 11, 12. Then shall thy light break forth as the morning, and
thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness shall go before
thee, etc. One fast well kept might rid us of all our confusions.

And thus to fast, would well become all of us from the highest to the lowest,
as here:

From the greatest of them to the least of them.

A duty for all.
All are sinners, both in their nature and life, and all run into Arrear with
God, and are in danger of remporal and eternal vengeance: If Nineve had been
overthrown in those forty days, all had gone to wrack; infants and sucklings as
well as elderly people; and therefore all must smart by this humiliation; Joel
2.16.
so in Joel, Those that suck the breasts must want their milk for a while, and
cry to God as well as they can. Yea, these Ninevites go farther, to the beast,
the herd, and the flock; no eating, no tasting, no drinking of water; that the
very lowing of the cattle may go up to heaven, and call (in their language) for
mercy, as is said, Psalm. 147.9.
He hears the young Ravens when they cry.

If so, at such times let the greatest forget and lay aside their greatness;
and let the least among us bear their part in humiliation; especially they that
are least in the Kingdom of God: and they that think themselves less then the
least of all Saints. All such may help to stand in the gap, and make up the
breach, that we perish not.

Ver. 6.7, 8. Word came to the King of Nineve, and he arose from his Throne,
and he laid his Robe from him, etc.


This is a farther Declaration of the Ninevites repentance.

First, it is declared by the good example of the King; to whom the word of
Jonahs preaching came, and he humbled double sins, that is, not only in act,
but by their bad example which causes others to stumble and fall.

Consider this, ye that are heads of the people, and be thoroughly humbled for
all your sins. Be examples in humiliation and reformation, as well as in
transgression. This is no place to exhort King and Nobles to those duties: but
an equity lies upon Magistrates of a lower size, upon rich men, and all whom
God has set above others, to seek God by fasting and prayer for their good,
and the good of underlings. Here is a special rule for that in Romans 12.16. Make
your selves equal to them of the lower sort.

Secondly, the Ninevites repentance is declared by the Authority they had for
their fasting: namely, The Decree of the King and his Nobles. The people
proclaimed a fast, said the first verse; but not of their own head, they had
the sanction and stamp of civil Authority for their doings.

Jehosaphat, and so did other good Princes; and so they entermedled in ordering
other matters of Religion; as it is said, The Christian Magistrate is the
Keeper of both Tables.

That the Father who sees in secret, may reward them openly. Mat. 6.17.
Certainly nothing may be done in Religion with contempt of Authority, or so as
to disgrace Magistrates before their people. It is an evil and headlong
devotion, which out-faceth or shameth Gods Vicegerents.

Contents of the Proclamation.
Now in this Proclamation for a Fast at Nineve we have to consider, 1. The
abstinence enjoined, Not to eat or drink, or wear soft Apparel. 2. Prayer
required, and that in a fervent manner, Let them cry mightily unto God. 3.
Reformation of life exacted, Let every one turn from his evil way. All
amplified by an hope to over-intreat God, as Jonah had preached: Joel 2.14.
just as the Prophet Joel framed his Motive, Who knows if he will return and
repent, and leave a blessing behind him? Categorical denunciations of
judgments are (with God) secretly suspended with conditions; for which see
Jer. 18.7, 8.

Outward humiliation required of Penitents
For the abstinence here required: Heathens newly converted could see these
outward observations to be necessary, as judging themselves unworthy of comfort
by the creatures; and the Jews in their fasts did five ways afflict their
souls, says Maymonides.

1. By abstaining from meat and drink; which are the Judge. 20.26.

2. By putting off fine Apparel, Ornaments, and Shoos, Exodus 33.4, 6. 2 Samuel
15.30. Psalm. 35.13.

3. By not washing themselves as they were wont, and Sam. 12.20, 21. Abraham
and Lot gave water to the strangers they entertained, that they might wash
after their sore and scorching travel.

4. By not anointing themselves, as was ordinary, Dan. 10.3. God gives man Oil
to make his face shine; Psalm. 104.15.
but now there shall be a forbearance; where if any object, that Christ bids
anoint our face when we fast: the answer is easy; Mat. 6.17.
Our Savior speaks comparatively, and in opposition to hypocrites; rather then
appear to men to fast, anoint thy face and look pleasantly.

5. By forbearing the use of the Marriage Bed, and all Sam. 11.11. Joel 2.16.
Zech. 12.14. 1 Cor. 7.5. The order of grace must bear sway against the order of
nature: and all say, A less good must give way to a greater.

Remember, Object. We have no such eminent occasion as the Ninevites had, Yet
forty days and Nineve shall be overthrown. Answ. Danger may be as much eminent
to us as it was to them. Ye know the contrary agitations of several parties
bandying one against another, and ye know our sins are much greater then
theirs, because of more abundant light, means of grace, offers of peace,
patience and long-suffering of God, and offending after former humiliations.

But may I not eat a little on a fasting-day, by reason of my infirmity? Answ.
1. In case of extraordinary danger all such infirmities should be forgotten,
and the matter put to an adventure; and so men will do sometime for their
pleasure, in hunting or the like; lose a meals-meat or more. 2. In our ordinary
fasts which come of course as it were, it may be lawful for us to take some
re-past against a notable infirmity; as, of colic, or fainting fits. In such
cases God will have mercy, and not sacrifie.

But were it not ridiculous to put sackcloth on our cattle, or cause them to
fast? Answ. 1. For the sackloth, none urges it as necessary either for them or
our selves, nor yet ashes. They were the transient actions of those Countries.
2. If cattle were suffered to want for a while, it would do them no hurt: and
in their mourning the Masters might well take notice of their own a^ use of the
creature, their riot, their excessive pleasure in hunting, etc. And if the
cattle must be so pinched and pained for their sin, what must they be for their
own sin? But in truth these are mere Ceremonies, and no farther good then they
testify the humility of our spirits.

Fervent prayer needful to a Fast.
For the fervent prayer here required, Let them cry mightily unto God: Hearty
and fervent prayer is a chief matter at a Fast: the King of Nineve understood
well, that those naked ceremonies could do little, unless such kind of prayer
were added. The like we are to understand of all outward observations
abstracted from true piety, they are nothing worth, 1 Timothy 4.8. Bodily exercise
profits little. Though the body were never so much macerated, and even
brought to a Consumption, yet without contrition of spirit it would avail
nothing. It is the fervent prayer of the righteous that avails much, Jam.
5.16.

And note by the way, how this King speaks only of one God, namely, the God
of the Hebrews whom Jonah had preached in the message he brought. The many gods
which he had served before, began now to be vile in his eyes, as able to do him
no good. Which is the guise of all true Converts, to reject idol-gods; the
belly, the Child that is idolized, the wealth, etc.

See hence, why we make those long prayers on a day of Apology.
and hardly to be endured: But the case stands thus, Prayer is the chief work
of the day, and all our preaching is but to prepare your hearts, and stir up
your affections to cry mightily unto God, even with sighs and groans that
cannot be uttered. And by that time we have duly confessed our own sins and the
sins of the Land, together with supplications for mercy and forbearance, judge
you whether it be not requisite to spend more time then ordinary. Add thus:

1. These sins are mighty sins, and need mightily to be cried down, Amos 5.12.
I know your manifold transgressions, and your mighty sins. Some sinners are
mighty to pour in strong drink, to swear bloudily, to commit uncleanness, to
oppress their brethren, and the like.

2. The mighty God is mightily offended, and provoked to wrath. Psalm. 90 11.
Who knows the power of thine anger? it has proved heavy to men and Angels:
and so there needs a mighty cry to appease this wrath, and get judgments
prevented, or removed. It had been too late for Nineve to pray, when once the
forty days were exp^red.

3. The enemies of our peace and Gospel are mighty enemies, idolaters, profane
persons, dissembling friends, real enemies. It is a wonder, that our house and
Kingdom which is so divided, is not fallen asunder long ago. There needs mighty
crying to God, that we may defeat these enemies.

Remember this against a Fast, and in your ordinary Jacob who wrestled with the
Angel, and would not let him go without a blessing; See how it is described in
Hos. 12.3, 4, 5, 6. By his strength he had power with God; yea, he had power
over the Angel, and prevailed: he wept and made supplications unto him. And the
truly-godly are said to be a generation of people much of the same frame, Psalm.
24.6. This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O
Jacob. They are the Israel of God; weak in themselves, but mighty in a
spiritual consideration. The weapons of their warfare are not carnal, but
m^ghty through God to throw down strongholds.

Amendment needful to true Penitents.
For the reformation of life here required: Amendment of life is necessary to
all that repent and fast aright. Let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands. In Scripture a man's way is that
course of life which a man steers for the pleasing of God, and saving of his
soul; And they that steer not aright, are said to go in an evil way, and need
to turn out of it: And so to turn, is the true fast, and the true repentance.
Sackcloth and all abstinence is nothing without crying to God by prayer, and
all prayer is nothing without a real reformation. Esa. 58 6,7. Is not this the
fast that I have chosen? to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free? and that ye break every yoke? Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast
out, to thine house? when thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and that
thou hide not thy self from thine own flesh? Zech. 7.7. Should ye not hear the
words which the Lord cried by the former Prophets?

fast in all those years, nor truly repented of their sins. If they had, they
would not be such swearers as they are, or drunkards, liars, unjust,
incontinent, otherwise ungodly. If they had, they would every one have turned
from his evil way, and wrought righteousness before God. Sound reformation ever
follows upon sound humiliation.

Those that would justify their repentance for sound, let them turn every one
from his evil way. Never tell of the many fasts ye have kept, and how many
tears ye have shed, or sighs, or groans, but make all good by a through
reforming of things amiss. Bring forth fruits meet for repentance. Mat. 3.8.
Good apples argue the tree to be good; and the works of p^ety, mercy, and
righteousness argue the man who fasted, to be a man truly-godly.

But how shall I know, that I reform aright, Notes of right turning from sin.
and in a saving manner? Answ.

1. In true conversion there is a turning from every evil way; though there be
profit to be had by the sin, or pleasure, David that was a true Penitent, hated
every false way, Psalm. 119.104. The reason is, because all sin is displeasing
to God, and dangerous to the soul: And no sin is forgiven but it cost Christ
his dearest blood, there is no other price of our redemption, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
We are not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold; but by the
precious blood of Christ as of a Lamb without spot.

2. In true conversion the special sin shall be singled out violence of these
N^nevites: So David confessed his foul sins of filthiness and bloud-guiltiness.
Zacheus confessed his forged cavillation. Matthew his sitting at the receipt of
custom. Jonah wrote the story of his flying from God, and declining the work
which he had appointed him to do. All which things (and the like) are written
for our instruction, to do the like.

Jer. 4.1. If thou will return, O Israel, Joel 2.12, 13.
says the Lord, return unto me. And Paul was sent to turn the Gentiles from
the power of Satan unto God, Act. 26.18. Otherwise the conversion does not
reach home: God is the party offended by sin, and in Christ must be pleased
with us again, or else we do nothing. Remember this our ordinary Theme, and
turn aright from your evil way.

Ver. 9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not?


This may be the voice of faith striving between hope and fear. The King and
Nobles of Nineve hope well they may be spared upon their repentance, but they
fear the worst; they cannot tell what the event will be; they will use the
means, but are not sure what will be the success: Only they hope God may be
over-intreated by their humiliation and reformation to save them from
perishing. It is a temporal mercy which they crave, and Gods own Children are
not sure always to speed in such matters, viz. to escape the danger of war, to
get out of a great fit of sickness, or the like: Yea, such is the modesty of
godly men, that in the sense of their own unworthiness they will not prescribe
to Gods wisdom concerning the length or strength of their afflictions, but
quietly submit to his will and good pleasure; I was dumb, and opened not my
mouth, because thou did it, Psalm. 39.9.

Yet methinks we may look higher, even to the forgiveness of sin, and salvation
of the soul. Our Savior says of the Ninevites, that they repented at the
preaching of Jonah: and in the former words we have seen three acts of
repentance, and now the fourth will make up a competent description of
repentance. Repentance is such a grace of God, as whereby we are humbled for
sin, Description of repentance.
pray for pardon, reform what is amiss, and have some hope of finding mercy at
Gods hands. All these were in the Ninevites, and are in each true Convert.

1. A true Convert is humbled for sin, though not perhaps 1 Cor 14.25.
or though he do not fall down on his face, as he in the Corinthians; yet his
heart is pierced with godly sorrow for sin, which now begins to be very bitter
and grievous to him: Jer. 2.19.
He finds it an evil and bitter thing to have forsaken the Lord his God. Sin
now is grown burdensome to his soul as is employed in those words, labor and
are heavy laden: Mat. 11.2^.
And now earthly comforts grow unsavory; what joy can he have so long as he is
under the guilt and condemnation of his sins? especially the pleasures of sin,
O odious and bitter to be thought on!

2. A true Convert prays for the pardon of his sins, God be merciful to me a
sinner; Luke 18.13. Psalm. 51.1.
according to the multitude of thy mercies blot out my transgressions. So
Daniel and Ezra in their humiliations: and these Ninevites cry mightily unto
God. In the one and fiftieth Psalm we see David's doubled and trebled Petitions
for mercy; just as a condemned Malefactor earnestly beseeches the Judge to
show him mercy; forgiveness of sins being the happiness of a sinner, Romans 4.6.
and a chief mercy for which we should give thanks, Psalm. 103.1, 2, 3. Oh how
happy should I be (thinks the distressed soul) if I were released of my sins!

3. A true Convert reforms what is amiss: Turns from both Commissions, that the
wickednesses shall not be done over and over, as heretofore; and Om^ssions,
that he will do the duties which formerly he neglected, pesonal and in the
family; not as our negative Christians, who rest contented if they be not so
bad as sometime they were: No, God requires good to be done, as well as evil to
be left undone. Cease to do evil, and learn to do w^ll; Put off the old man,
Esa 1 16. Ephesians. 4 22.24.
put on the new. Paul when he was converted, presently a sked, Lord, what will thou have me to do?

who can tell whether he will turn and show favor? Though he cannot yet say his
sin is pardoned; yet he conceives it is pardonable; To the Lord my God belong
mercies and forgivenesses; we have heard of this King of Israel that he is a
merciful King, therefore we will nourish some hope amidst all our fears, and
notwithstanding many discouragements.

Mixture of hope and fear in Converts.
The point is this: Gods own Children sometimes cannot well tell whether he will
be merciful to them, that they perish not; there is a Conflict of faith between
hope and fear: we read of a bruised reed, and smoking flax; some fire, but
much smoke. They can say with the poor man, I believe, Mark 9.24. Rom 7 24
but say with tears too, Lord help my unbelief. They can say, Good is present
with me; but withal, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

Now this holds both first and last.

1. At the beginning of conversion, a young Convert cannot tell whether his
sins be forgiven him, and his soul set in safety by Jesus Christ; as the Child
lives in the womb, but knows not that he lives. A man may be rich, and not know
that he is rich; so a^ Christian is ignorant concerning his good estate toward
God, till the Spirit of revelation be given him to know his happiness.

2. Afterward, all along in his course he has his doubtings, fears, cares,
jealousies concerning the love of God returning upon him now and then; which
comes to pass by the weakness of his faith, by the strength of temptations, by
his remisness in using the means of grace, or by neglecting his religious
course: Has the Lord forgotten to be gracious? etc. One way or other it comes
to pass, that even a good Christian must rejoice with trembling, Pas. 77. Psalm
2 11. Phil 2.12.
and work out his salvation with fear and trembling; and, he that ere while was
very confident, in little time begins to flag and faint exceedingly; I know
that my Redeemer lives, said Job, yet by and by he was quite carried down the
stream.

But may not a Christian tell whether Gods fierce anger be turned from him, or
no? Answ.

1. There be good and sufficient grounds for assurance; strong consolation?
Heb. 6.18.
God would not have his Children to doubt and be afraid; and has said, Why did
ye doubt, O ye of little faith? Be not faithless, but believing, etc. Assurance
then is to be had, and those are the grounds of this assurance.

2. This assurance admits of degrees. In Scripture we read of assurance, much
assurance, and full assurance of faith; Some days are brighter then other, and
the comforts of some Christians are more lively then of others. Yea in the same
Christian there be lucida intervalla among all their evidences, dusky at times,
but the cloud soon vanishes; and after many wrestlings comes at last the
triumph of faith, Who shall accuse, or condemn, Romans 8.34. 1 Cor. 15 55.
or separate us from the love of God in Jesus Christ? Again, O death, where is
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Which is seen sometimes of them that
said heretofore, There is but a step between me and death, between me and hell.

All which makes against the vain confidence of idle

Here we will examine a little the fears of the one, Godly men's fears are
hopeful.
and the hopes of the other.

For the fears of the godly.

1. The Lord orders all their fears, and tenderness of spirit to their greatest
good; as here, the fear of these Ninevites; first they are affrighted with the
horror of a sudden overthrow, and this fear works them to repentance, that
they shall escape the denounced overthrow: So still, generally it is the Lords
method in bringing souls home to himself, first out of security to convince
them of a bad estate, and so let them repent and seek after God: let them be
sick, and see their need of a Physician; let them be pricked at heart, and ask
what they must do to be saved; and, Did ye see him whom my soul loves? can ye
give me any sure mark of my being in Christ? can this or that stand with the
truth of grace? I am afraid I am not right in the main. I doubt that all this
while I do but deceive my own soul. Of which tenderness the Lord makes this
use, to bring forth judgment to victory: He will not break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax; his power is manifested in his peoples weakness,
and his grace shall be sufficient for them.

Pet. 1.10. So pray, and so read, and so hear, and so receive Sacraments, and
walk so strictly and orderly, as God may please to show them his salvation.
Psalm. 50.23. Timor facit consiliatives.
Fear makes men Clients, so to secure their Estates by repairing to their
learned Counsel: so here, for the estate of the soul. And a discreet man newly
recovered out of great sickness, narrowly observes his diet, and so gets more
health perhaps then a stronger man; so here, and this is the phrase of working
out salvation with fear and trembling. Phil. 2.12.


Prove 28 14. Blessed is the man that fears always; namely, with a Childlike
and holy fear, fear to offend, care to please, and perfect holiness in the fear
of the Lord. The tenderness of such is the heart of flesh, Ezekiel. 11.19.
which the Lord by Covenant said he would give his people; and, he will be
their God, and they shall be his people; he will forgive their sins, and
remember their iniquity no more; and will so put his fear into them, that they
shall never depart from him.

But if carnal persons have any fears concerning their spiritual estate, it
never works in such a manner; all passes away in flashes, Be rid of them as
soon as ye can, and be merry while ye may; away with this melancholy, and be
jovial.

For the hopes of idle and vain Christans, Wicked men's hopes are fearful.
who doubt not a whit of Gods love to them, I say thus;

1. They are disgraced by the subject, that is, the persons the righteous has
hope in his death. Such at worst are prisoners of hope. Zech 9.12.
Ever since they were converted, they have been in an hopeful condition. For
others, their hope shall perish, it shall be as the spiders web, or as the
giving up of the ghost. Profane persons and hypocrites, never went upon a good
foundation, and so all their building lies in the dust.

2. True hope is grounded in faith, and in reconcilation the hope of Israel,
Jer. 17 13.
the Savior thereof in the time of need. So we are saved by hope, Romans 8.24.
But this is skipped over by these persons, A general hope of mercy shall serve
the turn.

3. True hope arises out of regeneration, and dwells God begets us again to a
lively hope. But numbers have all their hope from the first birth, believe in
God ever since they can remember, never do bred since they were born; Pity he
should live who doubts of his salvation; which is too fine and easy to be
good. Jonahs gourd sprung up in a night, and withered in a night. The like we
may say of these Mushromes.

4. True hope yields the benefit of strong consolation in it is an anchor sure
and steadfast. By hope we have seen him to live, who was about to dye. David had
fainted, but that hope held him up by the chinne, Ps. 27.13. I had fainted, but
that I hoped to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living But the
heart of an hypocrite, 1 Samuel 25.
when brought into great danger, dies in him, as Nabals. The house built on the
sand, when the winds and storms came, fell quickly, and great was the fall
thereof.

Every one that has this hope, purifieth himself even as God is pure. It is of
the same nature with the mother, Acts 15.9, 26, 18.
which is Faith, and purifies the heart. Hope is neither sloven nor slut: but
so is the hope of many; expect much at the hands of God, but live in their
sins: which is against all reason, as if a man should stand for preferme^t yet
lives so as to be incapable.

full assurance of faith, yet ye may have much assurance; or if not much yet
some assurance: Do all that may help your faith against your fears, and that
your hope in God may be cherished: which ye will find to be very good when you
come to lie on your deathbed, or be cast into great affliction, to say, 2 Timothy
1.12.
I know whom I have believed, etc.

There be some that should think of the great change by conversion. Some have
not yet repented, nor made their peace with God, and may well think that it is
they who must repent, and not God. Repentance notes a change in the creature,
Jan. 1 17.
not the Creator; With him is no variableness, nor shadow of turning. Therefore
never think he will come to thy bent, but come thou to his. If not, know he
has a fierce anger to put forth upon thee; nor can all men or Angels turn it
away, Ephesians. 2 14.
but only Jesus Christ: He is our peace, he has taken away the enmity and
handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, 2.12. Col. 2.14.
nailing it to his Cross. And we may have access with holdness by the faith of
him. We need not say, Who can tell if God will turn, that we perish not? I can
tell (says Bernard) and I will be surety for God that he will not burn forth
in anger upon the truly Penitent. By promise he has made himself our Debtor,
Atqui ego novi, and fide-juss^r, sum Dei.
and he will perform to the uttermost, so he did here to the Ninevites, as
follows.

Ver. 10. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way; and
God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto them, and he
did it not.


The King of Nineve spoke doubtingly, Who can tell if the and now the Lord
gives a resolution of the doubt, They shall be spared; So to doubting
Christians, the Lord will step in with a timely satisfaction, for staying their
hearts, and doing them good. Esa. 40.1, 2.
He will speak peace to his people, saying, Your iniquity is pardoned, your
warfare is accomplished. Does any repent, and seek the peace with his Majesty?
he will quickly say, I have found a ransom, he shall not dye.

Note again, the King doubted whether they should be spared, though they
fasted, prayed, and amended their lives. But the world is grown far worse
nowadays; that though men fast not, nor pray, nor amend, yet they can tell
the Lord will spare, and be merciful to them. Though they keep violence in
their hands, deceit, filthiness, other provocations, yet all shall do well;
they fear nothing. A note of desperate wickedness in the men, and of abundant
long-suffering in God, who spares such a venturous and vile generation. Oh that
the patience and goodness of God might once at last lead them to repentance!
Romans 2.4. Parts.


In the words we have two parts. 1. The Lord takes notice of the Ninevites
humiliation and reformation; He saw their works, that they turned from their
evil way. 2. He grants them pardon and peace, He did not the evil that he said
he would do unto them.

God true, though threats not excented.
Out of the whole it might be asked, how the Lord is a true God, and yet
performs not the threat which was denounced against Nineve. Answ. Categorical
denunciations of judgment are ever secretly suspended with conditions, which
the Lord keeps close to himself; thus, Except Nineve repent within forty days,
within forty days Nineve shall be overthrown. God being the Sovereign Lord of
the world, is not bound to disclose his whole counsel. An earthly King has his
secrets; and whatever of his pleasure he reveals, yet he reveals not all:
Say the like of the King of Nations.

This our answer is cleared out of plainer places of Scripture, where God
himself gives such an exposition; as for example. 1. Concerning a particular
sinner, against whom wrath and damnation is thundered: Yet if the wicked shall
turn from all his sins, and keep all my statutes, he shall surely live, he
shall not dye; Ezekiel. 18 21, 22, 23. 2 Concerning a whole Nation, against which
the faithful preachers have preached much and often; yet upon humiliation all
shall do well, Jer. 18 7, 8. At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation,
and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it: If
that Nation against which I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. 3. Concerning the Jewish
Nation, against which wrath had gone forth many a time, yet at the prayers of
godly men they were a long time spared, Psalm. 106.23. He said that he would
destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn
away his wrath, lest he should destroy them. In the like manner here against
Nineve; this change in them admits a change in Gods execution of his menaces,
called repentance.

threats absolutely; that is, without the employed conditions? Answ. 1. Because
of his absolute Sovereignty. Nineve at this time*

God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way.

The Lord takes notice of the actions and behaviors of penitent and converted
sinners, as of the Ninevites here; Acts of Penitents observed of God. Luke
15.20.
of the Prodigal returning to his Father; of Hezekiah weeping and praying, and
so of others.

1. He looks to the counterfeit repentance of hypocrites, Ahabs case, 1 King.
21 29. See thou how he humble^ himself before me? and the repentance of Judah
in Josiahs time, where was great humiliation and much reformation, but all was
in a fained manner; and so it is censured, Jer. 3 10. Judah has not turned to
me with her whole heart, but fainedly, says the Lord. And Rehoboam was spared
a while because after a sort he humbled himself, 2 Chronicles. 12.12.

2. He looks to the sincere repentance of true Converts; Mana^eh, and of
Ephraim, Jer. 31.18. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself; And Peter
who went forth and wept bitterly; And the Churches of Asia, whose works he
knew. So in the Gospel, the Father that sees in secret, takes notice who fasts
and prays in secret; and means to reward him openly: which is appliable to
each true Penitent at this day; One day all shall be rewarded openly.

Observe, it is not said that God saw the abstinence of these Ninevites, or
heard their mighty crying (though yet he heard and saw all this, being all eye,
so as in every place he beholds the evil and good) but he saw their works,
Prove. 15.3.
and what a real reformation was come among them; without which all the rest
would have past away as idle and fruitless Ceremonies; So are all forms without
obedience. Bodily exercise profits little. 1 Timothy 4.8.
Bring no more vain oblations, etc.

Yet amidst all doing remember one things: God first and principally has an
eye to the heart, whethet that be right with him or no: It is the broken heart
which the Lord mainly respects in a penitent; A broken and a contrite heart is
the sacrifices of God. Psalm. 51.17.
And then on the other side, where the heart is contrite, the life will
conform; there will be a turning of every one from his evil way, as also the
working of righteousness. At Nineve a man now might have seen one making
restitution of his ill-gotten goods, another giving satisfaction for the wrong
he had done, a third paying his debts, a fourth exhorting his Children and
Servants, all confessing their sins, bewailing them, and turning over a new
leaf; So with us, where any are truly penitent, we shall quickly see a great
reformation.

Encouragement to repent.
But Gods notice taking may be a notable encouragement to all, both to repent,
and to bring forth fruits meet for repentance. It encourages a good servant to
do duty, when the Master takes notice of his dutifulness. Be therefore, and do,
as God may note thee for good; so fast, and so pray, and so give alms, as the
great and good God may like and approve; no matter though men see not, so long
as God sees; and no matter if they scorn when they see. The approbation of God
alone is far to be preferred before all suffrage of men whosoever they be. The
Apostles in all the course of their ministry approved themselves to God, and
then esteemed all to be well: and they said, 2 Cor. 6 4.10 18. Romans 2.29.
Not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends. And
he is the true Jew (or Christian) whose praise is not of men, but of God. And
such a one will say as David in doing duty, I will be more vile in the eye of
the world; and however it go, 2 Samuel 6.22. Esa. 49.5.
yet in the eye of my God I shall be glorious. And certainly, the true and
lasting honor is that which comes from above.

There be many hindrances of a true and effectual repentance, many Objections
against it, and many Delusions about it. Objections against repenting


1. When a man is of the mind to repent and turn from his evil ways, he meets
with many Objections which may delay the matter, if not quite hinder him; as
for example, the sourness of the thing, the contrary course of the world, the
subtilties of Satan, the pleasures or profits that are to be had by sin, the
jeers of idle companions, or counsels, carnal reasonings, and the like: Against
all which a man should arm himself with these considerations, My God oftentimes
calls me to repentance, I have done enough and enough to repent most earnestly,
I am in great danger unless I repent to the purpose; and on the other side, if
I repent truly and effectually, God will take notice of me for good; as here to
the Ninevites. On therefore I will go, breaking through all objections and
difficulties. The Lord hold thee in that good resolution! It is the ready way
to life and salvation.

2. For Delusions; Mistakes about it.
many a man mistakes the business of repentance, thinking he has repented when
it is no such matter; and so, that God is reconciled to him, when indeed he is
not; as for example, Those that deceive themselves with a few sighs or tears,
as did Ahab: Those that lift up their voice on high, and hang the head like a
Bulrush for a day, as in Esaias; And they that say they are sorrowful, but it
appears not afterward, who all should remember Judas and other hypocrites, and
the morning dew which is soon dried up; and honoring God with the lips when the
heart is far from him, and the fruits or works meet for repentance. And they
should remember how a natural man would be willing to flee from the wrath to
come, though he never take a through course thereunto. Self-love can do it; that
the worst that is would be loath to go to hell when he dies, and desire to go to
heaven: And they should remember what work is laid out for the truly-penitent,
2 Cor. 7.11. Carefulness, Zeal, and the rest: With those notes of turning
rightly from the evil way, every evil way; the beloved evil way; and that
constantly, Ye must no more return to folly. Psalm. 85.8. Jer. 4 1.
And to turn so far, as to get unto God, and walk with him in holiness.

Consider, and be not loath to repent, nor yet mistaken.

Mot.
Know this is the only comfortable change for a poor sinner* not God is changed
when he is said to repent, but the sinner is changed. When God does his great
works of Creation and of Miracles, he sets forth his own glory: but when he
works upon the creatures, he works for their commodity; as here, for the
benefit of Nineve which was sorely threatened. And the change was in the
Ninevites, not God, either essence or purpose. Try it after them who will, he
shall find that without the great change of conversion there is no good to be
done with the great God of heaven: And upon such a change, God will turn frowns
into smiles, and threats into promises, yea most gracious performances, as here;

He repented of the ev^l, and did it not.

God merciful to the penitent.
God pardons penitent sinners, and turns away their deserved punishment. For
pardon, see Psalm. 32 5. David was humbled, and confessed his transgressions,
and the Lord forgave him the iniquity of his sin. And see Esa. 55.6, 7. Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him a ^^le he is near; Let the
wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. So he did to the Ninevites, Jonah, Manasseh, the
Prodigal, other great offenders. For punishment, distinguish.

1. There is an eternal punishment due for sin, according to the infinite
Majesty of God who is offended; everlasting punishment, Mat. 3.12.25.46.
unquenchable fire, the, (...) goes not out. Of this the Lord always discharges
the penitent; He shall not dye; namely for ever, not the second death: ^e dies
naturally, but lives eternally.

2. There is a temporal punishment* suppose by Famine, Sword, Pestilence, and
other calamities. Many and great and sore evils the Lord denounces against
sinners, to affright them and bring them out of their evil ways; to hide pride
from them, Job 33.28.
and deliver their soul from going into the oil: And if they be reduced, God
may be pleased to release them of the evil threatened, as these Ninevites. But
this is not certain, nor always comes to pass: God^ (...) Children in the
temporal part are sometimes grievously afflicted, they so far provoke him by
securely and unthankfulness, that they cannot be excused, Jonah for three days
and three nights must needs lodge in the belly of the Whale: Jer. 46.28. I will
make a full end of all the Nations ^^^ther I have driven thee, but I will not
make a full and of thee, but correct thee in measure, yet I will not leave thee
wholly unpunished.

Reasons why God so pardons the penitent, are plain. Exodus 34.7.
The Lord, the Lord, merciful and gracious, forgiving iniquity, 2. By Jesus
Christ a ransom is found for the penitent; justice satisfied, wrath appeased,
favor procured; heaven opened. 3. Promises are made everywhere

So here is more encouragement to repent. Ye see your More encouragement to
repent.
or to be removed; be humbled before your God, and it may be done. Jonah was a
sign to the Ninevites, namely to repent and be pardoned: As he, so they; and as
they, so we. All is for our instruction, that repenting as they did, we may
escape as they did. And let none think to hold God to it, that though he repent
not, yet he shall do well enough* Verily, verily (said our Savior) except ye
repent, ye shall all perish. Luke 13.5.


So when a tender heart casts doubts, that his sins shall not be pardoned,
nor indeed can be, set it fly to this remedy; Grieve for thy sins, and confess
them, and crave pardon for them, in the Name and for the merit of Jesus Christ;
afterward doubt not but a pardon will be had, and in time will be sealed up to
thy foul. 1 John ^* 1.
He is our Advocate with the Father, and the propitiation for our sins; He sits
in his Pardon-office in heaven, and in time will issue forth a pardon for thee.
Mark 1.15.
Repent, and believe the Gospel, are the two main graces of the Gospel.

Mic. 7.18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and
passes by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage the retains not
his anger for ever, because he delights in mercy. He will turn again, he will
have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities; and thou will cast all
their sins into the depths of the sea. Subjects use to magnify a loving
Prince, who remits the penal laws, and grants pardon to offenders. So does our
God, and so ought we to honor him. Consider, this is his end in granting
forgiveness of sins, Psalm. 130.4. That he may be feared. And this was the first
and chief mercy which David commemorated in his thanksgiving, Ps. 105.3. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities. As also Paul, Ephesians. 1.6, 7. That we should be to
the praise of the glory of his grace.

CHAP. IV.
Ver. 1.2, 3. But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry: And
he prayed unto the Lord, and said, I pray thee O Lord, was not this my saying
when I was yet in my Country? therefore I fled unto Tarshish: for I knew that
thou art a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, of great kindness, and
repentest* thee of the evil. Therefore now, O Lord, Take I beseech thee my life
from me, for it is better for me to dye then to live.


THis Chapter sets forth the Events of Gods sparing of Nineve. Sum of the
Chapter.


The Events are of two sorts; a froward servant, and a gentle Master.

In Jonah we see the example of a froward and waspish Saint, who too much
cleaves to his own reason, without due respect had to the will of God, or to
the good of sinners. For a good man, he is as choleric a man as lightly we
shall read of. And we have his fellows, if not in goodness, yet in testiness
and peevishness. Take heed, and do not imitate.

1. We see how ill he takes the sparing of Nineve, Parts.
ver. 1. he is displeased and angry. 2. We hear him justifying his former
flying, ver. 2. 3. We read a strange prayer he makes, ver. 3. Take my life from
me. 4. We may hear more pevishness. ver. 9. I do well to be angry, even unto
death.

For the first of these, What is was that displeased Jonah.
we may not conceive Jonah displeased or angry at the repentance of the
Ninevites; this being quite contrary to the truth of grace which was in Jonah.
Grace never opposes grace in another, but first desires it, and then rejoices
in it. But, it displeased him exceedingly; that is, that the Lord did not the
evil which he said he would do to Nineve. And why so? because now he should be
accounted a false Prophets and God who said Nineve should be overthrown, should
be blasphemed as variable, and not true of his word; as not only the heathens
round about, but even the Israelites themselves would be ready to jeer at his
coming home among them: A goodly messenger and message! and hereafter we will
not regard thee a whit.

It displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry.

Some say he was offended at the calling of the Gentiles, as those in Act. 11.
and 22. and that by the spirit of prophecy he, foresaw the rejection of the
Jews, into whose room the Gentiles were to succeed. But this is too far
fetched, nor agrees with the Text and Argument here brought, nor with the
goodness of an holy heart, such as Jonahs was. It is best to understand it as
before.

Note. The godly have, and confess their infirmities.
And we may observe: A godly man has many and great infirmities; but withal,
confesses them though to the shame of his own face, as does Jonah here.
Formerly, from the same ground, we concluded the Divinity of the Scriptures;
and now the sincerity of the Saints. Paul for them all; I do not the good I
would, and I do the evil I would not: O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me!

to confess and give glory to God. J^s. 7 19.
Let God be true, and every man a liar. To me belongs nothing but shame and
confusion of face: with a lowly deportment, suitable to those humble conceits
and speeches you use concerning your selves.

Lessons to be learned from Jonah.
Then for mortification, learn by these failings of Jonah,

before or above the will of God, as did he. Self denial is the first lesson
that a Christian should take forth, and make use of it all along in his course:
Be not wise in thine own eyes. Lean not to thine own understanding. Go not by
thine own shallow reason, but which way the revealed will of God shall lead
thee. Jonah had Gods mind fully revealed to him in this point. Go and preach to
Nineve, and thereupon should have silenced his own reason utterly.

2. Having a desire to advance the glory of God, be Jonah, who for fear of Gods
dishonor refused to do Gods Errand at Nineve. It is a goodly and specious
color for actions to talk of the glory of God: but if the course be (...) a
direct and warrantable course, in vain shall the glory of God be pretended, who
will never account himself honored but in a way of his own. Yea, it has been
the advancement of many a wickedness, to pretend so and so in order to (...);
and the course of Antichrist, to make a noise of acting in order to the Church.

3. Be tender of the life of man, and of his outward Jonah was not, and we see
how he is chid for it* And we see how loving the Lord is, even in this respect,
ver 11. Should not I spare Nineve a City so populous? Remember the sixth
Commandment, Thou shall not kill, 1 These. 4.6.
no not in desire. Remember those commands, Let no man defraud or go beyond his
Brother in any matter, for the Lord is the avenger of all such. And, be chary
of thy Neighbors Ox or Ass, much more of his life, and comfort of his life;
We are fallen into an hard, yea bloody age, wherein the life of man is little
regarded; nor how well he shall go along in his course. Take heed, there
remains a merciless judgment for them that show no mercy. Jam. 2.13.


4. Study the gaining of souls to God, and be glad when there is the least hope
of grace begun in any. Here also was some fault in Jonah; certainly he heard
how they fasted and prayed, and turned from their evil ways: which should have
gladded him, and made him congratulate their repentance, and safety thereupon.
Remember, and do so: Luke 15.10.
Convert any if thou may be so happy, and as there is joy in heaven for a
sinner that repents, so let it be on earth. It was a wicked humor in the
Pharisees, that they envyed the conversion of the Publicans. Beware thou, and
be ambitious of the great honor of converting a soul, Dan. 12.3. To shine as
the Stars for ever and ever.

For the second particular: A marvel it is, that Jonah is so stout and sturdy
after his great punishment, and all those terrors which God sent upon him. One
would have thought he had had enough of his flying to Tarsus.

But I had rather put this humor of Jonah upon a way of carnal reasoning, which
too much swayed with him at this time; taken from the mercy of God, which he
thought would never so far proceed, as to let Nineve be overthrown though he
said it; Was not this my saying, thou art merciful, etc? Calvin.
If Jonah had been sent to Nineve with an offer of mercy upon their repentance,
as to the ten Tribes, we may verily think he would rather have offered his
service, then declined it. But now he mutters against God for his mere
denunciation of judgment, Note. Carnal reasonings mischievous.
as if it could not agree with the nature of so merciful and gracious a Lord
God: and this mis-leadeth him.

Carnal reasonings do sometimes lead us from God and duty.

1. Totally as in the ungodly: eve^ the mercy of God gracious, and merciful,
and flow to (...), and of great kindness; therefore live as they list, turn
grace into wantonness, sin more that grace may abound more. As men make it,
mercy is a common pack-horse for horrible wickednesses, and final impenitency.
Why should they trouble themselves about repenting, when God is so merciful?

2. Partially, in the godly, as here in Jonah; he knew Nineve and went to
Tarsus. It were well if we did not sometimes bear up our selves too much upon
the mercy of God, and an interest in Christ, and certainty of salvation, and
perseverance in grace, We hold these things right in the Doctrine, and
miserably pervert them in the Use. And though we swim not with full Wind and
Tide, yet we sail too fast with a side-winde.

Take head, Christians, Avoid them.
and down with these carnal reasonings, which exalt themselves against the
knowledge of God, and against the due obedience to Jesus Christ. The ministry
intends the casting them down, and so do you, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Never will
Religion thrive, where such reasonings prevail. As it prevails more with any
man, so he leaves them off, as Gal. 1.16. Paul consulted not with flesh and
blood, but fell to his preaching-work.

Consider, there be many of these carnal reasonings taken from the multitude,
from example, profit, pleasure, credit, safety, or the like: but none more
dangerous then this from the mercy of God; so long as God is merciful, on they
go in their sins, and fear nothing. A miserable case!

God is gracious; that is, freely for his own sake to forgive the sins of his
people. And he is merciful; that is, will relieve them against all their
misery, spiritual, temporal, and eternal. And he is (...) to anger; that is, he
is loath to empty the Vials of his displeasure upon sinners. And of great
kindness; that is, tenderly considers their case, and is willing to do them
good.

But should this or any of these be abused to keep from repentance and
amendment? were not this the ready way to be drowned in a sea of mercy? Jonah
was almost drowned in such a sea; though a godly man, yet almost undone by
misapplication of the mercy of God: But thou, O man, a secure and hard-hearted
wretch, wilt be quite drowned one day, look to it as well as thou will.

For the third particular, It is a strange prayer that Jonah here makes, both
for the manner, and for the matter of it: He prayed unto the Lord, and said,
Take my life from me.

Mark, this is spoken in haste, being exceedingly displeased, and very angry;
and he speaks it in a muttering and chiding manner, expostulating the case even
with God himself, I pray thee O Lord, was not this my saying when I was yet in
my Country? as if he had said, I thought what thou would do; I had just
cause to fly away and never do the Errand at Nineve; I said what would come of
it: A merciful God thou art, and by doing the Errand thou would dishonor thy
self, and I should go for a false Prophet.

Tim. 2.8. and many good limitations there are for the ordering of our prayers.



And let a Christian that observes his weaknesses, learn hereby to pray for his
prayers; not only for his Sins, Wants, Dangers, other evils, but even his
prayers: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord hearken and do, Dan. 9.19. There
is an iniquity that cleaves to our holy things, which needs to be pardoned.
Christ is our High Priest to take them away, and we need his intercession for
that purpose. Prayer is so far from being meritorious, that without mercy it
should not be accepted.

But come we to the matter of Jonahs prayer: Take my life from me, for it is
better for me to dye then to live; so Elias would needs dye in all the haste
for the wickedness of Israel, and for the persecution of Jezabel, 1 King. 19.4.
Elias cause was, better then Jonahs, who only stood upon his own Credit, and
Gods truth in the message delivered: yet Eliah is reproved for it, ver. 9. What
do thou here, Elias? and here, Do thou well to be angry? Note. Sinful to
desire death, how.


It is sinful to desire death according to our own passionate humors, and may
justly be reproved.

There be Cases wherein it is lawful to desire Death; as for example, when we
see God calling us out of the world; when the Martyrs saw the truth of God
lying at the stake; when the Congregation of the faithful is in danger if
betrayed; when an eminent Minister or Brother is to be rescued, as Aquila and
Priscilla laid down their necks for Paul, and we ought to lay down our lives
for the Brethren.

But for irksomeness of living, or in any corrupt way whatsoever to desire
death, is utterly faulty, and deserves to be reproved. Why? Our life is the
gift of God, vouchsafed for special uses which he has appointed; that he may
be glorified in us, both living and dying, Phil. 1.20. And therefore it may not
be foregone till he please to take us off from our station. Rightly Paul, who
in one respect desired to dye, but in another respect desired to live, ver.
21.22, 23, 24.

Take heed, Christians, and suppress all such way-ward and hasty humors of
desiring to dye. Ye may be dead before ye are aware. And some have desired to
dye, who were glad afterward that they were alive. And why should ye dye before
ye have done your work? Or why are ye so shie of suffering according to the
will of God? It comes to pass sometimes, that those desire death in their own
way, who have basely and treacherously avoided death in the way of God: nice
and fine while they get their own ends, but otherwise foolhardy.

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, Esa. 38.19. Spoken in opposition
to the state of the dead, from whom all occasion of praising God is cut off,
ver. 18. So in Psalm. 115.17, 18.

Take heed, it may be in death thou will wish for more time to live: or that
thou had done more work for God, or gotten more hold of his love, or were
grown more fit to dye. Such cases have been, and such may be again. Walk in
fear, and while thou do live, live to some purpose.

Ver. 4.5. Then said the Lord, Do thou well to be angry? So Jonah went out
of the City, and sat on the East Side of the City, and there made him a Booth,
and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see what would become of the
City.


In these two Verses we have two things to be considered. 1. Gods gentle
chiding of Jonah, Do thou well to be angry? 2. Jonahs expectation of the
Event, To see what would become of the City.

For the former, we may well admire the gentleness and goodness of God toward
his froward servant. God does not fall foul upon Jonah for his rash anger, nor
take away his life as he had desired, nor throw him into the sea again, which
he could easily have done: But debates the matter calmly with him, to bring him
to a sight of his Error, and set him into his right way again:

And now we speak of zeal, we must remember that Jonah in his passion had a
zeal of God after a fashion, being jealous lest his truth and glory should
suffer by the sparing of Nineve, and himself accounted a false Prophet. Our
zeal for God sometimes has much mixture, not according to knowledge, as Romans
10.^. Take heed, and watch over this hot affection; neither let it be dampened
on the one side, nor too much inflamed in the other. Beware lest God have cause
to chide for the excess, saying, Do thou well to be angry?

So of good meanings: A man may mean well, and yet make great faults. Jonah
meant well when he was exceedingly displeased and angry. Saul meant well when
he kept the best of the cattle for sacrifice. Uzzah meant well when he stayed
the Ark from falling. Take heed, nothing is more deceitful then man's judgment
of his actions in the things of God. In all points we should look to the will
of God, and the rule which he has given in his word.

Do thou well to be angry? He says not positively, Thou sinnest in being so
angry, but puts him upon his own better thoughts, and would draw from him his
own confession; as if he had said, If I should make thy self judge, yet upon a
serious consideration thou would find thine error, that thy mind is as the
raging sea, all in a tumult. L^cha, weigh well within thy self whether there be
not a foul fault in this thine anger. So the expostulation is far more
emphatical and urging, then a plain affirmation, though a chiding.

Do thou well to be angry? If a man would Rhetorically defend Jonah in his
anger, there might be many specious colors for it. Or if we would a little
admit his excuses, something might be said for him with some handsomeness. Romans
3.
But, let God be true, and every man a liar: We know the judgment of God is
according to truth and equity; And, a man shall never proceed safely and
comfortably, unless he can satisfy his conscience by the word upon a just
examination.

Do thou well to be angry? God could provide for his own glory without
Jonahs care; yea and for Jonahs reputation. And, if God were so merciful as
Jonah said, why should he not show it to repenting Nineve? Or must God at
Jonahs pleasure bacome severe and terrible? must he be cruel, that Jonah might
not seem a liar? must more regard he had of Jonahs Credit, then of Gods most
holy Nature and glory? Lastly, it seems scarce to be endured, that Gods doings
should be so censured and misliked by a poor, weak, mortal sinner. One of us
would scarce abide it. Yet God abides it day by day. God can scarce do any
thing either for afflicting us, or out of the ordinary rode, but we are apt to
mutter and complain; suppose about the confusions of the times, etc. In general
we confess he is righteous in his judgments, Jer. 12.1.
yet in particulars we will needs plead with him, and talk with him of his
judgments, why and wherefore. Take heed, and submit better.

But the main point is this: Say, Do I well to be angry?
A Christian when he finds anger stirring, should say, Do I well to be angry?
Anger is a natural affection, and very good use may be made of it. Without some
anger there will be no zeal for God, nor against sin. And he must needs be
blockish and senseless, who will not be angry when he ought. There is a
quietness which is sinful, and dishonours God exceedingly, and drowns souls in
security. But otherwise, we should look well to our anger; suppose in case of
Gods doings against us, or man's, or any cross, accident; A beloved Child is
taken away by death, I suffer great loss by my Neighbor, or the like; my
affections now are all in a hurry. But, Do I well to be angry? Ephesians. 4.26.
my rule is to be angry and not sin; the affection is good, but the distemper
is evil. What is it? where am I? whether do I swerve from my rule or no? I am
apt to offend one way or other: therefore I must weigh well how I manage my
anger.

But how shall a man know, whether he do well to be angry? Signs of allowed
anger.
Answ.

1. If there be just cause for thy anger, thou do well to be angry; suppose
at thine own sin, or the sin of another: especially to see the wickedness of
the world, and how corruptly things are carried among men. In these ca^es,
godly men have showed great anger, and were never disliked for it. Moses was
very angry at their murmurings and idolatries: and Christ at the profanation of
the Temple. Exodus 16.20.32 22. John ^.17. 1 Cor. 11.
And in such cases we ought to judge our selves, that we may not be judged of
the Lord; to rate our selves for our ^illiness, and revenge on our selves, and
undo what we have done, to the best we can: there is just cause for it,
because we were so fool^sh and ignorant, Psalm 73.22.
and as a beast before God. Godly sorrow ever works indignation for errors
committed, 2 Cor. 7.11.

But there will never be just cause to be offended or angry with Gods doings
against us, or against our opinion, as Jonah was in this place. All reason
requires, that here we be dumb and complain not, and rest in this, There is
more reason for it then we are aware.

covers a multitude of sins, and is not easily provoked. 1 Pet. 4.8. 1 Cor.
13.4, 5, 7. Jam 3.17.
Not wisdom: for, the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable. True love and wisdom reserves it self for weighty matters, where God
requires more of our anger and severity, then of our mildness.

to be merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful; and we see how his mercy
goes, Hab. 3.2. in wrath he remembers mercy. Esa. 27.7, 8.
Imitate God in punishing a Child, a Servant, an evil doer. God corrects in
measure, and so must we.

4. Thou shall not do well to be angry, if thou keep Jonah did, Ephesians. 4.26.
ver. 9. I do well is be angry, even unto death. Our rule is, not to let the
Sun go down upon our wrath. As we must not be quickly angry, so, when we are
angry, we must be quickly pleased again; Else our anger may be turned into
malice: And the Devil will watch the occasion to work us to farther
ungodliness; as there, ver. 27. neither give place to the Devil. With a
malicious man the Devil lies down at night, and goes to bed with him. Pure Wine
is corrupted, if it stand too long upon the Lees.

5. Thou shall not do well to be angry, if thou grow Mark 3.5. He looked about
on them with anger, and grieved for the hardness of their hearts. Impenitency
is the principal object of our grief and anger; And there are certain rules,
that we must neither approve the sin for the offenders sake, nor hate the
offender for the sins sake: Only in his great wickedness he must be either
shunned and avoided, or else reproved.

6. Thou shall not do well to be angry, unless thou Moses, Number. 12.3.
the meekest man on earth in his own cause, when spoken against by Aaron and
Miriam, but in point of idolatry nothing but killing and slaying. And for our
own sins, we see what our Savior says of M^tes and Beams in the eye, Mat. 7
1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Certainly every man has most business to do at home: And those
shall ever go for hypocrites, who strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel.

Christians, bring your anger to these rules, against all excess and
irregularity in your anger. And, the better to express it, suppress all the
causes of disorderly anger, as Pride, Envy, Self love, Covetousness, Curiosity,
Credulity, and all the bellows that use to blow up anger into a flame and
combustion. Stop the cause, and the effect will cease.

For Motives, consider how the Lord here chides Jonah for his excess, Do
thou well to be angry? consider how it is forbidden in Scripture, Ephesians. 5.31.
Put away all Bitterness, and Wrath, and Anger. The same again, Col. 3.8.
Consider how much sin this anger breeds Jam. 1.20. It works not the
righteousness of God. Consider the danger that comes of unadvised anger, Mat.
5.22. a man shall be culpable of judgment. Consider thy own infirmities, and
how thy self would not be handled angrily. Consider, the Lord here uses Jonah
withal the gentleness and moderation that can be; and we ought to be followers
of God as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1.

Jonah was a good man, and but now reproved of God for his anger, yet still he
goes on in his way-wardness, and nothing will content him but to see the ruin
of Nineve. Horrible stubbornness, which even makes him worthy to perish instead
of the City.

Jonahs example, to be obstinate or stiff in any of your resolutions;
especially when the word gives some inkling to the contrary. Natural corruption
is a sturdy old man, which will hardly be subdued.

He went out of the City, and sat on the East Side of it.

One would have thought rather he should have stayed in the City, to have given
them more instructions, now that they were upon the point of conversion. If he
had met with such a crop of Converts in Israel, he would have been glad of the
occasion, and stayed among them with all his heart.

But thus it is;

Take heed, and mortify the remainders of thy corruption; There be Canaanites
yet abiding in the land: take them in hand, and subdue them more and more. It
was the fault of Israel, that they sat still, and rooted not out the Remnant
of the Nations: and therefore they proved pricks in their sides, and thorns in
their eyes, to vex and trouble them from time to time, so it is still:
Christians suffer by their corruptions, because they take not pains to root
them out. And we see the contray, how when Paul prayed thrice against the
thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7.9.
he found a grace sufficient for him.

He sat in the shadow of his Booth, till he might see what would become of the
City. Calvin.
Jonah was too literal a Teacher, and did not reach the whole mind of God, who,
however he denounced destruction against Nineve, yet still left place for
repentance; that if they humbled themselves, they should be spared; which Jonah
understood well in preaching to Israel; but here in his prejudicate opinions he
cannot remember, and so is justly kept doubtful of the Event, with enduring of
scorching heat, and the loss of his Gourd.

Every man is tempted when he is drawn aside with his own lust, and enticed,
Jam 1.14.

the Spirit of truth, who will both teach thee all saving truth, and bring all
to thy remembrance. Had Jonah remembered the tenor of his former preaching, he
had not expected Nineves destruction so pertinaciously.

Ver. 6.7. And the Lord God prepared a Gourd, and made it come up over Jonah
that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from his grief; So
Jonah was exceeding glad of the Gourd. But God prepared a worm when the morning
rose the next day, and it smote the Gourd that it withered.


Here the Lord seeks to correct Jonahs Error by a real instruction, namely of
a gourd, which, Jonah would have spared: but Nineve was far better then a
gourd, and therefore the Lord most righteously will have it to be spared.

The Simile is in five Verses, the Application in the last.

For the former: we have, 1. Gods providence, in ordering of such an help for
Jonah against the heat of the Country; he prepared a guard. 2. Jonahs
comforting with such a help; he was exceeding glad of the gourd. 3. The
withering of it, which was a great grief to him.

Of the gourd; no such grow in these Northern Countries, A gourd, what
Dioscorides.
but in the Eastern Countries a gourd is a shrub with broad, black, and smooth
leaves, and has a Pod with seeds which resemble some creature of that Climate.
Such a shurb the Lord now provides for Jonah, that he may be sheltered from the
scorching of the Sun. But here is something extraordinary in it; namely, that
so tall and useful a creature should start up in a night, and that it should
grow just to Jonahs Booth, and so strengthen the weak shelter he had provided
for himself. So it is a kind of miracle: and miracles have seldom been done for
a particular man's use and benefit, though a dear Servant and Child of God. The
greater mercy is this to Jonah.

Observe here the providence of God reaches to the shrub which God prepares
for Jonah, and in a silly worm which he prepares to wither the shrub. So of
little sparrow, and hairs of the head Mat. 10.29, 30. All are numbered, and not
one falls to the ground without the will of our heavenly Father, who also
tells the number of the Stars: And upon Egypt he sent the Flies, Lice, Frogs,
Locusts, other Plagues, and took them away when he pleased.

Now bless the Lord who humbles himself to behold things Psalm. 147 5.
Psalm. 113.6. We may well admire and adore this glorious Lord God; his
understanding is infinite, his Power, Presence, Wisdom, Mercy, care of his
people, preservation of the creatures, even the meanest. Jonah was much bound
to be thankful, that when the Ninevites yielded him no entertainment, and he
provided a simple one for himself, the Lord prepared this gourd for him. Which
is also our case not seldom.

It is the Lord; be patient, 1 Samuel 3.18. Job 1 21.
or be thankful; The Lord gave, and the Lord took away, blessed be the Name of
the Lord. It is not our own how or sword, but the right hand of out God. If it
be a little drug or potion that does me good, an obscure friend, a small
accident, a little help to stand me in stead, it comes of God and he shall have
the glory of the thing, Dan. 11.34. They shall be helped with a little help.

This would be of singular use in our whole course, to live as Christians: to
acknowledge a dependence on heaven, to see by faith the Sovereign Lord of the
world; to breed contentment in that little which is allotted to us, to make us
thankful for small favors showed, or patient when a small matter falls out and
crosses us. The Lord prepares the gourd and the worm: not only the Whale, but
the Worm. We are apt in great matters to think God has an hand, but in small
matters we scarce look so high: take heed, and look upward even in small
matters.

Observe again, how powerful the providence of God is it came up in a night; in
the common course of Nature it should have been growing up a quarter of a year
together, to a just tallness and bigness: but God makes it shoot up in a night.
The Lord sometimes on a sudden shows light and comfort to his people, when and
where they least expect it; at the Red sea, out of a Rock, in the midst of
Jordan. He stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, to send his people home to their own
land. He delivered them from Haman in a way which they least thought on. 2. In
taking the gourd away: he prepared a worm which smote it, and it withered. He
could have blasted it without a worm, but pleased to use such a vile creature
for our instruction. Small things can cross us when God bids them: Grasshoppers,
Amos 7.1. Flies and Lice pestered Pharaoh exceedingly. A small cut in the flesh
has gangrened and killed. Little David slew the mighty Goliath.

Learn to see a powerful God in a weak creature; 1 Cor. 1 27, 21.
Weak things of the world to confound the mighty. By the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe. To uphold a weak Christian against
Principalities and powers, 2 Cor. 12.9. My strength is made perfect in
weakness; Water in Baptism to set forth Christ's blood, and cleansing from sin.
Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper to set forth the body and blood of Christ,
and to nourish the believing soul to life eternal. So of old, the sword of the
Lord and of Gideon; his Barly-cake overthrew the Tents of the Mid^anites, Lamps
and Pitchers confounded their mighty host. Trumpets of Rams-horns demolished
the walls of Jericho. Moses his Rod divided the Sea. All pointing at the
wonderful power of God, working by such silly means. Where glorious means are
used, we are apt to dote on the means; but where the means are so simple, we
are forced to look up unto God.

God provides well for ill deservers.
as here for choleric Jonah; he lives whereas he desired to dye, and beside,
has a gourd prepared which affords him much comfort. Though we believe not,
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. Gods Children
sometimes deserve full ill at his hands, and are ready to draw down wrath upon
themselves, but in mercy he forbears, and continues a gracious providence
toward them.



Note. Small matters sometimes very comfortable.
Come we now to see how Jonah. comfort himself with his gourd; he was
exceeding glad of the gourd. Small matters sometimes are very comfortable to
us; a Cup of cold water, water out of a Rock, Manna out of a congeled dew.
Naamans washing seven times in Jordan. A few Figs and Raisins to the fainting
Amalekite. A bunch of Figs to Hezekiahs Bile. Barly-loaves to thousands of
people. And, to an hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.

Whereby we see what poor and weak creatures we are, I am the way, the truth,
and the life; John 14.6.
to get the Spirit of life, to enter into the way of life, to nourish an hope
of life everlasting. Life of the soul is infinitely better then the life of the
body, and so are all the means that maintain it. Outward things commonly are
prized according to their worth, and what they will yield, and so should the
means of grace be mightily prized. The wisemen were very glad of the Star that
led them to Christ, Mat. 2.10.
teaching us to prize gracious means which first lead us to Christ, and
afterward confirm us in him.

And we learn in small matters to take notice of a great Inest sun gracia
parvis.

For the latter, the withering of the gourd, to the great grief of Jonah.

God has ways and means to blast our greatest comforts; as here, Note. God
can soon blast our comforts.
the gourd whereof Jonah was so exceeding glad, a worm was bespoken to smite
and wither it. So we read of blasting and meldew, Locusts, Caterpillars,
Canker-worms, Palmer-worms, Grasshoppers, other Destroyers of Gods providing;
whereby an hopeful crop in the Spring comes to very little in the harvest; all
of the Lords doing, Hag. 1.6, 9, 10, 11. Psalm. 107.33, 34.



1. Whither to look in all calamities of the year; as for example, the worm
which God prepares, the East Wind, Red wind, Black wind, other evils that come
and blast our hopes: They come not without the Lords sending, therefore this is
his Controversy, therefore for sin, therefore be humbled, make peace, get into
his favor, walk more carefully for time to come. Excellent instructions for
all of us: Do we not all live of the field? and who must prosper the fruits of
the field, harvest or vintage, but only God? and if it be not prosperous, who
is it that blasted it? the common saying is, My Garden or Field was likely to
yield a good Crop, but a scurvy worm came and destroyed all; I shall scarce be
able to pay my Rent, or maintain my Charge. Nay but, O man, who prepared that
worm, or sent that East Wind, or other spoiler? Affliction springs not out of
the dust, there is an higher cause, look thither, and see what is to be done in
a Religious way.

1 Cor. 7.30.
Therefore rejoice as not rejoicing. Comfort may be taken, but take it in a
moderate manner. Some are taxed, Jude 12.
that they fed themselves without fear; and they are a great generation
nowadays of men that are wholly in their natural enjoyments. It is noted for
part of Jobs piety, that he was jealous over his Childrens Feasting, and it
would be piety in others to be jealous over themselves.

3. To improve the comfort we have by the creatures, 1 Cor. 10.31. Drut. 28.47,
48.
and must bless them to us. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatever ye do, do all
to the glory of God. In his hands our breath is, and all our times, and all our
comfortable enjoyments. It were good to keep in with him, that these mercies
may be continued, as also blessed to us. The chief Motive is, to have
comfortable Communion with our good God; but it is one Motive, to have an holy
and wholesome use of the creatures. While the Rent or Service is duly paid, the
Tenant enjoyes all quietly.

4. To foresee changes that may quickly come upon Jonah should have thought, it
is a pretty accommodation to have such a gourd; but, may not a worm soon smite
it, and cause it to wither? Certain it is, that God never lets us a long Lease
of these temporals, but we shall have and hold them at his pleasure. A great
change there will be at the last, and we should ever wait for it: but before
that time there may be many changes, Job 14.14.
and it will be our wisdom to make account of them. It will be far easier to
say, The evil that I feared, is come upon me. He was wise and holy who said,
All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change shall come.

5. In all such changes that happen, we should be patient and submit to the
will of God; as dumb, Psalm. 39 9.
and not open This was one of Jonahs faults, that when his gourd withered, he
was angry, and said he did well to be angry to the death. Take heed; by much
wrigling we may make our burden heavier then it would have been. But by
patience an evil becomes much lighter, which could not be prevented, nor
afterward shaken off.

6. Above all blasts take heed of a blast upon thy soul, Never fruit grow on
the tree more; Mat. 21. Ez^k. 24.13. Rev. ^^.11.
or that, Thou would not be cleansed, thou shall not be cleansed; or that,
Be filthy still, be unrigh^eous still. These are heavy judgments of God, and
lie upon the spirits of many for their unthankfulness and unfruitfulness under
the means of grace. They are worse then Famine, War, or any temporal
judgments, as the foul is more excellent then the body: Yet inflicted on many,
because they have long sat under the dews of heaven, and are still a barren
heath; nigh unto a Curse, whose end is to be burned, Heb. 6.8.

Take heed, Christians, lest God in wrath blow upon these Ordinances, and for
your sluggishness make them altogether ineffectual. This is come upon some
already, no whit moved by all the good instructions and exhortations they have
heard in the ministry. And some have lost the fine and ripe parts which
sometimes they had, and are become very sots. Others are quite fallen away
either to Profaness or Heresy, as the Dog to the Vomit, or the Sow that was
washed, to wallow in the mire: or as the Salt which has lost his favor, and
good for nothing but the Dunghill.

There be some sorts of men specially that should beware of these spiritual
blasts. 1. Young people, who are newly looking into the world. 2. Those that
come out of dark Countries to a place of light and warmth, by good preaching.
3. Those that had their Consciences rowsed by a fit of sickness, and took up
good resolutions. Beware lest for negligence the Lord swear in his wrath that
ye shall not enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.11.

Ver. 8.9. And it came to pass when the Sun did rise, that God prepared a
vehement East-winde, and the Sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted,
and wished in himself to dye, and said, It is better for me to dye then to
live. And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he
said, I do well to be angry, even unto death.


Two things are proposed in these two Verses. Parts.
1. A farther trial of Jonahs patience which is found to be small. 2. A new
chiding him for his anger about the gourd, together with his stout reply, ver.
9.

For the former: God is pleased farther to try the patience of Jonah by adding
a new affliction; he not only blasts his gourd and takes that away, but
increases the vehemence of the Sunshine which faints him up, and makes him
even weary of his life.

So with us: Note. Loss of good, smart of evil.
God sometimes not only takes away our natural comfort and worldly
accommodations, but sends upon us smart and grievous afflictions; droughts,
scorching weather, distempers in the Air, thereby distempers in the body, fiery
and acute Diseases, as Agues, Fevers, Inflammations, Leprosy, Calenture, etc.
which are one of the threats for disobedience, Deuteronomy. 28.21. Or if it be not so
bad, yet the hot season shall make us faint, and weary of our lives, as here
Jonah.

But why did not Jonah return into Nineve, and get where he might be protected
from this hot weather? Answ. 1. Because he was of a stout and sturdy spirit,
Ninevites, or any of their Neighbors. 2. Because he expected every day the
ruin of Nineve, which he would be glad to see with all his heart for his
Credit fake which he took to be much engaged in the business. And what should
he do in a ruinous house, which was likely in short time to come tumbling upon
his head?

Answ. Because he had a mind to break and subdue this sturdy humor in Jonah:
which the mere loss of the gourd could not do, as ver 9. he was angry for the
gourd; and fears not to tell God, that he does well to be angry, even unto
death. So there needs a farther and stronger Purge to carry away this extremely
peccant humor; as with us also, whom lighter afflictions do little prevail
withal.



1. To justify God in all his sharp dealings with us; when not only he takes
away our Children, Wealth, Corn, Cattle, comforts of this life, but sends
Famine, Sword, Pestilence, new Diseases, Pox, Agues, other evils; Say, Psalm.
145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. We are apt
to sit in judgment upon his doings, and charge him foolishly, as too severe;
but should rather clear him, and lay the blame where it ought to be laid, Psalm.
51.4. That thou might be justified when thou speak, and be clear when
thou judge.

Pharaoh at last was taught to do, The Lord is righteous, but I and my people
have sinned. And when we find our selves apt to mutter against God for
feverity, we should take our selves in the manner, and say, Why do we complain
when the cause is in our selves? Wherefore does a living man complain, Lam.
3.39, 40.
a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try our ways, and turn
again to the Lord. And if we had our due, we should be utterly consumed, yea
cast into hell long before this time; as in the same place, It is the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, because

3. To mortify those wretched corruptions which God Jonah; and to break off
those sins which most agree with our crooked nature, and odd occasions of
offending. A sharp winter uses to kill the weeds and vermin and cherish the
Corn that is bidden. So let it be with our failings in one kind or other.

Jonah fainted, and wished in himself to dye.

He that will wish himself dead so often as he has sore occasion, shall have
more occasions then one so to wish. Note. Idle wishes.
Jonah had prayed this before ver. 3. I beseech thee, take away my life from
me. And now seeing God pleased not thus to gratify him, he falls to wishing
which is a lighter kind of desire. And whereas at first he only thus wished in
himself, afterward he uttered his mind, saying. It is better for me to dye then
to live, as ver. 3. So David in Psalm. 39.3. My heart was not within me, while I
was musing the fire burned then spoke I with my tongue.

Take heed, Christians, For which cause we faint not but though our outward man
perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. For our light affliction
which is but for a woman, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory: While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen; for the things which are seen, are temporal; but the
things which are not seen, are eternal. And consider it is not a manly thing,
to desire death so often as strong afflictions shall urge; and we saw on ver.
3. how we may desire death, and how not.

Whether it be better to dye then to live.
But let us a little examine the truth of this saying of Jonah, It is better for
me to dye then to live. Is it indeed better to dye then to live? Answ. 1.
Within the limits formerly mentioned it is better, namely, when God calls us
away, or the like, Eccl. 7.1. The day of death is better the day of ones birth.
2. Without such cautions it is not better; and mark, it is neither better for
godly men, nor for others.

Paul continued among his Converts, he abode with them for their furtherance
and joy of faith, Phil. 1.25. and this consideration put him into a straight,
Phil 1.23.
whither he should be dissolved which was far better for him in his own
particular, or live yet longer. A godly Minister while alive, may be a means of
converting, confirming, or recovering many. So a godly parent; or master. Yea,
in respect of a man's own self: he may get the more hold of Gods love, and do
more good to put upon his accounts in that day, and see his charge of Children
well bred up, and entered into the world; with counsel to them where they err,
or to neighbors between whom peace is to be made; and diverse good offices.

as they can. Why? then they shall keep out of hell so much the longer. Prove.
14.32.
None but the righteous has hope in his death. Others, by well using the means
of grace, and accepting the offers of grace, should labor to become righteous;
namely by justification and sanctification.

For the latter: God gently chides Jonah for his anger about the gourd, and
Jonah stoutly replies upon God in way of justifying himself. Two strange
passages! see a little what instruction they yield us, to glorify God, and
condemn sinful self.

For Gods gentleness, he does not take Jonah at his word, when he wished to
dye, but only gives him a gentle chiding, as ver. 4. Do thou well to be
angry? but there he was angry for sparing of Nineve, Chide gently.
here for losing of the gourd. Both times God is very meek to him; chides him,
but as gently as may be. Imitate, chide as occasion requires, but chide with
mildness, and in a treatable manner; try whether ye cannot reprove sin with
some love to the sinner: use mild words and strong arguments; we ought to be
follower of God as dear Children. Ephesians. 5.1.


Do thou well to be angry? and he said, I do well to be angry, even unto
death.

Note the strength of affections; When we are angry, Note. Affections unruly.
we are apt to be angry to death. When we grieve, our worldly sorrow causes
death. When we desire, we are all on fire, and dye if we be not satisfied. When
we love, we fall to doting: and so in other particulars, Cant. 8.6. Love is
strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave.

See hereby how much need there is to bridle affections with reason, especially
with Religion. (...).
Well are they called unreasonable, and need to be carefully ordered. We have
our affections common to us with the beasts, but have reason to curb them as
beasts have not; and as Christians, we have rules of Religion where natural
reason can do little; and even those that are religious, find enough to do in
mortifying their passions, and regulating their affections matter of much and
constant care beforehand, and of sorrow afterward. Jonah was a godly man, and
yet ye see in what a pickle he is, and with how much grief he is likely to
return into his own Country.

But mark how God expresses the object of Jonahs great anger; the gourd, a
filty shrub, for which he had not labored, nor made it to grow; it came up in
a night, and perished in a night: yet he is angry, even unto death, and tells
God he does well to be angry. Apt to be angry for small matters.
We are sometimes apt to be very angry for small matters; things not worth the
joy while we have them, nor the grief or anger when we forgo them; as for
example, If we sustain a little loss, If a small cross befall us, If a little
discredit light upon us, or an opinion of difered it; etc. Weak minds and
strong fancies do us much ruth in these cases. Our hearts are set too much upon
them, Hagar, when a well of water was near unto her. And here, no doubt but
there were other shrubs thereabouts, to which Jonah might have repaired: or if
not, this is not the first time that shrubs and Trees too have been blasted.

be patient.
Take heed, Christians, and bewray not such weakness about these trifles. Say,
if I keep patience so little in these poor things, what shall I do when God
comes to take away my life? what, if my house should fall on fire, and all my
goods consumed to ashes? what, if all my Children were slain at a clap, as Jobs
were even there I must submit, and be patient, possess my soul, and inherit the
promises: much more in the matter of shrubs.

Answ. Whatever it was, it was not too good for him that took it away, and he
saw thy doting; and he intended good by the affliction. No doubt but some of
Jobs Children were pretty and towardly: and we read they were very loving one
to another. And we easily conceive, that a gourd to a Booth was a pretty
accommodation.

Oh I shall never get the like comfort if I live never so Answ. 1. Thou do
not know; if not in kind, yet thou may have as good, or better. 2. To a good
soul one God is better then ten Sons, an hundred houses, millions of gourds, or
the best of creatures.

Oh there is the question, whether God love me or no: Answ. 1. The assuring of
Gods love to the soul is a business to be done at all times; not only in
troubles, losses, and afflictions, but even in our greatest prosperity, and
when we have gone farthest about our evidences. Even Believers themselves must
give diligence to make sure their Calling and Election, 2 Pet. 1.10. 2. Certain
it is, that neither the enjoying of earthly comforts is a sign of Gods love,
not the losing of them a sign of his wrath or hatred; Eccl. 9.2. None can know
love or hatred by all that is before him. Yet this is a case wherein some godly
Christians do sometimes too puzzle and perplex themselves.

But I conclude with this stout reply of Jonah upon God: Reply not against God.
Do thou well to be angry? yea, I do well to be angry, even unto death. He
showed strange weakness before, that he was so angry for a trifle; but now he
bewrays some wickedness, that he answers God so stubbedly, and with some degree
of blasphemy. We might say as Romans 9.20. Nay but, O man, who art thou that
replyest against God? Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it, Why
have thou made me thus* We have little now to say for Jonah and his goodness,
but only that, first, he writes these things of himself though to his own great
shame in the Church for ever; secondly, he gives God the last word, as yielding
at last to the equity of spiring Nineve. Go, and do thou likewise. Luke 1




Passions in the strength of them do tend unto blasphemy.

Observe them how they come upon thee, and be exceeding watchful against them.
Augustus for staying his anger was counseled to say over his Greek Alphabet
distinctly. Theodosius in the like case must stay forty days between a bloody
decree and the execution. Some for want of such deliberation have broken forth
into horrible Butcheries. Others into horrible blasphemies, Cursing and
Swearing. And David blessed God for staying him in his bloody intentions
against Nabal and his family. 1 Samuel 25 32.


Ver. 10.11. Then said the Lord, Thou have had pity on the gourd, for the which
thou have not labored, neither made it grow, which came up in a night, and
perished in a night. And should not I spare Nineve, that great City, wherein
are more then sixscore thousand persons, that cannot discern between their
right hand and their left hand, and also much cattle?


Drift of the words.
In this Conclusion of the Book the Lord applies the former Simile; showing that
not the gourd was intended in the erecting or withering of it, but something
else. So in other temporals: We live in the world, we eat, and drink, and
sleep, and do business; but must so order our matters, as we may finally attain
the life eternal. And in spirituals, so much good Preaching is not intended
merely for hearing of Sermons, Romans 10.17.
but by hearing to get faith, and to walk with God in an holy obedience; the
receiveing of Sacraments is not merely for the refreshment of the body, but
that the soul may be strengthened in faith, comfort of the holy Ghost, and way
of obedience. Remember, and aim aright, and put not asunder what God would have
joined together.

But mark the inference which the Lord makes; Jonah may be pitiful, why not the
God of heaven? and if the gourd may be spared, why not Nineve much more? God is
infinitely greater then Jonah, and Nineve is almost infinitely better then a
gourd. Therefore all the reason in the world requires, that Nineve be spared,
seeing God pleased to have it so; say Jonah, is it not reason? And this
convinces him, that he has no more to object; we shall not hear one reply
more; he yields to the equity of sparing Nineve.

It were good, that all sinners would thus be silenced, Note. Yield to holy
convictions.
and yield to the convictions of the Ministry; as the man that was convinced
in Preaching, and fell down on his face, saying, God in you of a truth, 1 Cor.
14.24, 25. Augustine faith, It is good for a man to be overcome by the truth;
for, if he be unwilling, it will overcome him howsoever. Whatever defenses a
wicked man makes for his sins, hereafter he shall be non-plused, and have
nothing to say for himself; as the Guest who had not on a Wedding Garment,
questioned, stood silent, and could make no defense, Mat. 22.11. He was
speechless; or, he was choked. (...).
And so, out of the sinners own mouth he shall one day be condemned.

Beware, and yield to a convincing Ministry, Title, or the Patient that doubts
his Disease may prove mortal: to make sure work in soul matters, is far better
then either of these.

Parable, what it is.
Still mark, what kind of Doctrine the Lord uses, to make Jonah come to
himself; namely, a parable; so Nathan by a parable brought David to a sight of
his sins, and to repentance: and it was ordinary with our Savior, by earthly
things to instruct about heavenly. Without a parable he spoke nothing: Mat.
13.35.
I will open my mouth in a parable: A familiar kind of teaching, whereby a man
of Art and Wisdom convinces the judgment and Conscience of his Hearers
concerning heavenly matters by occasion of earthly. And it is well, if men of
Art and Wisdom do come down sometimes from lofty Themes, to treat with plain
people in a plain and familiar manner. Some cases have showed, that this course
has taken when grave and weighty Discourses has prevailed little, as being
much transcendent to vulgar capacities. University-men grew not profitable
Preachers, till they learned to Lispe and Halt with plain people. And some have
adventured to say, Efope.
that the man in his Fables showed as much wisdom as any of the Philosophers. I
am sure God has chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, 1
Cor. 1.27.

Jonah, and so let it profit thee. And beware, lest if thou profit not, it rise
up in judgment to condemn thee the more heavily. Judge 9.
Jotham by a parable reproached the Sichemites with their ingratitude and
treachery; Christ the Jews with their unfruitfulness and unthankfulness, by a
Vineyard let out to Husbandmem: Which to this day affords instruction to
barren Christians, lest at the last they be deprived of the Gospel.

For farther observations, gather up these gleanings.

the gourd for the which thou have not labored. Many of us enjoy mercies and
comforts, We enjoy mercies for which we labored not.
for which we never labored, houses which we never built, wells which we never
dug, friends which we never deserved, it may be never thought on them. Heirs
have lands they never purchased. All live of the field though they never
plowed. Children feed and are clothed though they take no care nor pains for
their living: and all of us live at Gods finding though we deserve nothing, but
rather the contrary; Man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God: and, Man's life consists hot in the
abundance of the things he possesses.

Whereby see the free and undeserved goodness of God, gourd to spring up for
Joaah: he cast a Kingdom upon Saul while he sought Asses: and upon David while
he kept Sheep. Every morning Israel gathered bread in their Tents, which the
dew of the night had baked. Who of us but can say, we have received mercies
which we little thought on? we had mean beginnings, and sorry proceedings, and
yet we are increased into two Bands.

Then for gracious Christians, how has God prevented them with his graces, not
willing, yea resisting? Ephesians. 2.12.
aliens to the commonwealth of Israel: enemies in their minds: rebels to all
spiritual good: yet called and brought home, justified and sanctified, and in
a fair way to be glorified. God is greater then they, and so they were
overcome. God be thanked that ye were the servants of sin, but have obeyed from
the heart he doctrine delivered, Romans 6.17. An argument there, to urge a real
holiness: to dye to sin, and live to righteousness.

Learn also to do good with those temporalls, which God Honor the Lord with thy
substance, Do good with such mercies the rather. Pro. 3 9. Deuteronomy. 8.11.26.5.
Psalm. 116.12.103.1.
and with the first fruits of all thy increase. When thou have eaten and art
full, forget not the Lord thy God. Hence the offering of the first fruits in
the Law, and the paying of Tithes, and the confession, A Syrian ready to perish
was my Father: and Jacohs confession, With my staff I went over this Jordan,
and now I am become a rich man: and David's deliberation with himself, What
shall I render to the Lord for all his henefits? Bless thou the Lord, O my
soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy Name. And the censuring of the
unthankful Lepers when cleansed, Ten were cleansed, but where are the nine?
Luc. 17.17.


Here let none take up an evil thought, as if excused because he has
faithfully labored for what he has gotten. Other Scriptures require it of the
painful and laborious; or tell how God gives strength to get substance, Deuteronomy 8
18. and, how without the blessing of God all a man's labor will com to nothing,
Ps. 127.1, 2. Still therefore he is the great Benefactor, and must be so
acknowledged. Without him, and some grace from him, thou had been idle, rash,
undiscreet a spend-thrift, or crossed in thy way of getting.

Much less think, What need I labor if God gives his blessings to them that
labor not? Not so: for he has set an order from the beginning of the world,
that in the sweat of our brows we must eat our bread. Man is born to labor, as
the sparks fly upward. Be not slothful in business. None may walk
disorderly, but labor with his hands the thing that is good. So that Gods
preventing us with goodness is no warrant for any to be idle, and cast care
away. Idleness is a sin, and such are threatened to be clothed with rags.

So in spiritual things: all are bound to a diligent and conscionable use of
the means of grace, whereby they may get into the favor of God, and be saved.
Lie at the pool to be healed of spiritual maladies. Wash in Jordan to be cured
of the leprosy of thy soul. Dives his brethren were sent to Moses and the
Prophets, to believe them if they meant to escape the place of torment.

2 The Lord tells of sixscore thousand infants in Nineve, Our infants regarded
of God.
which argues the hugeness of the city: twice before called a great city,
and now we see it must needs be so; by this proportion what were all the
Citizens put together?

The Lord sees and respects the multitudes of people that are in the world,
young and old, infants and all that know not the right hand from the left; one
hundred and twenty thousand of them, millions in Constantinople, in Grand
Cairo, Paris, other great Cities; one hundred thousand families of Jews in
Alexandria beside the other Citizens, four hundred twenty and eight thousand
heads at Rome upon a just account; so of others, London, York, Bristol, all
particular Towns and Countries. He that calls the stars by their names, and
counts the number of them, keeps accounts also of young children: And as he
feeds the Ravens when they cry, so he provides for us and our little ones. He
told Abraham, Psalm. 147.3.
how his posterity should be as the stars of heaven, and as the sands of the
seashore for multitude, and how he meant to advance them.

The reason whereof is taken from the infiniteness of his divine perfections:
He makes all, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed. These Nivevites were
heathens, Genesis 17.7.
and yet their little ones were thus respected. What then shall we say of
Believers and their offspring?

Now magnify God in this his large, and yet special providence. Psalm it
stands among the arguments of praise and thanksgiving. Ahasuerus by his great
and long Feast did show forth the Majesty of his Kingdom: yet we read of no
children among the guests: but our great Feast-maker gives entertainment
continually to young and old, even all the millions in several countries.
Meditate, and see how the glory of God will swell in thine eyes. We admire
great Housekeepers, who keep many in family, and provide for every one
decently, and in very order. The Queen of Sheba was ravished in mfnd, to see
the order and glory, and provisions of Solomon's household. But behold, a greater
then Solomon is here, infinitely more guests, and better provisions.

Comfort to Parents.
and sometimes they have careful and heavy thoughts how to provide for them;
especially what will become of them when themselves are dead and gone; alas
poor creatures, what will they do? If they were grown up, and able to shift for
themselves, I should care the less: but they are young and tender, and my
heart is much troubled for them. Now remember wbo looked upon Nineve, and there
noted six score thousand who could not discern between the right hand and the
left. And he is the same God still, infinite in all his Attributes, and as
loving to our little ones as ever he was to these of Nineve: one of them far
better then all the Ravens in the world, and yet God feeds every of them: and
the Angels have a charge of our Children as well as of our selves, Mat. 18.10.
and it has been seen, that God has raised poor men's Children, and set them
among Princes, Psalm. 113.7, 8.

Only let Parents be advised in three things.

1. To lay hold upon the Covenant for themselves and their little ones: get God
to be thy God, and the God of thine. A careless Parent in this respect is but
a sorry friend to his poor Babes. Mark to whom the blessing is entailed, Psalm.
103 17, 18. The mercy of nhe Lord is from everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness unto childrens children: To such as keep
his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do them.

2. To pray for their Children, that they may be respected in special love, and
find mercy with the Lord; as did Father Abraham, Oh that Ismael might live in
thy sight! Genesis 17.
He that can pray, should exercise his gift in praying for his poor Children.
As for the Church, State, health, harvest, other interests, so specially for
the souls of his Children, and their eternal welfare.

3. To give them religious education: bringing them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord, as Parents are commanded, Ephesians. 6.4. It must not be
only civil education, but religious. So did Father Abraham, and found it the
way to obtain a blessing, Genesis 18.19. That the Lord may bring upon Abraham that
which he has spoken of him. So did David to Solomon. So did Lois and Eunice to
Timothy. And so do thou to thine.

And when this is done, be quiet, commit them to God and his providence, hope
well of them even in dying: his seed shall inherit the blessing. Or if they
miscarry, it is their own fault, who fell from their good education, and
forfeited your prayers, and Gods blessing withal.

3. We saw on Chap. 3. that even the least in Nineve Cattle: Humbled ones shall
be saved.
all cried mightily unto God to be spared: and now we see in the grant that is
made, how the little Children and Cattle are mentioned.

They that bear a part in days of humiliation and fasting, shall find mercy
with God in an evil time. Fasts shall be turned into joyful Feasts for them,
Zach. 8.19. They that humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, in due
time shall be lifted up, Jam. 4.9, 10. They that mourn, shall be comforted,
Mat. 5.4. They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. Sorrow
endures for a night, but joy comes in the morning, Psalm. 30.5.

Observe here: the Jews had a solemn Fast once every year, wherein they were to
afflict their souls for sin, that they might find favor in the sight of God:
And of this day two things are affirmed.

Lev. 23.27.
1. That it was a day of atonement, that is, they should have their sins
pardoned, namely in the blood of Christ who should come, figured in the blood
of the sacrifices: Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the
world. Now this forgiveness of sins is the blessedness of a man, as Paul
says out of David, Romans 4.6. So that the everlasting welfare of a sinful soul
depends upon the due humiliation for sin.

2. That in the evening of that day the Trumpet sounded for beginning the year
of Jubilee; wherein every servant became a freeman, and every one returned to
his land which he had any way alienated, Lev. 25.8. and when the Church of the
New Testament was to be showed in vision to Ezekiel, it was on the same day of
the same month, Chap. 40.1.

bodily exercise profits little. 2. Those that truly humble themselves, are
(...) Mat. 3.17.
In Christ he is well-pleased, and so with them.

atonement, or the forgiveness of their sins. They miss of many temporal
mercies which might be had. And they smart with diverse afflictions, which to
them are so many curses: as also are all outward blessings, Mal. 2.2. I have
cursed your blessings. And see Zach. 14.16, 17, 18, 19.

a broken heart, cast down for sin, Joel 2.12, 13. 2. With forsaking those sins
which are confessed and lamented, Pro. 28.13. He that confesses and forsakes
them, shall find mercy. 3. With doing the works of holiness, righteousness
and mercy, which are quite contrary, Esa. 58.5, 6. Then follow large and
precious promises, verse. 8. And all other are accounted but hypocrites, when
they fast never so much, or never so often, Zach. 7.5, 6, 7.

Consider, and remember the afflicting of the soul in fasting: and what the
Infants and Cattle could not do for want of understanding but merely by force,
do you perform voluntarily, and do it sincerely, really, effectually. Such is
the Fast which God has chosen: and this is the way to find favor with God.
After humiliation comes exaltation.

FINIS.

