Soled comfort for Sound Christians.

OR A TREATISE OF Gods absolute (and most certain) performance of his
Conditional Promises, in regard of the Elect.

Being a parcel of a larger Discourse on John. 13.17.

By ROBERT JENISON, Dr. of Divinity.

IER. 10.23. O Lord, I know that the way of man is not in himself: it is not
in man that walks, to direct his steps.

Printed in the Year 1641.

To every one that seeks after the truth in sincerity, SALUTATIONS.
READER (if so thou please to make thy self) understand, that this ensuing
Treatise is but a parcel of a larger discourse (long since begun, and as yet
not finished) on these words Joh. 13.17. If ye know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them. Wherein is intended the trial of our blessed estate, by true
knowledge, and the trial of our knowledge and profession, by practice and
obedience, which is not to pass without its Trial too.

Now this short Discourse (being the sum of two Sermons) is thus apart
presented to thy view, Preached on Thursdayes, Sept. 10, and 17. 1629.
by reason of some special opposition it found. For it no soones ^ad sounded
in the Pulpit, but immediately in the same Church it was loudly incounte^ed;
and I welcomed out of the Pulpit with most impetuous opposition rage, and
passion, with deep chardges, as that my doctrine did overthrow the Foundations
of Religion, etc. with threatenings also, as that I must be countable to
authority, and show my (...).

This the next day they got our Chancelour (who sent for me) to wish me to have
ready against a convenient time. Now, as then I signified I was not afraid who
see my notes, (but rather wish they might pass the Censure of our
Universities, and there be disputed) to which end I have spared time, (from my
weekly tripled pains) to bring them out of the rude Lump into this (not
pollished, yet) more digested form, and to present them, if not to the Censure
of the whole World, (which I should much desire,) yet to the view of such
judicious friends and lovers of the truth, and of our Churches Doctrine, as are
able to judge whether they deserve such encounter or not. Yet herein I would
also satisfy such especially, as are the hearers of my weekly Lecture, (if
possibly I can) who may thus by the eye more deliberatly take a view off, and
consider, that which by the ear had scarce time to enter into their brains
and hearts, and so at least endeavor to remove that prejudice, which the truth
receives by many of them, who gives it, its measure, from men's persons, on
whose sleeves (after an implicit and popish manner) they begin to pin their
Faith and judgments, contrary to the ancient rule: Non ex personis
aestimandam f^^e^, sed ex fide personas; Tertull: de prescript
That our Faith is not to be judged off by men's persons, but men's persons by
the Faith. My hope was that my former Lecture on Ephesians. 1.3.4. would have
settled our peoples judgments in that truth of God, which by some new Masters
(partly coming but chiefly corrupted amongst us) began with us to be
questioned, whilst (what by preaching, what by Chatechising, yea and printing)
they began to Entersperse the Leaven of outlandish Lutheran, or rather Arminian
Doctrine, but in a minced, sublimated, and refined manner, and as they would
seem by way of Moderation and Reconcilement; Yea whilst (after a ^essation
and Forbearance was enjoined) they begin anew (and contrary almost ever since)
to dispute.

But I plainly see that the opinion many have of their great learning and
deep judgment (unto which they are willing rather to captivate their own,
then to contest or yet endure so many encounters, as through the others
continual assaults in private and in public, they find) makes the authority
of Gods plain word (which in this argument here handled is most evident less
respected) though to such (...) desire to have God for their Teacher, and not
to understand above that which is written, the authority of divine Scripture,
Divinar^^ Scripturarum authoritas mayor est, quam omnis humani ingenij
capacitas August. de Genesis ad lit. lib. 2. c. 5.
is much greater then the whole capacity of humane understanding.

Though then I here in this place may be thought singular in my judgment (as
being now left alone and forsaken of all my Brethren in the ministry, and of
many others besides) yet I hope it shall appear to such as read advisedly this
Tract ensuing, that I have both Christ himself, and his Apostles, and our own
(and other Reformed Churches) Doctrine, to take my part, and bear me out.
Howsoever, I will choose much rather thus to be accounted singular, then cleave
to his judgment (who being chief here, was my chief opposer) whose words (so
near as I can remember them, and I am confident I miss not in the substance
of them) were these (in the hearing of our Chancellor and another) I am
assured (says he) that there are not three (or not above three) that know
what I hold concerning praedestination; neither have I seen past two that so
conceive of it as I do.

Whence I must needs conclude, seeing all other points controverted, are framed
and maintained according to men's conceits of Praedestination: (as even our
Adversaries confess,) First, Collat. Hagiens. L 1. page 488. edit. Brandij.
that the said party holds not the Doctrine of our Church of England, seeing
more then three or four, know what the Doctrine of the Articles thereof
(especially the 17. Article) is.

Secondly, that the singularity of this his opinion ought to be a sufficient
Condemnation of it (be it what it will be) seeing none can probably think that
God should keep secret from his Churches this mystery for so many ages, and
now reveal it only to two or three.

In case of such upstart, singular, and private opinions, Vincent. Lirinensis,
contra Here Is. cap. 38.
let the rule of Vincentius Lirinensis be set before us. Let the Children of
the Church follow the Universality, Antiquity, and Consent of the Catholic and
Apostolic Church: Et si quando pars contra Vniversitatem, novitas contra
vetustatem, unius vel paucorum, and errant dissentio contra omnium vel certo
multo plurium consensionem rebellarent, praeserant (...) corruptioni
universitatis integritatem novitatis pre^^^nitati antiquitat^^ religionem unius
sive paucissimorum temeritati, univers^^is consili (...), ^uno si (...) minus
est, sequantur multorum atque magnorum consentientes (...) Sententias
magistrorum.

Now Christian Reader, I leave thee to the Treatis^ it selfen which when thou
have read, thou will perceive what Doctrine ^he^^^y pleases some here, when
this so much displeases them.

From my house in New^: upon Tyne, 10. November. 1629. Thine and the Churches
Servant. ROBERT JENISON.

THE CONTENTS.
Section 1. A General Hint of such points as have been handled out of this
Text.

D^ing here how to be understood* Namely, Evangelically and sons to be extended
to Conversion, Faith, and to Gods will, manifested by word and work.

This Will of God made known in his word, the only Rule of our Doing, and of
all our Actions.

And not 1. Gods secret will. 2. The Will, Command, and Example of others. 3.
Our own will and wisdom.

Sect. 2. Two maine doubts propounded and answered in this Treatise. 1. Doubt:
whether Gods promises of Salvation, etc. be doubtful, because they are
Conditional. Here concerning the Vallidity of Gods Conditional promises and
force of the motives thence to weldoing.

Happiness and Salvation promised Conditionally: 1: To welding. 2. To Constancy
therein.

Yet is not the Happiness of the Elect uncertain: Either in it self, or to
them always after Conversion.

How Gods Word speaks differently of the same things. Two Considerations for
the clearing of the first doubt.

Sect. 3. First Consideration: Gods (...) distinguished: Some are are of the
End; and these are Conditional; Some are of the Means, and they are absolute.

Sect. 4. A Digression, further clearing, and justifying the aforesaid
distinction from th'imputation of Libertinisme.

1. In as much as this life is not promised, but upon Condition, neglect of the
means is excluded.

2. Concerning the absolute promises of the Means and Conditions.

1. The Means being many must not be divided.

2. Yet they may and must be compared: and so some graces are considered as
Ends and Effects of former and more common graces, such as the Gospel, etc. is.

3. Yet the promises of the End, whether maine End, or mean End, as the End,
are ever Conditional; and the promises of the Means, as Means, ever
absolute, whether they be Means more remote or dearer.

4: The Gospel it self is absolutely promised, and also freely given, both
for the outward Ministry, (which is directed by specia^ll choice, and sent to
some, not to all,) and for the inward work and power of it.

Sect. 5. These promises concerning the Means and Conditions of Life, depend
on Gods election.

Gods Election is not conditional, though his word be.

Sect. 6. Yet 1. God mocks none in his word.

2. His Word and Decree are not contrary one to another.

Sect. 7. 3. Gods Decree takes not a way the Consent and Liberty of Man's will.

Sect. 8: Second Consideration. The Conditions required of us, are also part of
Gods Covenant and promise made unto us.

One maine difference between the Law and Gospel.

Sect. 9. What God requires, he both promises and works in the Elect. This
is showed in diverse graces, as

1. In Faith, which God, 1. Requires, 2. Promises, 3. Works.

Sect. 10. 2. In Remission of sin, which God, 1. Requires, 2. Promises, etc.

Sect. 11. 3. In Repentance, which God, 1. requires, 2. promises, etc.

Sect. 12. 4. In New obedience, which God, 1. requires, etc.

Sect. 13. 5. In Perseverance, which God, 1. requires, 2. Pro. etc.

Sect. 14. So in other graces, as Fear of God, knowledge and in humility and
meeknes, which God, 1. requires, 2. promises, 3. works; Yea all graces
given us in time, are according to Gods Election of us before time.

Sect. 15. Second Doubt: Whether it be in our power to keep

1. The Conditions, and to do things required. 2. If not, to what end are such
precepts and exhortations.

First Branch. It is showed, that it is not in man's power to do well; to
convert, and as of himself.

Sect. 16. What power man has in Civil actions.

Of seven degres, to be considered in the perfecting of every good work, and
not any one of them is in man's power.

Sect. 17. Reasons hereof. 1. His ignorance. 2. Unbeleefe. 3. Natural
impotencie.

The estate of each man before his Conversion: Showing how unable he is to do
good.

Sect. 18. Use: To teach us humility, and to ascribe all to Gods power, which
subdues our rebellion. Though we will yet both power and act are from God.

Sect. 19. Gods grace is more then a gentle persuasion, or common influence.

The power of Gods grace in giving Faith, and working Conversion, showed out of
Scripture.

Sect. 20. Four absurdities: Ensuing out of the Doctrine of common grace.

1. O^r benefitt by Christ should be be no more certain then that which we
had and lost in Adam.

2. God should be no more effectual in good then in Evil.

3. Man's goodness should be ascribed to himself more then God.

4. The difference between the good and bad should be made by himself, and
by nature, and man converted should have cause to glory in Gods sight.

Sect. 21. Whence man's conversion is? it is from Gods special grace, who
removes the aforesaid impediments, 1. Of ignorance, 2, Unbeleefe, 3. Inability.

Sect. 22. What may be ascribed to man; What must be ascribed to God.

What our Churches Doctrine is herein.

Sect. 23. Use hereof: 1. To give all glory to God, and not any to our selves.
Thus to do is truly Christian.

To glory in our selves is, 1. Heathenish, 2. Pop^sh, 3. Jewish, 4. Profane.
Such can neither pray aright, nor be truly thankful.

Sect. 24. Use 2. To Comfort us, from the immutability of Gods purpose and
promises; On which, and not on our selves, his grace and our Salvation depends.

To ascribe all to God the safest.

Sect. 25. Second Branch, of the second maine doubt.

To what end then are Gods precepts and exhortations? The needfulnes of this
question.

The answer in three things:

1. Our strength is now not to be measured by God Commaundments.

Sect. 26. 2. Gods precepts and Exhortations are grounded on his promise.

Sect. 27. 3. These Exhortations are not in vain.

1. Not in regard of the reprobate, who thus: 1. Told what they could have
done. 2. Are,
Convinced: and so the Commandment in regard of God, not in vain; Yet is not
^od unjust in so doing. Why? 3. Restrained: So that the Godly live more
peaceably by them.


Sect. 28. 2. Such are not in vain, in regard of the Elect. 1. Unconverted who
thus: 1. Are taught to deny themselves, to ^ly to Christ, and to seek help
where only it may be had.


Sect. 29. 2. Are indeed converted, such precepts and Exhortations are
sanctified of God as Means of Conversion.

Gods Word is operative.

Sect. 30. 2. Converted, who thus are put in mind: 1. To stir up Gods grace
in them. 2. To seek after perfection, and to be thankful.


Sect. 31. These Exhortations expel Security, notwithstanding that Gods grace
work all.

1. Ministers must exhort, etc.

Sect. 32. The certainty of Election, and of Gods grace, should whet our
diligence to all good duties, 1. Such as know their election, must not neglect
means. 2. Much less should such as know it not as yet. 3. All must strive to
do well, and expect an End, answerable to their Doings.


Sect. 33. A General Inference, teaching how, from the foregoing Discourse to
conceive of other controverted points, as praedestination, etc.

Sect. 3. All other points are framed according to the Doctrine of Gods
praedestination, though the Remonstrants (pretending so much) make Free Will
and the power of nature the chief matter of their intention, and accordingly
frame other points.

Sect. 35. The Doctrine taught, concerning Gods Free and effectual grace, lets
us see: 1. That his Election is absolute and independent. 2. That Grace and
Redemption are not universal. 3. That the Salvation and perseverance of the
Saints is certain. 4. That the Faithful may be assured of their Election and
Salvation.


JOHN 13.17. Happy are ye if ye do them.


SECTION 1.
HAving out of this Verse in several Sermons, already (after a general and
Methodicall deciphering of Happiness, A General Hint of such points as have
been handled out of this Text.
according as the Scriptures speak diversely of it) considered 1. Of the things
to be known, and that both according to their restraint, only things
revealed, and specification here, namely d^eties of love and humility; 2. Of
our duty and the necessity of knowing them; 3. Of our duty in bele^ving,
willing, and affecting the things known; 4. the necessity of practice to be
added to knowledge.

Whence we concluded, that true knowledge is not bare knowledge, but such as
is accompanied with good and answerable affections and actions.

We are now in the 5th. and last place to consider of that blessedness, or at
least assurance of Blessedness, which results out of such practice, as a strong
motive to excite and stir up to the practice of things known, and that out
of these last words: Happy are ye if ye doc them. And so from thence to try
ou^ knowledge, by our practice and obedience.

Where it would be considered that we must conceive of doing here, Doing here
understood Evangelically, and so as to be extended to Conversion, Faith, and
Repen^^^ce; etc
not legally, acc^r^ing to the rigor of the Law; For so should never any man
be happy; And Christ only performed that perfect obedience to Gods will, and
we only in him:) but Evangelically, according to the equity of the Gospel, and
according to a weaker degree of obedience, performed in sincerity, Faith, and
constancy, and such as God will graciously accept off in Christ; So that we may
and must also extend this Doing more largely, as having reference to Gods whole
will, revealed and made known unto us.

Now God manifests his will either by his words or works; By word: 1. of
Command, both Legal and Evangelicall; And so not only obedience, Gods will
how manifested.
but Faith, Repentance, Conversion, etc. Come within the Compass of Gods
command. This is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 Job. 3.23. Job: 6.29 Isa. 1.16.17,
and love one another, etc. And this is the word of God, that ye believe on him
whom he has sent.

2. Of Restraint; and threatening; and so our Doing is indeed our not doing, of
evil forbidden, according to that. Cease to do evil, learn to do well.

3. Of Promise; whether absolute or Conditional; So that our obedience and
Doing according to this word will be also our Faith, and our keeping, and
observing the Conditions, of Repentance, Obedience, etc. upon which the
promises are made.

2. By Work, and by the Event experimentally according to his word; which if
it be good, then the thing required is our thankfulness: if evil, befalling
ourselves, our Doing is our patient suffering, as we are taught to pray: Thy
will be done (which includes also a willing suffering) and to say, Act. 21.14.
The rule of our Doing, is only Gods will made known.
the will of the Lord be done; if it befall others, our Doing is Fearing, Romans
11.20. and our amendment, Luke 13.5.

Now before I urge the further necessity of this doing from the motive of
happiness in the Text, consider we bre^fly from the words, the rule of our
actions and obedie^^^, which we may consider off from the last word in the
Text, (...), Them. For we thus are directed to Gods only will revealed and
made known unto us; which as we have heard, are, according ^o their restraint,
only of things revealed, and which we are bound (and here supposed) to know;
our Doings must be squared, according to the things we know; and this (...)
here, must answer that (...), so that (...) Doings should neither be scanter,
nor larger, then these things which are made known and revealed.

For 1. we must do all we know to be done, otherwise we should live in sins
against knowledge and conscience, and so should sin more damnably and
inexcusably, and be beaten with more stripes.

2. And in Doing we must not (especially in matters of Gods worship) do any
thing but according to that rule and will of God made known, and that both for
matter and manner: Ia. 2.12.
We must set that only rule before us, and make it the Square and Line, the
Sampler and the Coppie, according to which we must direct and order not only
our Faith, but all our Doing, not following such other rules as will not
warrant our actions.

Now these Roles are, 1. The secret will of God, Nota. 1. His secret will.
2. The will and Example of others, 3. Our own will and wisdom.

1. Gods secret will, though we do comformably thereunto, will not justify
our actions, either good or bad. Not good, because they are not of Faith; and
so I may say that Gods written word, not understood aright, is for the true
meaning of it secret to us. So that though we do according to the true meaning
of it, yet doing it with a doubtful conscience, Ro^ 14.23 Act. 4.27 28. To do
according to that rule, will not justify our actions, either good or bad.
and not of Faith and certain knowledge, it is sin to us.

2. Not bad; for so might Hered and Pontius Pilat, and the people of Israel
have been excused when they crucified Christ, seeing they were gathered
together for to do whatsoever the hand and counsel of God determined before
to be done, to justify out actions from Gods secret will, were to Saucy;
Neither must we desperately live by tha^t rule, saying: If J be praedestinat to
Life, live as I list, I shall not miss of Life, if not, all my endeavors are
in vain, I cannot alter Gods Counsel. Wretched Creature art thou, who so
reasonest; Do thou not make Gods secret will thy ^^le?

Suppose there were no^^^g else to stop thy mouth, tell me: how know thou
thy self to be reprobated? Yea, or elected? For so thou must needs assume. But
I am repr^bated; Yea, or I am elected; But when did ever God tell thee, ((...)
any,) that thou a^t a reprobate? that concerning particular persons, is (...)
secret kept to himself, till the event and end declare it; And no man can know
himself elected whilst he lives so carelessly, and reasons profanely. Thy
rule then is to believe, repent, etc. and so thou shall be saved, and Happy are
ye, if ye do these things.

2. The will and command of others, Not the will and command of others. Mar. 15
12.13.14.15. Nether the example of others.
will not excuse us, neither must be any rule unto us, as yet Pilate m^de it to
himself, in delivering Christ to the Jews to be crucified, saying, What will
ye that I shall do unto him? etc. And they cried: Crucify him, Crucify him.
So he delivered him to be crucified.

So Math. 28 18. the Soldiers hired for money, did as they were taught, etc.

The like I may say concerning the Example of other men, many or great, ill or
good; Yea of Christ himself simply, without his word, so Mat. 23.3. and Luke
9.5. Will thou that we command Fire to come down from Heaven and consume
them? even as Elias did.

3. Our own will and wisdom; Neither our own will or wisdom.
as to say, we will certainly do whatsoever thing goes forth out of our own
mouth, etc. as Ier. 44.17: So Paul before his Conversion (as now in like case)
J verily thought with my self, that I ought to do many things contrary to the
Name of Jesus of Nazareth, Act. 26.9.10.14.
which thing I also did, etc. And yet so doing he persecuted Christ, and kicked
against the pricks.

The things made known to us then, being the rule of our practice, we are to
be excited to live, practice, and do according to that rule, and that the
rather that we thus may get some comfortable testimony, that our knowledge and
professiion is sound; Yea especially because as here we are told: Happy are we
if we do so.

SECT. 2.
But here, 1. It may be objected: Two maine doubts propounded and answered in
this Treatise. 1. Whether Gods promises be doubtful, because conditional? 2.
Whether it be in our power to keep the conditions, and to do the things
required. And if not, to what end are such precepts and exhortatio^s. 1.
Concerning the vallidity of Gods Conditional promises and force of the motives
thence to weldoing. etc. Genesis 47* John ^ 17.

Happiness promised to weldoing, Luke 13.9. 2 Pet. 1.10. And to constan^y
therein. Gal. 6 9.


of what valliditie is this motive from blessedness, or what comfort or
encouragement to weldoing can this be, when blessedness here is promised only
upon condition: is ye do them? What blessedness is this, which (seems) thus
to depend on Iffs and Ands:

2. It may be asked, whether it be in our power to keep and perform these
Conditions, and indeed to do these things, seeing its here required of us; and
if we be not able of our selves to do such things, to what end is it that God
requires them at our hands, or exhorts and excites us to the doing of them?

To the former I answer: This Condition here seems indeed to make the Happiness
of Saints doubtful, seeing Happiness is not here or elsewhere in the Gospel
promised, but upon Condition, and that both of our doing (as doing has been
explained already) and of our continuance and perseverance in weldoing.

For the first, if thou do well, (that is, repentest, beleevest, and becomest
sincere,) shall thou not be accepted? Or shall there not be a Remission, said
God to Cain? who yet not doing well, found no acceptance.

And says our Savior Christ: If any man will do his w^ll, he shall know of
the Doctrine, etc. And if bear fruit well, (th^^ may spare it) and if not,
then after that thou shall cut it down; and if ye do these things, ye
shall never fall. And f^r perseverance: be not weary of weldoing, for in ^^e
season we shall reap if we faint not.

But notwithstanding such conditional promises we are taught by the same mouth
and pen, Yet is not the Happiness of the Elect uncertain either in it self,
that the reaping the blessedness, the acceptance here, and the Eternal
Salvation of Gods people and Elect is not barely doubtful, either in it self,
or yet always to them after their effectual calling.

1. Not in it self, seeing it depends not on man barely, but upon another
cause and ground; namely, on Gods eternal and immutable decree of Election, 2
These. 2.13.
who has from the beginning chosen them to salvation through sanctification of
the Spirit, and belief of the truth. Which two (sanctification and Faith, and
so repentance, obedience, and perseverance in them all) as he requires them
of us, as Conditions and Means of Life and Salvation; so does he also promise,
and by virtue of his election effect these conditions in us; as we shall anon
see in the particulars.

2. Not to them, Or to the^ alvvayes after Co^version.
after their effectual calling; And that the Conditions forenamed, (not of
their Election, but) of their Salvation, be fulfilled in them; And, through
Gods grace, by them: For so their Election (yea and Salvation unto which they
are elected) is also sure to them; For (says St. Peter) if ye do these
things ye shall never fall. (as we heard even now.)

So that here we may take notice, How gods word speaks differe^tly ly of the
same things.
that the Scripture speaks of the same things differently, sometimes as
required of us, otherwhiles as promised by himself; sometimes as duties and as
our works, otherwhiles as blessings and his own works; sometimes as the
graces required, and the glory promised, may be called the Fruits of the
Gospel, and the effects of the Ministry, as the instrument, otherwhiles as
effects of his own eternal decree of Election, and good purpose toward us in
Christ; and so sometimes as belonging to the execution of his eternal decree,
otherwhiles as belonging to his eternal decree to be executed; sometimes as he
is pleased to make them known to us in his word and will revealed, showing
what he requires of us, and what is and will be pleasing unto him, otherwhiles as
he has purposed in himself from all eternity to work them; sometimes as in
common propounded to all in the Church, otherwhiles as proper to his own
peculiar, in whom he will glorify his mercy; And hence it is that sometimes
his promises are propounded with condition, otherwhiles without condition
absolutely and independantly.

God knows who are his, and what he will do himself, and accordingly he
works all his works, as depending merely on his own, most wise, just,
gracious, and good will and pleasure, which nothing can or shall hinder, or
disappoint; And so with reference to his own counsel and purpose, he speaks
absolutely, and as things shall be: Yet for the effecting of his purpose, he
dispenses things in his word, as he pleases by propounding things generally
to all promiscuously in the Church (passing by others as he pleases) and that
with and under condition, and so as (for ought at least we know) they may or
may not be, as the event also does declare, and yet in regard of his elect
ones all his purposes (and promises) of grace and glory shall most undoubtedly
take place, and they shall not miss of that Salvation, whereunto (through
Faith and Sanctification of the Spirit) ^hey were elected.

This course (because we see it and do observe it in the Scripture) we must
conceive G^d bath thought fittest for the manifestation of his glory, by
showing forth his mercy, justice, Liberty, and other his attributes.

Now if we understand and conceive it not so well as we would, yet should we
not by any means question it, or frame things as we please according to our
easiest apprehension, but rather rest (denying our own reason, judgment,
will,) in that we see it to be the course which God pleases to take. Two
considerations for the clearing of the first doubt.


And this is that which now we come particularly to show and prove out of his
word, preparing the way, and endeavoring to make all plain, by handling of
two maine Considerations.

SECT. 3.
First, Gods promises distinguish^d, some are of the End, or of Happiness. Act.
16.21. Rev. 2.10. And these are conditional. Psalm. 1, 1. Psalm. 119 1.2. Ioh.
20.29. Ro^. 4.7.8 Psalm. 32, 1 2. Math. 24.26.
Consider that Gods promises in Scripture are either of the End, or of the
means leading to the End.

Now first the promises concerning the End, as especially concerning Salvation
and Blessedness, are with Condition, as: Believe and thou shall be saved; Be
thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life; Or because
here is mention of blessedness, this happiness is promised with Condition of
Doing and Evangelicall obedience; Happy are ye if ye do them. So elsewhere
upon the condition of obedience, negative; Blessed is the man that walks not
in the Counsel of the ungodly, etc.

2. Assirmative: Blessed are the undefiled in the way who walk* in the Law of
the Lord. So it is promised upon the condition of Faith; Blessed are they that
have (not seen and yet have) believed; of the pardon of sins Blessed are
they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered; And of
perseverance and constancy until the day of Jesus Christ; Blessed is that
servant whom his Lord when he comm^th shall find so doing.

Now these promises being conditional all partake not of the End (which is
Salvation) because all (partake not of, nor) keep the condition, none indeed
being able of himself to keep any of those Conditions; It is not in man's power
to do good, to Believe, Repent* Pe^severe, as of himself, (the promise of
this will follow anon) and God is not now bound to give this power to all, but
to whom only he pleases,

2. But now God bath also made promises, Some are of the Means, and they are
absolute.
which are most free and absolute, of giving where and to whom he pleases, as
the Conditions and Means themselves of Life, which he himself works in us,
that so by these Means we might attain to the End, as Deuteronomy. 30.6. The Lord
thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy Seed to love the Lord
thy God, with all thy heart and with all thy soul, that thou ma^st live.

Where the End promised is life, Suffrag. Brittannorum de 5. article-Thes.
Het^rodoxa. 1.
which the Israelites shall never attain, unless this Condition of loving God
were kept; But God does here absolutely promise, that he himself will give unto
them this Condition, and accordingly will circumcise their hearts to love the
Lord.

So, in like manner as we have heard, God promises Blessedness, to well-doing,
to Faith, Repentance, Perseverance, etc. which are also Conditions required of
us; And this is the tenor of the Gospel, yet he also promises to give Faith
Repentance, power to do well, with the act of weldoing and perseverance, with
all other Means and Conditions, and that without Condition, without Iffs and
Ands, and absolutely.

So that these Graces and Means of Salvation are not gifts given or promised,
and offered upon Condition but absolutely; Gods promises concerning these Means
of Salvation and Blessedness, as is said, are absolute, and are of such gifts
and graces, as which God (seeing our impotency and inability to attain the End
without the means also to perform the Conditions, and to use the Means as of
our selves, and by our own strength and power) does promise to perform, or
will enable us to perform. This will also be more evident ^non in the
particular instances.

SECT. 4.
But before I further proceed, A digression; further clearings, and justifying,
the aforesaid distinction from the imputation of Libertinisme.
it will be needful to vindicate what has been taught from such inferences as
some, mistaking or rather cavelling at this Doctrine and differenes of the
promises, may make, yea have already made; As if because it is said (as shall be
proved (...) that the graces of Faith, Repentance, etc. are promised
absolutely, without Iffs and Ands, or without respect to Conditions in man,
that therefore a door is hence opened to Libertinisme and Swenckfeldianisme,
whereby the foundations of Christianity are overthrownne, in as much as men are
thus taught to neglect the hearing of Gods Word and of the Gospel preached,
not to regard meekness in receiving the Word and Humility, unto which Grace
is promised? Yea even as they would have it, the grace of Election.

I answer: No such thing can rightly without wilful cavilling be inferred
hence.

For first, That life is not promised but upon condition, does exo^ude all
negleot of means.
(not to speak that none oppose Libertisme, Familisme, and Contempt or neglect
of the means of the hearing and reading of the Gospel, more then those that
use this distinction of the promises) this very Doctrine (that the promise of
Salvation is made upon condition, and made good to none (being otherwise
capable) but to those that carefully use all the means ordained and appointed
to Salvation) excludes, all carelessness and neglect of means, one or other,
seeing we teach men according to the Scriptures; Gal. 6.7.8.9.
That whatsoevever a man sows, that shall he reap, etc. And that we are no^
to be weary of weldoing. Without which constancy no reaping can be expected;
and that we ought to give earnest heed to the things we hear, for how else can
we escape if we neglect so great Salvation? Heb. 2.1.2.3.
etc. This we shall further show and urge in the Conclusion of all.

2. But now chiefly concerning the absolute promise of giving the Means and
effecting the Conditions, concerning the absolute promises of the means.
on which blessedness and Salvation is promised.

I say, 1. Seeing Salvation and blessedness is the maine end instanced in, and
the chief end respecting man, that the means appointed of God thereunto, The
mean^s being many, must not be divi^
being many, are not to be severed and divided one from another, but to be
considered conjoynedly and all of them, with relation to their maine end, and
that therefore as they are means of Salvation, (whether they have a nearer
connection with life, as Faith, Repentance, Justification, etc Or be further
off, as the Gospel it self, our hearing of it, and common and general grace
wrought by it) they all of them conjoynedly and with respect to their maine
end, are promised absolutely, and without condition, though life it self, as
man's chief end, be not promised in the Gospel, but upon such conditions.

2. We may yet consider that these same Conditions, Yet they may and might be
compared and so some graces may be considered as Ends and effects of former
and more co^mongrace such as is the Gospel, etc.
which all of them have their reference to Salvation, as the Means thereof,
may yet be compared one with another; And so some, in regard of such relation,
may be considered as particular Means, Ends, and effects of some proceeding
Gifts, which God has ordained as Means more immediately of such graces, yet
as means also more remorely of the maine End, and of Salvation. So Faith,
Repentance, Holiness, Perseverance, which are Means of blessedness and
Salvation, and Conditions of eternal Life, may be considered also as the Ends
and effects of other graces and gifts of God; and so not given or promised but
upon some Conditions, which must be used as means more immediately respecting
those meane-ends, and which have reference not only further off to the
maine-end, Salvation, but more nearly to these intermidle-ends, of Faith,
Repentance, etc. For Logic and nature teaches us, that there is the least and
utmost end, which is chiefly intended and aimed at, Finis ultimus, i (...): and
(...). Finis intermedius or finis ad finem, fine propter finem.
unto which all means are ordained, and there is an intermidle-end: a
maine-end, and a meane-end, which is the Act and instrument of the efficient
cause, by which he intends to attain to the maine and last end.

The former in this business now in hand, is eternal Life, unto which we are
elected; The latter are Faith, and other graces, namely, which as they are
means of Life and blessedness, so are they effects and ends intended, which God
works and intends by the Gospel and word sent, preached, and received, or
attended to; So that the Gospel is the means by which we attain first to
these graces, and then to Salvation, by which God brings us to, and works
Faith, Romans 10.17. Ioh. 17.17. Luke 3.5. 1 Cor. 10 4, 5.
(for Faith comes by the hearing, and hearing by the Word of God,) and so
Sanctification; So says Christ: Sanctify them through thy truth, thy Word is
truth. And so Humility, for it is Gods voice in and by the Ministry, whereby
every mountain and hill is brought low, etc.

This is one of those weapons, if not chief, which pull down strong holds, and
casts down imaginations, and every high thing, which exalts it self against
the knowledge of God.

Thus then the Gospel is a means of these and other graces, as the next end
thereof, as of Salvation it self more remotely; and these graces bring
considered as the next and most immediate Ends of the Gospel, have their
conditions, which must not be neglected, as the hearing of the word, and
attending thereunto, etc. Yet the same graces of Faith, etc. as considered
also, and chiefly as means of eternal Life, and Conditions thereof; which
therefore as means of Life and blessedness, and as Conditions of the new
Covenant of Life, are promised by God absolutely and without condition; Yet the
promises of the end, whethermain and or meane^ad, as the end, are ever
Conditiona^^. And the promises of the means as means ever absolute, whether
they be remote or nearer.

The gos^ell it self is absolutely. Ro^. 10 17 1 ^oh. 1.9 James 2.6


though as subordinate and intermidle-ends, they depend also (ordinarily) on
their Means and Conditions.

Thirdly, I say, yet that whether we speak of the chief and last end, or of
the mean and midle-end, that it is true, as was said: That the promise of the
end, as it is the end, is with Condition; and the promise of the Means
(whether nearer or further off) as means is absolute, and without condition;
So that let the Condition be what it will be, whether of the maine-end, or mean
and midle-end, yet God does both freely promise, and freely give and effect it;
and that whether it have a more necessary and infallible connection with its
end, as true Faith, Remission and Sanctification have; or doubtful only and
uncertain (in regard of us) as the preaching of the Gospel (by which yet all
and each are not converted) which yet in regard of Gods Elect, and of his
chief intent in sending it, is made effectual by God, and so promised without
condition.

Fourthly, then I avow concerning the Gospel, the hearing, and receiving of
it, (as also concerning all such things as may be called more remote means of
life, or conditions of Faith, which hearing is of Remission, which Confession
is of more grace, which Humility is, etc.) that it (as these other) is both
freely promised, and freely given, both in regard of the outward mean^ and of
the inward work and effect of it.

1. The Gospel and outward Means are freely and absolutely promised (even as
was Christ himself the blessed Seed, Promised.
Genesis 3.15.) and so the calling of us Gentiles, to partake of it. In the last
days the mountain of the Lords House shall be established in the top of the
Mountains; and all Nations shall flow unto it, etc. Isa: 2, 2, 3
So Christ is promised to be given for a Covenant of the people: Isa: 42, 6 7.
and 49, 5 6, etc. Isa: 66, 18 19, 20.
For a light to the Gentiles, to open the blindo eyes, etc. I will gather all
Nations and Tongues, and they shall come and see my glory; and I will set a
sign among them; and they shall bring all your brethren for an offering unto
the Lord out of all Nations, etc.

Secondly, Freely give^ both for the outvvard ministry. Romans 10, 14, 15.
the Gospel and the preaching thereof is freely given of God and sent, without
which, how should men come to Faith, or calling upon God, or yet any other
grace? For how shall they call on him in whom they have not believed? and how
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a preacher? and how shall they preach, except they be sent?

Therefore says our Savior to his Apostles: Mat. 28, 18, 19. Marc. 16 15.
Go ye and teach ab Nations, etc. And go ye into all the World, and preach
the Gospel to every Creature.

Yet this is done, both freely (in regard of the first moving cause, Gods only
compassion and love,) and with choice, Which is directed by special choice,
and sent to some, not to all.
in regard of the Nations, to which in their leverall and fit times the Gospel
is sent, not to each Nation at once, and to some scarce at all. Yet whosoever
they are that at any time enjoy the Gospel and outward Means, they have them
from the free mercies and goodness of God, they were not more worthy then
others; Neither is it because God did foresee they would profit by the Gospel
more then others. Why was it then sent and preached first to Israel, again
saying people, (otherwise then for their further conviction,) and not to
Tyrians and Sydonians, who (if like mighty works, which were wrought to
confirm the Gospel, had been done among them which were done in Corazin and
Bethsaida,) would have repented long ago; Math. 11 21.
Which yet Israel did not.

But this is from Gods free choice, who (according to his wise and just
Counsel) sends it to this or that place (where he has much people, Act. 18,
9, 10.
at least some, to call and gather by i^) and purposely as he pleases, will
not, (or will not as yet) have it come to some other people.

Thus when P^ul and Sylas had gone throughout Phrigia, Act. 16, 6, 7.
and the region of Gallatia, (preaching the Gospel,) they were forbidden of
the Holy Ghost to preach the Word in Asia; after they were come to Misia, they
assayed to go into Bithinia, but the Spirit suffered them not.

3. Amongst those, And for the inward power of it.
whether the Gospel is sent, God gives grace effectually to receive, and with
meek, humble, and good hearts, to entertain it, not to all, but to whom he
pleases. Thus among those that heard Paul preach at Philippi, its noted (only
of Lydia, that the Lord opened her heart, that she attended unto the things
which were spoken of Paul. Act. 16, 14.


And who are called effectually (as being vessels of mercy, which God had before
prepared unto glory,) not all Jews, not all Gentiles, but us, says Paul, whom
he has called of the Jews and of the Gentiles, and not of the Jews only,
but also of the Gentiles.

Therefore the Light of the Gospel, Rom: ^, 23, 24.
and saving revelation of the mystery of it, and the giving of wildome by it is
made to be the gift of Gods free grace by Christ: In whom we have Redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according the riches of his
grace, Ephesians. 1, 7 8, 9.
wherein be has abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence, having made
known to us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he
has purposed in himself, etc. So, Mat. 11, 25.26.
I thank thee, Oh Father, says Christ, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them to Babes; Even so Father, for
so it seemed good in thy sight.

Now if Gods Word prove fruitful, and the effect of it show it self only in
those who receive and hear it in an honest and good heart. L^^k. 8, 15. Iam:
1, 17
I would ask from whom is this good heart? Is it not from him from whom is
every good gift, and every perfect gift, etc?

We conclude then this digression (occasioned by an unjust ^avill) and say,
that though Gods promise of Salvation, What god requires as a Condition, he
also work^ in the Elect.
yea and of Faith, and other graces, wrought ordinarily by the ministry, be
propounded with Condition, yet the Conditions themselves and the Means of
Salvation, whether more immediate as our effectual calling, Repentance, Faith,
regeneration, justification, etc. or mediate and remote, are both promised and
effected in us, without Condition, Media salutis immediata and media mediorum.
as being not made to depend upon man, either for the giving or the working and
effecting in him, and so for other like particulars; God promises forgivenes
of sin, to such as do confess, forsake, and repent thereof; but who gives
repentance, etc. does not God? Ezekiel. 36.26.31, and Zach. 12.10. God requires
our prayers, and will scarce give us any good thing, unless we ask it, Mat.
7.7. As Confession. 1 Ioh. 1.9
Ask and it shall be given you; And Ezekiel. 36. after a most free and gracious
promise made by God of working all grace in our hearts, and giving both
Spiritual and Temporal Blessings. Verse. 25.26, and 27, etc. Yet thus says
the Lord: Prayer.
I will for this be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it for them. But
who gives this gift of prayer? only he that gives Faith, out of which prayer
follows; Romans 10.14, and 8.26.
only God by his Spirit; Zach. 12.10. Romans 8.26. We know not what we should
pray for as we ought; but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, etc.

Lastly, God gives grace to the humble; that is, more grace, Humility
James 4.6. But who gives the grace of Humility? Does not the Spirit? Gal.
5.22. Of which more afterward.

I say then of all these, though God promise not good things to his Church but
upon Conditions, and in the use of Means, (which to neglect, and yet to expect
the end, were presumption and to tempt G^d, Heb. 4.12
yea to come short of it) yet God freely and absolutely promises to give, and
make effectual the Condition and Means themselves.

Let this suffice for the present, till we make it more evident anon.

To proceed: These promises c^cerning the means depend on Gods election.

Which his election is not conditional.


these promises of the means, and of fulfilling the Conditions in us, depend
upon Gods decree and Election, which is not conditional, though his word be.
His order in electing us to life is not the same which he observes in
promising and giving life; He promises it upon condition, and gives it not but
upon performance of such Condition; But he must not therefore be thought to
elect us conditionally, or upon the foresight of such conditions wrought in us,
or by us.

To teach (which yet some teach) that God is so to be conceived to decree, as
he does execute his decree, were to invent the order of things.

Indeed in the execution, Armin. contra lun. proposit. 19.
and in the Gospel, he will have no man to attain the end without the means,
and without such conditions as he requires, yea as he may and does require of
all; (which is one reason why the promises are, as they should be, Though his
Word be.
propounded in Scripture, and by the Gospel preached, gonerally and
promiscuously to all in the Church;) and God has also so decreed to bring men
to Salvation by such means; But yet this is not the whole and entyre decree of
God, which implies his praedestination of certain singular and definite
persons, who are known to God, and severed from others by the decree of his
election, whereby he has absolutely and only according to his own counsel
chosen them to Salvation; unto which yet he (for the execution of his Decree)
will bring them by means, and by the observation of such Conditions, as he
will propound and require in the Gospel, on the performance of which he
promises this salvation to all in the church, but works them only in his
Elect. Concerning which Election we thus read: Mat. 22, 16. 2 Timothy 2, 19. Ro^.
11, 5
Many are called but sew are chosen. And the foundation of God stands sure,
having this Seal, the Lord knows them that are his; And so we are told of a
Remnant according to the Election of Grace.

Otherwise (if Gods Election were conditional) it might so fall out, that all
might be reprobated, that his Church might fail on earth, yea and Christ
should be no certain Head, as having no certain members assigned unto him.

But God in the matter of our Salvation does also use his absolute will in
bringing his Elect to the end appointed, powerfully and most infallibly.

Christ says, Luke 12, 32. John. 15.16.
it is our Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom; and, you have not
chosen me, but J have chosen you.

This would not be true, if Gods will were in this case only conditional. For
though God in his word promised life and blessedness under condition of Faith
and Holiness, yet he decrees nothing under any doubtful or uncertain
condition. God in his word tells us what we shall do, and how we may hope to
attain to Salvation, and to assurance of our Election; but in his decree he
sets down what he himself will do, according to which he works and effects
that grace in his Elect, which he requires of them (yea of all) leaving others
in his Justice, Fol. 14^ l. 3.
to their own hardness.

SECT. 6.
Yet first he does not mock such as do not, Yet first, god mocks none in his
Word.
through their own obstinacy and inability keep the conditions; But most
certainly if they do keep and do that which is required (as once they were
able to have obeyed God in his hardest command, and still stand bound so to
do) they shall undoubtedly be saved; therefore was it said even to Cain: If
thou do well, Genesis 4, 7*
shall thou not be accepted? Gods promises of life are conditional.

Yea in such commands God does not delude, but reprove and convince such-men of
unbeleefe, and that in his Justice.

And secondly, His Word and Decree are not contrary one to another^*
neither are the decree and Word of God contrary or rep^g^ant each to other,
but only subordinate. God makes his word subserving to his decree, and
reveals so much of his own counsel and purpose, and in that manner as he
speaks, and so as may best serve his own ends, which if we cannot see by
his Word, yet must we not search, much less quarrel, with God there about, or
frame his Decrees, according to our own conceits.

God in commanding duties at men's hands, has sometimes other ends, then
obedience, (though that only be the thing which we are to look unto, as
required of us, in and by his word,) his precepts are also sometimes for
trial, as that commandment given to Abraham, Ge^. 22, 2
of Sacrificing his Son.

Sometimes for Conviction, whereby he intends to convince his Creatures of
disobedience, yea of its own inability, etc. as in bidding Pharaoh, ^xod. 8, 1
let the people go.

These Ends he keeps secret to himself, (as they respect this or that
particular person,) and therefore though his precepts seem to cross his
secret pleasure and purpose, (which the event declares at length what it was,)
yet our ignorance must not cause us quarrel with God, but Faith should
reconcile this seeming contrariety.

The like is true in all Gods promises and threats where the exceptions and
Conditions are often concealed and kept secret to himself. If God then
reveals part of his will and conceales part, this is neither to contradict
himself, nor to deal dubble and deceitfully with his Creature. He speaks not
one thing and means another; But speaks that which concerns us to take
notice off, and conceales that which he will do himself, and which he has
absolutely set down with himself especially concerning the Salvation of those
whom in mercy he will save, and in time effectually call; and the just
desertion of those whom he in justice will leave in the mass of perdition, See
who list D^-^rackan^horpes Sermon of praede^^ination, page 15, 16,
and therefore not give his grace effectually unto them. I may therefore say,
the Conditional part of Gods will is set down in his word; But what he has
set down absolutely, and whom in particular he will save, and imprint Faith
and Holiness in their hearts, he has reserved to himself, (as not being
bound to reveal it till the event show it,) only that there is such an
absolute will in God, is revealed, as we have already showed.

SECT. 7.
So that now, as we may further note, though in regard of the word and work of
the ministry, things may go with Iffs and Ands, and that the Conditions in
regard of man (whose actions proceeding of judgment, and having their
beginning from within his will, are voluntary, may, or may not be done or
performed; Yet as they are Gods work (though required of us) and effects of
his Election, (who changes without violence our wills) he speaks of them
without Iff^, and promises them absolutely, yea and accordingly works and
effects them himself.

So that things may remain in themselves indifferent, to fall out this ways
or that ways, Gods decree dot^^ not take away the consent and liberty of man's
will.
notwithstanding Gods decree working infallibly this or that.

The certainty of Gods decree does not abolish the consent of man's will, but
rather order it, and mildly incline or draw it forth, man's freedom of will may
well stand, with that necessity which is of infallibilite, or of consequence,
and man's actions may be free, though otherwise in respect of Gods will they be
of unchangeable necessity.

Gods decree takes not away all possibility to the contrary event, but only
the contrary event it self, Sufficit ad rationem voluntarij s^ ascie^te and
volu^tario Comittatur, Greg. Armin. lib. 2. did. 29* in fine.
as his decree before all worlds, that at this time I should preach in this
place, on this argument, at this time, did not take from me, ever since, all
possibility of not preaching at this time; (for I might have bee^e absent, or
otherwise determined;) But it took from me the actual not preaching at this
time.

I do this certainly and infallibly, and yet freely; Gods decree takes from me
the contrary event, so that ( in sensu composito) these two cannot stand
together, God has decreed that at this moment, I should be preaching these
things; and I do not at this moment preach these things; But ( in sensu
divisio) these two may consist together; God decrees that I should preach
these things at this moment, and I had power not to preach these things at this
moment if I had pleased.

Now if this sound harsh to any, let it be considered, the like inconvenience
would follow upon. Praescientia Dei falli non potest.
Gods preference, (which none denies,) and his prescience may as well hence be
denied as his praedefinitions; Seeing Gods prescience is as infallible as his
Decree is immutable. And thus much for the first Consideration.

SECT. 8.
2. We may secondly consider, The second consideration making good the former.
that in Gods new Covenant of Grace, the Condition required of us, is also part
of Gods Covenant and promise made unto us. So that this is one maine difference
between the Law (strictly taken according to the Condition of works,) and the
Gospel preached both before and after the death of Christ, that the Law
promises Life, and requires perfect obedience, but neither promises nor gives
power to perform what it requires; It leaves a man wholly to himself, The
conditions required of us, are also part of Gods Covenant and promise made unto
us. Difference, between the Law and the Gospel. Heb. 7, 19 and 8, 6 Ro^. 8,
2, 3
and to his own power.

But the Gospel and new Covenant promises the same life upon new and other
Conditions, no less (I take) hard in themselves and impossible to us to
perform aright by our own strength then the other, and that is upon condition
of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, and Perseverance in them all; Yet so as that
it both promises and gives power to keep and perform the Conditions (this
latter depending on Gods Election) in which regard it is said, that the Law
made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did, and Christ is a
Mediator of a better Covenant, which is established on better promises; And
why better? But because what the Law could not do, in that it was weak,
through the Flesh, is done by the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus,
whom God sent, etc.

The first Covenant is said to be faulty, yet not in it self, for says the
Scripture, the Lord finding fault with them, (not with it barely) says, the
days come when I will make a new Covenan with the House of Israel and Judah;
not according to the Covenant which J made with their. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
etc.
Fathers, because they continued not in my Covenant (so there is the fault of
it) I regarded (...)

1. To perfect, finish, or perform a good work thoroughly so as to answer our
desire and purpose, To perfect it.
or to persevere in a good work to the end; is not from us, but from God; For
it is God, who having begun a good work^ in you (says Paul to the Philippians)
will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ. Phil: 1, 6
So Paul concerning himself to will is present with me, but how to perform
that which is good (that is, how, fully to finish it) J sinde not. Rom 7, 8
Yea men cannot finish their own evil work always according to their
intent; how much less good works, as Joseph's Brethren; they thought evil
against him, but God meant it unto good; Genesis 50, 20.
and so overreached them, so that they came short of their purpose;) So Paul
going toward 'Damascus, with a purpose to fetch thence, and bring bound to
Jerusalem the Disciples of Christ, Acts 9. (...) 2. Yet was taken short in the
way, fell down; and in stead of finishing his own wicked intent, he is turned
to the obedience of Christ, not to do or finish his own will, Act. 9, 26
but Christ's; saying: Lord, what will thou have me to do?

2. We cannot so much as do that which is good without Christ, yea unless we
be ingrafted into him, To do it.
as the branch can not bear the Fruit of it self, except it abide in the
vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me; John 15* 4, 5.
For without me (or severed from me) ye can do nothing. The way of man is
not in himself, it is not in man that walks to direct his steps, Iere.
10.23. A man's heart may devise his way, Jer. 10, 2^ Pro. 16, (...)
but the Lord directs his steps.

We may know (as in my Text) what to do; but we, as of our selves are not able
to do according to our knowledge; Therefore prays David; saying, not only,
Psalm. 11^ 33, 34, 35
Teach me the way of thy Statutes, and give me understanding, but make me to
go in the path of thy Commandments. For we are of our selves not only
blind, but lame; and God must teach us, not only to know. but to do;
Therefore says David again: Psalm. 143, 10.
Teach me to do thy will. We have that in us, which till it be removed,
hinders us from doing that which otherwise we should do. For the Flesh
lusts against the Spirit. Gat. 5.17 To 7, 19.
So that (says Paul) ye can not do the things that ye would. So he himself
found it; The good that J would (says her) I d^e not. Isa. 26, 12
If therefore ought to be done that is good; It is God that works (as
formerly is said) all our works for us and in us.

3. To begin a good work, To begin it. Phil. 1, 6.
is not from us (though we purpose it) but from the Lord; It is he that
begins a good work in us.

4. To speak what we have thought on and prepared, To speak good.
is also from the Lord, and not from us; For so wise Solomon concerning them
both: The preparation of the heart in man and the answer of the Tongue, Pr^.
16, 1
is from the Lord; And who (what minister especially) finds it not t^us?

5. As we cannot do, To will ^t.
or speak and utter; so can we not so much as will any thing truly and
spiritually good, as not our own Conversion or Salvation; For it is God (says
Paul to the Philippians) which works in you both to will and to do; Phil. 2,
13
But of this more largely anon^.

6. How should man will that which is good, To co^ceive it.
as of himself, when he cannot so much as understand or perceive it; For so we
are taught: The natural man receives not the thing of the Spirit of God, for
they are foolish ^es unto him; neither can he know them, Romans 8, 7
because they are spiritually discerned; Yea the carnal mind is enmity
against God.

7. Lastly: To think it. 2 Cor. 3, 5. 1 Cor. 3, 19, 20. Psalm. 94.
Nay he cannot think any thing that is good; So Paul: We are not sufficient of
our selves to think any thing as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is from
God; Yea man's best thoughts are vain; the wisdom of the World is foolishnes
with God; And, the Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.

All these put together: what is it that man is able as of himself to do,
without Gods special and effectual grace, especially in the matter of
Conversion, Repentance, Faith, etc.

SECT. 17.
Now the reasons of this our inability to do good, may partly be gathered and
considered out of the foregoing discourse; Reasons hereof. 1. His ign^^ance.
where we may take notice: First of that Ignorance (that ill dilposed
Ignorance) which is in us all naturally; whereby Repentance, Faith, with the
power and life of Godliness, is accounted foolishnes to the natural man; At
which, being called to these; he scoffeth and mocketh. Hence it was that when
H^zekiah K. of Judah sent out messengers with letters, 2 Chronicles. 30, 6, 7, 8 9,
10.
to call those of Israel to turn again unto the Lord; inviting by many fair
and gracious promises; in the name and according to the Word of the Lord; they
laughed the messengers to scorn and mocked the^.

And do not too many now adays in like manner scoff and laugh at such
Teachers as are most earnest with them to call them from their sins to a new
course of Life and well doing? Though yet diverse of Asher, Mamasseth, Verse. 11.
and Zebulon humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem; But what? By their own
power? No; no otherwise then those of Judah humbled themselves; of whom with
those others it is said, and added, that the hand (this notes the work, yea
and power) of God was to give them (that is all of them both of Judah and
Asher, etc.) one heart ^o do the commandment of the King and of the Princes,
by the word of the Lord; And 12.
But where was this back wardnes in others (whose hearts the Lord had not
touched otherwise then by these common motives and exhortations used alike to
them all) because their corruption (where special grace overcomes not) tells
men now that God calls them to forsake their own ways which they have chosen,
and so to deny their own will and choice, to forgo their sweet sins, and so
to undergo such afflictions and reproach as commonly attends upon Godliness;
and a stricter course of Sanctification; Yea the nature of Gods persuasions is
such, as that for the most part they rather dissuade a natural man; (left to
himself) as, whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
his cross and follow me. And, Mark 8 34, 35.
whosoever shall loose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall
save it. This to fles^ly, yea to natural understanding, is as much as if Christ
should have said: Fly from m^e.

2. Secondly, His unbeleese.
to Ignorance, we may add natural unbeleefe, which makes us with A^^m rather
fly from God as from a consuming Fire, Heb. 12, 29.
then come to him by Faith, Repentance, and by a to^al^ resignation of our
selves unto his will.

3. But chiefly, His natural impote^cy.
when God does inform our ignorance by his word, and also by it gives hope,
and proclaims a pardon freely to the penitent, and to such as shall believe
and become new men. Yet there is that nature all impotency in man, whereby he
wants power (now since the Fall) to return and do any thing which is truly
and spiritually good. Therefore says God: Can the Ethiop^^n change his skin,
Ier. 13, 23
or the Leopard his spots? then may ye also (...) good that are accustomed (or
as it is in the Hebrew: taught) to do evil. In a word, we are dead in sin,
and by it; The estat of each man before his Conversion.
So that ^f we would know what our natural estate is, before we by Gods
special grace be effectually called, the Scripture will plainly and fully tell
us, which calls us Servants of sin, Romans 6.20. And tells us: We are sold
under sin, To. 7.14.. That we are by nature the Children of Wrath, Ephesians.
2.3. Conceived in sin, Psalm. 51.7. That we drink iniquity as the fish
does water. Job 15.16. That our thoughts are only and always evil. Genesis
6.5. That our hearts are stony. Ezekiel. 36.26. that it is perverse and deceitful
above all things, and desperately wicked. Ier. 17.9. that our carnal mind is
enmity against God, and not subject to the Law of God, neither can be. Romans
8.7. Yea that out of Christ we can do nothing. Joh. 15.5. And as is said,
(which may include all) we are dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2.1. Dead
in sins, and in the uncircumcision of the flesh. Coll. 2.13.

Now surely all these shovv unto us, that man's ability and power of his own
free will, especially in the business of his own Salvation, is none at all.
For if we be Servants of sin, how can Liberty stand with this Servitude?
If sold under the power of sin, must not the Son only make us free? If
we be conceived in sin naturally, then surely the remedy of sin must be
sought and found, not in nature, but without it. Shevving how unable he is to
do good.
If our thoughts and imaginations be wholy and only evil, can they at all
reach and lead us to that which is truly good. If our hearts be naturally
stony hearts; Can they, so remaining admit^ of the Seed of Gods Word, and prove
fruitful? Must they not be made both soft and good hearts before they keep
the Word, they hear, and bring forth Fruit with Patience? Luke 8.15. If our
hearts be deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, what
soundness, sincerity, or rectitude can be imagined in us naturally? If nature
cannot submitt it self to the Law of God, can it (think we) as of itself
either think or do what is truly good? If out of Christ we can do nothing,
can any think that we can do that which is chief of all, even return again
to God? And if we be dead in sin, what sense or motion can we have, to do
any thing that is truly good?

SECT. 18,
Hence we are taught humility, Use of this his impotencie to teach us
humility, to ascribe all to Gods power, subduing our Rebellion,
and not to glory in our selves, but only in God; Yea hence we see that man
brings nothing to his own Conversion^, besides the bare faculty of Willing or
nilling, which power if he had not, he should not be so much as a man, but
as a block or stock, incapable of Gods grace; But, when a man obeyes Gods call,
the Spirit of God so mightily and powerfully persuades, that the will of man
being elevated above it self, is both withdrawn from evil, and drawn to
God and goodness, without any final resistance.

As, when we are borne again, this is not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, ^ohn 1, 13
nor of the will of man; but of God; (who works in us both to will and to
do.) So when God works, it is not left to man's power to use grace well, or
to believe, Repent, and do good or no; as if when God has done all he
means to do, man's will is an equipage and even Balance to move it self
this ways or that ways, as it lists; For so Gods grace should not be
praedominant; and the Conversion of the Elect should be merely contingent:)
but when God works the will, we cannot but will; It is not left to us to
resist; For God especially in the work of our Conversion, works so
powerfully, as that our natural resistability, yea and that actual resistance
which we make, does not prevail; neither does always actually resist; but at
that time the will yields its consent. So that when we will actually that which
is good, (supposing that God does give us an ability to will) yet that willing
is not from our selves. Posse velle.


It is true we (suppose in our Conversion) do freely assent and will and yield
to the motions of Gods grace; Though we will freely, yet power and act are
from him See Doct: Ward; great. discrimina^t. page 23. Works. Certitudine
causalitatis certum est non velle cum volumus. Sed ille facit ut vellimus bonum
certumest nos facere cum facimus. Sed ille facit ut faciamus praebendo vires
efficacissimas voluntati. Aug: de gratia, and lib: arbit. cap. 16.
But the chief question is not: whether the will do freely yield and give
assent to the first motion and attraction of grace; but whence is that free
assent; not whether we will freely, but whence it is that we will freely;
whether from our own will, or from Gods effectual grace; It is man that
formally wills in every good work, (yea and this his will it is which does
bring and draw out the formal act of willing,) but it is God that so
effectually and powerfully moves the will; that when he Works, then the will
most certainly is wrought and brought into act. So says S. Augustine: It is
certain that we our selves do will, when we will, but yet God makes us will
that which is good. And it is certain, that it is we our selves which do any
good when we do it, but it is he that makes us do it, Non ergo volumus sed
Deus in nobis operatur and velle; Non ergo operamur, sed Deus in nobis operatur
and operari. Aug. de bono perseverantiae, c. 13.
by giving us most effectual abilite to our will; and it is we that will, but
God works in us to will; therefore we work, but it is God that works in
us to work, or the very act of working.

We must not think with some, that God gives only a general and common
grace; and by it gives to us posse si velimus, power to work if we will
(though in some sense this may be true, seeing there is a certain power which
the will (where it is) rules, and which it commands; God denies not the
faculty of willing to the wickedest; which makes their condemnation the more
just: For if they had not such a power so far they could not have sin; so
that there is no man but may be good, or has a power to be good, if he could
will to be good;) But to think we can will of our selves what is good is
erroneous; so especially to will, as also not to will, or to will, and by
willing to resist de facto, and indeed Gods grace.

SECT. 18.
Gods grace then is more then a gentle persuasion, Gods grace is more the^ a
gentle persuasion or common influence.
and common influence, giving us a power which we may use or not use at our
pleasure; So that we may if we will, be redeemed, Believe, Repent, Persevere.
No, God gives also the will it self, and his grace (at also his intention to
save and redeem) depends not upon condition, neither is suspended upon the
contingent act of man's Faith and Will.

Grace has its first act in the will itself, Haec gratia, a nullo duro cord
respuitur: ideo quippe er^o^tur ut cordis duritia primitus auferetur. Aug. de
praedestih. Santor, cap. 8.
which therefore can not be resisted, because it first works in it the will not
to resist; And surely, that can resist no more, from which is taken away the
will to resist; thus to will is an effect of Grace, and not Grace an effect of
the will not resisting. And thus God of unwilling makes us willing; Man does
not first will, and then God make him to will; for so we might run back in
infinitum: Infinitely.

To will then is a work of Gods special and effectual Grace and power, unto
which his works of Grace are ascribed; Ephesians. 3, 20 2 These. 1* 11. The power of
grace in giving Faith and vvorking Conversio^ showed out of scripture.

Quoad specificationem no^ quoad exercitu^ actus.


He being able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think,
according to the power that works in us; unto which power or effectual grace
not only Faith it self and Conversion, but the fulfilling of it also is
ascribed; For it is God that fulfille all the good pleasure of his goodness,
and the work of Faith with power.

Now the power of Grace appears in giving the act of faith, and the giving of
the act of Faith, (especially if with all we consider the manner of giving it,
and of Conversion; by which all resistance is subdued) proves the power of
Grace; seeing the act is not presently given when to pass, or the power to
believe if we will, is given; yea thou we should grant that the inward and
outward persuasion and fit object may carry a man to that which is good, and
from that which is evil, (to approve and prefer the one before the other,)
yet they carry him not to the acting of that which is good, or to the exercise
of the act. God exercises his omnipotency in giving the act of Faith and
Conversion; Therefore the Apostle tells us of the exceeding greatness of his
power to usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power
which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead. Ephesians. 1, 19 20.
Here we hear of a power, of the greatness of his power, of the exceeding
greatness of his power; yea of the might of his power. Whereof such as believe
have an experimental feeling and knowledge; it being no other power which
raises up the Soul by a spiritual resurrection from the death of sin by
Faith, then that which raised our blessed Savior in his body out of the grave;
For the Apostle speaks there of a present effect, and not only of G^ds power
in raising the dead.

This is that divine power which gives unto us all things that pertain to life
and godliness. 2 Pet. 13 Luke 11, 21, 22. 2 Pet. 5, 9 Ephesians. 6, 16
By this power of Christ's grace, the strong man armed is overcome and
disar^^ed, yea cast out; And so Peter would have us resist Satan, strong and
st^^fast in the Faith; this is that shield wherewith we ^^albe able to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked, and the Gospel in the power of it, that is,
the preaching of the Word together with the Sword of the Spirit, are the
weapons of our warfarr, which are mighty through God to the pulling down of
strong holds, 2 Cor. 10 4 5. Theophilact. Caje tan. and Anselme in locum. Act.
19. 19. Act. 26, 18. Ro^. 1, 16 1 Cor. 1, 18.
casting down imaginations, etc. By these weapons were vanguished and brought
to the Faith: Dion^sius the Areopagite, Justin the Philosopher, and Martyr;
Pautenus, and these who had used curious arts, who brought their books
together, and burned them, the vallew of which amounted to fifty thousand
pieces of silver, that is, to some eight hundred pounds of our money.

And this do many find by comfortable experience, the power of Gods Word and
grace converting them to God from such sins as were very powerful and strong
in them; And from the power of Satan; In which regard the preaching of the
Gospel is called, the power of God to salvation, to every one that believes,
though to them that pe^^sh it be foolishnes; Yet unto us (says Paul) that are
saved it is the power of God; what us? 2 Cor. 2, 4, 5.
the preaching of the Cross; which was not (says Paul again) with the
enticing words of man's wisdom, Phil. 1, 29
but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your Faith should not
stand in the wisdom of man, but in the power of God. And seeing it is given to
us not only to believe on Christ, but also to suffer for his sake, not only
the Act of Faith, is the work of Gods power, 2 Timothy 1 8.
but also our actual suffering with patience for our Faith; Hence Paul to
Timothy: Be not a shamed of the Testimony of the Lord, nor of me his prisoner,
but be thou partaker of the affliction of the Gospel, according to the power
of God. Col. 1, 11
So he prays that the Colossians might be strenghthened with all might,
according to (Gods) glorious power unto all patience and long suffering with
joysulnes.

SECT. 20. Four absurdities, issuing out of the Doctrine of common grace.

Now for conclusion of this point, if Faith, Repentance, and generally the
Fruit of Christ's death and passion be only Conditional; if we will believe,
if we will Repent; if we will apply the Fruit of Christ's death unto our selves,
then will these gross absurdities (among many others) follow.

For then first, Our Benefit by Christ should be no more certain then that
which we lost in Adam.
the Benefit we have by Christ, shall be as uncertain as that we had in and by
Adam, which we lost when it was left to his keeping. Happiness was set before
him, and propounded to him with Condition (which was renewed to the Jews in
the giving of the moral Law) do this and live. Yea God gave him (and us in
him) power to have kept that Condition; If he would, but he gave him not the
power and grace that he should infallibly in very deed keep the same; Adam (as
we had in him power to stand or fall; yet power was never granted to him or any
(by virtue of the first Covenant) to use again if he or they did fall. Bernard.
But God now gives more grace, and works in us the Conditions of his new
Covenant, which consists chiefly (not in commandments) but his most gracious
and free promises. God should be no more effectual in good then Satan in evil.


Secondly, if Gods grace and the efficacy of it reach not further then to
moral persuasion, (outwardly and inwardly) what does God more toward the
Conversion then the devil toward subversion of a sinner?

Thirdly, Man's goodness should be more ascribed to himself then to God.
in the Conversion of a sinner, more should be ascribed to nature then to
grace; to man's will then to God; because God (by common grace) only moves, but
man obeyes; Now no man is good in that barely, he is moved to his duty and
admonished, but in that he obeyes the admonition, motive, or persuasion. And
thus should man be good and do good; (be Converted, have Faith, and continue
in weldoing) especially because he so wills, not because God made him good, or
gave him Faith and Repentance, etc. but only because God admonished him that
he should be good, and called upon him by precepts, exhortations, and promises,
to believe and to be holy.

Lastly, Difference between the good and bad should be made by man himself
and by nature.
hence also it would follow, that the difference between the good and the bad,
between the Children of God and of this World, as suppose between Peter and
Judas, should be wholly made from nature. Not from grace, because to use grace
aright, (that is, to yield consent, and to will our own Conversion is from
man's free will, and that is from nature; and so grace should confer, and
afford no more to Peter, who converts, then to Judas, who remains unconverted;
which is contrary to to that of the Apostle, saying, and asking: Who
disting^^sheth thee, or makes thee differ from another? And, 1 Cor. 4, 7
what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

This Text cutts the throat of free will, and overthrowes the error of
universal or common grace. For so might Peter boast and glory, and that justly
with God; for if God by his common grace give only a possibility to will, And
the converted should have just cause to glory eve^ in Gods sight.
our own Conversion or not, and man's will afford the act, or to be willing to
convert, then grace grants no more to Peter then to Judas; and therefore Peter
differenceth himself from Judas, (as all true Converts from others) by
something of his own, and proper to himself; for they differ not really by
any grace of God, which they aforehand have receiyed, wherewith they might
freely work and Cooperate with Gods grace, or not. For both receive the same
grace in common, and a power to will their own Conversion; So as that they may
also will it; This grace being thus far common, puts no difference betvveene
them. What does it then? Peter wills what Judas wills not: He will make
use of that common help afforded of God, and that out of his own Liberty of
will and power of nature, Judas (having the same Liberty and power) will
not; So that the difference betvveen them is in the last place brought to that
free Cooperation and vvorking, Dr. Wardin Concione de gratia discriminance.
which ea^h of them has from his natural power and imbred Liberty of will;
So that it will invincibly follovv that Peter may glory in Gods sight after
this manner, as even a Popish Writer (handling this argument against the
Jesuits) brings him in thus speaking: Lord I give thee thanks that thou have
in mercy conferred unto me superna^urall help; namely, to be able to will
mine own Conversion^; but yet thou have afforded the like and equal help
unto Judas, Bannez. n q. 10, ire. 1, doaume^t. 30 c
my fellow-disciple; Howbeit I have added to that thou have given me, that
which by the supernatural power thou did not give me; namely, the will
(actually) to convert; and whereas I received no more then he, yet I have done
more then he, in as much as I now become justified, and he remains in his
sins; Therefore I owe no more to thee and to thy grace then this Judas who is
not Converted.

Now, says this Author, and so say I, Christian Ears abhor to hear this
boasting; For it were pride in the highest so to think, Sic Augustine. de
praedes^^nat. Sanctor. cap 5
and ex^reame blasphemy so to speak. Hence we conclude, that Peter, and so all
true Converts, do receive from God, not only a power to convert if they will,
but the very goodwill it self, whereby they consent and accept of grace
offered; yea they receive not only common grace, but that grace which
eminently diffrence them from others; and that grace is from Gods
praedestination.

SECT. 21. It is further showed whence man's Conversion is.

It is from gods special grace, who removes the aforesaid impediments. 2 Timothy
2, 25. As Our Ignorance. Mat. 11, 25, 26, 27



If now we further take a view, and ask whence this power of thinking
conceiving, Willing, speaking, beginning, doing, and perfecting a good work is
(for such things are done as we see in the Faithful, and in such as live and
dye in the Faith and fear of God) the answer is readily given; It is (as not
of our selves) from God and his effectual grace; for he it is that remoues the
first obstacle (spoken off) which is our natural Ignorance, by revealing his
will effectually to those that are his, giving them Repentance, to the
acknowleagement of the Truth. Which effect, though to the Ministers and
Teachers of the Truth (who know not before hand the effect of their ministry
in regard especially of particular persons) it go with a peradventure, yet in
regard of God, and of those whom God has given unto Christ, it is without all
peradventure; and given according to Gods good pleasure; with special choice
to some, not all, and that by the free gift and gracious working of Christ,
according to that of Christ himself: I thank thee O Father, because thou have
hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes:
Even so Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight: All things are delivered to
me of my Father; And no man knows the Son but the Father; Neither knows
any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal
him. See John 6.45.

The second Impediment (which was our natural unbeleefe, Our unbeleefe. Ephesians.
2, 13
making us fly from God) he removes by giving his Son Christ, and ^ffring
himself propitious to us in him, thereby holding out the Goulden Scepter; yea
making us (who sometimes were far off) nigh by the blood of Christ.

But thirdly and cheifely, Our natural inability.
he takes away that natural inability which is in us, by enabling and giving
not only power to Repent, Believe, and do good, and to persevere therein, but
the very Act of all these, (as is often noted) Isa. 26.12. Phill. 2.13. So that
now Paul, who looking to his own strength, could say for himself and others:
We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing as of our selves, yet
elsewhere can say: 2 Cor. 3, 5 Phil. 4, 13
I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me; And our
sufficiency is from God.

Now this sufficient grace of God, Which work of God is diversely called in
Scripture
is his efficient or effectual grace, as is proved. In which regard the work
of Gods grace and spirit in Scripture is called a Creation, Psalm. 51.12. Ephesians.
2.10. Vinification, Ephesians. 2.5. Regeneration, Joh. 3.5. Renovation, Ephesians. 4.23.
The taking away of the stony heart and giving a heart of Flesh. Ezekiel. 36.26.
Conversion Jer. 31.18. A Drawing. Ioh. 6.44. A pulling a man out of the
Kingdom of Darkness, into the Kingdom of Light. Coll. 1.13. 1 Peter 2.9.
Acts 26.18. A working of the will and deed. Phill. 2.13. A writing of the Law
in the heart. Ier. 31.33. In a word: A raising from the dead* John 5.25. Ephesians.
2.5.

SECT. 22.
Therefore all this grace and power is from God, and not from us; For, who can
make or Create himself? Or who can raise himself from death by his own power?

Objection: what may be ascribed to man, what must be ascribed to God.
Yea, but we are not wholly dead, but have some free will. I answer: We indeed
will freely what we will, but we cannot attain to will that which is
sauingly good; Our Will is not corrupt or dead, in regard of the root and
beginning of such actions as are within its reach and power, but in regard of
the Term or Object: So that though it has some Liberty in things within
the Compass of reason, yet it can no more reach to its own Conversion, No^
quoad radicem agendi sed terminum.
or to do things truly and Spiritually good, as of it self, then the thing
created to its own Creation, or then the Child that is borne to its own
begetting, or then Lazarus did to the raising of himself from death.

This Work (especially of Conversion and Faith) as we have heard, is ascribed
to the same power which raised Christ from the dead, Ephesians. 1.19.26. And it is
said by Christ: No man can come unto me, Ioh. 6, 44.
except the Father, which has sent me, draw him. And I will raise him up at
the last day. Noting that both these require the same power, and that we are
as unable to do the one, or to come to Christ, as the other; namely, to raise
our selves from the dead; As then it was Gods power, and it only which did
at first Create the World by his Word, which was operative, Genesis 1, 3
whereby God said: Let there be Light, and there was Light, etc.) So it must
be, and is the same mighty power, which by his word begetts us, and creates us
anew; Yea a greater power seems to be required; because in our Creation
nothing resisted, whereas in our reparation and new Creation our wicked wills
resist and withstands as much as in them lies, so that Gods power appears in
subduing and taking away this evil disposition of our wills, making us of
unwilling and rebellious, most willing and obsequious.

The grace then afforded us, (which is as S. Augustine calls it, the grace of
God by Jesus Christ,) is not only a monitory grace, or whereby (whether
outwardly or inwardly) he would persuade us (for this is not enough, unless
God first create in us spiritual Life, whereby we may hear and yield to his
persuasions: For where there is no Life, persuasion can take no place, no more
then if Cicero with his eloquence should seek to move the affections of a dead
man;) Quae primu^ ipsum bonam voluntate^ operatur deinde per eam operatur,
Hugo: de Sacrame^tis, l. 1, par. 6, c. 17.
neither is it a common universal grace, assisting all and each alike; but it
is such a grace as gives to the Soul a spiritual and divine being, which is
to the Soul as health to the body, (yea more,) and which has man's Liberty
under the power of it, so as to make use of it, and to rule in man's will as it
pleases, without offering any violence thereunto, and without prejudicing the
Liberty of it, or its free manner of working. In a word, this grace is that
which first works this good will, and then works by it. It is that inward
moving, and effectual grace, which is both praeveniens quam velimus and
subsequens ne frrustra velimus; That is, it both prevents whereby we will, and
it follows us (and accompanies us continually) that we will not in vain;
What our Churches Doctrine is herein.
(or that we fall not away from our stedfastness^;) This is also the Doctrine
of our Church in the tenth Artecle, which tells us, we cannot turn and prepare
our selves by our natural strength and good works to Faith and calling upon
God, and that we have no power to do good works pleasant and acceptable to
God, without the grace of God preventing us, that we may have a good will, and
working in us when we have that good will.

SECT. 23.
This Doctrine (being the very plain and evident truth of God as we have
seen) both lets us see what our duty is toward him, Use hereof.
as also what is the immutability of his counsel and good purpose to us.

1. We are hence taught to give all glory unto God, Hence we learn to give all
glory to God, and not to our selves.
and not to glory in our selves; and for ever to remember that of the Apostle,
1 Cor. 4, 6, 7.
that we learn not to think (of others or of ourselves) above that which is
written, that no one of ye (says he) be puffed up one against another, and,
what have thou that thou have not received; Now if thou did receive it, why
do thou glory, as if thou had not received it? Let God then have all the
glory of that grace and goodness whereby thou differest from another; for it
is he who has praedestinated us, unto the adoption of Children, Ephesians 1, 5, 6,
Psalm. 115, 1.
by Jesus Christ, to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will; To
the Praise of the glory of his grace, etc. But in such case, let us with the
Psalmist in another case, say, and that from the heart: Not unto us O Lord, not
unto us, but to thy name give glory.

Thus to do is truly Christian; Thus to do is Christian 1 Cor. 1, 29, Ier.
9, 34
For God has so (according to his eternal Counsel) disposed of all things
here below, that no flesh should glory in his presence. Let him that glarieth,
glory in this, says the Lord, that he understands and knows me, that I
am the Lord that exercises loving kindness, etc. The Law of Faith excludes
all boasting in our selves: otherwise if we will bring ought of our own, Ro^.
3, 27 Romans 4, 2 To glory in our selves is Heathenish.
we may rejoice and glory but not before God. Let us then leave all glorying to
the profane Heathen, who indeed, wholly ignorant of Gods grace, have avouched,
that we truly and justly may glory in our virtue; Which say they, we would
never do if it were the gift of God, and not a thing of our own; And says
another, it is one principal step to happiness, for a man to admire
himself, that is, Cicero de not. Deorum, lib. 9 Seneca de vita Beata, C. 8.
Popish.
to doat upon his own excellency.

Let us then give glory to God, and depend wholly upon him, and on his grace.
Papists (not to say others) will be as little beholding to Gods grace as may be,
where they imagine their own will and natural strength to be sufficient,
there they think not the gift of special grace to be so necessary: they
think it needful to make us to do good duties, more easily and readily;
Bellarm. de gratia etc. lib. 5 6, 7.
So that to overcome tentations, that no sin be committed, they do not
always require Gods special help, that is internal illumination, and
supernatural motion, but any help whatsoever; But what availes it to be a
Christian if this be so? The Heathen indeed think they may come to
happiness, and avoid all sin, by the good Husbanding of their own Freewill;
and therefore flatter themselves, saying, it is enough that they pray to
Jupiter, for long Life and riches; Horac. Ep. 18. Lib. 1.
As for a good mind and virtue they would give that to themselves, (and so not
be beholding to Jupiter for it,) for one flattered a great man, saying: The
Gods grant thee long life, for as other things thou will give them to thy self.

Now these are no Poetical flourishes, Dij tibi dent annos, atena caetera
sumem sint modo virtuti tempora longa tuae Ovid. lib. 2. de po^to Eleg. 1. ad
Iermanie. Aristot. in Ethic. Senec. Ep. 31. Epist. 5, 4 Jewish. Morn. de
veritate religion. Christ. c. 29.
but agreeable to the Doctrine and most serious meditations of their best
Philosophers; seeing great Aristotle, the Master of morality tells us, that
both virtue and vice are in our power, or else we were neither to be praised
for weldoing, nor dispraised for ill-doing; and that every man is the forger of
his own Fortune. Hence Seneca is angry with those that trouble the Gods with
their prayers, that they might be happy; Yea he tells us moreover, that in some
respect man has the advantage of God himself, seeing God is happy by the
benefitt of nature, but man is happy by his own good Husbanding; That is, God
is happy, and cannot be otherwise; He is happy of necessity, but a good man
is so by his own Election and choice. (which by the way we see from whose
force we receive these Doctrines, which daily do so magnify man's power,
against Gods grace, even from Philosophers and Poets) hereunto add what I
read concerning one Baroozba a Jew, who would make himself Christ (though it
were forty Years after the destruction of the Second Temple,) and who having
gathered a hundred thousand men about him, did so trust to their in vincible
strength, as that he did cut off one of each of their singers; and going to
Battle he was wont to say: Help us not thou Lord of the World, seeing thou
have forsaken us, etc. Profane.


Answerable to which arrogance is that of the Great Turk of late, who
attempting against Pouland, presumed even without Gods assent, that they were
able to destroy that Nation; for when the chief Muphty, at the instance of
Scander Basha, General against the Polonians, appointed solemn prayers in
their Meschitis, for the good success of his Army; the Great Turk did forbid
them; saying, that without any aid from God, they were able by their own
forces to destroy the Polonians; as was intimated to our late Sovereign of
famous and happy Memory King James by the Count George. Ossolniski Ambassador
of the King of Poland, in his Oration to him.

See from these Examples what a height of pride men, who admire themselves, and
trust in their own strength, may attain unto; Even to think themselves, if
not in whole, yet in part sufficient without God; every one carries an Idol in
his heart, which is a man's own self, whom he (eft to himself) would set up
against God himself less or more.

To conclude this application, we see how justly S. Austin of old, Such can
neither pray aright.
and we now may challenge the enemies of Gods grace, with manifest dishonor
done unto God, and monstrous pride, which appears from hence; because in very
deed, such can neither pray aright, nor give thanks unto God for many good
things; For says S. Austin, August. de not. and gratia c. 18.
what is more foolish then to pray for that which I have in mine own power.
And so may I say to our own Masters, what is that which I am to beg and ask
of God? Is it sufficient grace? Nay they will tell me, I enjoy that already,
by Covenant (in Baptism, in which is given to each sufficient grace to serve
God if they will) and this I have with such Hypocrites as never beg it. De.
Pride. lect. 4.
Is it then the good use of that grace? But this I can draw into Act by mine
own endeavor, out of the imbred indifferency of mine own freewill. Nor be
truly thankful.
Now who I pray you can seriously beg that of another, which he has and
possesses already? Yea or how can any be truly thankful for that which he
has not so much received as given and himself afforded? How can we glorify
God by offering him praise when we ascribe (though but in part and in the
second place) the praise and power of weldoing to our selves? Let them see to
it who will have Gods grace in man's Conversion to be common, universal, and
such as they also partake truly off; yea and as effectually, who remain
unconverted.

SECT. 24.
Secondly, Use, second is to comfort us from the immutability of gods purpose
and promises.
the aforesaid Doctrine lets us see the immutability of Gods good purpose,
manifested by his promises toward those that are his; And so (to our
unspeakable comfort) arms us against all doubts and conceits of our own
unworthines, inability, fraylty, and readiness to fall from grace, for as the
freenes of his promises and grace prevents our pride, so for the firmnes of his
purpose, and most certain, powerful, and independent performance of his
promises should prevent our fears. For Gods purpose according to Election,
does and will stand, not of our works (or of any thing or power in man) but of
him that calls. Romans 9, 11
Though then Gods promises of Life and Salvation do in Scripture run with
Condition, and so are made generally to all in the Church, that none may have
just cause to complain or blame God, but themselves if they attain not to life;
On which and not on our selves his grace and our salvation depends.
Yet the performance of the Condition, and consequently the thing promised are
made (in regard of the Elect) to depend upon Gods most free grace and power,
and so the effects of Gods grace and love are in us but the free grace and
favor and love it self, together with the power, working; these are in God,
and therefore are immutable, and consequently our happy estate, and our
Salvation which depends not on our selves, but on these, is infinitely more
safe, being thus in God, then it could be in us, our Justification, Faith, and
Sanctification and Perseverance, and so our Salvation, should be most mutable
if they depended of our selves, (so that we may give such men leave to hold a
falling away from grace, who make it to depend on themselves, on their own
acceptance or rejection,) but blessed be God who has undertaken for these
also, and will accordingly as he has most absolutely promised, so effectually
work in us, whatsoever he has promised.

If any should ask concerning the World, why it continues so long? Why the
Sun does constantly rise and set night and day? Why the Seasons of the year
do so constantly succeed one another? The answer is, that the wisdom, power,
and providence, by which the World is governed, is not in the Creatures
themselves, neither depends on them, either Angels or Men, but on the immutable
God, else all things would soon fall into confusion and ruin; even so is it
in this business here of man's Salvation (so often mentioned) Happy then are we,
and most safe, Feliciores viuimus si totum Deo damus, etc. August.
if in matters of this nature we (not neglecting the means) do ascribe
nothing to our selves but all to God. It is most dangerous to ascribe too
little to the grace of God; (says a wise and Learned Prelat;) for then we
rob him of his glory. But if we ascribe too little to our selves, there is no
danger; for whatsoever we take from our selves, it cannot hinder us from being
true Christians; To ascribe all to God the safest.
But if we ascribe that to the strength of our own nature, which is the proper
work of grace, then do we blemish Gods glory.

SECT. 25.
There remains yet one maine question, To what end then are Gods precepts and
exhortations?
and doubt to be resolved, and so we will conclude: If things be thus, why
then does God command and exhort us to that which is not in our power to
perform? This question is not needless, seeing from such exhortations and
commands in Scripture: 1. Common Christians do gather a possibility in us to
keep all Gods commandments. The need fulness of this question.
2. The Lutherans and others would conclude universal grace, and the like
possibility, to do or not to do the things commanded and exhorted unto,
seeing such commands and exhortations are made to all, (especially in the
Church,) in common to do good and bad. 3. Both they in part, and cheifely
Papists would hence establish (besides the other) freedom of will, which we
hitherto hold overthrowen.

In answer then in particular to the doubt propounded: The answer, 1. Our
strength now is not to be measured by Gods comma^dments. Mat. 22, 37. Deu.
30, 6
Three things; first we must not now measure our own strength by Gods
commandments, so much we may and must learn out of Scripture; God commands us
to love him, saying: Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy hear and
with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. So also Deuteronomy. 6.5. Yet the same
Lord tells us also, that he himself must first Circumcise our hearts to love
him; Saying by Moses: The Lord thy God will Circumcise thine heart, and the
heart of thy Seed, to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all
thy soul, that thou may live. And to the like effect all these places named,
concerning Faith, remission of sin, Repentance, new obedience, Perseverance,
yea and humility; all which God requires at our hands, yea and exhorts us unto;
yet as we have said we work not these, but God by his effectual grace, and
according to his promise, works them in us. So to specify it, and to show it
in some of these more expressly. Christ says: Mat. 11, 28, Joel. 2, 12 Ier. 31,
18
Come unto me all ye that labor; yet the same mouth says: No man can come
unto me, except the Father which has sent me draw him. So God bidds us turn:
Turn ye even unto me with all your heart, etc. Yet says Ephraim: Turn thou
me, and I shall be turned. And the Church, Loment. 5.21. Turn thou us unto thee
O Lord, and we shall be turned; And in very deed we cannot suspirare: sigh for
sin, unless God do first inspirare, inspire and breath it in, Romans 8.26.
Psalm. 147, 18.
God must came his w^nde to blow, (and breath into us the Spirit of Life)
before these ^ate^s (of repentant tears) do flow. So again: Learn to do
well. Isa. 1.17. and Ia. 2.12. So do as they, etc. And here: Happy are ye if
ye do them. And yet says our Savior Christ: Without me ye can do nothing. 1
Chro. 28, 9.
And so for knowledge David speaks thus: And thou Solomon my Son, know thou
the God ^f thy Father etc. And here: If we know these things, etc. Mat: 11, 27.
And yet (...) Christ: No man knows the Father save the son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will reveal him. And John 6.46.

SECT. 26.
Secondly, Gods precepts and exhortations grounded on his promise. 1 These. 5,
23, 24. Phil. 2, 12. Isa. 1, 16. Genesis 17, 1 Ezekiel. 36, 27. Romans 6, 12, 14.
such Exhortations and Precepts have their Foundation and ground, not on our
natural power, but on Gods promises, as is said, and on the new Covenant. So,
the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God, your whole soul and
spirit and body, be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; Then it follows: Faithful is he that calls you, who will also do
it. So, work out your Selvation with fear and trembling; For it is God that
works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure. So, Wash ye, make
ye clean, says God by his Prophet Jsa: But by his Prophet Ezeksel: I will
sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; and I will cleanse you.
So, walk before me, and be thou perfect. And, I will cause you to walk in my
Statutes. Lastly, Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. And, sin shall
not reign or have Dominion over you, etc. Romans 6.12.14.

SECT. 27.
Thirdly, These exhortatio^s are not yet in vain, 1. Not in regard of the
Reprobate, who thus are told what they should have done Luke 12, 47. 2. They
are thus convinced as was Pharaoh. Exodus 8, 1
and lastly: I say, that yet such Exhortations and Commandments are not in
vain, but serve for very good ends, and that both in regard of the reprobate
and Elect.

1. The reprobate, are hence put in mind what they should do, or should have
done, and what once they had power to have done.

Secondly, they are left without excuse, as knowing Gods will, but not doing
it; and Gods justice is thus made more manifest in their condemnation, they
cannot say they now perish for want of means, but because they are awanting to
the means. Such commands then are not in vain, though the thing commanded be
not performed; For God has other ends, (which he is not bound to make known
to us) why he command: such things. God sends Moses to Pharaoh, bidding him,
say unto (...): Let my people go, that they may serve more; Which was often
repeated, yet the event showed that the secret pleasure and purpose of God was,
that he should not let them go; yea God also told Moses so much, saying:
Pharaoh shall not hearken unto you, Exodus 11 10.
(and a reason is given,) that my wonders may be multiplied in the Land of
Egypt. (And see Romans 9.17. and Exodus 9.16.) And thus it is added: And the Lord
hardened Pharaohs heart, so that he would not let the Children of Israel go
out of his Land.

Now though Pharaoh (as others like now) stood bound to obey this Commandment,
And the Commandment in regard of God is not in vain.
yet Gods chief herein was not Pharaohs obedience, but to convince him of
Rebellion and hardness of heart; and so according to Gods intention it was
properly a commandment of Conviction, so I may say as found Divines have said
before me; Gods Word in the ministry of it, where the command is given to all
to Repent and Believe, is not to delude men, though grace be not given to all
so to do; That Commandment, though it should of all in duty be obeyed, and
though in the intent of the minister (who is to preach Faith and Repentance,
and to call them thereunto, 2 Timothy 2, 25.
even those that oppose themselves) it have only one end; namely, the
Salvation of those he preaches unto, (yet as the event makes it plain, by
which God declares at length what his purpose was) in the intention and
counsel it has diverse ends; In them that are ordained to eternal Life it is
a precept of obedience, because God will enable them to do that which he
commands: In the rest, it is a commandment of trial or conviction; that to
unbeleevers, their sin might be discovered, and all excuse cut off. Thus when
the precept is given to believe, but not the grace of Faith, God does not
delude, but reprove and convince men of unbeleefe, and that in his justice. So
that from such Exhortations made in common to all, we may not conclude, that
God has the same and alike good mind and intent to save all.

Object: Though God thus should attain his end, Yet God is not unjust in so
doing.
and so in regard of him the Commandment should not be in vain; Yet should
not this ^avour of great injustice and cruelty, to require a thing impossible
to man left to himself?

J answer: Why? 1.
True, if God not given man power and a possibility. They are thus restrained,
and the godly live more peaceably by them.
These Exhortations and precepts (unto which are annexed curses and punishments
upon disobedience) are to restrain their natural corruption (as in Herod)
which else would break out unto all outrage; So that there would be no living
for the Godly in the World, if the fear of punishments upon their disobedience
did not restrain the wicked. Or howsoever, God 4. (in his justice) may do
this for the increase of their sin, their further hardening, and just
Condemnation, as Isa 6.9.10. Hear ye, but understand not; and make the heart
of the people fatt.

SECT. 28.
Secondly, Such precepts are not in vain, in regard of the Elect.
the Elect may be considered first as unconverted; And first then, such
Exhortations and Commands are not in vain; inasmuch: 1. As they prove to be
the means of their Conversion; whilst seeing hereby, and finding (upon
trial) their own impotency to do the thing required, and consequently their
misery if the things be not done, Unconverted, who thus: 1. Are taught to deny
themselves, and fly to Christ. Gal. 3.24
they are forced to fly out of themselves, to seek help where help may be
had, and that is from Christ (who is also preached and offered to such as thus
groaning under their own burden seek and come to him for ease, Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden, etc.) thus the Law is
said to be our Schoolmasters to Christ, seeing it proves a preparation to
Conversion, by accident, yet by Gods singular providence toward his electones,
who in manner are forced to acknowledge their own unrighteousness and
impotency to despair of themselves, and to seek righteousness and life in
Christ, the redeemer by Faith, according to that: If there had been a Law
given, Gall. 3, 21 and 22.
which could have given life, verily righteousness should have been by the
Law. But the Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the promise by
Faith of lesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

This then teaches them what especially to beg at Gods hand, And to seek help
where it only may be had.
namely, the renewing of their nature by his power; Yea and stirs them up to
beg the same, to pray for grace, and to use all good means besides, as the
Word and Sacraments whereby they might attain to saving and effectual Grace.

But God bids his people turn unto him, saying: Ezck. 33, 11. La^ 5, 21. Heb.
12, 1 1 Cor. 9, 24. Psalm. 119 32.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye dye Oh house of
Israel? And they pray to him now (sensible of their own inability,) saying:
Turn thou us Oh Lord, and we shall be turned. Let us run, says the Apostle,
with patience the race that is set before us: And, so run that ye may
obtain; Now the affections of Gods people is expressed of that in David: I
will run the way of thy Commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart; Cant.
1, 4.
And by that of the Church: Draw me, and we will run after thee.

Thus agains David speaking to God: Psalm. 119 4, 5.
Thou have commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently. (It seems then it is
in our power so to do; No, therefore he knowing his own impotency, flies to
God; by prayer, saying:) O th^^ my ways were directed to keep thy statutes;
And thus the Imperative in Scripture does not begett the Potentiall, but only
the optative.

Hence, Da Domine quod jubos and jube quod vu, and no^ frustra^ ju bebat. Aug
de bono persever. c. 20.
S. Austin: Lord give me power to do what thois command, then command and
require of me what thou please, and thou shall not require in vain. And
accordingly it may be noted, that there is not any thing required of us in all
Gods commandments, both Legal and Evangelicall, but for the effect of it, we
are directed, enjoined, and called upon to seek the same of God by prayer, in
some or other of the petitions of the Lords prayer; as might be at large
declared, and as I ell where have showed; So that if God required our
obedience, as every where he doeh both for matter and manner, saying: So sptake
you, Iam. 2, 12
and so do ye, etc. And here: Happy are ye if ye do them. This should but
stir us up to pray, as in the Lords prayer: Thy will be done in Earth as it
is in Heaven; Psalm. 143, 10.
and as David prays: Teach me to do thy w^ll, for thou art my God. We may
then very truly say, that for God thus to require of us things to us
impossible, is a very great Benefitt, because it is the way for us to attain
to a possibility and power to do what God commands. Are indeed converted.


SECT. 29.
And this now is secondly to be considered, that by such Exhortations and
Commands the Elect are indeed converted. Such precepts and exhortations being
sanctified of God as means of Conversio^ Heb. 4, 12
Seeing these are Sanctified of God as means to this end, and as instruments
by which the Holy Ghost renewes the will, and does convert it; for by the
means of such his precepts and Exhortations the Holy Ghost uses to show forth
its power in the Conversion of sinners. With his Commandments and Exhortations
God touches the heart, and opens it, to attend, to receive the Word, and to
obey it, as in those convert^, Act. 2.27. and in Lydia, Act. 16.14. Act. 3, 6,
7, and 12.16
Yea with his Word (which is operative) he gives grace, strength, and power,
and himself performs that which he requires. As when Peter said to the Lame
man: Rise up and walk; Immediately his feet and ancle bone^ received
strength, ana he leaping up stood and walked, etc. But by whose power? His
own? Nay, not by the power of Peter, much less by his own power; But only
by the name and power of Jesus, who wrought with Peter's Word. Thus Christ cried
to Lazarus, who had been dead four days, saying: Lazarus come forth. But
what power had dead Lazarus so to do? Yet Lazarus, even he that was dead, came
forth, etc. He arose from the dead (as we shall all do hereafter) but not by
his own power, but Christ's. Yet the rising is ascribed unto him, though the
power by which he arose was only Christ's. So we are taught to preach and
speak even to such as are dead in sin, and to say to them: Awake thou that
sleep, and arise from the dead. Ephesians. 5, 14
And yet though they be dead, our exhortation is not in vain, where it
pleases God to make it effectual (whose Spirit as the wind, blows and
works where it will, in every one that is borne of God, Joh. 3.8.) and Christ
gives unto them Light and Life.

This at once shows that such precepts and exhortations do neither imply any
power in us, now as of our selves, to Convert, Repent, and to Believe, and do
well, neither (though we are said to Convert, Repent, and Believe) are they in
vain, seeing though God require, that which is impossible to us, yet he gives
the power to us, to do that which he requires; namely, to Repent and Believe,
and to obey; this he does in part here, and will fully finish and perfect in
his good time hereafter. Unconverted, who are putt in mind to stir up grace
in them. 2 Timothy 1, 6.


SECT. 30.
But now, lastly, let us consider, the Elect as thus already converted, and
then such precepts and admonitions are not in vain; For (...). now having
received a new Life, they are thus putt in mind to stir up (as ^ne would do
fire) Gods grace in them; which without such Exhortations, like a weak fire
under green wood would soon decay; And to work out their Salvation with
fear and trembling, that is, with much humility, and with as little self
confidence.

2. To seek after perfection, and To be thankful.
They are thus admonished to seek after perfection, to seek to Christ, still
for their preservation and perseverance; And to consider what Christ has done
for them, that so they might be more thankful and careful, by all holy and
good endeavors, to do and perform what God on their parts does and may
justly require by way of requital at their hands.

Such Exhortations then to them do help to keep in his Heavenly fire; For
God preserves them by such means, who otherwise of themselves are ready to
depart from, yea and to fall from grace received.

Therefore is that Caveat, Hebr. 3, 12, 13.
take heed Brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbeleefe,
in departing from the living God; But exhort one another daily, while it is
called to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceit fullness of
sin. Thus also does Paul and Timothy exhort the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6, 1.
saying: We beseech you, that ye receive not the Word in vain. Such
exhortations are not to insinuate that men may or shall at least fall from the
grace of praedestination, or from that grace of Gods effectual calling, which
proceeds from God, and comes to us by way of Gods eternal purpose; for this is
most constant and unchangable; Romans 11.29. But least they fall away, God
preserves them by such exhortations (his own and others) as by the means of
their safety.

And God may justly require of these whom he has once effectually called and
quickened by grace, the right use and employments of such Talents as they have
received. Yea it would now be greater shame to them, if being made strong, and
furnished with Spiritual Weapons, they should not resist Satan, sin, and
temptation, but suffer the Thief to rob, and spoil them of their grace:

SECT. 31.
To conclude all these Exhortations and Commands, These exbortatio^s expel
security, though gods grace work all.
though they be not in our own power to do and keep accordingly, yet we see
they are not in vain, but have their special use many ways, yea we are by no
means to neglect them, unless we will neglect our own Salvation. Though the
power be Gods, yet the duty is ours; And God promising his power, requires
yet of us our endeavors; Therefore says he: Labor or work not for the
meat, that perishes, Job, 6, 27.
but for that which endures to everlasting Life; which the Son of Man shall
give unto you. Though the Son will give it us, yet not without our labor:
Phill. 2, 12, 13.
Work out your salvation; For it is God that works in you, etc. Though it be
God that works, yea and will work in us, yet we must not neglect to work.

As we Ministers must labor and cast in our Netts, Ministers must exhort.
yea be patient though of a long time we catch nothing, in meeknesle
instructing those that oppose themselves, (expecting if God peradventure will
give them repentance, to the acknowledging of the Truth; and must reft assured,
that we bring glory to God, even in those that perish, and that power which we
preach in and by the Gospel, (whereof they judge themselves unworthy,) shall
return to us again, and our work still be with the Lord.

So all generally are hence taught to depend on the public ministry, and on
the Word of Exhortation, The people must depend on the public ministry.
seeing God Counsels us not, but gently draws us; and neither to expect that
God by Enthusiasme and immediate revelation without the Word should inspire us,
or yet so far presume on Gods decre^ of our praedestination of us (either the
one way or the other) as either to expect and hope to attain eternal Life,
(being the end) without a careful, conscionable, and constant use of the
Means, or yet to despair of attaining unto Life, if we with any good
conscience do use the Means.

SECT. 32. The ^er^^inty of Gods election and of Gods grace, should whe^t our
diligence to all good duties. 2 These. 2 13. 2 Pet. 1, 10.

The consideration of our Election, whether we have the knowledge of it or no,
and the certain and infallible performance of all Gods promises (which we have
so fully proved) should whett our diligence to all good dueti^s, teaching us to
labor earnestly for Faith and all other saving graces, which as they are the
means of our Salvation, so are they the evidence of our Election; As we are
chosen to Salvation (and to attain it) through sanctification of the Spirit
and belief of the Truth; So are we to give all diligence to make our calling
and Election, si^e; For, says S. Peter, if ye do these things, ye shall
never full. As Faith and Repentance, and like graces are blessings, in regard
of God, and so do befall the Elect, most certain^ly; whereof also he gives
them assuran^e, by his most free and absolute promises, Ephesians. 1, 3
and by his Covenant of Grace. So are they (most of them at least) duetyes, in
regard of us, being required of all (living especially in the Church) and such
as from which none may exempt themselves. Such as know their election, must not
neglect the means.


Though we should know our selves to be elected to life, yet we are by no
means to neglect the means of Life; as hearing of the word Faith, Repentance,
prayer, perseverance, etc. Seeing God has as well fore ordained us to the means
as to the end, to these as well as to life; yea to life by these means; So that
if any will neglect the means; let him never look to attain the end. So that
I avow it, and say, that if it were possible that the Elect should not be
sanctified, should not beleev^, or not use the means (being called to the use
of them) upon that supposal they should never attain to life, but pe^ish
eternally; So Paul concluded in a like case; He was assured of safety for
himself, and those that sailed with him; yet said be most truly, except these
(the mariners) abide in the shipp, and so use the means of safety appointed of
God, Hebr. 12, 14. Luke 13, 3. Ioh. 8, 24
ye cannot be saved. See Acts 27.22.24.25. with verses 30.31. Therefore say I
to such: Follow peace and holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord.
And, except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish. And if ye believe not,
says Christ, Joh. 3, 36
that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins, and he that believes not the
Son, shall not see Life. Much les should such as know it not as ye^ Genesis 4, 7


On the other hand, let not the wickedest that truly repent and believe,
despair of Life; Let them do well, and they most undoubtedly shall have well;
God himself could say to Cain, whom yet he knew to be a reprobate: if thou
do well, shall thou not be accepted? And as I truly may say to all (one and
another) as our Savior in my Text: If ye know these things, happy are ye if
ye do them. Exclude not thou thy self, and Gods Word will not exclude thee;
do thou thy duty, and attend to the Word; (as for Gods secret Counsel meddle
not with it, neither search into it, and I am sure God has not revealed to any
in particular aforehand, that they are reprobates) and fly to God, though he
seem an enemy unto thee; at least putt it to this adventure, and say to God as
the Lepers reasoned concerning the Syrians: if he kill us, we shall but dye;
See 2 Kings 7.3.4. And with the Ninivites, Iona. 3, 9
saying when they heard a terrible threatening, absol^^tely (for the form of
it) denounced: who knows if God will return and repent, etc. Repent thou,
and put it to the trial (otherwise thou shall most undoubtedly perish) and
thou shall find unexpected success. Oh that we durst or would but take
trial of Gods Truth, and promised mercies. Oh that God would make this
exhortation (working powerfully by it) effectual to the calling home of his
own.

But howsoever let us all know that we must expect an end, All must expect an
end ansoverable to their doings. Ro^. 8, 13 Gal. 6, 7, 8. Isa. 1, 16, 17-19, 20
answerable to our doings: If then, says Paul, ye live after the flesh, ye
shall dye; but if through the Spirit ye do more tify the deeds of the body, ye
shall live; Be not deceived, God is not mocked; For whatsoever a man sows
that shall he also reap; For he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh
reap corruption; But he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap
Life everlasting. Cease then to do evil, learn to do well; If ye be
willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land; But if ye refuse
and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the Sword; For the mouth of the Lord has
spoken it. Know it then for a certainty, that God will render to every man
according to his deeds, to them who by patient continuan^e in weldoing seek
for glory, Romans 3, 6 7, 8, 9, 10
honor, and immortality, eternal Life; But to them that are contentious and
do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteosnesse, Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil; But glory,
honor and pea^e to every man that works good; And so I conclude, saying with
my Text: If ye know these things, happy are ye if ye dee them.

A COROLLARIE. SECT. 33.
WHereas Truth is ever consonant to it self, A general inference from the
foregoing discourse.
and that there is no real and true contradiction in the Scriptures, but a
sweet Harmony and Analogy, proportion, and correspondence, between and among
all the parts thereof; and seeing the Scriptures are so evident and exceeding
plain, pregnant, and full, For the proof of the powerful determining, and
most effectual operation of Gods grace, and of the most certain performance
of Gods Conditional promises, by his undoubted working and effecting of the
required Conditions themselves, according to his most absolute and free
promises, and his new Covenant made in Christ, Teaching us how to conceive of
other ^^ntroverted poin^s.
as now has been showed; we may from such pregnant proofs and evidence of
Scripture conceive of the truth, and such other points and articles, as have
either dependence on, or reference unto the aforesaid evide^t doctrine, which
(some of them especially) perhaps are not so clear unto us, partly through the
doubtfullnesse and seeming obscurity of some texts of Scripture; partly and
especially by reason of the blindness and yet selfe-wisedome of man's corrupt
reason, who is ready to conceive of God only, according to his own fancy, or
at least not willing to entertain any thought of God, but such as he can well
in reason conceive off.

Now these other points are especially the Doctrine of praedestination, namely
of election and reprobation, the efficacy, As of predestination, the end of
Christ's death, certainty of Salvation and persever^^ce.
intention, and end of Christ's death, the certainty of Salvation, both in it
self and to us, with the perseverance of the Saints in grace, without falling
away from it, either finally or totally, with other lesser yet like point,
which our Church of England and other Reformed Churches do hold and maintain
against P^lagians, Papists, Semipelagians, Remonstrants, or Arminians, and
Socinians.

SECT. 34.
Its true, all other points do cheifely depend upon the Do^trine of Gods
praedestination; (...) other poince are framed, according to the Doctrine of
gods praedestinatio^
and as it is conceived off by either party, so and accordingly all other Heads
of Doctrine are ^ramed. But whereas our Adversaries charge us with an
unwillingnesse in handling that Controversy, they do it very falsely. For our
men begin with it and prove it substantially out of holy Scripture^, to the
full Conviction (though not satisfaction) of our refractory Adversaries; And
do accordingly thence conclude against universal grace and redomption,
Collat. Hagiens, page 409.
(which extend not themselves beyond the Decree, and are no more Conditional
then the Decree it self, which Gods Word makes absolute and independent;) So
against the Apostasy of the Saints, and uncertainty of Salvation, etc.

But yet it is as true, that there is that necessary Argument amongst all these
points of Controversy, that holding any of these latter points as we,
according to Scripture, do hold and maintain them; Praedestination (as those
other points also) must be maintained just in that manner, and no otherwise
then we hold and teach it, (which yet is according to the Scriptures,) Ibid.
Though the Remonstra^ts make free will their Helena, and accordingly frame
other points.
which the same our Adversaries cannot (wholly) deny.

Though to speak as the thing is, the Remonstrants, pretending to make the
Doctrine of praedestination the sole and only controversi^, and acccordingly
to reduce and frame all other controverted points thereunto; hoping for great
advantage thereby, and presuming to make their Doctrine, especially concerning
reprobation, pass for current amongst the vulgar or most, because of the
plausiblenesse thereof; and because every common understanding cannot clear it
so easily, of the odious, though most unjust, imputations laid upon it, as,
that it makes God the author of man's sin, unjust, cruel, and tyrannical,
etc. Yet I say in very deed, the only Helena, which they as their Friends the
Papists, do so earnestly strive and contend for, is the power of nature and
liberty, indifferency, and freedom of man's will, and natural power in works
and actions supernatural; This they do, will, and must maintain, and
accordingly they frame their praedestination, and all their other Tene^s,
opposing mainely the Doctrine so clearly laid down in the Scripture, and now
taught (though by me but weakly) in this present Treatise. Against this
especially they bend all their forces, (though in vain) as knowing that if
this free, powerful and determining grace of God in man's conversion
especially) be granted and suffered to stand, then of necessity the whole
Fabric of their praedestination and other Tenets must all of them fall before
it, as Dagon before the Ark of God.

SECT. 35.
Seeing then that (as our Courches Doctrine is) the Church may not so expound
one place of the Scripture, Artic. 20. From the Doctrine taught of Gods free
and effectual grace we may infer, 1. That this Election is not Conditional,
or of all, but a^solute and indepandant.
that it be repugnant to another; And that the places brought for proof of
this one point, are so pregnant, we are therefore to conclude also:

1. That Gods eternal decree of Election is as absolute as are his promises,
for effecting in us what he requires of us; (on which indeed the promis^s
depend;) and that his Election is not of all, with Condition of their w^^kes,
(as the Papists would have it) of Faith, (as the Armintans would have it,) or
of humility and meeknes (as our new refiners frame it,) but of those few only,
to whom he has absolutely in his new Covenant promised, and in whom he
effectually in time works all these, both Faith, Humility, and other Graces.

2. That grace and Redemption are not universal.
That Gods effectual Grace, and the Redemption wrought by Christ, is not (in
the A^minian sense) universal and common, eq^ally ^ntended for all, and that
Christ by his death has not obtained Reconciliation and remission of sin,
for all and each. So that if any place of Scripture to us seem to import
otherwise; it must be expounded (as indeed the hardest places of all may)
agreeable to suc^ most evident Texts, as whereon the foregoing d^scourse is
built, and must admit of such an exposition, as is agreeable to the Analogy
of Faith, and not repugnant thereunto.

3. That, as Gods promises of grace are most free, That the Salvation and
final perseverance of the Saints is certain.
and absolute, and do infallibly and necess^rily take place; So also, not
only the Election, but Salvation, and so the final perseverance in grace of
Gods Children, is most certain and infallible, as not depending on man
himself, but on Gods purpose, promise, and power.

4. That consequently the Elect, after Conversion, That the faithful may be
assured of their Salvation
may be assured and ascertained by their Faith, in these absolute promises (to
their unspeakable comfort) of their Election and Salvation, and not only of
their present estate and being in grace.

pntote doxa the.
FINIS.

