A NET FOR THE Fishers of MEN And the same which Christ gave to his Apostles.

Wherein the Points contraverted betwixt Catholics and Sectaries, are briefly
vindicated by way of Dilemma.

By two Gentlemen Late CONVERTS.

Mark. 1.17. And Jesus said unto them, come ye after me, and I will make ye to
become Fishers of Men.

Printed Anno, 1686.

To Her Most Excellent Majesty, Mary, Queen of Great Britan.
May it please your Sacred Majesty;
WHat in this little Book is contained, being the Motives of of our Conversions
to the amient Apostolical, Catholic, Roman, Church; we have made bold to
Didicate it to Your Serene Majesty, and also our Hearts Blood and Life, to the
Service of your Royal Spouse Great James the Second.

We humbly beg Pardon for presuming to put the Products of so weak Brains under
so Princely and Gracious a Patronage; acknowledging a Matter of so great
Moment, not only far above our unlearned Capacities, but that rather it
required the Learning of St. Hierome, the Eloquence of St. Chrysostom, the
Quick Wit of St. Augustine, the Sobriety of St. Ambrose, and sweet Style of
St. Barnard.

But Madam, if favorably received by your Great Majesty, our Adversaries who
will undergo to answer it, shall find that Children set upon the shoulders of
so High Giants, as the forementioned Pious Fathers were; shall see farther into
Heavenly Religion, than he that proudly will not follow Scripture Councils, nor
Fathers, but his own human Inventions, and private Spirits, after the creuel
Example of the Tyrant Proclus, who made Men of all Proportions, fit the length
of his Bed, by cutting off him what was too long, or by drawing him longer who
was too short.

Most Sacred Madam, what is promised, if received into Your Majesty's
Protection, which we most humbly beg, may be the easier performed, because the
chaste Spouse of the most High; wants not a thousand Bucklers of Defense:
Again humbly beging Pardon for this Ambition, of avowing our selves, Your
Majesty's.

Most Humble, Most Obedient, and Most Loyal Subjects. C. J. J. M'C.


TO THE READER.
SAcred Writ informs us that in the primitive Times, our Blessed Savior
beginning to lay the Foundation of his holy Church; called Fishermen to the
Apostleship, and to those he gave a Net which was the Wisdom and Knowledge of
the Eternal Father, suitable for taking such Fish, as swim in the Ocean of
Apostasy, Heresy and Schism: The Apostles after Experiencing the great good
that did ^^^own'd to the World, by the special benefit of this Net; and the
many Souls that were caught therein, would not prejudice the Church, (...)
robbing her of so ^agnificent a Gift; ^ut buried the same in the Bowels of holy
Scripture; where we illuminated by the Father of Light, finding so precious a
Treasure, though ^it to present it unto you Courteous Reader, as a pledge of our
affectionate Respects; it being the only Motive of our Conversions, hoping if
perused with no more Passion, prejudice, or Interest, then we did, who had as
great Aversion against the Catholic Church, as you, or any other can have,
that it may produce the same effects in your heart, that it has in ours.

If you acknowledge to be convinced in all Points, saving these which we omitted
for brevitys sake, Viz. the unbloody Sacrafice of the Mass, Communion under one
kind, the Works of Supererogation etc. We hope to go Victorious out of the
Field.

But if any will undertake to answer this little Treatise? he shall not be the
Instrument only of our Recantation, but o^ many more.

We with all Christian sincerity, desire that if you can resolve the following
Queries for to annex your Answer thereunto; if not, we Pray the devine Majesty;
of his infinite Mercy, to iluminate you with the Beams of his holy and saving
Grace, which shall ever be the Prayers of your well Wishers in Christ.

Farewell. C. I. J. M'C.


TO The Holy Wisdom of of the Glorious Trinity.
BLessed Everliving Wisdom: Exellent and Supreme Intelligence; behold us
prostrate before the Majesty of your Great and Divine Light, to offer up the
Hommage of our Persons and Book; humbly acknowledging the Nothing, both of the
one and the other; and with all the Powers of our Souls, protesting to have
neither Spirit nor Pen, which is not of Yon, and from You, who are the Scource
of all good Thoughts, and Accomplishment of all Honorable and Praiseworthy
Discourses.

A NET For the FISHERS of MEN.
First. GOD has a true Church, in the World, or not? if not, then Christ left
Man without a Medium to Salvation? if he has, yours is that true Church, or
not? if not, than yours is not the true Christian Church; if it be? than your
Church must have these following marks, viz. Visibility, Unity, Universality,
and Sanctity; which the Scriptures teaches to be the Signs of Christ' s
Immaculate Spouse.

VISIBILITY Demonstrated to be a Mark of the true Church.
2. THe House of our Lord shall be prepared on the top of Mountains, or not? if
it be, why then do you deny that the Church may be always visible, if not? why
do you deny that of Isa. 2.2. The Mountain of the house of our Lord shall be
prepared on the top of Mountains.

3. A City seated on a Hill can be hid, or not? if it can, why do you deny that
of St. Mat. 5 14. A City seated upon a Hill cannot be hid, if not? than the
Church cannot be invisible.

4. Christ founded a Church on Earth that all Nations may be edified therein,
or not? if not, why do you deny that of Isa. 2.2. All Nations shall flow unto
her, (...) again, Psalm. 85.9. All Nations whatsoever thou have made, shall com^
and adore before thee. if he did, why then do you say the Church may be
invisible? since all Nations cannot be edified in a Church unseen.

5. A Man for not hearing the Church is termed in Scripture a Heathen, and
Publican, or not? if not, why the^ do you deny the wor^^ of St. Mt. 18.18. He
th^^ will not hear thee Church, let him be to the as an Heathen and Publican.
if he be, how than shall a Man be termed an Heathen for not hearing a Church
that was not visible or yet extant in the World.

UNITY Demonstrated to be a mark of the True Church.
6. A Natural Unity and conection or the parts among themselves and to the
head, is necessary for the conservation of the natural body or not? if not, how
can a natural body subsist, if the parts be divided and torn from one another
from the head? If it be, why is that natural conection proper to a natural
body; and not a spiritual conection proper to a spritual body.

7. Christ promised that there should be unity in his Church, or not? if not,
why do you deny that of St. John 10.16. there shall be made one fol^ and one
Pas^o^* if he did* why do you deny unity.

8. Unity is requisite in Gods Church or not? if not, why do you deny that of
St. John 17.11. Christ prayed that his Disciples should be one, and again 1.
Cor. 1.10. I beseech you that you all speak one and the same thing, and that
there be no Schisms among you; but that you be perfect in one sense and in one
Judgment, if she be why do you deny the necessity of unity.

9. Christ when he prayed, his prayer took efect or not? if not, then he in
vain prayed that his Disciples should be one, if it did then Christ^ people is
one.

UNIVERSALITY Demonstrated to be a mark of the True Church.
10. TO be Universal or Coexistant with time and place, is a mark of the true
Church or not? (...) if not, why does the Scriptures say in St. Man 28.20. go
ye teaching all Natons, etc. and behold I am with you even to the Consumation
of the World, and again Ephesians. 4.12 13 He gave some Apostles, etc. to the
Consumation of the Sts. if it be, why do you reject so evedent a mark of the
true Church?

11. The Church of God is Universal or Coexistant with all time or not? if not,
why do you deny that of St. John 14.15.16. the Paracleet shall abide with you
for ever, and again that of St. Lu. 1.33. he (Christ) shall reign in the house
of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end; if it be, why do
you deny Universality?

12. Christ's Church is Universal or Coexistant with all place, or not? if not,
how can that of the prophet be true, their sound went over all the Earth, o^
how can all Nations be taught; if it be, why do you deny Universality.

13. The Church of Christ is Universal and Catholic or not? if not, why do you
deny the Apostles Creed, if it be, why do you renounce Universality?

SANCTITY Demonstrated to be a mark of the true Church.
14. THe Church of Christ is eminent for Sanctity of discipline and doctrine,
or not? if not, why do you deny the Apostles Creed, which says, I believe in
the Holy Catholic Church, and again that of the Ephe. 5.17. Christ gave
himself for his Church, cleansing her by the laver of water in the Word, that
he might present her to himself a Glorious Church not having spot nor wrinkle;
but that she might be Holy and unspoted; if she be, why do you deny Sanctity in
the Church?

15. The Church of Christ is Sanctified or not? if not, why do you contradict
St. Paul's words saying 1. Cor. 6.10. these things ye were, but ye are washed,
but ye are Sanctified, but ye are Justified in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ and in the Spirit of our God; if she be, why do you deny Sanctity in the
Church?

16. The Church of Christ is manifested to be Holy by the Grace of Miracle or
not? if not, why did Christ say in St. Jo. 14.10. he that Beleiveth in me, the
works that I do he shall do, and greater, if it be, why do you Sacriligiously
rob the Church of Sanctity, seeing Christ granted her the Grace of Miracle
which we prove thus.

17. Christ granted true beleivers the grace of casting out Devils, and by the
imposition of hands to cure the suck, or not? if not, why do you belie the
Scriptures. Mark. 16.17. Those that believe in me, these Signs shall follow
them, in my Name they shall cast out Devils, they shall lay hands on the Sick
and they shall be whole. If he did, you cannot deny the grace of Miracles in
the Church.

18. Your Church has the above mentioned Marks; or not? if not, than she is false, if she has, answer to the following Queries.

19. Your Church has been apparent and visible since Christ, or not? if not,
then she is false; if she has, prove your lawful and uninterrupted Succession
of Pastors, from the time of the Apostles, till Mart. Luther, and Jo. Calvin.

20. Your Church did appear before Luther and Calvin, or not? if not, then she
is false; if she did, in what Kingdom or Nation was your Doctrine preached, or
by whom.

21. Martin Luther, and Jo. Calvin was the first founders of your Church, or
not? if not, produce any that ever professed the same Articles with you before
them; if they were, then your Church is false.

22. Luther and Calvin separated themselves from the world, or not? if not, who
joined with them, or to whom did they adhere; if they did, then they departed
from the visible Christian Religion.

23. Your Church has Unity, or not? if not, then she is not the Church of
Christ? if she has, why is there so many Schisms and Sects among you.

24. All your Reformers did agree in matters of Faith, or not? if not, then
your pretended Reformation had no Unity; if they did, why did they so much
differ in most essential Points, as we prove thus?

25. Luther an^ Calvin were true Ref^^^ers, or not? if not the^^ you follow
false Ref^^^ers; if they were, why (...) they differ in the most ^^^ntial Point
of the hol^^ ^^crament? and agai^^ (...) the Government (...) the Church.

26. All your Reformations does agree, of not? if not, then they are false, and
void of the essential Point of Unity; if they do, produce any two that agree in
all points.

27. Your Church is universal, or not? if not, the ^^^he is not the Catho^^^e
Church; if she be, ^^hew one of your Prea^^ers in Japonia nay or i^ ^he Kingdom
of Spa^^^

28. Your Church has converted Nations, or not? if not, how can she be
universal; if she has, show one Nation that she has ever converted.

29. Your Church has been universal with all time, or not? if not, then she
cannot be the true Churh, if she has, with what time has she been coexistant
before Luther and Calvin.

30. Your Church has been Universal in place or not? if not, then she is not
the true Church; if she has, in what place or nation did she appear before
Luther and Calvin.

31. Your Church has Sanctity or not? if not, then she is not the holy
Catholic Church; if she has, show one of your Sect that ever was Canonized.

32. Luther Calvin and the rest of your Reformers confirmed their Doctrine with
Miracle or not? if not, then they were not true Apostles? if they did show one
of their Meracles.

33. The signs which Christ said in Scripture, followed your pretended
Reformers, or not? if not, then they were not true Beleivers; if they did, show
one Man they dispossesed, or one sick that they restored to health.

34. Your Reformers were famous for their virtuous Lives, or not? if not, then
they had not Sanctity; if they were, why did they break their Vows made to God,
and teach men so to do.

35. The Catholic Roman Church, and no other stands firm, and infalliable as
a Rock against all the tempests of Apostasy, Heresy and Schism, which we prove
thus.

36. The Romans had once the true Church, or not? if not, then you deny the
words of Scripture; Romans 1.8. First I thank my Lord through Jesus Christ, that
your Faith is spoken of throughout the whole World: and again ver. 7. To all
that be in Rome beloved of God called to be Saints, grace to you and Peace.
etc, if they had, they retain the same Faith still infalliably, or not? if they
do, then we agree; if not, then they must have their fall, either by Apostasy,
Heresy, or Schism. to the contrary,

37. The Ancient Apostolic Catholic Roman Church fell by Apostasy, or not?
if not, then she is free from Apostasy; if she did, what prudent Man will say
that she ever renounced the sweet Name of Jesu, which she ever has in so great
Veneration.

38. The Ancient Catholic Roman Church fell by Heresy, or not? if not, then
she is free from all Heresy; if she did, by what general Council was she ever
condemned, which of the Fathers ever wrote against her, or by what Authority
was she otherwise reproved?

39. The Ancient Catholic Roman Church fell by Schism and by deviding her
self from some other Church, or not? if not then she is not guilty of Schism;
if she did whose company did she leave, from what body did she go forth, where
was the true Church she forsook.

40. The true holy Apostolic Catholic Church, is Falible and can er or not?
if not, why do you falsely condemn her? if she be, how can that of Scripture be
true 1. Tim. 3.15. the House of God, which is the Church of the living God, is
the pillar and firmament of truth.

41. The Church of God is Infalible in all her proposals and definitions of
Faith, or not? if not, why should a Man be esteemed a heathen and a publican
for not hering afals and eronious Church Mat. 11.18. if she be, why do you deny
Infalibiltiy.

42. Christ being the head of the Church, and the holy Ghost the soul of the
Church, guiding and directing the Church in all truth, she can er or not? if
not, then she is not falible, if she can then Jesus Christ and the holy Ghost
is her directors into errors Jo. 16.13.

43. Christ is a true Prophet, or not? if not, then you are Blasfemers, if he
be, how then can the Gates of Hell prevail against the Church, seeing that he
prophesied in St. Mat. 16.18. the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her.

44. The holy Ghost suggesteth all truth to the Church, or not? if not, why do
you deny that of St. Jo. 14.16. he shall teach you all things, and suggest unto
you all things, whatsoever I shall say unto you, if he does then he will suggest
no errors, etc.

45. Christ is a wise Man, or a fooll? if a wise, why did he build his house
upon the sand, and make it subject to the Infernal Tempests; if a fool then you
are Blasfemers.

46. A Congregation of people in dispiseing Christ, is guilty of Apostasy, or
not? if not, then you deny the true definition of Apostasy; if they be, how can
you clear your selves of Apostasy in dispiseing his Church, seeing it is said
in Scripture Luke 10.16. he that hears you hears me, and he that dispiseth
you dispiseth me, and he that dispiseth me dispiseth him that sent me.

47. Your Church is guilty of Heresy or not* if she be, etc. if not, how does
the definition of Heresy agree with you, in adhereing to so many private and
singular Opinions and errors of Faith, contrary to the general approved
Doctrine, of the Catholic Church.

48. Your Church is guilty of Schism, or not? if she be, etc. if not, how then
does the definition of Schism agree with you, in dividing your selves from the
body of Faithful Christians and in breaking comunion with the Ancient
Apostolic Catholic Roman Church,

49. That Church, to which the above mentioned marks does agree, (to wit)
Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism, is a false Church, or not? if not, then you do
not esteem Apostasy, Heresy, and Schism, to be marks of a false Church; if they
be, then your Church is false erroneous and no Church, seeing they so aptly
agree with you.

50. All that which the, Ancient, Holy, Catholic, Roman, Church, holds as
articles of Faith, is Pious, Good and Lawful, which we prove thus out of Holy
Writ, and by common Sense and reason.

The Pope 's SUPREMACY Vindicated by the most solid Texts of Scripture.
51. The Foundation of the Church of God next after Christ, was builded on St.
Peter, or not? if not, why does the Scriptures say, St. Mat. 16.18. Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church; if it was, why do you deny
Peter's Supremacy?

52. Christ bid prefer Peter before the other Apostles, or not? if not, why did
he say to Peter only, Joh. 21.16, 17, 18. Feed my Lambs, feed my Lambs, feed my
Sheep? if he did, why do you deny Peter's Supremacy.

53. The Apostles were of like Authority, or not? if not; why do you deny
Peter's Supremacy? if they were, why have you Primates, Archbishops, Bishops,
and no equal Authority as they had?

54. To whom the chief charge of feeding Christ 's Sheep was given; was chief
of the Apostles, or not? if not, why was the chief charge given to him? if he
was, why do you deny Peter's Supremacy to whom the chief charge was committed.

Oral and Apostolical TRADITION Vindicated by the most solid Texts of Scripture.
55. ORal and Apostolical Traditions without written Books, was the means of
planting and conserving the Christian Religion, or not? if not; how did the
Apostles propagate the Faith of Christ without written Books? if it was, why do
you deny Oral and Apostolical Tradition.

56. The number of the Canonical Books is mentioned in Scripture, or not? if
not, how do you know the Canonical Books, but by Oral Tradition? if they be, in
what Book, Chapter or Verse does it appear.

57. The Christians of the Primitive Age, on pain of Damnation, held nothing
for Faith, but what they received from Christ and his Apostles for such, or
not? if not, why do you condemn that of Scripture, Gal. 1.8. Although we, or an
Angel from heaven, preach to you besides that which we have preached to you, be
he Anathema: And again, 2. These. 15. Therefore Brethren stand ye fast, and hold
ye the traditions which ye have learned, whether by word or byour Epistle; if
they did, why do you deny Tradition?

58. Apostolical Tradition is the Rule by which we may infalliably be assured,
both what Doctrine Christ and his Apostles taught, and what Books they wrote,
or not? if not, how otherwise can we be assured; if it be, Why do you deny
Apostolical Tradition?

The Blessed EUCHARIST Vindicated to be the most Precious Body and Blood of our
Savior, by the most sollid Texts of Scripture.
59. THat natural Body and Blood which Christ offered for the remission of Sins
on the Cross, was the same that Christ gave to his Apostles at his last Supper,
or not? if not, why do you deny that Scripture of St. Luke. 22.19. This is my
Body which shall be given for you, and again, Matthew, the 26.28. This is my
Blood of the new Testament. which shall be shed for many, for the Remission of
Sins. If it be, why do you deny the real presence in the Eucharist?

60. Christ gave his Body and Blood to his Apostles at his last Supper, or not?
if not, than you make Christ a liar, and the Scriptures false; if he did, why
do you deny the real Presence?

61. When Christ said, this is my Body, did he speak Metaphorically, or not? if
not, why do you deny the real Presence? if he did, prove the Metaphor out of
Scripture.

62. The blessed Body of Christ, not being contained in the Bread, can be
eaten, or not? if not, why do you maintain that you eat the Body that is not
contained in the Bread; if it can, does i^ not imply a great contradiction,
seeing you hold the Body is eaten in the Eucharist, and not eaten in the
Eucharist.

LITURGY In an unknown Tongue, Vindicated by most sollid Texts in Scripture.
63. THat which the Apostles practiced, is lawful for us to p^actise, or not?
if not, then you accuse the Apostles of doing that which was not lawful, if it
be, why do you deny the lawfulness of the Liturgy in an unknown Tongue, seeing
the Apostles had their public Liturgies in Hebrew, Greek, Syriack, and Latin,
as is manifest in History.

64. Seeing God has commanded nothing concerning the Language of the public
Liturgy, we ought to follow the Commands of the Church, or not? if not why do
you deny that of St. Mat. 18.18. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to
the as an Heathen and Publican; if it be, why then do you deny the Liturgy in
an unknown Tongue, being the Church commands the same.

65. The Man that Prays and gives Thanks in an unknown Tongue, does well, or
not? if not, why do you condemn that of Scripture, 1 Cor. 14.17? Thou indeed
give thanks well, but the other is not edified: If he does, why do you
condemn the Liturgy in an unknowu Tongue.

66. That which is praised in Scripture and proved to be pleasing to God, is
lawful and expedient for us to practice, or not? if not, then the Scriptures
contain unlawful and unnecessary things; if it be, why do you deny Liturgy in
an unknown Tongue? seeing the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.14.2. He that speaks
with Tongues speaks not to Men but to God; and again, ver. 14. If I pray with
Tongues my Spirit prays, but my Understanding is without fruit; and finally,
ver. 30. To speak with Tongues forbid (...) not.

Sacramental CONFESSION AND ABSOLUTION, Vindicated to be Pious, Good, and
Lawful, by the most sollid Texts of Scripture.
67. THe Apostles being made Spiritual Judges by Christ our Lord, had power
from him, to bind and loose from sin, or not? if not, why do you deny that of
St. Mat. 18.18? Whatsoever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound also in
Heaven, and whatsoever ye shall loose on Earth, shall be loosed also in Heaven;
if they had, why do you reject Absolution.

68. The Laity is obliged to disclose their faults to their Judges, or not? if
not, how can they absolve them from what they know not? if they be, why then do
you deny confession of Sins.

69. Christ in speaking these Words, ( Joh. 20. 24, Whose Sins ye shall
forgive, they are forgiven* and whose Sins ye shall retain, they are retained)
spoke true, or false? if false, then you condemn the Author of Truth in Lies;
if true, why do you deny the Power of Absolution?

70. That which the Scripture commands is necessary, or no? if not, then the
Scriptures command unnecessary things if it be, why do you deny that of St.
Jam. 5.16? Confess your faults to one another.

PURGATORY Vindicated by the most sollid Texts of Scripture.
71. THere is a penal Prison or place of temporal Punishment and Payment after
this Life, or not? if not, why then do you falsify that of Scripture, Zach.
4.11. Thou also in the Blood of thy Testament, have let forth thy Prisoners out
of the Lake wherein there is no Water: And again, Man. 3. He shall sit as
purging Fire, and shall purge the Sons of Levy: And again, 1 Cor. 3.14, 15. The
work of every Man shall be manifest, for the day of our Lord will declare it,
because (...) will be revealed in Fire, and the work of every one of what sort
it is, the Fire shall try; if any man's work abide he shall receive a reward, if
any ones works burn, he shall suffer loss, but himself shall be saved, yet so
as by Fire: And finally Mat. 5.27. Be at agreement with thy Adversary betimes,
whiles thou art on the way with him, least thy Adversary deliver thee to the
Judge, and the Judge to the Jailer, and thou be cast into Prison, Amen. I say
to thee thou shall not go out from thence till thou repay the last farthing; if
there be, why do you deny Purgatory.

72. Those Souls which our Blessed Savior and his Apostles raised from death,
they were in Heaven, or Hell, or not? if not, why then do you deny a third
place? if they were, how could they return to mortality?

74. Christ's descention was into the Hell of the Damned or not? if not, then it
was into the third place; if it was, then you Blaspheme.

74. When Christ preached to the Souls in prison, 1 Pet. 3.13. it was to the
Damned o^ not? if not, then it was to the Souls in Purgatory; If it was to the
Damned, then you would have Christ to preach in vain, seeing out of Hell there
is no redemtion.

Mortal and Venial SINS Vindicated by most solid Texts of Scripture.
75. ALL kind of sins robs the Soul of Justice, and makes her guilty of
Damnation or not? if not, then some sins are only Venial; if they do, why then
does Christ make three different sorts of sins, of which the last only renders
a man guilty of Demnation, Mat. 5.23. Whoever shall be angry with his brother
shall be in danger of judgment, whosoever shall say to his brother Racha shall
be in danger of council, and whoever shall say thou fool shall be in danger of
hell fire.

76. All Sins are mortal and sufficient to break Charity betwixt God and Man,
or not? if not, then there must be some venial, and not sufficient to break
Charity betwixt, God and Man; if they be, then the Apostles themselves were not
in the Charity of God, seeing it is said in St. Jam. 3.2. We all offend in many
things.

77. All Idle Words are mortal Sins, or not? if not, then there must be some
venial; if they be, how then can any hope for Salvation, seeing no man (morally
speaking) can avoid idle Words.

78. All Sins are unto Death, or not? if not, then there are some venial; if
there be, then you make Christ a Liar: who said, There is a Sin unto Death, and
a Sin not unto Death, Joh. 5.16.

The Invocation OF ANGELS AND SAINTS, Vindidated by solid Texts of Scripture.
79. THe enjoyment of God, Angels, Saints, and the Glory of Heaven, rob men of
their Knowledge, or not? if it does, you make our Celestial Life to be far
inferior to our Teresterial in matters of Knowledge; if not, why do you deny
that Prophets now in Heaven can know things at a distance, as well as they did
on Earth? 1. Kings 4.6. Eliseus by the special Light of Grace only, saw what
was done in the King of Syriah's Privy Chamber: And again, 2. Kings 5. And what
passed betwixt his servant Geezi and Naaman, when he was absent. St. Peter
likewise knew the sacriligious Act of Ananias and Saphira, though acted
privately betwixt themselves.

80. The damned Spirits of Hell, know more then the blessed Souls in the glory
of the Father or not? if not, why do you acknowledge the Devils to understand
our most secret Thoughts and Prayers, and not the Saints and Angels also? if
they do, then you attribute more knowledge to them in Perdition, than to the
Immaculate Saints in the Eternal Bliss?

81. The Angels of God have ever prayed for those on Earth, or not? if not, why
do you deny that of Zach. 1.12. The Angel of our Lord, answered and said, O
Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have Mercy on Jerusasalem, and the Cities
of Juda? if they have, why do you not agree with us, that the Angels pray for
us.

12. It is Lawful to pray to the Angels, or not? if it be, then the invocation
of Angels, is not vain; if not, why do you accuse Jacob of an Error, in
invocating the Angel to bless his Children? Genesis 48.16. and again, Job. 5.1.
Call therefore (says Elisas to Job) and turn thee to some of the Saints, and
again Hos. 12.4. Jacob prevailed against the Angel, and wept and prayed to him.

The worshipping of ANGELS and holy IMAGES, Vindicated by the most solid Text of
Scripture.
83. WHen St. John in the Apoc. 22.8. fell down to adore before the feet of the
Angel, he knew it to be lawful, or not? if not, then you condemn the most wise
and excelent Prophet, Apostle, and Evangelist of gross Ignorance, and wilful
Idolatry; if he did, why was it lawful to him, and not to us? and again, Genesis
19.1. when Lot adored the Angels, with his Face bowed toward the Earth; he
committed Idolatry, or not? if not, than the worship of Angels is lawful; if he
did, than you accuse him of more than the Scriptures does?

84. All that which is recorded in holy Writ to have been done by the known
Saints of God, without Reproof, is lawful, or not? if not, why did the great
Precursor of Christ St. John the Baptist, worship the very Latchets of our
Savior's Shoes? and again, why did Jacob worship the top of Joseph's Rod? Heb
11.21. if it be why do you call the worship of Images Idolatry?

85. The Holy Veneration and worship of Images have profitted the Jews and
Christians, or not? if not, how then was the Israelites healed of the biting of
the Serpents in the Desert: And again, how then did the Primitive Christians,
receive special Benefit by venerating the Shadow and Garments of St. Peter and
Paul, Acts 5.15. and 19.11. if it did then, why not now also?

86. Is it lawful to bow the Knee to Images, or not? if not, why does the
Apostle say, At the Name of Jesus every Knee shall bow, Phil. 2.8. which Name
is nothing but an Image of the hearing; if it be, why do you reject the
Veneration of Sacred Images.

The Veneration of RELICS, Vindicated by the most solid Texts of Scripture.
87. THat Honor and Veneration of the Relics of Saints, which God himself
has approved by many famous Miracles, is good, or not? if not, why does God
set his Seal of Miracles to confirm a Lie? if it be, why do yo condemn the
Veneration of Relics?

88. That Woman which was miraculously cured of her bloody Flux by only
touching the Hem of Christ's Garment, was cured either for venerating the
Relics, or not? if not, but by Faith only; why was not she cured at a
distance, without touching the Garment, Matthew. 19.21, 22. If she was, why do
you slight the veneration of sacred Relics.

89. The Virtue of casting out Devils, and curing the Diseased, consisted in
the Napkins and Handkerchiefs, that had but touched the Body of St. Paul, Acts
29.12. or not? if not, why did they not cure them without touching the Apostle?
if it did, why do you deny the veneration of Relics?

90. The Bones of Dead Saints have restored Men to Life, or not? if not, why do
you deny the Miracle of Eleseus's Bones, Kings 4.14, 21. if they did, then the
Relics and Bones of Saints are worthy of veneration.

FREE WILL, Vindicated by the most solid Texts of Scripture.
91. GOd left Man to his own free will, or not? if not, why do you falsify the
Scripture, Eccles. 15. God from the beginning made Man, and left him in the
hand of his own Council, if he did, why do you deny Free Will.

92. The choice of good and evil is left in Man's Free-wll, or not? if not, why
do you deny that of Joshua 24. Choice is given you, choose this day that which
pleases you; and again, Acts 7.15. You allways resist the Holy Ghost: and
again, John 1.12. But as many as received him, (Christ) he gave them power to
be made the Sons of God. If it be, why do you deny Free Will?

93. Man has power to keep his Virgin, or not? if not, why does the Scriptures
say, 1 Cor. 7.37. He that has determined in his heart, not having necessity,
but having power of his own will to keep his Virgin, does well. If he has, why
do you deny-Free-will?

94. All that God commands is in Man's Free-power, or not? if not, why do you
condemn God with Tyranny, in commanding that which is not in Man's free-power to
do? as if I should threaten my Servant with a horrible Death, for not bringing
me the Man of the Moon; if it be, why do you deny Free Will.

FAITH without WORKS, Vindicated to be of no effect, by the most sold Texts of
Holy Writ.
96. FAith Working by Charity justifies, or not? if not, why do you condemn
that of Gall. 5.6. For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails naught,
nor prepuce, but Faith working by Charity: If it does, then your justifying
Faith flies without Wings.

97. A Man saying Lord, Lord, may be saved, or not? if not, then where is your
Justifying Faith? if he may, once more you confound the Scriptures, Mat. 7.21.
Not every one that says Lord, Lord, but he th^^ does the will of my Father
shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

98 You hope to be saved by believing in God only without Works, or not? if
not, then your justifying Faith is vain? if you do, why, but the damned Spirits
may expect Salvation, seeing they believe in God, and tremble also.

The MERIT Of WORKS, Vindicated by the most so-Texts of Scripture.
92. EVery Man will be rewarded at the last Day according to his Works, or not?
if not, then you accuse God of Injustice, in not to each Man according to his
Works? if he will, why but good Works will be Meritorious and receive a good
Reward?

100. Christ encouraged his Apostles to suffer Afflictions patiently in
expectation of a Reward, or not? if not, why did he say in St. Mat. 15.12.
Blessed are ye when they shall revile and persecute you, for my sake, rejoice
and be glad, for very great is your Reward in Heaven. If he did, why was not
there Persecutions Meritorious, and consequently our good Works?

101. That Crown of Justice which Paul said was laid up for himself, was the
Reward of his good Fight, or no? if not, why do you deny that of 2. Tim. 4.7,
8. I have fought a good Fight, there is a Crown of justice laid up for me,
which our Lord will render to me at that Day a just Judge, etc. if it was, how
can you deny the Merit of good Works?

102. A Cup of cold water given in the Name of a Disciple, it is Meritorious, or
not? if not, why is it said in St. Mat. 10.48. Whosoever shall give to one of
these little Ones a Cup of cold water only in the Name of a Disciple, Amen: I
say unto you he shall not loose his reward. If it be, why do you arrogantly
deny the Merit of good Works?

Holy and Religious VOWS Vindicated by the most solid Texts of holy Writ.
103. THe Vows which are taught us in the Holy Scripture are lawful, or not? if
not, why do you condemn Isa. 19.21. They shall Vow Vows unto our Lord and pay
them. and Psalm. 75.2. Vow ye and Render ye to the Lord your God; and again
Psalm. David Vowed a Vow to the God of Jacob: Hear David voued lawfully, or not?
if not, then ye convince the Prophet of the most High in a wilful Error; if he
did, why was a Vow lawful to him and not to us?

104. The greatest perfection of a Christian Life consists in Evangelical
Poverty, or not? if not, why did our Savior in St. Mat. 19.21. Say unto the
young Man, if thou will be perfect, go and sell all that thou have and give to
the Poor, and follow me, and thou shall have treasure in Heeven. if it be, why
do you reject the Vow of poverty as a human Invention?

105. It was a Virtue in Eunuchs, who gelded themselves for the Kingdom of
Heaven, or not? if not, you condemn that of St. Mat. 19.12. There be Eunuchs
who have gelded themselves for the Kingdom of Heaven, which pious Action our
Savior himself did not reprove: We yet insist, he who resolves in his heart to
keep his Virgin does well, or not? if not, you deny that in the 1. Cor. 7. He
that has resolved in his heart etc. to keep his Virgin does well. And if he
does, why do you condemn the holy Vow of Chastity?

106. We ought to obey our Prelates and Superiors or not? if not, then you deny
that of. Heb. 13.17. Obey your Prelates and be subject to them: If we ought,
why do you reject the Vow of Obedience as a Popish Fiction: And again in St.
Luke 2.51. our Savior in obedience to the Blessed Virgin and St. Joseph, gave
us an Example of Obedience, or not? if not, why did he subject himself unto
them by a mere volentary subjection? if he did, then the Vow of Obedience is
evident to be a Pious Action, by the Example of Christ himself?

The possibility of keeping THE COMMANDMENTS Vindicated by most solid Texts of
Holy Scripture.
107. A Man being assiisted by the special Grace of God, can keep the
Commandments of God, or not? if not, why do you make God a Tyrant, in
commanding us that which he himself cannot enable us to perform? if he can, why
do you deny the possibility of keeping the Commandments.

108. It is impossible with man to keep the Commandments, or not? if not, why
did John say, he who says he knows God and keeps not his Commandments is
a Liar, and the Truth is not in him; if it be, why do you falsely accuse God of
commanding impossibilities; we insist further, hearers of the Law only are
justified, or not? if not, then the fulfiling of the Law is necessary to our
Justification; if they be, then you falsify that of Romans 2 13. Not hearers of
the Law are just with God, but doers of the Law are justisyed.

109. God according to his promise enabled Men by his Holy Spirit, to keep his
Commandments, or not? if not, why do you deny that promise made in Ezekiel.
36.27. I will put my Spirit in the middle of you, and I will make that you walk
in my precepts, and keep my judgments, and do them. Again Ezekiel. 37.24. They
shall be my People, etc. They shall walk in my Judgments, and keeo my
Commandments. If he did, why do you deny in Man the possibility of keeping the
Commandments?

110. It is evident in Holy Writ, that some keep the Commandments, de facto,
or not? if not, why do you belie that of St. 1.6. Zacbaria and Elizabeth were
both just before God, walking in all the Commandments, Justifications without
blame: If it be, why do you deny possibility of keeping the commandments?

The IFSTITUTION of the seven SACRAMENT in Christ's Church, Vindicated by the
most solid Texts of holy Scripture.
111. CHrist for the Sanctification of Mankind, instituted seven Visible Signs
of Invisible Graces, or not? if he did, then there is seven Sacraments; if not,
then let our learned Adversaries satisfy us to the following Propositions. viz.
Baptism is a Sacrament, or not? if it be, then we agree; if not, why then has
it the Visible Signs (to wit) the Words and Water of an Invisible Grace,
according to St. John 3.5 Unless a Man be born of the Water and Spirit, he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God and again Gal. 3.27. As many of you as are
baptized in Christ have-put on Christ.

112. Confirmation is a Sacrament, or not? if it be, then we agree, if not why
has it the Visible Sign (to wit) the Oil and Balm of an Invisible Grace?
according to the Acts. 19.5.6. Hearing these things they, etc. and when Paul
had imposed his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came upon them: Again Acts.
8.14.15.16. St. Peter and St. John did impose their hands upon them, and they
received the Holy Ghost.

113. The Eucharist is a Sacrament, or not? if it be, the Controversy is ended;
if not why has it the Visible Signs? (to wit) the accidents of Bread and
Wine, of an In visible Grace, according to that of Mat. 26 27. This is my Blood
of the New Testament, which hall be shed for many, to the Remission of Sins.
And St. John 6.52. Unless ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
Bood, ye have no Life in you.

Penance is a Sacrament, or not? if it be then we agree; if not, why has it
the Visibe Sign? (to wit) the Penitents Confession, and the Priests Absolution
of an Invisible Grace, which is the Remission of Sins according to St. John
20.23. Whose Sins ye shall ^^tain, they are retained, a^^ whose Sins you shall
forgi^^ they are fotven.

115. Extreme Vunc^^on is a Sacrament, or no^ if it be, then there a^^ more
then two Sacraments; if not, why then has it the Visible Sign (to wit) the
Priests Prayer, and the anointing with Oil of an invisible Grace; whereof St.
J^^ speaks in the 5.13, 14, 15. Is any Man sick among you^ let him bring in the
Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him, anointin^ him with Oil in
the Name of ^^^cur Lord, and the Pray^^^ of Faith shall shall save (...) Sick
Man, and our Lord ^^^ll lift him up, and if he (...) in Sins, his Sins shall be
^^^given him.

117. Holy Order is a^^crament, or not? if it be, then it is no vacuant
^^rimony; if not, why ^^en has it the Visible ^igne (to wit) the words of the
Bishop, and ^he things given to him ^^at it ordained; of an ^^visible Grace
according 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect ^or the Grace which is in (...) very Prophecy
with the imposition of the hands of the Priesthood.

117. Matrimony is a-Sacrament, or not? if it be, then it is not a naked
Ceremony of the Popsh Church; if not, why then has it a Visible Sign? (to
wit) the mutual consent of both Parties of an Invisible Grace, and
Supernatural Conjunction made by Almighty God; St. Mat. 19.6. That therefore
which God has joined, let not man separate. And again Ephesians. 5.31.3^. There
shall be two in one Flesh, this is agreat Sacrament, but I say in Christ and
the Church.

118. A Visible Sign of an Invisible Grace, divinely instituted by Christ is
the true Definition of a Sacrament; or not? if not, then you deny the
definition which your selves attributes to a Sacrament; if it be, how can you
deny the above mentioned seven Visible Signs of Invisible Graces, divinely
instituted by Christ to be Sacraments.

119. Baptism and the Lord's Supper is more evidently said in Scripture then
any of the other 5 to be Sacraments, or not? if not, why then do you hold
those two only and none of the other five to be Sacrament? if they be, then
shows us in what Book, Chapter, or Verse is Baptism and the Lord's Supper said
to be Sacraments, and none of the other five which you so obstinately deny.

THE APENDIX.
120. THat the Sectaries of our Times, have no lawful or continued Succession,
which we prove thus.

Your Church has it is Succession from the undernamed Sects, or not? if not,
then you cannot have your Succession from any other visible in the World, since
Gregory the Great; about whoss Time you hold the Romish Church fell from her
Purity; if she has, why do you not profess the sam^ Articles with the
undernamed Sects, viz. with the Waldenses, that Laymen and Women may
Consecrate and Preach, that Clergy Men ought to have no Possessions or
Porperties; and that Oaths was unlawful in all cases, etc. which absurdities
were condemned by the third Lateran Council, in the twelveth Century; with
Abbot Joachim, who denied the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, to be one highest
Thing, Essence, or Nature, though three distinct Person^ Can. 3, which Heresy
was condemned by the fourth Lateran Council, in the thirteenth Century; wi^^
Bergardes and Beg^^ines, who held Car^^a Lust to be done out of Temptation to
be ^o Sin, etc. which adsurdity was condemned by the Council of Vienna; ^n the
fourteenth Cen^^ry with John Husse. (...) Wicklif, Hierome o^ Prague; that all
Priests and Majistrates ^^ll from their Dignity by any Mortal Sin, and ought no
longer (...) be obeyed; that God must obey the Devil, and that temporal Lords
might t^ke away Church Liveings at their pleasure, etc. which obsurdities, were
totally condemned by the the Council of Constance, in the fifteenth Century;
your Church had her Succession from the above mentioned Sects, or not? if you
have then you must maintain the same, most rediculous Tenets, with the above
mentioned Sectaries; if not, then you must have no Succession unless it be from
the Ancient Roman Catholic Church? (to the contrary)

121. Luther and Calvin, had their Mission from the Roman Church, or not? if
not, then they had no Mission, if they had, the Roman Church had the Spirit of
God, when she gave them the^ mission, or not? if no^ how could she give them
lawful Mission not having the Spir^^^ of God? if she had how could she fall
into Errors, and why did they depart from the Spirit of God? W^^ insist
further, they ha^^ their Mission from God, or not? if no^ then it was from the
Devil; if they ha^ why did they not confirm their Doctrine with Miracles? ^s
God did the unwriten Law, Moses the written Law, and Christ Jesus the new Law.

122. Luther and Calvin's Doctrine, was manifested to be true by Miracles, or
not? if it was, by what Miracles did they ever confirm that which they
preached? if not, then seeing you cannot alledg any Texts of sacred Writ to
vindicate their Tenets, you must of necessity run to your private Spirit for
arefuge (to the Contrary)

123. The Apostles had the private Spirit, or not? if not, then it is not
Apostolical, but rather Diabolical; if they had, why then did they call a
Council Acts the 15.

124. Your private Spirit is of God, or not? if not then it is of the Devil; if
it be of God, why then are there so many disagreeing Sects amongst you.

125. A Man endowed with your private Spirt, can interpret Scriptures, or not?
if not, why then does rude and unlitarated Mechanics, the meanest of Peasants,
and in fine, all the Plebeian Sort presume to interpret the most difficult
parts of Holy Scripture, and distinguish the Canonical Books from Apocr. if
they can, what need have you of Preachers, or Teachers, seeing no Man will
believe any thing, but what his private Spirit suggests unto him.

(...) forged by those w^^^ never could learn (...) speak or write Truth; (...)
if he does, we Faithfu^ly promise by the Gra^^ of God, to paint, and also rip
up all the Sores of Protestancy; not by Imaginary Fancies, or rather wilful
Falcities, as they obtrude against u^ but even from Protes^ant approved History
graphers, and the present times, which all the Impartial and clear sighted Eyes
are witnesses of.

We of the Society of Jesus, in obedience to the command of our superiors,
have perused this Book, and finding nothing in it contradicting the Catholic
Church, are in hopes, that it may be the Instrument of great good,

FINIS.

