THE WORKS OF Heaven upon Earth: OR The Eccellencie of Praise and
Thanksgiving, in part displayed IN A Sermon, enlarged into a Treatise, Preached
at Taunton in the County of Somerset May 11. 1648. Being the day set apart for
the Annual Commemoration of the Deliverance of that Town, by the Relief which
they received on May 11. Anno 1645.

By HENRY JEANES Minister of Gods Word at Chedzoy in the same County.

Psalm. 102.18. This shall be written for the Generation to come, and the People
which shall be created shall praise the Lord.

LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Francis Eglesfield at the Marigold in Paul's
Churchyard, and are to be sold by George Treagle in Taunton. 1649.

TO THE Right Worshipful ROGER HILL late Major, the COMMONCOUNSELL with all
other the well-affected Inhabitants of the Town of TAVNTON.
WHEN I was prevailed with for the preaching of this Sermon, I was so far from
having the least thoughts of making it public, as that I did not so much as
suspect, or fear an invitation thereunto. And when I received intimation that
it would be expected from me, I yet fully resolved to resist the utmost
violence of importunity; and I had done so (although as it is said of Elisha, 2
Kings 2.17. I was urged till I was ashamed) but that it was objected to me,
That this my denial was unsuitable to my Sermon: for the scope of that was to
quicken unto the love and practice of Thankesgiving; in the pressing of which,
if I were serious and in earnest, how could I with hold that which you desired
only as a testimony and help of your thankfulness; If thanksgiving were so
excellent and divine a duty, why would I not (having a Call from such as I
acknowledged godly and judicious) further it by my pen as well as tongue?
This argument I confess won upon me, and has drawn from me more then a
conformity to your desires; for that which was but a Sermon, I have enlarged
into a Treatise. If God shall honor and bless it so far as to make it
isntrumental in stirring you up unto a zealous and sincere practice of this
glorious and heavenly duty of thanksgiving, I have my end. But now if it should
meet with a contrary issue, if you should be unmoved thereby, and not
vvithstanding it, remain unthankful, or else cold and remiss in your
thanks, the grief will be mine, but the danger yours. For this small
Tractate will be one witness and aggravation of your unthankfulness, John
12.48. And besides, such an entertainment of it, will be very unagreeable to
the argument by which you persuaded me; nay, it will argue that your obstinate
earnestness for the publication hereof, proceeded rather from curiosity and
vainglory, then from a religigious desire to be quickened unto, and assisted in
your praises. But to use the expression of the Apostle, Heb. 6.9. I am
persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany salvation, that are
answerable to such a salvation as this of yours. In confidence of, and prayer
for which, Irest,

Yours to serve you in the things of Christ, HENRY IEANES.

Gentle Reader, I desire thee to amend with thy pen, these grossest escapes of
the Printer: for they are such as spoil the sense. As for others, I leave to
thine own correction.

Page 9. line 7. for universal read unusual. line last, blot out the second
it. marg. for Morteni r. Mortoni. p. 11. marg. for Pala r. Rada. p. 12. l. ^.
blot out (...). p. 13. marg. for ldas r. laudas. for ldare r. laudare. for desi
r. desinis. p. 16. l. 3. blot out and. p. 22. l. 7. for ordering r. bordering.
l. 8.9. for cognitionem r. cognationem. p. 24. marg. for (...) r. (...). p. 26.
l. ^9. for 87. r. 37. p. 2^. l. 17. for Phil. 2.29. r. Phil. 1.29. p. 29. l. 8.
for intention r. intension. p. 31. l. 2. for he r. she. l. last, for part r.
past. p. 35. l. 29. add Acts 20.35. p. 38. l. 9. for peacelesse r. peerlesse.
p. 41. l. 7. for undeniable r. undeniably. p. 42. l. 32. for operation r.
opposition. p. 43. l. 30. for ignorance r. ignorant. l. 21. for forgetfulness
r. forgetful. p. 44. l. 12. for many r. in any. p. 48. l. 29. for mallet r.
malis. p. 54. l. 18. add of after the first love, and blot out the second
love. p. 56. l. r. for love r. law. p. 65. l. 8. for dispose r. dispossess. p.
73. l. 29. for incoation r. inchoation. p. 74. l. 24. for not r. our. p. 75. l.
30. for intensive r. extensive. p. 72. l. 4. for desire r. deter, as also
another, p. 75. l. 3. for more r. most.

Imprimatur, JOHN DOWNHAM. December. 4. 1648.

PSALM. 92.1. It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing
Praises unto thy Name, o most High.


The words are so full, and entire in themselves, as that we may look upon
them absolutely, setting aside their Coherence with the following. And they are
so plain as that they need not either Analisis or Explication: Therefore
without farther prefaceing, I shall presently betake my self unto the Proof
of that Point, which is the Theame^ of the whole verse, the excellency of
Praise or Thanksgiving.

Gratitude is a noble grace, Thanksgiving or Praise an excellent Duty.

YOu have it elsewhere affirmed, as Psalm. 54.6. and Psalm. 147.1. (...) q. d. a
good and amiable grace.
It is good to sing praises unto our God, and Praise is comely. The word
translated comely denotes (as Aynsworth observes on Psalm. 33. v. 1.) a fair
and comely grace, for which a thing is to be liked, or desired. The Apostle
expresses the word in Greek by (...) Romans 10.15. fair or beautiful. In Exodus
30.3. The Altar of Incense was to be overlayd with pure gold, and to have a
Crown of gold round about it. Which (if we may allegorically apply) intimates
unto us, that the spiritual Incense of prayers and praises is rich and
precious a golden and a royal thing. Man's tongue is his Glory, as plainly
appears by comparison of Psalm. 16.9. with Act. 2.26. for my glory shall
rejoice Psalm. 16.9. is rendered by Peter in quotation of the place, my tongue
was glad. Now how is the tongue the glory of man, but as it is an instrument
employed in the glorifying of God wherein stands man's highest praise and glory,
Mere speech is the glory of all men above the dumb and unreasonable
creatures; eloquent speech is the glory of the learned, above the ignorant: but
Gracious speech, the speech of prayer, and praise, is the glory of a David, of
a Christian, above all mere natural men.

The point may fully and clearly be evidenced, from the Titles, Subject,
Object, Duficulty, Comprehensivenesse, Causes of praise or thanksgving, from
the acceptablenesse thereof unto God, from an application of the several sorts
or kinds of goodness thereunto, from a Comparison of it with other graces and
duties.

First from the synonomous Titles, or appellations of it which are very high
and honorable. It is an honoring, blessing, magnifying, glorifying, and
exalting, and extolling of the infinitely-blessed, great and glorious God, not
by way of efficacy, for so his glorious name is exalted above all blessing and
praise. Nehem. 9.5. His glory greatness and blessedness are infinite, and
therefore incapable of either addition or dimunition; but by way of Testimony,
declaration and acknowledgement. It is a pouring forth of the name of God as
ointment, Cant. 1.3. a spreading and displaying, a setting forth of all the
glories, perfections and excellencies which are in God: unto which yet thereby
there can be no more real accession, then there is unto the brightness of the
Sun by reflection of its beams, from a wall or glass.

Secondly, from the Subject of it, which in Paradise was Adam in his estate of
innocence, in Heaven is the manhood of Christ, the glorious Angels, and the
spirits of just men made perfect, in Earth the Servants and Saints of God, all
those that seek and fear him, Psalm. 22.26. Psalm. 113.1, Psalm. 135.20. Psalm.
145.10. All those that are of the Fountain of Israel, Psalm. 68.26. River in
Loc.
that is who are children of the Promise, borne after the spirit, like
Nathanael, true Israelites indeed, Jews inwardly whose praise is not of men but
of God. Romans 2.29. By Adams fall man came short of the glory of God, Romans 3.23.
all his faculties were miserably out of tune so that he was utterly unable to
yeeeld forth the sweet music of thanks. But though the first instrument that
God made for this, was cracked; yet God would not have this great and glorious
work to die upon the earth; but, that still there might be a people set apart
for his praise, he purchased, his church by the unvaluable blood of his son.
Isa. 43.7. Every one that is called by my name, I have created for my glory, I
have formed him, yea, I have made him, verse. 21, This people have I formed for
my self they shall show forth my praise. The latter words expound the former.
To be formed for Gods self, is to be formed for to show forth his praise. The
Church was made, formed, created for Gods glory to show forth his praise. For
this work the Church is exalted by many unspeakeable privileges above the
rest of mankind, 1 Pet. 2.9. ye are a chosen generation, a royal preisthood,
an holy nation, a peculiar or purchased people that you should show forth the
praises of him, who has called you etc. Now surely that must needs be the
peculiar privilege of the Church, which is a proper end of her being, and of
all those dignities, which God has conferred upon her.

But now (that there may be no mistake) we must distinguish betwixt an
Obligation unto, and an Acceptable performance of the duty. The Obligation lies
upon all: because, first, the Command is general, and exempts none. Psalm.
150.6 Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Secondly, Gods mercy is
universal, and reaches unto all. Psalm. 145.9. But now if we speak of a due
and acceptable Performance of the duty, Praise, as the Psalmist says, waits
for God in Sion. Psalm. 65.1 which words may be expounded by those of Paul,
Ephe. 3.21. unto him be glory in the Church. Gratitude is a grace seated in,
and Thanksgiving a duty performable by only the true and genuine members of
the Church mystical, the body and fullness of Christ. Ephe. 1, 23. and this
appropriation of the duty unto the Church might be signified by the very Name
that was given unto that tribe, which was in an especial manner a type of the
Church, It was called Judah that is, Praise. However then all men are obliged
unto the duty by the generallity of Gods both command and mercy, yet they only
who are truly Church members and so members of Christ are enabled for and
accepted in performance of the duty.

First they only are enabled and gifted for the duty, they only have the gift
and grace of thankfulness, their hearts alone are set in a right tune by God,
and so none but they can make this music. All others are out of Christ, and
without him, severed from him, we can do nothing says our Savior. Joh. 15,
5. in this or any other duty. Tract. in Joan. 81. De Verbis Apost. Sermon. 13.
Least any s^ith Austin by occasion of those foregoing words in the same verse,
He that abides in me, and ^in him, brings forth much fruit, might
conjecture that the branch which did not abide in Christ might bring forth of
it self, some, though but a little fruit; Christ does not say without me ye
can do but a little or a small matter, or without me if ye do any thing it
will be with a great deal of difficulty: but without me ye can do nothing
at all. A spiritual knowledge of God and his mercy is as you shall here annon
a root of Thanksgiving. The unregenerate then cannot but be unable for it who
have their understandings darkened Ephe. 4.18. Now as Doctor Field notes out of
the book called Destructorium Vitiorum, Field of the church. p. 254.
though a man may know in the dark the length, breadth and other dimensions of
a thing; but not whether it be fair, or foul, white, or black: so however
wicked men in that dark condition, and obscurity of discerning into which sin
throws them, may find out that there is a God, and that he is the beginning,
and cause of all things, yet they cannot know how fair, how good, how
merciful, and how glorious he is, that so they may love him etc. praise, and
thank him, unless they have an illumination of grace. To propound Gods glory
as the highest end is required in all true thanksgiving, and therefore
unregenerate men, have no ability for the work, because their hearts are
utterly void of that, which is the original of such a proposal, that love of
God, which the Schoolmen call a love of Freindship, whereby God is loved for
himself, for that absolute goodness which he has in himself. The highest
kind of love that they can reach unto is a Love of Concupisence whereby they
desire to make use of God to serve their own turns. Their love of God is but
a circular love that begins and ends in themselves, in their own commodity and
benefit. Real and sincere thankfulness calls for the soul, the tongue and the
life. And neither souls, tongues, nor lives of the unregenerate can bear a
part in this duty. Not their souls, seeing every imagination of the thoughts
of their hearts (the Hebrew word (...) signifies not only imaginations but
also the purposes and desires) are only evil continually Genesis 6.5. not
secondly their tongues Mat: 12.34. O. Generation of Vipers how can ye being
evil speak good things. Not their lives, A corrupt tree cannot bring forth
good fruit. Mat. 7.18.

Secondly, as the Saints only have gifts and abilities for the duty, so they
alone find acceptance in it. To give thanks says Paul, is the will of God in
Christ Jesus concerning you. 1 Thessa. 5.18. that is as Zanchy expounds the
words. Toward you who are in Christ Jesus from such only it is the acceptable
will of God, that is by a Metonymy, Iunius Willet on Levit.
an Object which will please and delight his will. In Peace offerings the
sacrifices were to be eaten, as, pure. Levit. 7.15. so Pura a Puris, both the
sacrifices, and the sacrificers were to be free from any legal or ceremonial
uncleanness, or pollution, verse. 19.20, 21. To teach, That as the expressions
of thankfulness, so the persons of the thankful were to be holy. If he that
did eat of the flesh of the Peace Offerings were Levitically unclean, he was
to be cut off: Thereby intimateing the unacceptablenesse of our thanksgivngs if
tendered by one morally unclean; whose uncleannes is unmortified, who indulgeth
himself in the love, and practice of his lusts, and corruptions. Amos 5.22,
23. Every such a man is a child of wrath, Ephe. 2.3. an object of Gods
vindicative wrath, a wrath of malediction and if his Person be hated and
accursed by God, how can his praises be accepted with god? He is a corrupt
tree and therefore all his thanks are corrupt, rotten and stinking in the
nostrils of God. He is in the flesh and in an estate of infidellity; now they
that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8, without faith it is impossible
to please him. Heb. 11.6. All his sacrifices, his sacrifices of praise; all his
prayers, his prayers of thanksgiving, as well as petition are an abomination
unto the Lord. Prove. 15.8. and 28.9. He will spread the dung of them upon his
face. Mal. 2.3. He will regard them no more, then the cutting off a Dogs neck,
Dickson and new Annotat.
then the offering of Swines blood, then the blessing of an Idol, Isa. 66.3.
The Apostle in Heb. 6.1, terms all works that go before repentance, and
conversion, Dead works: because they proceed from a dead principle, from a
nature dead in sins, and trespasses; because they make liable to death, they
deserve death. Now to argue from the general to the particular, it follows
therefore; that the praises, and thanks of unregenerate men, which go before
their repentance, and conversion, are but a dead work, only the carkase, and
form of praise and thanksgiving, as comeing from dead hearts, and affections
and being so far from finding favor, and acceptance with God, as that the
wages of them is death. Although then they be very forward, and seemingly
zealous in their praises and thanks, though they be very elaborate, and make
great flourishes in their celebrations of God mercies: yet, to use the
similitude of Chrysostom applied by him to the works of the wicked in
general. All this is but like the Relics of the dead wrapped up fairly. We
ourselves reckon it no credit but a disgrace rather, to be praised by base and
unworthy men. Paul was greived with the praises that the damsel possessed with
the Spirit of divination gave him and Silas. Act 16.16, 17, 18., And will God
then, think you, be well pleased with those prayers that come from impure,
mouths, and unsanctified hearts? or will he not rather account them disprayses?
a stain, and a blemish unto his glory? when the spirit of an unclean Devil
uttered the glorious praise of Christ Proclaiming him with a loud voice to be
the holy one of God, Christ rebuked him, and commanded him to hold his peace.
Luke 4.33, 34, 35. In like manner, though not in so high a degree, he deeply
distasteth and disrellisheth all praises, and thanks which come from those that
are of the Devil. 1 John 3.8. children, limbs of the Devil. Act. 13.10 who
commit sin make a trade of sinning, obey sin in the lusts thereof. For
their most glorious praises are so far from exaltation of Gods most holy
Name, as that they are a profanation and pollution thereof.

Thirdly, In a third place. The excellency of the duty may be gathered from the
excellency of its object, and that in the text is the name of God. It is a good
thing to fing praises unto thy Name. Now the name of God is great, terrible,
and holy. Psalm. 99*3. glorious. 1 Chro. 29.13. Exalted above all blessing and
praise. Nehem. 9.5. Excellent above the Earth and heaven. Psalm. 8.1. Psalm.
148.13. But to speak distinctly Gods mercies, and benefits, are the object of
thanksgiving, his excellencies, and perfections of praise. So then thanksgiving
looks upon that which is most amiable, sweet, and lovely in Gods attributes,
and works, his tender mercies that are over all his works. Psalm. 145.9. that
are as great as the heaven is high above the earth. Psalm. 130.11. And that
which respects so sweet an object cannot possibly be unlovely. Praise regards
what is most admirable in Gods nature, and works, his divine excellencies, and
perfections Psalm. 107.8. Psalm. 145: 5 6. And in reference unto this is it that
God is said to be fearful in praises doing wonders. Exodus 15.11. Rivet upon
the place thinks that praises may be taken metonymically for the matter of
praises, those works of God for which he is to be praised, and then the sense
is; Those works of thine for which thou art to be praised are fearful,
terrible, and wonderful. The latter words doing wonders, explain the former,
Fearful in praises. God is therefore fearful in praises: because he does
wonders. Regard is had unto that great, and dreadful execution of judgment
upon the Egyptians in the foregoing chapters. But the expression upon good
ground is applyable unto all the mavelous works of God. Now that which
respects so glorious an object, cannot possibly be inglorious, that cannot but
be an admirable duty which is whole ly taken up with those works of God, that
deserve dread and wonder.

Fourthly, (...). Arist. 3. Top. 2. c. text. (...).
difficulty is an argument of excellency and how difficult the duty is may be
collected from that interrogation of the Psalmist. Psalm. 106.2. Who can utter
the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show forth all his praises? which may be
resolved either into a Negation or Restriction. Few or none can utter the
mighty acts of the Lord, can show forth all his praise; few can do it in an
acceptable manner, and none can do it in a perfect manner. Reynolds on Hosea.
And indeed it is not universal in Scripture for such kind of Interrogations
to amount unto either a negation or at least an expression of the rareness and
difficulty of the thing spoken of. 1 Cor. 2.16. Psalm. 90.11. Isa. 53.1. Without
a full confession of mercies it is not possible to make either a due valuation
of them, or a just requital for them. And how impossible a thing it is, fully
to recount mercies you may see Psalm. 40.5 Many, o Lord, are thy wonderful
works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are to us ward, they cannot
be reckoned up in order unto thee: If I could declare and speak of them they
are more then can be numbered.

But the difficulty of the duty, may yet farther be prooved from the fifth
proof of its excellency, the Comprehensivenesse of it. It is a very wide and
comprehensive duty whether we regard its Elicite or Imperate acts: Its Elicite
acts, those which immediately flow from the grace or virtue of thanksgiving,
viz. Observation, Confession, Remembrance, Valuation, Retribution, are things
of a very large extent that take up the whole heart. Psalm. 9 1. Psalm. 138.1 Nay
the whole man, all his parts and all his powers. But its Imperate acts, those
which are performed by its command, and more remote influence comprehend the
whole compass of obedience all works of Religion concerning God, of charity
and, Justice toward both, our brethren, and our selves. Willet, Iunius.
Peace Offerings were never offered alone but always joined with other
sacrifices. Judge. 20.26. and 21.4., 1 Chronicles. 21.26. Thereby showing that
thanksgiving if it go not to the constitution of, it has yet a necessary Vid.
Morteni Antidot. contra Merita. 19. c. sect. 4.
connection with and relation unto all our spiritual sacrifices, all our
duties. Austine makes the whole duty of man to stand in this, Vt anima non sit
ingrat^ deo, that the soul be not unthankful to God. Vrsinus gives his third
book of the Body of Divinity the title of Gratitude which yet treates
concerning conversion, good works, the law of God, prayer etc, Hoe thought it
seems that gratitude comprehended all these. The title of the book of Psalms
is in the Original (...), the book of praises and yet it compriseth all
subjects belonging to Divinity. No point of Doctrine almost but is handled; no
duty but is pressed therein. The whole Body of Divinity belongs to the praise
of God. What is there Speculative therein, but sets forth some matter or
argument of prase What is there Practical therein but is an expression, and
fruit of the praise of God. Even Hujus virtu it is materia tam late patet quam
Vita. de Benef l. ^. c. 19.
Seneca tells us, that the matter of this virtue is as broad as our lives. There
is little difference betwixt the praising, and glorifying of God, and
glorification of God comprehends in general, Fructification, or obedience.
Joh. 15.8. Herein is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit, Phil. 1.11.
The fruits of righteousness are by Jesus Christ unto the praise and glory of
God. More particularly. Confession of sin. Josh. 7.19. My son give glory to
the Lord God of Israel and make confession unto him. Repentance; Rev. 16.9.
They repented not to give God glory. Faith. Romans 4.20. He staggered not at the
promise of God through unbeleife: but was strong in faith giving glory to God.
Martyrdom. John 21.19. Signifying by what death he should glorify God. The
Apostle having exhorted to give thanks in every thing 1 These. 5.18. backs it
with this motive, For this is the will of God etc. which (why may we not
interpret thus) This is the sum or abridgment of Gods revealed will.

Sixthly, The excellency of thanksgiving may be inferred from the worth of its
Causes. I shall instance but in five. Faith in, and Love of God, spiritual,
both Knowledge of, and Joy in God, and his mercies, Humbleness, Meekness of
mind, or Brokennesse of heart. These excellent and precious graces do produce
thanksgiving, and therefore cannot but derive unto it somewhat of their
perfection and excellency.

First then, Faith is a cause of thankfulness. Psalm. 106.12. Then believed
they his word, they sang his praise, Their singing of his praise was an effect
of belief of his word. The Psamist has regard, as appears plainly by the
coherence unto Exodus 14.31. and 15.1. When Israel saw that great work which
the Lord did upon the Egyptians, and believed the Lord etc. Then sang Moses
and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord. First Faith unites with God
and Christ, and a soul that is one with God and Christ, apprehends it self
interessed in their honor, and glory: the advancement of which, it answearably
desires and indeavoureth. Secondly, Faith is a self-denying grace, it carries
a man out of himself unto God and Christ, and therefore carries away all
honor, and glory from a man's self unto God, and Christ, Now faith has by
Peter the Epithet of Precious, expressly given unto it. 2 Pet. 1.1. And
precious it is in regard of its object Christ, his precious truths and
promises; In regard of its effects or offices. For it unites with God, and
Christ. Justifies our persons before God, Purifyeth our hearts, worke^h by
love, that is, it is a means of the increase and exercise of Love, and all
other practical graces; it stirs them unto, and forwards them in their
operations, and is therefore called the Root the Queen, the Empress of all
other graces.

Secondly, A second cause of thankfulness is Love of God. The Schoole-m^n
distinguish of a twofold love one of Freindship, another of Concupiscence
according to both Aquin. 1 ^ 2 ae. Quest. 26. art. 4. Scot. l. 2. d. 6. q. 2.
n. 3. Faber Favent. padae.
Aquinas, and * Scotus. A Love of freindship regards the object unto which we
wish or desire good A Love of concupiscence respects the good which we wish,
or desire unto the Object loved with the love of freindship: and 2 da. 2 dae.
q. 23. art. 1.
thus, to use the instances of Aquinas. We love Wine, an Horse, or any thing
else, by which we our selves, or any other thing we love with the love of
freindship n^y be adv^ntaged, or delighted. Now it is as impossible that the
love of God which is but of concupiscence should produce thankfulness. For,
first, Faber Faventi. l. 2. d. 6. q. 2. d. 32.
that is a love of a thing propter aliud, and in ordine ad aliud for something
else in order, or in subordination unto some other thing. Now, that which goes
about to make God any way subordinate is so far, from working his praise, as
that it is an attempt to un-God him, to rob him of that honor, and glory which
is essential to him. Secondly, true thanks, and praises are terminated in God,
now, as Amor concupis^entiae dicitur inclinatio appetitus in bonum, non
secundum se and ut in terminum, sed ut relatum ad alterum vel ut alteri
applicandum seu applicatum. Tom. 2. did 3. q. 2. punct. 1.
Gregory de Valentia observes, the love of concupiscence is not terminated in
the goodness of its object, but referred farther unto an application thereof,
unto the object loved with the love of freindship, Aquin. 22. 2ae q. 33. art. 1.
our love of Wine and horse stays not in the goodness of Wine, or horse, but
respects the use thereof by our selves or friends. We wish our Wine, our Horse
good, but it is, in reference to our selves, or our friends that we or they may
have: the use, service, or benefit of this their goodness. That love of God
then which is but of concupiscence is terminated not in God, but in our selves,
in that advantage which we desire to reap by, in that use which we desire to
make of him. This love then is more desirous, and studious of our own good,
then Gods glory, and therefore cannot beget thankfulness, which principally
minds the exaltation of Gods glory. But now the very height of praise, and
thanksgiving is an effect of that love of God which is called a love of
freindship: for that is a love of God principally for his own sake, and
therefore subjects unto his glory whatsoever is finite, and created. This love
makes God subordinate unto nothing, and an acknowledgment of the
unsubordinatenesse of God, is the greatest glory that a poor creature can give
him. This love of freindship, as Aquinas observes out of Arstotle, is a love
of Benevolence, whereby we wish, or desire good unto the object loved. He
then that loves God with the love of freindship, loves him with a love of
Benevolence, and to love God with a love of Benevolence is to wish, and desire
all possible good unto him. Now our goodness, says the Psalmest, extends
not unto him Psalm. 16.2. viz. otherwise then by way of praise, declaration,
glory and acknowledgement. The love of God then that is of benevolence
enclineth to desire, and endeavor the bringing of all possible praise, honor,
and glory unto him The Apostle speaking of this love, says that it seeks not
her own. 1 Cor. 13.5. that is principally. If then we love God with this kind
of love, we will not seek our own, we will more zealously, and diligently
seek the advancement of Gods glory, then the profit, pleasure, honor, credit,
and reputation of our selves. Amas et l^das definis l^dare si desir amare. Aust
Psalm. 85.
If we love God with all our hearts, with all our souls, with all our mights,
we will set a higher value upon his glory, and praise, then upon the whole
creation And therefore rather then his glory, and praise should run any hazard,
will resolve to undergo the utmost extremities. Love of God you see is a cause
of praise, and thanksgiving; and for proof of its excellency, I shall in this
have refer you unto 1 Cor. 13. which chapter is wholly spent in the elogies,
and commendations thereof.

Thirdly, A third cause of thankfulness is a spiritual, and experimental
knowledge of God, and his works of mercy, and deliverance A thankful man must
praise God for them, and therefore he must be acquainted with them. He must
distinctly, and lively blazon out the specialties of them, and therefore he
cannot be ignorant of shem David was sensible that he could neither have a
thankful heart, nor thankful lips without knowledge not a thankful heart.
Psalm. 119.7. I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments: not thankful lips Psalm. 119.171. my lips
shall utter praise when thou have taught me thy statutes. Psa. 68. v. 24.26.
compared.
An open mouth to praise God for benefits presupposes ever as its cause an
open eve, an enlightened understanding to behold the name of God written upon
it, as a token of his love, Now knowledge is a very precious grace, that
wonderfully beautifyeth, and inricheth the mind of man, and therefore compared
by Solomon to silver, and hid treasure. Prove. 2 4.

Fourthly, A Fourth cause of praise and thanksgiving is spiritual Joy that
comes chiefly from a fight, and sense or relishing of Gods love, and
goodness in mercies. This will be evident, if you will compare my text with
the 4 verse of the Psalm; for then you shall see that the Psalmist there
sets down the ground, or reason why he thought giving of thanks, singing
of praise so good, and excellent a thing. For thou Lord have made me glad
through thy work. v. 4. viz. of mercy, and deliverance. A rej^ycing of the
heart by Gods works of mercy begets a sollid, and serious apprehension of the
goodness and excellency of praise and thanksgivings and such an apprehension
will quicken unto a cheerful performance of it. And indeed it is impossible,
but that praise, and thanks should be the effect of spiritual joy in mercies.
How can a man be unthankful for mercies, which witness and seal up Gods
special love, and favor, and so produce glorious and unspeakable comfort? A
man truly and spiritually joyful is satisfied with the love of God shed abroad
through his heart, as with marrow, and fatness etc. And how can such an one,
but be excited unto thankfulness I Psalm. 63.5. My soul says the Psalmist
shall be satisfied as with marrow, and fatness, and then my mouth shall prayso
thee with joyful lips. In the ring of graces, Faith is the diamond, Joy the
sparkle of the diamond. Arrowsmith, on 1 Samuel 7.12.
Now the excellency of joy is set forth Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and Joy for the upright in heart. The latter part of the words
expound the former, and show that by the Light sown for the righteous, is
meant Joy. And indeed it is usual in Scripture for light to be put for joy,
Hest. 8.16. Isai. 50.10 Now light is of all sensible qualities the brightest,
and most glorious.

Lastly, Humbleness, Meekness of mind, Brokennesse of heart is a cause of
thankfulness. An humble, contrite and penitent soul, will debase it self,
lay it self low before God, it will disclaim all desert of the meanest
mercies. And that is the way to value mercies to exalt, and extol God aright:
such a soul will challenge to it self nothing but sin, and impotency; and
therefore it will not dare to finger any part of the glory, honor, and praise
which is due unto God. Now for the excellency of rhis humility, meekness, and
brokennesse of heart, I shall allege but these few following places of
Scripture. Psalm, 51.17. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, and a
contrite heart, o God, thou will not despise. The Psalmist, alludes (thinks
some) unto spices which are most fragrant when pounded, and bruised; so are our
hearts most pleasing to God when broken with spiritual sorrow. For in the
latter part of the verse a contrite, and broken heart thou will not despise,
there is a (...) or Liptotes. less is said, and more understood. So that the
meaning is. A broken and contrite heart thou will highly value, and prize, and
so much may be gathered, for that it is called not only the sacrifice of God
in the singular number, but the sacrifices of God in the plural, to denote
that it was insteede of all Leviticall, or ceremonial sacrifices, mentioned in
the foregoing verse, more acceptable unto God then all of them. Isai. 57.15.
Thus says the high and lofty one that inhabiteth eternity, whose name is holy,
I dwell in the high, and holy place, with him also that is of a contrite, and
humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of
the contrite ones. Isai. 66.2. To this man will I look that is of a poor
contrite spirit, and not with a bare Intuitive look, but with a look of Love,
and Respect. If you compare the words with the foregoing verse, and heed the
Antithesis hinted by the Particle, But, it will be obvious to infer, that a
poor and contrite spirit is Gods place of rest, his temple, and sanctuary. A
meek spirit is termed by Peter an Ornament of great price in the sight of God.
1. Pet. 3 4.

The worth of praise, and thanksgiving may seventhly, be concluded from the
acceptablenesse thereof to God. To praise the name of God with a song, to
magnify him with thanksgiving shall please the Lord better, said David, then
an Ox, or Bullock that has horns, and hoofes. Psalm. 69.30, 31. An Ox or
Bullock that has horns, and hoofes is taken by a Synech d^ he of the part for
the whole for all ceremonial sacrifices and external rights under the old
Testament whatsoever: and from David's preferring of praise, and thanksgiving
unto them, we may by way of Analogy, and Proportion infer the pecular
gratefulness, and singular acceptablenesse thereof unto God above all that is
positive, ceremonial, or rituall in the worship of God under the new
testament, as Baptism, the Lords Supper, and discipline etc. In Beza's
annotations upon the 1 Thessa. 5.18. In every thing give thanks, for this is
the will of God in Jesus Christ etc. The will of God is paraphrased; Res deo
accepta, et qua in primis delectatur, a thing acceptable unto God, wherewith
he is espicially delighted. And that it is such, I shall clear by these 5.
following reasons.

First, Because God vouchsafes to account himself blessed, honored,
glorified, magnified, exalted etc. thereby.

Secondly, Because in a peace offering a female was accepted, Levit. 3.1. which
might be to signify, that the weakest expressions, which are clothed with
thankfulness find with God, not only allowance, but also favor and gracious
acceptance. Gratitude ennobleth the meanest presents, the smallest services
unto both God, and man.

Thirdly, That praise and thanksgiving is a thing which God likes very well
of, may be gathered from comparison thereof unto the most pleasing, and
delightful objects of the senses. As First of Hearing Cant. 2.14. Let me
hear thy voice says Christ to his Church, for sweet is thy voice; and the
voice of the Church is not only of prayer and supplication Psalm. 5.3. Psalm.
28.2. but also of praise Psalm. 42.4. and thanksgiving Plal. 26.7 Secondly of
Taste. Cant. 7.9. The roof or as Aynsworth translates it, the Palate of thy
mouth shall be like the best wine, that goes down sweetly etc. And the
Palate, as he observes upon the place, is an instrument, not only of taste,
but also of speech. This latter use, says he, seems here to be meant, that
the Palate, to wit, by a Metonomy, her speech should be like the best, or most
excellent wine. Now the speech of the Church, gracious speech comprehends not
only her doctrine, and prayers; but also her praises and thanksgivings. A
Peace Offering is termed Levit. 3.11. food, or bread unto the Lord: it is the
food, or bread of the offering made by fire unto the Lord* the meaning is, God
takes delight in it, as man does in his meat, when he is refreshed thereby.
Numb. 28.2. Ezech. 44.7.

Thirdly, of Smelling in Rev. 5.8. The Prayers of the Saints are termed odours,
or incense; and there are two sorts, or kinds of prayer: the prayer of
Petition, and the prayer of thanksgiving. Levit 3.5. A peace offering is of a
sweet savor unto the Lord. Aynsworth reads it, of a savor of rest; the
Septuagint of sweet smell. The Chaldee expounds it, an offering which shall
be received with favor before the Lord. Moses speaks of God after the manner
of men, as if he were delighted, comforted, and refreshed by our thanksgiving,
as men's senses are with sweet, and fragrant odours.

Fourthly, How wonderfully acceptable this duty is unto God may be scene from
Gods jealousy of it, his unwillingnesse to communicate it. God has dealt with
us as Potiphar with Joseph. Genesis 39.9. There is none greater in this house then
I, says Joseph, neither has he kept back any thing from me; but thee,
meaning his Wife. God has made man his Viceroy upon earth, there is none
greater in this house then he, neither has he kept back any thing from him,
but his praise, and glory. He has given him Himself, his only begotten
Son, and his heart blood, his spirit, and all its graces, and comforts,
things present, and things to come 1 Cor. 3.22. this present world, and the
world to come Heb. 25. The earth and all the fullness thereof, heaven, and all
the glory, and happiness thereof: but now his praise, and glory is a thing so
dear unto him, of which he is so tender, and even jealous, as that he will at
no hand part with it Isai. 42.8. My glory will I not give to another, neither
my praise to graven Images He freely, and fully bestows on us the benefit,
comfort, and sweet of mercies, but the praise, and glory he reserveth wholly,
and altoget her for himself.

Fifthly, And lastly. The clearest proof of Gods acceptance of it, is his
proposal of it, as an end of his conferring mercies, and deliverances: for
which we have out of Psalm. 30.11, 12. a most pregnant proof, Thou have turned
for me my mourning into dancing, thou have put off my sackcloth, and girded me
with gladness, to the end that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be
silent, o Lord, my God. Gods glory, and praise is the end of all his works,
the greatest of his works the work of Creation. Romans 11.36. Prove. 16.4. The
Lord has made all things for himself. It is the end of all the glorious
works of God in, or about his Church, the end for which he gives the Church a
being. Isai. 43.7.21. The end of all the dignities, privileges, and mercies,
adoption, glorification etc. which he bestows on true members of the Church.
1 Pet; 2.9. Isai. 60.21. Ephe. 1.5.6.11, 12.14. Now the end of working is by
the agent most desired. In sine non adhibetur aliqua mensura sed solum in ijs
quae sunt ad sinem Aquin. 2a. 2ae. 84. art 3.
Performance of this duty then or the result thereof Gods glory being the end
of God works, especially of his works about so beloved an object, as the
Church, cannot but be highly valued with God. The value of that duty must
needs be unvaluable which heaven aims at, which is the scope of any of the
Lords either works or gifts. Wise men work ever for some notable good, how
much more the infinitely wise God impossible that so omniscient an agent should
propound to himself any low, or mean end.

Eighthly, The Point may be made good from an application of the several sorts,
or kinds of goodness unto praise, and thanksgiving. It is Bonum, Honestum,
Iucundum, Vtile, an Honest, Pleasant, and Profitable good.

First, it is an Honest, or Quid tam lauda i will, quid tam aequaliter, in omnium
avimos quam refer been meritis gratiam Senec. de Benef. l. 4. c. 16. Quid est
hovestius quam gratumesse! (...) ^19.
virtuous good unto which we are engaged by many several virtues bp Religion,
Charity, Justice, and Fidelity.

First by Religion which inclines to performance of those things that carry
direct, and immediate honor, and glory unto God. And God himself tells us, Who
so offers praise, glorifieth, or honors him. Psalm. 50, 23, Indeed, other
graces, and duties look unto Gods honor, and glory too, but none so fully, so
expressly, as this, because it is its proper and peculiar office to honor God in
all his attributes.

Secondly, by Charity, For that as a^ppeares by our Saviors opening the full
extent thereof Mat. 5.43, 44. obliges to love our enemies to do good to them
that hate us to pray for them that despitefully use, and persecute us. And
therefore sure it engages us even to loose our selves in the love, admiration,
and praises of a God, whose mercies toward us are so unspeakable, so
unconceivable. Not to be ravished with such goodness is to be unthankful.

Charity binds us to bless them that curse us, much more to bless God who
continually blesses us; to recompense to no man evil for evil, much more to
return good for good; not to be overcome with evil, but to overcome evil
with good. Romans 12.17.21. Much more to be overcome, and conquered with the
riches of* Gods goodness, forbearance, and long suffering.

Thirdly, by Justice. In Keckerm. Hthick l. 2. ^. 5.
Moral Philosophy gratitude to men is made a branch of i^stice. And shall not
thankfulness to God be so also in Divinity? Are we bound to men for their
courtesies* and not obliged to God for his blessings. Vlpian defines justice to
be, Constans et penpetua voluntas jus suum cuique tribuendi, that is a virtue
which constantly and firmly inclines to give unto every one his due, and
right. And glory, says the Psalmist, is due unto the name of the Lord. Psalm.
29.2. Psalm. 96.8. Aynsworth on Levit. 3.1* notes that a sacrifice of
Peace Offerings is in the Original, a sacrifice of pay-offerings, or a
sacrifice of payments. In our peace offerings in our sacrifices of
thanksgivings, we do but pay a debt unto God, now it is justice to pay men
their debts, much more God his. Thanksgiving is both Debitum Morale sive
debitum Honestatis quod fundatur in honestate morali and debita^ reclitudine
virtutis quam quisque servare tenetur in suis actionibus quoe sunt ad alterum.
Debitum Legale seu Iustitiae ad quod redden dum aliquis lege astringitur.
Aquin, 2a. 2ae. q 80. Debitum Legale and ad quod exigendum alter verum jus and
actionem moralem habet, and ideo ratione illius juris alius obligatur lege
justitiae ad illud reddendum Becan. Sum. Theol. partis 2ae. p. 3. q. 1.
debitum morale, and debitum legale. First, debitum morale a debt of duty unto
which we are tied by moral honesty in Gods commandment. Secondly, debitum
legale, or debitum justitiae, unto which we are tied by Gods law, which God
has a full right to exact, and challenge, and that by virtue of our relation
unto him, and our mercies received from him. First of relation to him, He is
our father, and if I be a father, says he, where is mine honor? Mal. 1.6.
Secondly, by virtue of our mercies received from him. Every mercy is a strong
obligation unto the payment of thanks; especially such m^rcies as win us
praise, and honor with men. Of every such mercy we may say as Pro Marcello.
Cicero did in the like case, Quanta est in dato beneficio laus, cum accepto
tanta sit gloria what praise, and glory is due unto God for the gift of mercies
seeing upon our bare receipt, and possession of them, such praise does acrew
unto us. Our having of mercies renders us praise worthy: much more does gods
giving of them make his praise worthy. For, it is, says the Lord Jesus, a more
blessed thing to give then to receive. Act. 20.35.

This deliverance for which you keep this Anniversary, has made you honorable
in the eyes of men: And is it not justice that it should gain from you an high
esteem both of it, and its author, God. It has made you, the delivered,
famous, and renowned, not only in this Kingdom, but also in foreign parts. O
then, how precious, and glorious should it render in your account, God the
deliverer. Your enjoyment of the mercy has purchased glory, and renown to
you, o then, it is very just, and equal that Gods bestowing of it should procure
glory, praise, and thanks from you. A single mercy you see makes us debtors,
binds us unto a return of thanks, much more the fullness of mercies, his
daily loading us with benefits Psalm. 68.19. his showers of blessing Ezech.
34.26. his giving to all men liberally, or largly. Jam. 1.5. His giving us
richly all things to enjoy. 1 Timothy 6.17. Especially, if you add thereunto the
consideration of the freeness of Gods mercies, which are oftentimes beyond our
hopes, and desires, without our prayers, and endeavors, without, ^ay against
our deserts. Luke 6.35. The highest is kind unto the unthankful, and to the
evil. Christ has received gifts for the rebellious Psalm. 68.18. compared with
Ephesians. 4.8. Now as he in the Teren. Phorm act. 1. Sc. 2.
Comedran, Vt nunc sunt mores, adeo res redit si quis quid reddit, magna
habenda est gratia, as the manners of men are in this corrupt age the world is
come to that pass, that great thanks must be given for payment of what is ones
own, and due. O then, how deeply do free, and undeserved favors engage unto
thanks, indeed they engage us unto thanks by an higher title, and bond then
that of justice 2a. 2ae. q. 80.
Aquinas makes thanksgiving to be* but a potentiall part of justice, such a
part of justice as the powers and faculties of the soul are thereof, to be
but a virtue ordering upon justice. Magnam, says he, cum justitia cognitionem
habet, perfectam tamen ejus rationem non attingit; It has as all other
potentiall parts of justice a kind of kindred unto, or alliance with justice,
but yet it does not perfectly reach the nature of justice, in quantum deficit
in ratione debiti, in as much it comes short of the duenesse, debt, or right
required unto justice. But he is to be understood of thanksgiving unto men: for
the duenesse of thanksgiving unto God, falls no way short of the debt, or
obligation of justice, but rather infinitely transcends it. If it be then to be
excluded from being either a sort and kind or else a part of justice (as I
believe it is) if we take justice in the most strict sense, it is for the
reason that he gives for exclusion of religion, piety, observance etc. from
belonging properly to justice, in quantum deficit a ratione equalis propter
retributionis inaequalitatem, because it falls short of that equality in point
of retribution which is required unto justice strictly so termed. What shall I
render to the Lord for all his benefits toward me Psalm. 116.12. says the
Psalmist, that is, I can render nothing that is answerable unto all, nay to any
of all his benefits.

Lastly, we are obliged to this duty by the bond of Fidelity, which inclines
us to make good all covenants, and promises made with men, much more with God.
Now the covenant of grace of which we have received the Seals, Baptism, and
the Lords Supper, is a mutual covenant, as a covenant of mercy on Gods part,
so a covenant of duty, and service on our part in the general, and in
particular it is a covenant of praise and thanksgivng. In reference whereunto,
one of the seals thereof the Lords Supper, is called the Eucharist from the
Greek word for thanksgiving, because one of its chief ends is (...) giving of
thanks, a thankful celebration, and commemoration of christ's death, and all
blessings flowing there from. 1 Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26.

Secondly, it is a pleasant, and delightful good. The Psalmist expressly
affirms as much in Psalm. 135.3. Psalm. 147.1. and the Prophet Isaiah opposes
the garment of praise unto the spirit of heaviness. Isai. 60.1.3* Spiritual
joy, and pleasance is so essential unto this duty, as that Psalm. 33.1. it is
put for praise. Rejoice in the Lord, o ye righteous, for praise is comely for
the upright. Now, there is no validity in this argument unless to rejoice in
the Lord, be to praise the Lord or at least except it be a principle part of
the praising of him, and therefore may well by a Synechdoche of the part for
the whole stand for all the duty.

Lastly, It is a Profitable good. For it secures, and sanctisies mercies
already enjoyed, and procures others, which are desired and expected.

First, it secures them, it assures them unto our selves, and entayleth them
upon our posterities, and nothing but unthankfulness shall be ever able to cut
off the entayle. Had it not been for unthankfulness Adam had yet remained in
Paradise, the lapsed Angels in Heaven the dispersed Jews in the land of
promise. The Jews have a saying, Arrowsmith.
that the world stands upon 3 things, the Law, holy Worship, and Retribution:
by which I conceive they mean that the way to setle and secure our selves in a
qu^et and peaceable enjoyment of the things and blessings of this world is
obedience to the law of God, zeal and diligence in the worship of God, and a
thankful retribution for the mercies of God. Great blessings that are woone,
with prayer are says a Thomas Goodwin.
Divine of this Kingdom; worn with thankfulness. There is a passage of
Chrysostom in his first Homily unto the people of Antioch, (...).
that proves the thankful man to be no looser though he loose all that he
has. Have thou says he, lost thy money? if thou art thankful, thou have
gained thy soul, and obtained greater riches, drawing unto thy self greater
good will from God. Thanksgiving is so rich a jewel, as that it is able to
countervail all losses whatsoever. It is, says Chrysostom in the Homily, but
now cited (...): a great treasure, an unperishing and undeprivable good, of
which we cannot be plundered.

Secondly, Thanksgiving sanctifies, and as it were blesses our blessings unto
us. Reynolds, Sanderson-
1 Timothy 4 4. Every creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it be
received with thanksgiving; for it is sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer. We may put an enlargment on the words, and extend them farther then
the creatures appointed for nourishment, and apply them to all other mercies,
We may say, Every mercy every victory, every deliverance is good, if it be
received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by the Word of God, and
prayer. Principally by the word, by the word of Gods actual power, and
providence, command, and blessing by the word of promise, the covenant of
grace, the gospel of salvation mixed with, and apprehended by faith
Instrumentally, by prayer, as by the prayer of Petition in the obtaining, and
enjoyment of mercies, so by the prayer of thanksgiving in the recognition of
mercies. The word is the fountain of this blessing, and sanctification of
mercies, and prayer, both of Petition, and Thanksgiving is Gods ordinance for
procurement, and application thereof unto us. To open this place a little more
fully, we must inquire what is meant by the sanctification of mercies. It
denotes the enabling of them to yield forth their natural effects, as also
the exaltation of them above that which they are in their own nature in regard
both of original, and effects. Mercies then are sanctified, when they are
enabled to yield forth their natural effects, to afford that service and
comfort, to perform those offices and operations for which in their own nature
they serve. Thus meats and drinks are sanctisied, when they are strengthened
to feed, nourish, and refresh us. This degree of the sanctification of mercies,
is common to the unthankful, as well as the thankful; and therefore there is
another degree beyond this, to wit, the advancement of mercies above their
natural condition in regard of both original and effects. Mercies are then
sanctified, when they come from a higher original then general providence,
when they reach further then natural effects.

1. When they come from a higher original then general and common providence,
to wit, from the love of election, and the purchase of Christ, from a right of
covenant or promise grounded thereon, from a right of inheritance derived
therefrom. The Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 9.17. Reynolds Treat.
makes a distinction between a reward and a dispensation. If I preach the
Gospel willingly, I have a reward; if against my will, a dispensation is
committed to me. We may make application of the distinction to our present
putpose. If mercies, victories and deliverances are received with thanksgiving,
they are then enjoyed ex promisso, out of Gods promise, as a reward, as
additionals unto the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof: whereas
unto the unthankful they are but dispensations enjoyed only ex largitate, out
of patience and forbearance.

2. Mercies are sanctified when they reach further then their natural effects,
when they are lifted up unto the production of spiritual and supernatural
effects, when they are made isntrumental of sanctification and spiritual
consolation.

First, wen they are made isntrumental of our sanctification, when they
improve our graces, quicken to duties, stir up holy and heavenly affections,
when they help and further us in the ways of God. And thus all mercies do^
that are received, enjoyed, and used thankfully. Such mer. cies are as glasses
to discover and represent the wise and careful providence of God toward us,
as steps whereby our souls ascend toward God in holy and heavenly
contemplations and affections, as needles (to use the smilitude of Austin) to
sew God and our souls together, as golden cords to draw us, and as Anchors to
fasten us unto God. As the shining of the Sun on a garden of Spices, raises
up a fragrant smell, as a shower of rain makes the Woodbine or honysuckle, as
also the Eglantine or sweet-bryer Rose more fresh and sweet: so the Sunshine of
mercies, and the showers of blessings, Ezekiel. 34.26. on thankful persons,
begets a sweet savor of obedience, betters both their souls and their lives,
makes them more faithful unto God, and fruitful unto men.

Lastly, sanctified mercies are made isntrumental of spiritual consolation,
sound peace of conscience, joy unspeakable and full of glory, arising from an
apprehension of a renewed and comfortable estate in such mercies, as also of a
testimony of Gods love by them, a discovery of the light of Gods countenance
shining through them on us in his Son Christ Jesus. A thankful heart looks
on all mercies, the smallest, meanest mercies, as fruits of Gods special love,
as branches of his promises, as returns of his own prayers ^and this renders
his little, his narrow measure of temporals better, that is, more sweet and
comfortable unto him, then the vastest riches and possessions are unto the
unthankful. Psalm 87.16, He finds and feels amidst his greatest wants, a
purer, clearer, more unmixed, more satisfying gladness, then they can take in
the greatest increase of their corn and wine. That is very remarkable which
Luke records of the Primitive Christians, Acts 2.46, 7. in even their
persecuted condition, They did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of
heart, praising God. They therefore did eat their meat with gladness, because
they praised God. The praise of God will make relishable the meanest and
coursest fare, a morsel of brown bread, and cup of cold water, etc.

Thirdly, Vide Antidum Mortoni contra meritum, c 19. sect. 3.
thanksgiving and praise procures at Gods hands new mercies, which are
expected and desired not in a way of justice, but only in a way of mercy and
liberality, not out of desert of the duty, but merely in virtue of Gods free
grace, and promise in Christ Jesus. Against the merit of thanksgiving, I shall
only allege these two Arguments, It is our duty, and Gods free gift. First,
our duty, as appears by what we have spoken at large concerning the justice of
it; and our Savior commands us when we have done those things which are
commanded, to say, We are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was
our duty to do, Luke 17.9, 10. Secondly, Illud quod sumus and quod habemus,
sive sint boni actus, five boni habitus scu usus, totum est in nobis ex
liberalitate divina gratis dante and conservante. Et quia ex dono gratuito
nullus obligatur ad dandu^ amplius, sed potius recipiens magis obligatur danti.
Idco ex bonis habitibus and ex bonis actibu^ sive usibus, nobis a Deo datis,
Deus non obligatur nobis and ex aliquo debito justitiae ad aliquid amplius
dandii, ita quod si non dederit, sit injus^us, sed potius nos sumus Deo
obligati. Durand.
it is Gods free gift, as all graces and good works are, 2 Cor. 3.5. Phil.
2.29. Phil. 2.13. Now free gifts oblige the receiver unto gratitude, and not
the giver unto any further degree, or larger measure of bounty. But although
thanksgiving cannot be Medium meritorium of mercies, it is yet of them Medium
impetratorium, What is usually said of the prayer of petition, is appliable
even unto the prayer of thanksgiving. It is the key of heaven, which unlocketh
all the treasuries of Gods mercies, both temporal and spiritual. Deliverance
of our selves, and overthrow of adversaries, is a mercy highly valued in these
dangerous times, and what an influence praise has thereon, you may see by
comparison of Psalm 8.2. with our Saviors quotation of the place, Matthew.
21.16. David's words are, Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings have thou
ordained strength, because of thine enemies, that thou might still [or cause
to cease] the enemy and the avenger. Now our Savior renders strength, praise,
Matthew. 21.16. Out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings thou have perfected
praise. And from these two places compared together, it is obvious to infer,
That the praises of Babes and Sucklings, the weak and contemptible members of
a distressed and persecuted Church, is their strength, such a strength as is
able to still the enemy and the avenger, to rout and destroy all the Churches
adversaries. Hence it is that the Psalmist for the obtaining of a full and
complete victory against Church-adversaries, advised the Saints to make use as
of a two edged sword in their hand, so also of the high praises of God in their
mouth, Psalm 149.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Let the Saints be joyful in glory, let them
sing aloud upon their beds, let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and
a two edged Sword in their hand, to execute vengeance upon the Heathen, and
punishments upon the people, to bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles
with fetters of iron, to execute upon them the judgment written, etc. Of this
strength of praise we have a notable example in the success of Jehosaphat
against the children of Moab and Ammon, 2 Chronicles. 20, 21, 22. He appointed
Singers unto the Lord, and that should praise the beauty of holiness, as they
went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for his mercy e^dureth
for ever. And when they began to sing, and to praise, the Lord set ambushments
against the children of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were come against
Judah, and they were smitten. It was not then you see without good reason, that
Luther called the prayers and praises of Christians, their Artillery, and
Gun^es. If you desire growth in grace, increase of the Spirit, such a
perfection and fullness of grace as is attainable here in this life, the
Apostle Paul prescribes as means of obtaining it, the exercise of Psalms, and
giving of thanks, Ephesians. 5.18, 19, 20. Be filled with the Spirit, speaking to
your selves in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, singing and making
melody in your heart to the Lord, giving of thanks always, etc. From which
words the pious and learned Bayn collects, that the exercise of Psalms, and
thanksgiving procure increase of Gods gracious Spirit. Trumpeters delight to
sound, and Musicians to play there, where they may have their music resounded
back unto them by an echo: so does God delight to bestow mercies where they
are answered with an echo of thanks. The Sun beams in their passage
through the air, have but a weak heat and light; but when once from some
solid body they are reflected upwards, they then gain a great increase, or
intention of both: so though Gods mercies and our successes, and deliverances
be at first but few and small, if they be reflected back unto God in songs of
thanksgiving, how wonderfully will they be enlarged? The earth sends up those
vapors to fill the clouds, which she received from them, and hereby she
gains a constant supply of seasonable dewes, and rain: so our returns of
thanks unto God for mercies received from him, will draw down on us plentiful
and refreshing showers of blessings, Ezekiel. 34 26. But similitudes only
illustrate, and therefore I shall further confirm the point from Gods promises,
and the Saints confident expectation of mercies upon performance of this duty
of thanksgiving.

First, Vide D. Twisse Vind^grat. lib. 3. digress. 1.
from Gods promises of mercies upon our thanksgiving, Matthew. 25.29. unto every
one that has, it shall be given, and he shall have abundance. Unto every one
that has, that is, unto every one that uses, and improveth, as diligently, so
thankfully unto Gods glory, those Talents of mercy, and gifts of grace, which
he has received from God, shall be given a greater increase, and enlargement
of those Talents, and gifts. Philip. 4.6, 7. If thanksgiving be joined unto
prayer, and supplication, then the peace of God which passes all
understanding, shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. Psalm
67.5, 6. Let the people praise thee, O God, let all the people praise thee:
then shall the earth yield her increase, and God even our own God shall bless
us. Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy substance, and with the first
fruits of all thine increase; so shall thy Barnes be filled with plenty, and
thy presses shall burst out with new wine. Now to honor God with our
substance, is to praise him with our substance, 1 Samuel 2.30. Them that honor
me I will honor. If we honor God ad extra, he will honor us both ad intra
and ad extra. If we glorify and bless him declaratively; if we acknowledge
him to be glorious, and blessed, he will glorify and bless us operatively, he
will make us glorious and blessed. What shall be done to the man, said the King
Ahasuerus to Haman, whom the King delights to honor? Hest. 6.6. we may apply
the interrogation to our purpose, What shall be done to the Man, to the Town,
to the County, to the Kingdom, which God the King of heaven and earth
delights to honor? how honorable, glorious, and happy shall such a Person,
such a Town, such a County, such a Kingdom be? For Gods honoring of us is not
like the empty titles of honor amongst men, it carries reality with it, and
comprehends all sorts and kinds of blessings. Because therefore God delights
to honor the thankful, he will even study to heap mercies and successes upon
them. Real and sincere praises then for our many deliverances in the bypast
bloody war, would long ere this have established and made this Kingdom a
praise in the earth, so that now no new tempest had hung over our heads, there
had been an end, not only of our troubles, but also of our fears and
jealousies. This annual commemoration of your deliverance, if there be vigor
and life in it, and if it do not degenerate into matter of form only, will
render you honorable with Gods people, not only of the present, but also of
succeding Ages; nay, it will make God himself to be a wall of fire round about
your Town, and the glory in the midst of her.

Secondly, that thanksgiving obtains mercies at Gods hand, is plain from the
Saints confident expectation of mercies upon their thanksgiving. And of this we
have an instance in the Church, Psalm. 124. where first he relates, amplifieth*
and magnifieth Gods goodness in her miraculous deliverance in the seven first
verses; she blesses God for it verse 6. and having finished her thankesgiving,
she grows in the last verse unto a boldnes^e of hope for future help, Our help
is in the name of the Lord From Hos. 2.15. we may gather, that if we sing at
the valley of Achor, in the borders of the land of Canaan, if we be joyful and
thankful for the beginnings of mercy, the initials of deliverance and
reformation, then the valley of Achor will be a door of hope, a pawn of, and
in*let to future and greater mercies unto a full deliverance, unto a through
and perfect reformation. Every mercy that we sing unto God for, that we are
joyful and thankful for, we may call as Rachel did her first borne, Joseph.
Genes. 30.24. that is, Adding, and she said, The Lord shall add to me another
son. The thankful man may call his mercies Joseph's, pledges of constant
additionall mercies. And thus have we seen how that mercies are the undoubted
sequel, and consequent of thanksgiving, the ground of which is plainy hinted
by Chrysostom in his 26. Homily on Genesis. The reason (says he) why God
would have us be thankful is, that the gain which acreweth thereby, may redound
to us, (...), and that we may make our selves worthy of greater assistance or
help. Thankfulness makes us worthy of mercies, though not with a worthiness
of merit, that deserves them, yet with a worthiness of condecency, or
fitness that prepares the heart and affections, and makes them suitable unto
mercies. Which acception of worthithinesse is very frequent in Scripture, Luke
3.8. Luke 7.^. Luke 20.35. Luke 21.36. Ephesians. 4.1. Philip 1.27. Coloss. 1.10. 1 Thessalonians. 2.12. 2 Thessalonians. 1.5.11. 3 John 6. Rev. 3.4* and 16.6* He that is truly
thankful for part, and received mercies unfainedly, and sincerely, desires
and endeavors to render unto God the honor, praise, and glory of them
(which was the end God aimed at in bestowing them, and therefore he is though
not meritoriously, yet acceptably qualified, and fitted for the receipt of
future mercies) he is to use the expression of the Apostle, Coloss. 1.12. Made
meet to be a partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light.

I am now come at length unto the last proof of the excellency of
thankfulness, and thanksgiving. A comparison of it with other graces and
duties: and this comparison shall be first in general with all other graces
and duties: secondly, in special with the prayer of petition.

First, in general with all other graces and duties. In every thing give
thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. where the
will of God may, perhaps, be taken by way of excellency, for that which is a
principal, and chief point of the revealed will of God touching man's duty.
Thankesgiving (says (...) Homil. 1. ad pop. Antioch.
Chrysostom) has no good that is equal, or a peer unto it, as there is no
evil worse then blasphemy.

Indeed it excells all graces and duties in its end, many in its duration.

1. All of them in its end, Gods glory and honor, though not absolutely, yet
in the manner of its reference thereunto; which is more full, express, and
immediate, then in any other graces, or duties. All other graces and duties aim
at this end remotely, but thankesgiving immediately; they all look toward it
virtually and implicitly, but praise and thankesgiving formally and expressly.
To celebrate and set forth the honor and glory of God, is the study and
business of the thankful man, as his maine, so his sole and proper work.

2. It excells many of them in duration. Many graces and duties, as Faith,
Hope, Alms, etc. many Ordinances, as preaching of the Word, Sacraments,
Discipline, etc. have place only in this life, as being required because of
the Churches state of imperfection here upon earth: and therefore there is
neither need nor use of them in heaven in the Church triumphant, where they
shall all be swallowed up in a present, perfect, and full fruition, 1 Cor.
13.8. Whether there be prophesies, they shall fail; whether they be tongues,
they shall cease; whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish away; but the
grace of thankfulness shall never expire. The duty of thankesgiving is heaven
work, and worship. Rev. 19, 1. and therefore shall last to all eternity, for
ever and ever, even when we have obtained salvation to the utmost, our
perpetual task shall be to sing, Salvation to our God, which sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb.

I proceed secondly unto a comparison of thankfulness, and thanksgiving with a
prayer of Petition. The prayer of thanksgiving is more Needful, more
Comfortable, more Honorable then the prayer of petition.

First, more Needful, and that,

First, Necessitate Praecepti, we are more deeply obliged unto the prayer of
thanksgiving, then unto the prayer of petition. For, first, lay the matter or
object of both duties together in the scales, and see whether, or no, our
blessings and deliverances, the matter of thanksgiving, do not weigh down to
the ground our wants, and miseries, the matter of our petitions. The comparison
is easily to be justified in temporal benefits, but as for spiritual ones,
there is no comparison to be made betwixt them, and the gr^^test wants, and
suff^rings that are imaginable. For they are not to be compared with the
smallest skantling of grace, or the least spark, or beam of that glory which
shall be revealed in us. Romans 8.18.

And, secondly, All our wants, and miseries are not only deserved, but also
suppererrogated fot by our sins: whereas our mercies are all unmerited. And
does there not lie upon us a greater obligation to be thankful for undese^ved
mercies, then to sue for removal of deserved evils.

Secondly, Thanksgiving is more necessary then petition necessitate medii, The
prayer of petition is necessary to sanctify afflictions, but the prayer of
thanksgiving is by far more necessary to sanctify blessings. For according
unto the degree of dangers is proportioned the degree of the necessity of
remedies, and prosperity is a more dangerous, a shrewder, and more shaking
temptation then adversity. The Sun by the fervency of its beams made the
Traveller, (as it is in the Fable) throw away his cloak, whereas a great Wind,
and terrible Storm made him wrap it faster about him. We are therefore in
greater danger of being swollen, and puffed up with mercies, victories, and
deliverances, then of being imbittered with wants, losses, and crosses; and
therefore, there is more need of praises to sanctify those, then of petitions
to season, sweeten, and, as it were, allay the bitterness of these.

Secondly, The prayer of thanksgiving is more Comfortable, then the prayer of
petition; because it is a stronger argument of our being in a present estate of
grace, and of our title unto a future estate of glory.

1 It Is a stronger argument of our being in a present estate of grace; because a
surer evidence of our sincerity, and spiritual ingenuity.

First, of our sincerity, Flesh, and blood, nature, base self-love may put us
on a kind of mercinary petitions, which may be consistent with the very depth
of hypocrisy, for in them our supposed, and desired good takes the upper hand
of Gods glory, Now thanksgiving is a selfedenying grace, that gives Gods glory
the supremacy in all our thoughts, desires, aims, and proposals, and therefore
proceeds from the greatest height, and perfection of of grace, that is
attainable in this life.

It Is, secondly, a surer Evidence of our spiritual Ingenuity, even staves will
beg when the whip is shaken over them, servile dispositions may by extremities
be dragged unto petitions, whereas thanksgiving is a free will offering; not
wrung from us by our wants, or necessities: we are drawn unto it only by the
coards of a man, by the bonds of love. Hos 12.4. and therefore it argues a
spirit of adoption, a sonne-like temper, and holy freedom, and bravery of
spirit.

Secondly, The prayer of thanksgiving is a stronger proof of our titleunto a
future estate of glory, then the prayer of petition: for it is a principal
work; and worship of heaven, and can we have a better argument to assure us,
that we shall go to heaven when we leave the earth, then our love, and
performance of the work, and worship of heaven upon earth? A thankful soul
is a kind of heaven upon earth, it holds consort with the music of heaven,
and therefore can never be excluded from heaven.

Lastly, thankesgiving is more honorable then petition, and that for these
following reasons.

1. It out-strips it in reference to its end, Gods glory, unto which it looks
more, and contributes more then petition.

It looks more to Gods glory then petition, because it looks only unto 'Gods
glory; whereas in petition respect may be had unto our own good. This Argument
is used by Nobilior in sese and perfectior est gratiarum actio, quam petitio:
quia in petitione soepe bonum nostrum spectatur, sed in gratiarum action Dei
honor tantum. Lib. 2. c. 9. These. 93.
Dr Ames in his Marrow of Divinity. Giving of thanks; is more noble and perfect
in it self, then petition, because in petition often our own good is eyed and
regarded, but in giving of thanks only Gods honor. The Lord Jesus said, it
is more blessed to give then to recieve. Now a subordinate end of petition is
to receive some good from God, but the sole end of thanks is to give glory
unto God.

Secondly, as it aims more at, so it contributes more unto Gods glory then
petition: for it confesses and magnifieth Gods mercy in actual blessings and
deliverances; whereas in petition there is only an acknowledgement of Gods
ableness and willingness to bless and deliver. And it makes more to the
praise of ones goodness to acknowledge that he has given, then that he can
or will give.

Secondly, the precedence of praise may be concluded, because it is of greater
use in heaven then petition. Some have affirmed, that praise shall be our
whole and only employment in heaven; Field of the Church. Dr. Edw. Reynolds on
Psalm. 1^0. page 433.
but others of equal note for piety and learning, think there is no danger in
affirming, that the Saints in heaven, and the blessed Angels do pray, though
not for particular persons, yet for the general state and condition of the
Church militant; as also that the Saints departed pray for their own
resurrection, public acquital in the day of judgment, and perfect consummation
of their happiness in their bodies as well as souls. But we need not meddle
with this dispute; for though it be not the whole and only, yet it is the
ohiefe work and business of all the host of heaven, the manhood of Christ, the
glorious Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect, Rev. 4.8. Rev. 7.12.
They have little use of the prayer of petition, in comparison of the prayer of
praise and thankesgiving: the matter of which is as wide as heaven, as infinite
as God himself, as lasting as eternity. Hence is it that by Bernard in
dedicatione Ecclesiae, Sermon. 2. this world is called the house of prayer, he
means the prayer of petition, and heaven the house of praise. What is heaven
but a Mr. Herle.
circle of the beatifical vision and love of God, of praises and songs unto
God. As Austin speaks, our Circle of employment there will be, vacabimus and
videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus and laudabimus, laudabimus and
cantabimus, etc. There we shall always delight to see, and seeing to love, and
loving to praise, and praising to sing, and singing to praise, and so back
again.

Thirdly, the end excells that of which it is an end. Now as Gratiarum actio
est secundarius finis omnis petitionis religiosae, qui enim recto aliquid petit
a Dco, non idcirco tantum petit ut accipiat, nedum ut in voluptates insumat
Jac. 4.3. sed ut acceptum referaturdenuo ad gloriam dei qui dedit. Medul.
Theol. l. 2. c 9. These. 91.
Docter Ames well observes. Giving of thanks is a secondary end of every
religious petition for he that craveth any thing at Gods hands as he ought to
do, does not only therefore crave it, that he may receive it, much less that
he may consume it upon his lusts, but that being received it may be referred,
or returned back unto the glory of God. For this he quotes 2 Cor. 1.11. You
also helping together by prayer for us that for the gift bestowed upon us by
the means of many persons, thanks may be given by many in our behalf, unto
which we may add 1 Chronicles. 16.35. Psalm. 106.47. and say ye, Save us o God of
our salvation, and gather us together, and deliver us from the Heathen, that we
may give thanks to thy holy name, and glory in thy praise. Psalm. 9.13.14 Have
mercy upon me, o Lord, consider my trouble which I suffer of them that hate me,
thou that liftst me up from the gates of death, that I may show forth all thy
praise in the gates of the Daughter of Sion. As also Psalm. 142.6, 7. Attend
unto my cry etc. Deliver me from my persecuters etc. bring my soul out of
prison that I may praise thy name.

4. Thankesgiving transcends Petition, because we are naturally more unable
for, and averse from it, then petition: for in our natures there is a
disability unto, and an aversation from, as all good things, so especially the
best things, the most spiritual and refined duties.

1. We are naturally more unable for thankesgiving, because more unmindfull and
insensile of benefits and comforts, then of wants, necessities, and crosses:
those are written in sand, nay in dust, these in marble, nay in metal, in
brasle. Who almost, but is more affected in a way of grief with the aching of
the head, nay finger, then in a way of joy with the health of the whole body?
Insitum hoc a natura bumano ingenio ad tristia acriter flectere oculos,
praeterire quae laeta, ut muscae and ejusmodi insecta laevibus politisque locis
non diu insident scabris adhaereseunt, sic querula ista meus, meliorem sortem
peviter transvolat, asperam non dimittit, tractat, inspicit, plerumque auget:
atque ut amantos in domina sua m^nquam non inveniunt, cur eximia ^a ante omnes:
sic dolentes in suo luctn. Lipsius de Constantia.
Look as Flies skip over those parts which are smooth, sound, and healthy, and
only stick upon those which are itchy, scabbed, or any other ways unsound,
diseased, and disaffected: so our minds, and affections, which naturally are
querulous, and discontented, lightly pass over mercies, and joyful
occurrences, but for disasters, and all sad events, they take a serious and
through view of them, they stay and even dwell upon them, and receive from them
a deep and lasting impression, and so accordingly most tragically amplify
them, as if they were peacelesse. That deliverance which has occasioned our
meeting at this present, was so allied unto a miracle, and withal so great,
and I may say, general concernment, as that God might justly expect from all
wel-willers unto the public, a ravishment of joy, such a doxology which
Hierome, if I forget not, relates of the Primitive Church, that was like a clap
of Thunder, and roaring of of the Sea: such an ecstasy of thanks as the
Psalmist reports of the Jews, Psalm 126. who were like men that dream, their
mouths being filled with laughter, and their tongues with singing. But now our
carnal tempers do so unfit and indispose us for this most spiritual duty, as
that passed losses of a far inferior alloy, and present fears and jealousies
do not only allay, but even drown the voice of our joy an thanksgiving. Mr
Marshal in his Sermon preached to the House of Commons, September. 7. 1641. at
their public thankesgiving for the peace coucluded between England and
Scotland, has in his Preface a remarkable passage touching this argument: In a
day of humiliation, says he, even wicked men have affections stirring in them
consciousnes of evil, guiltiness of mind, sense of wrath, astonishing and
oppressing fears arising from the apprehension of near and unavoydable
dangers, are natural means to make even Pharaohs, Ahabs, and Ninevites mourn,
and humble themselves before God. But in a keeping a spiritual rejoicing unto
God, little or no help is to be expected from the flesh: and that is one reason
why commonly days of thankesgiving are translated with much less affection,
life, and savor, then days of Humiliation.


Secondly, We are more averse from the prayer of thankesgiving then from the
prayer of petition, as will easily appear by comparison of our petitions with
our thanks and praises, in regard of both Quantity and Quality, Number and
Duration, also Weight, or Zeal. If wants and afflictions lie heavy on us, we
are clamorous, and important suitors, like the Widow, Luke 18. we will have no
nay, like Jacob, we even wrestle with God, and will not let him go until he
bless and deliver us, Genes. 32.26. Well, God hears us, and grants all, nay
more then we desire, and we presently grow unregardfull to return God his
praise and honor; so our turns be once served, we take little or no care
whether God be glorisied, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36, 37. It is with most of us as
with mariners, who will pray and howl in a storm, Bernard contra pessimum
vitium ingratitudinis.
but when a calm succeeds, when they are gotten into a safe harbor, or landed
on the shore, they seem as if they had forgotten all their past danger, their
devotion presently cooles, and they seldom render unto God so much as the
form, and outside of thankfulness. Pharaoh desires Moses and Aaron to
entreat the Lord to take away several plagues from him, Exodus 8.8. Exodus 9.28.
Exodus 10.16. but he never invites them to join with him in praises for
deliverance from these plagues.

All the ten Lepers were loud and earnest in their cries for remedy, Luke
17.13. but when they were healed, there was but one of them returned to give
glory unto God, Luke 17.13, 15, 16, 17, 18.

Causinus Hierogl.
Themistocles compared himself unto a Plain tree, for as Travelers in a
storm would run to a Plain-tree for shelter, but when once the heavens were
cleared, leave the tree, and rend its boughs: so the Athenians, said he, in
time of war or danger run to me, as to a common Father, but in times of
peace, and security, they reward me with nothing but accusations and
banishment. Just so we deal with God, when the storms of his indignation beat
upon us, we run unto him with open mouths, and even besiege him with our
petitions, like those Hos. 5, 15. In out afflictions we seek him early, like
them Psa. 75.34. when he slayes us then we seek him, and return, and enquire
early after God, and remember that God is our Rock, and the high God our
redeemer; but when the tempest of wrath is blown over, we are so sarre from
compassing him about with songs of deliverance, as that some of us tear his
name even in pieces with horrid oaths and blasphemies: the best of us grieve
his Spirit, and provoke the eyes of his glory by renewing and multiplying our
abominations. Others, who pretend most unto thankfulness, give unto him as
great affronts almost as are imaginable; for they contemn all his Ordinances,
vilify his most sacred Scriptures, call in question, nay deny the most
precious and fundamental of Divine truths, bespatter the faithfullest of his
Ministers and servants. For a final proof of this particular, I shall desire
you of this place to reflect upon your selves, to compare your selves with your
selves, to balance the earnestness and violence of the petitions that you put
up to God in your straight and close siege, especially in that dreadful
storming of your town, May 8. and 9, Anno Dom. 1645. with the coldness and
dullness of the thanks that you have returned upon, and since your deliverance.
When the thunder of Ordnance, the warlike sound of Drums and Trumpets, the
clattering of Armor and Arms, the bloody threats of your adversaries, the
hideous groans and cries of wounded and dying men, the doleful lamentations of
your wives and children, the groves of pikes that stood ready to charge you,
the showers of lead that fell round about you, the terror of a devouring fire
on all hands of you, and before you, and behind you presented nothing but
horror, death and ruin, to your distracted and amazed senses; I believe then
there were few hearts amongst you so Atheistical, as not to power out
seemingly zealous petitions for succor and deliverance. But when the storm
was over, the siege raised, and you freed from sense and fear of your fore-past
danger, I dare appeal to all your bosoms, whether the praises, and thanks of
the best among you, did not fall very short of the petitions, that you powered
out in your extremity, whether they were not fewer, colder, duller, more
liveles, and heartles.

And thus have I done with the Confirmation of the point, upon which, if any
think I have stood overlong, because it is undeniable clear and evident, I
shall desire them to consider, that in Practical points; Reasons have the
nature, and force of Motives, and are used, not so much to prove a thing unto
the Judgment, as to press it upon the heart and conscience.

The Uses shall be either of Information, or Exhortation.

First, Information, and that touching. 1. the subject. 2, the opposite of
praise, and thanksgiving.

First, Touching the subject of praise, and thanksgiving, and it shall be that
of the Psalmist Psalm. 33.1. Praise is comely for the upright. Which words are
to be taken exclusively, Praise is only comely for the upright. And the reason
of it is held out in the point we have now handled. Thankfulness is an
excellent grace, praise, and thanksgiving an excellent duty, and therefore it
only becomes the Saints that are in the earth, unto whom the Epithet of
excellent is appropriated. Psalm. 16.3. It has a sutablenesse unto them, and
therefore beseemes them best. Tacitus speaking of certain words of Tiberius,
says they were, praeclara verba, sed non pro Tiberio, very excellent words,
but not suteing with Tiberius. The like may we say of words of thanksgiving
uttered by ungodly men. They are very good, and excellent in themselves, but
very much unbefitting them For as Theophylact upon Luke the 4. Non est speciosa
Laus in ore peccatoris. Praise is not seemly or comely in the mouth of a
sinner. Prove. 17.7. Excellent speech, or the lip of excellency, says Solomon,
becomes not a fool, that is, a sinner. It is like beauty in a woman without
discretion, a Jewel of gold in a Swines snout. Prove. 11.22. And the reason of
it is that which Tacitus gave of his dislike of other words of Tiberius. Nec
enim adhanc formam caeterasunt; his other words, and actions are not of the
same stamp, but of a far different strain. His other words are vain, idle,
unsavory words of blasphemy against God, words of calumny against his
brethren. As Iam. 3.10.
James says. Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing, and cursing; the
incongruence of which we have verse. 11. Does a fountain send forth at the
same place, sweet water, and bitter. And then for his actions they are also as
unsuteable unto the language of praise; for they sound forth Gods dispraise,
and dishonor in a louder accent then his lips his praise. Lingua benedicit;
sed vita maledicit. Canticum novum and vet us homo male concordant, says
Augustine on Psalm. 149. A new song sounds very ill-favouredly, loses much of
its grace, and relish from the old man's mouth, Cantet canticum novum qui nova
est creatura, qui novam praestat obedientiam, let him sing a new song that is a
new creature that performs new obedience, that leads a new life.

The second use of Information concerns the opposite, or contrary of
thanksgiving, Unthankfulness. Contrariorum contraria est consequentia, of
contraries there be contrary inferences: so, then from the excellency of
thanksgiving, we may conclude the baseness, vileness, and unworthiness of
unthankfulness. And in discovery hereof We shall run, so far, as we can,
a method parallel unto that we have used in the proof of the excellency of
thanksgiving. We shall prove it to be a base, vile, and unworthy vice from
its Subject, Comprehensivenesse, causes, from the operation which it bears unto
all sorts or kinds of goodness, unto virtue, pleasure and profit.

First, the subjects in which reigning and unmortified unthankfulnes is seated,
are Devils, damned Spirits, wicked and unregenerate men. For all other
creatures yield unto God such praise as their low natures are capable of, Psalm
19.1. The Heavens declare the glory of God. The beasts of the field shall
honor me, says God, Isai. 4^.20. the Dragons and the Owls, etc.
Unthankfulnes then does wonderfully debase us; it unmans us, throws us who are
by nature but a little lower then the Angels, beneath the very beasts that
perish: it ranks us with Devils, damned Spirits, and graceless men.

Secondly, you may conclude the baseness of unthankfulnes from the
Comprehensiveness thereof. It is the Epitome of all vices. Omnia dixeris si
ingratum dixeris. Abernethy.
It is a comprehensive and original sin which lies at the root of all other
sins, and therefore In quolibet peccato est materialis ingratitudo ad Deum, in
quantum scilicet facit homo aliquid quod potest ad ingratitudinem pertinere.
Formaliter' autem ingratitudo est (...) quando actualiter beneficium
contemnetur. 2a 2ae. q. 107. art. ^2.
Aquinas affirms, that there is a kind of material ingratitude in every
finne we commit. In all our sins there is a spice of unthankfulnes. Gods
mercies are over all his works, Psalm 145.9. they reach over the whole world;
and unthankfulnes, as if it studied to keep in some sort a proportionable pace
unto Gods goodness, overspreads the lesser world, our whole natures. The
unthankful man's understanding is ignorance, his memory forgetfulness, his will
and affections disregardfull of Gods blessings, his tongue silent in the
recounting of them, his whole man backward in making requital for them: nay,
of so diffusive and spreading a nature is it, as that it runs out into our very
ornaments and excrements, our apparel and hair. Neither stoppes it here, but
is extended further, even unto all blessings whatsoever, that are without us;
for it makes them all isntrumental of Gods dishonor, it does as it were
muster them up to do God disservice, and even fight against him and his.

Thirdly, the vileness of un hankfulnes may be inferred from the baseness of
its causes, the reign and mortification of sin in general, and in
particular: 1. Hardness of Heart. 2. Ignorance. 3. Unbelief. 4. Want of the
love of God. 5. Pride. 6. Envy. 7. Covetousness.


First then the reign and unmortification of sin in general, is a cause of
unthankfulness, and that because it makes us fail in the observation, and in
the valuation of blessings.

First, in the observation of them; for it carries the soul downward, and will
not suffer it so much as to look upward unto God the Author of every mercy, and
therefore the unmortified sinner has not many of his mercies, so much as a
glimpse of the light of Gods countenance: your sins, lusts and corruptions,
if they be not mortified, will hinder from a right apprehension of the mercy
which we this day celebrate, they will fix your thoughts upon the deliverance
it self, and will eclipse that hand which wrought it, they will be as a mist
to cloud those beams of providence which met therein.

Secondly, unmortified lusts disable for a due estimation of mercies.

First, because they sever from God, from the sight, and enjoyment of him,
without whom what is the raising of your siege, the deliverance of your Town,
but a cipher: if God be not chiefly prized in mercies, our valuation of them is
gross and unspirituall.

Secondly, unmortified lusts unsweeten imbitter the greatest mercies, they put
a thorn and a curse into them. As unto a palate prepossessed with bitterness,
the daintiest viands taste bitter: so a soul that is filled with the ground of
bitterness, and vexation of sin, meets with nothing but vanity and vexation of
spirit in the sweetest blessings. As a green wound smarts though touched with
the soft^st lawn: so an ulcerous and sinful soul is grieved and discontented
at, and therefore unthankful for the most tender mercies. Unmortified sinners
never knew the right use of mercies, victories, and deliverances, never felt
that solid comfort which they yield when sanctisied by the Word and prayer,
when one meets with God in them. For they are unto them as snares, which work
for the worst unto them, which occasion in them nothing but pride, security,
presumption, and hardness of heart; and therefore it is impossible, that
whilst they remain in that estate, they should value them as they ought: and
consequently be thankful for them.

The influence that the reign and unmortification of sin has upon
unthankfulness, will the better appear, if we consider the several
denominations thereof. It is an estate of death in sin, an estate of bondage
and slavery unto sin.

First, an estate of death in sin, Ephesians. 2.1. and to use the words of the
Psalmist, Psalm 115.17. The dead praise not the Lord: their praises are as all
other works that go before repentance, or conversion, Heb 6.1. A dead work,
that has only the picture and form of thankfulness. Power the ho^test and
strongest waters into a^dead man, make t^* greatest fires about him, cloth him
with the costliest robes, anoint him with the most precious ointments, he feels
it not, thanks you not. Just so it fares with one dead in sins and trespasses,
notwithstanding the extreme warmth of Gods blessings within him, without him,
above him, beneath him, on every hand of him, though he be clothed with, and
made up of them, though he feed, nay tread on them, yet he is not truly
sensible of them, and cannot by them (until God enliven his soul) be possibly
quickened unto any due, and acceptable performance of the duty of thankesgiving
in the least degree and measure. Without spiritual life then, you see you do
but fill up a room, you can bear no part in the inward and spiritual part of
the duty of the day; and in regard of that which you outwardly contribute unto
the work, why, you are but as dull and livelesse images, which cannot move
naturally of themselves, all your motion herein is but compulsary, from outward
respects, not flowing from any true inward inclination.

Secondly, the reign and unmortification of sin, is an estate of slavery and
bondage unto sin. Rom 6.16. and therefore inconsistent with thankfulness,
which is of so excellent a nature, as that it never lodged in any, but free,
brave, and ingenuous bosoms. As for base, low, and servile spirits, they are
unacquainted with, and incapable of it. No man can serve two Masters, Matthew.
6.24. Now thankesgiving is an immediate and special service of God, and
therefore unperformable by the servants of sin, and Satan. Consider the
excellency and difficulty of the duty, and then tell me whether or no we can
possibly perform it without enlarged hearts, hearts freed from the commands of
sin, and Satan. What can a prisoner do that is laden with Irons and fetters?
Alas then, what can an imprisoned and fettered soul do in this most great and
difficult work of a Christian. And thus have you seen how the reign and
unmortification of sin, causes unthankfulness. Now there cannot be a baser
and viler estate or condition, then that of the reign of sin, for it is a
deprivation of the best of blessings spiritual, and a subjection unto the
worst of tyrants, a slavery and bondage unto the worst of masters, sin and
Satan. Unthankfulness then proceeding therefrom, cannot but be most vile,
base, and unworthy.

In the next place, let us specify those particular sins which cause
unthankfulnes. The first I shall mention, shall be hardness of heart: An hard
and stony heart (whilst such) cannot possiby be softened or melted into a
grateful disposition by the greatest sunshine of Gods most tender mercies.
Rain you know will seldom stay upon a stone, at least it will not sink into a
stone: even so Gods mercies cannot fasten on the observation, settle in the
memory of an hard and stony soul; they slide away from it, as water from a
stone. However, they can make no more impression on its affections, then a
Seal on wax whilst hard: they cannot soak or sink into its joy, love and
admiration. Hardness of heart begets unthankfulnes, and an hard heart is of a
very base temper, it is an untractable, unteachable, unsensible, unslexable
heart, and therefore so is an unthankful heart too.

Secondly, Ignorance is a cause of unthankfulnes: ignorance of our selves, of
God, of his blessings. He that is ignorant of his own weakness, and unworthines;
that knows not how unable he is either to procure, or deserve mercies, he that
is ignorant of Gods providence, that knows not what stroke it has in the
managery of these inferior things, can reach no further then the Pharise^^
thanksgiving, Luke 18.11, 12, 14. which indeed was nothing, but a boasting, and
cracking of mercies. He that is not studied in the excellency, and sweetness of
blessings will quickly undervalue them; and therefore be unthankful for them.
Darkness and dimnes in the eyes of our mind in discerning blessings, will be
fellowed with a dumbnes of the tongue, and a deadnes of the heart, and
affections in praising God for them, Deutr. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the
Lord, o foolish people and unwise? It is folly, and unwisedome that makes a
people to requite the Lord unthankfully. Now ignorance wonderfully debaseth the
mind of man. Proverb. 19. verse. 2. that the soul b^e without knowledge is not
good; it renders a man brutish Psalm* 92.6. A brutish man knows not, neither
does a fool understand this. Psalm. 32.9. Be not as the horse, or as the mule
which have no understanding. To have no understanding is to be as a horse and
the mule.

Thirdly, Unbelief is a cause of unthankfulnes; for it stays and rests upon a
man's self and the creature, and so stops all honor and glory from going to God
and Christ. Now unbelief is of all sins the most dangerous, because it is the
edge and sting of all other sins, that which shackles the guilt of all sins
upon the conscience. Dr. Edward Reynolds treat. page 496.
All sins are damnable in their nature and desert, but unbeleif makes them to
condemn actually in regard of the event, Joh. 3.18, 36.

Fourthly, Want of the love of God is a cause of unthankfulnes. For how can he
that does not love God above all be more desirous and studious of Gods glory
then his own good? and can there be a greater sin of omission then not to love
the supreme and infinite good?

Fifthly, Pride is a cause of unthankfulnes, Hos. 13. v. 6. Their heart was
exalted, therefore have they forgot me: and to be forgetful is to be
unthankful. 2 Chronicles. 36.25. But Hezekiah rendered not again, according to the
benefit done to him, for his heart was lifted up. This dependence of
unthankfulness upon pride, may be evinced from these two reasons.

1 The proud man underrates Gods mercies, as not answerable, or but answerable
unto his own deservings. Hence also is it, that he looks upon his afflictions,
as undeserved, and therefore, as injuries, and consequently upon deliverance
from them not as mercies, but only as a kind of restitution and satisfaction:
so that we may apply unto him that which Quintus Curtius.
Craterus informed Alexander with against Philotas. Alexander had pardoned
Philotas, and Craterus bears him in hand that Philotas will not be so
thankful for his pardon, as angry at his accusation. Quadam beneficia odimus,
meruisse mortem confiteri pudet: superest ut mallet videri injuriam accepisse,
quam vitam.

Secondly, A proud man will rob God of his honor and arrogate it unto himself.
The proud scholar will ascribe his learning unto his industry, the proud
soldier his victory unto his sword, and p^owes, the proud worldling his riches
unto his labor, and policy; he will sacrifice unto his nets, burn incense unto
his drags, as if by them his portion were made fat, and his meat plenteous,
Hab. 1.16. he will say in his heart, my power and the might of mine hand has
gotten me this wealth. Deutr. 8.17. now pride is reckoned up Prove. 6.16, 17.
amongst the principal objects of Gods hatred, and abomination, Psalm. 101.5.
Him that has an high look and a proud heart will I not suffer, or I cannot
suffer, (as Ainsworth, and others read it) the word suffer is but supplied by
the translation, as being to be understood, in the original it is only. Him that
has an high look, and a proud heart I will not, or I cannot Dr. Donue.
Gods abrupt breaking off his speech denotes the very hight of his indignation
against an high look, and a proud heart. 1 Pet. 5. v. 5. God resist^th the
proud. Pride puts God upon a defensive war it being an invasion of, and an
assault upon his Throne, and usurpation of his crown, and the incommunicable
prerogative thereof.

Another cause of unthankfulness is envy, then which there can hardly be a
greater violation of the charity we owe to our neighbor: it is a fretfull,
sullen, dogged, and snarling vice, rottenness unto the bones says Solomon,
Prove. 14 30. And this base and unworthy sin does always produce ingratitude.
The envious man undervalueth all that he has, because he supposes it to be
short of what others have. He that has an evil eye, a repyning heart, because
God is good to others slights Gods goodness to himself, and repays it with
nothing, but discontent, and murmuring; Non potest a^tem quisquam invidere and
gratias agere quia invidere querentis and maesti est, grarias agere gaudentis.
Senec. de Benef. lib. 3. c. 3. Omnibus his vehementius and importunius malum
est invidia quae nos inquietat, dum compara^. Hoc mihi praestitit, sed illi
plus, sed illi maturius. Id. de Benef. lib. 2. c. 27, 28.
which are extremely contrary unto that joy contentation, and complacency in
blessings which are essential unto thanksgiving.

The last cause of unthankfulnes which I will make mention of respects these out
ward things, and it is covetousnes, or greedines of our desires after them;
which is in Paul's censure Idolatry, Col^s. 3.5. and in the account of all
ingenuous men the most sordid of vices. It arises from supposals, and hopes of
more good, then it finds in the enjoyment of them. When we have outclimed our
most boundless d^sires, like Ixion, we do but embrace a cloud, instead of our
desired Juno, grasp a shadow instead of that solid comfort, and content which
we promised unto our selves: and this deceiving of our expectations makes us
loath those things which before we so eagerly desired and pursued. 2 Samuel 13.2,
15. at least it abateth much of our valuation of them, and consequently of our
thankfulness for them. Non patitur aviditas quenquam esse gratum, nun; uam cuim
improbae spei quod datur satis est. Eo majora capimus quo majora venerunt:
multoque concitatior est avarit^a in magnarum opum congestu collocata. Vt
flammae infinito acr^or vis est, quo ex majore incendi^ emicuit. Aeque ambitio
non patitur quenquam in (...) mensura honorum conquiesccre quae quondam ejus
fuit impudens votum. Nemoagit de tribunatu gratias; sed queritur quod non est
ad Praeturam usque perductus: nec haec grata est si decst consulaetus; ne his
quidem satiat s^unus est. Vltra se cupiditas porrigit and felicitatem suam non
^ntelligit: qu^a non undo venerit respicit, sed quo tendat. Senec. de Benef.
lib. 2. c.27, 28. Praeter hanc causam aliae quoque sun^ quae nob^^ m^rit^ non
nunquam maxima velam. Prima omnium as potissima quod n^vis semper cupiditatibus
occupati, non quid habeamus sed quid petamus inspicimus. Non in id quod est sed
quod appetitur intenti. Quicquid enim domi est, vile est. Sequitur autem ut ubi
quod acceperds leve novorum cupiditas fecit, author quoque, orum non sit in
pretio* Id. de Benes. lib. 3. c. 3. Cuduca memoria est future imminentium. Id.
ibid.
Besides this inordinatenes of our desires makes us in a sullen neglect, and
discontent overlook and underprize the many blessings which we have for the
want of one which we crave and long after.

I^stly, I shall show the baseness of unthankfulness from the opposition which
it bears unto all sorts, or kinds of goodness, unto Virtue, Pleasure, and
Profit.

First, from the opposition it bears unto an honest, or virtuous good; This we
have employed in the interrogation of Moses, D^u^r. 32.6. concerning the
ingratitude of Israel. Do ye thus requite the Lord? for it amounts unto a
sharp reprehension, and may he thus expressed. Are ye not ashamed thus to
requite the Lord? Nay it may denote a deep admiration at the greatness of their
sin. Do ye thus requite the Lord, that is. Is it possible that you should be
so base and vile to make so bad, and unworthy a return unto God for his
favors? But in the remainder of the verse, we have their unthankfulnes
aggravated from the folly and injustice of it. First from the folly of it; do
ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise? are ye so foolish and
unwise, thus to requite him upon whose mere will and pleasure depends all your
good and happiness? Secondly, from the injustice of it: do ye thus requite the
Lord? is not he thy Father, that has bought thee, has he not made thee, and
established thee? The sweet name, and relation of a Father made good by the
mercies of Creation, Preservation and redemption, challenge and deserve a
better requital. The wonderful obliquitie and deformity of this sin, is set
forth very Rhetorically in the Prophet Isaiah cap. 1. verse. 2, 3, 4. Where,
first, God declares wherein the unthankfulnes of Judah and Jerusal^^ did
stand. First, they were peccant in requital of mercies. I have nourished and
brought up children, and they rebelled against me, verse. 2. Secondly, they
failed in the observation of mer^ies, verse. 3. The Ox knows his owner and the
Ass his masters crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not consider.
In the 4 verse, we have Gods censure of them for their unthankfulness. He
censured them to be a sinful Nation, a People laden with iniquity, a seed of
evil doers, children that are corrupters, to have forsaken the Lord, to have
provoked the holy One of Israel unto anger, to have gone away backward. In the
third verse, you have a comparative censure of them for this their
unthankfulnes: It renders them worse then the Ox or Ass. And lastly, which is
the greatest amplification that can be of its heynousnes; he brings in God
speaking after the manner of men, as if he were affected with wonder and grief
at their ingratitude. First, with wonder and amazement. Hear O heavens and
give ear O earth. verse 2. God stands as if he were amazed that they should
dare to commit so high and heynou^ a crime* and for it he arra^^ns them* not
before men or angels, but (to * note the horror of the vice) before the
senseless creatures, the heaven and the earth, that all the corners, and
creatures of the world may both know and detest it. Lastly, verse. 4. he makes
as if God were grieved and troubled at it, it draws a sigh from him; ah,
sinful nation, etc.

To discover the heynousnesse of this sin, we will take a view of its both
Formal and Causal Obliquity, that which is found in it self, and that which it
causes in other sins.

First, it we consider it formally in it self, the obliquity of it is very
great: for it is a transgression against Religion, Justice, Charity and
Fidelity.

First, against Religion. To give thanks and praises, is to honor and glorify
God, Psalm. 50.23. and therefore by the rule of contraries, unthankfulnes
dishonours God. Hence Paul couples the no^-glorifying of God with
unthankfulness. They glorysied him not as God, neither were thankful: and
indeed it goes about to rob God of the glory of almost all his attributes,
especially of that darling attribute of his mercy: in the dispensation and
manifestation of which he especially delights. M^c. 6.18, whose effects are
over all the works of his other attributes which are equally infinite and
glorious in himself.

Religion can hardly be violated by any thing more then by Idolatry. Heresy,
Apostasy, and all these are found in unthankfulness unto God.

First, Idolatry for the unthankful attribute mercies unto either themselves
or their fellow creatures, and this in scripture language is a sacrificing unto
their net, a burning of incense unto their drag. Hab. 1.16.

Secondly, Heresy, and one of the grossest of Heresies Pelagianisme.
Whereupon, Prosper entitled his Poems against the Pelagians, Contra ingratos,
against the unthankful, thereby intimating, not only that the Pelagians were
unthankful, but also that unthankful persons were all in some respect
Pelagians because as Pelagians they magnified nature, self, their own deserts,
and holiness and debased Gods free grace and goodness.

Thirdly, Apostasy, God in Isaiah cap. 1. v. 2, 3. accuses Judah of
ingratitude, and verse. 4 he censureth them for it, to be revolters and
back-sliders; They have forsaken the Lord, they have gone a way backward. God
charge the Jews, Ier. 2.5. that they were gone far from him, and he proves
the charge from their unthankfulness, verse 6. because they did not thankfully
recognize his deliverance of them out of Egypt, neither said they, where is
the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt.

Secondly, It is a transgression against justice, for it is a refusal to make
payment of that which we ow unto God as a debt; it is a withholding of that
rent and tribute, which is due unto him for his mercies. This injustice of
unthankfulness is against a principle and law of nature, deeply engraven in
the hearts of all men. The very Philistims praised their Dagon for the
deliverance of Sampson into their hands, Judge. 16 23, 24. In Jonah cap. 1.16.
you have heathenish mariners off ring a sacrifice unto the Lord, for causing a
tempest to cease. Keckerm, de Monarchia Persarum.
And as for unthankfuln^s toward men, it has been declined by the worst of
men. Even Publicans and Sinners, says our Savior; love and do good to those
who love and do good to them, Luke 6 2.33. Zenaphon relates, that it was a
crime actionable; Senec de Benef. l. 3. 6, 6.
and severely punishable amongst the Persians. And Seneca Neque absolvimus
illud, sed cum difficilis esset incertae rei aestimatio, tantum odio
damnavimus, and inter ea reliquimus, quaead vindices deso^ mittimus. de Benef^.
3. c. 6.
intimates as much concerning the Macedonians. Indeed he himself thought it
not fit that it should be impleaded, and fined with any set mulct: but it was
not out of any favorable opinion that he had thereof, neither says he,
absolve we the same; but whereas the judgment of a thing uncertain is
difficult, we have only condemned it with hatred, and left it among those
things, which we refer to the justice and judgment of the gods. The same
author has a very remarkable story of the severity of Philip of Macedon upon a
Soldier, that most ungratefully had begged the lands of one who had saved his
life, and very hospitably had entertained and relieved him, when he was
shipwrackt and cast away at Sea; Idem de benef. lib. ^. c. 27.
he was so displeased with him, that he commanded Pausania^ to brand him in the
forehead, to witness that he wasan ungrateful guest. The injustice of our
unthankfulnes is, you see, more then Heathenish, nay it is more then brutish,
Isai. 43.20 The beasts of the field shall honor me, the Dragons and the Owls,
because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert. The Storkes
do nourish and carry their Damm^s by whom they are bred, and fed. God has
nourished us, and brought us up as children, and yet we have rebelled against
him. Isai. 1.2. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib, but
we (like Israel) do not know, do not consider, verse 3. Famous is the story
of Androdus whom the Lion saved for pulling the stub out of his foot. God has
pulled the sting of sin out of our souls, and what coldness or remissness of
love, and zeal for him, and his love, have we answered it with? When Sabinus
by the command of Tiberius was put to death, his Dog expressed a very grateful
respect unto him, he lay down by his dead body, brought to his mouth the
bread that was given him: and when he was cast into Tyber, the violence of the
waves deterred him not from doing his last office unto his Master; for he
leaped after him, to keep him up that he might not sink to the bottom. This
poor beast hazarded his life for his master, which may very well put us unto
the blush, who are very loath to venture any thing for the glory, cause, and
Church of God, and Christ. Not only death, but the least threats and frowns
of great men, the reproaches of the vilest, and most contemptible of men,
startle us from not only the performance, but also profession of those
respects which Gods benefits challenge at our hands.

Thirdly, it is a transgression against Charity, a violation of that love we
owe unto God. First, of the love of union, and desire, Amor non nisi donum
amantis in amatum. Guliel. Paris. de legibus, cap. 19.
For by that we give our selves unto the person or thing which is beloved; and
the unthankful man detaineth himself from God and Christ, and yields himself
up unto his lusts and corruptions. Secondly, it is a violation of the love of
Complacency, or delight; because it hinders that joy and delight in the gifts
of God, and in God the giver, which they and he deserve. Lastly, it is a
violation of the love of Benevolence, which is defined by Dr Amore
benevolentiae est affectus quo nos totos Deo tradimus, and volumus, atque
conamur ut omnia ipsi deferantur quae pertinent ad ejus gloria^. Apoc. 4.10.11.
1 Cor. 10.31. Medul. theol. li.^.c.7. These. 13.
Ames out of the Schoolmen, to be an affection whereby we yield or resign up
our whole selves unto God, whereby we will and endeavor that all things be
given or carried unto him, which appertain unto his glory.

Lastly, it is a transgression against Fidelity, a breach of the covenant that
has been sealed between God and us in our Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord. For that is a Covenant, as I have showed already, as of mercy on Gods
part, so of gratitude on our part. Our unthankfulnes then is in Gods account a
double sin, not only a deviation from his Law, but also an infringement of
our own voluntary covenant and engagement, and therefore accompanied with
falsehood, and a kind of perjury unto heaven.

And this of the formal obliquity of unthankfulness, which receives much
aggravation from the persons in whom it is their quality, the causes which they
have for, and the means which they have of thankfulness. The unthankfulnes of
men is of a deeper guilt then that of Devils, because men are unthankful for
the patience and long-suffering of God, for the blood of Jesus Christ, mercies
never vouchsafed to Devil^. The Dico ego vobis, quoniam pro meo sapere, nihil
ita displicet Deo, praesertim in filiis gratiae, in hominibus conversionis
quemadmodum ingratitudo. Bern. de misericordiis, Sermon. 2.
unthankfulnes of Gods people is of a greater demerit then that of aliens. In
that charge of ingratitude upon Israel, Hos. 2.8 She did not know that I gave
her corn, and wine, and oil, and multiplied her gold, and silver, etc.
Interpreters observe, that the word She is emphaticall, and serves much to
aggravate the sin, that She, unto whom God had committed his Oracles, given
his love, sent his Prophets, should bereave him of the honor of his benefits,
was an offense by far more heinous, then if it had been done by the Heathen,
who had only the light of Nature, and the Book of the Creatures for their
instruction.

A word next of the causall obliquity of unthankfulness, that which it causes
in other sins, and that both as a physical or working, and as a moral or
meritorious cause.

First, it has a Physical influence in the increase of sin: for it disposes
and prepares the mind of man, for even the most unnatural sins; a soul
profaned and polluted therewith, will not scruple at the height of mischief.
The despising of the riches of Gods goodness, Romans 2.4.
and forbearance, and long-suffering, is in the fifth verse followed Erunt
homicidae, tyranni, fures, adulteri, raptores, sacrilegi, proditores. infra
ista omnia ingratus est, nisi quod omnia ista ab i^grato animo sunt, fine quo
vix ullum magnum facinus accrevit. Sen. de Benef. lib. 1. c. 10.
with hardness and an impenitent heart. In all times (says Seneca) there will
be Murderers, Tyrants, Thieves, Adulterers, Robbers, Sacrilegious persons, and
Traitors, and the least of all these is the ungrateful man. He speaks of
ingratitude toward man, but then he puts in an exception, Nisi quod omnia ista
ab ingrato animo sunt, sine quo vix ullum magnum facinus accrevit, except it be
that all these come from ingratitude, without which scarce any evil enterprise
has been plotted, or performed. Though he thought ingratitude to be absolutely
inferior unto those horrible vices, yet he thought again, that in this
respect, so far forth as it was their cause and seminary, it was superior
unto them all.

The ground of this influence of unthankfulnes upon other sins, is its
nature. For a main part of it is an undervaluation of mercies, which are of all
others the most kindly, and powerful, both motives unto duty, and disswasives
from sin.

Is it any wonder that they should run into all excess of sin, who trample
under their feet the most precious mercies of God, who despise the riches of
his goodness, forbearance, and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of
God leads them to repentance, as for past sins, so to caution and resolution
against future sins.

Secondly, unthankfulnes has a moral and meritorious influence upon the
increase of sin by aggravating, and ripening other sins.

First, it aggravates other sins, and makes them more sinful then otherwise
they would be. What more frequent with the holy Ghost in the aggravation of any
sin, then to insist upon this consideration, that it is accompanied with
unthankfulnes? Deuteronomy. 32.5, 6, 7, etc. 2 Samuel 12.8, 9. Mich. 6.3, 4, 5. A
greater measure of unthankfulnes makes the estate of an Apostate more dangerous
and desperate then of a simple alien, or unbeleever. And what but it, Matthew. 11.
will make it at the day of judgment more tolerable for Tire and Sydon: for
the land of Sodom, then for Corazin, Bethsaida, Capernaum, Cities honored with
the presence, preaching, and miracles of Christ. Their lives were in all
probability as bad, if not worse then these, and therefore why should their
account, and punishment be lighter, but because the mercies they enjoyed were
much less, and so answerably their unthankfulness.

Secondly, because it aggravates other sins, hightens their guilt and
demerit, therefore it ripens them, and makes them arive more speedily unto a
fullness, then otherwise they would. It makes them like Summer fruits, which
are the first ripe fruits, Amos 8.1, 2. The sins of Israel and Judah were
sooner ripe then those of the Amorites, and the reason was, because the
blessings of Israel were more precious, Psalm 147.19, 20. and therefore their
unthankfulnes more heinous. Why does judgment begin first at the House, the
Church of God, 1 Pet. 4 17. but because their sins are more aggravated from,
and ripened by unthankfulnes, then the sins of others, as being under, and
against greater mercies then are granted unto the rest of mankind.

Secondly, unthankfulnes carries opposition unto the second sort, or kind of
goodness, Pleasure or delight. Spiritual joy, you have heard, is a cause of
thankesgiving, and by the same reason the sorrow or sadness of the world, 2.
Cor. 7.10. is a cause of unthankfulnes, nay joy is an ingredient or part of
thankesgiving. Psalm 33.1. and therefore want of joy belongs formally unto
unthankfulnes. Ignorant persons are always unthankful: for ignorance, as I
have showed at large, is a cause of unthankfulnes. Now ignorance is in
Scripture compared unto darkness, which usually figureth a sad and uncomfortable
state or condition. The unthankful person walks in darkness, and has no
light, that is, no solid joy, peace, or comfort, Isai. 50.10. Well he may have
a sensual, or carnal joy, begotten by the natural effects of outward
blessings; but that alas, is but a false and deceitful joy, full of vanity and
emptiness; and because joined with a guilty and trembling conscience, full
also of vexation of spirit, Gataker.
well it may like a little counterfeit complexion, alter the look, and smooth
the face outwardly, but it can never thoroughly fill, or truly cheer up the
soul inwardly.

Finally, unthankfulness bears opposition unto a profitable good, as being a
very dangerous evil, and the danger of it will appear from the terrible
threatenings against, and dreadful punishments of unthankfulness which are
recorded in Scripture, Jer. 13.16. Give glory to the Lord your God, before he
cause darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the mountains, and while ye
look for light, he turn it into the shadow of death. Capernaum by mercies
exalted unto heaven, was by unthankfulnes brought down to hell, Mat. 11.23.
Because the Gentiles glorified not God, neither were thankful, God gave them
up to vile affections, unnatural lusts, and a reprobate mind, Romans 1.21, etc.
Were they for their ingratitude given over to such horrible uncleanness, O
then to what hardness of heart, and searednes or cauterizednes of conscience
shall we be left unto for ours? Were the sons of Nature thus punished for
being unthankful but for the light of nature, what severity then may we expect
who pretending our selves to be the sons of grace, are unthankful for the
glorious light of the Gospel? Part of the Argument which Paul uses to prove,
that in the last days perilous times, shall come, is because men shall be
unthankful, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2. Unthankfulnes makes the times perilous. Now the
ground or reason of this rigor toward ingratitude is, because God will some
way or other be glorified by us: for his glory is the supreme end of all that
we are, and have, and therefore if we do not glorify him actively by our
thanks and praises, we shall glorify him passively by our sufferings, we
shall contribute to his glory, if not with our songs here on earth, with
howling, weeping and gnashing of teeth in hell.

But I shall make a more full and particular proof of the peril of
unthankfulnes, from the threatenings and punishments of all the several parts
thereof. Secondly, by instancing in such punishments as relate unto mercies, to
wit, removal of, or a curse upon mercies already enjoyed: and thirdly, a
withholding of such as are desired and expected.

First from the threatenings against; and punishments of all the several parts,
or degrees of unthankfulnes. First, the not observing of mercies, Psalm 28.5.
Isai. 5.12, 13. Secondly, the ascribing them unto our selves, or receiving and
countenancing others ascribing them unto us. Herod was smitten by the Angel of
the Lord, and eaten of worms, because he gave not God the glory of the
eloquence for which the people magnified, and even deified him. Acts 12.23.
Thirdly, the forgetfulness of mercies, or of God their donor, 1. Sam. 12.9.
Psalm 106.21, 22, 23. Ier. 2.6, 7, 8, 9. Hos. 13.6, 7, 8. Forgetfulness of
benefits is so borrid a sin, as that for it the Lamb of God becomes as a Lion,
as a Leopard, as a Bear than is bereaved of her Whelps. God our merciful
Father becomes a wrathful and revengefull Judge, our Creator and preserver
falls to rending of the caul of our hearts, to devouring and tearing of us.
Fourthly, the under-valuation of mercies, 1 Samuel 2.30. They that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed: and whosoever despises the gifts of God, despises
the love and good will of God the giver. Romans 2.4, 5. He that despises the
riches of Gods goodness, forbearance, and long-suffering, treasureth up unto
himself wrath against the day of wrath. Psalm 106.24, 26, 27. Because Israel
despised the pleasant land of Canaan, therefore God lifted up his hand against
them to overthrow them in the wilderness, etc. Lastly, a nonrequitall, or an
ill requital of benefits. First, a non-requitall, 2 Chronicles. 32.25. Hezekiah
rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him: for his heart was
lifted up, therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem. If
public persons do not make retribution unto God for his mercies, it draws
down from heaven not only personal, but also national plagues. The Fig Tree
that bears not fruit, does but cumber the ground, and therefore is to be cut
down, Luke 13.7. The slothful and unprofitable servant that did hide his
talent in the earth, that did not improve and employ his gifts and mercies for
the praise of God, was to be cast out into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 25.30. Secondly, an ill requital of
blessings, Prove. 17.13. Whosoever rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart
from his house. Whosoever rewards evil for good to man, much more to God. In
the words we have a double extent of the punishment of rendering evil for good.
One in regard of time how long it shall last: it shall not only light or seize
upon him, and his Family, but it shall never depart from his house. Another
extent of the punishment is, in regard of the object, how far it shall reach;
not to his own person only, but to his whole House and Family. Evil shall not
depart from his House. The earth which drinks in the rain that comes often
upon it, the heart that is plentifully watered from heaven with rain, as of
Ordinances, so of mercies, and brings not forth herbs meet for them by whom
it is dressed, brings not forth fruits of welldoing, fruits worthy of
repentance, but bears thorns, and briars, is fruitful in nothing, but lusts
and corruptions, such an heart is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end
is to be burned, Hebr. 6.7, 8. Ezra 9.13, 14.

Secondly, the danger of unthankfulnes may be proved by instancing in such
punishments thereof, as relate unto mercies, to wit, first, a Removal of, or
secondly a curse upon mercies already enjoyed, and thirdly, a withholding of
such as are desired, or expected.

First, God punishes unthankfulnes by removal of mercies already enjoyed. In
Exodus 14.21. we read of a strong East wind that dried up the red Sea in a
night. Unto which I conceive Bernard did allude, when he said, Sermon. 51. super
Cant.
Ingratitudo est ventus urens, and siccans sibi fontem pietatis, rorem
misericordiae, fluenta gratiae: Ingratitude is a wind that burns and dryes up
the fountain of piety, dew of mercies, and streams of grace. The Rivers if
they did not disburden themselves into the Sea, the chief mother of all
waters, would soon grow dry; and so should we be quickly empty of all mercies
and comforts, if we do not empty our souls in the praises of Gods goodness,
whence as from an infinite Ocean, all our mercies, and comforts flow. The
slothful servant had his Talent taken from him, because out of an unthankful
neglect, he buried it, and did not use and improve it for the glory of God, and
good of his Church. Matthew. 25.24. etc. From him that has not shall be taken
away even that which he has, verse 29. that is, Gods gifts shall be taken
away from him, that does not thankfully and diligently employ them. Rivet,
Downham upon the place.
Hos 4.7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me: therefore will I
change their glory into shame. Where we have the unthankfulnes of the Priests
of Israel, and Gods punishment thereof.

First, their unthankfulnes, as they were increased, to wit, in the outward
blessings of this life, honors, riches, so they sinned against me: that is, by
so much the more they sinned against me; the more I multiplied my blessings
upon them, the more they multiplied their sins against me.

Secondly, Gods punishment of this their unthankfulnes, Therefore will I change
their glory into shame, that is, I will take away those blessing, wherein they
glory, or, I will take away that glory wherein they increased, and thereby
expose them to shame and reproach. But the fullest and plainest place that we
have for this is, Hos. 2.8, 9. Where Israel is by God accused of
unthankfulness, and for it threatened with deprivation of those mercies for
which she was unthankful.

First, she is charged with unthankfulnes, as failing in three parts of
thanksgiving, Observation, Confession, Retribution, Zanchy, Pareus, Rivet,
Downham, Burrows. in loc.
first she did not observe Gods mercies at least as his gifts, she did not know
that I gave her Corn and Wine, and Oil, and multiplied her Silver and Gold, v.
8. Secondly, she was so far from confessing God to be the author of them, as
that she ascribed them unto her Idols, as the bestowers of them. My lovers give
me my Bread, and my Water, my Wool, and my Flax, my Oil and my Drink, v, 5.
secondly, unto her self as the deserver of them v. 12. these are my rewards
that my lovers, mine Idols have given me for my worship and service of them.

Lastly, she was so short of requital, as that she abused Gods mercies against
him, unto the extreme dishonor of him: she misimployed them about the worship
of an abominable Idol, multiplied her silver and gold, which they prepared for
Baal; that is, either to sacrifice unto him, or to make him off, or to deck and
adorn him with. In the nineth verse, God threatens Israel to bereave her of
those mercies, for which she was thus unthankful. Therefore will I return and
take away my Corn in the time thereof, and my Wine in the season thereof; and
will recover my Wool and my Flax given to cover her nakedness. In which words,
this severe handling of them for their unthankfulness is amplified and
justified. First, amplified by, first a comparison of it, with Gods former
dispensations unto them. Secondly, from the unexpectedness thereof. First, by
a comparison of it with Gods former dispensations unto them, which is
insinuated in the word translated: I will return, to wit, into a way of
judgment, I will take a new course with her. First, I dealt with her in a way
of severity, and then upon her seeming and flattering repentance or
humiliation, I betook my self to a way of mercy: but her unthankfulness will
drive me into a way of judgment again: therefore I will return.
Unthankfulness alters the manner of Gods dealing with his people: puts him out
of his sweet and loving ways of mercy into the severe, sharp, and sower ways
of judgment, and punishment. Secondly, from the unexpectednes of it. I will
take away my Corn in the time thereof, my Wine in the season thereof; that is,
my Corn in the time of harvest, my Wine in the time of Vintage, as if he should
have said, I will take away their mercies (for Corn and Wine by a synechdoche
stand for all other mercies) when in regard of natural, and second causes they
make full, and certain account of enjoying them most. Unthankfulnes will strip
us of mercyes, when we are confident of having them. It will take away our Corn
at the harvest, our Wine at the vintage: it will sink a ship in the harbor, it
will cast us into straights in the fullness of our sufficiency. Job 20.22. It
will raise War when we think our peace firm, and unshakeable: it will snatch
victory out of our hands when we deem an overthrow impossible. Jer. 37.10. it
will shipwreck a Church or State, when it even touches the shore of peace and
safety: it will drive us back into the wilderness, when we are in sight of
Canaan.

Of this severity of God toward Israel we have next a justification taken from
the in ustice of her unthankfulness, and that is signified

First, by the pronounce, My. My Corn, my Wine, my Wool, my, Flax. From this we
may infer. That God had an absolute supreme and sovereign property in their
mercies, which by their unthankfulnes they defrauded him of, and divided
between themselves and their Idols. This also may be gathered from the two
first Verbs of the text rendered in our translation, I will return, and take
away. For the former of them by an usual Hebraisme, as Tremelius, and after
him Rivet conjecture, has the nature, and force of the Adverb again, so that
both Verbs may be expressed in one. I will resume, or receive, take again into
mine hands my Corn, and Wine, etc. As if he should have said, I will claim or
challenge as mine own those mercies which you have denied to have received of
me, which you have abused against me. When God takes away mercies from the
unthankful, it is but a real claiming, a chalenging or resuming of his own
right. But most clearly may the injustice of unthankfulness be concluded from
the word here rendered, Recover, which signifies with strong hand to pluck away
from one that which he injustly possesses. When God takes away mercies from
the unthankful, he does but recover them as out of the hands of usurpers.

For first, unthankfulness is a kind of spiritual theft, because that
wherein it principally consists, attribution of blessings unto either our
selves or others, is a most injust invasion or intrusion upon, and usurpation
of that which is solely Gods right. However then the unthankful may have a just
title unto the creatures, and blessings they enjoy, and so be true and lawful
owners of them: they are yet usurpers of, and intruders upon the praise,
honor, and glory of them.

Secondly, unthankfulnes makes a forfeiture of mercies, as being a deny all of
that fealty and homage, and withholding of that rent which Gods expects from
them. Justly then may God deal with the unthankful, as Landlords in the like
case with their tenants, make an entry upon their mercies and quite dispose of
them.

Thirdly, however we cannot say absolutely, that the unthankful are usurpers
of, and intruders upon the creatures, and mercies which they enjoy as having no
right unto them: Yet we may say it comparatively, in comparison of that higher
title, which the thankful have in Chrst Jesus: they have not such a sanctified
renewed and comfortable estate in them as they. And this only was meant in
those expressions of the Waldenses, Wickliffe and John Husse, which the Papists
of old charged with heresy. And thus also the learned Rivet qualifieth and
allayeth a seeming rigid expression of Peter Mowlin in his Anatomy of
Arminanisme, which Corvinus accuses as treasonable and destructive of
propriety; and thus also might the Papists interpret, if they had but common
and ordinary candor; What Gerson, Conradus and some of the Sorbonists have
written concerning that which they call Dominium gratificum. But now if we
translate this Verb as Hierons and others do, I will free and set at liberty
my Wool and my Flax, etc. so it has reference to prisoners and bondslaves;
and from it we may gather, that there is in unthankfulness a kind of
injustice, and cruelty toward the good creatures and mercies of God: by it
they are imprisoned, and manacled in a kind of bondage, to be delivered from
which they do, as it were groan and cry.

By what has been said in opening of this place of scripture, you have at
large seen how justly God may take away mercies from the unthankful. Why, it
is but a receiving, a resuming, a challenging and claiming of his own, a
recovery of his right, a making of an entry upon that which is by ingratitude
forfeited, a deliverance of the imprisoned, and abused mercies of God into a
kind of freedom. That is applyable unto ingratitude, which is by some
reported of Pyrrhus and Hanibal, that they knew how to conquer, but had no
skill to keep, use, and improve their conquests. Unthankfulnes will dash the
most hopeful beginnings of deliverance and reformation: it will throw away in
an instant that which a people have a long time most valiantly fought for with
men, and most zealously wrestled for in prayer unto God. The deliverance which
we this day celebtate, cost you many bitter tears, many fervent prayers, much
precious blood, for it you have hazarded all that under the Sun was dear
unto you. But now your unthankfulness will be a grave unto all those mercies
and comforts, which you reap by virtue of this deliverance: it will make your
last state worse then your first; it will make your preservation to be but a
reservation of you to a more calamitous condition, then that which you feared
in the time of your greatest danger and extremity; it will reduce you to such
an estate as the Saguntine Ambassadors said they were in after the recovery of
their Town, T. Livius.
Ad hoc retracti ex distantibus locis in sedem antiquam videbamur, ut iterum
periremus, and alterum excidium patriae videremus. We seemed to be brought
home from the places of our exile, for no other purpose, but to be ruined a
second time, and to behold another funeral and desolation of our Town and
Country.

Secondly, unthankfulness brings a curse, poison, and pollution upon all our
mercies, Carpenter Geogr. lib. 2. p. 162.
it rots and putrifieth them, makes them like the waters of a Pond, or standing
Poole, which having no intercourse with the Sea, nor supply from springs, as it
is by the heat of the Sun exhausting it out by Vapors either extraordinarily
diminished or altogether dried up; so howsoever it is corrupted and grows
stinking and unsavory. God will not loose the honor of his benefits that he
bestows upon us, but will some way or other beglorified by them.

If we do not glorify his mercy, whilst he bestows them as blessings, he
will glorify his justice by altering their nature, and turning them into
curses, Mal. 2.2. If ye will not lay it to heart to give glory to my name,
says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a curse upon you, and will curse
your blessings; yea, I have cursed them already because you do not lay it to
heart. Mercies received with thanksgiving are sanctified, 1 Timothy 4.45.
therefore by the rule of contraries, mercies received with unthankful hearts
are unsanctified, and accursed unto us; and what that is, you may gather from
that I have delivered concerning the sanctification of mercies.

First, Then mercies are a curse unto us, when they are disabled from ye ding
forth their natural effects; when the Land does not yield her increase,
neither the Trees of the Land their fruit, Levit. 26.20, 26. when the Floor,
and the Wine Press cannot feed us. Hos. 9.2. Hos. 4.10. When as Job speaks, we
be in straits, in the fullness of our sufficiency, Job 20.22. When we Sow much
and bring in little, when we eat and have not enough, when we drink but are
not filled with drink, cloth us but are not warm, earn wages to put it into a
bagg with holes. Hagg. 1. verse. 6.

Secondly, Mercies that are unsanctified and accursed unto us proceed but from
a common and ordinary ground, the general providence of God which makes the
Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and sends rain on the just and
unjust, Matt. 5.45. They come but from the patience and forbearance of God,
like the Diet, Lodgings, and other accommodations which are indulged unto a
condemned prisoner until execution, nay sometimes they are given in wrath, as
Quayles and a King were to Israel, Numb. 11. v. 33. Hos. 13. v. 11. to fatten
against the day of slaughter, and render the more inexcusable.

Thirdly, mercies are unsanctified, and accursed unto us, when they reach but
natural effects, when they advance us not as much as one step or degree
toward heaven, toward union and communion with the God of heaven, when they
make no spiritual discoveries of him, nor provoke unto any obedience unto him,
when they promote not our sanctification, and spiritual consolation: but
rather work effects quite contrary, increase of sin, and vexation of Spirit.
Tully tells us out of Pliny, that in a certain Country drought stirs up
dirt, and rain dust. Not to dispute the truth of the relation; give me leave to
apply it to my purpose. Unthankfulness has made the mercies of God to bring
forth in us effects as unsuitable to their nature, as moisture to drought, and
dust to rain. It has made the Gospel the savor of death unto death: it makes
mercies to have such an influence upon us, as the shining of the Sun on clay,
and on a dunghill, it begets hardness of heart, and raises up the noisome
steem, and exhalations of stinking lusts, it makes our table to become a snare
before us, and that which should have been for our welfare, to become a trap,
Psalm 69.22. It corrupts our riches, and makes them as thorns to pierce us
thorough with many sorrows, it poysoneth our honors and dignities, and makes
them swell and break us with pride and ambition, it sowreth and imbittereth all
our pleasures, and makes them as uncomfortable and as undelightsome, as the
music of a Trumpet at an Assize unto a condemned prisoner.

Thirdly, unthankfulnes withholds mercies desired, and expected. Gratiarum
cessat decursus, ubi recursus non fuerit. The course of Gods favors cease,
where there is not a return of them by our gratitude. Nibil ae^ne concordiam
humani generis dissociat, ac distrahit, quam hoc vitium.
Nothing (says Seneca) so much dissolveth and breaks off men's friendship, as
this vice of ingratitude: and why may we not apply to it that which is
assirmed, Isai. 59.2, Of all iniquities and sins whatsoever; that they
separate between God and us, and hide his face from us, that he will not
hear. Unthankfulnes interrupts, though not Gods love of intention, which is
unchangeable, yet his love of execution, as also his love of complacency, or
delight, it is a bar, or obstacle unto the effects and flowings of Gods
bounty; it does as it were close Gods eyes, shut his hands against our wants,
and stop his cares against our cries and prayers. And indeed with what face can
an unthankful wretch beg new favors of God, who has neglected, forgotten,
slighted, and most miserably perverted and abused old ones? Unto Et forte hoc
etiam clementia esse videtur ingratis negare quod postulant: necontingat nobis
ut tanto gravius de ingratitudine judicemur quanto magis accumulatis beneficiis
ingrati probabimur extitisse. Ergo mi scri^ordiae res est, in hac p^rte
subtrahere miscricordiam. Bernard. contra pessimum vitium ingratitudiuis. 495.
D.
Bernard it seems a piece of clemency to deny the requests of the ungrateful,
lest they should be so much the more heavily and rigorously censured, and
judged for unthankfulnes by how much the more they shall be proved to be
unthankful for the accumulation of benefits. To withdraw mercy in this respect
will be a kind of mercy, it will be a favor to withold favors, which will
aggravate unthankfulness, and increase condemnation. We Huic ingrate qui
beneficiorum fraudator est, and in hanc partem procubnit animo, non magis dabit
beneficiton, quam decoctori pecumiam credit aut depositum committit ei qui iam
pluribus abxegavit. Sen. de Benef. lib. 4. c. 26:
will not lend or trust our money unto Bankrupts, nor leave a pledge in their
hands who have denied others of what they have deposited with them. And may not
God then in equity detain desired mercies from the unthankful who have
defrauded and robbed him of the honor of all former mercies? Semina in solum
effetum and sterilo non spargimus. Id. ibid. l. 1. c. 1. Agricolae quidem
scmina arcnis non committunt. Lib. 4. c, 9.
The husbandman will not sow his corn in the sands, nor in barren or
unfruitful ground: and will God, think you, Nunquam non perit quod datur
ingrato. 148. Omnino enim sola nos a profectu conversationis impedit
ingratitudo nostra dum quodammodo amissum reputans dator quod ingratus accepit,
cavet sibi de caetero ne tauto plura amittcret quanto plura conferret ingrato.
Ibid. 406.
cast, or throw away his mercies upon unthankful hearts, from whom he never
had so much as the least crop or harvest of thanks? Ingenuous men will be
ashamed to take up new wares and commodities of Tradesmen, before they have
cleared their books, and paid all former scores: and gracious hearts blush to
petition God for new favors, without premising thankfulness for the old, and
promising thankfulness for the new.

First, without premising thankfulness for the old. Jacobs petition for
deliverance from his brother Esau, Genesis 32.11. is ushered in with a
commemoration of Gos former bounty, verses 9, 10. David in Psalm 40. first
makes mention of his thankfulness, verse 10. and then falls to praying from
the eleventh verse to the end of the Psalm. You have the Church most
affectionatly and ravishingly praising God for the initials of her deliverance
from Babyl^n, Psalm. 126 1, 2, 3. before she prays for the perfection and
consummation thereof, verse. 4. And this also was Paul's method in his prayers
for those unto whom he wrote, Col. 1.3. 1 Thessalonians. 3.9, 10.

Secondly, without promising thankfulness for the new. not to lay an obligation
of merit upon God by the duty, but only to impose upon themselves a tie or
obligation for performance of the duty. In every petition, says Doctor In omni
petitione vel express vel implicit promittitur gratiaru^ actio, de illo
beneficio quod petitur. Medul. Theol. lib. 2. c. 9. These. 92.
Ames, giving of thanks for the benefit that is petitioned for, is promised
either expressly or implicitly, and the Scripture abounds in instances of
joining in prayers express promises of thankfulness. Psalm 51.14. Psalm.
61.7, 8. Psalm. 79.11, 12, 13. Psalm. 86.11, 12. Hos. 14.2. And thus you see,
that as Paul advises, Phil. 4.6, the requests of the Saints have been made
known unto God by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving: their petitions
have been seasoned with thankfulness; with thankfulness in performance for
blessings received, with thankfulness in purpose, and promise for such as are
expected and desired Luther. Arrowsmith.
Prayer without praise is as a Censer without burning coals, from which there
can no sweet savor ascend. Oration sine laud est thuribulum sine prunis. The.
Good* win in his Return of prayers.
Prayer and thanks are like the double motion of the lungs, the air that is
sucked in by prayer, is breathed forth again by thanks.

The second sort of Uses shall be of exhortation. And upon the excellency of
praise and thankesgiving, we may ground a double exhortation: one, unto a
performance of it; the other unto an observation of a due manner in performance
thereof.

1. We may from consideration of the excellency of praise and thankesgiving, be
exhorted unto a performance of the duty. Whatsoever things are true (says the
Apostle) whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever
things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.
Phi. 4.8 Now all the goodly Epithites, or attributions, do in a most eminent
manner agree unto thankesgiving. It is true, and just, made up of truth and
justice as its parts, say both Keckerman* Ursinus*
Philosophers and Divines. It is honest, pure, and lovely, and of good report,
and therefore me thinks we should have our hearts wonderfully inflamed with
the love, and stirred up unto the practice of it.

I shall use no new motives to press this exhortation, but only refer you to
what I have delivered in consirmation of the point: by which it is evident,
that it is not only a gracious, but also a graceful, comely, and fair
endowment; that beautifieth, and becomes a Christian. Psalm. 33.1. What can
more forcibly provoke and persuade unto this duty, then Gods gracious account
of it, his vouchsafing to esteem himself honored, blessed, magnified, and
glorified by the weak pray ses of our polluted hearts, and lips. Who will not
be excited to a duty that is appropriated unto so glorious a subject, as the
church and people of God, that is the privilege of the Saints, though the duty
of all mankind, that respects so gracious, and beneficiall^ an object as the
incomprehensible mercies of God, so glorious, and admirable an object as the
infinite perfections of God. The wonderful difficulty of it should no ways
defer, or discourage from it, because it arises from excess of its perfection
from the vast extent, and comprehensivenesse thereof. for if we consider it
formally, it takes in, as you have heard, many duties, and if we look upon it
by way of Concomitancy, so it takes in all duties whatsoever belonging to the
first, and second table. So that we may say of it as the Preacher of the fear
of God did. Eccles. 12, 13. This is the whole duty of man. Tully said of
gratitude unto man, that it is Maxima, and matter omnium reliquarum virtutum.
And if we except faith, we may affirm as much of gratitude unto God. If we
are taken with an high descent, and original of things, why, thankfulness is
the product of the noblest, and most divine of graces. But can there be a
stronger proof of its excellency, and more prevaling motive unto the love, and
practice of it, then Gods gracious acceptance of it; wonderful, complacency
in it, and extreme jealousy for it! shall not we have a very high esteem of
that, then which there is nothing dearer unto our God? It is (you have heard)
as music to his ear, as sweet wine to his taste, as a rich, and precious
perfume to his nostrils. Can we then withhold it from him, and yet pretend,
that we bear any love, and respect unto him, and profess that we are his
servants, and subjects? It is the great end of the greatest and most glorious
of his works and mercies; and shall we by our unthankfulness attempt to
frustrate or disappoint God of this his end. shall we stop, and withhold from
God, that which has been the principal scope of the sweet influences of his
goodness upon us. Are you affected with virtue, pleasure, or profit? why, all
these kinds of goodness as you have heard at large, are most eminently
applyable unto the grace of thankfulness, and duty of thanksgiving. If you
enter into a comparison of it with other graces, and duties, you shall find it
to be in diverse respects unmatchable for of all graces, and duties it comes
fullest, closest, and nearest up unto the highest end, Gods glory: and besides
it is more durable, then other graces, whose exercise, and proper acts are of
use only in this life, but after we are translated from death unto life
thanksgiving will be our eternal exercise in heaven. And therefore let us
redeem as much time as we can, for the performance of it, here upon earth. You
have seen how the prayer of petition compared therewith is over balanced
thereby in regard of necessity, comfort and dignity. And hence David the sweet
singer of Israel, upon whom the spirit of prayer, and supplication was powered
in a most abundant measure, did yet it seems more abound in the prayer of
thanksgiving, then in that of petition. For, we read of his praying but thrice
a day. Psalm. 55.17. Evening, and mourning, and at noone will I pray and cry
aloud: but he makes mention of praising God seven times a day. Psalm. 119.164.
As also in the very depth of the night. At midnight will I rise to give thanks
unto thee. Psalm. 119.62. To conclude this use, this duty will be a great part
of our happiness in heaven, and therefore it is but sit, that it should be a
chief part of our business here upon earth, it is now the music of Heaven of
the blessed Angels, and glorified spirits, with whom if we be not in consort
now, we may justly fear, everlasting separation from them hereafter. The
state of grace is an ^incohation of the state of glory, and therefore we can
have no ground to assure our selves that we shall praise God everlastingly in
heaven, unless here on earth our hearts be put in tune, and we study, and
learn the song of Moses, and the Lamb.

Secondly from the excellency of praise, and thanksgiving we may be exhorted
to observe a due manner in the performance thereof to perform it Preparedly,
Reverently, Zealously, and Entirely.

First, Preparedly. So excellent divine, and glorious a duty calls for the
utmost preparation, that is possible of our understandings, wills, and
affections; and accordingly the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 65.1. Praise wayteth
for thee O God in Sion, that is, all true members of the Church, of which Sion
was a type, have their hearts in tune in a readiness, and due frame for this
work. In Psalm. 57.7, 8. and Psalm. 108.1, 2. We have David making a profession
of his both habitual, and actual preparation for it. First, he professes how
he was habitually fitted and prepared for it, verse. 7. My heart is fixed, or
prepared, O God, my heart is fixed, or prepared: I will sing and give praise,
The ingemination of this profession of his preparation for praise, denotes
either the absolute and great necessity of it, or else his wonderful
exactness in it. In verse. 8. he betakes himself unto an actual preparation
for it, he awakeneth and rouzeth up all that within, or without him, may
contribute unto the work. Awake up my glory, awake Psaltery and Harp, I my
self will awake early. If the alacrity of the sweet Singer of Israel must be
thus awakened to give praise unto God; O then what rowzing and stirring up does
not backwardness and dullness stand in need of? In that exhortation of Paul,
Coloss. 4.2. to watch in prayer with thankesgiving; the watchfulness there
required, is referred to thankesgiving as well as prayer. To fit us for both
prayer and thankesgiving, we must have both our heads and our hearts wakefull,
they are both duties of such near and intimate communion with God, as that
they are not to be come unto with drowsy and sleepy souls. Thankesgiving is
a kind of Heavenly and Angelical worship, and therefore should not be
appreached with earthly hearts. In it (to aply that speech of Moses, Exodus
3.5.) we turn aside to see a great sight, Gods greatness and goodness; and
therefore put off thy shoes from thy feet, all low, earthly and sensual
affections: So a The new Annotations.
some allegorize the phrase, because the shoo^s being next the earth, are
usually more foul and dirty.

Secondly, so excellent and divine a duty is to be performed reverently, God is
fearful in praises, Exodus 15.11. therefore his praises are to be celebrated
with an awful fear, and religious reverence, and accordingly Junius and
Tremellius render the words, Reverendus landibus, to be reverenced or feared in
prayies. And that God is to be reverenced or feared in his praises, is plain,
first, because joy, a main ingredient of our praises, is to be with trembling,
Psalm. 2.11. Secondly, because the object of our praises, mercy and goodness,
should affect us with a filial fear. Psalm. 130.4. Jer. 33 9.

Thirdly, so heavenly and glorious a duty is to be performed zealously and
devoutly, and not perfunctorily or slightly to be slubber'd over. Psalm. 66.2.
Sing forth the honor of his name, make his praise glorious, says the
Psalmist. In the original it is, Put glory to his praise: it is (says
Mollerus) as if he should have said, Be not dull, sluggish, or drowsy in the
celebration of Gods benefits, do not content your selves with ordinary praises,
let them be in as glorious and honorable a manner as it is possible, according
unto the utmost of your powers, with all your hearts, souls, strength and
might. Hither also may you refer those places wherein it is said, that God is
greatly to be praised, Psa. 48.1. Psa. 109.30. Psa. 145.3. There is an
extensive and an intensive greatness, and both must be found in our praises of
God. First, an intensive greatness in regard of their number, we must be
frequent and plentiful in the duty, we must (to use the expression of David)
Psa. 145.7. abundantly utter the memory of Gods great goodness. Secondly, there
must be an intensive greatness in our praises, in regard of the degree, fervor
and heat of them. They must be high, and vehement, fervent, flaming zealous,
and affectionate, full of life and vigour', our Spirits must be raised, our
hearts and tongues enlarged in the performance of this duty. Gods glorious
name, as it is Nehem. 9.5, is exalted above all blessing and praise, above our
devoutest and most zealous praises; and therefore surely, faint, heartlesse,
and livelesse praises, are so far from reaching him, as that they may seem to
be meant of another of a lower object. God then is not praised at al, if he be
not greatly praised. Weak and dull praises are dispraises: for a person or
thing is not honored or praised, unless there be some proportion between the
honor and praise, and the worthiness of the person or thing honored and
praised. Honor (says Aquinas, and we may say the same of praise) is nothing
else but a testimony of the excellency of a person or thing. Now when a
testimony is so far from being home, and full, as that it does not in any sort
reach that for which it is brought, there must be either a falsehood or a
nullity in it. It were strange then, if cold, unzealous, and unfervent praises
should bear witness unto the infinite greatness of God. Hence it is that you
shall find in Psalm 108. that after David had professed a purpose of praising
God, v. 1, 2, 3. he tells you next the proportion that is between the
attributes which he praises in God, and his praise of him. The greatness of the
attributes, Mercy and Truth, we have v. 4. Thy Mercy is great above the
heavens, and thy Truth reaeheth unto the clouds: And there is an answerable
greatness in his praises of God for them, verse. 5. Be thou exalted, O God, above
the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth. He wishes and endeavors to
exalt him as high in his praises as he is in himself, to exalt him above the
earth, above the heaven, and the clouds. In peace offerings for thanksgiving,
levened bread was to be offered, Levit. 7.13. now the property of leven is to
raise the meal, so then the requiring of it might be to signify, that in
thanksgiving our hearts are to he raised and elevated above the pitch of nature
by spiritual, holy and heavenly affections; and because it is not possible
that our hearts should be lifted up in so high a manner, as the nature and
number of Gods mercies merit, we must supply what is wanting with an holy and
devout stupor and admiration. That place in Psalm 65.1. rendered by our
Translators, Praise waits for thee, o God, in Syon, is in the original,
Praise is silent, or, silence unto thee, to wit, out of wonder at the
incomprehensiblenes of thy goodness, it is this that strikes them dumb with
admiration, as being beyond all not only expressions, but also apprehensions.

Lastly, if thanksgiving be so excellent a duty, let it be performed by us
entirely, wholly, and fully, and not blemished with the omissions of any of its
parts; which are five; Observation, Confession, Remembrance, Valuation,
Retribution; let all these have a place in this your day of thanksgiving, and
not so much as one of them left out. For would it not be pity, that so noble,
and worthy a work, should be maimed, and defective, should want any thing
that makes unto its integrity, and fullness?

First, then, Observe narrowly and inquisitively the mercy, for the public
acknowledgement whereof we hold this Assembly, take a steady and curious view
of all particular circumstances, and passages in the Seige, that had any thing
either of mercy, or marvel in them; that so you may digest them into matter
of praise, and thanksgiving. And let not your observation dwell, and stay upon
an arm of flesh. The prudence, and resolution of your worthy Governor, the
golden mettle of your Soldiers, and Townsmen, the care and speed, that was
used by the valiant instruments of your relief: but let it go higher, so high
as heaven. Observe the mercy, and the hand, the wisdom, power, and providence
of God therein. Besides, as he who drew the picture of Antigonus, painted only
one side of his face, and not the other, which was blemished with the want of
an eye: so do you as it were overlook all miseries and losses, that you
sustained by the siege, the burning of a great part of your town and goods; the
slaughter of many of your dearest friends and neighbors; and chiefly fix your
thoughts upon the many and great mercies that you owe to your deliverance; The
preservation of your own lives, of the most considerable part of the town, of
most of your goods, and many of your friends: For all these will serve to
heighten and increase the flame of your thanksgiving; and therefore the
consideration of them should be more permanent, and make a deeper impression
upon your hearts, then the thoughts of any thing that might dampe you joy and
lame your praises.

2 Next do not stifle and imprison these thoughts in your hearts, but vent
them unto others by a full publication, and confession of what God has herein
done for so undeserving a people, thereby the better to quicken your selves,
and stir up others to a zealous performance of the duty.

3 And thirdly, Lest your joy and thanks for so a great a preservation should
in time cool and languish, do you frequently and affectionately reflect upon
it, that so it may never be buried in a grave of Oblivion. Master Burrows
relates of the City of Berne, that they wrote the day of their deliverance from
Antichrist, upon pillars with letters of gold. But I shall exhort you to a way
of preserving the memorial of your deliverance that shall be less chargable,
but more acceptable unto God; Let it be written in your memories with a pen of
iron, and with the point of a Diamond, let it be graven upon the table of your
hearts.

Fourthly, Detract nothing from the value and importance of your deliverance,
but look upon it as a prevention of your utter ruin and desolation: as a
resurrection from the bottom of danger and doubt, if not despair. For, who of
you but gave all for lost? If you will but look back upon your own fears,
perplexities and misgivings of mind, they will inform: That if the Lord had
not been on your side, when men rose up against you, when their wrath was
kindled against you, a red Sea of blood and fire had overwhelmed you, had gone
over your souls. If you consider the progress that the enemy had made in
winning of your Town; how he had entered your Line, fired several Streets, etc.
you cannot, me thinks, but have such an esteem of your preservation, as Christ
had of the Restoration of Jerusalem, Zach. 3.2. Is not this a brand plucked
out of the fire? Florus speaking of the horrible devastation which the people
of Rome made of the Country of the Samnites, thus expresses it, It a ruinas
ipsas urbium diruit, ut hodie Samnium in ipso Samnio requiratur. And if you
call to mind the bloody and barbarous threats, that your adversaries night and
day thundered in your ears, they will give you a full and undoubted assurance,
that if they had prevailed, the expression would have bin too too appliable
unto this place; they would have so ruined the very ruins thereof, as that in
but the succeeding age, a man might have looked for Taunton in Taunton, and not
have found it.

Fifthly and lastly, Be you studiously inquisitive, as David, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall we render unto the Lord for so great and seasonaeble a benefit? Why,
let all your aims and purposes reach as high as Heaven; Let Gods glory
overbalance all other ends; Let all selfish respects stoop thereunto. Do not
think much to part with your lives, much less with you lusts: the diseases and
corruptions of your Souls and Lives, for a God that has been so graciously
merciful to you and yours: Let the meditation of this deliverance inflame your
zeal for Gods cause, enlarge your bowels and affection to his Church and
People, improve and increase your care of obedience, and endeavors of
mortification, stir you up to devote and dedicate all that you have and are to
his service and glory.

FINIS.

