CHRIST And His SAINTS, Spending their time together Day and Night: OR, Christ
and his Saints.

1. Walking together in the Fields, by Day. 2. Lodging in the Villages, by
Night. 3. Early-Rising together for the heavenly Vineyards every Morning.
Being the substance of sundry Sermons upon Cant. 7.11, 12.

By Christopber Jelinger, Minister of the Gospel at South-Brent in Devon.

Printed for Edward Brewster, at the sign of the Crane in Pauls-Churchyard.
1656.

To the Right Worship-the MAjOR, and to his Brethren; and to all the
Inhabitants of the town of Plimpton, together with the rest of my loving
hearers of the Gentry, and others who dwell in the adjacent Country. Grace be
unto you, and peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
IT was meet that these Sermons should first come to your public view, being
dedicated to you, because they were first preached among you.

But I hope you do not think that the sole hearing, or reading of them, will
bring your souls to heaven.

Heaven must be taken by violence, For the Kingdom of Heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. And therefore you must
offer an holy violence to your own natures, every one of you, must Isa. 64
stir up your selves, and lay hold on God himself, must labor hard with your
selves, and with the God of heaven, and force heaven.

Heaven has a new title, Mat* 7 14.
and straight gate; for straight is the gate which leads to life, and therefore
you must strive to enter. Be as wise as Serpents, says Christ, Mat. 10.16.

Serpents will go to a rock, and creep into the narrow clefts or holes of it,
to strip off their old skins, when they are old, that they may become young
again; let your wisdoms match theirs, and let Christ, with his strictness,
which is the straight gate of heaven, be your rock, and do you thereat
exercise your selves, strip your selves, and force your selves to become new,
laboring hard to put off the old man, and to put on the new man, which is
created after God, in true holiness and righteousness, that so doing you may
com to heaven.

I beseech you mark what I say, this you must do by faith in Christ; for
without him you can do nothing, John 15.5.

Without him you cannot come off from your houses of clay and sin, to walk with
him over the fields of Contemplation, there to meditate. Without him you cannot
forego your old lodgings of sinful and sensual delights, to go with him over
his pleasant villages, there to lodge: without him you cannot leav your beds of
ease, and rest, to break your beloved sleep, and to rise early enough to get
with him to his heavenly vineyards, there to rest.

It is said, that when Christ had preached much to his lest beloved disciples
of watching, he closed up his lecture at last with this most seasonable
Scripture, And what I say unto you, I say to all, watch, Mark 13.37.

So I, having spoken much of striving to you, ny dearly beloved Auditors, I
wind up and finish my discourse in like manner, saying, And what I write unto
you I write unto all, Strive.

That is, strive to deny your selves, and to overcom sleep: strive to stir up
your selves and to vanquish sloth: strive to conquer your selves, and to have
more sweet communion with Christ himself. strive to walk more with him, to lodge
more with him, to rise more with him, that when you have been dead and buried,
you may be gloriously raised again by him out of your graves at the last day;
and being raised by him, rest and reign with him, and walk with him arm in
arm, together with all the holy Angels, and all the truly worthy that ever
lived, being lifted up to the highest perfection of bliss, endless peace, and
blessed immortality, to be enjoied to all eternity. So prays

Your faithful friend and humble servant in Christ, Christopher Jelinger.

TEXT.
Canticles. 7.11, 12. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the Field, let us
lodge in the Villages: let us go early to the Vineyards.


WHen I look upon a Towns life, first, and then upon that which we live in the
Country, I conclude that Towns, and Townes-men, are more happy, because they
live an easier life, and are not so pe^^ered with a world of businesses and
Country work, as men are in the Country; but when I reflect back upon my Te^^,
I begin to b^ck in my thoughts, and am in a straight betwixt two, as not
knowing whether a Town or City be happier then the country, or the Country
happyer then either, because I see by it how much a devout soul desires to be
in it, by saying to Jesus Christ, Come my beloved, let us walk into the field,
etc. And my final determination is this, that neither Townsmen nor Countrymen
are or can be happy indeed, unless they have Christ with them indeed, and that
if Christ be with them, and centred among them, both are happy alike, because
Christ is near to both alike, and because as lines in a Circumference their
pious multitudes do al meet in their center Christ, being all alike for Christ.

Now for their sake especially who groan under country burdens I have culed out
this precious scripture that by it they may be taught what to do when they are
under a Country Pressure as namely, that they must come to Christ to have him
come along into their field, and Villages with them, that there he may dispense
his love unto them.

Yet so as that Citizens, and Townsmen are not to be secluded from them, for I
shall but ostend and show, how the Country life also, mark but also, is
capable of, and fit for the exercise of that love, which is betwixt Christ and
his espoused Saints, thereby leaving room and place for Townsmen and
Citizens, among whom Christ takes place.

The occasion of these words some do Prompt from the 6 Chapter, of this Book
Verse, 11. unto which this Text does look for there Christ is al for the
Field, for Gar^e^s, for Vinyards to see the fruit thereof, and therefore the
Church here is so too even al bent for the field too, saying, come my be loved,
let us go into the Field, etc.

Where three things are nominated, to which her gracious self the Church of
Christ I mean in her servent, and flaming love is carried.

She is for the Field.

For Villages.

For Vinyards.

Or for a Holy walk^ng with Christ by day.

Lodging with Christ by Night.

Early Rising with Christ in the Morning.

She is for the field, saying, Come my beloved, let us go into the Field; where
we have

a Compellation.

an Excitation.

My beloved or friend, For the Hebrew signifies both.

Come, let us go forth into the Field.

Come.

Let us go forth.

Into the field.

Come, the Hebrew is a word which also signifies to be at leisure, and so the
sense is, can you be at leisure.

Let us go forth, or go out, for so much also I find in original, or if she
had been immured or straightened, and shut up in a narrow compassed alluding
thereby to the narow room which the Jewish church did cover, as some would
have, it.

Into the field The Hebrew is (...) which also signifies a country Gregory
hereby understands, the world; Tomson tells, us that he alludeth to those, who
being in love are wont to go forth into the field and country, that there the
more freely they may be merry. Jun. et Termall in Loc.
others say, that her meaning is this do not reserve thy self wholly for thy
self, thinking upon that blessed day, when we shall meet in glory, but let us
join both. For I also desire to think and to confer about that blessed time
when we shall be for ever together in joy, I for my part being free to both
Mystical and litterall senses, yet shall stick to the latter most, having such
an original copy before me, which leads and carries me for and to it, yet
so, as that I shall not be unmindful of the my stical field of contemplation
into which souls do walk, who walk abroad for their Heavenly recreation.



Let us lodge in the villages.

Let us lodge, or lie by night, as the Hebrew has it, as if she should say, I
do not desire to live as I did formerly, when I slept whole nights carlesly,
nor will I be found unready at thy coming; No, I am ashamed now of my former
oscitancie, and I am now bent to spend day and night in the Jun et Tremell in
Loc.
observing of the signs of thy glorious appearing.

Or thus, let us take the night too, to solace our selves together with our
mutual society, for I desire to spend even day and night with thee, o sweet
Jesus, whom my soul so dearly loves; or thus, let us even lie together by
night, and wake to gether by night, for I do not desire to spend all the night
in sleeping. No but I desire to be up some times Tomson in Loc.
to behold by night the maker of the heaven of the Pleiades of Orion Arcturus
and of the rest of those glorious stars which so glitter by night for man's
delight or thus to contemplate that great and glorious, essence which commutes
the thickest darkest into the brightest morning, and the day into the darkest
night. Amos 5.8.

ad Cyp^es to Cypres because (...) signifies Cyperes that is certain Grapes,
which grow in Cyprus, Others take it to be a certain sort of spice called
Camphyr Cant. 1.14, but because the same word signifies S^e is^m 6.8. hebr.
villages to and agrees with lodging better I retain villages, whereby some
understand the Gregu in Loc.
gentiles, others alive souls, such as are in country villages others Theodor
in Loc.
those souls which have given up their names to Christ. Exposi t^^ 3 Patrum in
Lock.


I for my part understand first the country literally, and hearts Mystically,
that is, Christ's heart and the churches heart, in the which both do mutually
lodge.

Let us get up early to the vineyards; as if she should say, let us rise very
early and be up before the Sun is up to behold those trembling and be fore the
approaching day flying torches of Heaven, and to salute the fair and pleasant
morning carried, in its golden chariot, and that we may contemplate that vast
and admirable flame, the Sun I mean peeping forth with its yellow and golden
locks. in the canopy of Heaven, to fill the whole earth with its glorious
light, after all that darkness which covered it before by night or thus, and
then let us rise sweet Jesus, I with thee and thou with me, for I desire and
long to see thee who art my light my joy, my Sun, my Sun of righousnesse, that
Sun which lighteneth the world with its brightness, and fills the whole earth
with its warnesse, is very comfortable, but thou art much more, when as a
Bridgroome thou come forth out of heaven, and show forth the brightness of
thy face to make me glad on earth, and therefore* I do so desire to enjoy thee.

Lyra in Loc.
Theodor in Loc.
others those who have received the preaching of the Gospel, as if the Church
should say, I mean those precious souls, which together with me have obtained
the like pretions faith, and been made partakers of the like penetrating and
soule-searching Gospel-preaching; to these my very hearts desire is to go and
see them with my best beloved, says, the Church to Jesus Christ to whom she is
by the same most precious says espoused for my part I understand such too but
not only such for I take these vinyards, to be the Heavenly mansions also
filled with glorified Saints which are the vines thereof now let us gather
roses which* grow in this Scriptures garden.

1. I And observe hence. 1 Do^r.


That the country and a country-life also is capable of, and fit for the
exercise or manifestation of that love which is between Christ and his
espoused Saints for the illustration hereof these.

2. Queries will be proposed and must be resolved.



The, 2. is why it is so.

Shame, Repentance, Sorrow, Reproach, a Center, in which all these tragedies,
as lines in a circle do meet, as namely, Travel without Fruit, Sorrow without
Profit, Desire without success, Hope without Remorse, Mirth without Duration,
miseries without Remedies. Thus we speak of the Country, if Christ be not
there; but if he be, al these miseries cannot hinder the operation of that love
which is betwixt him, and his Espoused Saints; for as that tree in Exodus,
15.28. being in the waters of Meribah made them all sweet, so does he and will
make the Country Sweet, which else is as bitter as Marah was.



I Answer, Because there also is that which will.

1. Blow up the fire of love.

2. Will feed it.

1. Will blow it up, for there are roses which will mind us of that sweet Rose
of Sharon, Christ Cantic. 2.1.

And there are Trees, which will put us upon that sweet Tree of life Christ,
Revelation. 22.1.2

And there are waters which will lead us to the water of life Christ. John, 4.
And there are fruits in the earth, which will draw us to that fruit which the
Tree of life does bear in heaven. Revelation, 22. And is not all this able to
blow up the fire of love, if any be in us, when such things are represented, to
us, being so lovely so amiable and so Delicious.

2. Will feed it, for in the Country or Fields, are herbs of all sorts good,
not only for food but also for Physic, able not only to delight, but also to
maintain us and so consequently, able to maintain, to feed, to nourish our
love to Christ when in them we do still behold the divin nature the virtue the
nourishment, the mightiness the Medicinalnes which is in Christ, who is like a
garden of herbs is good for to cure al our ma ladies, for by his stripes we
are healed Esaias, 53.5.

So that in this respect also the Country is capable, and fit for the exercise
of that love which is between Christ and his espoused Saints, because all this
does nourish love showing forth that great and mighty Love, which is in Christ
whom our Souls love and who by all those very herbs does manifest to us that
mightiness of his love For what a love is it that he shows us, in that he so
decketh the green diaperie of the earth, with such a tapestry and variety of al
sorts of herbs for our, both food and Physic lo says the Apostle what manner
of love the Father has showed us, that we shall be called the sons of God.
1. John. 3.1. So we see what manner of love Christ does show in that we shall
see so much of God in all these creaturs which were made by God the first use
will be one of Raticination,

Exercises there are enough in the Country, there is Card-playing Dicing,
Dancing, Hunting, Drinking, Night-watching, but as for, the exercise of Christ's
love, O how rare is that? Secondly, For how far must a man go before he shall
see one go into the field to meditate, to pray, to talk, and to converse with
Christ. Thirdly, Christ is the great'st stranger to most, who should be their
greatest delight, and the only companion that should be desired by most, but
so it is he must be farthest off, and crowders, musicians, Drunkards, Gamsters,
Company -- keepers, Sabbath Breakers, Whore-Mongers, Harlots, jesters,
sport-makers, Rabshakes, that can revile most, must be nearest. And why my
brethren, ^an you tell if you will not, or cannot, truly it is because his
love is not in you; for did you once love Christ indeed, then you would desire
to be with him, as it is meet, you would even long as much to be with him, and
to see him as a Bride to see her Bridegroom; you would show then as much love
to his Person, as ever you did to any Person, your talk would b Heavenly, your
walks Heavenly, for such are the Exercises of those that are lovers of him,
because their delight is in him: but mark what I shall say; of you, who live in
the Country, and use no such Exercises, as are so Heavenly, when others whose,
wingy Solues Heaven do aspire, shall mount up from this Country, which is but
Earthly, into that which is Heavenly, then you whose Earthly minded Souls,
nothing but earth do desire, must descend from one Country, wherein there is
nothing but Travel and Trouble, Madness, and sadness, Tears and Fears,
Asperity and Adversity, Certain Pressure, and uncertain Pleasure, into
another, where is but Weeping and Houling, Crying, and Frying, Burning, and
Blaspheming, in a Lake, which burns With Fire and Brimstone, for ever. Verse.
21. etc.





Devout and holy Souls desire very, much to enjoy the company of Christ abroad
as well as at home even in Fields and Villages, to satisfy the longing of their
flaming love.

For the Illustration whereof, I Propose these. 3. Queries.

1. Qu. What that society of Christ is, which such a Soul does so much desire.

2. Qu. Why it desires it so.

3. Qu. Why abroad, as well as at home, etc,

To the 1. Qu. I Answer.

That it is a ^^caucie, 3 Query, Resolved.
as the Hebrew has it, or being at leisure after an holy and Heavenly manner
to walk, to converse to be with Jesus Christ.

Christ being sweetly, graciously Friendly, Familiarly, Present, with it, in
and by, his blessed sperit, all which I gather from my Text.

To the second thus.

1. Because it is most comfort able. 2 Query. Resolved.


2. Most Profitable.

1. Most comfortable, the company of a friend is so, especially if he be of a
sweet disposition Christ is so. Can. 5. the last, so in my Text, he is called,
(...), a friend, see, John. 14.18. which place does Ostend, and show, that
where Christ comes cumfort, comes joy comes, delight, comes, because he is the
Surge, the well, spring the Fountain, yea, ocean of all, consolation, so that he
must needs therefore be a most sweet and comfortable, companion.

Ephesians. 3.8. The Apostle, tells us of the unsearchable riches of Christ, and
then Verse. 9 of the fellowship of the mystery, Verse 3. Fellowship to show what
a Companion Christ is, how rich, how rare, how profitabl, which though it be a
thing hid from the World, yet cannot be hid from those whose life is hid in
Christ, Col. 3.3. For they find it so, when they walk with him so, as the
spouse here being unnailed from the World, crucified to the Flesh, embosomed in
God, imparadice, in Christ, Separated from Sinners, and Elevated to the highest
Horison, of Christ's sweetest Communion.

To the 3. 3 Query Resolved.
Query. I Answer.

1. Because the more comfortable, then

2. More profitable.

1. The more Comfortable.

The more objects, the more Aspects, that is, the more God shows himself by
objects to us, the more Comfort is felt by us, his pleasant Countenance there,
and then shining upon us, so that as a spouse, if she may but see her beloved
wheresoever she comes, comes to be the more comforted by him, so souls when
they may behold the Face of Christ, in all places abroad and athome in Fields
and Villages, must needs increase their Heavenly Solaces.

broad as well as at home: every creature which they see being a pearl in
their eyes and all creaturs together as heaps of treasures in their minds,
able to make them thrive most wonderfully, after they be applied by them
graciously again, when abroad Christ being with them, carries his riches his
merits, his righteousness his spirit with him so that they may have of him what
they will because his will is, that they should have as much as they need to
make them richer still.



This may serve as a touchstone then, whereby a man may know whether his soul
be such a devout soul yea or no. For if it be this will be his desire. Now how
do your pulses beat and what spirits are you of? is it the desire of your
souls then to enjoy Christ's sweet society? If it be O how happy are you? For
your souls are married to Christ and your Spirits therefore may rejoice in
Christ: but if not, that is, if neither at home nor abroad you do enjoy nor
desire to enjoy his blessed communion, if when you walk abroad you go without
him, taking more felicity in a mere carnal man's or woman's society, if when at
home you are even there also from home, not being with Jesus Christ who causes
us to be at home, that is, if you do neither mind him nor see him nor speak
with him or of him, but have fellowship with drunkards, and ruffans, swaggerers
and swearers, being such your selves, or else impend and spend your time in
nothing else but telling of news or tales, and lies, and calling of names,
when you should call upon Christ's name, and keep him company; if so, then I
for my part make this conclusion, to come to

A 2. you must look after all your sports, games, pastimes, fellow-
merie-meetings and idle walkings up and down in alehouses tavernes in fields
and villages to walk down to hell, when after a revolution and vi cissitude of
all your merriments you shall all be forced to obey the swinge of that wheel
not moved by intelligences but by the hand of God whereby all do rise and come
to their zenith and predestined periods. For all your lives and the whole
world do run not upon a helix that still enlarges but a circle where arriving
to their meridian they declin again and at last do fall under these horizon
again which to they all press amain so that your sitting cannot be long nor
your setting a far off, because your breath it self is but short and because
your courses which you take make it shorter and will bring you soon to your by
Gods predestined doom.

But I would not have it so if I could help it, and therefore am resolved to
persuade you, that if you would escape this doom, and make it evident to your
selves and others, that your souls are such devout souls, as are married to
Christ, you will.

1. Kindle such desires, whch are like fires.

2. Show such desires.





series of the context, and the concatenation of it with my text: first his
desire is toward me, says she, and then come, come then my brethren and
because you see this, say, Lord, I see now clearly that I cannot desire thee,
unless thy desire be first toward me, and therefore Lord where is that desire
of thine which must attract mine, O show it manifest it, let me see it, let it
be like fire to me, and let it kindle a fire in me which may never go out even
a desire to thee I humbly beseech thee.



1. Call him, when you are going abroad to go with you.

2. Take him with you.

3. Talk and walk with him when you have him.

Hos. 14.1. so come Lord Jesus, or come my beloved, let us walk into the fields.





A. Take him by the hand of faith, believing verily that he will go with you;
here steel your faith with those mighty and precious Scriptures Cant. 4 last,
Let my beloved come into my Garden, and Cant. 5.1. I am come into my garder,
which plainly shows how willing he is to go with us and to come to us, being
desired by us.

when he is come, and you have him with you.





Q. How going out?

A. Not out of this world, for that cannot be but out of the care of this
world, that is care for nothing but him when you go that you may not go from
him.

2. Keep close to him as he that walks with his companion and is still close
by the side of his companion so be you still hard by him and not far from him
who must be far from you. For in him we live we move, and have our being. Act.
17.18. Oh my brethren this keeping close to God, what a sweet thing is it it
linkes us with God it ensoules us in God it tieth us to God it will not suffer
us to disgress from the sacred Laws of God therefore let us never from him go
when we go abroad so the patriarks walk^d with God and so may we if we will but
stick close to him wa^king abroad with him.

Luke. 24.2.

Q. What shall we talk.

A. Jun, et Tremel^. in Loc.
Two that write upon this Scripture say, that that great and glorious wedding
which is Rev, 12.7
coming was here the churches lecture. For her desire was, say they, that he
and she might both confer about it, and therefore my advise and counsel is,
that when you talk with or of Christ you make that wedding especially the
subject of your talking, as thus; tell Christ how much you long to see that day
wherein those your eyes shall see him as he is Job 19.26. Your tongues fully
praise him, and your souls, being re-organized with you^ bodies highly and
eternally magnify him, when the corruptibility of that sperme, Adams I mean,
which has dilated it self into so many millions shall put on immortality, for
this corruptible must put on in corruption, 1. Cor. 15. and when our
retired-selves shall be no more as now we are, as for our selves, but rather
altogether for himself, being our selves swallowed up in life after death shall
be swallowed up in victories 1 Cor. 15.

Such let be our discourses with him; again let us tell him, how much we
desire then to be always with him, and not only to see him, as it is written,
that we shall be ever with the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 4. the last verse.

Here make a discourse upon this Scripture, as thus Lord Jesus, sweet Savior,
how do I long to enjoy that felicity? When I shall be with thee to all eternity.

The Bride that has the Bridegroom cannot possibly so much desire the company
and presence of her beloved, as I do the society of my best beloved. For the
society and presence of an earthly Husband is but for the present, but thine
for ever and therefore how do I wish for that day when I shall come to enjoy
thee so when an earthly Bride and Bridgroomes come together all that time
seems to be but short because it is so sweet, and so will that time doubtless
to me when I shall be with thee whereas all my time now seems to be too long
because I am absent from thee and therefore I do so long to enjoy thee Oh when
will it be that I shall be with thee and give my love unto thee Oh let it no the
too long too long but as soon as may be I humbly pray thee.

A. 3d. Doctrine follows which I will but name.

The gathering calling and bringing home of the blinded Gentiles to jesus
christ should be much longed after by such as themselves are in a
Church-society with Christ.

A. The 4 Doct.
Fourth Conclusion is.

That Christ's Saints have a great desire to lie and to lodge with Christ by
night.

For the jllustration hereof I shall put forth and resolve these two problemes.
Probl. 2


The 1. What it is to lie and to lodge with Christ by night

The 2. Why his Saints have such a desire to lie and to lodge with him so.

To the 1. I answer. The ^. Probl.


1. It is to have him in the region of our minds, 2. Sol.
as Cant. 1.13. betwixt our breasts that is in our thoughts as thus who died for
me? Christ who rose for me? Christ who ascended for me? Christ who is my Love
Christ.

This is the Saints sweet and gracious Symploce according to Romans 8, 34.35.

by it in the bosoms of his Saints, when by night he is made the object of it
in his Saints hence Cant. 7.11.

There, or as the Hebrw has it, Then will I give thee my love.

Cant. 2.6. His left hand is under my head; and how is that? I answer, here I
must break out into this epaheticall exolamation ah thea ocean of divine
consolation?

Oh sweetness not to be uttred? Oh delights not to be expressed! Oh pleasures
not to be paralled! For here the devout soul which lodges Christ by night
melts in the arms of Christ by night feeds on celestial dainty, is
ravished with unexpressible solaces, dissolved into unconceivable joys carried
above humane contentments elevated beyond the zenith of all momentanie
blandishments satiated with the food of Angels extatiz'd with the enjoyments of
the bread of Angels.

To the, 2.

1. The night is no man's friend and therefore it is good, say his Saints, to
have such a friend with us, as he is (so called in the Hebrew (...)) by night
for our Souls delight.

Ephesians. 5.14.

sick with his love do so defire his company by night that they may talk with
him when they cannot sleep and so they may pass away their time by night.

Psalm. 30. Weeping as for a night in Hebrew The night is called therefore Laiil
which word has a great affinity with another which signifies he has howled
and lamented which also causes the Saints so to desire Christ by night that he
may cheer them up in the night.



Saints who at not willing to miss Christ at any time and to loose so much time
do so desire to lodge with Christ by night.

7. Nights are fit for the sweetest enjoyments of Jesus Christ. For there is as
it were a divine aptness in our minds that time, which disposes it for
contemplation in a wonderful manner because there is such a silence then and a
resting time for the senses of our bodies as that we cannot be the more fit for
things of highest concernment to think upon Hence Sophcoles, (...), that is a
night ceartenly thou art for the most part a partaker of the wisdom of God,
which therefore causes the Saints so to desire to lodge with Christ by night.

I do now wheel my thoughts toward you by way of application. And.

1. This point may serve for Communication, 1 Use of Communication
as This. Then how do we spend our Nights? Nights are to be spent with Christ,
as well as days: If we be his Saints, and yet how many are there, who say,
that they are Saints, but can sleep whole Nights, and never so much as think
upon Christ, by Night, if any body will sit up with them, by Night, if any body
will sit up with them by Night and go to Cards with them, or Drink with them,
or Play the Wanton with them, who but they, but let Christ be spoken for? to
them, to be lodged by them, and to go to Bed with them, and they will as much
nauseate and loath his society, as if he were the loathsomest companion that
ever they heard of; for they have no Mind, no Heart, no Desired to that, that
is two Tedious, that they do not relish, that they do not like: No, they Sleep,
they say as well as Walk, or else they cannot hold out but, I ask; how can
you hold out then when you go to Cards, to Dice, to Dancing, to Play the
Wanton, For that I am sure you can break your sleep, but for Christ you
cannot. And why, my Brethren, Why? Shall I tell you? The reason is, because you
know what cards are, and sports are, and the lusts of the flesh are, but what
Christ is by Night you never knew since you knew a Night, Christ is, and has
been as great a stranger to you, as one whom you never saw, and therefore, a
strange thing it is, to see, how many Nights you Consume, in sleeping or doing
that which is worse, when you should spend some part of every Night in a holy
communion with Christ, which is far better. But so it is, Christ, who should
lie even all Night betwixt your breasts lies a far off in the bosoms of his
real Saints, and some wanton Dames and Carnal Companions must be near to
you, because the the love of Christ is not in you; and therefore mark what will
follow, as now you lie whole Nights upon your beds, and never mind Christ
whilst you are abed: So hereafter you must expect to lie in Hell, which will be
your bed. I say again in Hell, where there it is Night only and no day,
darkness and no Lightsomeness, and where Christ will be as great a stranger to
you, as now you are to him, when Namely that great and terrible day of the Lord
shall come, when the Sun, it self shall be turned into darkness, and the
Stars shall lose their lights when your souls shall be bound up again, with
the ligaments of your bodies reorganized with your several members, and
re-invested with their several Endowments, that both may suffer together for
ever, or thus, when as in your lest sience you must all enter to make up and to
complete the Catastroph of your whole lives, when your bad-Night-watching,
Night-dancing Night-Playing, Night-whoring, Night-forgeting of Jesus Christ,
must and will be brought upon the Stage before Christ, that you may be for all*
and at once doomed and Damned, to Hell for ever Christ being your Inexorsable
judge, whom now you might have, and enjoy as a most comfortable Friend.

2. This point may serve for Counsel then you would evidence it to the World,
and to your selves that you are Christ's Saints. Let at be your desire to lodge
and Lie with Jesus Christ by Night.

Here take these. 1. Directives, 2. Incentives. 3. Directives, as.






2. You must so resolved as, Gant. 1.13. He shall Lie all Night betwixt my
breasts so let every one of us say likewise. And so he shall lie betwixt my breast
this night and every night and al nights nor will I ever go any more to bed
without him or take myrest without him for he is mychief yea only rest because
he only can give me rest.

2. Your desires must be really followed as thus.









1. Your hearts must be opened, for they must be like Villages which are open,
and there fore as David Psalm. 24. at the last Verse, Stand open ye Everlasting
Doors, that the King of Glory may Come in.

For some men's hearts are like that silly flower in the Judies, which opens
it self against the sun seting: and closes it self, against the sun rising:
For so they open themselves against the evil motions of the Devil, which like
the Night* And shut themselves against the motions of Christ, and that is the
reason, why all this while, Christ never lodged with them one Night, because
they closed their bodies against Christ, as not being willing to be troubled
with Christ, like some men, who shut their Doors, by Night, against all
comers, because they will not be troubled in their sleep, but do you not so
dally with Christ, if you mean to lodge, and to lie with Christ.

Que. Can I open my Heart.

Ans. I know thou can not: Acts. 16. so he will open thine.

Malachi. 1. the last uers And therefore looks far a large room, and for
great enlargements.

Que. What shall I do to have my heart Enlarged?

Ans. Consider what a companion Christ is by Night, namely the sweetest that
you can have, or choose: For his mouth is all sweetness the Hebrew has it Cant.
5. The last Verse.

eyes, were you to Lodge but a Knight: You would, make clean your Houses, and
should not you, much more, make clean your hearts, when you are to lodge, the
King, of Kings, in your hearts: O Christians, what are ever, you do, see, that
your hearts, be clean therefore? Oh, let no Pride, no, Lust: no Malice: no
Covetousness: no Naughtiness: lodge there, and for that purpose, pray that,
God will give you faith, in Christ. For that will purify your hearts, that
they may be fit lodgings for Christ. Acts. 18.7.

Pet. 3.

as here, come my beloved, let us lodge in the Villages: That is, in thy heart,
and thou in mine, or as, Cant. 4, the last. Let my beloved, come into my
Garden, so let my beloved, come into my bed, and Lodge with me, all this Night:
or thus into thy hands, I do my self, commit; Sweet Savior,: which Heaven
do Inhabit? O lodge; O Lie, now all this Night, between Breasts my, for my
delight,

Nights are terrable, when the Arrows flee, of that wicked one: whom none can
se; Watch thou therefore, when I do Sleep, and at my temples sentrie keep.



Ephesians. 4.22.

his Night-cloathes, so let us put on ours, that is, Holy and Heavenly thoughts
of Jesus Christ, as these, let a man's meditations be thus: I am now going to
lie, and to lodge with the Holiest, and Faitest, of all men, as he is called;
Ps. 45. And therefore, Oh, what manner of person, ought I to be, in all manner
of Godliness and holy Conversation. 1. Pet. 3.

1. Our Graves, and Death. 2. Our End: His Love. 3. Our future Rest. 4. His
Absence. 5. Embraces. 6. Darkness.




My bed, me think is an Emblem, of my Grave: For as here I Lie. Down in my
bed: So I must lie down in my Grave: But here lies my comfort, that my Savior
has, by his lying in his Grave, Perfumed mine: Which makes me, to Triumph upon
Death, saying, O Death, where is thy Sting, O Grave where is thy, Victory. 1.
Cor. 15.5.

Cane. 7.11.
give thee my love; O God, my King, my life, my love, my joy: Which I do, so
long, so desire, so thirst, to Enjoy; Oh, Sweet Savior, where is thy love, Oh,
Now, now, Give me thy love, as I am ready to give thee mine; Mine is but weak,
and therefore, I beg thine, which is stronger then mine, and and can make it as
strong as Death: that I may love thee unto Death, Oh give it me, and do not
keep it from me, I humbly pray thee.

Oh, how sweet was but now my sleep, my rest, my repose with thee, this Night,
and if so how sweet will be that which is to come when I shall come to be
refreshed with him: and by him, whom my soul loves for ever: and when I shall
clearly see him, though now I cannot: I grant, that if two Bodies were placed
be yond the tenth sphere they would not be able see to one another, because
they want, a mediaum, to convey light one, to the other, but as for Christ, him
we shall see, as he is, when we shall be above, the tenth sphere, because in
his own light we shall see him, who is our light, and therefore let us talk
with him, about it, that our souls may take delight, and pleasure in it, or
thus: if this natural sleep, be so comfortable, Oh, how comfortable, will be,
that rest which is to come, when I shall, only walk and no more sleep,
feel, and no more faint and no more seek.

About Darkness, Oh, what a Dismal thing, is this Darkness, if all the men on
earth should combine against it, they are not able to dispell it, but the light
can, so lord Jesus Christ chase away all the Darkness, of life, which is in me,
and free me from the very Blackness, of Darkness, which is meaned against me,
and therefore, do so lord, Jesus, I Humbly pray thee, or thus, Oh, how
terrible is this darkness and so is my pride my Passion, my Lust, my Malice
but if these will both appear against it, it must needs vanish: arise,
therefore, sweet Savior, and shine in the midst, of this Darkness, and
dispell it. Oh, Sun of Righteousness, show thy self, and deliver me from this
Darkness who have lowed Darkness, more then light, that I may see thy
marvelous light.

Cant. 3.1. As thus has not the Lord, Promised me, that he will be allwaies
with me: Saying, lo, I am with you Always, Math. 28. And therefore how
comes, this to pass, that the Lord is such, a stranger to me, this time of
Night that I cannot, neither see him, nor feel him, nor hear him, is this to
be always with me? Ah, Lord how can it be always, if not now, and therefore
now Lord, now, and for all this Night, I humbly Pray thee.

Cant. 2.6. It is Written, His left Hand, is under my Head, and his Right Hand,
does Embrace me: The sense of which Words is this, his left Hand, that is, his
punishments, are under me, by reason of him, who is my Head: and his right
Hand, that is, Pleasures for Evermore do Encompasse me, and therefore Lord
Jesus, let thy Punishments, which I have deserved not be inflicted: But rather
let the Pleasures which are at thy Right Hand, for Evermore, now over flow me,
I humbly Pray thee.

spend much of our time by Night, in caring and carking about the things of
this life, but let it be so no more, though we have done so in times past, let
that time past suffice, and let the thing here be no longer so near; for if
they be near, Christ cannot be near, and therefore let them be under and him
over, I beseech you.

5. As he with his right hand embrace us let everyone of us with his right hand
of faith embrace him, that is, let us lay hold on him as the spouse, Cant. 3.3.
believing verily that he will lie and lodge with us graciously this night, and
so every night, yea eternally, which God in mercy grant.

2. Now incentives, consider that this lying and lodging with Christ by night
is a thing 1. Most comely. 2. Most sweet. 3. Most thrifty. 4. Most Heavenly.


Solomon's, Cant. 3.7. Meaning heaven, last, and his heart first, so expositors,
explicate, that high and lofty passage, and so the Saints find it that thus
they are in heaven, when thus they be with Christ by Night, being separated
from the world, separated from Sinners, weaned from sinful, and sensual
delights, ensouled in God, heavened in Christ, and sublimated, to the highest
zenith of Christ dearest and nearest society, which hereafter shall be
contained, to all eternity, and should not all this make, and move us all, to
lodge with Christ every Night, for our souls delight.

The 5th. Doctrine.
5thly, I observe hear, that saints have mighty longings, together, with
Christ, together, with Christ, to visit those heavenly mansions, which are like
unto Vineyards: and this point I do but name also, because I hasten, to the
principal.

The 6th. Doctrine.
6thly, I will name but one more, and then come to that which I chiefly aim at.

The lovers of Christ are very much bent together with Christ and as soon as
they may, to visit, their brethren, and fellow-saints who by
Gospell-preaching, have been made the Vineyards, of Christ, 7 thly, I note that
Christ's espoused Saints have a great desire, The 7th. Do^.
to be up very early, in the morning for and with Christ.

For the Illustration hereof I shall propose and Resolve these 3, Queeries. 3
Quer


The, 1. Is how for him, The, 2. How with him. The, 3. Why both.
For the 1. 1 Querie. Resolved.


I Answer to it. That it is (1) to (...) to take a journey from home; so they,
as they have had him in their hearts, when they wear abed, so they desire to
have him, in their minds, when they are up: To take a journey for Heaven and so
they carry him, as they rife with him, to the place where they are wont to
displace all their Wordly cares, Mary, which so sought him Weeping, John 20.15.

3. Why? both so early. I Answer

1. When the Morning comes, light comes.

When the Monning comes* joy comes.

3. When the Morning comes, strongth comes.

When the Morning comes, opening comes.

For Christ will give thee light, Quoth the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.14. Understand
in the morning chiefly, in that being that bright and Morning Star, he does
very early a rise in our hearts, when we have very early sought him with all
our hearts Pro. 8.17.

2. Joycometh. For the morning is Aurora, quasi Avium Hora.
quasi avium hora, that is, the birds nowre, because it exhilarates and makes
those silly creatures so merry, as to sing that time more sweetly then any
other time. Now as the Morning makes those poor creatures, so glad, so it
makes us, when we are early up with Jesus Christ, and Christ with us: then
(...) Christ himself, we do lay open our very hearts to Christ telling him as
Samson did Dalila all that is in our hearts, Judges, 16.17 Again, our mouths
are open then, when crying a loud as David did, when he did rise in the morning
Psalm. 5.2.3. We give the Lord no rest, till we see heaven open with Stephen,
and the son of man standing at Gods right hand who but the night before did
embrace us with his right hand; all this comes to be so when the morning
comes, and therefore Christ's espoused Saints do so desire to be up so early
with him and for him in the morning.

The 1 Use
The 1. Use Use of the point will be a use of interrogation, and commination.
Then what are we? When one of the ancient fathers had read the 5.6.7. chapters
of Matthew he clapped up the book, and said, either these are not the words of
Christ, or we are not christians; so I, either these words which I have chosen
touching early rising, are not the spirits of God, and the spouses of Christ,
or we for the most part are not espoused to Christ. For how few shall a man see
or hear of, that will rise so early with, and for Christ. For the world there
be enough that will rise early enough; so for mischief, so for drink, that we
read Esa, 5.11 so for idle-worship, for eating and for playing Exo. 32.6. But
tell such of Christ that he must be sought, and served early, and they will all
with one consent excuse themselves as those, Luke 14.18. One will say, that he
cannot rise, because he is weak; another, because he is married to a wife,
from which he cannot come, a third, that he cannot rise so soon, because he
cannot wake so soon; a fourth, that he cannot be up so early, because he goes
to bed so late, or because he cannot sleep the first of the night, or for fear
that he shall be sick. But let me tell you my friends 1. what will become of you
that can rise for the world, for drink, for mischief, for play, neglecting
Christ; the time will shortly come when that inexorable messenger, whose name
is the first death, will unflesh you, and when he has done, the second death
will follow after, and hell will have you; for woe unto them that rise up early
in the morning, that they away follow strong drink, Esa. 5.11. The like may be
said of others; woe unto them that rise early to do mischief, and to follow the
world with all their might, not caring for Christ.

2. And as for you that love your beds so well, as that you cannot rise at all,
but say, yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, you are but a company of
sluggards, For so the spirit of God calls you, and therefore you must look for
the sluggards portion, and what is that you will say? I answer, it is poverty,
Prou. 6.6.11. That is, you shall want for ever, if being out of Christ, you
care not for Christ, to rise with Christ, like purpurall Dives, who wanted a
drop of water to cool his tongue when he was tormented in his tongue, as he
lay frying in the arms of everlasting flames; and if you be in Christ, and yet
will not, as others do, rise early for Christ, Christ will not rise for you, to
justify you with the brightness of his face, or to enrich you with the riches
of his grace, when others who are more gracious, are refreshed with his
likeness, greatned with his goodness, being even fraighted by him to the
full, and sublimated by him to the highest top of virtues preferment, then you
shall be empty and beggarly, low and lean, void of al consolation, and full
of confusion.



1. If then you cannot rise with and for Christ in the morning, you must get
your selves espoused to Christ, for then you will, because it is the desire of
such so to rise with and for Christ.

Q.

answer thus, it is written, 2 Cor. 11.2. I have espoused you to one Husband,
namely Christ, and therefore. God that such a one may be sent from God, and
when he is sent hear him, that you may be espoused to Christ by him.

Rebecah did Eleazar. Beloved, believe it, that I, for my part, am come for
you, and to you, this time purposely to espouse you to my Master Isaac, I
should say, Jesus Chr. who has sent me to tell you so much that he will marry
you Hos. 2.19 and therefore what say you? will you that Christ shall marry you?
if it be your mind that he shall, then let every one of you say in his heart, I
will, I will, with all my heart, if God will but put faith to take him into my
heant. Oh Lord I believe help, my unbelief.

to rise very early in the morning with and for Jesus Christ.

Here take these








1. Resolute, as the spouse Canticles, 3.2. I will rise now etc. as if she
should say, what do I hear, here is nothing but heavienesse and slug
gishnesse, dimnesse and dullness, disconsolatenesse and dismayednesse because
he is absent from me who is wont to solace me, and therefore I will come away
from my bed of eas, and rise with, or rather before the Sun is up, that the Sun
of rightousnesse may give me his heavenly ease; I was wont to love my bed as
much as any, but now for Christ's sake I loath it, and therefore by the grace of
God I will leave it for these; so do ye resolve likewise, saying, Lord we take
up here this solemn resolution before thee, that for the time to come we will
all become as great early risers with thee, as any thou have that love thee;
our beds we did love, that is certain, but love them so as we did, we will no
more whilst we live, but rather we will leave them when the shadows flee a
way, and rise we will as soon as the day appears, to rise with thee and for
thee as long as we live, and this we will begin to do to morrow, God willing,
and so every morning by Gods blessing, till we are dying.

2. Active, as thus.

1. Offering violence to yourselves.





Because nature is frail, and the Devil strong, you must strive and strugle
mightily to come away from your beds of ease, as if you were to win a city; for
what says the flesh, then what says eas, what says cuftom, Oh it is too
soon, too soon, yet a little sleep, yet a little slumber, an hour hence it is
soon enough to rise hence; and if then we do not struglagainst the stream to
get up, we go down amain, down with the stream and lie still till 8. til. 9
may ten; and therefore get up against the stream, break your custom, break
sleep, and break away from your beds, by force forcing yourselves to rise, and
leaping over your beds, as giants and conquerors over walls, to win, to gain,
to obtain the Mastery over your own natures, if thereby you know your selves
to be dull and sleepy, and let not your beds hold you when Christ will have you
to be up, to hold correspondence with you.



Christ, and heaven are unequal, or convexed; and therefore, look as we must
deal with one, so with the other, as for heaven, that you know must be taken
by violence, says Christ himself, peremptorily by, Matthew. 11.12. and so say I
of Christ* semblably, that if we will have him, rising for him, or keep him,
rising with him, we must offer violence, to him: Beloved we must wen wrestle
with the Lord, that time, as Jacob did, in olden time, Genesis 32.24. That is, we
must tell him, in plain terms, that we will have him upon any terms: we must
encounter him with the promises of his word: For they are a Christians Sword;
As for example. Prove. 8.17. and Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always.

Hereupon, let a devout soul say to the Lord, being risen for the Lord; Lord, I
am up according to thy word, but that cannot please my soul, nor content my
heart, nor satisfy my spirit* unless I can see thee also in my spirit, my
spirit therefore gives thee no rest, till it can see thee, after my natural
rest. For in thee, I enter my chiefest rest. Rest natural is good, but thine
is better; and therefore, as I am risen, so let God, let Christ, let my
beloved, rise too. Ah Lord? The Sunn is risen, or rising upon me, and the light
thereof does shine about me, but where is the light of thy countenance, which
shining within me, will infinitely more refresh me. Ah, Shine, Shine, Shine:
Thou pleasant and blessed sun of Righteousness, as the sun now shines, nay
before the sun is up, (If thou art up before it,) for thou art before it, and
as the darkness now flees away, so let my finnes flee away and as I now do,
or shall see that admirable lamp of heaven, so let me see thee, that glorious
sun of Righteousness, I humbly pray thee.

Or thus.

Ah, this Night I have enjoyed thee, sweet and dear savior, so I desire to
rise with thee, and therefore, come Lord Jesus, come, let us rise both, I with
thee, and thou with me, I humbly pray thee: Ah, my love, I desire to have thee
with me in that very place where I am wont to place my self, to displace
drowsiness, and to make room for Godliness, and to talk with thee, as if it
were face to face, and therefore Lord leave me not, for I will not leave thee,
till thou go with me, and bless me. Dear love, haft thou not said expressly,
Lo, I am with you all -- ways, and will thou leave me now? Ah, far be it
from the Lord so to deal witha poor creatur which desires to enjoy this,
infinitely more then anyother creatur. Besides, how can the Lord be true, in all
his sayings, if he be not in this, Lo I am with you always, if now the Lord
do leave me here be earnest with the Lord, and show him the Book, the verse,
the place where His promise lies, and tell him: Lord, arise therefore with me,
and show thy self to me, I Humbly Pray thee.

Considerations, as.

Consider, What good early rising will do.

2. What good this violence will do.

Early rising.

1. It will speed all our work.

2. It will chase away all our Enemies.

3. It will sweeten, our present Morning Sacrifice.

4. It will put us into a gracious Tamper all the Day after.

Jacob had been thus early up with his God, he sped the better afterward, when
he met with his Brother. Genesis 32. So we, when we have been up with Christ,
before the sun is up with us, we fare the better, when other things come to be
taken in hand by us, whereas else, if we lie it out till, 7.8. Or 9. Our maine
work, lies behind, and our other work too lies back, because we rise no
sooner to do it. Oh! it is a mighty speeding, if a Christian, walking with
God, when he has been very early talking with God: And therefore let us rise,
let us rise, my brethren early, that Christ may be found of us graciously, and
all our work may speed the more blessedly.

Aurora, est latronum expulsiva. That is, the Morning, will chase thieves, and
murderers; thieves, that would be out, by Night, cannot abide to be abroad when
it is light; so sin, so Satan, who troubled us with evil thoughts, before it
was day, will shun us, and flee away from us, when by prayer, we betake our
selves to Christ as soon as it is day, and wrestle with his Majesty. Ah, my
brethren, it is not to be conceived what a mighty Enemy to sin and temptations
are our early devotion, thereby we strangle our lusts, trucidate our pride,
prostrate the world, superate our passions, and become Conquerers, over all on
terrors, for when the day appears the darkness flees, and natural fear
cease, because the light shines, Christ I mean, who is the light of the
world, and shines into our hearts, then when being up very early, we seek him
with all our hearts, that we may be Master over the world, and not overcome by
the world.

aurora est roris insusiva that is, the morning does infuse the dew, for which
cause it is called aurora, quasi aura rorans; now dew is sweet, so the morning
spent in duty and improved to Christ will increase and sweeten all our prayers
we make to Christ, Christ being pleased to speak to us when we speak to him,
and refocillating my spirit and thy spirit, when you and I do worship him in
thespirit. For that is his fashion, his custom, his wonted course, then to
visit souls with his celestial consolation when souls visit him in their early
devotion: devotions, me thinks, are never sweeter therefore, then at that
time, when being up betime we are talking with God, before we have talked with
man, can see the face of Christ, before we have seen the face of a christian,
that is, before we have been abroad among men, who commonly hinder us so much,
as that we cannot as we should, be conversant with Christ: they that love their
beds, their sleep, their rest, will say, Oh! sleep is sweet, in the morning
especially; and I was sweetly a sleep before such a one awak'dme, and loath are
such to be troubled therefore in their morning sleep; but I do, and will say so
still, that Christ is sweeter, and early rising to talk with Christ, sweeter.
For when we do then talk with him, he is wont to talk with us, and when he
speaks to us with his mouth, his mouth is altogether sweet, yea sweetness it
self; and when it is so, his saying of himself is found true, that he is that
Mannah, which came from Heaven, For he is as sweet to our souls; as that other
Mannah was, which feasted so many hundred souls; and we are for the present,
whilst we are in prayer as it were in heaven.

For the morning is Aurora est caloris t^mperaiiva
cooling, Genesis 3.8. They that sweat by night, yet begin to cool in the morning,
so we when having been in a sweat, as it were by night, about many things
which did then trouble our thoughts; as for example, our predestination before
al time, and our justification in time, we rise very early for Christ, are
commonly refrigerated exceedingly, and bedewed most sweetly by the spirit of
Christ, and when his spirit has so refreshed our spirits, we relish what his
bedewing of us is, and taste as it were the sweetness of it all the day long,
and find our souls to be in so sweet a condition, as that we can serve God the
better ever after, being put upon any gracious action*









(...) A quinus in 7 phys. l. 1 c. 1.
Aquinus defines it thus, when a thing is moved from one thing to another;
where to it has no proper aptness of its own nature, that is violence, and
that which violence forces, will do more then that which shamefastness
persuades, so quoteth Vale^ Max. l. 3.
another. Whereupon I infer, that therefore by God's help we may force our
bodies to remove from their beds, if there they were wont mornings to lie, as
in their proper place, and had no aptitude of themselves to rise, and that when
no persuasion or entreating would do it; force, which goes beyond all shame,
will carry it; and therefore force your selves every morning from the place of
sleeping to the place of praying, praying Christ to sanctify unto you the
violence which is used by you.

2. It will prevail with Christ. Christ in the beginning of your praying may
be strange too; for it is his custom so to do. I for my part find it so, and
so do must they that seek him, I do believ; witness Jacob, the woman of Cana
an, and others; but go on a while, and persist in praying, or that which we
call wrestling; no violence like that which we use in praying: But then this
violence, as Aver, 3 de coelo text. 10
one notes, is a thing, which though it move, yet will not do so always, but
in aliqua hora, that is, in a certain hour; a speech I much wonder at, as it
comes from him, about a thing there treated on by him; but not to be wondered
at here, because the morning time which I treat of, is such a time indeed,
wherein violence will more speed than any other time, when in prayer with
Christ we meet. I confess it is always good, but then especially, because it
meets with a powerful help as the morning is, which then does help. This made
Jacob, that great and mighty champion, so victorious, because he rose so soon,
and wrestled so stoutly at the break of the day, and made him even get the day.
His rising first gained Christ sweetest presence, his violence kept it, and a
gracious blessing sweetly crowned it. For violence will surely cause an
alteration, because it will cause a breaking through (as the *Hebrew has it) a
breaking through, a rapture, a remove, whereby changing place, and being wrapped
up, as it were, into heaven, we fetch down Christ from heaven, and force him,
as it were to bless us, before he leaves us. For this is the language of a
Saint, I will not leav thee till thou bless me, which when Christ sees that
we will not let him go, he goes with us, and is entreated by us, before we
go from him. I can (to God's glory be it spoken) fay it by experience, that I
seldom tried it, but so found it; and the reason is, because he has bound
himself by his own saying, Pro. 8.17. from which he cannot go; and therefore
never let ns go from him without him, but strive, but struggle, but offer him
violence, to gain and to keep his sweet and blessed presence.

3. It will place us even in heaven with Christ. For by it the soul of a Saint
is loosened from the ligaments of the body, his reasoning is so raised on
high, he is so translated into heaven, he does so overlook earthly things,
is so collocated near the regal throne of God, though he be an illiterate
man, though a poor man, as that when he is so, he minds nothing but heaven,
seeeth nothing but heaven, feels nothing but heaven: heaven is in his
desires, heaven is in his eye, heaven is in his heart, and heaven is his
reward. For by it he feeds on the bread of Angels, which comes down from
heaven, his solace is the solace of heaven, and his joy the joy of heaven: so
Jacob was in heaven as he was wrestling with the God of heaven, and so may you
be, if you will do as he did: And therefore it is good for a man to be a
mighty man in prayer, a wrestler, an early riser, a most zealous suitor and
orator to the throne of grace, because that brings the greatest solace, and
carries a man's soul to heaven. Strive therefore, Oh strive! dear brethren and
Fellow Christians, and be men of prayer; be fervent, be importunate, be
wrestling with Christ in praying, when early you are up in the morning, that
having left your beds on earth, you may make your bed in heaven, where now I
leav you.

Soli Deo gloria.
THere is lately extant, a Treatise of the Four last things, Death, Judgment,
Hell and Heaven, by Simon Birckbeck, Minister at Gilling in Richmondshire; also
Family-Religion revived, or a Treatise, as to discover the good old way of
serving God in private houses, so to recover the pious practice of those
precious duties to their primitive platform, by Philip Goodwin, Minister of the
Gospel at Watford in Hartfordshire. A Treatise of Faith, wherein is
methodically handled the Nature of Saving, Justifying Faith, in opposition unto
Counterfeit; Helps thereunto prescribed, Hindrances thereunto removed, and
several other Gospel Truths clearly discussed, by N.W. late of Lee in Essex:
Also the Complete Politician, or policy put in practice, wherein the
principles of policy are laid open to the view of all, and the practice of it
by the Ancients, discovered to these latter times, illustrated with many
excellent rules both Divine and Moral, a Work useful for these times. All these
are printed for, and sold by Edward Brewster, at the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.


