A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH: AT THE Primary
Visitation of The Right Reverend Father in God, JOHN, Lord Bishop of NORWICH.
May 18. 1692.

By JOHN JEFFERY, M.A. Minister of S. Peter's of Mancroft in Norwich.

LONDON: Printed by Samuel Roycroft, for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1692.

IMPRIMATUR,

Ra: Barker.
Jul. 27. 1692.
A SERMON Preached in the Cathedral Church OF NORWICH.
2 Cor. IV. 5. For we Preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord: and our
selves your Servants for Jesus sake.


GOD is the Supreme, Absolute, and Universal Governor of the World; and acts
as such by the immediate Influences of his Wisdom, Goodness, and Power (a)
Salv. de gub. Dei, (...). Isid. Ep. 123.
. Those Influences have their proper and full effect (according to the Divine
Will) upon all Creatures, Animate and Inanimate; Rational and Irrational: But
the Government is most perfect, where Rational Natures are the Subjects. Those
Rational Natures are Angels and Men; and among Men, those who are Truly
Religious, are most eminently Subjects of this Kingdom: And therefore the State
of Religion (especially in the Days of the Messiah) is called the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Kingdom of God Vid. Grot. ad Mat. 3.2. Dan. 2.44. and 7.13, 14.
. That Kingdom is no other than the Empire of Reason and Religion in the Souls
and Lives of Men, by which (so far as it prevails) they are made Wise, and
Good, and Happy V. Erasm. Paraphr. Mat. 4. p. 125. Jam enim instat Regnum
coelorum, etc. Luc. 22 p. 217. Nolite tale, etc. Mat. 20. p. 133. Illic enim
qui, etc.
: And the Son of God (to whom the Father has committed all Power) came down
from Heaven, and assumed our Nature, and was born, and lived, and died, and
rose again, and ascended into Heaven, and became the Author and the Pattern of
the Religion and of the Happiness of Men. This is the glorious Doctrine of the
Gospel; and this is the True Notion of Jesus Christ: This was sincerely
declared by the Apostles; and this is easy to be understood by all Christians.
Their Office, the Apostles were separated unto, by the Son of God; and they
were Qualified for it by the Divine Spirit: They performed it with all
Simplicity and Faithfulness; and they were accompanied with Assurance and
Success. Therefore says S. Paul, Ver. 1, 2. Seeing we have this Ministry, we
faint not: But have renounced the hidden things of dishonesty, not walking in
craftiness, not handling the Word of God deceitfully; but by manifestation of
the Truth, commending our selves to every man's Conscience, in the sight of
God. This Doctrine the Disciples of Christ were obliged to believe and profess:
In such Teachers as the Apostles, they might entirely confide; and Nothing
could hinder the Conversion of Men to Christianity, but vicious Principles, and
infernal Delusion. Ver. 3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that
are lost: In whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds of them which
believe not, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image
of God, should shine unto them. Such is the Fidelity of those who Preached the
Gospel of the Kingdom: And such is the case of those to whom it was preached.
As a Mark of their Fidelity to whom the publication of this Divine Doctrine was
committed, They did not assume unto themselves; but ascribe all unto Christ:
And had no other Design upon Men; but to minister to the Conversion and
Salvation of them. For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and
our selves your Servants, for Jesus sake. They published the Gospel of the
Kingdom: That Jesus Christ alone was the Supreme Lord: That themselves were
only his Inferior Ministers: That in setting up this Spiritual Kingdom in the
Souls of Men, they were Servants of Christ, and of them. This is the great
Truth I am to discourse, viz.

the Son of God Incarnate, is the only Supreme Lord: That the Teachers of
Christianity are the Inferior Ministers of his Spiritual Kingdom.

For Explication of which Truth, I shall give some Account, 1. Of the Nature of
the Spiritual Kingdom: 2. Of the Glory of the Supreme Lord: 3. Of the Office of
his Inferior Ministers.


1. I shall give an Account of the Nature of this Spiritual Kingdom.

Since the Original degeneracy of Man; there has been a gradual advancement of
the State of Religion. In the first Ages of the World, it did subsist in
dispersed Individuals; till some Assemblies began to Call upon the Name of the
Lord Genesis 4 6.
. Afterward God set up an Empire among the Jews, peculiarly for the interest
of Virtue; and a whole Nation professed the True Religion, as they were taught
by supernatural Revelation. The Government of that Holy Nation was a Theocracy;
and the Laws of their Polity, as well as of their Religion, were Divine 1 Samuel
2.12.8.7.10.19. Judge. 8.23.
. In allusion to this Sacred Empire, God foretold (unto that People) the
Perfection of Religion, that should be, in the Days of the Messiah; under the
Notion of His Kingdom, which should be Universal, and that all Kings should
fall down before, and all Nations serve Messiah the Prince Psalm. 72.1. Dan.
9.25.
. The submission of all Orders and Nations of Men, to be Subjects of this
Kingdom, is demonstration that the Nature of it is Spiritual: For that
Subjection was to be, by voluntary and cheerful Consent, as Men accept what
they account their Glory. Agreeable unto this, was the Declaration of Christ,
who disowned all Secular Power, and said, His Kingdom was not of this World
Joh. 18.34.
; signifying, that it was such as GOD had exercised from the beginning, but
with extraordinary manifestation and effect. It was indeed the Empire of
Religion, or the Effectual and Universal prevalency of it; by which, Men of all
Nations, who became Christians, should become Like God in Wisdom and Goodness
(...). Hiero. ad v. 67. p. 290.
. This the Jews called the Kingdom of Heaven; and this the Gentiles called,
Philosophy: Which, according to Plutarch is the Institution of a Virtuous Man
Plut. de lib. Educ. Hieroc. Praes.
. For among the Gentiles Religion was no such thing, as it ought to have been;
but rather the consecration of Vice, than the practice of Virtue Quid mirum si
ab hac gente universa flagitia manarunt? apud quam ipsa vitia religiosa sunt:
Eaque non modo non vitantur, verum etiam coluntur. Lactant. l. 1. c. 20. Aug.
de Civ. D. lib. 2. c. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 14, 16, 22, 25, 26.
; and their Philosophers and Lawgivers (...). Hiero. p. 309.
(not their Priests) taught Men to Live. Hence the Christians speaking of our
Religion, to the Capacity of the Gentiles, called it Our Philosophy (...).
Tatian. contra Gr. p. 166.
, the Divine Philosophy (...). Justin M. Ap. 1.
, and the Lord's Philosophy -- Magis duru^ secularis Philosophiae pravitate,
quam Philosophiae Dominicae lonitate pacificus. Cypr. Ep. 1. l. 1.
; looking upon it as the Institution of a Religious Man, and that delivered in
the Divine History of the Son of God: The Doctrine of True Religion, is the
Image of God in Records; and the Practice of Religion, is the Image of God in
Life; and then Men are most properly subject to, when they are Imitators of God
Ephesians. 5.1. (...). 1 Cor. 11.1.
. The Perfection of Religion, is in a peculiar sense, this Divine Kingdom: And
as by Baptism Christians take upon them, the Profession of, and Obligation to
it; so by the Lord's Supper, they continually set Him before their eyes, who is
the Author and Pattern thereof. Instruction and Persuasion are the proper Means
to make men Wise and Good; and the Addresses to that purpose are made
effectual, by the Spirit of God, on the Souls of Men. Thus is the Kingdom of
God set up in Individual Persons; and the Society of all such Persons is the
Catholic Act. 10.^^.
Church; or Universal Kingdom of God on Earth, entitled from its Nature, The
Kingdom of Heaven. For as the Blessedness of Heaven, is the highest perfection
of Religion; so the Religion of Christ has the nature of that Blessedness on
Earth. Beatitude and Piety are the same, in the accounts of the Gospel Mat.
5.3. etc. (...). Arist.
and Truth it self; and every Man is so far truly Happy, as he is truly
Religious. This Institution is Eternal and Divine, such as continues after
Death; and raises the Souls of Christians to the state of Angels. So this
Kingdom of God over Men, which shall never end, is begun here; and as the
Nature of that Kingdom is entirely Spiritual, so it is most Excellent and
Glorious. The External Polity of this Religious State is Temporary and Secular,
and is such a Defense for Christianity (the Spiritual Kingdom of God,) as
Worldly Government is for Moral Virtue (his Natural Kingdom.) Among degenerate
Christians, this Secular Polity, and the Worldly Advantages of it, are their
chief Design: Religion is made by them, subservient to their Greatness, Wealth,
and Power: Christianity is made a Carnal Religion, and the State of it is made
a Worldly Empire Vid. Erasm. Annot. ad Matt. 11. Jugum meum suave] and ad Matt.
5. Omne malum.]
. But this Antichristian Cheat is not to be run down, by depriving Religion of
all Secular Protection and Encouragement from Laws; but Christian Constitutions
must favor Piety, as the Civil Constitutions have favored Justice, (which is
also Divine and an Essential part of Religion Jus a Jove.
.) This then is the Nature of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, The Perfection of
Religion in the Souls and Lives of Men, promoted by Spiritual Means and
Influences. Of this there is an External Polity, by which it is guarded against
the Violence and Craft of wicked and unreasonable Men, who have not Faith: And
so Kings are the Nursing Fathers, and Queens the Nursing Mothers of the Church
Is. 49.23.
.

2. I am to give an account of the Glory of the Supreme Lord.

The Archetypal Idea of this Spiritual Kingdom, is the Nature of God himself;
and so far as God is manifested to Men, his Kingdom is come among them. But as
Plato observed, the Eyes of Men are not able to bear the Rays of Divinity
(...). Plato Soph. p. 119.
; and the Image of the greatest things cannot affect Human Sense, or descend to
Human Capacity (...). Plato Civil.
: Yet it is necessary, that there should be in Men a right, and stable, and
lively Opinion of Wisdom and Virtue; and such an Opinion is a Particle of
Divinity, in whomsoever it abides (...). Plato p. 137.
. The True God provided a glorious Expedient for this, when He caused the
Divine (...) ( the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person
Heb. 1.3.
,) to assume the Nature of Man, and in it to perform the Works of God. This
Sacred Person ( Consubstantial (...). Vid. Athan. de Syn. Arim. and Sal. Ep. p.
928. 937. Niceph. l. 8. c. 22.
to the Most High God,) was Incarnate: The Word was made Flesh, and dwelt among
us; and we beheld his glory, the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full
of Grace and Truth Joh. 1.14.
. Thus God exhibited Himself to Men in the person of his Son, and He appeared
in the Shape and Form of Man, familiarly to Men. The Human Nature of the Son of
God was consecrated into a Living Temple by his residence in, and Union with
it: And God the Word, so acquainted Himself with Mortal men, by the Instrument
of a Body, as Eusebius says Eusebius. Orat. ad Tric. Constable. c. 14.
. He demonstrated His Divine Perfections in the using of our Nature, as an
excellent Musician discovers his Skill by using an Harp, whose Nature is
altogether unlike and inferior to his. Such a Nature as ours (which is Rational
and Material,) was fit for the Eternal (...), for God the Word to show Himself
in, to Men; and when He showed himself, He showed the most High God, for He is
God of God, as the Rays of the Sun are Light of Light. Therefore he said, He
that has seen me, has seen the Father Joh. 14.9.
; and, He that sees me, sees him that sent me Joh. 14.45.
Thus was God gloriously and sensibly manifested unto Men, when He came down to
Men in the likeness of Man, and in our Nature discovered his own: For in Jesus
Christ dwelt all the fullness of the Godhead Bodily Col. 2.9.
. And when he appeared in Human Nature, He discovered Himself by Divine Works;
and His glory was disclosed by his Actions. If any one looked upon the Man
Christ Jesus, there was no sensible Glory about his Head, that might
distinguish Him from Others; but there was an Intellectual Luster, which Wisdom
and Goodness adorned Him with. His Words and Deeds were such, as mere Man never
did exhibit; and upon his Speeches and Actions there were Marks of Divinity
visible. His Miracles were such as no Power, but that of God could do; and with
them He entertained and astonished the Minds of Men, who expressed their
Admiration, saying, What manner of Man is this Matt. 8.27.
. Besides, these Miracles were all Acts of Love, and Men were affected at them,
as at the observation of Greatness and Goodness Mar. 7.37. Act. 10.38.
. At the fame time, the obliged and amazed Multitude were entertained by the
Divine Reason, with Discourses full of Wisdom and Virtue; such as were most
worthy of God, and most profitable to Men Joh. ^.46.
. Those who heard Him speak such Wisdom as never Man spoke, saw Him Live such
Virtue as never Man lived; and Celestial Holiness clothed the Son of Man with
Glory. He was thus a Living Law of Virtue, and the substantial Doctrine of
Wisdom, and a sensible manifestation of Power; and yet a Man like unto Us in
all things, except those excellent Glories, and except our vicious Infirmities.
Here then was Human Nature in view, and Human Conversation observable: But in
all this, a Divine Wisdom, Goodness and Power did appear. Here was the Life of
God exhibited in the Nature of Men; and the Invisible Divinity did appear
veiled in the sensibleness of Humanity. His Conversation was familiar, and yet
stupendous; and every appearance was Wonderful, but not Terrible. Such a
manifestation of God there was, as obliged Men to the greatest Veneration of
Him: and what the Son of God did, was most God-like. Such an One is He, who is
the Supreme in the Spiritual Kingdom of God, and none Other was either worthy
or fit to be Supreme but He, who by his Appearance could show us the Father,
and reconcile us unto Him. Men had sinned against God, and some Atonement was
necessary for the expiation of Sin, and reconciling of Sinners. This was the
common and true Opinion of all Mankind, who were justly sollicitous how God
might be appeased, and their Pardon be obtained. For this end they at first
made their Sacrifices of Beasts; but at length deeming them an insufficient
Oblation, they came to offer Men Deorum maxim Mercurium colunt, cui certis
diebus humanis quoque hostiis litare fas habent. Tacit. de mor. Germ. Caesar.
de bell. Gall. l. 1. p. 129. Eusebius. Orat. in Constat. Tric. c. 13. Plin. Not.
Hist. l. 30. c. 1. Plut. de defect, Orac.
. Their Superstition was a violence to their Nature, and they sacrificed their
Children Psalm. 106.37, 38.
, ( i.e. their own Bowels) to their Idols. This was the Law and the Opinion of
the Gentiles; for, as Plato says, The Law is the Opinion of the Country (...).
Plato Minos.
: And he adds in the same place, That the sacrificing of Men, was according to
the Laws of the Carthaginians; it was Legal and Holy among them (...). Plato
Mino.
. This inhuman and horrid Custom, shows how odious Sin was thought to be in the
sight of God; and how difficult it was to appease Him, who was made our Enemy
by our Sins. This was the Reason of the Death of Christ, That He might be a
Holy Victim offered up to God, as a perfect expiation of the Sins of Men. He
gave Himself a Ransom for us (...), Life for Life.
, and died to deliver us from Death. Through the power of the same Sacrifice,
He also destroyed the Diabolical Superstitions; and saved Men, not only from
the Perdition of Hell, but also from the tyranny of Satan upon Earth. Through
the virtue of this Death, and the Victory he gained over Death, He destroyed
Him who had the power of Death, that is, the Devil; and delivered them who were
all their Lives subject unto bondage Heb 2.25.
. So that by the Appearance, and Doctrine, and Sufferings of the Son of God,
Satan's Kingdom was abolished; and (as one Evidence of it) the dead Bones of
the Martyr Babylas, disabled Apollo Daphnaeus from giving an Answer to Julian,
who consulted that Oracle Evagrius, lib. 1. c. 16. Socrates, l. 3. c. 18.
. Of such Virtue was the Death of Christ. for the good of Men; for their
Eternal and Temporal Salvation, from the power and malice of the Devil. After
this, the Son of God Incarnate showed Himself the Author and Pattern of our
Happiness, by his Resurrection and Ascension. He who was the Divine Word, and
Power, and Life, could not so yield unto Death as not to be the Conqueror of
it; and this He was by Dying, and Rising from the dead. By this Resurrection of
Jesus from the dead, Men were led into the prospect of Eternity, and enabled to
look beyond the narrow limits of Time. They saw a Life and Death in this World,
by Sense; and they saw Life and Immortality in the other World, by Faith.
Christians fear only that which is the Second, and Eternal Death: And to avoid
that, they take care how they live here; but fear not to die and go from hence.
This, which is their Reproach among the Heathen, is their Wisdom: While they
fear to die after this Death, they do not fear to dye this Death, Et dum mori
post mortem timent interim mori non timent. Minu. Fe. p. 26.
The same Jesus who had promised Life unto Others, by his Resurrection
manifested himself the Lord of Life Joh. 11.25, 26.
; and no better or greater demonstration could there be of a future and blessed
Immortality 2. Tim. 1. 10.
. Of Old it had been common among Pagans, to Deifie dead Men (as Athanasius
Athanasius contra Gentes.
and others tell us); and their Gratitude transported them into Idolatry. But
He whom we worship as the Son of God, dwelt in Human Nature, and was the Son of
Man, and showed by his Resurrection that his Nature was Divine Romans 1.4.
. After his Resurrection He ascended into Heaven in the Humane Nature, and is
Enthroned at the Right Hand of the Majesty on High; and it is in the Power of
Him alone to give Salvation unto the Souls of Men, and to bestow Immortality
upon those whom He has Redeemed. This is the utmost Perfection which Human
Nature is capable of; and such a State, as even that Nature must be improved,
that it may be capable of it. But the Son of God, is able to exalt us unto that
place and state whither He is gone before Us; and there We shall be for ever
with the Lord 1 These. 4.17.
, and like unto Him Phil. 3.21. 1 John 3.2.
. Thus is the Son of God, the Author and Pattern of the Duty and Happiness of
Men; who was Born, and Lived, and Died, and Rose again, and Ascended into
Heaven. There all Power is committed unto Him Mat. 28.18. Phil. 2.6, etc. Heb.
1.4, etc.
, and He is the Supreme Lord of that Kingdom which is established by the
Gospel. So Great is the Person of our Teacher and Redeemer; and He is no less
our Only Master, than our Only Savior (...). Nazianz. p. 597
. For his Doctrine is the Standard of our Faith, and Himself is both the Subject
and Author of the Gospel. To the Conduct of Him we are to give up our selves;
And if Christ alone be to be heard, we are not to regard what Any before us
have thought; but what Christ, who was before all, has declared Quare si solus
Christus audiendus est, non debemus attendere quid aliquis ante nos saciendum
putaverit, sed, quid, qui ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Cyprian. L. 2.
Ep. 3. p. 56. de Haer. Bapt. p. 321. Contra Ep. Steph. p. 330.

Non est autem de Consuetudine praescribendum, sed ratione Vincendum. Quir.
Fratri, p. 332. Sentent. Epise. de Haer. bapt. Castus a Sicca, p. 338. Libofus
ab Agra, p. 339. Felix a Bulacc. 342.


. We are the Servants of Christ, and of God; and we must follow Him, who is the
Son of God, and the Light of the World Joh. 1.4, 9. 12.46. 8.12.95.
. He is the Teacher come from God Joh. 3.2.
, and was qualified for his Undertaking by, his Nature; and we who hearken unto
Him are all taught of God Isa. 54.13. Lactant. l. 4. c. 24.
. He alone is the Great Teacher, who did not learn what He taught; and so began
to Teach without being first a Disciple Ambrose de Offic. l. 1. c. 1.
: And the Reason of this is manifest from his Nature, forasmuch as. He was the
Eternal Son of God. 'Twas in these last Days, that He was Born; but he is
supposed by the Ancients, long before to have Appeared, and always to have been
the Teacher of Men Iren. l. 4. c. 26, 27. Tertul. adv. Herm. p. 231, 240, 395,
400, 723, 725. Orig. l. 6. p. 329. and l. 3. p. 119.
. He manifested God unto Men; and of Him it is said by Irenaeus, The Father is
that which is Invisible of the Son; and the Son is that which is Visible of the
Father Invisibile etenim filij Pater, Visibile autem patris Filius. Lib. 4. c.
14.
. He is called by Eusebius, The Chief of Philosophers, and the Teacher of
Religious Men (...). Eusebius. Them. Evang. l. 3. c. 6.
. As the Kingdom of God is the Perfection of Religion; so He is the Supreme
Lord of that Kingdom, who is the only Author of that Doctrine, and the Son of
God Incarnate. We Christians are not therefore the Disciples of Men, but of God
and his Son; and are Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost:
And that Initiation obliges us to observe whatever Christ has commanded Matt.
28.19, 20. V. Grot. ad loc.
. His Ministers did not Baptize into their own Names, but into their Masters;
as S. Paul, in the justification of Himself, said 1 Cor. 1.14, 15.
, Christ had taught them to call no man Father, or (which is the same) Master,
upon Earth; for that, One is their Master, even Christ; and all they were
Brethren. It Is not therefore any Person, or Number, or Succession of Men; that
can prescribe unto our Faith: There is but One Lord, as there is but One Faith,
and One Baptism, and One God Ephesians. 4.5, 6.
. We know in whom we believe, and in whom we confide; to whom we subject our
Consciences, and from whom we expect our Salvation. It Is from that Glorious and
Divine Person, who is the Son of God; and it is from God manifested in the Flesh
1 Timothy 3.16.
. Such is the Person; and such is the Glory of the Supreme Lord.

3. I am to give an Account of the Office of his Inferior Ministers.

In the same Sense in which this Order and Succession of Men are Ministers of
Christ's Kingdom, they are Teachers of his Religion; and this is the greatest
Honor, since the Son of God Himself was the Summus Ecclesiastes Erasin. de rat.
Concion, l. 1. Matt. 4.17.
, the Chief Preacher: And we (according to our several proportions) are his
Servants and Successors in the Office of preaching the Kingdom of God. We are
Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech Men by us; we pray them in
Christ's stead, to be reconciled unto God 2 Cor 5.20.
. This Office we are to have in high Esteem, and to account it our Dignity,
that this Ministry is committed unto us: For (to use the Words of that Book,
called the Institution of a Christian Man) surely the Office of Preaching is
the chief and most principal Office, whereunto Priests and Bishops be called by
Authority of the Gospel P. 44.2.
. This is the Means to lead men into all Truth, and to communicate to them the
knowledge of Heavenly Wisdom; to make men Religious, and that is to make them
Blessed. The Doctrine of our Religion is delivered in the Gospel of our Savior;
and the History of Christ, is the Institution of a Christian. The Office of the
Ministers of the Gospel is to teach men the Knowledge, and to conduct them in
their Imitation of Christ; that by such help Christians may Learn of Christ to
Live that they may be Happy. This is such a Provision for the advancement of
Wisdom and Virtue, as never was among any sort of men, but Jews and Christians;
where whole Nations are taught to Live; and no greater Benefactors can there be
unto Mankind. S. Augustine justly Objects against the Gods of the Heathens, That
they never delivered Rules of Living to their Votaries: But on the contrary
debauched them, by the Immoralities of their Worship Ang. de Civ. D. l. 2. c.
6, 2, 28.
. Let them show (says he) in what places, Officers were appointed to teach the
Precepts of Virtue; and where the People were assembled to Learn them, among
the Gentiles; as it is in the Churches ordained to this purpose, wherever the
Christian Religion does obtain Aug. de C.D. l. 2. c. 6.
. From the Infernal Took and Penal Society of Unclean Powers, men are delivered
by the Name of Christ; and wicked and ungrateful Men, slaves unto the Accursed
Spirit, complain, that others are translated from that Night of pernicious
Impiety, unto the Light of Life and Godliness: They complain, that Men gather
unto our Churches, that they may Learn to Live well here, that they may live
happily for ever. In those places the Holy Scriptures, the Doctrine of
Righteousness sounds from on high, in the presence of all; and they that obey,
Hear unto Life, and they who obey not, Hear unto Judgment Aug. de C.D. l. 2. c.
28.
. He that understands the History of Jesus Christ; He that Reverences God and
Loves men, must magnify this Office: For by it we are made Wise and Holy unto
Salvation. Go teach all Nations, etc. Matt. 28.19, 20.
, was the Commission our Lord gave unto his Apostles; and in the performance of
their Duty, He promised to be with them unto the end of the World. The whole of
their Office, and of all Ecclesiastical Ministers, is comprehended by the
Apostle in Prayer and the Ministry of the Word Act. 6.4.
; and to this Office they are separated by their Ordination. Through this
Ministration, the Churches of Christ, compared with other Assemblies of Men,
are as the Lights of the World Origin. cont. Cells. l. 3. p. 128.
; and according to the success of this Work, so is the Increase of Wisdom and
Righteousness among men. This is a Rational Service Romans 12.1.
, by which we are the Ministers of God to men, for their Spiritual and Eternal
Good; and by which the Communion between God and Men is maintained. For by
Prayer Men make their Addresses unto God; and by his Word, God makes his
Addresses unto Men. By this Sacred Intercourse Men assimulate unto God, and
receive Influences from Him; and thus, by the Exercises of Religion, they are
prepared for the enjoyment of Happiness. For this end, when the Son of God had
fulfilled his Ministry, He ascended up on High, and led Captivity Captive, and
gave Gifts unto Men; viz. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some
Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ Ephesians. 4.8,
11, 12.
. Some extraordinary, and some ordinary Ministers of Christ; and the several
Orders and Degrees of both have been in the Christian Church; as the Records of
Ancient Times attest, and as the Nature of things does require. These all are
Ministers by whom we believe, according as God gave unto every man 1 Cor. 3.5.
. So far therefore as the Kingdom of God, i. e. the Interest of True Religion (
for the Kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost
Romans 14.17.
): So far, I say, as True Religion, and the Power of Godliness 2 Timothy 3.5.
does prevail upon the Hearts and Lives of men, and so many as those men are
upon whom it prevails; so far Christ's Kingdom is set up, and He reigns among
men. This is what we are to expect by our Attendance upon the Appointments of
God, and putting our selves under the conduct of the Guides of Souls. When
Christ Lives in us Gal. 2.20.
, then are we Subjects of his Spiritual Kingdom; and He is with effect our
Lord, and we are in Truth his Servants. Thus is the Son of God Incarnate the
only Supreme Lord: Thus is the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the Inferior Ministers
of his Spiritual Kingdom: And thus are Men, by the power of Godliness, Subjects
of that Kingdom.

Hitherto I have given an Account, 1. Of the Nature of this Spiritual Kingdom:
2. Of the Glory of its Supreme Lord: And, 3. of the Office of his Inferior
Ministers.

The Application of what I have said, shall be made, 1. To those who are the
Ministers: And, 2. To those who are the Subjects of this Spiritual Kingdom, of
which Christ is the Lord.

1. By what I have said, those who have the Honor to be Ministers of the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, are obliged, 1. To be Faithful in their Office:
And, 2. To be Humble toward their Brethren.

1. Those who are Ministers of the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, are obliged to
be Faithful in their Office.

We are entrusted with the Gospel of Christ, and with the Souls of Men; and we
sensibly cry out with the Apostle, Who is sufficient for these things 2 Cor.
2.16.
? But our sufficiency is of God, who has made us Able Ministers of the New
Testament. 2 Cor. 3.5, 6.
At the beginning, the Ministers of the Gospel were endowed with the
extraordinary Gifts of the Holy Ghost; and performed their Duty by a Wisdom and
Inclination, that they were Inspired with. But, as We pretend not to such
Miraculous Gifts; so we are now prepared by the Experience of a Religious Life,
and by the Study of Divine Truth. With these Advantages we offer our selves to
Examination, and the Censure of those whom God has Appointed to Ordain
Ministers, and to Judge what Persons are fit for that Office. We do not Intrude
our selves upon the Sacred Function, without a regular Calling and Approbation;
and therefore we humbly expect, that God will Accept and Prosper our
Endeavors. We know that Men are to account of us, as the Ministers of Christ,
and the Stewards of the Mysteries of God: Moreover, we know it is required in
Stewards, that a Man be found Faithful 1 Cor. 4.1, 2.
. We consider, that we are (according to our proportion) Watch men unto the
House of Israel; and that if we give not Warning unto the Wicked Man, He shall
die in his Sin; but his Blood will be required at Our hands: And if we do give
Warning to the Wicked, and He turn not, He shall die in his Sin, and We have
delivered our Souls Ezekiel. 18.17, 18, 19.
. Our great Care therefore is, To keep back nothing that is necessary or
profitable; but to Teach and Inculcate the Duties of Repentance toward God,
and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ; that we may be pure from the Blood of
all Men Act. 20.20, 21, 26.
. We are Dignified by our Character; and our Solicitude is, that we may act
suitably to it. We are sensible what will befall us, If while a Heathen was
applauded by Heathens, for doing Honor to a vile Office by his Virtue; we
should render a Sacred Office contemptible by our Vice Erasm. de rat. Concion.
l. 1. p. 80.
. I have noted, that our Religion is, by some of the Ancients, called
Philosophy: And we remember, that such as the Philosophy is, such ought the
Professor of it to be Qualis est Philosophia, talem decet esse Professorem.
Erasm. ibid. p. 62, etc.
: And that to ascend to a higher degree of Dignity, and not to ascend to a
higher degree of Virtue, is to descend, and not to ascend Ascendere ad
dignitatis gradum, etc non ascendere and sublimes Virtutes, descendere est
verius quam ascendere. Ibid. p. 152.
. We study to Affect our selves with the Importance of our Office, that others
may be affected by our Exercise of it; knowing that none can speak to the
Heart, but from the Heart Nullus autem potest loqui ad Cor populi nisi loquatur
ex Cord. Id. p. 155. Ut ridentibus arrident, sic flentibus adsunt
Humani vultus, si vis me flere, dolendum
Primum ipsi tibi tunc tua me insortunia laedunt.
Hor. de Art. Poet..
We are aware, that it is sufficient Honor to be the faithful Shepherd of a
small Flock: And that all Souls are equally precious in the sight of God. We
are aware that our Sins, rest not in our own persons, but spread among the
People; and that it is not possible we should be vicious alone, as Isidore
speaks (...). Isid. Ep. 3 22.
. We have a double Care upon us, to be Good Men, and Faithful Guides: For we
know well, that The Ecclesiastical Dignity makes not any One a Christian, as S.
Jerome says Non omnes Episcopi Episcopi sunt, non facit Ecclesiastica dignitas
Christianum. Hieren. Ep, 1.
. We feel the burden of the Office that is upon us, and call to mind our great
Account; and study the Conversion, and not the Applause of Men. The Sin, and
the Impenitency of our Charge, are our shame and sorrow: We mourn over those
who chose Death, and anxiously enquire into our selves, whether we be not
guilty of their Death. This consideration of our Danger makes us Sigh, and
Pray; and we daily recommend them unto the Mercy of God, who are, perhaps, our
Enemies because we tell them the Truth, and call upon them to Amend. But All
that we can do, by a whole Life of Study and Prayer, and Care and Diligence,
is, that we may save some, and that after we have preached unto others, our
selves may not be castaway 1 Cor. 9.27.
. Thus we spend our Days, and our Selves, in Fears and Labors; and are
transported with Joy, when we find we do any good unto those Souls, which are
redeemed by the Blood of the Son of God. If those who belong unto our Charge
knew, how much solicitude for them filled our Hearts; they would almost out of
Pity to us, Hearken, that their Souls might Live. But whether Men will Hear, or
whether they will forbear Ezekiel. 2.5, 7.
, the Obligation abides upon us; and we must bear with the Indiscretion and ill
Usage of the most Perverse, lest we harden them in Sin, by Ours. Thus we take
heed unto our Selves, and to our Doctrine, and continue in it, that so doing we
may (if possible) save our selves, and those that hear us 1 Timothy 4.16.
.

2. We must be Humble to our Brethren, and look more upon the Labor, than the
Dignity of our Vocation; as the Apostle did, when he said, we are your Servants
for Jesus sake. Herein we follow too the Example of our Master, who took upon
Him the form of a Servant, and came not to be ministered unto, but to minister
Mat. 20.28.
. He presided with the Power of a Lord; not as over Slaves, but as over
Disciples; and being Gracious and Gentle, He loved them as Brethren, says S.
Cyprian Discipulis non ut servis dominica potestate praefuit, sed benignus and
mitis fraterna cos charitate dilexit* Cyprian. de bono Patient. p. 199.
. This Meekness notwithstanding, must not hinder that Severity which
Faithfulness obliges us to: For we must sometimes Rebuke sharply, when need
does require, and when Good can be done thereby. Like Surgeons, who are
really most Tender, when they seem most Cruel, as S. Jerome says Putridae carnes
serro indigent and cauterio, nec est medicinae culpa sed vulneris: Cum clementi
crudelitate non parcit medicus, ut parcat saevit, ut misereatur. Hieron. Ep.
147.
. We cannot perform this Office without Honor; but it is not Honor which we
seek, in the performance of it; we design the Profit of those we preside over,
and value our selves by their Improvement Ecclesia mihi credita, cujus
utilitatibus servio, cui non tam praeesse quam prodesse desidero. Aug. Ep. 160.
. This made the Great Apostle say, Though I be free from all Men; yet have I
made my self Servant unto all, that I might gain the more 1 Cor. 9.19.
. It Is no Humility in Him who is properly a Servant, to Act as such, or to
suffer himself to be used as such by his Master: But where Men's Education and
Office are a Dignity, it is a voluntary and Christian Abasement, to do and
suffer any thing, that They may be Useful. Such an Education is necessary to
Us, who Minister about Holy Things: And while any sort of Learning is thought
considerable, Ours will be so. Our Office is like unto our Education; and that
under a double consideration, as Human, and as Divine. If it were no other than
a Human Institution; yet were it an Honorable Employment, to teach Men Wisdom
and Virtue: And so long as those Perfections of Men are had in just Esteem, our
Office cannot be despised. But our Office is not only Excellent, but also
Sacred; and in this performance We are the Immediate Servants of the Most High
God and our Savior. Whosoever therefore has any Reverence for Religion, must
own, that there is no small degree of it due to the Ministers of Religion: And
if God be Venerable, it cannot but be a high Honor to be his Priests 1 Samuel
9.6.
. We are therefore advanced by our Character, that we may descend by our
Humility; and He that humbles himself shall be exalted Luc. 14.11.18.14.
. We have this Obligation, and Encouragement, and Necessity, for Abasing our
selves in doing good unto the Souls of Men: And if we should be ill used, we
must not render Evil for Evil, but remember the Example of our Lord Jesus, who
endured the contradiction of Sinners against Himself; who when He was reviled,
reviled not again; when He suffered, He threatened not Heb. 12.3.1 Pet. 2.23.
. Those very Persons who scorn, or hate us, are part of those whose Souls we
are charged with; and we must upon peril of our Souls, Discharge our selves.
Let us therefore Mourn for those who sin, and Pity those who are miserable: Let
us remember they are our Brethren by Nature and Religion, and let us stoop to
any thing, that they may come to Repentance, and be saved. Christ humbled
Himself unto the death, even the death of the Cross; and We imitate Him but
very faintly, when we willingly suffer any Indignity, pursuant of his Design,
to save a Soul from death Jam. 5.19, 20.
.

Thus the Doctrine of the Text may be applied unto the Ministers of Christ's
Spiritual Kingdom; for the persuading them, 1. To be Faithful in their Office;
and, 2. Humble toward their Brethren.

Secondly, This Doctrine may be applied to the Subjects of this Kingdom; for the
persuading them, 1. To Reverence their Guides: And, 2. Live their Religion.

1. The Subjects of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, i.e. the Professors of his
Religion must be persuaded, to Reverence the Guides of their Souls. As there is
a God, to whom our Services are due, and upon whom our Interest depends; so is
it necessary we should Worship that God, and be Instructed how we may be in
Favor with Him. There must therefore be such as Minister about Holy Things;
and, the reason of all Mankind has taught them, That such Persons are
necessary and venerable. Aristotle, in his Politics enquires, how many things
there are, without which a Nation cannot subsist; among others, he says, The
Fifth and Chief thing is, The Care of Holy Things, which is called Priesthood
(...). Arist. Pol. l. 7.. 41.
. The Designation of such (he says) is manifest, That no Plowman, or Artificer,
ought to be a Priest; because the Gods ought to be Honored by the Nation Id..
43.
. The Office is sacred, and the Persons ought to be so; and care must be taken,
that God may be honored by the choice of his Ministers. The First Precept of
those golden Verses ascribed to Pythagoras, is to Honor the Gods, according to
their Natures (...).
. In order unto that, says Hierocles, a Priest is necessary; because he is
supposed to have an Understanding and a Temper fit for it: He only is Wise, He
only is Acceptable to the Gods, He only knows how to pray (...). Hieroc. p. 25.
. So he. And thus much is unquestionably true, That it is the greatest Interest
of Men, to secure the Favor of God; and that those who have studied the Nature
of Religion, are best able to direct Men how to do this. But it is the duty of
the Ministers of Religion, to Understand, and Teach, and Exemplify it V.
Collect. (...) Ordin of Bish. Pr. and Deac.
; and from them Men can most advantagiously be informed. As every Institution
of Virtue and Wisdom is Divine, (as Plutarch notes Plut. de lib. Educ. (...).
;) so the Institution of Religious Virtue and Wisdom is most Divine. This is,
in an eminent sense, Eternal and Divine; and the Advantage of it is Great and
Everlasting. Nothing else is so considerable as this; and this a Man cannot be
deprived of. A man's Learning and Religion will abide with him, when all other
things fail; and no Adversary can take them away from him. Some things are
consumed by Time, and others by Use; but Piety is improved by Exercise and
Continuance. This Benefit we receive from the Ministers of the Gospel, and
Gratitude obliges us to a respect for them. The Office is neither unnecessary
or unprofitable, as some Enemies of Religion pretend: But as Fools only hate
knowledge Pro. 1.22.
; so Irreligious persons only hate the Ministers of Religion Jo. 3.22;
. All others find by Experience, how much they owe unto their Labors; and
reverence those as Guardian-Angels, who watch for their Souls Rev. 2.2, 8.
. Of Old, when Zeal for Christianity was high, the Veneration of Bishops was so
too: They were not only esteemed among the People, but among Princes, and
almost adored. Witness the Case of the Emperor Theodosius, who submitted to
the Censure of S. Ambrose; and that Authority the Bishop obtained by being a
Bishop indeed Erasm. de rat. Conc. l. 1. p. 123. (...). Isid. Ep. 127.
. The Duty of a Minister of Christ, conciliates a respect to Him, among all who
who honor God and Religion; and nothing can diminish such an One among wise
and good Men, but his doing what is contrary to his Character Erasm. de rat.
Conc. l. 1. p. 164, etc. and p. 73.
. But the Cheerfulness and Alacrity with which a Minister of Christ is to
perform his Office, has a dependence upon the Peoples performing their Duty;
and if the People show themselves sincerely Teachable, God will not suffer them
to want Faithful Teachers: And it comes to pass often, for the Sins of the
People, That instead of a King, God sends them a Tyrant; and instead of a
Shepherd, He sends them a Wolf Erasm. p. 177, 178. Vid. Consecrat. of Bishops.
. Before therefore Christians break forth into Contempt and Indignation against
their Teachers, they should do well strictly to examine themselves, and see if
some Sin of theirs, in despising a Faithful Guide, or being Obstinate against
his good Counsel; has not provoked God, to punish them with a blind and vicious
One. We Ministers are no more than Men, of like Passions Act. 14.15.
and Infirmities with others: But our Office is Divine, and our Labor
difficult, and our Account severe: Therefore the People committed to our
Charge, ought to Excuse the defects of our Nature; to pray for the Success of
our Ministry; and to Reverence the Character of the Servants of the Most High
God. Jamblicus tells us, That there is a double person in a Priest; one Human,
which He has from Nature; and the other Divine, which He has from his
Consecration Jamb. de Mist.
. After him, Isidore says much the same thing, That Priesthood is a Medium
between the Divine and Human Nature (...). Isid. Ep. 20.
. Upon this account the Apostle says, We beseech you Brethren, to know them
which Labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and Admonish you; and to
esteem them very highly in Love for their Works sake; and to be at Peace among
your selves 1 These. 5.20.
. For such Address themselves to Men, in the Name, and by the Command of
Christ; and Christ considers their Usage, and his own. He that receives you,
receives me, (says our Savior) and he that receives Me, receives Him that
sent me Matt 10.40.
: And he that receives a Prophet in the Name of a Prophet, shall receive a
Prophets reward. On the contrary, He that despises you, despises Me; and he
that despises Me, despises Him that sent Me Luc. 10.16.
. The Contempt of the Ministers of Christ, is the Contempt of Christ and of
God; and sure God will vindicate His own Honor, and the Honor of his Faithful
Servants. Therefore let all Profane Persons consider in time; since the
Contempt of their Spiritual Guides will prove their Eternal confusion, if they
do not Repent. It Is a dangerous sign, that such have no True Religion, who
scorn and malign the Ministers of it; and he must be Profane, who has no
Reverence for Persons who are Sacred. Obey them that have the Rule over you,
and submit your selves. For they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
account; that they may do it with joy, and not with grief: For that is
unprofitable for you Hebr. 13.17.
. It is a grief and discouragement, when a Minister of Christ, observes such an
Enmity against Religion; but it is Destruction to those in whom that Enmity is,
if they do not Repent: Let such therefore know, That to scorn and malign those
whose peculiar and distinctive Character it is, that they belong to God; is to
oppose God Himself. That to have no Respect and Reverence for the Messengers of
God, is a Neglect of Him. It Is not therefore for our own sakes, but for yours,
that we say such things as these. For we know our Character is Sacred, and that
All who are Wise and Religious count it so. We know also, that God is
interested in the Honor of his Immediate Servants, and that he takes care of
those who are Faithful to Him. But we dare not be guilty of such vicious
Modesty, as wholly to forbear reminding Christians, what Reverence is due to
their Spiritual Guide; because that Reverence is fundamentally necessary to
Christians profiting by them, and the want of that Reverence, is a fatal Sign,
that their Ministry has no effect on such Men. In short, We are unto God, a
sweet savor of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish. To the
one we are the savor of Death unto Death, and to the other we are the savor
of Life unto Life. So we are, if we do not corrupt the Word of God; but as of
sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ 2. Cor. 2.15,
16, 17.
. Therefore no Case can be more dangerous than that of those Men, who have a
Faithful Minister of Christ, watching for their Souls; and who do not submit to
their Conduct, or Reverence their Function. This is the Reason which moves and
constrains us, to magnify our Office: And may what is said, be heartily
understood, and seriously considered.

Thus must Christians Reverence their Ministers: And,

2. They must Live their Religion.

This may justly be inferred from the foregoing Discourse; in which, the Nature
of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, and the Glories of Him our Supreme Lord, and the
Office of his Inferior Ministers have been accounted for. A Christian professes
the Religion of Christian, and pretends to belong unto the Kingdom of God: He
is under the Obligations of a Disciple and Subject. A Christians Duty is the
Study of Wisdom, and the Practice of Goodness, by the History of Jesus Christ;
Learning his Doctrine, and Imitating his Example. That Wisdom is such as may
influence us to, and direct us in the practice of Goodness; and that Goodness
is such, as the Son of God was the Pattern of, who is the Consubstantial Reason
of the Father. Without that Wisdom, there can be no Virtue: For as Wisdom
separated from Goodness, turns Enthusiasm; so Goodness separated from Wisdom,
turns Superstition. There is no true Holiness without great Understanding, and
an Unlearned is an Ungodly life Si verum fateri volumus, nulla est sancta
rusticitas sicut nulla est rusticana sanctitas; ubicunque est vera Sanctitas
ibi est magna Philosophia, minimeque vulgaris Eruditio* Erasm. de rat. Conc. l.
1. p. 46.
. The Life of Man is the Matter of Virtue, and he who Lives wisely, Lives
religiously. He does not live like a Man, who does not, in some sort, Live like
a Christian; and a Rational, is a Divine Conversation. Religion is a practical
Institution; the True Art of Living well and happily: For Virtue is the Art of
Living in which all Action is contained, says Philo (...). Philo de Leg. l. 1.
p. 80.
. Reason and Religion are of the same Original, and Nature; and what is
Irrational is Irreligious (...). Philo, ibid p. 43.
, As Philo said of the Jewish Virtue, so Justin M. said of Christian Piety, it
consists not in Words, but Deeds Justin M. ad Gr p. 33.
. No man must pretend to a Practical Institution, and not practice by it: All
such Pretenses are so grossly false, that they are very ridiculous. But as the
Christian Institution is the Perfection of Religion, and that Religion is a
Divine Life The Life of God, Ephesians. 4.18.
; so the Conversation of a Christian, must excel in Virtue. Except our
Righteousness exceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (i. e. the
most celebrated among the Jews,) we can in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven (h) Matt. 5.20.
. We cannot be happy in the other World; nor Religious in this. S. Cyprian in
his Tract concerning Patience, gives this Character of Christians; We Brethren,
are they, who are Philosophers, not in Words but in Deeds; who do not pretend
wisdom in Habit, but in Truth; who know rather the Conscience, than the Boast
of Virtue: Who do not Speak, but Live great things, as the Servants and
Worshippers of God (i) Nos autem fratres charissimi, qui Philosophi, non verbis
sed factis sumus, nec vestitu sapientiam, sed veritate praeserimus, qui
Virtutum magis Conscientiam quam jactantiam novimus, qui non loquimur magna sed
vivimus, quasi servi and cultores Dei. Cyprian. de Patient.
. It Is not in Speculation, but in Practice; it is not in some single Acts, but
in a course of Life, that Christianity does consist 1 Pet. 1.15.
. Job gives the description of True Wisdom, and represents it as coming from
God: And unto Man he said; Behold, the Fear of the Lord, that is Wisdom; and to
depart from Evil, is Understanding Job 28.28.
. Thus we must be Wise in this Life, or we must be Miserable in the next. For
we have not another Life afforded us, that we may seek Wisdom in this, and be
Wise in that: It Is necessary we should do both in this Non enim nobis altera
vita conceditur, ut cum quaeramus in hae, sapientiam, in illa sapere possimus:
In hac utrumque fieri necesse est. Lactant. l. 3. c. 16.
. This is the great Design of the Gospel, which is called the Grace of God; and
that Grace is saving, as it teaches this. The Grace of God, that brings
Salvation, has appeared to all Men; teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World: Looking for the Blessed Hope, and the glorious Appearing of the Great
God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave Himself for us, that He might
redeem us from all Iniquity, and purify unto Himself a peculiar People,
zealous of good Works (...). Tit. 2.11, 12, 13, 14.
. This is the Design of our Lord, and this is the Duty of his Disciples: And to
this End, the Performances, of his Ministers tend; and agreeable is their
Obligation. I charge thee (says S. Paul to Timothy) therefore before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead, at his Appearing
and his Kingdom; Preach the Word, be instant, in season and out of season;
reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine 2 Timothy 4.1, 2.
. The Kingdom of God signifies that state Eminently, which shall be at the
Resurrection of the Dead Vid. Grot. ad Matt. 5.19. and 16.28.
. Then they that sleep in the Dust of the Earth, shall awake, some to
everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt: And they that be
Wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many
unto righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever Dan. 12.2, 3.
. Let all then who are Christians, Take heed unto themselves. And let us who
are Ministers take heed unto our selves, and to all the Flock over which the
Holy Ghost has made us Overseers; to feed the Church of God, which He has
purchased with his own Blood; That when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, we may
receive that Crown of Glory that fades not away Hebr. 2.1, 2, 3.
. And, O Lord God, keep this for ever in the Imagination of the thoughts of the
Heart of Us thy Servants, and prepare our Hearts unto thee 1 Chronicles. 29.18.
.

ALmighty God, the Giver of all good Gifts, who of thy Divine Providence have
appointed diverse Orders in thy Church: Give thy Grace, we humbly beseech thee,
to all those, who are called to any Office and Administration in the same; and
so replenish them with the Truth of thy Doctrine, and endue them with Innocence
of Life, That they may faithfully serve before Thee, to the glory of thy great
Name, and the benefit of thy Holy Church, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

