SEVERAL PAPERS Lately Written and Published by JUDGE IENKINS, Prisoner in
the Tower: viz.

1. His Vindication. 2. The Armies indemnity: with a Declaration, showing, how
every Subject ought to be tried for Treasons, Felonies, and all other Capital
Crimes. 3. Lex Terrae. 4. A Cordial for the good people of London. 5. A
Discourse touching the inconveniences of a long continued Parliament. 6. An
Apology for the Army.
ANNO 1647.

The Vindication of Judge Jenkins, Prisoner in the Tower, the 29. of Apr. 1647.
I Was convened upon Saturday the 10. of this month of April before a
Committee of the House of Commons, wherein Master Corbet had the Chair; and I
was there to be examined upon some questions then to be propounded to me; to
which questions I refused to give any other answer then that which was set down
in a paper I then delivered to the said M. Corbet, which follows in these
words:

Gentlemen, I stand committed by the House of Commons for High Treason, for not
acknowledging, nor obeying the power of the Two Houses, by adhering to the King
in this War. I deny this to be Treason, for the supreme and only power, by
the Laws of this Land, is in the King. If I should submit to any examination
derived from your Power, which by the Negative Oath stands in opposition to the
Kings Power, I should confess the Power to be in you, and so condemn my self
for a Traitor, which I neither ought nor will do.

I am sworn to obey the King, and the Laws of this Land: you have not power to
examine me by those Laws, by the Kings Writ, Patent, or Commission; if you can
produce either thereof, I will answer the questions you shall propound;
otherwise I cannot answer thereto, without the breach of my Oath, and the
violation of the Laws, which I will not do to save my life.

You your selves, all of you this Parliament, have sworn that the King is our
only and supreme Governor: your Protestation, your Vow and Covenant, your
solemn League and Covenant, your Declarations, all of them publish to the
Kingdom, that your scope is the maintenance of the Laws; those Laws are and
must be derived to us, and enlivened by the only supreme Governor, the
Fountain of justice, and the life of the Law, the King. The Parliaments are
called by his writs; the Judges sit by his Pattents, so of all other Officers;
the Cities and Towns corporate, govern by the Kings Charters; and therefore
since by the Law I cannot be examined by you, without a power derived by His
Majesty, I neither can, nor will, nor ought you to examine me upon any
question. But if as private Gentlemen, you shall be pleased to ask me any
questions, I shall really and truly answer every such question, as you shall
demand.

April 10. 1647. David Jenkins.


This paper has been misrepresented to the good people of this City by a
Printed one, styling it my Recantation, which I own not; and besides is in it
self repugnant (just like these times) the Body falls out with the Head. To
vindicate my self from that Recantation, and to publish to the world the
realitie of the Paper then delivered to M. Corbet, and the matter therein
contained, I have published this ensuing discourse.

No person who has committed Treason, Murder, or Felony, has any assurance at
all for so much as one hour of life, Lands or Goods without the Kings gracious
pardon, 27. Hen. 8. Cap. 24.

The King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster, whereby they may
give any assurance at all to any person, in any thing, for any such offense.

1. The House of Commons has declared to the Kingdom in their Declarations of
the 28. of November last to the Scots Papers, page 8. That the King at this
time is not in a condition to govern. No person or thing can derive a virtue
to other men, or things, which it self has not: and therefore it is
impossible that they should have a virtue from the King to govern, which they
declare he has not himself to give.

2. 5. Elizab. Cap. 1.
The Law of the Land is, That no person in any Parliament has a voice in the
House of Commons, but that he stands a person to all intents and purposes as if
he had never been elected or returned, if before he sit in the House, he take
not his Oath upon the holy Evangelists, that the Kings Majesty is the only and
supreme Governor over all persons in all Causes. All the Members of the said
House have taken it, and at all times as they are returned do take it;
otherwise they have no color to intermeddle with the public Affairs. How
does this Solemn and Legal Oath agree with their said Declaration, That the
King is in no condition to govern? By the one it is sworn, He is the only
supreme Governor; by the other, that he is not in a condition to govern.

2. The Oath is not, that the K. was, or ought to be, or had been, before he
was seduced by ill Council, our only and supreme Governor in all Causes,
over all persons; but in the present tense, that he is our only and supreme
Governor, at this present, in all Causes and over all persons. So they the
same persons swear one thing, and declare to the Kingdom the contrary of the
same thing, at the same time, in that which concerns the weal of all this
Nation.

4. The Ministers in the Pulpits do not say, what they swear in the House of
Commons. Whoever heard s^thence this unnatural War, any of their Presbyters
attribute that to His Majesty which they swear? The reason is, their Oath is
taken at Westminster amongst themselves: That which their Ministers pray and
preach, goes amongst the people. To tell the people that the King is now their
only and supreme Governor in all Causes, is contrary to that the Houses do
now practice, and to all they act and maintain. They, the two Houses forsooth,
are the only and supreme Governors in default of the King, for that he has
left his great Council and will not come to them, and yet the King desires to
come, but they will not suffer him, but keep him prisoner at Holmby: so well
do their Actions and Oaths agree.

5. They swear now King CHARLES is their only and supreme Governor; but with
a resolution at the time of the Oath taking, and before and after, that he
shall not be only or supreme Governor, or only and supreme, but not any
Governor at all: For there is no point of Government, but for some years past
they have taken to themselves, and used his name only, to abuse and deceive
the people.

6. That this virtuall power is a mere fiction, their Propositions sent to
Oxford, to Newcastle, to be signed by the King, do prove it so. What needs
this ado, if they have the virtuall power with them at Westminster?

7. To affirm that the Kings power (which is the virtue they talk of) is
separable from his Person, is High Treason by the Law of the Land; which is so
declared by that learned man of the Law, Sir Edward Coke; so much magnified by
this present Parliament; who in the 7. part of his Reports, in Calv. Case, fo.
11. says thus: In the reign of Edward the second, the Spencers, the Father
and Son, to cover the Treason hatched in their hearts, invented this damnable
and damned opinion, that Homage and Oath of Ligeance was more by reason of the
Kings Crown, (that is, of his politic capacity) then by reason of the person
of the King: upon which opinion they inferred 3. execrable and detestable
consequences. 1. If the King do not demean himself by reason in the right of
his Crown, his lieges are bound by Oath to remove the King. 2. seeing that the
King could not be reformed by suit of Law, that ought to be done per aspertee
that is by force. 3. That his lieges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in
default of him: All which were condemned by two Parliaments, one in the reign
of Edw, 2. called exilium Hugonis le Spencer; and the other in Anno 1. Edw. 3.
cap. 2.

And that the natural body and politic makes one indivisible body, and that
these two bodies incorporate in one person make one body, and not diverse, is
resolved as the Law of England. 4. Eliz. Ploydon Com. fol. 213. by Sir Cobert
Catlin, Lord Chief Justice of England, Sir James Dier, Lord Chief Justice of
the Common Pleas, the Lord Sanders, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and by
the rest of the Judges, viz. Justice Rastall, Justice Brown, Justice Corbet,
Justice Weston, Baron Frevyll, Conne and Pewdrell, Sergeant Gerrard Atturny
General; Carre^ Atturny of the Dutch: Plowdon the learned man of that age,
in the knowledge of the Law, and Customs of the Realm.

8. The Law in all ages without any controversy is and has been: That no Act
of Parliament binds the Subjects of this Land without the assent of the King,
either for person, Lands, Goods, or Fame. No man can show any syllable, letter,
or line to the contrary in the books of the Law, or printed Acts of
Parliament, in any age in this Land. If the vertuall Power be in the Houses,
there needs no assent of the Kings. The styles of the Acts printed from 9.
Hen. 3. to 1. Hen. 7. were either, 9 Hen. 3. Magna Charta. So in every age till
this day, and in every Kings time, as appears by the Acts in Print. 1 part of
the Instit Sect. 234. in fine, where many of the Law-Bookes are cited. 7. H.
7.14.12. of Hen. 7.20.
The King ordaines at his Parliament, etc. or the King ordains by the advice
of his Prelates and Barons, and at the humble Petition of the Commons, etc. In
Hen. 7. his time the Style altered, and has sithence continued thus, It is
ordained by the Kings Majesty, and the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
Commons in this present Parliament assembled. So that always the Assent of the
King gives the life to all, as the soul to the body; and therefore our
Law-Bookes call the King the Fountain of Justice, and the life of the Law.

9. 2. H. 4. c. 22. 4 pars instit. 42. M. Prin in his Treatise of the great
Seal Fol. 17.27. Hen. 8. Chap. 24.
Mercy as well as Justice belongs by the law of the Land only to the King. This
is confessed by Master Prynn, and it is so without any quection: The King can
only pardon, and never more cause to have sufficient pardons then in such
troublesome times as these, and God send us pardons and peace. None can give
any pardon, but the King by the Law of the Land: The whole and sole power of
pardoning Treasons and Felonies belongs to the King, are the words of the Law,
and it is a delusion to take it from any other and utterly invalid. 27 Hen. 8.
Cap 24.

10. Queen Elizabeth summoned her first Parliament, to be held the 23. of
January, in the first year of Her Majesty's Reign. The Lords and Commons
assembled by force of the same writ the 23. day the Queen fell sick and could
not appear in her person in Parliament that day, and therefore prorogued it
until the 25. of the same Month of January. Resolved by all the Judges of
England, 3 Of Eliz. Dier. 203.
that the Parliament began not the day of the return of the writ, viz. the 23.
of January, when the Lords and Commons appeared, but the 25. of the said month
when the Queen came in person: Which shows evidently that this virtuall
presence is a mere deluding fiction that has no ground in Law, reason, or
sense. They have the King now a prisoner at Holmby, with guards upon him, and
yet they govern by the vertuall Power of their Prisoner. These are some of the
causes and reasons which moved me to deliver that paper to Master Corbet, which
I am ready to justify with my life, and should hold it a great honor to die
for the honorable and holy Laws of the Land.

That which will save this Land from destruction, is an Act of Oblivion, and
His Majesty's gracious general pardon, the Soldiers their Arears, and every
man his own, and Truth and Peace established in the Land, and a favorable
regard to the satisfaction of tender Consciences.

April 29. 1647. David Jenkins.


THE ARMIES INDEMNITY, With Addition; Together, With a Declaration, showing how
every Subject of England ought to be tried for Treasons, Felonies, and all
other Capital Crimes, as it is set down in the Laws of the LAND.

By David Jenkins, now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Armies Indemnity, etc.
UPon the publishing of the Ordinance of the 22. of May last, for the Indemnity
of the Army, certain Gentlemen well affected to the peace of the Kingdom, and
safety of the Army, desired me to set down in writing, whether by the Law of
the Land, the said Ordinance did secure them from danger, as to the matters
therein mentioned. For whose satisfaction in a business wherein the lives and
fortunes of so many men were concerned, and the Peace of the Kingdom involved,
I conceived I was bound in duty and conscience, faithfully and truly to set
down what the Law of the Land therein is, which accordingly I have with all
sincerity expressed in this following discourse.

The danger of the Army by the Law of the Land is apparent to all men. 25. Ed.
3. c. 11. 2 Ri. 2. cap. 3. 1 Hen. 4. c. 10. 1 and 2. Phil. and Mary. c. 10
It is high Treason by the Law of the Land to leavy war against the King, to
compass or imagine his death, or the death of his Queen, or of his eldest
Son, to counterfeit his Money, or his great Seal; They are the words of the
Law. Other Treasons then are specified in that Act, are declared to be no
Treasons until the King and his Parliament shall declare otherwise, they are
the very words of the Law. 3. Pars instit. Page 22. and 2. pars instit. Page
47, 48. and 4. pars instit. P. 23.48.29.
King and Commons, King and Lords, Commons and Lords, cannot declare any other
thing to be Treason, then there is declared: as appears by the Lord Cook in
the places cited in the Margin: A Law-booke published by order of the House of
Commons this Parliament, 3. Pars instit. cap. Treason Pa. 9, 10, and 12. Mr S.
John the Solicitor in his Speech upon the araignment of the Earl of Straford,
Printed by order of the House of Commons. p. 7. 13.
as appears in the last leaf of the second part of the Institutes, published
likewise by their Order.

The Resolutions of all the Judges of England, upon the said Statute of the 25.
Ed. 3. (as appears in the said third part of the Institutes, Chap.
High Treason) have been, that to imprison the King until he agree to certain
demands is High Treason; to seize his Ports, Forts, Magazine for War, are
High Treason: to alter the Laws is High Treason.

The word King in the Statute of 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. must be understood of the
Kings natural person: for that person can only dye, have a wife, have a son,
or be imprisoned.

The Privilege of Parliament protects no man from treason or felony, 4. Pars
instit. c. Parl. p. 25.
howbeit he be a Member: much less can they protect others. Those who cannot
protect themselves, have no color to make Ordinances to protect others who are
no Members.

The Statute of 11. 11. M. 7. cap. 1.
Hen. 7. cap. 1. does by express words free all persons who adhere to the King.

The Army by an Act of Indemnity free themselves from all those dangers,
Stamford. l. 2. fol. 99. 18 Ed. 3. Statutes at large 144. 20 Ed. 3. c. 1. 11.
Rye. 2. c. 10. 4 Pars instit. Page 23.48.29.
which an Ordinance can no more do then repeal all the Laws of the Land, the
whole and sole power by Law to pardon all Treasons, Felonies, etc. being solely
and wholly in the King, as is cleared by the Statute of 27. H. 8. c. 24. and
the Law of the Land in all times.

Having showed the danger of the Army by the Law of the Land, next consider the
Ordinance of the Lords and Commons published the 22. of May last for their
Indemnity. By the ensuing discourse it does appear they have no Indemnity at
all thereby.

The Indemnity proposed by the Ordinance, is for any Act done by the authority
of the Parl. or for the service or benefit thereof: and that the Judges and all
other Ministers of Justice shall allow thereof.

This Ordinance cannot secure the Army for these reasons:

I.
Their Judges are sworn to do justice according to the Law of the Land, 3.
Pars instit. Page 22. 2 Pars instit. 47, 48. 1. Pars instit. 193. Princes case
^. ^^perte.
and therefore the Judges must be forsworn men, if they obey it: because an
Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land; and no man can believe they
will perjure themselves so palpably and visibly in the eye of the world.

II.
All trials for Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Magna Charta cap. 29. 25. Ed. 3.
cap 4. 28. Ed. 3. cap. 3. 37. Ed. 3. cap. 8. 42. Ed. 3 cap. 3.
and such like Capital offenses, are by the Law of the Land to be by
indictment of a Jury appointed out of the Neighborhood where the offense was
done. There is no common Jury-man but understands what the Law is in these
cases as well as the best Lawyers: and the Law makes the Jury Judges of the
fact, whereby the soldier is left to their mercy whom he has offended (as
some of them have lately had woeful experience, Declaration of the Army
presented at Warden, and Printed by the appointment of the Officers subscribed.
and thereupon do rightly apprehend their danger) Now no man can think that
the Jurors will perjure themselves to acquit the soldiers for robbing and
plundring of the Countries, and thereby utterly destroy their own Rights and
Properties.

III.
If the Judges conceive (as they may) that the taking of other men's horses or
goods, is not by the Authority of Parliament, or for the service and benefit
thereof, the soldier dies for it: they may say to steal or rob any man of his
goods is not for the Parliaments service but against it, which was always the
sense of the people, and doubtless the Jurors will not think otherwise.

IV.
This Ordinance is restrained to the authority, 4. Pars instit. page 1. 3. Pars
instit. page 22. 1. Pars instit. page 1. 28. H. 8. s^l 11. Dier 38. H. 8. sol.
60. 12. H. 7.20. 1. Pars instit. 159. Princes case 8. reports.
service or benefit of the Parliament. The Lords and Commons make no more a
Parliament by the Law of the Land then a body without a head makes a man: for a
Parliament is a body composed of a King their head; the Lords and Commons the
Members. All three together make one body, and that is the Parliament, and none
other. And the Judges may, ought, and I believe will according to their Oaths
proceed as not bound at all by this Ordinance. For it is restrained to the
Authority of Parliament, ^^vice or benefit thereof, whereas the two Houses are
not the ^^^liament, but only parts thereof, and by the abuse and
misunderstanding of this word Parliament, they have miserably deceived the
people.

V.
This Ordinance is against their Ordinances which expressly prohibit plundring,
28 Aug. 1642. Col. of Ord. first part. 565.592.605. several Ordinances.
and so there is one Ordinance against another, whereby their Judges have an
outlet to proceed on the one or the other, and thereby the Army has no manner
of security.

VI.
The word Parliament is a French word (howbeit such Assemblies were before the
Norman Conquest here) and signifies in that Language to consult and treat: 1.
Pars iastit. 109. 1 Pars instit. 110. 4 Pars p. 49.
that is the sense of the word Parler in the French Tongue. The Writ whereby
the two Houses are assembled, which is called the Writ of Summons of
Parliament, at all times, and at this Parliament used, and which is the
warrant, ground and foundation of their meeting, is for the Lords of the House
of Peers, the Judges and Kings Council to consult and treat with the King
(that is the Parler) of great concernments, touching 1. the King, secondly, the
defense of his Kingdom, thirdly, the defense of the Church of England. It
cannot be a Parliament that will not Parle with their King, but keep him in
prison, and not suffer him to come to them and parle; and therefore the Law,
and sense, and reason, informing every man that is no manner of Parliament (the
King with whom they should parle, being so restrained that they will not parle
with him) The Army has no manner of security by this Ordinance: For their
indemnification referres to that which is not in being until the King be at
liberty.

VII.
It is more then probable that their Judges before the last circuit had
instructions to the effect or this Ordinance: The Common Soldiers sccond
Apology. 6. Grievances of the Army published 15. May last. Three grievances of
Col. Riche's Regiment.
but they the Judges making conscience of their Oath, laid aside the said
Instructions, and ought, and may, and it is believed will no more regard this
Ordinance, then the said instructions: What was done in the last circuit, the
Army well knows, touching many of their fellow soldiers.

VIII.
The Houses in their first Proposition to his Majesty for a safe and
well-grounded peace, sent to Neweastle to desire a pardon from his Majesty for
themselves: they who desire a pardon, cannot grant a pardon (common reason
dictates this to every man) and therefore that the Army should accept an
Indemnity from them, who seek it for themselves, or should conceive it of any
manner of force, is a fancy: so that no man in the whole Army but may
apprehend, that it is vain and a mere delusion.

IX.
His Majesty by his gracious Message of the 12. of May fast, the 22 of the
same, has offered an Act of Oblivion, and a general pardon to all his people,
this done the Law does indemnifie the Army (without all manner of scruple) for
any thing that has been done: for it is an Act of Parliament when the King
and two Houses concur, and binds all men. There is no safety by the
Ordinance; There is safety by an act of Parliament: And will not reasonable men
prefer that which is safe before that which is unsafe?

X.
His Majesty by his said Letter agrees to pay the Arreares of the Army; I am
sure that it is a public Debt, and the chiefest and the first that by the two
Houses should be paid, and before any Divident or Gratuities bestowed among
themselves; for their Blood, Limbs, and Lives have put and kept the both
Houses at rest in the power they have: So by this concurrence of his Majesty
for your indemnity, and for your Arreares, The Army have not an Ordinance, or
the Public Faith, but the Law of the Land to make sure unto them their
Indemnity for all Acts, and for their Arreares, and therewith also bring peace
to the Land.

XI.
The Kingdom and people generally desire these things. To such an Army, just
and reasonable things must not be denied; the things formerly proposed are most
just and reasonable, you may have them if you will; if you will not, you render
this Kingdom miserable; Mr Pyms Speech against the Earl of Strafford. p. 16
Sixth consideration Printed by the command of the House of Commons.
wherein you will have your shares of miseries: The head and the body are such
an incorporation as cannot be dissolved without the destruction of both.

The Additional Ordinance of both houses passed the fifth of June instant for
the fuller indemnity of the Army, makes nothing at all to the matter. 1. For
that it extends not to Felony, Homicide, Burglary, Robbery, or any other
capital crime, which is the maine business insisted upon, and most concerns
the Soldiers security.

II.
The both Houses in the said Additionall Ordinance, say, that it is expedient
that all offenses be pardoned and put in oblivion. Pardon and Oblivion cannot
be understood to be for a time, but for ever: and they themselves confess,
that an Ordinance is not binding but pro tempore which with the most
advantageous Interpretation can be but a reprieve or delay of the execution of
the Law, and therefore that cannot pardon or put in oblivion by their own
showing.

But the Law of the Land is, 27. H. 8. c. 24.
(and so it has constantly been practiced in all times) that no persons of
what estate soever, have any power to pardon Treason, Felony, or any other
offenses but the King only, who has the sole and whole power to pardon all
such crimes whatsoever. And in the same manner an Ordinance is of no Authority
at all to take away the right of private men's actions, by any evidence it can
give: In truth all the evidence that this Ordinance will give is, that it
records to posterity nothing but a lawless and distempered time.

For remedy therefore I say again, it is a certain truth, This Kingdom
without an act of Oblivion, and a general Pardon, and the payment of Soldiers
arreares, and a meet regard had to tender Consciences, will unavoidably be
ruined.

June 10. 1647. David Jenkins, Prisoner in the Tower of London.

Sundry Acts of Parliament mentioned and cited in the Armies Indemnities: set
forth in words at large for the better satisfaction of such as desire to be
rightly informed.
25. Edw. 3. Chap. 2. A Declaration what offenses shall be adjudged Treason.
Whereas diverse opinions have been before this time, in what case Treason
shall be said, and in what not: The K. at the request of the Lords and of the
Commons has made a Declaration in the manner as hereafter follows: That is
to say, When a man does compass, or imagine the death of our Lord the King, or
of our Lady the Queen, or of their eldest Son and Heir: or if a man do violate
the Kings companion, or the Kings eldest daughter unmarried, or the wife of the
Kings eldest son and heir: or if a man do levy war against the Lord our
King in his Realm, or be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, giving
to them aid and comfort in the Realm, or elsewhere, and thereof be probably
attainted of open deed by people of their condition; And if a man counterfeit
the Kings great or privy Scale, or his Money: and if a man bring false money
into this Realm, counterfeit to the money of England, and the money called
Lusburgh, or other like to the said money of England, etc.

11. Hen. 7. Cap. 1. None that shall attend upon the King, and do him true
service, shall be attainted or forfeit any thing.
THe King our Sovereign Lord calling to his remembrance the duty of allegiance
of his Subjects of this his Realm, and that they by reason of the same are
bound to serve their Prince and Sovereign Lord for the time being in his wars,
for the defense of Him and the Land, against every rebellion power and might
raised, reared against him, and with him to enter and abide in service in
battle, if case so require, and that for the same service what fortune ever
fall by chance in the same battle against the mind and will of the Prince (as
in this Land sometime passed has been seen) that it is not reasonable, but
against all laws, reason and good conscience, that the said Subjects going
with their Sovereign Lord in wars, attending upon him in his person, or being
in other places by his commandment within this Land or without any thing
should lose or forfeit, for doing their duty or service of Allegiance. It be
therefore ordained, enacted, and established by the King our Sovereign Lord,
by the advice and assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from
henceforth no manner of person or persons whatsoever he or they be, that attend
upon the King and Sovereign Lord of this Land for the time being, in his
person, and do him true and faithful service of allegiance in the same, or be
in other places by his commandment in his wars, within this Land or without,
that for the said deed and true duty of allegiance he or they be in no wise
convict or attaint of high treason, nor of other offenses for that cause, by
act of Parliament, or otherwise by any process of Law, whereby he or any of
them shall lose or forfeit life, lands, tenements, rents, possessions,
hereditaments, goods, chattels, or any other things, but to be for that deed
and service utterly discharged of any vexation, trouble, or loss. And if any
act or acts, or other process of the Law hereafter thereupon for the same,
happen to be made contrary to this Ordinance, that then that act or acts, or
other process of the Law, whatsoever they shall be, stand and be utterly void.
Provided always, that no person or persons shall take any benefit or advantage
by this Act, which shall hereafter decline from his or their said allegiance.

Cap. 24. In the Statute of 27. H. 8. It is enacted, that no person or persons
of what estate or degree soever they be of, shall have any power or authority
to pardon or remit any treason, murders, man-slaughters, or any kind of
Fellonies, etc. but that the King shall have the sole and whole power and
authority thereof united and knit to the Imperial Crown, as of right it
appertains, etc. And in the same it is enacted further, that none shall have
power, of what estate, degree, or condition soever they be, to make Justices of
Air, Justices of Assize, Justices of the Peace, etc. but all such officers and
Ministers shall be made by Letters Patents under the Kings great Seal in the
name and by the authority of the King and his Heirs and Successors Kings of
this Realm.

In the first year of Queen Mary, and the first Chapter, It is enacted by the
Queen, with the consent of the Lords and Commons, That no deed, or offense, by
Act of Parliament made treason, shall be taken, deemed, or adjudged to be high
treason, but only such as be declared and expressed to be treason by the Act of
Parliament, made 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. before mentioned.

A Declaration of M. David Ienkins, now Prisoner in the Tower of London, one of
His Majesty's Judges in Wales, for trials of Treasons, Murders, Felonies, and
all other capital crimes, that they ought only to be by Iuries and not
otherwise, unless it be by Act of Parliament.
THe common Law of this Land is, That every freeman is subject to a trial by
bill of Attainder in Parliament, wherein His Majesty and both Houses must
necessarily concur, for that trial and attainder is an Act of Parliament to
which all men are subject to.

Mag. Chart. cap. 29. 2 part. instit. fol. 28 29.46.48, 49, 50. composed by Sir
Ed. Cook and published by the Order of the House of Commons in May 1641.
No man shall otherwise be destroyed, etc but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the common Law of the Land. Peers to Noblemen are Noblemen, Peers
to the Commons are Knights, Gentlemen, etc. Judgment of Peers refers to Peers,
those words, The Law of the Land, refers to the Commons, the Law of the Land is
for the trial of the life of a free Commoner, by Indictment, Presentment of
good and lawful men where the deed is done, or by Writ original of the common
Law, all this is declared in Magna Charta c. 29. and by 25. Ed. 3. c. 4. 28.
Ed. 3. c. 3. 37. Ed. 3. c. 8. 42. Ed. 3. c. 3. If the Lords will try any man by
an Ordinance, they destroy that excellent Act of Magna Charta, and all those
other good Laws.

Sir Simon de Bereford a free Commoner of England was condemned by the Lords to
death by an Ordinance, which after the Lords better considering the matter,
that they might be acquitted of that sentence; became suitors to the King, that
what they had so done in future time might not be drawn into president, because
that which they had so done was against the Law, Rot. Par. 1. roll 4. E. 3.
Number. 2. part inst page 50. with this (...). grees Sir Jo^n Lees case, Rot. Par.
42. E. 3. Number. 22.23. 2. inst. fol. 50.
with this agrees the practice and usage of all times in this Land, all the
free Commoners of this Kingdom have always been tried and acquitted or
condemned in capital causes by Jurers of their equals.

An Ordinance binds not in Law at all, See 4. part. inst. fol. 23.48.292. 2.
part. inst. f. 47, 48.
and but pro tempore, as the two Houses now affirm, a man's life cannot be
tried by that which is not binding, and to continue for all times, for a life
lost cannot be restored.

By an Act of Parliament of the 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary, chap. 10. It is
enacted that a^^ trials for Treason hereafter to be had, shall be according to
the course of the common law.

If the crime charged upon any be treason against the two Houses (against the
Parliament it cannot be, for there is no Parliament without the King) that is
no Treason in Law, as appears by 25. Ed. 3. chap. 2. 11. R. 2. chap. 3. 1 Hen.
4. cha. 10. 1. and 2. Philip and Mary, chap. 10. 3 part. of the institutes Page
23.

An Act of Parliament to make any a Judge where he is party, is a void act, Dr
^o^ams case 8. part of Cooks reports.
for none can be a Judge and party in the same cause, and therefore the House
of Peers being a party touching the crime charged upon any man, whom they would
try by an Ordinance for Treason against both Houses, cannot be a Judge.

By the Petition of Right, Petition of Right. 3. Car. Regis.
if any man deserve death he ought to suffer the same according to the Laws of
the Land established, and not otherwise; but an Ordinance of the Lords is no
established law.

The Protestation, the Vow and Covenant, the solemn League and Covenant, the
Declarations of both Houses, had, made and published sithence this unnatural
War, are amongst other things sworn and set down to be for the maintenance
of the Laws, the people of this land ought to enjoy the benefit of their
Birthright the Law of the Land, and the making good of the said Protestation,
Vow and Covenant, League and Covenant, and Declarations, otherwise truth must
be said and will be said, that there is brought in a new arbitrary and
tyrannical government.

If the Lords have taken one man's life by an Ordinance, they are not bound to
take any more, and the case differs in case any appeal be made from a trial
by Ordinance to a trial at common law, which was not done by that man whose
life was taken away by an Ordinance.

The Lords ought to remember, that his Majesty and his Progenitors have made
them a house of Peers, they are trusted to counsel him in peace, Nevels case
8. part Cooks reports.
and defend him in war, his Majesty in Parliament is to consult and treat with
the Peers, and with his Counsel at Law, Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney, and
Solicitor, and Masters of the Chancery, the Lords and that counsel by the
respective Writs of Summons to Parliament are to give Counsel, 4 Pars instit.
fol. 4.9.
the House of Commons by their Writ to perform and consent.

In the House of Lords, the Court of Parliament only is, for they only examine
upon oath, 1 H. 7. fol. 20.
with them, the King in person sits, and by them there erroneous judgments 14.
Ed. 3. c. 5.
(upon a Petition to his Majesty for obtaining of a Writ of Error) by the
advice of the Judges are reversed, or affirmed, etc. the Lords are to remember
that their eminency and grandeur, is preserved by the Laws, if they leave all
to will, and dishonor their King, and make nothing of the Laws, they will
make nothing of themselves in the end.

And therefore, it is well worth your observation what was said by Mr John Pym
a Member of the House of Commons in his speech against the Earl of Strafford,
in the beginning of the Parliament, which speech is published by the express
order of the House of Commons, the words are these. The Law is that which puts
a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and unjust, if you take away
the Law, all things will fall into a confusion, every man will become a Law
unto himself, which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs
produce many great enormities: Lust will become a Law, and Envy will become a
Law, Covetousness and Ambition will become Laws, and what di^tates, what
decisions such Laws will produce, may easily be discerned, i See part. book
deel. page 140.163.
etc. They that love this Commonwealth as things now stand, will use all
means to procure an Act of Oblivion, a general pardon from his Majesty, the
Soldiers their Arrears, and tender consciences a just and reasonable
satisfaction, else we all must perish, first or last.

God preserve His Majesty, and the Laws wherein their Lordships and the whole
Kingdom are concerned. May. 17. 1647. David Ienkins Prisoner in the Tower of
London.

FINIS.
TO THE HONORABLE Societies of Grayes-Jnne, and of the rest of the Innes of
Court, and to all the Professors of the LAW.
I Have now spent Forty five years in the Study of the Laws of this Land
being my profession, under and by the conduct of which Laws this commonwealth
has flourished for some ages past in great splendour and happiness (jam seges
est ubi Troja fuit) The great and full body of this Kingdom has of late
years fallen into an extreme sickness it is truly said that the cause of the
disease being known, the disease is easily cured. There is none of you I hope,
but does heartily wish the recovery of our common parent, our native country
(Moribus antiquis stat res Britannica) I call God to witness that this discourse
of mine has no other end then my wishes of the common^g^od: how far I have
been from Ambition, my life past, and your own knowledge of me, can abundantly
inform you, and many of you well know, that I ever d^tested the ship (...) and
monopolies, and that in the beginning of this Parliament, for opposing the
excesses of one of the Bishopes, I lay under three Excommunications and the
Examination of seeventy seven Articles in the high Commission Court. His sacred
Majesty: (God is my witness) made me a judge in the parts of Wales against my
will, and all the means I was able to make; and a patent for my place was sent
me for the which I have not paid one farthing, and the place is of so
inconsiderable a benefit that it is worth but 80. l. per Annum when paid, and
it cost me every year I served twice as much out of mine own estate in the
way of an ordinary and frugall expense. That which gave me comfort was that I
knew well that his Majesty was a just and a prudent Prince.

In the time of the Attournyships of Master Noy and the Lord Banks, they Were
pleased to make often use of me, and many referrences concerning suits at Court
upon that occasion came to my knowledge, and as I shall answer to God upon my
last account this is truth, that all or most of the referrences which I have
seen in that Kind (and I have seen many) were to this effect, That his Majesty
would be informed by his Counsel if the suits preferred were agreeable to the
Laws, and not inconvenient to his people, before he would pass them. [What
could a just and pious Prince do more?] Gentlemen you shall find the Cause and
the Curse of the present great distemper in this discourse, and God Prosper it
in your hands, thoughts, and words, as the Case deserves.

Hold to the Laws, this great body recovers: for sake them, it will certainly
perish. I have resolved to tender my self a Sacrifice for them as cheerfully,
and I hope (by Gods assistance) as constantly as old Eleazer did for the holy
Laws of his Nation.

Your well-wisher DAVID JENKINS. Now Prisoner in the Tower.

LEX TERRAE.
THE Law of this Land has three grounds. First Custom. Secondly Judicial
Records. Thirdly Acts of Parliament. The two latter are but declarations of the
Common Law and Custom of the Realm, touching Royal Government. And this Law
of Royall-Government, is a Law-Fundamentall.

The Government of this Kingdom by a Royal Sovereign, has been as ancient
as history is, or the memorial of any time; The kings prerogative is a
principal part of the common Law. Com: Litt^ 344:
what power this Sovereignty always had and used in war and peace in this
land, is the scope of this discourse; That Usage so practiced makes therein a
Fundamental Law, and the Common. Law of the Land is common Usage, Pl^wdens
Commentaries. 195.

For the first of our Kings ^ithence the Norman conquest, the first William,
second William, Henry the first, Stephen, Henry the second and Richard the
first, the Customs of the Realm touching Royal Government, were never
questioned: The said Kings enjoyed them in a full measunt. In King John's time
the Nobles and Commons of the Realm conceiving that the arcient customs and
Rights were violated, and thereupon pressing the said King to allow them in the
seventeenth of King John the said Liberties were by King John allowed, and by
his son Hen. the third, after in the ninth year of his Reign confirmed, and
are called Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta declared four hundred twenty
two years sithhence by the said Charters.

Now rests to be considered, after the Subjects had obtained their Rights and
Liberties, which w^n^ no other then their ancient Customs (and the
fundamental Rights of the King as Sovereign are no other.) How the Rights of
Sovereignty continued in practice from Henry the thirds time until this
present Par^^ament of the third of November 1640. for before Henry the thirds
time, the Sovereignty had a very full Power.

Rex habet Potestatem and jurisdictionem super omnes qui in Regnosuo sunt, ea
quae sunt jurisdictionis and Pacis ad nullum pertinent nisi ad Regiam
dignitatem, ^reacton temps. H. 3. lib. 4. cap. 24. Sect 1
habet etiam coeroionem, ut Delinquentes puniat and coerceat; This proves where
the supreme Power is.

A Delinquent is he who adheres to the Kings Enemies Com Sur. Littl. 261. This
shows who are Delinquents.

Omnis sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo nisi tuntum Deo, non est inferior sibi
Subjectis, Sect 5 Bractabid.
non parem habet in Regnosuo. This shows where the supreme power is.

Rex non habet superiorem nisi Deum, satis habet ad poenam quod Deum expectat
ultorem. Bracton lib. 5. tract 3. de de saltis Cap. 3. Bracton. Lib 3. Cap. 7.
This shows where the suprerme power i^.

Treasons, Fellonies, and other Pleas of the Crown, are propri^ causa Regis.
This shows the same power.

By these passages it does appear what the Custom was for the power of
Sovereignty before that time; the power of the Militia, of coining of Money, of
making Leagues with foreign Princes, the power of Pardoning, of making of
Officers, etc. All Kings had them, the said Powers have no beginning.

Sexto Ed: 1. Comsur. Littl. 85. Liege Homage, every Subject owes to the King
(viz) Faith de Membre, Ewd. 1.
de vita, de terren^ Honor, the form of the Oath inter vetera statuta is set
down; We read of no such, or any Homage made to the two Houses but frequently
of such made by them.

It is declared by the Prelates, Earls, Barrons, and Commonalty of the Realm,
that it belongs to the King and his Royal Segniory, 7. Ed. 1. statuts at
large^^l. 42.
straightly to defend force of Armor, and all other force against the Kings
peace, at all times when it shall please him, and to punish them that shall do
contrary according to the Law and Usage of the Realm, and hereunto they are
bound to aid their Sovereign Lord, at all seasons when need shall be. Here
the supreme power in the time of Parliament, by both Houses is declared to
belong to the King.

At the beginning of every Parliament, all Arms are, or ought to be forbidden
to be born in London, 7. Ed. 2.4. pars instit. 14. 1 Ed. 2. de Militibus.
Westminster, or the Subburbs. This condemns the multitudes coming to
Westminster, and the Guards of armed men.

All who held by Knights-service, and had twenty pounds per (...), were
distraynable ad Arma militaria suscipienda. This agrees with the Records of
ancient time, continued cer^^^ntly in all Kings times, but at this Parliament
3. November 1640. The King, out of his grace, discharged this duty, which
proves that the power of war and preparation thereto, belongs not to the two
houses, but only to the King.

The two Spencers in Ed. 2. Ed 3. Calvin's Case Cook l. 7. fol. 1
time hatched (to cover their Treason) this damnable and damned opinion (viz.)
That Ligeance was more by reason of the Kings politic capacity then of his
person, upon which they inferred these execrable and detestable consequences.
First, if the King demeaned not himself by reason in the right of his Crown,
his Lieges are bound by Oath to remove him. Secondly, seeing the King could not
be removed by suit of Law it was to be done by force. Thirdly, that his Lieges
be bound to govern in default of him.

All which tenets were condemned by two Parliaments, the one called exilium
Hugonis in Ed. 2. time; the other by 1. Ed. 3. cap. 2. All which Articles
against the Spencers are confirmed by this last Statute, the Articles are
extant in the book called vetera Statuta. The separation of the Kings person
from his power, is the principal Article condemned, and yet all these three
damnable, detestable, and execrable consequents, are the grounds whereupon this
present time relies, and the principles whereupon the two Houses found their
Cause,

The Villeine of a Lord, in the presence of the King; Plowdon com. 322, 27.
ass. pl. 49. 33 Ed. 3^ aid der^y 103 Fitz. 10 H. 7 16.
cannot be seized for the presence of the King is a protection for that time to
him: This shows what reverence the Law gives to the person of a King.

Reges, sacro oleo uncti sunt capaces spirituallis jurisdictionis But the two
Houses were never held capable of that power.

Rex est persona mixta cum sacerdote, habet Ecclesiasticam and spititualem
jurisdictionem. This shows the Kings power in Ecclesiastical Canses.

The lands of the King is caled in Law Patromonium sacrum. Com. Sur Littl Sect
4. 3. Ed. 3. 19
The houses should not have meddled with that sacred Patr^^^^y.

The King has no Peer in his land, and cannot be judged? Ergo the two Houses
are not above him.

The Parliament 15. Ed. 3 was repealed, for that it was against the Kings Laws
and prerogative. 4 pars. instit fol. 52. this shows clearly the propositions
sent to Newcastle, ought not to have been presented to his Majesty, for that
they are contrary to the Laws and his Prerogative.

The Lords and Commons cannot assent in Parliament to any thing that ^ends to
the disinherision of the King and his Crown, 4 pars Cooks instit. fol. 14 42.
E. 3. Parliament Roll. number. 7. Lex and consuetudo Parliamenti.
to which they are sworn. This condemns the said Propositions likewise.

To depose the King, to imprison him until he assent to certain demands, A
war to alter the Religion established by Law, or any other Law, or to remove
Counselors, to hold a Castle or Fort against the King; are offenses against
that Law declared to be treason by the resolutions herein after mentioned, by
that Law men are bound to aid the King when war is levied against him in his
Realm. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2.
King, in this Statute must be intended in his natural body and person that
only can die; for to compass his death, and declare it by overt Act is declared
thereby treason, to encounter in fight such as come to aid the King in his
wars, is treason.

Compassing of the Queens death, of the Kings eldest son, to coin his money,
to counterfeit his Great-Seale, to levy War against him, to adhere to such
as shall so do, are declared by that Act to be high Treason. This Statute
cannot refer to the King in his politic capacity, but to his natural, which
is inseparable from the politic, for a body politic can have neither. Wife
nor Child, 21. Ed. 4.14.
not, levy War, nor do any Act but by the operation of the natural body: A
Corporation or body politic has no soul or life, but is a fiction of the
Law, and the Statute meant not fictitious persons, but the body natural,
conjoined with the public, which are inseparable.

The clause in that Act, that no man should sue for grace or pardon for any
offense condemned, R. 2.11. (...) cap. 13. 4. pars instit. fol. 42.
or forfeiture given by that Act, was repealed by a subsequent Act in (...) R^^
holden unreasonable, without example and against the Law and custom of the
Parliament. This condemns the Proposition for disabling the King to Pardon. 4.
pars instit, fol. 42. The Act of 11. R. 2. so much urged by the other side, was
an Act to the which the King consented, and so a perfect Act: yet Note the Army
then about the Town: Note that that Law is against private persons, and by the
3. cap. thereof, the Treasons there declared, are declared to be new Treasons
made by that Act, and not to be drawn to example, it was abrogated 21. R. 2.
and revived by an usurper 1. H. 4. to please the people, and by the tenth chap.
thereof enacts that nothing shall be treason but what is declared by 25. Ed. 3.
16. R^. cap. 5.


The Regality of the Crown of England is immediately subject to God and to none
other. Plain words, H. 4.
showing where the supreme power is.

The Commission of Array is in force and no other Commission Ret. Parim. ^. H.
4. numb. 24. an Act not printed, this Act was repealed by 4. and 5. P. and M.
cap. 2. this repealed by the Act of 1. Iacobi and so it is of force at this
day, for the repealing Statute is repealed 4. pars institu. fol. 51. and 125.
published sithence this Parliament, by the desire of the house of Commons,
their Order is printed in the last leaf of the commentaries upon Magna Charta.

Sir Edward Cook, A book allowed by Sir Not. Brent, called the reason of the
War: fol. 65.
by their party is holden for the Oracle of the Law, who wrote the said fourth
part, in a calm and quiet time, and I may say, when there was no need to
defend the authority of the Commission of Array.

For that objection, that that Commission leaves power to the Commissioners to
tax men secundum facultates, and so make all men's estates Arbitrary: the Answer
is, that in levying of public ayds upon men's goods and estates, which are
variable, and probably cannot be certainly known by any but the owners, it is
impossible to avoid discretion in the assessements, for so it ever was, and
ever will be. By this appears that the Votes of the two houses against the
commission of Array, were against the Law.

The death of the King dissolves the Parliament, H. 5.
if Kings should refer to the politic capacity it would continue after his
death 4. pars Inst. 46. which proves that the King cannot be said to be there
when he is absent, as now he is: 2. H. 5. 4 pars instit 46.
there is no interregnum in the Kingdom the dissolution of the Parliament by
his death, shows that the beginning and end thereof refers to the natural
person of the King, and therefore he may lawfully refuse the Propositions.

2. H. 5. Chap. 6. to the King only it belongs to make Leagues with Foreign
Princes^ this shows where the supreme power is.

8. H. 6. numb. 57. R^tt. Parl-Cookes 4. p^ns instit. 25, N^ peiviledge of
Parliament is grantable for treason, H. 6.
Felony, or Breach of the Peace; if not to any one member, not to two, not to
ten, not to the Major part, 19. H. 6.62. The Law is the inheritance of the King
and his people by which they are ruled, King and people; And the people are by
the law bound to aid the King, and the King has an inheritance to hold
Parliaments and in the ayds granted by the Common^alty. If the major part of a
Parliament commit treason they must not be Judges of it, for no man or body,
can be Judge in his own cause, and as well as ten or any number may commit
treason, the greater number may as well.

The King by his letters pattents may constitute a County palatine and grant
Regal rights, 32. H. 6 13. Plowd. 334.
this shows where the supreme power is.

17. Ed. 4. rot parl. numb. 39. Ed 4.
No privilege of Parliament is grantable for Treason, Felony, or Breach of
the peace, if not for one, not for two or more, or a Major part.

The same persons must not be Judge and party. A corporate body can committ no
treason, Calvin's Case 7 pars fol. 11 12
nor can treason be committed against a corporate body, 21. E. 4, 13. and 14.
but the persons of the men who make that body may committ treason, and commit
it against the natural person of him who to some purposes is a body corporate,
but quatenus corporate no treason can be committed by or against such a body;
that body has no soul, no life, and subsists only by the fiction of the Law,
and for that reason the Law does conclude as aforesaid; Plow. com. 213.
therefore the statute of 25. E. 3. must be intended of the Kings natural
person conjoined with the politic which are inseparable and the Kings
natural person being at Holmby, his politic is there also, and not at
Westminster; 19. Ed. 4.46.
for the politic and natural make one body indivisible.

If all the people of England should break the league made with a foreign
Prince, 22. Ed. 4. Fitz: juvisdiction. last placite.
without the Kings consent, the league holds and is not broken; and therefore
the representative body is inferior to his Majesty's.

The King may erect a Court of Common Pleas in what part of the kingdom be
pleases by his letters patents; can the two houses do the like?.

1. Ed. 5. fol. 2. It cannot be said that the King does wrong, Ed. 5. 4 Ed.
4.25. 5 Ed. 4.29.
declared by all the Judges and Sergeants at law then there.

The reason is, nothing can be done in this Common wealth by the Kings grant or
any other act of his, as to the subjects persons, goods, lands or liberties,
but must be according to established laws, which the Judges are sworn to
observe and deliver between the King and his people impartially to rich and
poor, high and low; and therefore the Justices and the Ministers of Justice are
to be questioned and punished if the Laws be violated: And no reflection to be
made on the King. All Counselors and Judges for a year and three months
until the tumults began this Parliament were all left to the ordinary course
of Justice, what has been done sithence is notorious.

For great Causes and considerations an act of Parliament was made for the
surety of the said Kings person; R. 3 1 R. 3. cap. 15.
if a Parliament were so tender of King Rich. the 3. the houses have greater
reason to care for the preservation of his Majesty.

The Subjects are bound by their allegiance to serve the King for the time
being against every Rebellion, power and might, H. 7. 11 H. 7. cap. 1.
reared against him within this land, that it is against all laws, reason and
good canscience, if the King should happen to be vanquished, that for the said
deed and true duty and alligeance they should suffer in any thing, it is
ordained they should not: and all acts of process of law hereafter to be made
to the conteary are to be void. This law is to be understood of the natural
person of the King, for his politic capacity cannot be vanquished; nor war
reared against it.

Relapsers are to have no benefit of this act.

It is no statute, if the King assent not to it, 12 H. 7.20. H. 8.
and he may disassent, this proves the negative voice.

The King has full power in all causes to do justice to all men this is
affirmed of the King, 24 H. 8. cap. 1^ 25 H. 8. cap. 2^
and not of the two Houses.

The commons in Parliament acknowledge no superior to the King under God, the
houses of Commons confess the king to be above the representative body of the
Realm.

Of good right and equity the whole and sole power of pardning treasons,
fellonies etc. belong to the King, 27 H. 8. cap. 24 Note.
as also to make all Justices of Oyer and Terminor, Judges, Justices of the
peace, etc. This law condemns the practice of both houses at this time.

The kings royal assent to any Act of Parliament signed with his hand
expressed in his Letters Patent under the great Seal, and declared to the
Lords and Commons shall be as effectual, 33 H. 8. cap. 21
as if he assented in his own person; a vain act if the King be virtually in
the Houses.

The King is the head of the Parliament, the Lords the princip^ll members of
the body, Dier 38. H. 8 fo 59.60.
the Commons the inferior members, and so the body is composed, therefore there
is no more Parliament without a king, then there is a body without a head.

There is a corporation by the Common Law, as the King. Lords, 14 H. 8 fol. 3.
and Commons, are a corporation in Parliament, and therefore they are no body
without the King.

The death of the King discharges all mainprise to appear in any Court, 24
Ed. 3.48. 1 Ed. 4.2. 2 H. 4.8. 1 H. 7.10. 1 Ed 5.1.
or to keep the Peace.

The death of the King discontinues all pleas by the Common Law, which agrees
not with the virtuall power insisted upon now.

Writs are discontinued by the death of the King; Ed. 6. 1 Ed. 6. cap. 7.
Patents of Judges, Commission for Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Escheators,
determined by his death; Where is the virtuall power.

All authority and jurisdictions spiritual and temporal is derived from the
King, 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2.
therefore none from the Houses.

His Majesty's subjects, 2. 3 Ed 6. ca. 2 11 H. 7. cap. 1. Calvin's Case. Sa.
pars Cook
according to their bounden duties, ought to serve the king in his wars, of
this side or beyond the Seas; beyond the seas is to be understood for wages:
This proves the power of wars, and preparation for war to be in the king.

It is most necessary both for common policy and duty of the subject, 5. 6 Ed.
cap. 11
to restrain all manner of shameful standers against their king, which when
they be heard, cannot but be odible to his true and loving subjects, upon whom
depends the whole unity and universal weal of the realm. This condemns their
continuing of the weekly pamphlets, who have been so foul mouthed against his
Majesty.

The punishment of all offenders against the laws, belongs to the king, Q.
Mary. 1 Mar. Pl. 2. c. 2
and all jurisdictions do, and of right ought to belong to the King. This
leaves all to his Majesty.

All Commissions to levy men for the war, 4 5 P and M. c. 3 Q. Eliz. 10 Eliz
pl 315
are a warded by the king. The power of war only belongs to the king.

It belongs to the king to defend his people, and to provide Arms and Force.
No speech of the two Houses.

Roy ad sole government de^ses subjects. Plow. 234.242 213. Calvin's case 7.
pars fol 12. Plow. com. 213
Corpse natural le Roy and politic sunt un corpse. that is, The king has the
sole government of his Subjects, the body politic and the natural body of
the king make one body and not diverse, and are inseparable and indivisible.

The body natural and politic make one body, and are not to be severed:
Ligeance is due to the natural body, Plow. 934 243.213. Calvin's case 7. pars
fol. 12.
and is due by nature; Gods Law, and Man's law, cannot be forfeited nor
renounced by any means, it is inseparable from the person.

Every Member of the House of Commons, at every Parliament, takes a corporal
Oath. 1 Eliz. cap. 1. Cawdries case. 5. pars fol. 1.
That the King is the Supreme and only Governor in all Causes, in all his
Dominions, otherwise he is no Member of that House; the words of the Law are,
In all Causes, over all persons.

The said Act of 1 Eliz. is but declarative of the ancient Law, Cawdries Case
ibid.

The Earl of Essex, and others, assembled multitudes of men to remove
Counselors, 43 Eliz. 3 pars instit. fo, 6.2.
adjudged Treason by all the Judges of England.

To depose the king, or take him by force, to imprison him until he has
yielded to certain demands, adjudged Treason, 39. Eliz. Hill. 1 Jacobi ibid.
and adjudged accordingly in the Lord Cobhams Case.

Arising to alter Religion established, or any Law, is Treason; 39 Ed. B^adf.
case f 9. and 16. By all the Judges of England ibid. 10 Eliz Plow, 316.
so for taking of the Kings Castles, Forts, Ports or Shipping Brook treason
24. 3 and 4. Philip and Mary, Dier, Staffords Case concerning Scarborough.

The Law makes not the servant greater then the Master, nor the subject
greater then the King, for that were to subvert Order and Measure.

The Law is not known but by Usage, 10 Eliz. Plow, 319.
and Usage proves the Law, and how Usage has been is notoriously known.

The King is our only Rightful and lawful Liege Lord and Sovereign, K.
James. 1 Jac. cap. 1. 9 Ed. 4. fol. 8.
We do upon the knees of our hearts ag^ze constant Faith, Loyalty and
Obedience to the King and his Royal progeny, in this high Court of Parliament,
where all the body of the Realm is either in person or by representation: We
do acknowledge that the true and sincere Religion of the Church, is continued
and established by the King. And do recognize, as we are bound by the Law of
God and Man, the Realm of England and the Imperial Crown thereof does belong
to him by inherent byrth-right, and lawful and undoubted succession, and
submit our selves and our posterities for ever, until the last drop of our
blood be spent, to his rule; and beseech the king to accept the same as the
first fruits of our Loyalty and Faith to his Majesty and his posterity for
ever, and for that this Act is not complete nor perfect without his Majesty's
assent, the same is humbly desired. This proves that the Houses are not above
the King; that Kings have not their Titles to the Crown by the two Houses, but
by inherent byrth-right, and that there can be no Statute without his express
assent, and destroys the chymera of the Kings virtuall being in the Houses.

To promise obedience to the Pope, or any other State, Prince or Potentate, 3
Jac. cap. 4,
other then the King his Heirs and Successors, is Treason; and therefore those
persons who call the Houses the Estates offend this Law.

Such Bills as his Majesty is bound in Conscience and Justice to pass, K.
Charles. Collection of Ordinances fo. 727. 1 pars ib. fol. 728.
are no Law without his assent.

To design the ruin of the Kings person, or of Monarchy is a monstrous and
injurious charge.

Vbi Lex non distinguit, ibid; fol. 865.
non est distinguendum, all the aforesaid Acts and Laws do evidently prove
the Militia to belong to the king: that the king is not virtnally in the two
Houses: that the king is not considerable separately in relation to his
politic capacity: that the king is not a person trusted with a power, but
that it is his inherent byrth-right, from God, Nature and Law, and that he
has not his power from the people: These Laws have none of those distinctions
of natural and politic, abstractum and concretum, power and person, in
Caesar's time this Island had kings, and ever since, which is almost 17 hundred
years ago.

No King can be named, in any time, made in this kingdom by the people: A
parliament never made king, for they were kings before, the Parliaments are
summoned by the kings Writs, which for Knights Citizens and Burgesses begins
thus, viz.

Rex vic. Wilis. Saltem. Quia Nos de avisamento and assensu consilij nri. pro
quibus. arduis and urgentib. negetiis nos statum and defensionem Regninri. Aug.
and Eccles. Anglic. concernentibus quoddam Parliamentum urum, apud B. teneri
ordinavimus and ibid cum Prelatis Magnatib. and proceribus dicti Regni uri.
Colloqui, habere and tractatum, ipsi Vicecomiti precipimus firmiter injungendo
quoth. facta Proclamatione in prox. Comitatu tuo post receptionem ejusd. Brevis,
dues Milites gladiis cinctos, etc. eligi facias ad faciendum and consentiendum
hiis quae tunc ibidem de Communi Concilio nro. Angl faventi De^ contigerit
ordinari super Negotiis antedictis, ita quod pro defectis potestatis hujusmodi
seu propter improvidam electionem Milium, Civium, and Burgensium pred. dicta
negotia ura. infecta non remanerent.

The King is Principium, caput and finis Parliamenti, the body makes not the
head, 4 pars Instit: fol. 3 and 4.
nor that which is posterior that which is prior: concilium non est Preceptum,
conciliarij non sunt Praeceptores, for Counsel to compel a consent, has not
been heard of to this time in any age, and the house of Commons, by the writ,
are not called ad concilium; the Writts to the twelve Judges, Kings Council,
twelve Masters of the Chancery are concilium impensuri, and so of the Peers.
The writts for the Cominalty, Ad faciendum and consentiendum. Which shows what
power the representative body has, they have not power to give an oath;
neither do they claim it. The Oath of the Justices 18 of E. 3. among Statutes
of that year.


The King at all times, when there is no parliament, and in Parliament is
assisted with the advice of the Judges of the Law, 12 in number, for England
at least has 2 Sergeants when fewest: an Attorney and Solicitor, twelve Masters
of the Chancery, his Council of State, consisting of some great Prelates and
other great Personages, versed in State affairs, when they are fewest to the
number of twelve. All these persons are always of great substance, which is
not preserved but by the keeping of the Law, The Prelates versed in divine
Law, the other Grandees in affairs of State and managery of Government. The
Judges, Kings Sergeants, Attorney, Solicitor, and Masters of the Chancery
versed in the Law and Customs of the Realm: All sworn to serve the King and
his people justly and truly, the King is also sworn to observe the Laws, and
the Judges have in their Oath a clause, That they shall do common right to the
Kings people, according to the established Laws, not withstanding any command
of the King to the contrary, under the Great Seal or otherwise, The people are
safe by the Laws in force without any new: The Law finding the Kings of this
Realm assisted with so many great men of Conscience, Honor and skill in the
rule of Commonwealth, knowledge of the Laws, and bound by the high and holy
bond of an Oath upon the Evangelists, settles among other powers upon the King,
a power to refuse any Bill agreed upon by both Houses, and power to pardon all
offenses, to pass any Graunts in his Minority, (there are many great persons
living hold many a thousand pound a year by Patents from Edward the sixth,
passed when he was but ten years of age) not to be bound to any Law to his
prejudice, whereby he does not bind himself; power of war and peace,
coining of Money, making all Officers, etc. The Law, for the reasons
aforesaid, has approved these powers to be unquestionable in the King, and all
Kings have enjoyed them till 3. Nov. 1640.

It will be said notwithstanding all this fence about the Laws, the Laws
have been violated, and therefore the said powers must not hold, the two
Houses will remedy this.

The answer to this is evident: There is no time past, nor time present, nor
will there be time to come, so long as men manage the Law, but the Laws
will be broken more or less, as appears by the story of every age. All the
pretended violations of this time were remedied by Acts to which the King
consented before his departure 10. Jan. 1641. being then driven away by
Tumults. And the Houses for a year and almost three Months: From 3. Nov. 1640
to 10 Jan. 1641. as aforesaid, being a year and almost three months, had time
and liberty to question all those persons who were either causes or instruments
of the violation of any of the Laws.

Examine how both Houses remedied them in former times. First, touching
Religion, What has beens done this way? Both houses in Henry the eights time
tendered to him a Bill to be passed called commonly the Bill of the six
Articles, this was conceivd by them to be a just and a necessary Bill: Had not
Henry the eighth done well to have refused the passing of this bill? both
houses tendered a bill to him to take the reading of the Scriptures from most of
the laity: had not King Henry the eight deserved much praise to reject this
bill? In Queen Maryes time both houses exhibited a bill to her to introduce
the Popes power and the Roman Religion; had not Queen Mary done well to have
refused this bill? Many such instances may be given. The two Houses now at
Westminster I am sure will not deny but the refusal of such Bills had been
just, the King being assisted as aforesaid, and why not so in these times?

For the Civil Government what a bill did both houses present to Richard the
third, to make good his title to the Crown; had it not been great honor to
him to have rejected it? what bills were exhibited to Henry the eight by both
houses for bastardizing of his daughter Elizabeth, a Queen of renowned memory,
to settle the Crown of this Relme, for default of Issue of his body, upon such
persons as he should declare by his letters Patents or his last will, and many
more of the like? had not this refusal of passing such bills magnified his
virtue and rendered him to posterity in a different Character from what he now
has?

And by the experience of all times and the consideration of human frailty this
conclusion is manifestly deduced, that it is not possible to keep men at all
times (be they the houses, or the King and his council) but there will be
sometimes some deviation from the Laws, and therefore the constant and certain
powers fixed by the ancient Law must not be made void, and the Kings Ministers;
the Laws do punish where the Law is transgressed, and they only ought to suffer
for the same.

In this Parliament the houses exhibited a bill to take away the suffrages of
Bishops in the upper house of Parliament, and have sithence agreed there shall
be no more Bishops at all, might not the King if he had so pleased have
answered this bill with Le Roy s'avisera, or no voult. it was against Magna
Charta; Articuli Cleri and many other acts of Parliament. And might have
farther given these reasons if it had so pleased him for the same: first that
this Bill destroys the writ whereby they are made two houses of Parliament
the King in the writ to the Lords being Cum praelatis colloquium habere;
secondly they have been in all Parliaments since we had any, and voted, but in
such wherein they themselves were concerned: And there have been Bishops here
sithence we were Christians, and the fundamental Law of the Kingdom approves
of them: if any of them were conceived offensive; they were left to justice,
and his Majesty would put in inoffensive men in their places: but sithence his
Majesty has passed the Bill for taking away their votes in Parliament, it is
a Law that binds us so far.

Upon the whole matter the Law has notably determined that Bills agreed by
both houses, pretended to be for the public good, are to be judged by the
King, for in all Kings reigns Bills have been preferred by both houses, which
all ways are pretended to be for the public good, and many times are not,
and were rejected with Roy s'avisera or Roy ne veult.

This Parliament began the third of November 1640 before that time in all the
Kings reign no armed power did force any of the people to do any thing against
the law: what was done, was by his Judges, officers Referees and Ministers from
that time until the tenth of January 1641 (when the King went from London to
avoyde the danger of frequent tumults, being a year and three months* Privy
Counselors and all his Justices and ministers were left to the Justice of the
law, there wanted (...) time to punishable men.

The Sphaere of the house of Comment is to represent the grievances of the
Country, to grant aids for the King upon all fit occasions extraordinary, to
assent to the making or abrogating of laws* The Orb of the house of Lords to
Reform eroneous judgments given in the Kings Bench, to redress the delays
of Courts of Justice, to receive all Petitions, to advise his Majesty with
their Council, to have their votes in making or abrogating of Laws, and to
propose for the common good, what they conceive meet.

L^x non cogit ad impossibilia, Subjects are not to expect from Kings
impossible things, so many Judges, Councillors Sheriffs, Justices of the
peace, Commissioners, Ministers of State, that the King should over-looke them
all cannot be, it is impossible.

The King is virtually in his ordinary Courts of Justice; so long as they
continue has Courts: their charge is to administer the laws in being, and not
to delay, defarre or sell-justice for any commandment of the King. We have
Laws enough ^^st^u^^^ta b^^i saculi sunt boni (...) good ministers, as Judges
and officers are many times wanting, the houses propose now Laws, or
abrogation of the old; both induce novelty; the law for the reasons aforesaid,
makes the King the only Judge, who is assisted therein by a great number of
grave learned, and prudent men, as aforesaid.

For the considerations aforesaid the Kings party adhered to him, the law of
the Land is their birthright, their guide, no offense is committed where that
is not violated: they found the commission of Array warranted by the law; they
found the King in this Parliament to have quitted the Ship Money,
Knighthood-money, seven Courts of Justice, consented to a trienniall
Parliament, settled the Forest bounds, took away the Clerk of the Market of
the household, trusted the house with the Navy, passed an Act not to dissolve
this Parliament without the Houses assent; no people in the world so free if
they could have been content with Laws, oaths and reason, and nothing more
could or can be devised to secure us, neither has been in any time.

Notwithstanding all this we found the King driven from London by frequent
tumults, that two thirds and more of the Lords had disserted that house, for
the same cause, and the greater part of the house of Commons left that house
also for the same reason: new men chosen in their places, against Law, by the
pretended Warrant of a counter set Seal; and in the Kings name against his
consent, levying war against him, and seizing his Ports, Forts, Magazines and
Revenue, and converting them to his destruction, and the subversion of the Law
and Land, laying taxes on the people, never heard of before in this Land;
devised new oaths to oppose forces ray fed by the King, not to adhaere to him,
but to them in this War which they call the Negative Oath, and the Vow and
Covenant.

By several ways never used in this Kingdom they have raised moneys to
foment this war, and especially to enrich some among them; namely first
Excise, secondly Contributions, thirdly Sequestrations, fourthly Fifth parts,
fifthly Twentieth Parts, fixtly Meale-money seventhly Sale of Plundered goods,
^ightly Loanes, ninthly Benevolences, tenthly, Collections upon their
Fast-dayes, eleventhly new Inpositions upon Merchandises, twelvethly Guards
maintained upon the charge of private men, thirteenthly Fifty Subsidies at one
time, fourteenthly Compositions with such as they call Delinquents, fifteenthly
Sale of Bishops lands, etc.

From the Kings party means of subsistence are taken; 1 R. 3. cap. 3. ^ract.
li. 3. c. 8. Stanford. 192. Sir Ger. Fleetwoods Case. 8. pars Cook 7. H. 4 last
lease.
before any indictment, their Lands seized, their goods taken, the Law allows a
Traitor or Fellon attainted, Necessaria sibi and family sua in vict^^ and
v^stitu, where is the Covenant? where is the Petition of light? where is the
liberty of the subject?

First, We have aided the King in this war contrary to the negative oath and
other votes, Our warrant is the twenty fifth of Edward the third, the second
Chapter, and the said resolutions of all the Judges.

Secondly, We have maintained the Commission of Array by the Kings Command,
contrary to their votes: We are warranted by the statute of the fifth of Henry
the fourth, and the judgment of Sir Edward Cook, the Oracle of the Law as
they call him.

Thirdly, We maintained Archbishops and Bishops, whom they would suppress.
Our warrant is Magna Charta, and many statutes more.

Fourthly, we have maintained the book of Common prayer, they suppress it,
Our warrant is five acts of Parliament in Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabeth's
time, 5. Pesch^. 35. Elizabeth inter placita Coronae in Banco Regis, New book
of Entries, sol. 252. Penry, for publishing two scandalous Libels against the
Church government, was indicted, arraigned, attainted, and executed at Tyburne.

Fifthly, We maintained the Militia of the Kingdom to belong to the King, they
the contrary, Our warrant is the statute of the seventh of Edward the first,
and many statures sithence, the practice of all times, and the custom of the
Realm.

Sixthly, We maintained the counterfeiting of the great Seal to be high
Treason, and so of the usurpation of the Kings Forts, Ports, Shipping, Castles
and his Revenue, and the Coining of money, against them; We have our warrant by
the said statute of the twenty fifth of Edward the third, Chapter the second,
and diverse others since, and the practice of all times.

Seventhly, We maintain that the King is the only supreme govermour in all
causes. They, that his Majesly is to be governed by them, Our warrant is the
statures of the first of Q. Eliza. Chapter the first, and the fifth of Q.
Elizabeth the first.

Eighthly, 9. Ed. 4. sol. 4.
We maintain that the King is King by an inhaerent birthright; by nature, by
Gods law, and by the lay^ of the Land, They say his Kingly right is an (...),
Our warrant is the statute of the first of King Ja^^^. Chapter the first. And
the resolution of all the Judges of England in Calvin's case.

Ninthly We maintain that the politic capacity i^ not to be severed from the
natural. They hold the contrary: Our warrant is two flatures (viz.) ^xilium
Hugonis in Edward the seconds time, and the first of Edward the third Chapter
the second, and their Oracle who has published it to posterity, that it is
damnable, detestable and execrable Treason, Calvin's case pars 7. fol. 11.

Tenthly we maintain that who aids the King at home or abroad ought not to be
molested or questioned for the same, they hold and practice the contrary, our
warrant is the statute of the eleventh of. Henry the seventh. Chapter the first.

Eleventhly We maintain that the King has power to disassent to any Bill
agreed by the two Houses; which they deny. Our warrant is the Statute of the
second of Henry the fifth and the practice of all times, the first of King
Charles, Chapter the seventh the first of King James Chapter the first.

Twelfthly We maintain that Parliaments ought to be holden in a grave and
peaceable manner, without ^^ults, They allowed multitudes of the meanest sort
of people to come to Westminster to cry for, Coll. of Ord. fol. 31.
Justice when they could not have their will, and keep guards of armed men to
wait upon them. Our warrant is the Statute of the seventh of Edward the second
and their Oracle.

Thirteenthly We maintain that there is no state within this Kingdom but the
Kings Majesty, and that to adhere to any other State within this Kingdom is
high treason, our warrant is the Statute of the third of King James Chapter the
fourth, and the ^^enty third of Queen Elizabeth Chapter the first.

Fourteenthly, We maintain that to levy a war to remove Councillors, to
alter religion, or any Law established is high Treason, They hold the contrary.
One warrant is the resolutions of all the judges of England in Queen Elisabeths
time, and their oracle agrees with the same.

Fifteenthly We maintain that no man should be imprisoned, put out of his
Lands, but by due course of Law, and that no man ought to be adjudged to death
but by the Law established, the customer of the Realm, or by act of Parliament;
They practice the contrary in London, Bristol, Kent, etc. Our warrant is Magna
Charta, Chapter the twenty ninth, the Petition of right the third of King
Charles, and diverse Laws there mentioned.

We of the Kings party, did and do detest Monopolies, and ship money, and all
the grievances of the people as much as any men living, we do well know that
our estates, lives and fortunes are preserved by the Laws, and that the King
is bound by his laws, we love Parliaments, if the Kings, Judges, Counsel or
Ministers have done amiss, they had from the third of November 1640 to the
tenth of January 1641 time to punish them, being all left to Justice where is
the Kings fault?

The law faith the King can do no wrong, 11 pars Cooks Reports Magdalen
College Cale.
that he is medicus Regni, pater patriae sponsus regni qui per annlum is
espoused to his Realm at his Coronation; The King is Gods Lieutenant, and is
not able to do an unjust thing, these are the words of the Law.

One great matter is pretended that the people are not sure to enjoy the acts
passed this Parliament, A succeeding Parliament may repeal them; The objection
is very weak, a Parliament succeeding to that may repeal that repealing
Parliament. That fear is endless and remediless, for it is the essence of
Parliaments being complete and as they ought to be, of head, and all the
Members, to have power over Parliaments before; Parliaments are as the time
are; if a turbulent faction prevails the Parliaments are wicked as appears by
the examples recited before of extreme wicked Parliaments: if the times be
sober and modest, prudent and not biassed, the Parliaments are right good, and
honorable, and they are good medicines and salves, but in this Parliament
excessit medi^i^a medum.

In this cause and war between the Kings Majesty, and the two Houses at
Westminster, what guide had the Subjects of the Land to direct them but the
laws? What means could they use to discern what to follow, what to avoid but
the Laws? The King declaresi^^^ treason to adhere to the Houses in this war:
The Houses declare it Treason to adhere to the King in this War. The Subjects
for a great and considerable part of them (treason being such a crime as
forfets life and estate, also renders a man's posterity base beggarly and
infamous) look upon the Laws, and find the letter of the law requires them to
assist the King, as before is manifested, was ever subject criminally punished
in any age or nation for his pursuit of what the letter of the Law commands?

The Subjects of the kingdom find the distinction and interpretation now put
upon the Laws of Abstractum and Concretam, Power and Person, body politic,
and natural, Personal presence and virtuall, to have been condemned by the
law: And so the Kings party has both the letter of the law and the
interpretation of the letter cleared to their judgments, whereby they might
evidently perceive what side to adhaere to, what satisfaction could modest
peaceable and loyal men more desire?

A verbo legis in criminibus and poenis non est recedendum, has been an
approved maxim of law in all ages and times. If the King be King and remain in
his Kingly office (as they call it) then all the said laws are against them
without color: Coll of Ordinances 777.
they say the said laws relate to him in his Office, they cannot say
otherwise, Commissions and pardon in the Kings name, and the person of the King
and his body politic cannot* nor ought to be severed as has been before
declared: 5 Eliz. cap. 1.1 Eliz. cap. 1.
And the members of both houses have sworn constantly in this Parliament that
the King is the only supreme Governor in all causes over all persons at this
present time.

For that of verbal or personal commands of the King which is objected, We
affirm few things to be subject thereto by the law: But his Majesty's Command
under his great Seal, which in this war has been used by the Kings command
for his Commission to leavy and array men, that is no personal command (which
the law in some cases disallowes) but that is such a command, so made, as all
men hold their lands by, who hold by Patents; All corporations have their
Charters which hold by Charters, and all Judges and officers their places and
callings.

It is objected the King cannot suppress his Courts of Justice, Ob. Sol. 7
pars The Earl of Westmerlands Case. 1 Eliz. Dier. 165.7. pars Cook.
and that this war tended to their suppression.

The answer is the King cannot nor ought to suppress Justice or his Courts of
Justice, nor ever did: But Courts of Justice by abuser or non user cease to be
courts of Justice; when Judges are made and proceedings in those courts holden
by others then Judges made by the King, and against his command under the great
Seal, and his Majesty is not obeyed, but the votes of the houses, The case of
discontinuance of Process.
they cease to be the Kings Courts and are become the Courts of the houses, and
his Judges breaking that condition in law, of trust and loyalty, implied in
their Patents, are no longer his Judges; they obey and exercise their places by
virtue of writts and processes under a counterfeit Seal. The King only can make
Judges, the twenty seventh of Henry the eighth, Chapter the twenty fourth,
Justices of the peace, etc. twenty eighth of Henry the eighth Dier the
eleventh, the Kings Patent makes Judges: The cheese Justice of the Kings Bench
is made by the Kings writ only of all the judges.

The great Seal is the key of the kingdom, Articuli super chartas cap. 5.
and meet it is that the King should have the key of his kingdom about him; 2.
pars instit 552. which confutes their saying that the King got the Seal away
surreptitiously.

The King, and he only, Britton sol. 23.
may remove his Courts from Westminster into some other place, at York the
Terms were kept for seven years, in Edward the first's time: but for the
Court of Common pleas, the place must be certain; for the Kings Bench and
Chancery, the King by the law may command them to attend his person always if
it seem so meet unto him: but the removing of the Common pleas must be to a
place certain and so notified to the people.

All the books of law in all times agree, 34. Assis. pl. 24.22. Ed. 4. Fitz.
jurisdiction last placit.
that the King may grant conusance of all Pleas at his pleasure within any
County or precinct to be holden there only, and remove the Courts from
Westminster to some other place (for the Common Pleas, 6 H. 7.9.6 Eliz. Dier.
226.
the place must be certain, and so notified to the people) and adjourne the
terms as he sees cause. All which the two houses have violated. Plebs sine
lege ruis.

Some seeming objections of Master Prin^'s, scattered in diverse books answered,
and the truth thereby more fully cleared.

The first of Henry the fourth reviveth the statute of the eleventh of Richard
second, 1 Ob.
and repeales to the twelfth of Richard the second, whereby certain persons
were declared traitors to the King and Kingdom, being of the Kings party.

True, Sol.
but note, the eleventh of Richard the second, A Parliament beset with 40000
men, and the King assents to it so an Act, and besides the first of Henry the
fourth declares, that the treasons mentioned in the act of the eleventh of
Richard the second, being but against a few private men shall not be drawn into
example, and that no Treason should be but such as the twenty fifth of Edward
the third declares. 9 Ed. 4. sol. 80.
All these are Acts passed by the King and the three estates, not to be drawn
into example, in a tumultuous time, by a besieged Parliament, with an army, and
the confirmer of Henry the fourth being an usurper makes that Act of the first
of Henry the fourth to secure himself. Also what is this in the votes of the
two houses only at this time.

The Court of Parliament is above the King, 2 Ob.
for it may avoid his Charters Commissions, etc. granted against the law.

And the Law is above the King. Sol.


By the same reason you may say that the Courts of Chancery, or any of the
Courts of Law at Westminster are above the King, for they make of no effect the
Kings Charters, which are passed against the Law: and the King is Subject to
Law, and sworn to maintain it. Again, it is no Parliament without the King,
and the King is the head thereof, he is principium Caput and finis of a
Parliament, as Medas tenends Parliament. has it, and two houses only, want
principium Caput and fixis of a Parliament and it is a sorry Parliament that
wants all these. And therefore to say that Parliaments are above the King, is
to say that the King is above himself.

The Parliament can enlarge the Kings prerogative, 3 Ob.
therefore it is above him.

If the King assent, otherwise not; Sol.
and then it is an Act of Parliament, and otherwise no Act.

Bracton says, God, the Law, and the Kings Court, 4 Ob
(viz.) his Earls and Barons are above the King, (viz.) in Parliament, as
Master Prynne expounds it.

Where is then the House of Commons? Indeed, take God, Sol.
the Law, and Earls and Barons together it is true; but to affirm that the
Earls and Barons in Parliament are above the King (the King being the head of
the Parliament, and they one of the members) how an inferior member is above
the head, is hard to conceive: besides, that position destroys all M. Pry^^es
discourse, who attributes so much to the House of Commons.

The King is but one of the three estates of Parliament, 5 Ob.
and two are greater then one; therefore above.

The Legs, Arms, Sol.
and Trunk of the Body are greater then the Head, and yet not above; nor with
life, without it: the argument holds for quantity, but not for quality; and
in truth, the King is none of the three estates, but above them all; the three
estates are, the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons; Coke,
their Oracle, in his Chapter of Parliaments, fol. 1.

In Corporations, 6 Ob.
the greater number of voices make all the Acts of the Corporation valid;
therefore so in Parliament.

By this reason the Kings assent is needless, and to no end, Sol.
and all the Acts of Parliament formerly mentioned, and Law-Bookes have quite
mistaken the matter, which with unanimous voice requires the Kings assent as
necessary: besides, the Corporations are so constituted by the Kings Charters,
that the greater number of Votes shall make their Acts valid.

The King, as King, 7 Ob.
is present in his Parliament as well as in all other his Courts of Justice,
how be it he is not there.

In his other Courts of Justice he has no voye, Sol.
he is none of the Judges, in the Parliament he has; if his presence be not
necessary, his voice is not, nor his assent. ^ Ob. Soverain power of
Parliaments, ^6, 47.


The original prime legislative power of making Laws to bind the subjects and
their posterity, rests not in the King, but in the Kingdom and Parliament,
which represents it.

Master Prynne in the same leaf affirms, and truly, that the Kings assent is
generally requisite to pass Laws and ratify them; Sol.
the King is the head of the Kingdom and Parliament, how then can a Body act
without a Head?

A major part of a Corporation binds, 9 Ob.
therefore the major part in Parliament, and so of by-Lawes.

The Corporation is so bound, either by the Kings Charters, Sol.
or by prescription, which sometimes had the Kings concession; but
prescription, and Law, and practice, always left the King a negative voice.

The King cannot alter the Bills presented to him by both Houses, 10 Ob.
go.

True; Sol.
but the King may refuse them.

Acts of Parliament and Laws ministered in the Reigns of Usurpers, 11 Ob.
bind rightful Kings, go.

What is this to prove the two Houses power only, Sol.
which is the question? A King de facto must be obeyed by them who submitted to
him, and they are his Subjects by their submission, and not Subjects de facto
to the true King, and such being Traitors and Rebels to the Regent King (having
renounced the true King) when the lawful King is restored, 9. Id. 4.12
may be punished by him for their Treason against the Usurper. But here is a
King still in both cases, and the proceedings at Law holds; the Judges having
their Patents from the being Kings, in the reigns of Kings, de facto or de
^ur^, for all Kings are bound and sworn to observe the Laws.

A King dies without Heir* 12 Ob.
is an infant, non compes mentis, etc. the two Houses may establish Laws. go.

There is no Inter-regnum in England, Sol.
as appears by all ou^ Books of Law; and therefore the dying without Hei^e is
a vain supposition, and by their principle (...) is considerable in his
politic capacity, which cannot die at also The Protector, assisted by the
Council of the King at Law, his twelve Judges, the Countell of State, his
Attorney, Solicitor, and two Sergeants at Law, his twelve Masters of the
Chancerie, has in the Kings behalf, and ever had, a negative Voice: but what
is thy no the present question? We have a King of fall age, of great wisdom
and judgment; the power of the two Houses in such a case to be over the King,
cannot be shown.

The King cannot dis-assent to public and necessary Bills for the common
good, go. 13 (...).


Nor ever did good King: but who shall be judge, Sol.
whether they be public and necessary? The major part in either of the
Houses, for passing of Bills so pretended, may be but one or two voices, or
very few, and perhaps of no judicious men: is it not then fitter or more
agreeable to reason, that his Majesty and Council of State, his twelve
Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney and Solicitor, twelve Masters of the Chancerie,
should judge of the conveniencie and benefit of such Bills for the public
good, rather then a minor, (of which sort there may be in the Houses) or a
weak man, or a few, who oftentimes carry it by making the major part, which
involves the consent of all? let reason determine.

The Kings of England have been elective; 14 Ob.
and the King by his Coronation Oath is bound to maintain justas leges and
consi^^tudines quas vulgas elegerit, go.

^^perie has been in the kingdom, So^.
and therefore to continue it still, will not be taken for a good argument;
when things are settled for many ages, to look back to times of confusion is to
destroy all repose: The Act of Parliament, of the first of K. James, Chapter
the first, and all our extant Law^s say, that the Kings Office is an heritage
inherent in the blood of our Kings, and their birthright.

And Usurpers that come in by the consent of the people are Kings de facto, but
not de jure, Ed. 4. c. ^.
but not de jure, as appears by the Acts of Parliament declaring them so: And
by all our Law-Bookes and the fundamental constitution of the Land, Regal
power is hereditarie and not elective.

For the words (vulgus-elegerit) if vulgus be applied to the House of Commons,
1 H. 7.
they of themselves can make no Laws. The Peers were never yet termed
vulgus; but allowing they be so called, the Laws to be made must be just; and
who is fit to judge thereof, is before made evident.

Customs cannot refer to future time, ^5 Ob.
and both are conpled, Laws and Customs.

Princes have been deposed, and may be by the two Houfes, go.

The deposers were Traitors, Sol.
as appears by the resolution of all the Judges of England; Coke, Chap.
Treason, in the second part of the Institutes. And never was King deposed but
in tumultuous and mad times, and by the power of Armies, and they who were to
be the succeeding Kings in the head of them, as Edward the third and Henry the
fourth.

The appeal to the Parliament for errors in judgments in all Courts, 16 Ob.
is frequent, go.

This is only to the House of Lords, Sol.
and that is not the Parliament; the House of Commons have nothing to do
therewith: and in the House of Peers, if a Writ of Error be brought to reverse
any judgment, there is first a petition to the King for the allowance thereof;
and the reason of the Law in this case is, for that the Judges of the Land all
of them, the Kings Council and twelve Masters of the Chancerie assist there,
by whose advice erroneous judgments are redressed.

The Parliaments have determined of the rights of Kings, 17 Ob.
as in Henry the sixts time, and others; and Parliaments have bound the
succession of Kings, as appears by the Statute of the thirteenth of Q. Elizab.
Chapter the first: and the descent of the Crown is guided rather by a
Parliamentarie Title then by Common Law, go.

If this Objection be true, Sol.
that the Title to the Crown is by Parliament, then we had no Usurpers, for
they all had Parliaments to back them, yea, Richard the third, that Monster.
All cur Books of Law say they have the Crown by descent, and the Statutes of
the Land declare, that they have the same by inherent birthright. And the
Statute of the thirteenth of Elizabeth, the first Chapter, was made to secure
Q, Elizabeth against the Qu. of Sca^^, then in the kingdom, clayming the Grown
of England, and having many adherent^. (...) (...) (...)
And that Statute to that end a firmes no such power in the two Homfor (which
is the Question) but in Q Elizabeth, and the two Houses, which makes against
the pretense of this time.

Master Prynne, fol. 104. of his book, entitled, The Parliaments supreme
power, etc. Objecting the Statute of the first of Queen Elizabeth, and his own
Oath, that the king is the only supreme Governor of this Realm; Answers, The
Parliament is the supreme power, and the king supreme Governor: And yet there
he allows him a Negative Voice; and fol. 107. confesses that Acts of
Parliament translated the Crown from the right Heirs at Common Law, to others
who had no good Title; then the Parliamentary* Title makes not the king, so
powerful in truth, that it escapes from a man unawares: To make a distinction
between Supreme Governor, and Supreme power, is very strange, for who can
Govern without power?

The king assembles the Parliament by His Writ, adjourns, Vide Speed 645.4 par.
Instit. 27. and 1.
prorogues, and dissolves the Parliament, by the law at his pleasure, as is
evident by constant practice, the House of Commons never sat after an
adjournment of the Parliament by the kings command. Where is the supreme Power.

The king by his Oath; 1^^. Ob.
is bound to deny no man right much less the Parliament, to agree to all just
and necessary laws proposed by them to the king. This is the substance of the
discourse against the kings Negative Voice.

The king is so bound as is set down in the Objection, but who shall judge
whether the Bill proposed be just and necessary: Sol.
For all that they do propose are so pretended and carried in either House,
sometimes by one or two Voices; or some few as aforesaid, and certainly as has
been shown, the king, his Council of State, his Judges, Sargeants, Attorney,
Solicitor, and twelve Masters of the Chatcery can better judge of them, then
two or three, or few more.

Mr. Pryn fol. 45. In his book of the Parliaments interest to nominate
Privie-Councellors, calls the opinion of the Spencers, to divide the Person
of the King from his Crown, a strange opinion, Calvin's case, 7. pars, fol. 11.
and cites Calvin's Case, but leaves out the conclusions there in mentioned,
fol. 15. Master Prynne says there, But let this opinion be what it will:
without the Kings Grace and Pardon it will go very far, and two Acts of
Parliament there mentioned are beyond an opinion. And in his Book of the
opening of the Great Scale, fol. 17. The Parliament has no jurisdiction to use
the Great Seal for Pardons General or Particular. Where is the Supreme power?

Mr. ^9. Ob.
Prynnes (opening of the Seal) page 19. says, The Noblemen and State, the day
after the Funeral of King Henry the third (King Edward the first his son
being in the Holy Land) made a new Great Seal, and Keepers of the same: And in
Henry the sixts time, in the first year of his Reign, the like was done in
Parliament.

A facto, Sol.
ad jus, is no good Argument, for that in Edward the firsts time, it was no
Parliament, for King Henry the 3. was dead, which dissolved the Parliament, if
called in his time, and it could be no Parliament of Edward the firsts time,
for no Writ issued to summon a Parliament in his Name, nor could issue but
under that New Seal, it was so suddenly done after Henry the thirds death,
King Edward the first being then in the Holy Land, it was the first year of
his Reign, and no Parliament was held that year, nor the second year of his
Reign: The first Parliament that was in his Reign, was in the third year of
his Reign, as appears by the Printed Acts. Also the making of that Seal was
by some Lords then present, What hand had the Commons in it? Concerning the
Seal made in Henry the sixths time, the Protector was Viceroy according to
the course of Law, and so the making of that Seal was by the Protector in the
Kings name; and that Protector, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, as Protector, in
the kings Name summoned that Parliament, and was Protector made by the Lords,
and not in Parliament, as appears plainly, for that Parliament was in the
first of Henry the sixth, and the first holden in his time, and power given by
Commission to the said Duke, then Protector, to summon that Parliament, Prynne,
ibid. fol. 19. ^^t the new count c^fe it Seal was made when the King was at
G^xford, in his own kingdom, and not in the holy Land.

M^. Prynne in his Book of the two Houses power to impose Taxes, restraines
Malignants against any Habeas Corpus, 20. Ob.
etc. says, that the Parliament is above Magna Charta, and fol. 15. ibid. The
Parliament has power over Magna Charta to repeal the same when there is Cause.

This Argument supposes that they have the kings power, Sol.
which has appeared formerly they have not. But suppose they had, Magna Charta
contains many moral Laws, which by the Law of the Land a Parliament cannot
alter, 21 H. 7.2. D. and Student, 2. Dialogue. For example it says cap 18
Justice shall not be sold, delayed, no^ denied to any man: but by this Argument
the Parliament may make law to delay, deny, and to sell Justice, which surely
is a very ill position to maintain.

What they would have does now by the Propositions sent to N^^^ castl^ to his
Majesty appear, whereby they would have him divest himself, and settle in
them all his kingly power by Sea and land, and of themselves ^o have power,
without him, today upon the people of this land what taxes they think meet, to
abolish the Common, prayer book, to abolish Episcopacie, and to introduce a
Church Government not yet agreed, but such as they shall agree on.

His Majes^y finding (...) prevailing p^rty in both Houses to (...), and being
chased away with Tumults from London, leaves the Houses for these Reasons,
((...).)

First, because to (...) the Government for Religion, in against the king (...).

(...), against their Oaths* For every of them has sworn in this Parliament,
That His M^j^sty is the (...) supreme Governor in all Causes Ecclesiastical
and over all persons.

Thirdly, This course is against Magna Charta, the 1. chap. and the last.
Salvae suis Episcopis omnes libertates suae, Confirmed by thirty two Acts of
Parliament; and in the two and fortieth of Edward the third, in the first
Chapter enacts; If any Statute be made to the contrary, it shall be holden for
none, and so it is for Judgments at Law, in the 25. of Edward the 1. chap. 1,
2. The Great Charter is declared to be the Common Law of the Land.

Fourthly, they endeavor to take away by their Propositions, the Government of
Bishops, which is as ancient as Christianity in this Land, and the Book of
Common Prayer settled by five Acts of Parliament, and compiled by the Reformers
and Martyrs, and practiced in the time of four Princes.

Fifthly, these Propositions taking away from His Majesty all his power by land
and Sea, rob him of that which all his Ancestors, kings of this Realm, have
enjoyed. That Enjoyment and Usage makes the Law, and a Right, by the same to
His Majesty. They are against their own Protestation made this Parliament,
(viz.) to maintain His Royal person, Honor, and Estate; They are against
their Covenant, which does say, that they will not diminish His Just Power and
Greatness.

For these Reasons His Majesty has left them, and as i^ believed, will refuse
to agree to the said Propositions, as by the Fundamental Law of the land he
may (having a Negative Voice) to any Bills proposed.

The result of all is, upon the whole matter: That the king thus leaving of the
Houses, and his Denial to pass the said Propositions, are so far from
making him a Tyrant, or not in a condition to Govern, at the present; That
thereby he is rendered a Just, Magnanimous, and pious Prince: so that by this
it appears clearly to whom the Miseries of these Times are to be imputed. The
remedy for all, is, an Act of Oblivion, and a General pardon.

God save the KING.
DAVID, JENKINS, now Prisoner in the Tower.
28, Aprilis, 1647.
THE CORDIAL OF JVDGE JENKINS, For the good People of LONDON; In Reply to a
thing, called, AN Answer to the Poisonous Seditious Paper of Mr David Jenkins;
By H.P. Barrester of Lincolns-Inne.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

The Cordial of Judge Jenkings for the good People of London, etc.
After the said Mr H.P. has made a recital of the Heads of my Vindication,
he deduceth his Answer unto these eight Particulars, which follow verbatum.

1.
It cannot be denied, but the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, ^ay if Statute
Law be greater then the Kings Writ, it cannot be denied but the Parliament sits
or ought to sit by something greater then the Kings Writ; And, if it be
confessed that the Parliament sits by the Kings Writ, but does not Act by the
Kings Writ, then it must follow that the Parliament is a void vain Court, and
sits to no purpose; nay it must also follow, that the Parliament is of less
authority, and of less use then any other inferior Court; forasmuch as it is
not in the Kings power to control other Courts, or to prevent them from
sitting or Acting.

2.
This is a gross non sequitur, the Kings power is in himself; Ergo, it is not
derived to, nor does reside virtually in the Parliament. For the light of the
Sun remains imbodied, and unexhausted in the Globe of the Sun, at the same
time as it is diffused and displayed through all the body of the ^yre; and who
sees not that the King without emptying himself, gives commissions daily of
Oyer and Terminer to others, which yet he himself can neither frustrate nor
clude? but for my part I conceive it is a great error to infer that the
Parliament has only the Kings power, because it has the Kings power in it: for
it seems to me, that the Parliament does both sit and act by concurrent power,
devolved both from the King and Kingdom; And this in some things is more
obvious and apparent then in others. For by what power does the Parliament
grant Subsidies to the King? if only by the power which the King gives, then
the King may take Subsidies without any grant from the Parliament: and if it be
so by a power which the people give to the Parliament; Then it will follow the
Parliament has a power given both by King and Kingdom.

3.
The sending Propositions to the King, and desiring his concurrence, is scarce
worth an Answer; for Subjects may humbly petition for that which is their
strict right and property. Nay, it may sometimes beseem a superior to
prefer suite to an inferior for matters in themselves du^. God himself has
not utterly disdained to beseech his own miserable impious unworthy creatures:
besides, it is not our Tenet, that the King has no power, because he has not all
power, nor that the King cannot at all promote our happiness, because he has
no just claim to procure our ruin.

4.
We affirm not, that the Kings power is separated from his Person, so as the
two Spencers affirmed, neither do we frame conclusions out of that separation,
as the two Spencers did, either that the King may be removed for misdemeanors,
or reformed per asperte or that the Subject is bound to govern in aid of him;
we only say, that his power is distinguishable from his person, and when he
himself makes a distinction betwixt them, commanding one thing by his Legal
Writs, Courts, and Officers, and commanding another thing extrajudically by
word of mouth, Letters, or Ministers, we are to obey his power rather then his
person.

5.
We take not from the King all power of pardoning Delinquents, we only say it
is not proper to him quarto modo: For if the King pardon him which has
murdered my son, his pardon shall not cut me off from my appeal; and it is
more unreasonable, that the Kings pardon should make a whole State, which has
suffered, remediless, then any private man. So if the King should deny
indemnity to these which in the fury of War have done things unjustifiable
by the Laws of Peace, and thereby keep the wounds of the State from being
bound up, it is equitable that an Act of Indemnity should be made forcible
another may. And if this will not hold, yet this is no good consequence, the
King is absolute in point of pardons, therefore he is absol^^e in all things
else; and the Parliament has no power to discharge Delinquencies, therefore it
has no power in other matters.

6.
The Parliament has declared the King to be in no condition to govern: but
this must not be interpreted rigidly, and without distinction; for if the King
with his sword drawn in his hand, and pursuing the Parliament and their
adherents as Rebels, be not fit for all Acts of Government, yet it is not hereby
insinuated that he is divested of the habit or right of governing: If he be
unqualified now, he is not unqualified for the future; if he may not do things
destructive to the Parliament, he is not barred from returning to the
Parliament, or doing justice to the Parliament. This is a frivolous cavil, and
subturfuge.

7.
We swear, that the King is our supreme Governor over all persons, and in all
Causes; but we do not swear that he is above all Law, nor above the safety of
his people, which is the end of the Law, and indeed Paramount to the Law it
self. If he be above all Law, or liable to no restraint of our Law, then we
are no freer then the French or the Turks; and if he be above the prime and of
Law, common fafety, then we are not so free as the French or Turks: For if the
total subversion of the French or the Turk were attempted, they might by Gods
Law, imprinted in the Book of Nature, justify a self-defence; but we must
remedilesty perish, when the King pleases to command our threats. Besides, how
achieved the King of England such a Supremacy above all Law and the community
it self, for whose behoof Law was made? If Gods donation be pleaded, which is
not special to him, or different from what other Kings may pretend to^, then
to what purpose serve our Laws, nay, to what purpose serve the Laws of other
Countries? for by this general donation, all Nations are condemned to all
servitude as well as we. If the Law of this Land be appealed to, what Books
has Mr Ienkins read, where has he found ont that Lex Regia, whereby the
people of England have given away from themselves all right in themselves? Some
of our Books tell us, that we are more free then the French; that the King
cannot oppress us in our our persons, or estates, by imprisonment, denying
justice, or laying Taxes without our consents: other Books tell us, that the
safety of the people is the supreme Law, and that the King has both God and
the Law for his Superior: But all this is nothing to learned Mr Ienkins.

8.
We admit, that no Acts of Parliament are complete, or formally binding,
without the Kings assent: yet this is still to be denied, that therefore
without this assent particularly expressed, the two Houses can do nothing, nor
have any virtuall power at all, no, not to examine Mr Ienkins, nor to do any
other thing of like nature, though in order to public justice and safety. I
have done, and wish Mr Ienkins would call in and lick up again his black
infamous execrable reproaches, so filthily vomited out against the Parliament.

To the first.
I Was examined by a Committee appointed by the House of Commons: I say and
said that the House of Commons have no power to examine me, for that it is no
Court; every Court has power to examine upon Oath; this power the House of
Commons never claimed; The Court of Pie-powders, Court Baron, Hundred Court, 5
H. 4. c. 3. 3 H. 6.46. 1, H 6.43. 35 H. 6.5.
County Court, and every other Court of Record, or not of Record, has power to
examine upon oath; and an examination without Oath is a communication only;
examination in Law is upon Oath.

There is no Court without a power of trial; the House of Commons have no
power to try any offense, Sir Anthony Maynes case, Cook 5. pars, Reports, Lit.
2. lib. Sect. 194.6. H. 4.1.
nor ever practiced it by Bill, Indictment, Information, Plaint or Original,
to deduce it to trial, nor to try it by Verdict, Demurrer or Examination of
Witnesses upon Oath, without which there can be no condemnation or judgment;
and that which can attain to no reasonable end, the Law rejects as a thing
inutile and useless; Sapiens incipit a fine.

The Writ Whereby they are called gives them power A^ faciendum and
consentiendum; to what? to such things Que ibidem de communi Consilie ordinari
contigerint, 4 pars, instit. fol. 4. and 9.
(viz.) in the Parliament: This makes nothing at all for a Court for the House
of Commons; that consilium which that Writ intends, is cleared partly by the
Writ for choosing Knights, etc. For the King by that Writ is said to resolve to
consult and treat with the Prelates and Peers of the Kingdom, for and
touching the great concernments of the Commonwealth (for the King never sits
in the House of Commons;) and this also is made evident by the Writs to the
Prelates, Peers, Judges, and to his Council at Law; the words in their Writ
are, To appear and attend the Parliament, consilium impensuri, the one does
consulere, the other facere and consentire.

The House of Lords, where the King sits in person, 7. H. 6.28. 1 H. 7.20. 13.
E. 3. ca. 5. 4 pars, instit. page 21.
assisted by his Lords, Judges, Sergeants, Attorney, Solicitor, Masters of the
Cnancery, is a Court of Record to many purposes, set down in the Books of Law
and the Statutes of the Land, and that Court is only in the House of Lords,
where the Kings sits.

A Court must either be by the Kings Patent, Statute Law, or by the Common Law,
which is common and constant usage; the House of Commons has no Patent to be a
Court, Plowd. Com. 319.
nor Statute Law to be a Court, nor common usage; they have no Iournall Book
but since E. 6. time: was there ever Fine by the House of Commons estreated
into the Exchequer? For murder or Felony they can imprison no man, much less
for Treason; that House which cannot do the less, cannot do the greater.

It is ordained, 25. E. 3. c. 4.3. Car. Petition of Right.
that no man shall be imprisoned or put out of his Franchise by the King or his
Council, but upon Indictment or presentment of his good and lawful
Neighbors, where the deed is done, or by original Writ at the Common Law, and
so is Lex terrae the Law of the land mentioned in Magna Charta, cap. 29.
expounded, and the said Magna Charta, and Charta de Foresta, are declared by
the Stat. of 25. E. 1. c. 1. to be the Common Law of the Land. All Judges and
Commissioners are to proceed, Secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni Anglia, as
appears by all proceedings in all Courts, and by all Commissions: and
therefore the House of Commons by themselves, proceeding not by Indictment,
Presentment, or Original Writ, have no power to imprison men, or put them out
of their Franchise.

This no way trenches upon the Parliament; for it is in Law no Parliament
without King and both Houses; 4 pars. Instit. page 1. 3 Pars, Instit. p. 23.
I have only in my Paper delivered to Mr Corbet, applied my self to that
Committee, that they had no power to examine me, 12. ^. 7.20. Princes case, 8
Pars, Cook. 1 Pars, Instit. p. 159. 14. H. 8.3. Dier, 38. H. 8.60. 1 Pars,
Instit. p. 19. b.
but I never thought, said, or wrote, that the Parliament had no power to
examine me: the Law and custom of this Land is, that a Parliament has power
over my life, liberty, lands and goods, and over every other subject, but the
House of Commons of it self has no such power.

For the Lord Cooks relation, that the House of Commons have imposed Fines, and
imprisoned men in Queen Elizabeth time, and since; Few facts of late time never
questioned, make no legal power nor Court; 4 Pa. Instit. ca. Parl.
a facto ad jus is no good argument; for the words of the Statute of 6. H. 8.
c. 16. that a license to depart from the House of Commons for any Member
thereof is to be entered of Record in the Book of the Clark of the Parliament,
appointed, or to be appointed for that House, does not conclude that the House
of Commons is a Court of Record.

For first, that Law of 6. H. 8. c. 26. handles no such question, as that,
whether the House of Commons be a Court; it is a maxim in all Laws, Lex aliud
tranctans nil probat, the word (Record) there mentioned, is only a memorial of
what was done and entered in a Book: A Plaint removed out of the County Court to
the Court of the Common Pleas, has these words in the Writ of remove, Fitzh.
Not. Br. 70. Fitzh. Not. Br. 13. 12. H 4.23. 34. H. 6.49.
Recordari facias loquelam, etc. and yet the County Court is no Court of
Record; and so for ancient Demesne, in a Writ of false judgment, the words are
Recordari facias loquelam, etc. and yet the Court of ancient Demesne is no
Court of Reco^d; and so of a Court Baron, the Law and custom of England must
be preserved, or England will be destroyed, and have neither Law nor custom.

Let any man show me, that the Court of Lords or the House of Commons in any
age has made any man a Delinquent (Rege dissentiente) the King contradicting
it under his Great Seal. Sir Giles M^mpessau, Michell, and others of late were
condemned by the prosecution of the House of Commons in King James his time;
did King James ever contradict it? And so of ancient times, 4 Pars, Inslit.
Tit. Parliam. page 23.
where the House of Peers condemned the Lord Latimer in 50. E. 3. the Kings
pardon freed him: which shows clearly, that the Kings express or employed
assent must of necessity be had to make a Delinquent.

The Geatleman says, That the Parliament sit^, or ought to sit by something
greater th^n the Kings Writ, etc.

No Parliament did ever sit without the Kings Writ, nor could ever Parliament
begin without the Kings presence in person, 4 Pars, Instit. page 4. and 6.
or by a Guardian of England by pacent under the Kings Great Seal, the King
being in re^^ti^, or by Commission under the Great Seal to certain Lords
representing the Kings person, and it has been thus in all Ages unto this
Session of Parliament, wherein his Majesty has been pressed, and has passed
two Acts of Parliament, one for a Triennall Parliament, and another for a
perpe^uall, if the Houses please, to satisfy their desires; ^ow these two Acts
agree one with another, and with the Statute in E. the thirds time, where
Parliaments are ordained to be holden every year, 4 E. 3. c. 14. 36. E. 3. c.
10.21. Iac. the Act of Limitation of Actions, cap. 26.
and what mischiefs to the people of this Land such length of Parliaments will
produce by protections and privileges to free them and their meniall servants
from all debts during their lives, if they please to continue it so long, and
how destructive to men's actions against them, by reason of the Statute of
Limitations, which confines their actions to certain years, and many other
inconveniences of greater importance, is easy to understand.

How can any man affirm, that the two Houses do act now by the Kings Wrie,
which relates to Counsel and Treaty with the King, concerning the King, the
defense of his Kingdom, and of the Church of England, 4 Pars, Instit. p. 14.
these are the three points which it tends to, as appears by the Writ. They
keep their King prisosoner at Holnby, and will not suffer him to consult and
treat with them. Vow and Covenant, p. 11.
They have made a Vow and Covenant to assist the Forces raised and continued by
both Houses against the Forces raised by the King without their consent, and to
the same effect have devised the Oath which they call the Negative Oath: Is
this to to defend the Kings Kingdom or their Kingdom?

When by their Solemn League and Covonant they extirpate Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters root and branch, is this to defend the Church of England? (that Church
must necessarily be meant, that was the Church of England when the said Writ
bore test) they were not summoned to defend a Church that was not in being; 3
Pars, Cook^ Deane and Chapter of Norwich.
to destroy and defend the Church are very contrary things; the Church is not
desended, when they take away and sell the Lands of the Church.

The Gentleman says, The King cannot contr^le other Courts of Justice, or
prevent them from sitting or acting, and therefore not the two Houses, etc. It
is true, the King cannot control or prevent his other Courts, for that they
are his ordinary Courts of common Justice, to administer common right unto all
men, according to the fixed Laws. 14 H. 8.3. 36 H. 8. Dier. 60.
The Houses make no Court without the King, they are no body corporate without
the King, nor Parliament without the King, they all make one corporate body,
one Court called the Parliament, 4 Pars, Instit. pa. 1.
whereof the King is the head, and the Court is in the Lords House, where the
King is present: and as a man is no man without a head, so the Houses severed
from the King, as now they are, have no power at all, and they themselves by
levying wa^ against the King, and imprisoning of him, have made the Statute for
not dissolving, adjourning, or proroging this Parliament of no effect, by the
said Acts of their own; they sit to no purpose without his assent to their
Bills, they will not suffer him to consult with them, and treat, and reason
with them; whereby he may discern what Bills are fit to pass, and what not,
which in all Ages the Kings of this Land have enjoyed as their undoubted
Rights, and therefore they sit to no purpose by their own disobedience and
fault.

For the ordinary Courts at Westminster, 27 H. 8. c. 24. 28 H. 8.11. Dier.
the Judges in all those Courts are Judges by the Kings Patent or Writ,
otherwise they are no Judge: the Houses can make no Judges, they are no Judges
at all who are made by them; the whole and sole power of making Judges, belongs
to the King: the King cannot control or prevent his own Judges from sitting
or acting, but the Houses he may, for they are not the Kings Judges, but the
Judges of the two Houses. 2 R. 3.11.
In his other Courts, the King commits his power to his Judges by his Patent,
and they are sworn to do common right to all men, and the King is sworn not to
let them from so doing: the King cannot judge in those Courts, nor control;
but the King is both Judge and Controller in the Court of Parliament: Quoad
Acts, for his assent or dissent does give life or death to all Bills. Many
Lawyers have much to answer to God, this Kingdom, and to p^sterity, for
puzling the poor of this Land with such Fancies, as the Gentleman who wrote
the Answer to my Paper, and others have published in these Troubles, which has
been none of the least causes of the raising and continuing of them: And so I
have with the first part of his Answer.

AD. 2.
For the Non sequitur, in the second Section of the Gent. Answer, the
Antecedent and the Censequent are his own.

Quem recitas meus est (o Fidentine!) libellus:
Sed male dum recitas incipit esse tuus.
My words are, that the King is not virtually in the two Houses at Westminster,
to enable them to grant pardons, for that whole and sole power by the Law
belongs to the King. My Paper has no such thing, 27 H. 8. c. 24.
as that the Kings power cannot be derived to others, or the virtue of his
power: For his power, and the virtue of his power, is in all Patents to his
Judges, in Charters to Corporations, in Commissions of all sorts, and in the
Parliament assembled by force of his Writ of Summons, so long as they obey him;
but when they renounce that power, and claim it not from the King, and declare
to the Kingdom that he is not in condition to govern, and imprison him, and
usurp to themselves all Royal Authority, as the two Houses now do, no
reasonable man can affirm that they act by the power of their prisoner, who
has no power to give them, that by force of Arms take all the power to
themselves.

The Gent. says, the King grants Commissions daily of Oyer and Terminer, which
he cannot frustrate nor ^lude. 4 E. 4.39. 5 F. 4.4. 1 Eliz, Dyer 165. 1 Mar.
Brooks case, 447.
The King may revoke and discharge the Commission by his Writ, as he may remove
all Judges, and place other men in their room; and any Kings death determines
all the Judges Patents of Westminster Hall, Commissions of Oyer and Terminer,
etc. and so he might dissolve both Houses in all times, by his Writ under the
Great Seal, until that by this Parliament, by his own concession, the King of
his goodness has secluded himself; which goodness has been full ill
requited.

The Gent, affirms, That the power the Parliament has, is concurrent from the
King and Kingdom; which, he conceives, is proved by the Grant of Subsidies to
the King by the Parliament. The mistaking of this word (Parliament) has been
mischievous in these times to this Land, 4 Pars, Instit. page 1.
and it is affectedly mistaken, which makes the sin the greater, for the two
Houses are not the Parliament, as before is declared; and at this time so to
inculcate it, when all men know, that of the 120 Peers of the Kingdom, who
were Temporal Peers before the Troubles; there are not now above 30 in the
Lords House, and in the House of Commons about 200 of the principal Gent. of
the Kingdom left the House, and adhered to his Majesty, who is imprisoned by
them, shows no such candor as is to be desired.

It is true, that no Tallage can be laid upon the people of this Land, 25. E.
1. confirmatio chartarum, cap. 6. 34. E. 1. cap. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo.
but by their consent in Parliament, as appears by the Laws mentioned in the
Margent; but you shall find in Mr S^ld^ns learned Book, called Mare Clausum, a
number of Presidents in Henry the Thirds time for Ship Money, justly condemned
this Parliament, to the which his Majesty assented; and in truth, that
Ship Money was condemned before, by the said two Statutes of 25. E. 1. and 34.
E. 1. de Tallagio non concedendo. Danegelt, Englitery, and many grievous
burdens were laid upon the people, and born, until that memorable Princes
time. But I am of opinion, that the Common Law of the Land did always
restrain Kings form all Subsidies and Tallages, but by consent in Parliament;
which does appear by Magna Charta the last chapter, where the Prelates, Lords,
and Communalty gave the King the fifteenth part of their movables. In truth it
is no manner of consequence, because the King cannot take what he pleases of
the sub^ects goods, that therefore they have a concurrent power in Parliament:
there have been many Parliaments, and no Subsidies granted; Parliaments may be
without Subsidies, but Subsidies cannot be without Parliaments: of ancient time
Parliaments rarely granted any, unless it were in the time of foreign Wars;
and in my time, Q^. Elizabeth refused a Subsidy granted in Parliament, and in
the Parliament of ^ Jac. none were granted. The Gent. should make a conscience
of blinding the people with such untrue colors, to the ruin of King and
people.

AD. 3.
The Gent. affirms, That the sonding Propositions to the King, and desiring his
concurrence, is carce worth an answer, for Sub, ects may humbly petition for
that which is their strict right and property, etc. The Propositions sent to
Newcastle, are in print; wherein the two Houses are so far from humbly
petitioning, that they style not themselves his Majesty's Subjects, as appears
by the Propositions.

That they have a strict right or property to any one of these Propositions, is
a strange assertion, every one of them being against the Laws now in force:
Have the two Houses a strict right and property, to lay upon the people what
Taxes they shall judge meet? To pardon all Treasons, etc. that is one of their
Propositions. Have they a strict right and proporty to pardon themselves? and
so for all the rest of their Propositions.

These Propositions have been Voted by both Houses, 12 H. 7.20. 1 Iac. cap. 1.
1 Car. cap. 7.
the Kings assent (the^ being drawn into Bills) makes them Acts of Parliment:
Has the King no right to assent or dis-assent? Was the sending but a
Complement? All our Law Books and Statutes speak otherwise. This Gent. and
others, must give an account one time or other for such delusions put upon the
people.

AD. 4.
The Gent. says, They affirm not, that the Kings power is separated from his
person, so as the two Spencers affirmed, etc. His Majesty's person is now at
Holnby under their Guards; have they not severed his power from him, when by no
power they have left him, he can have two of his Chaplains, who have not taken
their Covenant, to attend him for the exercise of his Conscience?

For the three Conclusions of the Spencers, 15. Ed. 2. Exilium Hugonis 1 E. 3.
c. 2. Calvin's case. 7 Pars, Reports, 11.
do not the two Houses act every of them? They sa^, his Majesty has broken
his Trust, touching the Government of his people: They have raised Armies to
take him, they have taken him, and imprisoned him; they govern themselves; they
make Laws, impose Taxes, make Judges, Sheriffs, and take upon them omnia
insigna summae p^t^statis: Is not this to remove the King for misdemeanors, to
reform per asperte, to govern in aid of him; the three Conclusions of the
^Pencers? Do they think the good people of England are become stupid, and will
not ^t length see these things?

The Gentleman says, They do not separate his power from his Person, but
distinguish it, etc. His power is in his legal Writs, Plowd. 4. Eliz. 213. the
Kings power and his Person are indivisible.
Courts, and Officers: when they counterfeit the Great Seal, and seal Writs
with the same, make Judges themselves, Courts and Officers, by their own
Ordinances against his consent, declared under his true Great Seal of England
(not by word of mouth, letters, or ministers only) their Seal is obeyed, their
own Writs, their own Judges, their own Courts, their own Officers, and not the
Kings: The time will come when such strange actions and discourses will be
lamented.

AD. 5.
The Gentleman goes on, We take not from the King all power of pardoning
Delinquents, we only say it is not proper to him quarto modo, etc. What do you
mean by quarto modo? I am sure, Omnis Rex Angliae, solus Rex and semper Rex
can do it, and none else; read the Books of the Law to this purpose collected
by that reverend and learned Judge Stanford, Stanfor. Plcas 99. 27 H 8. c. 24.
Dier, 163.
from all Antiquity to his time, who dyed in the last year of King Philip and
Queen Mary's Reign, you shall find this a truth undeniable; and this power was
never questioned in any Age in any Book by any until this time, that every
thing is put to the question: You Gentlemen who profess the Law, and maintain
the party against the King, return at length, and bring not so much scandal
upon the Law, (which preserves all) by publishing such incredible things.

We hold only what the Law holds, the Kings Prerogative and the Subjects
Liberty are determined, and bounded, and admeasured by the written Law what
they are; 1 Pars, Inst^t. page 344. Plowd. 3. Eliz. 236, 237.
we do not hold the King to have any more power, neither does His Majesty
claim any other but what the Law gives him; the two Houses by the Law of this
Land have no color of power, either to make Delinquents, or pardon
Delinquents, the King contradicting: (and the Army under Sir Thomas Fairfax
(howbeit but Soldiers) do now understand that to be Law, and do now
evidently see and assuredly know, that it is not an Ordinance of the two
Houses, but an act of Parliament, made by the King, Lords and Commons that will
secure them, and let this Army remember their executed fellow Soldiers,) And
the Law was always so taken by all men until these troubles, that have begot
Monsters of opinions.

AD. 6.
This Gentleman says, The Parliament has declared the King to be in no
condition to govern, etc.

There is no end of your distinctions, I and you profess the Law; show me Law
for your distinctions, or letter, syllable, or line, in any Age in the Books of
the Law, that the King may in one time be in no condition to govern, and yet
have the habit of governing, and another time he may (viz.) when the two Houses
will suffer him: The Law says thus, Vbi lex non distinguit, non est
distinguendum.

He says, The King is not barred from returning to His Parliament, (as he
calls the two Houses) he knows the contrary, the whole City knows the
contrary, Nos juris consulti sumus sacerdotes, (as Institian the Emperor has
it, in the first Book of his Institutions) and therefore knowledge and truth
should come from our lips: Worth) and ingenious men will remember, and reflect
upon that passage of that good and wise man Seneca, Non qua itur, sed qua
eundum; follow not the rays of the Lawyers of the House of Commons: God
forgive them, I am sure the King will, if they be wise and seek it in time.

AD. 7.
The Gent. says, We swear that the King is our supreme Governor over all
persons and in all causes, etc. Why has he lest out the word (only)? for the
oath the Members now take, is, that King Charles is now the only and supreme
Governor in all causes, over all persons, 5 El^z. cap. 1. Cawdreys case 5
pars, fol. 1.
and yet they keep their only Supreme Governor now in prison, and act now in
Parliament by virtue of their Prisoners Writ, and by a concurrent power in this
Parliament, and by their own strict right and property, (as the Gent. This Oath
is allowed by the Common L^w of the Land
affirms in his Answer) These things agree well with their Oath, that the King
is the only Supreme Governor in all causes, over all persons; this Oath is
taken now in the Parliament time, by all the Members of the House of Commons,
and is required by the Law to be taken in all Parliaments, otherwise they have
no power, nor color to meddle with the public Affairs.

This Oath being taken in Parliament, that the King is the only and Supreme
Governor in all Causes, then it follows in Parliament causes; over all
persons, then over the two Houses; let them keep this Oath; and we shall be
sure of peace in the Land: and good Lawyers ought to desire peace, both for the
public good and their private, and not dishonor that Noble profession, as
many do in this miserable time.

The Gent. says, We do not swear that the King i^ above all Law nor above
the safety of his people; neither do we so swear, but His Majesty and we will
swear to the contrary, and have swom, and have made good, and will by Gods
grace make good our Oath to the world, that the King is not above the Law, nor
above the safety of his people; the Law and the safery of his people are his
safety, his Honor and his Strength.

AD. 8.

The Gent. concludes, That Acts of Parliament are not formally binding, nor
complete without the Kings assent, yet the Houses have a virtuall power without
the Kings particular assent, to do things in order to public Justice and
Safety, (viz*) In setting up the Excise, in raising and maintaining of Armies,
in taxing the peopeople at pleasure with Fifth and Twentieth part, Fifty
Subsidies, Sequestrations, Loanes, Compositions, imprisoning the King,
abolishing the Common Prayer Book, selling the Churches Lands etc. all these
are in order to the public Justice and Safety.

Mr H.P. you are of my profession, I beseech you, for the good of your
Country, for the Honor of our Science persuade your self and others, as much
as in you lies, to believe and follow the monition and Council of that
memorable, reverend, and profoundly learned in the Laws and Customs of the
Land, the Lord Coke, who writes as becomes a great and a learned Judge of the
Law (a person much magnified by the two Houses) in these words? Peruse over all
Books, Records and Histories, and you shall finds a Principle in Law, 3 Pars,
Instit. p. 36.
a Rule in Reason, and a Trial in Experience, that Treason does over produc^
futall and final destruction to the offender, and never attaines to the
desired and (two incidents inseparable thereunto) and therefore let all men
abandon it, as the poisonous hait of the Devil, and follow the Precept in holy
Scripture, SERVE GOD, HONOR THE KING, AND HAVE NO COMPANY WITH THE SEDITIOVS.

CONCLUSION.
I Say again, that without an Act of Obliviow, a gracious general Pardon from
His Majesty, the Arreares of the Soulaiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender Consciences, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor any
man secure of any thing be has:

By me David Jenkins Prisoner in the Tower.

The End.
A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniences of a Long continued Parliament. AND
THE IVDGEMENT OF THE LAW OF THE LAND In that Behalf.

By DAVID JENKINS now Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

A DISCOURSE Touching the Inconveniences of a Long continued Parliament.
1.
Aerpetuall Parliament is repugnant to the Act made this Parliament for a
Trienniall Parliament; for how can every three years a Parliament begin, if
this be perpetual, which may be so if the two Houses please?

2.
An adjournment of the Parliament makes no Session, 4 Pars, Institut. fol. 27.
Howbeit, before the Adjournment, the King gives His Royal assent to some
Bills. Cook, ibid.

3.
There is no Session till a prorogation or dissolution of the Parliament.

4.
This Parliament, as appears by the Act for not dissolving thereof, set down
in the Printed Statutes of this Parliament, fol. 138. cannot be prorogued but
by Act of Parliament. There has been as yet no Act of Parliament present, and
therefore all the Acts of this Parliament, are Acts of one Session.

5.
All the A^^^ of one Session relate to the first day of the Parliament, Plow ^
com. 79 35 H. 8. Bro. relation 35. Bro. Parl. 86. Dier. 1 Mariae 45.
and all the Acts of such a Pa^liament are Acts of one day; so the Act for the
Trienniall, and the Act for this Perpetual, are two Acts of one day by the Law.

6.
4 Ed. 3. cap. and 36 Ed. 3. cap. 10. A Parliament is to be holden once every
year, and more often if need* shall be* those Acts are confirmed by the Act
for the Trienniall Parliament. How does a perpetual Parliament agree with a
Parliament once every year, or with the intention of those Laws? How does a
Parliament every three years agree with a Parliament for ever, which may be, if
the two Houses please?

7.
The result is this; at one day in Law this Parliament two Acts have passed
(for howbeit the one was in 16^ Carol. and the other in 17. Carol. yet both in
Law are Acts of one day) the one says there shall be a Trienniall Parliament
after the end of the sitting of this Parliament: The other, this Parliament
shall sit for ever, if they please. The one will have a Parliament with an end,
the other, a Parliament without an end.

When an Act of Parliament is against common right or Reason, 8 Pars, Doct.
Bonhams case fol. 118. 8 Ed. 3.30. 33 E. 3. cessavit, 32. 27. H. G. Annuity 11.
14 Eliz. Dier, 313.
or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the Common Law shall control
it, and adjudge this Act to be void; they are the words of the Law.

An Act of Parliament, that a man shall be Judge in his own cause, is a void
Act.

Begin with Common Right. It is against Common Right, that indebted men should
not pay their debts: That if any Member of the House of Commons do any Subject
wrong by diffeising him of his land, or dispossessing him of his goods, or
blasting of his fame, or doing violence to his person, that such persons during
their lives should not be questioned by a privilege of Parliament, and that
extended also to many others besides themselves. Common Right does abhor
these enormities, which a perpetual Paliament does beget, besides the utter
destruction of all men's actions, real, personal, or mixed, who have to do
with Parliament men, 21 Jac.
by the Statute of Limitation, which confines suits to certain years.

For Common Reason. Parliaments were ordained for remedies to redress public
grievances; It is against Reason they should make public and insufferable
grievances. The Law of the Land allows no protection for any man employed in
the service of the Kingdom but for a year, to be free from suits, and in many
suits none at all, howbeit he be in such service; 39 H. 6.39.
but a Parliament perpetual may prove a protection, not for a year, but for
ever, which is against all manner of Reason.

For Impossibility. The death of His Majesty (whose life God prolong) dissolves
it necessarily; For the Writ of summons is, Carolus Rex in hoc individuo, and
Carolus Rex is in this particular, Habiturus colloquium and tractatum cum
Prelatis and proceribus, etc. 2 H. 5. Cook Title Parliam 3. pars.
King Charles being to have Conference and Treaty with his Prelates and Peers;
Carolus Rex cannot have Colloquium and tractatum, Conference and Treaty, when
he is deceased; and therefore it is impossible for any Parliament to continue
as long as they please, as for a Parliament to make a dead man alive.

For Repugnancie. That which is but for a time, cannot be affirmed to have
continuance for ever, it is repugnant.

The end of the Act of 17. Caroli Regis, which is to continue at pleasure, is
in the said Act expressed to be to raise credit for money for these three
purposes. First, for relief of his Majesty's Army and people in the North.
Secondly, for preventing the iminent danger of the Kingdom. Thirdly, for
supply of other His Majesty's present and urgent occasions. These ends are
ended, the relief of that Army, the iminent danger supposed was six years
ago, the supply of His Majesty has been a supply against him, take away the
end, the means thereto are to no purpose, take away the cause, the effect
cease; and therefore the three ends of this Act being determined, it agrees
with Law and Reason, the Act should end, Sir Anthony Mayns case. 5. pars, 1. H.
4.6. Littl. cap. Villen.
the Law rejects things unprofitable and useless.

A perpetual Parliament (besides that it incites men to selfe-ends,
destructive of the public of which the whole Kingdom has had sufficient
experience) will be a constant charge to the Kingdom; for that every County and
Borough, who send Members to the Parliament, are by the Law to pay wages to
their Parliament men, which to many Counties will amount above some Subsidies
Yearly: There are many poor Borough-Townes in each County of this Kingdom,
who being to maintain two Burgesses in Parliament, will be quickly beggered,
if the Parliament have no end; for all which reasons it is clear, that such
long continuance of Parliaments, will instead of a remedy (which is and ought
to be the proper and true end of Parliaments) become an insufferable grievance
and oppression to all the People of the Land.

The Writ of Summons this Parliament is the basis and foundation of the
Parliament. If the Foundation be destroyed the Parliament falls. The Assembly
of Parliament if for three purposes. Rex est habiturus colloquium et tractatum
cum praelatis, magnatibus et proceribus super arduis negotijs, concernentibus,
1. Nos. 2 Defensionem regni nostri 3. Defensionem Ecclesiae Anglicanae. This
Parliament has overthrown this Foundation in all 3 parts, 1. Nos. the King,
they have chased him away, and imprisoned him; they have voted no prelates, and
a number of other Lords, about 40. in the City must not come to the House, and
about 40, more are out of Town, the colloquium et tractatus are made void
thereby. For the King cannot consult and treat there with men removed from
thence. 2. Defensionem regni nostri, that is gone; they have made it their
Kingdom, not His, for they have usurped all His Soveraigntie. 3. Defensionem
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, that is gone, that Ecclesia Anglicana trust be understood
necessarily that Church, that at the test of the Writ was Ecclesia Anglicana,
they have destroyed that too. So now these men would be called a Parliament,
having abated, quashed, and made nothing of the Writ whereby they were Summoned
and Assembled. If the Writ be made void, all the process is void also: that
House must needs fall, where the Foundation is overthrown, Sublato fundamento
opus cadit, the Foundation being taken away, the work falls, is both a maxim
in Law and Reason.

For some years past, there is no crime from Treason to Trespass, but they
are guilty of: all Treason, Felonies, Robberies, trespasses are contra pacem,
coronam, et dignitatem Regis, against the Peace, Crown and Dignity of the
King; as appears by all Indictments in all Ages. Pax Regis the Kings Peace,
Corona Regis, the Kings Crown, Dignitas Regis, the Kings Dignity, are all
trod under foot, and made nothing; Pax Regis, the Peace of the King is become a
War against the King, His Dignity put into prison, and the Crown put upon
their own heads.

All the Judges of England have resolved, Nevills ease 7. part, 34. 2. Jacobi.
that Noblemen committing Treason have forfeited their Office and Dignity,
their Officei^s to council the King in time of Peace, to defend him in time of
War, and therefore those men against the duty and end of their Dignity
taking not only Council, but Arms also to destroy Him, and being thereof
attaint by due course of Law by a racite condition annexed to the estate of
their Dignity, have forfeited the same; they are the words of the Law, and
therefore they have made themselves incapable to be Members of the upper House.

The Oppressions of the People.
Briberies, Extortions, Monopolies, ought to be inquired after by the House of
Commons, and complained of to the King and Lords, what have they done?

The House of Commons cannot by the Law commit any man to prison, who is not of
the said House, for Treason, Murder, or Felony, or any thing but for the
disturbance of the public Peace, by the privilege of the whole body.

They have no power by the Writ, which the King issues to elect and return
Members of that House, so to do. For the Writ for them is only ad faciendum
et consentiendum to those things, whereof His Majesty shall consult and treat
with his Prelates and Nobles, et de communi consilio Regni shall be there
ordained, as appears by the Writ. Here is no separate power given over the
Kings people to them, but only ad faciendum et consentiendum, 4 Pars.
institut. 23.24.25.
and in all times this has been expounded and restrained to that which
concerned their own Members in Relation to the public Service, as he is a
Member of the corporate body of the Parliament, whereof the King is the Head.

But that the House of Commons have committed any man for Treason, Murder or
Felony, or for any offense that had no relation to a Member of the House of
Commons, as it is against Law and Reason, so no instance can be given till this
Parliament. 19 H. 6.43. 22. E. 4.22. 5 H. 4. cap. 8. 3 H. 6.46.


All Questions and trials where witness are examined, the examination is upon
oath by the Law, by all our Books, Statutes, every days practice. Examination
without an Oath, is but a loose discourse; therefore the House of Commons not
claiming power to give an Oath, have no power to examine any man.

No man shall be imprisoned by the King or His Council, unless it be by
Indictment, 25 E. 3. c. 1. Petition of Right. 3 Car.
presentment of his good and lawful Neighbors where such deeds be done, in
due manner, or by process made by Writ original at the Common Law: This
Statute rehearses Magna Charta, page 29. and expounds Lex terrae, the Law of
the Land there mentioned: This Law binds all men, and the House of Commons (for
they say they are of the Kings Council) in all points, but only against the
disturbers of the service of the Parliament; and therefore the imprisonment of
several persons who are not their Members, and for no disturbance to their
Members, is utterly against the Law of the Land, and the franchise of the
Freemen of this Realm.

Cui non licet quod minus, non ^eet quod majus; he who may not do what is
less, may not do what is greater; they cannot commit a man for murder or
Felony, much less for Treason.

No Court can fine and imprison, but a Court of Record, the House of Commons is
no Court of Record, 8 Pars, Cook 120. 27 H. 6.8.
the House of the Lords where the King is in his Person, his Nobles and his
Judges, and Council at Law, the Masters of the Chancery assisting, is a Court
of Record, and that is the Court of Parliament, where the colloquium and
tractatus is. The House of Commons may present grievances, grant or not grant
aids, consent or not consent to new laws, but for fining and imprisoning any
but as aforesaid, is but of a late date, and no ancient usage: They have no
Journall Book, but sithence Edw. 6. time. 6 Hen. 8. cap. 15. does not prove
the House of Commons to be a Court of Record, it mentions only to be entered
on Record in the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament, if any Member depart
into the Country. There is no Journall there but sithence Ed. 6. time, or it is
a remembrance or memorial, as 12 H. 4.23.

The whole Parliament is one corporate body, 14 H. 8.3. 36 H. 8. Dier 60. 4
Pars Instit. cap. 1.
consisting of the Head and three Estates: The Court is only there where the
Consilium and tractatus is, where the consult and treaty is with the King,
which is in the House of Lords only.

The House of Commons claim not to examine upon oath any man; no Court can be
without a power to give an oath, Courts Baron, Court of Pipowders,
County Court, may and do give oath: No Court can be without a power to try,
no trial can be without Oath; and therefore the House of Commons not claiming
power to give an Oath, can bring no matter to trial, and consequently can be
no Court.

The behavior of the Commons at a Conference with the Lords, the Commons are
always uncovered, and standing when the Lords sit with their hats on, which
shows they are not Colleagues in judgment, for fellow Judges owe no such
Reverence to their Companions.

When was ever Fine imposed by the House of Commons estreated in the Exchequer?
11 H. 4. c^. ^.
The ejecting of a Member, who has sitten, is against the Law; for they cannot
remove a man out of the House unduly returned, much less a man returned duly.

By these Laws it appears, (...) H. 4. cap. 1. 1 H. 5. cap. 1. 8 H. 6. cap.
7. 23 H. 6. cap. 15
that if any undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a
Member, the Sheriffs punishment is 200. pound, one to the King, another to the
party that is duly elected, imprisonment for a year without Bail or
Mainprise; and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his own
charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament by the Writ De
solutione foendorum Militum, Civium and Burgensium Parliament. and the trial
of the falsity of the return, is to be before the Justices of Assizes in the
proper County, or by action of debt in any Court of Record. This condemns the
Committee for undue elections, which has been practiced but of late times; 3
Ed. ^. 20. 5 Ed. ^. 41.
for besides these Laws, it is against a maxim of the Common law; an averment
is not receivable against the return of the Sheriff, for his return is upon
Oath, which Oath is to be credited in that suit wherein the return is made.

The said Statutes condemn and make those members no members, which were not
resiant in the County or Boroughs, for which they were elected, at the time
(...) the rest of the Writ of the Summons of the Parliament, and any abusive
practice of late times to the contrary is against the Law, and ought not to be
allowed.

Assault upon Parliament Men.
If a Parliament man or his Meniall Servant be assaulted, beaten, or wounded,
in the Parliament time, 5 H. 4. cap 6. 11 H. 6, cap 11.
proclamation shall be made where the deed is done, that the offender shall
render himself to the Kings Bench, within a quarter of a year after
proclamation made, and the offense there to be tried, for default of appearance
the offender is declared, attainted of the misdeed, and it is accorded that
thereafter it be done likewise in the like Case.

Serving of process upon a Lord of the Parliament punished in the Lords House.
Bogo de Clare 18 E. 3. 4 pa^s, Instit. fol. 24. John Thornsbyes case, Clerk of
the Parliam. ibid. 10. E. ^.


Serving of process upon Thornsby inquired of in the Chancery, and there the
offenders were convicted.

The premises prove, that breaches of privilege of Parliament may be
punished elsewhere then in Parliament.

Upon all this Discourse, it is easy to discern what fruits may be expected
from this Parliament, continuing as long as the two Houses please; and that
there is no safety for this Commonwealth, but by the Observations of their
ancient Franchises, Customs and Laws.

CONCLUSION.
I Say again, that without an Act of Oblivion, a gracious general Pardon from
His Majesty, the Arreares of the Soldiers paid, a favorable regard had to
tender Consciences, there will be neither Truth nor Peace in this Land, nor
any man secure of any thing he has.

The End.
AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY, Touching the eight Quaeres upon the late Declarations
and Letters from the Army, touching sedition falsely charged upon them.

Wherein those Quaeres are resolved, and thereby the present proceedings of the
Army are proved to be Legal, Just and Honorable.

By DAVID JENKINS, Prisoner in the Tower of LONDON.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de seditione querentes.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

AN APOLOGY FOR THE ARMY.
THese Treasonable and insolent Qu^rie^ make the Army the Houses Subjects,
Bracton fol. 118, Stanford. f. 2
and not the Kings. None by the Laws of this ^and can in this Kingdom have
any Army but His Majesty.

It appears, the Army does now evidently perceive, that they were misled by
the specious pretencees of Sulus Papuli, the maintenance of the Kings Honor,
and of the maintenance of the Laws of the Land, and liberties of the Subject,
to take up Arms against their natural Liege Lord and Sovereign, the King.
The People is the Body, Mag. Char. c. 1. and ultim. All the act concerning the
King, Church, and Churchmen. 25. E. 1. c. 1.
the King is their Head; was the Body sufe when the Head was distressed and
imprisoned? For Laws and Liberties have not the prevailing pa^tie in the two
Houses destroyed above 100 Act of Parliament, and in (...), Magun Charta, and
Chorta de Forest^, which are the common Laws of the Land* Does Excize, Fifth
and Twentieth Parts, Mealemoney, and many more burdens which this Land never
heard of before maintain the Liberties of the people: You, and that party of
the two Houses, made the Army by several. Declar^tions before engagement,
believe that you would preserve the Kings Honor and Greatness, the Laws and
Liberties of the people: The Army and the whole Kingdom ^ow (...), see your
actions, and have no reason longer to bel^eve your Oaths, Vows, and
Declarations; and fince that party in the two Houses refuse to perform any
thing according to their said Oaths, Vows, and Declarations. The Army and the
Kingdom may and ought, both by your own principles and the Laws of the Land,
pursue the end for which they were raised. And so your first Quaere is
resolved, whereby it is manifest, that specious pretenses to carry on ambitious
and pernicious designs, fix not upon the Army, but upon you, and the
prevailing party in both Houses.

The Solution of the second Quaere.
The Army, (...)3. par. Instit. f. 12.39. Eli. 1. Jacob. ibi. 2. and 3. E. 6.
cap. 2. 11. H. 7. c. 1.
to their eternal honor, have freed the King from imprisonment a^ Holmby. It
was High Treason to imprison His Ma^estie (...) Tof^^^ His Majesty from that
imprisonment was to delive^^ Him out of Traitero^s mands, which was the Armies
bounden duty by the Law of God and the Land. That party refused to suffer His
Majesty to have two of His Chaplains for the exercise of His Conscience who
had not taken the Covenant, free aceesse wa^ not permitted, does the Army use
His Majesty so all men see that access to Him is free, (...)
and such Chaplains as His Majesty desired are now attending on His Grace:
Who are the guilty persons, the Army, who in this action of delivering the
King act according to Law, or the said party who acted Treasonably against the
Law? Who does observe the Protestation better, they who imprison their King, or
they who free Him from prison?

That this Army was raised by the Parliament is (...) false: The Army was
raised by the two Houses upon the specious pretenses of the Kings Honor,
common sa^etie, and the preservation of Laws and Liberties, which how made
good has been showed before, and all the people of the Kingdom do find by
woeful experience.

The two Houses are no more a Parliament then a Body without a Head a man. 14.
H^^. ^. 36. H. 8. Dier. 60. 4. par. Instit. p. 1.3.12.14. 16. R. 2. c. 1. 5.
Eliz. c. 2. 17. Carol. The act for the continuance of this Parliament.
The two Houses can make no Court without the King, they are no Body Corporate
without the King, they all, Head and Members, make one Corporate Body; and this
is so clear a truth, that in this Parliament, by the Act of 17 Caroli, it is
declared, That the Parliament shall not be dissolved or prorogued but by act of
Parliament; but the two Houses may respectively adjourne themselves; two Houses
and a Parliament are several things. Cunct a fidem vero faciunt, all
circumstances agree to prove this truth. Before the Norman Conquest, and
sithence to this day, the King is holden Principal, Caput, and finis, that is,
the beginning, Head and chief end of the Parliament, as appears by the
Treatise of the manner of holding of Parliaments made before the Norman
Conquest; 4. par. Instit. page 12.
by the Writ of Sumons of Parliament whereby the Treaty and Parler in
Parliament is to be had with the King only, by the Common Lau^ by the
Statute Law, by the Oath of Supremacy, 4. par. Instit. page 4.9. 5. Eli. c. 1.2.
taken at this and every Parliament, it does manifestly appear, that without
the King there can be no color of a Parliament.

How many Votes have they revoked in one Session, yea, and Bills? Was there
ever the like done? Nay, is not the constant course of Parliaments violated and
made nothing thereby? They are guarded by Armed-men, (...)
divide the public money among themselves, and that party endeavors to
bring in a Foreign to invade this Land again: If they be no Parliament, as
clearly they are none without His Majesty, they have no privileges, but do
exercise an Arbitrary, Tyrannical, and Treasonable power over the people.

By the Law of the Land, 7. E. 4.20. 8. E. 4.3. 9. E. 4.27. 4. H. 7.18. 27. H.
8.23.
when Treason or Felony is committed, it is lawful for every Subject, who
suspects the Offender, to apprehend him, and to secure him so, that Justice may
be done upon him according to the Law.

You say, The disobedience of the Army is a sad public president, like to
conjure up a spirit of universal disobedience, I pray object not that
conjuring up to the Army, whereof you, and the prevailing party in the Houses
are guilty; who conjured up the spirit of universal disobedience against His
Majesty, your and our only Supreme Governor, But you, and that party in the
two Houses, and even then, when the house of Commons were taking, and did take
the said Oath of Supremacy? For the Covenant you mention, it is an Oath against
the Laws of the Land, against the Petition of Right, devised in Scotland,
wherein the first Article is to maintain the Reformed Religion in the Church
of Scotland: 2. pars. Coll. of Ord. page 803. Petition of right 3. Car. 2.
pars. instit. 719.
And certainly there is no Subject of the English Nation does know what the
Scottish Religion is. I believe the Army took not the Covenant: No man by the
Law can give an Oath in a new case without an Act of Parliament; and therefore
the imposers thereof are very blamable and guilty of the highest Crime.

The Writer of these Quaeries seems to profess the L^wes, let him declare
what Act of Parliament does justify the tendering, giving, or taking of the
said Oath: he knows there is none, he knows that all the parts of it are
destructive of the Laws and Government to maintain which the Law of nature
and the Law of the Land had obliged them: Mag. Chart. cap. 1. and Ultimo
Articuli cleri, and many other statutes. 16. Ed. 4.10.
The Oath of the Covenant makes the Houses Supreme Governors in causes
Ecclesiastical, the Oath of Supremacy makes the King so, and yet both taken by
the same persons, at the same time. What credit is to be given to persons who
make nothing of Oaths, and contradict themselves? How d^e the Covenant and the
Oath of Supremacy agree? How does their Protestation and the Covenant agree?
How do their Declarations and Oaths agree? The Lord be merciful to this Land
for these Oaths.

It is a sad thing to consider that so many gentlemen who profess the laws,
and so many worthy men in both Houses should be so transported as they are,
knowing that the Laws of the Land from time to time, and in all times, are
contrary to all their actions, and that yet they should amuse themselves and
the people with the word of Parliament, without the King, and with the
Covenant; whereas they know they are no Parliament without His Majesty, and
that English men throughout the Kingdom should swear a Covenant, to preserve
the reformed Religion of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, which they no more know than the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government of Prester John in Ethiopia: if they consider it, they cannot but
discern that this is a high desperate and impious madness.

Be wise in time, without the King and the Laws you will never have one hour
of safety for your Persons, Wives, Children or Estates: Be good to your selves,
and to your Posterities; apply your selves to be capable of an Act of Oblivion,
and of a general Pardon, and to be able and willing to pay the Soldiery, and
to allow a reasonable liberty for m^^^ consciences, and God will bless your
endeavors, and the people (to whom you are now very hateful) will have you in
better estimation.

The third Quarie is thus answered.
You resemble the Army to Jack Cade and his Complians, and you cite the Act of
Parliament of 31. Hen. 6. cap. 1. and that it may appear who acts the Part of
Jack Cade, you and that Party in the two Houses, or the Army, I think it
necessary to set down the said Act in words at large as follows.

First, Whereas the most abominable Tyrant, horrible, odious and arrant false
Traitor John Cade, calling and naming himself sometime Mortimer, sometime Cap.
of Kent, which name, fame, acts, and feats are to be removed out of the speech
and mind of every faithful Christian man perpetually, falsely and traitorously
purposing, and imagining the perpetual destruction of the Kings said Person,
and final subversion of this Realm, taking upon him Royal power, and
gathering to him the, Kings people in great numbers, by false, subtle imagined
Language, and seditiously making a stirring Rebellion, and Insurrection, under
color of justice, for reformation of the Laws of the said King, robbing,
stealing, and spoiling great part of his faithful people, Our said Sovereign
Lord the King considering the premises, with many other which were more odious
to remember, by advise and consent of the Lords aforesaid, and at the request
of the said Commons, and by authority aforesaid, has ordained and established
that the said John Cade shall be reputed; had, named, and declared a false,
Traitor to our Sovereign Lord the King; and that all his tyranny, acts,
feats; and false opinions shall be voyded, abated, annulled, destroyed; and put
out of remembrance for ever: and that all enditements and all things depending
thereof, had and made under the power of tyranny shall be like wise void,
annulled, anated, repealed, and holden for none: and that the blood of (...)
them be thereof defiled nor corrupted, but by the authority of the said
Parliament clearly declared for even: and that all enditements in times
coming in like case under power of tyranny, rebellion and stirring had, shall
be of no Record nor effect, but void in Law; and all the Petitions delivered to
the said King in his last Parliament, holden at Westminster, Noveb. 6. in the
29. of his Reign, against his mind by him not agreed, shall be taken and put
in oblivion out of remembrance, undone, voyded, annulled and destroyed for
ever, as a thing purposed against God and conscience, and against His Royal
Estate and preeminence, and also dishonorable and unreasonable.

Now we are to examine who has trod in the step^ of Jack Cade, you and the
present prevailing party of the two Houses took upon them, and do take all
the Royal Power in all things; so did Jack Cade, as appears by the said Act;
the Army do not so: They who imprison the King purpose to destroy His Person
(our imprisoned Kings always Edward ^. Henry 6. Richard 2.
fared so) Jack Cade did likewise so purpose, but the Army do not so: The said
party in the two Houses made a stirring under color of Justice for Reformation
of the Laws; so did Jack Cade: The Army do not so, but desire that the Laws
should be observed: Jack Cade levied War against the King, the Army preserves
Him: Jack Cade dyed a Declared Traitor to his Sovereign Lord the King; this
Army lives to have the glorious true Honor of being restorers of their King.

Simon Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury was murtheted by Jack Cade i^ William
Laud Archbishop of Canterbury was likewise murdered by that party of the two
Houses, 25 Ed. 3.4. 28 Ed. 3.3. Petition of Right. 3 Car.
for that an Ordinance by Law cannot take away any man's life, and his life was
taken away by an Ordinance of the two Houses, the Army had no hand in it. Many
misled by Jack Cade, perceiving his Traiterous purposes, fell from him; and as
that was lawful, just, and Honorable, so it is for this Army to adhere to
their natural King, and to endeavor to settle the Kingdom again in the just
Laws and Liberties thereof: London did then right worthily adhere to the King
and the Laws, and not to Jack Cade and his specious pretenses, and it is hoped
they will now so do: By this it appears, that the Gentleman's Discourse
touching Jack Cade, fastens altogether on his party, and clears the Army.

To the IV. which is solved thus.
The Arreares of the Army (howbeit it is the least thing they look after) yet
being not paid them, it is by the Law of the Land a sufficient cause to leave
and desert that party in the Houses: A person who serves in any kind, and is
not paid his wages, the desertion of that service is warrantable by the Laws
of the Land: Pitz. N. B. 25. 9 Ed. ^.20. 38 H. 6.27. 23 Eliz. Dier 369.
You say, the Houses will reform all things when the Army does disband; who
will believe it? Will any believe that the settling of the Presbytery will do
it? Will any believe that his Majesty will pass the Propositions sent to Him
to Newcastle? Will any man believe that this Kingdom will ever be quiet,
without His Majesty and the ancient and just Laws? Can the Members of the Army
conceive any of them to be safe in any thing, without a Pardon from His
Majesty? Have they not seen some of their Fellows hanged before their eyes,
for actions done as Soldiers? Shall the Kingdom have no account of the many
Millions received of the Public Money? Will the Members of the Houses accuse
themselves? Shall private and public Debts be never paid? Shall the Kingdom
lie ever under burdens of Oppression and Tyranny? There is no visible way to
remedy all these enormities, but the power of the Army.

To the V. which is solved thus.
The Kingdom has better assurance of Reformation from the Army, then from the
Houses, for that in their Military way they have bin just, faithful and
honorable, they have kept their words: That party of the Houses have bin
constant to nothing but in dividing the public Treasure among themselves, and
in laying burdens upon the people, and in breaking all the Oaths, Vows, and
Promises they ever made: 2 and 3 Ed. 6. cap. 2. 11 H 7. cap. 1. Calvin's case,
7. pars, Cook fol. 11.
As the Army has power, so now adhering to the King, all the Laws of God,
Nature, and Man, are for them, their Arms are just, and blessed; and the King
is bound in Justice to reward his Deliverers with Honor, Profit, and meet
Liberty of Conscience.

To the VI. Quare.
All the sixth Quaere contains Calumnies cast upon the Army; the new
elections are against all the Laws mentioned in the Margin, 11 H. 4. c. 1. 1
H. 5. c. 1. 8 H. 6. c. 7. 23 H. 6. c. 15.
and are against the ejection of the old Members: and by this it may be judged,
what a House of Commons we have. By the said Laws it appears, that if any
undue return be made, the person returned is to continue a Member; the
Sherifes punishment is two hundred pounds, one to the King, and the other to
the party that is duly elected; imprisonment for a year, without Bail or
Mainprise: and that person who is unduly returned, shall serve at his own
charge, and have no benefit at the end of the Parliament, by the Writ de
solutione feodorum Militum, Civium and Burgensium Parliament. And the trial of
the falsitie of the return, is to be before the Justices of Assizes in the
proper County, or by Action of Debt in any Court of Record. This condemns the
Committee for undue elections, which has been practiced but of late times: for
besides these Laws, it is a Maxim of the Common Law, 3 Ed. 4.20. 5 Ed. 4.42.
an Averment is not receivable against the return of the Sheriff, for his
return is upon Oath which Oath is to be credited in that suit wherein the
return is made.

The said Statutes condemn elections of such men which were not resiant and
dwelt in the County or Boroughs for which they were returned; and any abusive
practice of late times to the contrary, is against the Law, and ought not to be
allowed.

To the VII. Quaere.
The Quaerist says, That the Votes of the Independents in the Houses were
arbitrarie, exorbitant, and irregular, and that they disposed and fingred more
of the common Treasure then others: That whole Quaere, I believe, is false and
slanderous; 37 E. 5. c. 17.
and the Author ought to make it good, or else to undergo the Law of Talton^;
which is, to suffer such punishment, failing of his proof, as the accured
should, in case of proof made.

To the VIII. Quaere.
This Quaere is all minatorie and threatening, and the contrary o^ every part
is true: by the deliverance of the King and Kingdom from the bondage of that
party in the two Houses by the Army, their renown will be everlasting; they
secure themselves, they content and please the Kingdom, City, and Country,
as appears by their confluence to see his Majesty and the Army, and their
acclamations for his Majesty's safety and restitution: all which does evidence
to every one of the Army, how acceptable the intentions of the Army are to
the people of this Land, who have been so long inthralled.

Sir Thomas Fairfax, let your Worthiness remember your extraction and your
Ladies, by the grace and favor of the Prince, to be in the rank of Nobility;
remember what honor and glory the present Age and all posterity will justly
give to the restorer of the King to his Throne, of the Laws to their strength,
and of the afflicted people of this Land to peace: let the Colonels and
Commanders under you, and likewise your Souldierie, rest assured, that they
shall not only share in the renown of this action, but also shall have such
remuneration as their hautie courage and so high a virtue does deserve: This
his Majesty can and will do, the Houses neither will nor can; and God bless
you all, and prosper you.

I conclude all, as I have always done: Without an Act of Oblivion, a general
Pardon, the Arreares of the Souldierie paid, and a regard to Liberty of
Conscience, this Kingdom will certainly be ruined.

FINIS.

