A Declaration of Mr. David Ienkins now Prisoner in the Tower of London, one of
his Majesty's Judges in Wales, for Trials, Murders, Felonies and all other
capital crimes that they ough^ only to be by Juries and not otherwise unless
it be by Act of Parliament.
THe common Law of this Land is, that every free man is subject to a trial by
a bill of Attainder in Parliament wherein his Majesty and both houses must
necessarily concur, for that trial and attainder is an Act of Parliament to
which all men are subject to.

No man shall otherwise be destroyed, etc. but by the lawful judgment of his
Peers, or by the common law of the Land, Peers to Noble men are Noble men,
peers to the Commons, are Knights, Gentlemen, etc. Judgment of peers refers to
peers, those words of the Law the land, refers to the Commons, the Law of the
land is for the trial of the life of a free Commoner, by Indictment,
presentment of good and lawful men where the deed is done, or by writ
original of the common law, all this is declared in Magna-Charta c.29. Mag.
Char. chap. 29.2. part. inst. fol. 28.29.4^.48.49.50. composed by Sir Ed. Cook
and published by the Order of the House of Commons in May, 1641.
and by the 25. Ed.3. c.4.28. Ed.3. c.3.37. Ed.3. c.8.42. Ed.3. c.3. If the
Lords will try any man by an Ordinance, they destroy that excellent Act of
Magna Charta, and all those other good laws.

Sir Simon de Bereford a free Commoner of England was condemned by the Lords to
death by an Ordinance, which after the Lords better considering the matter,
that they might be acquitted of that sentence, became suitors to the King, that
what they had so done in future time might not be drawn into presiddent,
because that which they had so don was against the Law, Rhot. par. ^. roll 4.
Ed.3. Number.2. part. inw. page 50. with this agrees Sir John Lees case, Ro^Par.
41. E 3. Number.22.23.2. inst. fol.50.
with this agrees the pructice and usage of all times in this land, all the
free Commoners of this Kingdom, have always been tayed and acquitted or
condemned in capital causes by Iuters of their equals.

An Ordinance binds not in law at all, See 4. part. inst. fol 23 48.292, 2.
part inst. f.47, 48.
and but pro tempore, as the two houses now affirm, a man's life cannot be
tried by that which is not binding, and to continue for all times, for a life
lost cannot be restored.

By an act of Parliament of the 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary chapter 10. It is
inacted that all trials for Treason hereafter to be had, shall be according to
the course of the Com-mon law.

If the crime charged upon any be Treason against the two houses (against the
Parliament it cannot be, for there is no Parliament without the King) that is
no Treason in law, as appeas by 25. Ed.3. chap2.11. R.2, ch.3.^. Hen.4. ch.10,
1. and 2. Philip and Mary. chap.10.

An act of Parliament to make any a Judge where he is party, is a yoid act, Dr.
Bonams case 8. part of Cook. reports.
for none can be a Judge and party in the same cause, and therefore the house
of peers being a party touching the crime clarged upon any man, whom they would
try by an Ordinance for Treason against both houses, cannot be a Judge.

By the petition of right, Petition of Right 3. C^r, reget.
if any man deserve death he ought to suffer the same according to the laws of
the Land established, and not otherwise, but an Ordinance of the Lords is no
established law.

The Protestation, the Vow and Covenant, the solemn League and Covenant, the
Declarations of both Houses, had made and published since this unnatuarll
War, are amongst other things sworn and set down to be for the maintenance
of the Laws (...) Land ought to enjoy the benifit of their Birthright the law
of the land, and making good of the said protestation, Vow and Covenant, League
and Covenant and Declarations, otherwise Truth must be said and will be said,
that there is brought in a new arbitrary and Tyrannical government.

If the Lords have taken one man's life by an ordinance, they are not bound to
take any more, and the case differs in case any appeal be made from a trial
by ordinance to a trial at common law, which was not done by that man whose
life was taken away by an ordinance.

The Lords ought to remember, that his Majesty and his progenitors have made
them a house of Peers, they are trusted to counsel him in peace Nevels case 2.
part Cook reports.
and defend him in war, his Majesty in Parliament is to consult and treat
with his Peers and with his Counsel at law, Judges, his Sergeants, Attorney,
and Solicetor, and masters of the chancery, the Lords and that counsel by the
respective writs of summons to Parliament are to give Counsel, 4. part: insti.
fol.4.9.
the House of Commons by their writ to perform and consent.

In the House of Lords, the Court of Parliament only is, for they only
examine upon oath, (...) ^0. ^-14. Ed 3. c.^
with them, the King in person sits, and by them there erroneous judgments
(upon a petition to his Majesty for obtaining of a writ of error) by the
advice of the Judges are reversed, or affirmed, etc. the Lords are to remember
that their eminency and grandeur, is preserved by the laws, if they leave all
to will and dishonor their King, and make nothing of the Laws, they will make
nothing of themselves in the end.

And therefore, it is well worth your observation what was said by Mr. John Pym
a member of the house of Commons in speech against the Earl of Strafford in
the beginning of the Parliament, which speech is published by the express
order of the house of Commons, the words are these. The law is that which puts
a difference betwixt good and evil, betwixt just and unjust if you take away
the law, all things will fall into a confusion every man will become a law unto
himself, which in the depraved condition of humane nature must needs produce
many great enormities: Lust will become a law, and Envy will become a law,
coveteousnesse and ambition will become laws, and what dictates what derisions
such laws will produce, may easily be discerned, See I, part. book deel. page
140. 163.
etc. They that love this Common wealth as things now stand, will use all
means to procure an act of oblivion, a general pardon from his Majesty the
Soldiers their Arrears, and tender conscience a just and reasonable
satisfaction, else we all must perish first or last.

God preserve his Majesty and the laws wherein their Lordships and the whole
Kingdom are concerned David Ienkins Prisoner in the Tower of London.
17 Ma. 1647.
Jenkins, David, 1586?-1667, one of the judges for South Wales, distinguished
for his loyalty to, and sufferings for, the cause of Charles I., pub. in 1618,
12mo, his Works, consisting of his vindication, occasional tracts, etc., which,
with some legal treatises, etc., were written in prison. He is best known by
his Eight Centuries of Reports Ex. Chapter and in Error, 4 Hen. III.-21 Jac. I,
(1228-1623;) 3d ed., Lon., 1771-77; his treatise Lex Terrae Angliae, 1647, 4vo;
and his Pacis Consultum, 1657, 8vo. See Athen. Oxon.; Bridgman's Leg. Bibl.;
Marvin's Leg. Bibl., and authorities there cited; Wallace's Reporters;
Disraeli's Comment on the Life and Reign of Charles I.


