JEMMY RETURNED: OR, THE NATIONS JOY A Pleasant New Ballad.
To the Tune of, Let Traitors plot on.
LEt his foes swear on, and conclude they are undone,
Now Iemmy's returning to favor;
While his fortune is blessed, by the wisest and best;
Whose Loyalty never did waver:
Their malice and envy snall never prevail,
But receive its deserved rebuke;
Whilst true-lovers of the King and their Country shant fail
To pray for the safety and health of the Duke.
Let Jemmy live long, let Jemmy live long,
For ever be happy, for ever be young,
But for those that maintain he will never flourish again,
Let them dye, let them dye, while Jemmy lives long.
While fortune is kind, with a favorable wind,
It is easy to go with the Current,
None but wise men can sail, with a contrary gale,
And successfully strive with the torrent.
This Iemmy could do; who, though long time oppressed
With the frowns of his Father and King;
Kept his honesty safe in his conquering breast,
Which brings him to Favor and Honor again.
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
Though to cross his desire his foes all conspire,
Mighty Charles too well sees their intention;
For wisely he knows, they his coming oppose,
Least their Engines should meet a prevention:
It Is Iemmy alone that can quash their designs,
And make their proud dealings to cease;
Who his honesty still with his interest joins,
To settle his King and his Country in peace.
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
Those that lately did shine, and look wonderful fine,
In the spoils that from Iemmy were taken;
Like Aesop's base Jay will cease to look gay,
When of those borrowed Honors forsaken:
This, this is the cause which makes them so hot,
to keep the brave Youth in disgrace:
But in vain; for Mastrick will never be forgot,
that Action becoming his Valor and Race.
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
Then a fig for those foes, that desire to oppose
This desired Reconciliation;
Whilst they basely contend against their Country chief fry(...)
they show how they value the Nation:
But in vain, with their envy to cross him they try,
Which gains him the higher applause;
For a King and a Father can never deny,
When Merit and Nature Plead both in a Cause.
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
While Iemmy's desire did nobly aspire,
And aimed to grow greater and greater,
'Twas without all pretense to give Caesar offense;
But the Vigor to show of his Nature:
And though the fierce Tories who all would control
Still blemish his honor with stains;
'Twas but vastness of Courage and largeness of soul
and the blood of great Charles which boiled in his vei(...)
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
Then in vain they design, and together combine,
While Providence thwarts their endeavor;
Which will Iemmy restore to his Honors before,
And make him now greater than ever:
His Eclipsed Renown will more nobly appear
Through the Veil which his Glory did shroud;
Like the Sun, which darts Beams more bright and mo cle(...)
When it lately has wrought out its way through a Clou(...)
Let Jemmy live long, etc.
May Heaven then still bless, and give him success,
And Crown his Proceedings with Glory:
That again to the Court he with Fame may resort*
And requite the ill-wishes of Tory:
May Caesar and Iemmy together combine;
For sure it was never yet known,
(For all their pretense to a Loyal design)
They the Father should love, who wish ill to the Son
Let Jemmy live long, let Jemmy live long,
For ever be happy, and ever be young,
But for those that maintain he will never flourish again,
Let them dye, let them dye, while Jemmy lives long.
Printed for I. Conyers and are to be sold at the Black Raven in Duck Lane


