A TREATISE Concerning the INDIFFERENCY OF HVMANE ACTIONS.

1 Corinthians. 6.10. All things are lawful for me, but all things are not
expedient. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any.

1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall, Printer to the UNIVERSITY, for Tho: Robinson,
1669.

To the Right Worshipful Sir WILLIAM WYNDHAM, of Orchard Wyndham, in the
County of Somerset, BARONET.
SIR,
THose that know the depth of my obligations to you, have long since expected
my public acknowledgment thereof; and having now an opportunity to make it:
My own Conscience would condemn me of a most disingenuous ingratitude, if I
should any longer defer it. But not only my private, and personal
engagements, but your own merit will justify this Dedication: for it is so well,
and generally known, as that it may, with a great deal of justice, entitle you
unto the exactest pieces of the able pens of the age, therefore much more unto
the poor, and mean endeavors of

Your Unworthy, though most grateful Servant HENRY JEANES.

A TREATISE Concerning the INDIFFERENCY OF HVMANE ACTIONS.
I Have often wondered at some Prelatists, charging the poor non-conformists
with denial of things indifferent; from which their Writings do sufficiently
acquit them: Dr John Burgess (in his Rejoinder, Page 188, 189.) tells us, that
Mr Bradshaw against all Learning, and sense, resolves, that there is nothing
indifferent. But from this accusation, we have Dr Ames his Vindication ( in his
fresh suite against Ceremonies, page 161, 162.) Dr Hammond (in his grounds of
Uniformity) accuses Amesius himself for this opinion; but with how little
truth, the Reader may soon see, if he please to peruse these following places
in him, Med Theolog. lib. 2. cap. 3. sect. 13, 14, 15. De Conscientia etc. lib.
3. cap. 18. Gregory de Valentia informs me, that one of the Articles of John
Husse, (anathematized in the Council of Constance) was, that nulla sunt opera
indifferentia. That which Papists of old charged upon him, these men impute to
those, whom they have been pleased to nickname Puritan's. But for the untruth,
and injustice of this crimination, we dare appeal to the more moderate, and
Learned of their own party. The Reverend, and Learned Dr Sanderson disputes
against them, for making the restraint of the outward man in matters
indifferent, an impeachment to Christian liberty; on Rom: 14.3. Page 24.25. And
this presupposes that they held somethings to be in their nature indifferent.
I shall therefore spend no more time, or paper, to wipe off an aspersion so
manifestly untrue, and unjust: But yet however this has occasioned me to
resolve upon the brief stating of the truth touching things, or actions
indifferent: and in order hereunto I shall 1. Premise some Distinctions
concerning the actions of man; and 2. Explain what is meant by indifferency.

1. First, The actions of man are either indeliberate or deliberate.

1. Indeliberate, which proceed, either from the disposition of natural
qualities (as hungering, thirsting, the easing and disburdening of nature) or
else from the force of Imagination, (as rubbing of the beard, or hand,
scratching of the head, lifting up of a straw from the ground, and such like
things, when a man thinks not of them.)

2. Deliberate, which proceed from deliberate reason and are properly humane,
and rational actions, all voluntary actions.

These may be considered two manner of ways. 1. In the general, actu signato.
2. In the singulars, and individual's, actu exercito.

The former consideration is merely in regard of the object; The latter takes
in all circumstances whatsoever: The former is a consideration of actions,
secundum speciem, according to their sort or kind; The latter is a
consideration of them in regard of their actual existence.

In a second place we are to enquire, what is meant by the indifferency of
actions: It apparently carries in its notion, a negation of moral goodness,
and illness: I say, sig nanter, of moral goodness, and illness; because the
most indifferent actions are transcend^ntly, and may be naturally good. An
indifferent action then is that, which is neither morally good, nor evil: The
nature of things indifferent, ( says the great Hooker in his Ecclesiast.
Policy, Page 59.) is neither to be commanded, nor forbidden, but left free,
and arbitrary: With which I would desire Dr Hammond to reconcile what he has
in his Treatise of Will Worship; that the best of moral actions, the highest
degrees of v^rtue, and of worship, the most superlative love of God are
uncommanded: and he, I hope, will give me leave to add, that they are not
forbidden, and hereupon I shall conclude, that (by Mr Hooker his definition)
they are indifferent; which is as unsober a conceit almost, as can be uttered,
and unworthy of any serious refutation. I shall here only make use of part of
his expressions against Ames (in his grounds of Uniformity, Page 14.) He that
thinks the highest degree of virtue is indifferent, does certainly use other
Dictionaries then we do. But to leave him, I shall for clearing the nature of
indifferency propound, and satisfy two Queries.

1. What medium indifferent things are betwixt things morally good, and evil?
whether medium abnegationis, or participationis? The Author of Altar
Damascenum affirms it to be medium or a middle between them by way of
abnegation, Adiaphora non sunt media per participationem, ut rubedo inter
album, and nigrum; sed per negationem utriusque extremi, conformitatis and
difformitatis ad rectam rationem, seu legem, page 496.

But for the disproofe of this, I shall desire you to observe out of Esse
indifferens ad bonum, and malum contingit dupliciter, aut per modum
abstractionis, secundum quod universale aliquid significat ut abstractum (...)
differentiis, and concontrariis dividentibus ipsum, unde in sua communitate
significatum significatur ut indifferenter se habens adutramque differentiam.
Sicut animal reque significatur u^ rationale neque ut irrationale, and tamen
oporter omne particulare animal esse rationale vel irrationale. Et similiter
est hoc. Si enim significetur actus in eo quod est agere, haber quiden^
bonitatem in quantum est ens, sed indifferenter se habet ad bonitatem, vel
malitiam moralen^ Et similiter bonum ex genere indifferenter le habet ad bonum
and malum ex circumstantia (...) fine, quamvis non inveniatur aliquod bonum in
genere particulari, quod non sit aliqua circumstantia vestitum, and ad aliquem
finem ordinatum, unde oportet, quod bonitatem, vel malitia^ contrabat. Et
secundum hanc considerationem quidam dixerunt omnes actus indifferen^ esse in
eo quod sunt accus, and quidam dixerunt, quod non omnes, sed aliqui,
accipientes mag^ in speciali nomina actuum, quae non exprimunt aliquid, unde
actus, ad malitiam vel bonitat^ determinetur, vel materiam vel finem vel
circumstantiam, sicut comedere, coire, et hujusmo^^ Alio modo conting it hoc
secundum, quod aliquod particulare significatum desicit a suscep^bilitate
alicujus perfectionis, sicut lapis a susceptibilitate visus, and hoc modo
aliqui actus, qui d^^ ficiunt a susceptibilitate bonitatis moralis dicuntur
indifferenter. lib. 2. senten. did. 40. quaest. 1.
Capreolus, that a thing may be said to be a medium, or middle betwixt that
which is morally good, and morally evil; either by way of abstraction from
them (as a general nature is abstracted from it is differences, a subject from
it is accidents,) or else by way of repugnancy unto them, because it is
incapable of them; and thus a stone is of a middle nature betwixt that which
sees, and is blind; because it is incapable of both sight, and blindness. Now
it is this latter way, that a thing is said to be a medium by the abnegation of
each extreme, as is evident by the instances usually brought for the
exemplification hereof; For they are of such things as are incapable of, and
repugnant unto both extremes. And the most indifferent actions, that proceed
from deliberate reason, are capable of becoming either good, or evil, by
circumstances, and carry no repugnancy thereunto: so much is confessed by
Didoclave himself in the place above mentioned. Tertium quod constituit hujus
medii formale est non repugnantia ad utrunque extremum. Actus homicidii in bove
cornu-peta nullam habet conformitatem, aut difformitatem adrectam rationem, non
tamen dicitur actus indifferens, quia ibi est repugnantia ad utrunque extremum,
nam bos est animal irrationale. Adiaphora igitur sunt dubia, indistincta, and
UTROQUE vergentia, sed non magis vergentia in unum quam alterum extremum.

Others therefore conclude, that indifferent actions are a medium, or middle
betwixt good, and bad, in a way of participation; and that either potentiall,
or actual.

1. Potentiall, There is in them a non-repugnancy unto either of the extremes,
unto moral goodness or badnesse, so that they may be either good, or bad by
circumstances.

2. Actual, and this agrees only to such indifferent acts, as become good by
circumstances; for they being but imperfectly good, are in part good, and in
part evil, and so partake actually of both extremes. By this you may see,
though indifferent actions, which proceed from deliberate reason may in some
sense be said to be a medium of participation betwixt that which is morally
good, or evil; yet they are not said to be a middle of participation in such a
strict sense, as lukewarmnesse is betwixt cold, and heat; for that always
partaketh actually of both extremes (cold, and heat,) whereas indifferent
actions do not always actually partake of the two extremes, (moral
goodness or badnesse,) but only when they are good; for many of them may be,
and too often are by circumstances totally and altogether evil, and in no
respect good. Amesius qualifies the matter, and affirms that as it is not
medium merae abnegationis, so it is medium alicujus participationis, a middle
not of mere abnegation, but of some participation. Absolutely, and simply, in
strictness of speech, it is neither medium negationis, nor participationis: 1.
Not negationis; because it has no repugnancy unto it is extremes: 2. Not
participationis; because it does not allwaies actually partake of both
extremes; But yet, secundum quid, after a sort, and in some respect, it may be
reduced unto both medium abnegationis, and participationis: It resembles
medium abnegationis, because as such it is neither of the extremes; and it
resembles medium participationis, because sometimes it actually participates
of both extremes: And thus you see how these different opinions may be
reconciled; But yet (because denominatio fit a potiori) we shall rather reduce
it unto medium participationis; because unto that it has the greatest
resemblance.

A second question is; Whether all indifferent actions be equally indifferent?
no more bending unto evil, then unto good? Didoclave holds the affirmative,
Nec solum (says he) requiritur negatio conformitatis, seu difformitatis ad
legem ceu rectam rationem, sed etiam majoris propensionis in unam quam in aliam
partem. And again afterward: Adiaphora non sunt magis vergentia in unum quam
alterum extremum. The incomparably Learned Dr Sanderson is of a contrary
opinion, that some things are unequally indifferent, Indifferentia ad unum (as
he is pleased to call them) I shall transcribe his words, and with all due
reverence of his person briefly examine them.

Dr Sanderson on Rom: 3.8. page 58.59.

Things unequally indifferent are such, as though they be neither universally
good, not absolutely evil, yet even barely considered, sway more, or less
rather the one way, then the other: And that either unto good, or unto evil.
Of the former sort are such outward actions, as being in moral precepts
indefinitely commanded, are yet sometimes sinfully and ill done: as, giving an
alms, hearing a sermon, repr^cving an offender; and the like, which are in
themselves good, and so to be accounted, rather then evil; though some unhappy
Circumstance or other may make them ill. Of the latter sort are such outward
actions, as being in moral precepts indefinitely prohibited, are yet in some
cases lawful, and may be well done: as, swearing an oath, traveling on the
Sabbath day, playing for money, and the like: which are in themselves rather
evil, then good, because they are ever evil, unless all circumstances
concur to make them good. Now of these actions, though the former sort carry
the face of good, the latter of evil; yet in very truth both sorts are
indifferent. Understand me aright: I do not mean indifferent, indifferentia
contradictionis, such as may be indifferently either done, or not done; but
indifferent only indifferentia contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing) may
be indifferently either good, or evil: because so they may be done, as to be
good, and so they may be done also, as to be evil; but yet with this
difference, that those former, though indifferent, and in some cases evil, are
yet of themselves notably and eminently inclined unto good rather then evil;
and these latter proportionably unto evil, rather then good.

For answer: The first sort of actions, such as being in moral precepts
indefinitely commanded, are yet sometimes sinfully and ill done, (as, giving an
alms, hearing a sermon, reproving an offender, and the like,) are not in the
language of the Schoolmen, indifferent actions: This I shall make good by an
argument out of Suarez (brought by him unto another purpose;) He disputing
against some, that held all humane actions to be indifferent, proves the
contrary; First in inward, then in outward actions: and his argument concerning
outward actions stands thus. If external acts be considered according to an
objective goodness, or illness, this cannot be true, because there are many
actions in their own nature objectively evil, and prohibited, and there are
other also objectively good, and honest; because this goodness, and illness
is not taken by extrinsick Denomination, from the inward act, but from it is
intrinsecall agreement with, or repugnancy unto right reason. Those actions
which have a material, and objective goodness, are not indifferent actions in
the language of the Schools. But the actions, that the Doctor speaks of, have
an objective, and material goodness, because they are commanded, and
therefore they are not indifferent. But, says the Doctor, they are indifferent
at least indifferentia Contrarietatis, such as (suppose the doing) may be
indifferently either good or evil: because so they may be done, as to be good,
and so they may be done also, as to be evil.

For answer: By this account all outward ordinances of God, all external acts
of worship, and indeed all outward good works whatsoever should be actions
indifferent, because they may be done well, or ill: But to say that all these
are indifferent would be very strange language: for although they may have
evil cast upon them externally by the agent, yet this is no hinderance but
that they may be in themselves objectively and materially good, as being matter
of precept.

But perhaps there may be some mystery in this clause, indefinitely commanded:
They are commanded, but not to be performed always, but only l^co, and tempere
debitis; according to the known rule, Affirmativa praecepta obligant semper,
non ad semper.

For answer: This will nothing alter the case; for hereby it will follow, that
the matter of all affirmative precepts should be indifferent; And whosoever
shall say so takes indifferency in a different notion from the usual acception
thereof by both Papists, and Protestants; who jointly make it to be a middle
thing betwixt that moral goodness, and badnesse, which is called objective or
material.

As for the second sort of Actions, I readily confess that in some sense they
may be said to be unequally indifferent, inclining and swaying more to evil,
then to good. To clear which I shall distinguish of a twofold consideration of
such actions: They may be considered merely in regard of their object, or else
also in regard of the circumstances, which usually are annexed with them: In
regard of their object they are equally indifferent; But yet in regard of
Circumstances may be said to be more notably and eminently inclined unto evil
then unto good; because the circumstances, which generally, and commonly are
connexed with them, are evil.

But as for the reason, which the Doctor brings to prove them to be unequally
indifferent, rather evil, then good, is to me very unsatisfying. His words
are, which are in themselves rather evil, then good, because they are ever
evil, unless all circumstances concur to make them good.

The ground of my exception against this reason is, because as much may be said
of all outward good works, religious duties, and services whatsoever: They are
all ever evil, unless all circumstances concur to make them good, according
to that of Dionysius, Bonum fit ex causa integra malum ex quovis defectu. I
shall conclude my answer unto this second Qu^re, with rehear-sall of Dr Ames
his proposal, and decision of it. An actiones indifferentes nihil inter se
differant, sed aeque omnes a bono, and malo distent?

Resp. In sua intrinsec a nature a nihil omnino differunt; sed tamen quaedam
sunt, quae ut plurimum habent circumstantias malas annexas, atque adeo dicuntur
vergere in malum, aut in malum sonare, ut accusatoris aut carnificis munere
fungi: quaedam etiam, quae ut plurimum habent circumstantias bonas annexas,
atque adeo dicuntur vergere in bonum, aut in bonum sonare, ut colere agros,
diligentiam in studiis adhibere, etc.

In their own intrinsecall nature they differ nothing at all: but yet there are
some which for the most part have evil circumstances annexed to them, and so
bend more toward evil, and have an evil name: as to do the work of an
accuser, the office of an hangman, etc. some there be also which for the most
part have good circumstances, and so bend toward good, and have a good name, as
to till the ground, to follow our study diligently etc.

Having premised these things, I shall in the next place, proceed to lay down
some conclusions concerning the indifferency of the actions of man: and they
shall be three.

1. Conclusion. The Indeliberate actions of man which proceed from the
disposition of natural qualities, or only from the Imagination, as to rub the
beard, or hands, to scratch the head, to move the head, feet, or a staff (The
mind being not intent upon them,) may be, and are indifferent, not only in the
general, but in their individuals, and singulars: The reason which 1. 2 ae qu.
18. art. 9.
Aquinas gives for this is very solid; Because such actions to speak properly
are not moral, and humane, for they do not proceed from the soul as
reasonable: Those actions, which are not moral, or of moral consideration,
are incapable of moral goodness or badnesse: for moral goodness, or
badnesse implies a moral being: But now those actions which proceed from the
disposition of natural qualities, or from the force of the Imagination only
are not moral, are not of moral consideration, they are extra genus moris:
And the reason is because actions have their morality from this, that they are
some way or other immediately, or mediately derived from reason.

Against this reason of Aquinas, Sed contra hoe instatur, quia ubi invenitur
dominium rationis, vel vosuntatis, ibi invenitur genus moris, led dominium
rationis vel voluntatis invenitur non solum in actibus qui sequuntur rationem
deliberantem, sed etiam qui praecedunt, in quantum a ratione praeveniri
potuerunt, ut dictum suit, supra, did. 24. q. 5. (alioquin in sensualitate
nullum posset esse peccatum) ergo actus procedentes a sola imaginatione
pertinent ad genus moris, qui^ subsunt imperio rationis, in quantum ab ea
pos^unt praeveniri, et sic per consequens sunt susceptivi bonitatis, and
malitiae moralis, cujus oppositum assumebatur pro fundamento.

Et ad hoc potest dici, quod aliqui actus procedentes ab imaginatione, et
praevenientes delib^rationem rationis sunt tales, circa quos ratio debet esse
pervigil, ne insurgant, et tales sunt actus appetitus sensitivi circa materiam
peccati etc. and respectu talium actuum quantumcunque deliberationem
praeveniant, potest esse negligens ratio in reprimendo, and peccare etc, Et de
his procedit ratio, scilicet quod sunt aliquo modo in genere moris, rec sunt
indisterentes. Alii autem sunt, circa quos ratio nullo modo tenetur esse
pervigil, nisi in casu ratione alicujus adjuncti, quia objecta talium secundum
se non sunt materia alicujus peccati etc. ut levare festucam, vel fricare
barbam: Et tales actus ut sic pervenientes, quos non tenetur praevenire ratio,
nifi in casu sunt pure extra genus moris, and indifferentes ad bonum, and
malum, de quibus intelligenda est przdicta opinie.


Durand propounds this following objection: that if the acts of the imagination
be incapable of a moral being, and so not of a moral consideration, that then
they are incapable of sin: for every sinful action is a moral action: But
now they are not incapable of sin: for it is most evident, that in
sensualitate potest esse peccatum, that sin may be in the indeliberate acts of
the sensitive appetite, and in the acts of the imagination; and the reason is,
because the sensual powers or faculties are said to belong or appertain unto
reason, though not essentialiter, yet participative, as being under the conduct
and guidance of right reason, obliged to hearken unto it is voice, and to obey
all it is just Commands, and dictates.

The answer here-unto in the same Author is, that the indeliberate acts of the
sensitive powers, and faculties are of two sorts.

1. Some have for their matter, sin, and such are moral: for they are
voluntary, though not directly, as being produced or commanded by the will, yet
indirectly, as being that, which the will is able, and obliged to hinder: and
therefore reason ought to be watchful to prevent the rising of them.

But now there are some indeliberate acts of the sensitive faculties, which
have not for their objects the matter of sin, such as are above instanced in,
and of them we may say indefinitely, and in the general, that they are not
moral; because they are not voluntary, either directly, or indirectly; Reason
is not bound to keep any watch over them, nor is the will bound to restrain,
and repress them; nisi in casu, ratione alicujus adiuncti, as Durand limits
it. As when they are a hinderance to Duties, or against that decency which is
required in the worship, and service of God; As for example if a man should be
rubbing of his beard, scratching of his head, moving of his feet, or any other
part of his body in an undecent way in the act of receiving the elements in the
Lords supper: That which I have said touching this Conclusion is for the
substance of it in Ames de Conscientia. lib. 3. cap. 18. His words I shall
transcribe. Actiones quaedam ita sunt hominis, ut non sint proprie humanae,
illae scilicet, quae procedunt ab imaginatione nuda, and non a ratione
deliberata, ut fricare manus, aut barbam, scalpere caput, levare festucam, etc.
dum aliud aliquid cogitamus. Hujusmodi actiones non sunt moraliter bonae aut
malae: quia non sunt in genere moris constitutae, dum omni consilio
destituuntur. Quamvis enim istis etiam p^ssit quis peccare, ut si tempore
precum vagari sineret imaginationem suam, et huiusmodi nugis indulgere, ipsae
tamen actiones per se neque malae sunt, neque bonae. Subijciuntur quidem
istiusmodi motus imperio arbitrii humani; sedita subijciuntur, ut possint
exerceri nullo rationis actu praeeunte: neque vlterius illas ratione praevenire
tenemur, quam ut officiis non obsint. -- Sicut in oculorum palpebris movendis
moderandi potestatem habet ratio, et voluntas: sed non est operae pretium
observare quoties connivemus, si modo caveatur, ne praeter decorum, aut
officium aliquid in istis admittatur.

1. There be some actions, which though they be actions of man, yet they are
not humane actions, such are those which proceed from imagination only, and not
from deliberate reason, as the rubbings of men's hands, to scratch the head or
beard, to take up a straw, etc. while we are thinking of something else: these
actions are not morally good or evil, they want that which is required to make
them so, namely counsel and deliberation: for although a man may sin by those
actions, as if in time of prayer he suffer his imagination to wander, and do
give way to such toyings as those. Yet these actions considered in themselves
are neither good nor evil. It is true these motions are subject to the Command
of man's will, but yet they are so subject, that they may be exercised without
any precedent act of reason; neither are we bound any farther by reason to
prevent them, but only so far that they hinder not the duties we are about. So
for moving of the eyelids, reason and the will have power to moderate them,
but it is not worth the while to take notice how often we wink, if so be we
take heed, that in such things nothing be done, which is undecent, or against
our duty.

A second Conclusion: There be diverse deliberate actions, that proceed from
deliberate reason, which if they be considered in actu signato, in the
general, secundum speciem, according to their sort, or Kind, as abstracted
from all singularizing circumstances. are indifferent, neither morally good,
nor evil: This I shall confirm by scripture, and by reason.

1. By scripture: And here we have a most signal place. 1. Cor. 6.12. All
things are lawful unto me. Here all things are to be taken not absolutely, but
limitedly, for all indifferent things: for as for things Commanded, they are
not only lawful, but also necessary, and therefore must be done loco and
tempore debitis: And as for things prohibited, they are unlawful and sinful.
The words then are an undeniable proof of the indifferency of some actions,
and withal an explication of such indifferency: Indifferent actions are merely
lawful, neither necessary, nor unlawful; They may lawfully be done, and
lawfully be abstained from. In this text then we have the extent of our
Christian liberty asserted, and limited.

1. We have the extent of it unto all indifferent things asserted; And the
Apostle contents not himself to affirm it once, but doubleth the affirmation:
The reason of which may be, because he thought it an important point, or
because he would put it out of all doubt, and controversy.

2. We have also a twofold limitation, or restraint put upon the use or
exercising of our Christian liberty as touching things indifferent; But all
things are not expedient; But I will not be brought under the power of any.

Many think, that Paul speaks these words per mimesin, a figure called
imitation; that he speaks not in his own person, but rehearses the words of
the Corinthians: so that here is, first Corinthiorum (...), the objection of
the Corinthians, All things are lawful for me: secondly, Aposteli (...), the
reply of Paul, But all things are not expedient: But I will not be brought
under the power of any. But whether the Apostle uttered his own words, or the
Corinthians is not material: because, suppose they be the words of the
Corinthians, he grants them with due limitations: The sentence of Paul, says
Aegidius Hunnius, consist's of a concession, and correction.

1. A Concession of the lawfulness of all indifferent things. All things are
lawful for me.

2. A Correction or restriction of this large grant: wherein he shows: that
though all indifferent things be in their general nature lawful; yet they are
in some cases to be abstained from, when they are inexpedient: when they
enthrall us unto either persons, or things: But all things are not expedient:
But I will not be brought under the power of any.

A great difference there is amongst expositors about the coherence of these
words: Some think, that the Apostle makes way for that Argument which he
handles at large chap: 9. All things are lawful for me; therefore to receive a
salary for preaching of the Gospel is lawful: But I will not make use of this
my liberty: Because it will not be expedient unto the promoting of the Gospel
amongst you, but an hinderance rather: And because I will retain my full
liberty of reproving you, which I shall in great part lose, if I should receive
my whole livelihood from you: As it fares with the false prophets among you,
that are no better then Trencher chaplains, that dare not touch your sores,
meddle with either your sins, or errors, for fear that hereupon you should
shorten your benevolence: I will not be brought under the power of any. But the
coherence is too far fetched, and we may say the same of others, who would
make these words to cohere with chap. 8. v. 9.

Others with more probability derive the connection of the words only from the
present chapter: and they are again subdivided: some fetch it from the words
foregoing: Others from the words following.

1. From the words foregoing. The Apostles discourse about going to law with
Brethren before the unjust, and unbelievers: The Corinthians might be ready to
object in behalf of this their practice, that it was a thing in it is own
nature indifferent, not prohibited by the word of God, and therefore lawful;
for all things are lawful, that is all indifferent things. True, says the
Apostle, but. 1. all things are not expedient: And in particular for Christians
to sue Christians before Paganish Tribunals is so far from being expedient, as
that it is an impediment unto Christians own glorifying of God in his immediate
worship and service, as also unto their quiet, peaceable, and comfortable
communion with Brethren.

2. I will not be brought under the power of any, either persons, or things.
And if you go in this manner to law with your Brethren you will put your
selves under the power of many both persons, and things.

1. Persons: Perhaps you will lie at the mercy of an unjust judge: a false
witness may undo you; A corrupt lawyer betray you; your own witnesses will
command your table, and purse, though for attesting the truth; And though your
Advocates be never so faithful, you must give them your most diligent
attendance; As the proverb is, you must not only pay, but pray them too.

2. Things: The many matters, the things of the world, which you sue for, will
have you so far under their power, as that they will be a great hinderance to
your free, and full service of God; for if they do not wholly withdraw you
from it, they will wonderfully distract you in it; Because law suits will take
up the greatest part of your time, and the best of your thoughts. Quidem hanc
partem sic explicant: Sub nullius redigar potestate, i. e. Non patiar me
propter res pecuniarias, ac temporales, vesut essem sub earum potestate, vel
abstrahi vel distrahi, quo minus li. bear, and absque impedimento serviam Deo,
quod non potero, si tempus and cogitationes impendam litibus. Esthius in loc.


Add unto this, that for Christians, especially in those primitive times, to
pursue their Brethren unto the judgment-seats of heathens, in matters capable
of an amicable compromise by the mediation of Brethren, was a plain evidence,
that they were under the power of the world, and the things thereof; for who
but a muckworme, a vassal to his wealth, would do a thing so much unto the
discredit of the Gospel, and reproach of Christianity; especially seeing they
might with greater probability expect justice from the umpirage of saints, then
the sentences of professed unbelievers?

Others in the next place look for the cohaesion of these words forwards, upon
the Apostles ensuing discourse, touching fornication: not only the Corinthians,
but the Gentiles in general held simple fornication to be a thing indifferent.
The old man in the Comedian, spoke the sense of the generality of them: Creed
mihi non est slagitium adolescentulum scortari. And you will the less wonder at
this, if you consider, that Durand, a Popish Schoolman, held it to be
unlawful, not by the law of nature, but only by the positive law of God: Quod
autem dicunt quidam, quod simplex fornicatio est peccatum mortale de se,
exclusa omni lege positiva, divina and humana, non been intelligo, lib. 4.
did. 33. quaest. 2. And upon the Consideration of this opinion of the Gentiles
touching the indifferency of fornication it was, (think interpreters,) that
fornication is Acts. 15. by the first Council ranged amongst indifferent
things, blood, and things strangled; The use of which was forbidden only for a
time. Unto this erroneous supposition the Apostle answers per limitationom,
and per inficiationem: He limits the general rule touching things indifferent,
and then he denies the instance in question; And this his denial he
illustrateth, and confirms from verse. 13. unto the end of the chapter. Unto
this his denial he premifeth limitations of the general rule. All indifferent
things are lawful: He puts a double restraint upon it. The first; But all
things are not expedient, or profitable: Many indifferent things sometimes
prove an impediment unto our Christian race, and then they are to be forborne.
A second restraint is in these words: But I will not be brought under the power
of any: My affection unto indifferent things shall be so temperate, as that it
shall be in my power to forbear them upon reasonable and important
Considerations. There should be an indifferency in our desires toward things
indifferent, so that they should not have the command of us* but we should be
able to use, or not to use them, as the concurrence of particular circumstances
guide us.

To give yet further light unto these words, I shall briefly consider their
coherence as they lie in 1 Cor. 10.23. with little variation. The Apostle there
states a case of Conscience touching the eating of Idolothytes, things offered
unto Idols. First, he resolves, that to eat them publicly in the temple of
Idols, at the idolatrous feasts of these Idols, was to have communion in the
worship of these idols to have fellowship with Devils; to be partakers of the
table of Devils: He that did thus eat them, did eat them considered formally,
as sacrificed and consecrated to idols; He did eat them in the honor of the
idols, unto which they were offered; He did tacitly acknowledge their Deity, and
interpretatively approve of the Idolatrous worship and service of them; But now
the Apostle allows a private use of things offered to idols, If they were not
eaten under a religious notion, but considered only and materially as meat,
matter of food, and as the good creatures of God. Two cases he instanceth in,
wherein they might be thus eaten; First, they might buy them in the shambles,
and eat them in their own houses, verse. 25. And secondly, they might eat them
at the tables of their unbelieving neighbors, that invited them: This latter
part of the Determination of the question he confirms, and limiteth, by
putting in an exception in the case of scandal: And unto all this he prefixeth
the extension of our Christian liberty, unto all indifferent things in the
general, together with two restrictions, that we are to put upon it in the use
and exercise: Even indifferent things are to be forborne, when they are not
profitable, and conducing unto the ends, which a Christian should propound:
when they are destructive and scandalous unto our Brethren: Omniamihi licent,
omnia scilicet adiaphora, quale est comedere idolothyta, non quasi sacra, aut
quasi idolothy. ta, sed tanquam communes cibos.

Ubi nota, Hactenus egit Paulus de idolothytis, qua talibus, ficque vetuit ea
comedere. Unde v. 14. Fugite, ait, ab idolorum cultu, scilicet, ne sitis
mensae, and calicis daemoniorum participes, ut explicat v. 20. puta, comedendo
cibos idolis oblatos, eo modo and iis circumstantiis, quibus censeamini eos,
quasi sacros, seu quasi idolothytum in honorem idoli velle comedere^ hoc vero
versu transit ad secundum casum, scilicet, quo idolothytum non formaliter qua
idolothytum, sed materialiter, qua cibus vel caro est, comeditur, and de hoc
ait: omn^a mihi licent, sed non omnia expediunt, quia, ut sequitur, non omnia
aedificant. Quasi dicat, Materialiter licet vesci idolothyto per se, per
accidens tamen non licet, si sequatur scandalum, pater ex v. 27. 28. 33.
Cornel. Alapide in loc.


All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: All things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not.

Unto these two places (1 Cor. 6.12. 1 Cor. 10.23.) I shall add one more (1
Cor. 8.8.) But meat Commend^th us not to God: for neither, if we eat are we the
better: neither if we eat not, are we the worse: Meat (that is) the use and
eating of meat ( abstractly considered, and in the general) commends us not
to God: for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink: for neither if we eat,
are we the better, (...), have we the more, (that is) the more virtue in our
selves, the more grace and favor with God: Neither if we eat not, are we the
worse (...), have we the less, the less virtue in our selves, the less
acceptance with God: Eating then of any sort or kind of meat (considered, as
abstracted from all singularizing circumstances) is a thing indifferent that
has neither virtue, nor vice in it, neither pleases nor displeases God: And
what the Apostle speaks of eating of meat, is applyable by way of analogy and
proportion unto a world of things of the like nature, as shall be manifested by
the reasons for the Conclusion, unto which in the next place I hasten.

The Protestants generally thus argue: The nature of things indifferent (as the
Learned Hooker determines) is neither to be commanded nor forbidden, but left
free and arbitrary: But now there are diverse humane and voluntary actions, that
are in the general neither commanded, nor forbidden (as to eat, drink, go a
journey, walk into the field:) Therefore there are diverse humane and
voluntary actions, that are in the general, and for the kind indifferent. This
argument the Papists dislike because they think, that there are matters of
Counsel, which contain the highest degree of moral goodness, and
perfection: And yet think they are uncommanded, and no man will say that they
are forbidden. The Argument of the Schoolmen therefore generally runs thus:
Actions, that are neither agreeable, nor disagreeable unto right reason are
indifferent: But there are diverse humane and voluntary actions, that in their
general nature, and consideration carry, neither conformity, nor repugnancy
unto right reason: And therefore there are diverse humane and voluntary actions,
that are indifferent. This argument is thus managed by Ubi autem ratio non
debet esse magis recta affirmando qua^ n^gando, ibi voluntas non debetmagiscon
formari rationi affirmativae quam negativae: unde potest sic argui. Ille actus
nec est bonus, nec est malus, circa quem ratio non potest esse magis recta in
affirmando quam in negando, sed levare festucam, quantum est praecise ex
ratione, quam fortitur actus ex objecto, est hujusmodi, quia ratio neque
affirmando quod levanda est, neque negando levandam esse magis recta est, ergo
actus de se neque bonus est, neque malus. Major pater, quia persecutio and fuga
actus voluntatis quoad bonitatem vel malitiam correspondent affirmationi, and
negationi rationis practicae quoad veritatem and falsitatem, and ideo ubi est
ratio aeque indifferens quoad veritatem, and falsitatem in affirmando and
negando, ibi est actus indifferens quoad malitiam and boniratem in prosequendo,
and fugiendo. Minor probatur, quia rectitud^ retionis confi^it in conformitate
ad aliquam legem naturalem vel divinam vel ex his derivatam, ^irea autem tales
actus, ut levare festucam; vel buiusmodi, nulla lex aliquid determinat, nec
divina, nec naturalis, nec ex his derivata, ergo circa cos sic acceptos ratio
non potest habere aliquam rectitudmem, vel obliquitatem magis in affirmando
quam in negando, and haec suit minor. Sequitur ergo conclusio. lib. 2. did.
40. q. 1.
Durand: That act is neither good nor evil, but indifferent, Concerning which
there is in the reason of man no more rectitude, or irrectitude and obliquity
in the affirmation, then in the negation in it is dictating either the practice,
or in its dictating the forbearance thereof. For the pursuit and eschewall of
the will are in regard of moral goodness, or badnesse correspondent unto the
dictates of the practical understanding, and therefore where there is an
indifferency in point of truth in the understandings dictates concerning the
doing, or not doing of a thing, there is an indifferency in regard of moral
goodness or badnesse in the wills embracing, or eschewing of that thing. If
the understanding err not, whether it prescribe the performance, or
forbearance of an action, then the will sins not, whether it perform or
forbear it: But there are diverse acts concerning which there is in the reason
of man no more rectitude, or irrectitude and obliquity in the affirmation, then
in the negation of them, in its dictating the practice, or in its dictating the
forbearance of them: This he proves because the rectitude of reason consists
in conformity unto some natural law, or some divine law, or some law derived
from these: But there are diverse humane actions concerning which, there
occurreth no such law, either forbidding, or commanding: and therefore there is
no rectitude or obliquity in the reasons or understandings affirming or denying
of them. It is indifferent, which way the understanding takes, whether it
dictates the doing or not doing of them: and consequently it is indifferent,
whether the will wills, or nilleth them. Here by the way I cannot but take
notice, how Durand unawares crosses their doctrine of Evangelicall Counsels:
for Suarez (de leg. lib. cap. 14.) will tell him, that Counsel is not properly
a Law: By this doctrine of Durand then in matters of Counsel there should be
no rectitude of reason, because no conformity unto any law: But this by the by.

This argument is yet further improved by Sunt quidem complure^ actus, quos dum
praecise consideramus, ut versantur circ^ hoc, vel illud objectum; nec
laudamus, nee vituperamus tanquam bonos vel malos, sed censemus esse
indifferentes. Loquimur enim in proposito debonitate, and malitia morali
proprie, ut scilicet bonitas non est qualis cunque congruentia cum ratione; and
voluntate hominis, sed congruentia ejusmodi, ut habeat laudem secundum
aestimationem hominum; tanquam aliquid, nempe quod quadret in rationem hominis,
etiam ut recta est, and ut is habet sibi a Deo propositam beatitudinem, ut
ultimum finem. Quemadmodum etiam contra, malitia moralis, cui opponitur moralis
bonitas, consistit in repugnantia quadam erga rationem rectam hominis, quae
secundum humanam aestimationem habeat vituperium, tanquam aliquid repugnans,
and nocens homini, ut is hibeat beatitudinem propositam sicut ultimum sinem
omnium actionum. Sic itaque loquendo proprie de bonitate, vel malitia morali
affirmamus, quosdam esse actus, qui ex objecto suo nee boni, nec mali sunt, sed
indifferentes. Tom: 2. Com. Theol* qu. 13. punct: 2.
Gregery de Valentia. The Moral goodness (says he) which we speak of, is
such a congruence unto reason, as carries praise with it according unto the
usual estimate of men, and appertains unto man's everlasting happiness, his
chief, and sovereign end; and answerably the moral illness or badnesse of an
action stands in such a repugnancie unto right reason, as that according to the
usual estimation of men, it is worthy of dispraise, and is an impediment unto
his attaining his supreme end, the eternal bliss of his soul; But now there
are several humane actions that considered in themselves have neither praise
nor dispraise; neither prejudice, nor advantage the salvation of our souls;
are neither helps, nor lets unto the obtaining of our highest end and
happiness, and therefore there are actions morally indifferent.

Unto what has been said, I shall add two arguments more out of a late
Philosopher. Irenaeus, A Carmelite or white Friar Si omnis actus esset bo^as
aut malus ex suo objecto, seu sua specie, liceret nobis judicare de ^uolibet
proxi^i opere, and tale ^psum asserere, ^uale habet ob^ectu^, sicuti ^ctus ex
ob^ecto determi^atospronunti^musbonos, aut ^alos determi^ate: sed non ^cet ita
de sin^ulis Judicare, (...) Matthew: 7. ^ujus ratio ^st apud patres, and
Interpretes quod plerique actus sint medii, scilicet de se indifferentes, ut
sint ^oni, aut mali: ergo, etc.

Multi actus sunt mali praecise ratione prohibitionis, V.G. portare arma de
nocte: ergo i^ ^nt ex specie sua indifferentes. Ethic: cap: 3. Sect: 2.




First, upon actions morally good, or bad, we may lawfully pass our Censures,
that they are such; But we should pass rash judgment, if we should censure
Diverse actions of our Brethren to be determinately virtuous, or determinately
vicious, moraly good or bad: Let not him that eats not judge him which
eats. Romans 14.2. There are therefore some actions, which for their kind are
neither good, nor bad, but indifferent.

Secondly, Many acts are evil, only by the prohibition of some positive law;
As unto the Jews it was unlawful to eat Swines flesh, to wear a garment of
diverse colors, as of woollen and linen together, Deuteronomy. 22.11. These actions
therefore, and many the like, were of themselves, and in their own nature,
indifferent, and became unlawful only by the ceremonial law given unto the
Jews, which law being abrogated, it is now a thing indifferent and lawful for
Christians to eat swines flesh, or not to eat it, to wear a garment of
linsey-woolsey, or not.

Unto these scriptures and reasons I shall add the testimony of Hierome,
frequently quoted for this purpose. Bonum, inquit, est continentia, malum est
luxuria. Inter utrumque indifferens ambulare, capitis, naribus purgamenta
projicere, sputis rheumat a jacere. Hoc nec benum, nec malum est: sive enim
feceris, sive non feceris, nec justitiam habebis, nec injustitiam. Aristotle,
and Sextus Empyricus give in their verdict for the truth of this assertion,
whose sayings the reader may peruse at large in Raynaudus moral. discipline.
distinct. 4. quaest. 1. Art. 3. number. 39. page 550.

There is but one Considerable objection, which I shall briefly propound and
answer. Whatsoever agrees unto the species, the sort or kind of a thing,
agrees unto all individuals contained under it, And therefore if there be
humane actions, that be indifferent, secundum speciem, according to their kind,
the Individuals of such actions are indifferent too, which will be opposed in a
third Conclusion: That which does agree unto a thing per se, the opposite
thereof cannot agree unto it, either per se, or per Accidens: And therefore if
some actions are per se of themselves indifferent, it is impossible for the
Individuals of such actions to be morally good, or evil. Dicendum est quod
actum ^sse indifferentem secundum speciem suam potest intellig^ dupliciter,
scilicet secundum quod negatio importata per hoc quod est indifferens, potest
duplicitet ordinari ad copulam verbalem: uno enim modo potest post poni, and
sic est sensus, quoth de ratione specifica actus est, quod sit indifferens et si
isto modo aliquis actus secendum speciem esset indifferens. non solum esset
impossible dare sub tali specie actum individualem indifferentem, immo
impossible esset sub tali specie dari actum, nisi indifferentem, quia ea quae
sunt de ratione speciei convenient omni individuo sub tali specie, sed si
nullus est actus indifferens secundum speciem suam; sub quo tamen sensu
argumentum procedit. Alio modo potest negatio importata per hoc, quod est
indifferens, praeponi copulae verbali sub hoc sensu, quod de ratione specifica
actus non est, quod fit indifferenter, vel determinate bonus vel malus, sed
tamen utrunque potest ipsi per aliud convenire, sicut homo ex sua specie non
habet quod sit determinate albus, vel determinate niger: et tamen per aliud ei
utrunque iftorum convenit. Et hoc modo sunt multiactus qui sunt indifferentes
secundum suam speciem, nullus tamen secundum individuum, quia individuum multa
includit quoad existentiam suam quae ad rationem speciei non pertinent. Lib. 2.
did. 40. q. 1.


Unto this objection Durand answers, by distinguishing of a twofold sense of
this expression. An act is indifferent secundum speciem, according to it is
kind. The first is, that indifferency is of the specific nature of such an
act. And this sense, which is the sense of the objection, is false, for then it
would be impossible for any individuals of such an act not to be indifferent:
But now there is a second sense of the expression, that the specific nature of
such an action does not involve, or imply in it is notion moral either
goodness or illness, But is equally and indifferently abstracted from both:
And this sense is true: It is not of the specificke nature of many actions to
be determinately good, or determinately evil; though they may be either by
circumstances. As for the confirmation which is added; Morisan Ethic. Murc:
Physic.
The answer unto it is usually as follows; A thing may be said to agree unto
another per se, either positively, or negatively.

1. Positively, when it is predicated in primo, or secundo modo dicondi per se,
when it is either an essential predicate, or proper passion: And thus it
agrees unto man to be a sensitive creature, to be endued with the powers of
understanding, willing, laughing, etc: And in this sense indifferency does not
agree per se, unto any humane voluntary actions, for then it would agree unto
them always, and in all places, so that it would be utterly impossible for the
individuals of such actions to be morally either good, or bad.

2. Negatively, When a thing of it self is not such, although by accident it
may be such: And thus we may say of a man, that per se he is not white, he is
not black, he is not tawny, he is not of an olive color, or the like, because
each of these colors considered separately, are accidental unto the nature of
man, considered in the general, and in it self: And yet the individuals of
the nature of man may some of them be white, some black, some tawny, some of
an olive color, or the like: Even so we may say of diverse voluntary rational
actions of man; that per se, (considered, as divested from all circumstances)
they are indifferent, morally neither good, nor bad: because moral goodness
and badnesse is accidental unto the nature of such actions considered in
themselves, and yet the individuals of such actions are all of them either
good, or evil, las shall be cleared by the next conclusion, unto which before
we proceed, let us make some application of this second conclusion.

Against this doctrine of Indifferency there are two failings; one in the
defect, Another in the excess:

There are, First, some, that fail in the defect, who know not the full extent
of indifferency: and so either impose, as necessary, or condemn, as sinful,
things that are in their own nature indifferent. Thus in the primitive Romish
Church there were some new converts, who abstained from swines flesh, and other
meats prohibited by the ceremonial law, as unlawful, The use of which yet was
indifferent and lawful under the Gospel: I know, and am persuaded (says
Paul,) by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it self. Romans
14.14. Thus also amongst the Corinthians there were some weak Christians, that
branded for Communion, and fellowship with Idolaters all eating of things
offered unto idols, Though bought in the market, or eaten at private meetings;
In both which yet Paul pronounces in general there was no unlawfulness, 1.
Cor. 10.25, 27. Amongst us there are diverse persons, that are doubtless well
affected in matters of Religion, and yet are too rigid in censuring as sins
diverse innocent and harmless recreations: This is an error in, and
consequently a blemish unto the understanding: Paul calls it a weakness in the
faith, Romans 14.1. that is an imperfection in point of knowledge, and that
privative, or blameable: For the faith and conscience of indifferent things is
never indifferent, we are never to judge a thing indifferent, to be either
sinful or necessary. Our Saviors command, John 7.24. Judge righteous judgment
may be extended unto things and actions as well as persons: Therefore as we are
not to call good, evil, or evil, good; so neither are we to call things
indifferent, either evil, or necessary. This is injuriously to straiten the
grand Charter of our Christian liberty, and presumptuously to make the narrow
way to heaven narrower then ever God made it. Besides, it opens a gappe unto
many mischiefs, it fills the Church of God with needless, and endless
disputes, it perplexeth the minds of many conscientious people with unnecessary
and unprofitably scruples; it causes many bitter and uncharitable censures,
and occasioneth many dangers: In the believing Jews that lived in the Church
of Rome, in Paul's time, there was but a little mistake touching things
indifferent, meats and days; but how pernicious was the sequel hereof?
Hereupon the strong despised the weak, and the weak judged the strong, Romans
14. And this was a great disturbance unto the peace of the Church, and a great
hinderance unto the comfortable communion of the Saints.

2. Against this doctrine of indifferency there are some, secondly, that fail
in the excess, who make things necessary or sinful, to be but indifferent.
There be some, that hold observation of the Lords day, preaching of the word,
in distinction from mere reading of it to be no ordinances of God, but things
merely indifferent; Erastians affirm, that Church Government, and
Ecclesiastical censures are only matters of indifferency: The Heathens in the
Apostles times generally ranked fornication amongst things indifferent: The
like estimate some of the Corinthians had of eating things offered to Idols, in
the midst of an Idols temple, at a religious feast of that Idol, which was a
palpable communicating with Devils, and therefore a fact in it is own nature
unlawful: And some Travailers, that profess themselves Protestants, have as
large and loose Consciences, as these Corinthians had; for they have the same
opinion of being present at an idolatrous mass, and bowing to popish Idols. Dr
Peter Heylin (as himself informs us) made no scruple of kissing a Crucifix,
when it was desired of him, to discriminate him from a Hugenot: No less loose
were the Principles of the Adiaphorists, and Flaccians in Charles the 5th his
time, who pressed the Interim; which gave allowance to diverse errors, and
superstitions of the Church of Rome, as matters that were indifferent: Our
Prelatists ever and anon in the controversy of Symbolicall ceremonies allege
their indifferency as a thing without dispute, which is never granted by us;
however it may sometimes for disputation sake be supposed. But what talk we of
Ceremonies, whilst some of greatest note among'st them have so eagerly pleaded
for such sports, and pastimes upon the Lords day as indifferent, which a devout
Papist would reckon a gross profanation thereof? Now this latter failing
against the Doctrine of indifferent actions, in a way of excess, is as much
against the Purity of the Church, as the former failing, in a way of defect,
was against the peace of the Church: It opens as wide a door to all
licentiousness and profaneness to call good and evil indifferent, as it does
to call good evil, or evil good, and therefore a woe equally belongs unto it
with this latter.

Secondly, we may be exhorted unto thankfulness, Because God has indulged us
Christians a greater extent of our liberty about things indifferent, then he
ever vouchsafed unto the Jewish Synagogue. Many things, in their own nature
indifferent, were prohibited them by positive precepts, and so made unlawful
unto them; This was a yoke (said Peter,) which they were unable to bear, Acts
15.10. Blessed therefore be God, who has freed us from this yoke by our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has abolished in his flesh the law of Commandments contained
in Ordinances, Ephesians. 2.15. So that now all (indifferent) things are lawful unto
us; There is nothing unclean of it self, Romans 14.14. all things indeed are
pure, Romans 14.20. Unto the pure all things are pure, Tit. 1.15. Every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be refused, 1 Timoth. 4.4.

There be two ways, unto which I shall direct for expressing our thankfulness
for the enlargement of this our liberty. 1. A stout asserting of it. 2. A due
and discreet use of it.

1. A stout asserting of it against Judaisme, Popery, or any other sect or
party, that shall be so presumptuous toward God, and injurious toward us, as
to abridg us thereof in any part. Stand fast therefore in the liberty,
wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the yoke
of bondage, Gal. 5.1. The Apostle would have us not to be entangled again with
the Jewish yoke of bondage; And there is the same reason, why in indifferent
things we should decline any other yoke of bondage, which any man whatsoever
should make, and attempt to put upon our necks: for liberty toward things
indifferent is one branch of that liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free:
and therefore we should stand fast against all opposers. But now in this our
asserting of our Christian liberty we should use a great deal of moderation
toward weak dissenting brethren: It Is ^he A^^^ce which the A postle Paul
gives in the like case, Romans 14.3. Let not him that eats, despise him, that
eats not: The eating of meats prohibited by the Mosaicall Law was after
Christ's death indifferent; But yet there were among the Romans some weaklings
in the faith, who thought the ceremonial law still in force, and consequently
judged, the eating of all meats therein forbidden, to be sinful; Now the
Apostle would not have those that were strong in the faith, that is, more
knowing, better principled, and more fully instructed in the extent of their
Christian liberty to despise, to disdain, and contemn those poor souls for
their ignorance, and weakness in judgment; But to reach out the right hand of
fellowship unto them, to receive them into an intimate communion, to deal
gently, and tenderly with them, restoring them in the spirit of meekness, with
all possible prudence, and caution: Him, that is weak in the faith, receive
you, but not to doubtful disputations, Romans 14.1. The Apostle does not
prohibit altogether all disputations for the future touching the point in
controversy: for he himself elsewhere very zealously disputes the matter, only
he interdicts such disputes as were unseasonable for the present: because these
Jewish converts were so extremely wedded unto the Law of Moses, as that to have
pressed upon them in their first conversion an abolition thereof, was the ready
way to have utterly prejudiced them against and alienated them from
Christianity: He would have them first to be taught the first principles of the
Oracles of God, the first Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, Heb. 5.12. and
chap. 6. verse. 1. And when they were well principled, and settled in the
Christian faith, then they might proceed to a calm, and peaceable debate of
this subject: for then their mind would be more capable of instruction, and the
forementioned prejudice would be more easily removed: Indeed, after a while,
there would be no place for such a prejudice: for when once there was a plenary
promulgation of the Gospel, to observe them afterward would be a virtuall
abrenunciation of the Christian Religion, a denial, that Christ is come in the
flesh. When once the Apostles had gived the Jewish Synagogue and Ceremonies an
honorable funeral, and respective burial, for any man afterward to revive
the observation of them, would be to rake in their dust, and sacrilegiously to
violate their grave: Preinde nunc quisquis Christianorum, quamvis sit ex
Judaeis, similiter ea celebrare voluerit, tanquam sopitos cineres eruens, non
erit pius deductor vel baiulus corporis, sed impius sepulturae violator,
August: Epist. 19.

A second way of expressing our thankfulness for the extension of our
Christian liberty in things indifferent is a due and discreet use of it, such
an use of it as may st, and with Gods glory, and may be no ways inconsistent
with our own or others edification. Touching this use of our liberty Paul gives
us a general caution, Gal. 5.13. only use not liberty for an occasion unto the
flesh; that is, to live according unto the flesh. Suitable unto which also is
the advice of St Peter, 1 Pet. 2.16. not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, But as the servants of God: In which advice there are two
parts: On enegative: not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness: that
is, for a color or pretense unto any sin for (...) is (as Dr Sand^rson well
observes) taken here more largly for all manner of evil and naughtiness,
according unto the adequate signification of the Greek and Latin Adjectives,
from whence the substantive used in the text is derived. Another part of the
advice is affirmative, using your liberty as the servants of God: that is in
the use of this liberty admit of nothing, that may be prejudicial unto the
service, unto the honor and glory of God: for this would be a most unthankful
abuse, and not a true use of it.

To inform us more fully, and particularly what we are to do in this weighty
point, I shall briefly propound such restraints, as we are by the rule of
Scripture to put on the use, and exercise of our Christian liberty in things
indifferent, for without such restraints we can never use this our liberty
aright, and as we ought: There be some loose people, that are impatient of all
these restraints: If they judge a thing lawful in it self, they never
consider, or consult farther, but without more ado adventure on it: But these
men ever and anon abuse their liberty unto Gods dishonor, their own danger,
and the scandal of both brethren, and aliens: They use their liberty as an
occasion to the flesh, for a cloak of maliciousness: He that gives himself
the full swing in things indifferent, He that will do whatsoever is lawful,
will soon slide into things unlawful, and ere he is aware indulge himself in
the practice of them: So Clemens Alexandrinus (...). 1. Qui faciunt quicquid
licet, huc cito delabuntur, ut faciant quod non licet. For prevention of this
licentiousness, I shall out of Gods word recommend unto you six restraints to
be put upon this part of your Christian liberty in the use and exercise of it,
1. By Prudence. 2. By Temperance and Sobriety. 3. By Conscience. 4. By
Religion. 5. By Authority. 6. By Charity,

1. By Prudence: which in indifferent things is, first, to compare them with
those ends which every Christian should aim at. 2. To consider whether there
concur not an obligation to some duty, or other.

First then, It is the work of Christian prudence to compare indifferent
actions with those ends, which every Christian should propound unto himself:
the glorifying of God, the salvation of his own soul, and the edifying of
Brethren: And to examine whether they be expedient, or inexpedient, profitable
and conducing, or unprofitable and impedient unto these ends: And if upon due
consideration it finds them inexpedient, an hinderance unto these ends, it then
forthwith dictates a forbearance of them: Because whatsoever is an impediment
unto these ends is opposite unto them, and in that regard sinful: This
restraint our Apostle lays down in way of Doctrine for the instruction of
all. All things are lawful for me, But all things are not expedient, 1 Cor.
6.12. and Chapt 9. we have him putting it upon himself in his own practice: It
was lawful for him to have received of the Corinthians a competent, and
honorable maintenance, for his labor in the Word and Doctrine, as being a
matter of due debt from them: But he did not exact it, but wrought with his
hands for his livelihood, because he found it would have obstructed, and
hindered the end of his preaching, which was the spreading of the Gospel, that
the word of the Lord might have free course, and be glorified in the conversion
of souls.

A second act of Prudence about indifferent things is to consider, whether in
that nicke of time we are about an indifferent action there concur not an
obligation unto some duty or other; And if there do, then prudence dictates,
that pro hic and nunc, we should abstain from that indifferent action; because
otherwise we should prefer it above a necessary and commanded duty; And
though it be simply in it self lawful, it would become accidentally sinful,
to wit, by comparison; Thus it would be sinful for a man to walk in the
fields, if there lay upon him at the same time an obligation to hear such a
sermon: Thus also it would be sinful for a man to follow recreations in
themselves lawful, when the necessities of his family call upon him to follow
his occupation, the works of his ordinary calling.

A second Restraint (that we are to put upon the use of our liberty about
things indifferent) is by temperance and sobriety, and this restraint also we
have laid down by the Apostle in the place but now quoted. 1. Cor. 6.12. All
things are lawful for me, But I will not be brought under the power of any:
Now what is it that brings a man under the power of meats, and drinks,
apparel, recreations? but an over-vehement affection unto them. This makes man
a vassal unto those things, over which God has given him a full Lordship, and
dominion: Qui nimis rem aliquam amat (says Aquinas) quodam modo servus istius
efficitur, He that loves a thing overmuch, renders himself thereby the servant
thereof: Know ye not that to whom ye yield your selves servants to obey, his
servants ye are, to whom ye obey, Romans 6.16. He that immoderately affects
those things, that are in themselves indifferent, cannot disobey, or resist the
least temptation unto sin drawn from them, and therefore is no better then a
slave unto them, nay an Idolater of them: You may see how Paul censures the
false Prophets for such an excess, Romans 16.18. They that are such serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly, Their God is their belly Phil.
3.19. We may say the like of those, that like the rich glutton, Luke. 16.19.
fare sumptuously or deliciously every day, and will have a splendid retinue,
when the lowness of their state requires a meaner table and smaller
attendance; of those that are wedded unto such gaiety and bravery of apparel
as is above their purses, or unsuitable unto their age, and rank; As also of
those that are so mad upon their recreations, sports and pastimes, as that in
the pursuit of them they forgo their meals, and sleep, they neglect the
worship of God, and their particular callings, unto their great impoverishment,
if not final and total beggary.

A third limitation upon the exercise of our Christian liberty in things
indifferent is to be by conscience: for though a man's conscience cannot
legitimate sins, either of Commission, or Omission; yet it is of force
sufficient to make that sinful, which is in it felfe indifferent, and lawful:
for this we have the Apostles determination, and that touching both a
condemning and doubting conscience.

1. A Condemning Conscience, Romans 14.14. I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that their is nothing unclean of it self; But unto him that
esteemethany thing to be unclean, to him it is unclean. Unto the authority of
Paul's Testimony I shall add two reasons.

1. Every man takes the voice of his conscience to be the voice of God; And
therefore he that does a thing in it self indifferent against the judgment of
his Conscience, he disobeyeth and slighteth the voice of God, as for the manner
of his action, and is a fighter against God.

A second reason I shall give you in the words of Willet upon the place,
Because the goodness or badnesse of an action is esteemed by the will and
affection of the doer; Now when he thinks a thing to be evil, and yet does
it, It shows that such an one has, deliberatam peccandi voluntatem, a
deliberate mind and purpose to sin.

The Apostle, secondly, gives us the same resolution touching a Doubting
consci^nce, Romans 14.23. He that doubts, is damned if he eat, because he
eats not of faith; for whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: that is; he that
performech an indifferent action, and yet doubts of the lawfulness thereof,
deserves damnation, because he does not act out of faith; for whatsoever we
perform, though, it be (intrinsecally, in it self) matter of indifferency;
nay though it be matter of duty, yet if it proceed not from a belief of it is
lawfulness it becomes (accidentally and extrinsecally) sinful; It bewrayes a
wicked and a wretched heart, that is not afraid of sin, but in a great
readiness to commit it; who, almost would do any thing that he doubts would
anger and grieve a dear friend? God then is not so dear as he should be unto
such men, as dare adventure upon the practice of that, which they are doubtful
is displeasing unto him: Let us therefore hearken unto that exhortation, which
the Apostle gave unto the Romans concerning things indifferent, Romans 14.5. Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind: And this exhortation he backs
with a very good reason. ver. 22. Happy is he which condemns not himself in
that thing which he allows: that is, he that does not condemn as sinful,
that which he chooses and embraces in his practice; such a man is in that
respect, and so far forth happy, as being free from those terrors, which
torment those, who do what their consciences condemn.

Thus you see, that not only condemnation, but doubtfulnesse of Conscience is a
sufficient warrant to forbear things that are in themselves indifferent: But
yet it is no ground for us to assume a liberty of condemning the same things in
others, who are sufficiently satisfied touching their indifferency and
lawfulness: Let not him that eats not judge him that eats. Romans 14.3. Let
not him that is weak in the faith, that out of ignorance censureth, or
suspecteth diverse actions to be sinful, which he cannot prove to be so by
any convincing argument; Let not such an one condemn for such actions the
strong in the faith, those who are as godly and more knowing, then themselves:
This exhortation the Apostle enforces by diverse reasons in the following
words; for God has received him; who art thou, that judge another man's
servant? To his own master he stands or falls, yea, he shall be holden up;
for God is able to make him stand, ver. 3.4.

The first argument is taken from the relation of the strong unto God, or Gods
acceptance of them; for God has received him; to wit, into his favor, into
an intimate union, and communion, into his family, as a servant, as a son, as
a member of his only begotten son: To condemn him then is to throw a
dishonor upon God himself.

A second reason is, Because for the weak to condemn the indifferent actions
of the strong for sin, of which they cannot prove them guilty, is a gross
and presumptuous usurpation of Gods prerogative, for which we have no
Authority: who art thou that judge another man's servant? Thou art but a
fellow servant at the most: And God only is the master of the family, the
Church: and therefore the unlawfulness of what is done in it is to be
determined by Gods precepts, and not by thy humor, or fancy, thy ungrounded
surmises: If God has permitted a thing, how dare thou interdict it? To his
own master h^standeth, or falls. The words are to be understood in a
law-sense, and their meaning is that God alone acquits or condemns the actions
of his servants, and none else: They are to be tried by his word and will, and
not by thy jealousies, and suspicions. Others expound the words thus: If a man
eat and drink temperately with outward prayer and thanksgiving, who but God can
discern, whether he eat or drink unto the glory of God, or no? It follows he
shall be holden up: that is, he shall be justified. This fact of his, his
eating of meats forbidden by the Leviticall Law, shall be abetted and
maintained: For God is able to make him stand: though thou load him with
censures, God is able to acquit, and clear him.

4thly. Our Christian liberty toward things indifferent must admit of a
restraint in the out ward practice of it* By Religion, by the Religion of a
vow, of an oath, Deuteronomy. 23. verse. 21, 22, 23. When thou shall vow a vow unto the
Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely
require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee. But if thou shall forbear
to vow, it shall be no sin in thee. That which is gone out of thy lips, thou
shall keep, and perform: even a free will offering, according as thou have
vowed unto the Lord thy God, which thou have promised with thy mouth. It was
indifferent for Ananias to have sold, or held his possession: But when once by
solemn vow he had devoted it unto God, to keep back any part of the price in
his own hand, was no less then sacrilege: Suppose Lusory lots be in
themselves lawful, yet if a man swear, that he will never play more at Cards,
or Tables, etc. By this Oath a man has bound himself from such games for the
future: and if he play at them, he shall incur the guilt of perjury: Numb.
30. v. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his soul
with a bond, he shall not break his word, he shall do according unto all that
proceeds out of his mouth. Calvinist's about oath's concerning things
indifferent have this case: Whether they be obligatory in trifles? As if a man
should swear to lift up a straw, to rub his beard, to give an apple, to lend a
pin unto a Child: This case Casus posterior est, cum res aut ob sui
levitatemindig^na est viri prudentis deliberatione, nec cassa ^nuce interest
^fecerisne an non feceris, ut levare fe^^ucam de terra, fricare barbam etc. aut
ob parvitatem mazeriae non estmultum estimabilis; ut dare pomum puero, aciculam
commodare etc. Juramenzum de re illo sensu adiaphora omnino est illicitum.
Arguit enim sancti nominis Dei aut nimiam irreverentiam, fi (ut fere fit) ex
quodam habitu jurandi longo usu contracto imprudenti fo^te exciderit; aut
apertum contemptum, siquis id sciens prudensque ad miserit, scilicet ^on est
Deus advocand us testis, nisi ubi dignus vindice nodus inciderit: ubi causa
exigit non justa modo sed and gravis. Et in hoc omnes consentiunt, caeterum de
obligatione quid sta^uendum? Video quidem plerosque casuistas pontificios in ea
esse sententia juramentum de re exigua et parvi momenti esse sua natura nullum,
and non obligate; quia scilicet re^ levis ^onest idonea materia juramenti, and
lex non curat de miminis. Sed miror potuisse eos, qui ^lias videri volunt esse
tam Lyncei, in tetam aperta caecu^ire: nisi quod putidae illi distinctioni
peccati mortalis and venialis, quo velut fermento totam Theologiae moralis
massam faede corruperunt, locum relictum cupiant. Sed obligare juramentum in re
vel levissimi momenti con^at; primo, quia in re gravi and levi eadem est
veritatis and falsitatis ratio. Secundo, quia in assertorio juramento, qui
aliter dicit quam res est, etsi in re levissima, pejerat, ergo a simili and in
promissorio, qui aliter, facit, quam jura vit. Tertio, quia ali^egrave;r,
quantum in se esset, Deum fallae rei ^estem faceret. Quar^o^quia omnis jurans
tenetur facere totum quod promisit, quatenus potest, and ^cet^sed dare puero
pomum, and possibile est, and licitum, ergo tenetur praestare, non debuit ergo
sic ^urari: sed ubi iuratum est, debet impleti. De Jurament: Obligat: praelect:
3. Sect. 15.
Dr Sanderson thus answers. 1. He premiseth that such oath's are unlawful,
Because in them Gods most Holy Name is taken in vain. The Great God of Heaven
and Earth is appealed unto, and called upon to witness unto toys: But yet
notwithstanding his resolution is, that such oath's bind; and for it he gives
four reasons.

1. Truth and falsehood have place in a light, as well as in a serious matter.

2. Because in an assertory Oath, He that says otherwise then the thing is,
though it be in a most trivial matter, is forsworn: therefore by the like
reason, he is perjured in a promissory oath, that does otherwise, then he has
sworn.

3. Because Otherwise, he that has taken such an oath, should make God as much
as in him lies the witness of a falsehood.

4. Because every one that swears, is bound to do all that he has sworn, so
far forth as he is able, and so far forth as the thing is lawful to be
done: But the matters here spoken of are possible and lawful, v. gr. it is
possible and lawful to give a child an apple, etc. therefore such oath's are
to be performed: Indeed such vain oath's should not be taken, but being once
taken they ought to be fulfilled.

A fifth restraint upon the exercise of our Christian liberty in things
indifferent is by the just commands of authority, unto which we must be subject
for conscience sake, Romans 13. v. 5. The Apostle Peter having, 1 Pet. 2.13. 14.
exhorted us to submit our selves unto every ordinance of man for the Lords
sake; In verse. 16. (by the general consent of interpreters) he prevents an
objection, that might be made against this submission, from our Christian
liberty, As free, and not using your liberty for a Cloak of maliciousness,
but as the servants of God: Upon which words it is well observed by Estius (out
of Oecumenius and Chrysostom) that, As free is to be construed with (...),
submit your selves: And not (as Bede would have it) with well doing. And from
this connection we may learn two things.

First, That in submission unto every ordinance of man, we must not infringe
our Christian liberty: We must not enslave our selves to sin, Satan, and the
World.

Secondly, That submission unto every Ordinance of man, and our Christian
freedom may very well stand together: We may submit our selves as free: we may
be obedient subjects, and yet free Christians: This may also be further
gathered from what the Apostle has in the following words touching the abuse,
and use of our Christian liberty; Not using your liberty as a cloak for
maliciousness, but as servants of God: Here we have. 1. A dehortation from the
abuse of our Christian liberty, not using your liberty as a cloak of
maliciousness: now to allege it as a plea for exemption of us from the yoke
of temporal dominion, is to use it as a cloak of maliciousness; for not
only scripture, but even nature it self condemns disobedience unto, and
rebellion against magistrates, as a very High point of maliciousness, that is
naughtiness, and wickedness.

2. We have here a Direction unto a right use of our liberty, using it as the
servants of God: Now the service of God is so far from being a bar, as that
it is rather a spur unto this subjection; for First; it is for the Lords
sake, that Peter would have us to submit our selves unto every ordinance of
man, verse. 13. Secondly, How can be cordially serve God, that contemnes and
disobeyes his deputy, and ministers? so the Apostle styles the magistrate, Romans
13.4, 6. And Thirdly, The servants of God are obliged to yield obedience unto
all his commands, and one of them is to be subject unto the higher powers, Romans
13.1. They then that resist the higher powers do not use their liberty as the
servants of God.

But now, (that we may not run into another extreme, and with the flatterers
of states, and Princes, extol the power of the magistrate beyond all bounds of
moderation;) I shall desire you to take notice, that the power of the
magistrate in things indifferent is not arbitrary, but is to be limited by the
end of all Magistracy, the public good, Romans 13.4. He is the Minister of God
unto thee for good. Unto this public good some indifferent things carry a
tendency, and such the magistrate may command; unto it others may be
prejudicial, and such he may forbid: But now he should abuse his power, and
play the tyrant, If he should injoyne things unprofitable; As if he should
command men to throw stones into the water, to pick strawes, to scatter
feathers into the air, or the like. By this you may see, that the legislative
power of the temporal magistrate in things indifferent is not unlimited: But
now as for Ecclesiastical superiors, They have no commission for to make any
laws properly so called. To make this good Ames quotes Junius against
Bellarmine, [ cont. 3. lib. 4. cap. 16. n. 86, 87. and chap. 17. n. 9, 10, 12,
13.] where he shows, that Christ is the only lawgiver, that appoints
things in his Church; and that he has appointed all that are requisite, and
that the Church makes no laws (properly so called) to appoint any new things
to be used, but only canons, orders, directions, ordering in seemly manner
th^se things which Christ has appointed: and that if she add any thing of her
own, she does decline: And the reason is, Because unto her is committed no
authority of appointing new things, but a ministry to observe, and d^e such
things which Christ has appointed.

[ This argument is prosecuted at large By Ames in his Reply unto Morton chap.
1. Sect. 16. and vindicated in his fresh suit against Ceremonies, page 64, 65,
66. usque ad 71. from the rejoinder of Dr John Burgess.]

The sixth and last restraint, which I shall mention, that is to be put upon
the outward exercise of our Christian liberty in things indifferent is by
Charity: and that. 1. Unto our selves. 2. Unto others.

1. Unto our selves: He that truly loves himself, will deny himself the use
of things indifferent, if he think it will hazard the health of his better
part, his spiritual and immortal soul; He will forbear those sports, and
Pastimes he most delights in, if he find that they usually tempt him to Choler,
or covetousness: He will not so much as step into a Tavern, Inn, or
Alehouse, if he find himself prone unto excess: According unto the advice,
that Solomon gives in the like case, Prove. 23.2. Put a knife unto thy throat,
if thou be a man given unto appetite: Our Savior exhorts us to pluck out our
right eye, and to cut off our right hand, when they offend us, Matthew. 5.29, 30.
And Maldonate supposes that he speaks literally of a true eye and hand indeed:
neither (says he) is there any absurdity in such a sense: because the plucking
out of the right eye, and the cutting off the right hand is mentioned only in a
way of hyperbolicall exaggeration. In which there is understood such an
exception, as is usual in the like cases, if it might be, if it were lawful:
He parallels it with a hyperbole of the same nature in Gal. 4.15. I bear you
record, that if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own eyes,
and have given them unto me; If it had been possible: that is, as Estius
glosseth it, si natura permitteret, If nature would give way unto such a
mutilation: Our Savior therefore signifies, that we must incur the greatest
loss, rather then expose our selves unto the danger of sin: And from this we
may conclude that we must cast away our most beloved indifferences; when once
they scandalize us, that is, when they prove occasions of, and incentives unto
sin.

2. Charity toward others should put a restraint upon the use of our Christian
liberty in things indifferent, and make us to forbear all indifferent things
whatsoever, that may destroy the souls, weaken, or wound the Consciences of
others, 1 Cor. 8.12. Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another, Gal. 5.13. Where the Antithesis implied in the particle,
but, plainly shows, that we use our liberty for an occasion unto the flesh,
if we do not by love serve one another, in the exercise thereof. Knowledge
puffs up, but charity edifieth. 1 Cor. 8.1. that is, a firm and full
knowledge of our liberty in things indifferent, if it be separated from Charity,
is apt to swell the mind with pride, and make men to despise, or set at naught
weak, doubting, and scrupulous Brethren; But Charity edifieth, that is it is
careful to build up others, as living stones in the spiritual house of God,
the Church; It inclines to promote their graces, and gracious practices, and
to avoid whatsoever is of a destroying nature unto their souls, that is,
every thing that may occasion their fall into sin: Now that indifferent things
may sometimes be of an unedifying and destroying nature, the Apostle affirms
1 Cor. 10.23. All things are lawful for me, but all things edify not, do not
build up our brethren in truth, faith, and holiness, do not farther them in
their Religion, charity, and justice: for that the Apostle speaks of the
edification of others is plain by what follows in the next verse, Let no man
seek his own (that is, only) but every man another wealth, that is,
spiritual, the edification and salvation of another soul. And therefore
indifferent things are to be forborne in case of scandal, when they prove to
be of a destructive nature unto the souls of men, when they weaken their
graces, hinder their duties, and lead them into sin. This course the Apostle
prescribes unto the Romans in the case of things legally unclean before the
coming of Christ. Those that were strong in the faith among them, well
instructed in the doctrine of Christian liberty, knew very well, that the
legal uncleanesse of meats and drinks, all Jewish festivalls and fasts were
removed by Christ's death, and that nothing was now of it self unclean, but
all things indifferent and lawful: yet the Apostle would have them in the use
of this point of Christian liberty not to scandalize those, that are weak in
the faith, that is, such as (being newly won from Judaisme to Christianity)
were as yet uninstructed about the cessation of Ceremonialls, Romans 14.13. Judge
this rather, that no man put a stumbling block, or occasion, to fall in his
brothers way; that is in the use of meats and drinks, that were before the
Gospel Levitically unclean, and neglect of Jewish Festivalls and fasts, the
observation of which was for a while indifferent, until the interrement of the
Ceremonial law: For however the words run generally, yet if we look to the
coherence backwards, the foregoing part of the chapter speaks only of such
things, meats, drinks, and days: and if we look to the coherence forwards,
it speaks only of such things, meats and drinks, verse. 15. Destroy not him
with thy meat, for whom Christ died, ver. 17. for the kingdom of God is not
meat and drink. v. 20. for meat destroys not the work of God: it is evil
for that man who eats with offense: It is evil not simply in it self, but
accidentally by scandal. And therefore I shall conclude, that the place is in
a special manner appliable against scandalizing by abuse of liberty in things
indifferent.

Interpreters guess at three things, wherein the practice of the strong
amongst the Romans might scandalize the weak.

1. It might unsettle them in, and distaste them against the Christian Religion:
for they might hereupon think it to be contrary unto the Law of Moses, which
they so highly reverenced, and so at last it might occasion their relapse unto
Judaisme. 2. It might embolden them to sin against their consciences, by
eating that which they thought to be unclean. And 3dly, it might grievously
exassperate them, and provoke them to power out many a bitter, uncharitable,
and sinful censure upon the actions, and state of those that were strong in
the faith.

In verse. 21. The Apostle proceeds to enlarge his doctrine touching this
particular, beyond the controversy, that occasioned this his discourse: for (as
Estius well notes) He teaches, that to avoid the scandal and offense of our
Brethren we are to abstain, not only from things prohibited by the law, but
also from things not prohibited, from flesh, wine, and any indifferent thing
whatsoever: It is good neither to eat flesh, nor to drink wine, nor any thing
whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak. It is good,
that is, it is morally good. 1. Good in regard of God, a thing very acceptable,
and pleasing unto him. 2. Good in regard of our Brethren, profitable and
conducing unto their edification. 3. Good in regard of our selves, a duty that
God requires of us: And from this we may infer that the contrary hereof is
(by the rule of contraries) morally evil: it is displeasing unto God, hurtful
unto the soul of thy Brother, and sinful in thy self.

In verse. 22. The Apostle prevents an objection of the strong: Have thou faith,
have it to thy self before God: He speaks not of a faith (says Chrysostom)
that is (...) of doctrines and tenets, to wit, such as are fundamental, and
necessary unto salvation: but of a faith, (...), concerning the subject matter
here handled, meats, and days, things indifferent, a belief touching their
lawfulness: the strong amongst the Romans might be ready to object, that their
knowledge and persuasion of their Christian liberty in the matter controverted
amounted unto a Divine faith: for it was built upon a divine Revelation: Each
of them might say as Paul did above verse. 14. I know, and am persuaded by the
Lord Jesus, that nothing is unclean of it self. The Lord Jesus has taught me
this liberty now is it not fit, that my practice should be agreeable unto my
belief; that I should exercise my knowledge, and act according unto my
judgment: seeing it is so well grounded, why should I forbear the doing of
that, which I know to be lawful? Unto this the Apostles answer is, that they
should not make a vain ostentation, or unseasonable discovery of their faith:
that is, knowledge, and persuasion, unto the offense of their Brother, the
hazard of his soul: but rather in such a case conceal it, and content
themselves with Gods knowledge, and approbation of it, who sees in secret, and
will reward openly, Matthew. 6. Have thou faith, have it to thy self before God:
This prudent and charitable management of Christian liberty, the Apostle
exhorts the Corinthians unto, in their carriage toward their Brethren touching
things offered unto Idols. 1 Cor. 8.9. take heed lest, by any means this
liberty of yours become a stumbling block to them that are weak. In Chapt. 10.
he determines, that it was lawful to eat things consecrated to the Idols, and
he instanceth in two cases. 1. When they were sold in open markets. verse. 25.
2ly, When they were made use of at private f^asts: But unto this his
determination he subjoyneth the exception of scandal, verse. 28.29. If any man
say unto you this is offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not, for his sake
that showed it, and for conscience sake; The earth is the Lords and the
fullness thereof. Conscience; I say, not thine own, but of the others: for why
is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? This some understand of the
unbelieving Idolater, others of a weak brother: And indeed this practice gives
an wound unto both their consciences. 1. The Idolater triumphs, because he
thinks it an honor unto his Idol, and so he is confirmed, and hardened in his
Idolatry: And then, 2ly, As for the weak Brother, he supposes, that the meat
is so polluted by Consecration and sacrifice unto Idols, as that to eat thereof
is a compliance with Idolatry; and therefore altogether sinful; and hereupon
the eating of these meats by the strong may occasion in the weak two scandalls.
1. The example of the strong may entice them unto imitation; and so they will
sin against their consciences. 2ly, The practice of the strong may provoke
them unto rash and uncharitable judgment: both scandals give a great blow unto
the Conscience of the weak: But, that the Apostle speaks of the latter
scandal, I am induced to think by the words following: Why is my liberty
judged of another man's Conscience? that is, why do I needlessely,
indiscreetly, and unseasonably expose my Christian liberty unto the rash
censures of a weak Brother, who may be ready to traduce it, as a profane
licentiousness? why shall I drive him upon a sin, which I may prevent by a
prudent and charitable forbearance of the exercise of my liberty? Liberty is a
thing, which men out of an excessive self love so much overvalue, as that they
are very impatient of any restraint to be put upon it at all: But the
Restraint, that Charity prompts us unto, is of all others most disregarded;
because there is nothing almost, that is so much undervalued, as the precious
souls of our poor Brethren, and therefore we make but little conscience how
thick we throw scandals in their way: I shall therefore briefly propound such
weighty, and pressing arguments, as the Apostle uses to persuade the Romans,
and Corinthians to abstain from a scandalous use of their liberty in things
otherwise indifferent, and lawful: and they are drawn, either, from the nature
of things indifferent, or from the nature of scandal.

1. From the nature of things indifferent: and here, the first argument is Romans
14.17. the kingdom of God is not meat and drink: It does not stand in
indifferent things; for they are neither the way to the kingdom of Glory, nor
our duty under the kingdom of grace: They are no part of Gods worship, and
service, no matter of Religion: the weal and safety of Gods people is in no
wise wrapped up in them; nay, many times a rigid pressing, and unseasonable
practice of them is a great disturbance unto the peace, and a great hinderance
unto the edification of the Church, the kingdom of Christ.

A second Argument from the nature of things indifferent, is the great latitude
of them: Though some of them be scandalous yet there will still remain an
ample field of them besides, 1 Cor. 10.28. If any man say unto you, this is
offered in sacrifice unto idols, eat not for his sake, that showed it, etc. the
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: It is as much as if he had said;
though ye abstain from things offered unto idols, yet there is no doubt of
want, no fear of pinching your bellies: for you have the earth, and the
fullness thereof for your supply: And from the scandal by meats, we may argue
in like manner touching the scandal by recreation: If cards, dyce, tables
offend thy brother, there is plenty enough of other sports, bowling, chesse,
draughts, etc.

A second sort of arguments, that the Apostle insists on, are taken from the
nature of scandal: It is a sin against that tender love, which we owe unto
our brethren: And when ye sin so against the brethren, 1 Cor. 8.12. (And that
it is no small, but a very heinous sin, the next words evince) And wound their
weak consci^nce, The words are (...), where (as Beza well observes,) the
Antecedent is put for the consequent, beating, striking, or smiting for the
effect thereof, wounding: As weapons or whips wound the body; so scandalls the
conscience. Unjustly to wound the body, the face, the eye of our Brother is a
cruel and inhumane part; but to wound so tender a piece as his conscience, to
wound a weak, a sickly, a diseased conscience is the very height of
inhumanity. To wound the soul of a Brother with sorrow, is a breach of
charity; If thy Brother be grieved with thy meat, now walk thou not
charitably, Romans 14.15. And hence we may reason in a way of comparison a minori
ad majus, that to wound the soul of a Brother with sin, violates Christian
love in a far higher measure; for the wound of the least sin is in its own
nature mortal; and therefore scandal is not only of a wounding, but of a
killing and destroying nature; it is a soul murder, Destroy not him with thy
meat, Romans 14.15. Indeed the weak, that were scandalized, might by Gods mercy,
and Christ's merit, escape an actual destroying and damning: But the Apostles
meaning is, that the strongs scandalizing of them carried in it is nature a
tendency toward their destruction: for it drew them into sin, and sin
without repentance will destroy the soul: This malignant and destructive
efficacy of scandal the Apostle urges also unto the Corinthians Epistle 1.
chapt. 8. v. 11. And through thy knowledge shall thy weak brother perish: that
is; through thy scandalous abuse of thy knowledge of thy liberty in eating
things offered unto idols, thou shall do, what lies in thee, to farther the
perishing of thy weak Brother: This cruelty that is in scandal toward the
souls of our Brethren, is aggravated from Christ's Redemption, Gods Creation of
their souls.

1. From Christ's Redemption of their souls: Destroy not him with thy meat for
whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother
perish, for whom Christ died? But when ye sin so against the Brethren, and
wound their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ: 1 Cor. 8.11, 12. In the
judgment of charity thou art to rank thy weak Brother in the number of those,
for whom Christ dyed: Christ died for his salvation, and how dare thou oppose
his work by doing that, which tends unto his damnation? Christ parted with his
life to save him, and wilt not thou for that end abridg thy self of thy
liberty in a few indifferent things.

2. From Gods creation of their souls: for meat destroy not the work of God,
Romans 14.20. that is the soul of thy brother: for that is styled Gods work in
a way of eminency: because it was one of the choycest, chiefest, and most
eminent works of the Creation, made as it were with the consultation of the
whole Trinity, and had in it engraven the very Image of God himself: Therefore
not only the defacing, but the very attempting to deface this would redound
very much unto the dishonor of the worker God; And he will doubtless
accordingly resent the despising of his workmanship: Some interpreters expound
the place of the work of Gods grace in the sanctification, or regeneration of
the soul, wherein faith is begotten, and that faith in a peculiar manner is
the work of God, we have Christ's own testimony, John 6.29. Jesus answered, and
said unto them, this is the work of God, that ye believe on him, whom he has
sent: But even so the words display the horrid malignancy of scandal: for they
show that he who scandalizeth his brother, fights against God; that he goes
about to demolish that, which has God alone for the builder. It was a part of
Christ's character not to break a bruised reed, nor quench the smoking flax,
Mat. 12.20. How unsuitable unto this, is the disposition of those by whom
offenses come? For they do what lies in them to quench the very beginnings of
grace, and goodness. Indeed the work of Gods grace is so all-powerfull, as
that it will finally prevail against all resistance: If God have begun a
good work, he will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. And
the gates of hell shall never be able to prevail against it, Matthew. 16.18. But
yet the gates of hell will be ever hindering of it: and in especial by the
spreadth of scandals. And this very opposition is a war against heaven, (in
the language of the Scripture) a destroying of the work of God. There is one
sequel more of active scandals of this nature, that our Apostle mentions,
Romans 14. and 1 Cor. 10. which deserves also our consideration: and it is the
blot of infamy, which they will contract unto our names, and the very Christian
liberty, which we abuse: A scandal in this case, tending unto sin, is
usually accompanied with a scandal tending unto disgrace, or defamation: And
how careful we should be to decline scandal, even in this English sense of
the word, the vehemence of the Apostles interrogations will sufficiently
inform us, 1 Cor. 10.29, 30. Conscience, I say, not thine own, but of the
others: for why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? for, if I by
grace be a partaker, why am I evil spoken of, for that for which I give
thanks? Unto these interrogations add we the Apostles precept also, Romans
14.16. Let not then your good be evil spoken of: that is, give none occasion
for this great privilege of your Christian liberty to be traduced.

Before I take my leave of this restraint of our liberty by Charity in the case
of scandal, I shall examine the restraints, that some have put upon it,
without any warrant from scripture: Those in which they most confide, are two.
1. They limit it unto the scandal of the weak, and, 2. Unto matters that are
undetermined by Authority.

1. They limit it unto the scandal of the weak: for the scandal of the
malicious, and presumptuous persons, The scandal of Pharisees (say they) may be
neglected, Mat. 15.12, 14. whether in our Ceremonies there was an active
scandal, a scandal given will be largely disputed in the next treatise, for
the present therefore we shall only prove that we are to avoid such an active
scandal in the malicious, as well as the weak.

For First, Such a scandal is of a soul destroying nature: Destroy not him
with thy meat, Romans 14.15. And who so wicked, and malicious upon the face of
the earth, whose soul a true Christian charity will exclude from it is care,
mercy, and compassion.

Secondly, The Apostles motive reaches unto the wicked and malicious: Destroy
not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. for they may be in the
number of those, for whom Christ died, who for their present state and
condition may be most wicked, and malicious; such as oppose themselves, such as
are in the snare of the Devil, taken captive by him at his will.

3. The Apostles prohibition, 1 Cor. 10.32. extends unto the malicious, as
well as the weak, Give none offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles,
nor to the Church of God: where Jews and Gentiles are distinguished from the
Church of God; and therefore by them are meant such as were unconverted, and as
yet enemies unto the faith of Christ, and Church of God. And the things wherein
the Apostle would have their offense to be avoided were matters of
indifferency; Whether ye eat or drink, v. 31. But now, lest some should be
ready to object unto Paul that which our Savior said of the Scribes and
Pharisees, Matthew. 23.4. that he did bind a heavy burden and grievous to be
borne, and lay it upon men's shoulders: but he himself would not move it with
one of his fingers: the Apostle in the next verse shows, how that his
practice was conformable unto his precept, Even as I please all men (good and
bad) in all things (that is, in all indifferent things) not seeking mine own
profit, but the profit of many that they may be saved, 1 Cor. 10.33.

In a second place, the Fautors of our Ceremonies limit this restraint of our
liberty in things indifferent by charity, in the case of scandal, only unto
things undetermined by Authority. Where Authority has determined our choice,
we must (say they) hold to their determination, any scandal to the Contrary
notwithstanding. It seems then in case the magistrate command it, we may wound
the weak consciences of our Brother, Destroy with our indifferencies, the
work of God, him for whom Christ died. It is good (says Paul) neither to eat
flesh, nor to drink win^, nor any thing whereby thy Brother stumbleth, or is
offended, or is made weak, Romans 14.22. But our Prelatists determine quite
otherwise, if authority enjoyne it, it is good (say they) to eat bread, drink
wine, wear a surplice, use the sign of the cross in Baptism, though thereby
never so many Brethren stumble, or are offended, or made weak.

The unreasonablenesse of this assertion Ames in his reply to Morton has
proved by many arguments, That are as yet unanswered, which I shall here
transcribe.

A scandal in the nature of it is spiritual murder: Now suppose a superior
should command a thing in it self indifferent, whereupon murder were like to
follow; as to run a horse, or a cart, in a certain way, at a certain time,
when it may be unwitting to the commander, little children were playing in the
way, would any man's conscience serve him to do it?

Avoiding of scandal is a maine duty of Charity: May Superiors at their
pleasure appoint how far I shall show my Charity toward my brothers soul?
Then surely an inferior earthly court may cross the determinations of the
high court of heaven.

The superiors have no power given them for destruction, but only for
edification: If therefore they command scandals, they go beyond their
Commission: neither are we tied therein to do as they bid, but as they should
bid.

If determination by superiors were sufficient to take away the sin of a
scandal. Then they do very ill that they do not (so far as is possible)
determine all things indifferent, that so no danger may be left in giving of
offense by the use of them. Then the Church of Rome is to be praised, in that
she has determined of so many indifferents: then Paul with the other Apostles
might have spared a great deal of labor in admonishing the Churches how they
should avoid offenses about some indifferent things: A far shorter way had
been either to determine the matter fully: or else to have given order, that
the Churches should among themselves determine it at home.

But say that the Archbishop of Corinth (for now I suppose such a one) had
called his convocation, and with consent of his Clergy had determined, that
men might, and for testifying of liberty should, at a certain time eat of such
and such meats, which men formerly doubted of: would not yet the Apostle have
given the same direction he did? Would not good Christians still have had care
of their brothers consciences? Can the determination of a superior be a
sufficient plea at the bar of Gods judgment seat, for a man that by virtue or
force thereof alone, has done any acti^n, that his conscience tells him,
will scandalize his brother.

Lastly, I would feign know whether those superiors do not give a great
scandal, which take upon them determinately to impose unnecessary rites, which
they know many good m^n will be scandalized by? Thus far Ames. But this
opinion of Ames, is I confess to be understood cum gravo salis, with many
limitations, which I shall lay down fully in the Tractate that next follows.

If the Prelates would have seriously laid to heart that golden saying of Paul
(1 Cor. 8.13. If meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh, while
the world stands, lest I make my brother to offend) This would supersede all
further dispute of this argument: for thence it is easy to evict, that it is
unlawful for Church governors to command the observation of things
indifferent, when in all probability they will scandalize: how dare they make
that the matter of a Church Canon, which Paul durst not adventure upon in his
own personal practice? He thought it unlawful to do a thing otherwise
indifferent, to eat flesh in the case of scandal; and therefore doubtless he
judged it unlawful in such a case to impose any such matter upon others:
Greater was the importance of the flesh forborne by Paul unto his health, and
the comfort of his life; then the profit of the controverted ceremonies can be
unto the worship and service of God: And besides, the indifferency of eating
flesh was a thing clear, and evident unto all, that were well instructed in
the Doctrine of Christian liberty; whereas the indifferency of our ceremonies
will at least be judged a very doubtful matter, and that by very indifferent
men, who shall thoroughly ponder the Arguments of Didoclave, Parker, Ames and
others against them, which to this day remain unanswered. The Prelates will
not pretend unto such an ample authority in the Church of God, as Paul had: But
though they be far inferior unto him in point of Authority, they are not yet
so humble, as to imitate him in the condescension of his charity. Paul's
peremptory resolve was to forbear a thing indifferent, wh^ it scandalized. If
meat make my brother to offend, I will (says he) eat no flesh, while the
world stands, least I make my brother to offend, 1 Cor. 8.13.

But what a wide difference, nay contrariety was there betwixt this charitable
resolution of Paul, and the rigid practice of the Prelates. For they were
obstinately bent to press the Ceremonies, with all severity, without any care,
or Conscience of the scandals ensuing: nay their endeavor was daily to add
unto the heap of former ceremonies, though they knew that thereby the scandals
would be increased: They spoke a language quite contrary to that of Paul: we
will enjoyne (say they) the surplice, cross, kneeling in the sacrament of the
Lords supper, while the world stands, as long as we have any power, and
authority in the Church of God, Let who will be offended: This their rigor
brings unto my mind a cruel command of Cum Augustus coenaret apud Vedium
Pollionem. Fregerat unus ex se^vis ejus cry stallinum: rapi eum Vedius jussit,
nec vulgari quidem periturum morte^ muraenis objici jubebatur, quas ingens
piscina cont^nebat. Q^^s non hoc illu^^ putaret luxuriae causa facere? saevitia
erat: evasit e manibus puer, and confugit ad Caesatis pedes: nihil aliud
petiturus, quam ut aliter periret, nec esca fieret. Motus est novitate
crudelitatis Caesar, and illum quidem mitti, crystallina autem omnia coram se
frangi jussit, complerique piscinam. Fuit Caesari sic castigand us amicus: been
usus est viribus suis. E convivio rapi homines imperas, and novi generis paenis
sancinari? si cali^ tuus fractus est, viscera hominis distrahentur* tantum tibi
placebis etc. Seneca de ira. Lib. 3.
Vedius Pollio, that was countermanded by Augustus Caesar supping with him: A
poor boy his slave had casually broken a Crystal glass, and for this Pollio
most inhumanely condemned him to be thrown into a great pond of Lampreys,
there to be devoured. The boy escaping from those appointed for his execution,
prostrated himself at the feet of Caesar, who then sup't with his master, and
desired not pardon, but only commutation of so horrid and unnatural a death:
Augustus was extremely transported with the strangeness and novelty of so
inhumane a cruelty, and hereupon to prevent the like for the future he
forthwith commanded all the Crystal glasses of Pollio, though his friend, to
be broken, and the fishpond to be filled up: for the breaking of a sorry glass
he thought it a disproportioned and too severe a punishment, to have a man's
bowels plucked in pieces, and torn asunder. This spirit of Vedius Pollio
breathed in many of our late Prelates; The Ceremonies in comparison of men's
souls were but as paltry trifles, as glasses, and feathers: and yet, by the
maintenance of them, they hazarded the souls of thousands (In as much as in
them lay) they destroyed the work of God, they destroyed those for whom Christ
died; they scandalize Papists, and separatists: people and Pastors:
conformists, and non-conformists, as Mr Parker at large demonstrates: Dr John
Burgess (as I have often heard) urged this story in a Sermon before King James
to persuade him unto the abolition of the Ceremonies: And King James had
doubtless expressed a Christian, and royal care of his people, if he had
broken these glasses in pieces: if he had cashered these toys out of the
Church, which had broken so many in their estates, wounded so many in their
consciences, and endangered the salvation of so many souls: and hereby have
prevented those unspeakable griefs, fears, and scandalls, which they formerly
occasioned.

I proceed unto the third and last conclusion, which is, that no deliberate
actions of men, which proceeds from deliberate reason, if they be considered in
actu exercito, in the singular or particular, as clothed with circumst ances,
are indifferent, but all of them are morally either good, or evil.

For the better understanding of this Conclusion, I shall out of Circumstantia
una aut altera actionis alicujus humanae potest esse indifferens, ut si
studiosus unus cum aliosermonem conferat, indifferens est, saepenumero, utrum
vernaculo utatursermone, an Latino: led sermo ipse, cum omnibus suis
circumstantiis, vel bonus est, vel malus. Ratio est, quia
determinatioactionisnon pendet ab una circumstantia seorsim, sed ab omnibus
conjunctim.

Datur actio aliqua singularis, in qua nulla bonitatis ratio reperitur, quae
inalia non possi^ inveniri: atque adeo quod hoc tempore, hoc vel illud potius
agimus quam aliud, in eo saepe nihil boni aut mali occurrit. Opportunitas, aut
animi suggestio, sine ullo respectu bonitatis moralis, satis h^bet ponderis ad
singula^em istam determinationem.

Quamvis igitur nulla singularis actio humana sit, quae neque est bona neque
mala, fiunt tamen variae, quae singulariter and in comparatione ad alias, neque
sunt necessariae, neque illicitae. Sicut enim statuarius certam rationem saepe
non habet, cur istam potius quam aliam statuam facit, si^a nen aliquam faciat,
necesse est, ut vel regulas artis sequendo bonam faciat, aut aberrando malam,
sic est in multis actionibus hominum singularibus, quae quoad exercitium nullam
habent rationem propriam, praeter inclinationem animi, sed cum exercentur vel
bonae sunt, vel malae. De cas. cons. Lib. 3. cap. 18.


Ames add two limitations of it.

1. Then; this conclusion is to be understood only of an adequate consideration
of the circumstances of singular actions, for not only one, but more
circumstances of a humane action in the individual may be indifferent: In a
conference of scholars it is many times indifferent, whether they discourse in
latin, or English, whether in the morning, or afternoon: But yet their whole
conference considered adequately with all circumstances is either good, or
evil; And the reason is because the determination of an action does not depend
upon one circumstance apart, but upon all jointly.

A second limitation of the conclusion is that it is not to be extended unto
every comparative consideration of humane actions and their circumstances: I
know, that not only actions indifferent, but also those that are commanded
become sometime to be sinful by comparison; when they are preferred to better
actions. God dislikes those recreations, that otherwise he allows, when they
justle out duties: nay he abhors sacrifice when it is inconsistent with
mercy: but notwithstanding this, when there is an equality, if not of actions
themselves, yet of their moral motives as to hic, and nunc this present time
and place, Then curiously to compare and balance such actions, were needless:
for in such a case, the prelation of one before the other, would be a thing
merely arbitrary, neither good nor bad: Reading, prayer, meditation are things
commanded: but many times that I set apart such an hour for reading
principally may be a thing indifferent: that I make choice of one Recreation
before another, of bowling before Chesse, draughts, etc. that I choose to walk
in the forenoon, rather then in the afternoon, may be of no moral
consideration, and so neither good, nor evil, but a matter of indifferency.
Look as an Image carver may have no peculiar reason to make this Image, rather
then that; yet if he make any Image at all; either he follows the rules of
his art, and then he makes a good Image, or he swarves from those rules, and
then he makes a bad image, and does not work like an Artist: So many times it
may be to a Christian, a marter merely indifferent to perform this or that
action, he may have no obligation to do either, or at least to do one rather
then the other, but may be left unto his own mind, and pleasure: but yet he is
as a Christian obliged to regard such circumstances in all his actions, and
therefore whatsoever he does, he does it either well, or ill; for either he
observes these circumstances, and then his action is good, or he neglects
them, and then it is bad.

The conclusion being thus explained may be made apparent from the end, and
rule of deliberate actions.

1. From their end, and what ought to be the end of all deliberate actions of
man may be evidenced from their relation unto their Original, from a
consideration of them absolutely as they are in themselves.

1. From their relation unto their Original, the rational soul, or the
soul, as rational, they flow from man, as man, they proceed from his
deliberate reason, and therefore, should have the same end, which man as
rational should propound, the glorifying of his maker; If they have not this
end, they are evil: and if they have this end, why then (if there be no
failing otherwise) they are good. This argument is by Quaerenda igitur sunt
firmiora praesidia, sententiae hu^ manos actusin^ differentes inficiantis. Unum
duco ex operatione humana prout est germen naturae rationalis. Hom^ enim ad
suas operationes habet se veluti a^ bor ad fructus ut optime ad^ vertit Antoni^
l. 9. de vita sua^ number. 8. and pu^ ch e Guliel. Pa^ lib. dev irrut. c^ 12.
initio: cu^ ea tamen diff^^rentia, ut scit^ notavit Anto^ us l. 11. number. quod
arboru^ and quarumvi^ plantarumfru^ us, alii percip^ unt: ipse hou^ fructus sui
percipit, nec alii, sed sibi ipsi laborat. Cum igitur operatio humana se habeat
ad (...) turam rationalem, sicut fructus and germen ejus, necesse est, ut idem
sit finis operationis ab hum^^na natura prodeuntis, and ipsius naturae
rationalis. Sic enim videmus, servata proportione, ac^ dear in omnibus aliis
naturis. Et ratio est, quia cum natura sit actus quidam primus, actio ve^ sit
actus ejus secundus, qui est ipsamet tendentia actus primi in objectum and
finem suum; nec^ sarium profecto videtur, ut idemmet sit finis ultimus actionis
and naturae actionem principia it is: sicut trunci and germinum and totius
a^boris, ac fructuum, idem est finis. Debet ergo hum^nae naturae and actionis
huma^^^ esse idem sinis. Atqui finis ultimus humanae naturae est De^ E^go sinis
quoque ultimus actionis nostrae debet esse Deus. Constat autem, actum indiffer^
tem, si daretur, non habiturum pro fine Deum: nam sic non esset indifferens,
led revera bon^ Ergo careret aliquo, quod habere deberet, nempe relatione illa
ad finem ultimum naturae hu^^^nae; ac proinde esset malus moraliter, non autem
indiff^tens. Moral. discipline: did 4 q 1 art. 2. n.
Raynaudus thus urged: man is related unto his operations, as a tree unto it is
fruits and branches: and therefore there is the same end of the humane
operations, and the humane nature, and the reason is, because that nature is
the first act, and it is operation the second act which is a tendencie of the
first act toward it is object, and end; and therefore it seems necessary, that
there should be the same uttermost end of the nature, and the operation; Even
as there is the same end of the tree, it is stock, branches, and fruits: But now
the uttermost end of the humane nature is God: and therefore God should be the
uttermost end of every humane action, and consequently no humane action can be
indifferent: for if it have not God for it is end, it is sinful: because it
wants that relation unto the uttermost end of the humane nature, which it ought
to have: and if it have God for it is end, then it is morally good, if it want
not any other essential requisite.

2. From a consideration of them Alterum sententiae nostrae firmamentum profero
ex ^ctu humano ^er seipsum considerato. Hoc est non ^uatenus est ^ermen
natu^ae, and quatenus ^undem cum a finem ul^mum habere ^bet, sed solitary,
perinde ac si non esset fructus illius naturae. Sic igitur argumentor. Actio
^mana vel ultimo refertur ad Deum, sive actu, sive virtualiter, and suapte
natura, quatenus est ra^ni conformis, and sic est bona: vel nullo modo in Deum
tend it: and sic eo ipso deflectit ab eo fine, ^que mala moraliter. Nam eo ipso
quod non fit ob finem increatum, nec in eum tendit sal^m virtualiter, sicut
faciunt omnes boni actus, sistit omnino in bono creato, est que ejus fruitio.
^rversum autem est, frui utendis, ut late tradit D. Augustinus 1. de Doct.
Christ. a cap. 3. etc. 21. 22. ostendens omnia bona creata debere tantum cadere
sub usum nostrum, sub fruitionem ^em non nisi Deum. Ergo Actus humani carentes
bono fine, vel intrinseco, vel extrinseco, sunt ^ipso depravati, carentque
aliquo quod habere deberent. Est enim in omni action creata, ^itum ut sit
fruitio fruendorum: id est, ut ultimo ad Deum tendat aliquo modo. Nam si non
^eret hoc ex debito, posset esse fruitio utendorum, nihilque idcirco haberet
indebitum. Quia ^ur actus humanus, qui dicitur fore prorsus indifferens, esset
fruitio puri boni creati, quod u^dum fuisset non fruendum; merito convincitur
non fuisse indifferens, sed oblitus coeno turpi^nis moralis, ob defectum
volitionis ad finem debitam. n. 38. loc. praedict.
absolutely as they are in themselves: Every humane rational action is
referred unto some chief end or other, and that must be, either the creature,
or the creator: If it be the creature, then the creature is most sinfully
enjoyed, as man's supreme end, and highest happiness: whereas it should be only
used, as a means: and hereby it is at least virtually, and interpretatively
idolized, deified, and placed in the room of God: If it be the Creator then
the action is good, unless it be in some other regard defective. And so you
see that unto whatsoever end it be referred, either created, or uncreated, it
cannot be indifferent.

For the further enforcement of this reason, I shall allege, and open some
few scriptures.

The first is Matthew. 12.36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give account thereof in the day of judgment. Three
things here merit our consideration. 1. What is meant by an idle word. 2. What
by giving account thereof: and 3dly, How this makes against the indifferency of
humane actions, considered in their singulars, and actual existence.

1. What is meant by an idle word: that which has no obliquity in it but this,
that it wants a good and honest end: That it is unprofitable, and unfruitful,
both unto speaker, and hearer: quod aut utilitate rectitudinis aut ratione
justae necessitatis caret, as Gregory, Homily. 6. As for those, who think, that
an idle word is extended unto every word, grossly wicked, false, lying,
blasphemous, the very context will disprove them: The occasion of our Saviors
discourse was that blasphemy of the Pharisees, verse. 24. But when the Pharisees
heard it, they said, this fellow does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub,
the prince of the Devils: Now our Saviors drift is to discover the
sinfulness; and danger of this blasphemous speech of theirs: And this he does,
as by several arguments, so particularly, in this verse, by arguing a minori
ad majus, from the less to the greater: As if he should have said: If in the
day of judgment ye shall give an account for every idle word, then much more
for such a blasphemous vomit as this of yours, That I cast out Devils by the
assistance of Beelzebub: That our Saviors Argument here stands thus Maldonate
tells us, all are of that opinion that he ever read. And for this coherence take
these two Reasons.

1. Our Savior proceeds in a way of aggravating the now mentioned Blasphemy:
But if by every idle word you understand every grossly wicked, and blasphemous
word, there will be little aggravation hereof: for to say that every wicked
lying, blasphemous word, that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof
in the day of judgment, falls very short of what was spoken already of this
blasphemy verse. 31.32. That it was a blasphemy against the Holy Ghost, and not
to be forgiven, either in this world, or in the world to come.

2. Compare we these words with those immediately foregoing verse. 35. A good
man out of the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things: and an
evil man out of the evil treasure, brings forth evil things: In the latter
part of these words, by evil things are understood such evil words as were
notoriously such, such as even the Pharisees acknowledged to be so; The Idle
words then in verse. 36. are distinguished from them, as may very probably be
gathered from the Antithesis insinuated in the particle [but] But I say unto
you every idle word, that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof in
the day of Judgment: It is apparent, that our Savior spoke of such words,
whose sinfulness seemed strange, and new unto such loose commentators on the
Law, as the Pharisees were: And it is very observable, that he ushereth in this
his commination against every idle word with the very same form of speech,
that he uses ( chapt. 5. verse. 12, 28, 31, 34, 39, 44.) In his correction of
their corrupt glosses upon the law of God. So then our Savior speaks of that,
which sounded as very harsh and rigid doctrine in the ears of the Pharisees:
But I say unto you that every idle word, that men shall speak they shall give
an account thereof in the day of Judgment: Notwithstanding your slighting
thoughts of your vain, and unprofitable discourse, I, who am the truth, and
know fully the mind of God, as being always in his bosom, do assure you,
that every idle word, which men shall speak, every word, which is not referred
unto a good end, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment.

2. Enquire we, what it is to give an account of every idle word in the day of
Judgment. The phrase sometimes signifies only trial, and examination, Luke
16.2. Heb. 13.17. But that here it imports condemnation, and punishment, Illa
verba dixit ad incutiendum hominibus timorem, and ex aggerandam severitatem
divini judiciitergo sen sus illorum verborum est ^^ta homines reddituros
rationem otiosi verbi, ut si nullam aliam excusationem, vel rationabilem causam
habeant, pro illo puniendi sunt alioquin verba Christi nullum fere pondus ^ut
energiam haberent, neque aliquem metum inferent, cum tamen illo singulari
exemplo vo^luerit Christus ostendere, quam sint g^aviter puniendi homines: pro
verbis pravioribus. De boni^tate and malit, humanorum actidisp. 9 Sect. 3.
Suarez proves from the scope of the words which was to terrify the Pharisees
for their blasphemy, and to deter others from the like, by displaying, and
amplifying the severity of Gods judgment against it: And unto this the
threatening of punishment and condemnation for every idle word is more
conducing, then a proposal of a bare trial and examination of every idle
word, which is agreeable unto the best words and works of men: because for them
they may give an account with joy, Heb. 13.17. In the words then, there is
plainly a Metalepsis, the Antecedent, to give an account in the day of Judgment
is put for the consequent to be punished in hellfire, Every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment: that is
they without repentance shall be condemned, and everlastingly punished for it:
And this acception of the phrase we find elsewhere, as 1 Pet. 4.5.

I pass on unto the third particular how this makes against the indifferency
of humane actions considered in their singular and actual existence: I
answer: because it concludes against the indifferency of any words of men; for
those words, which in the general, and in their own nature are indifferent:
yet as drawn into exercise, and putting on circumstances they are idle, if they
have no goodness adjoined unto them, by reference unto their due, and
requisite ends: And if they be idle they are sinful, and consequently not
indifferent: And what is said of idle words of men is applyable unto the idle
thoughts, and works of men: for the thought of man is a more rational act
then his speech, more an act of reason: And his rational works proceed from
his thoughts, and are of far greater moment and importance then his words:
and so in the upshot we may infer that if men's idle words are not
indifferent, then neither men's idle thoughts, and works: And the justness of
this inference, I shall confirm by two arguments.

1. Idle words are therefore sinful, because (being the birth and product of
reason, and the free will of man) there is not in them propounded an end
suitable unto the reasonable nature of man: Now all the vain thoughts, and
idle works of men are the issue of reason, and freedom of will: and therefore,
(because they are not referred unto such an honest end, as becomes the dignity
of such a rational creature, as man,) they are faulty and vicious.

2. Idle words are therefore morally evil: because in them, that precious
treasure, time, is wasted, in which a man may be more lavish, then in the most
prodigal mispence of money: But now our time is vainly consumed to no good
end, and purpose, in our idle thoughts, and works: and therefore they are
sinful, as well as our idle words: and consequently not indifferent.

A second place is, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether therefore ye eat, or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all unto the Glory of God: To eat, and to drink
abstractively considered, are indifferent actions, and yet such actions are
here commanded to be referred unto the glory of God: and therefore if they be
not thus referred, they are sinful: And we may say the same of all other
actions, that are in specie, in their own nature indifferent. Capreolus (lib.
2. did. 40. quaest 1. page 562.) notes, that these words of the Apostle [Let
all things be done unto the Glory of God] may be understood two manner of ways
negatively or affirmatively.

1. Negatively, and then the sense is, do nothing against Gods glory, nothing
that may dishonor him: Things offered unto idols were in themselves the good
creatures of God, and to eat them an action in it self indifferent, but to
eat them in the Idols Temple was to countenance Idolatry, and so a high
dishonouring of God, To eat them also with the scandal of a weak brother, was
to prejudice, and obstruct the glorifying of Gods name.

2dly, The words may be understood affirmatively, and so there is (as Capreolus
observes) a threefold reference unto the glory of God.

1. Habitual. 2. Actual. 3. Virtuall.
1. An habitual reference there is unto the glory of God, wheresoever there is
the habit, the grace, or virtue of the love of God, the principle of actually
referring all things unto the glory of God. But now this is not sufficient: for
the habit of love may (for a long time) lie idle, and un-active, and be
consistent with very gross sins: as we see in David, Peter, and others.

2. An action is actually referred unto Gods glory, when there is an actual
cogitation of God, and his glory: And this, (though it ought frequently to be
done) is not yet required in every action: well it may be our happiness in the
next life; But it can not be our duty in this; because it would leave no room,
or place for other duties: Thus for an Artist to be always thinking upon the
rules of his Art, would be a disturbance unto his work: for a traveller to
have perpetually in his thoughts, the end of his journey would retard his
progress therein.

In a third place therefore, the reference of all our actions unto Gods glory,
that is here exhorted to, is only virtuall. And that an action may virtually
be referred unto Gods glory three things are required. 1. The above mentioned
habitual reference unto Gods glory must be presupposed, as also. 2dly, A
foregoing actual reference of a man's self, and all that belongs unto him unto
the glory of God, and the more frequent this is, the better, and 3ly, The
Action it self. 1. Must not be referred unto any end opposite unto Gods glory.
2. It must be referred unto some end subordinate unto Gods glory, that carries
a tendency unto it, and is naturally referrible thereunto.

Now such an action is said to be virtually referred unto Gods glory, because
it is done in the virtue, and force of some preceding actual, and explicit
proposal of Gods glory as a supreme end: for the virtue, and force of the
chief, and utmost end abides in all inferior ends subordinated unto it; so
that he, who propounds unto himself those inferior ends, may be said to
propound implicitly, and mediately Gods glory for his uttermost end. Thus those
godly persons who have first actually made Gods honor and glory, the maine
aim of their desires, endeavors, and undertakings, may be said afterward to
refer even their eating, and drinking, their recreations unto Gods glory
virtually, if they aim at no dishonest end, though their explicit and
immediate intendment be only the refreshment of their bodies, by which they
are the better fitted, and prepared for the glorifying of God in both their
general, and particular callings. Thus every step in a man's journey, (so he
go not out of the way) may be said to be virtually designed unto the end of
his journey, and yet it is neither necessary, nor expedient, that in every step
a man should have actual thoughts of the end of his journey.

Unto this sentence of the Apostle here, Estius makes Parallel two other places.

The first, Col. 3.17. Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, that is; for his glory and honor, for his names sake.

The second is, 1 Pet. 4.11. If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles
of God: If any man minister, let him d^e it as of the ability, which God
gives, that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; Not only
in public ordinances, not only in acts of worship, not only in necessary
duties, but even in indifferencies, in all the common actions of this life.

But as for any further exposition of these two places in themselves, or
application unto the matter in hand, I shall refer the reader unto what I but
now spoke on the 1 Cor. 10.31. which with due change will serve here.

I shall therefore pass on unto a second argument taken from the rule of
humane actions, right reason: Unto this rule all rational actions, proceeding
from deliberate reason, are either agreeable, or disagreeable: If agreeable,
then they are morally good; for right reason is a part of Scripture materially
considered: If disagreeable, then they are vicious and sinful; For the will of
man is bound to look to it is rule, and conform all it is actions thereunto:
and therefore if in any thing it neglect, or thwart it, if it swarve therefrom
in the least particulars, it thereby commits a sin.

Unto these two arguments I shall add a third, drawn from the relation betwixt
m^rall goodness and illness: They are privatively opposite; and inter
privative opposita non datur medium in proprio subjecto susceptivo; betwixt
things privatively opposite there is no middle, either of abnegation, or
participation in capable subjects: Thus every sensitive creature either sees,
or is blind: but we cannot say of a stone, that it is blind, although it sees
not; because it is not capable of sight: Now moral goodness and illness are
privatively opposed, (the formality of sin being nothing else, but a
privation of that moral goodness, which is required unto every rational
action;) Now every rational action, Every action, that proceeds from
deliberate reason, and freedom of will, considered in its singulars, and as
drawn into exercise is capable of moral goodness; because it is referrible
unto a good end: and therefore it is either good, or evil, and so not
indifferent.

Against this there are diverse objections: unto those of Scotus the reader may
supply himself with answers out of what has been said already: As for the
arguments of Vasquez, there is but Prima ratio est desumpta ex eo, quod
Doctores prioris opinionis concedunt, esse nimirum actionem indifferentem ex
sea specie, and objecto, tametsi in individuo nulla maneat indifferens. Ratio
vero est hujusmodi. Nulla est natura in specie, quae non habeat aliquod
individuum in quo ratio ejus maneat, and non destruatur per contrariam: cum
igitur sit actio humana indifferens secundum suam naturam and speciem, habere
debet aliquod individuum ac proinde esse poterit aliqua actio individua, and
singularis, quae maneat indifferens. In 12ae tom. disp. 52. cap. 4. page 378.
one of them merit's any examination, and yet that has been also answered out
of Durand. (b)

In brief, it run's thus. As no Genus, no general nature can be without one
species, so no species, no special without one singular. No specificall nature
but has at least one individual: and therefore, if there be some humane
actions, that be in their species, in their specificall nature indifferent,
there must needs be an individual of such an action, that must be indifferent:
and consequently all humane actions considered in the individual are not
morally good, or evil.

This has been sufficiently answered already; but now I shall, ex abundanti,
add two things more.

The first is out of Hunc loquendi modum, fateor esse ca villo obnoxium;
impugnaturque ab Argentina in 2. d. 40. qu. unica. art. 2. in 2. particuli:
quia nulla potest esse species cujus non possit esse aliquid individuum. Ergo
si dantur actus secundum speciem indifferentes, debent quoque dari
indifferentes secundum individuum. Quod argumentum agendo de specie, and
individuo in sensu quotidiano, and vulgari, recte concludit, sed non contra
eos, qui admittunt actus secundum speciem indifferentes, negant autem dari
indifferentes in individuo. Nam hi Autores fatentur illos ipsos actus, quos
admittunt, esse secundum speciem indifferentes, habere queque indifferentiam
quoad gradum illorum specificum restrictum per individuationem. Tantum itaque
negant, eos actus, si spectentur cum omnibus sibi debitis accidentibus, esse
moraliter indifferentes. Et hoc appellant, actus non esse indifferentes
secundum individuum: nempe quia individuum, secluso rigore illo Metaphysico, in
quo tantum importat restrictionem gradus specifici, involvit congeriem omnium
horum accidentium, aut ut passim loquimur, conditionum individuantium, secundum
quam congeriem actus humanus non est indifferens, quatenus vel inter illa
accidentis est debitus finis extrinsecus, and sic actus est bonus. vel non est
debitus finis, and sic est malus, Mor. disc. distin. 4. qu. 1. art. 2. Number. 31.
Raynaudus: An humane action that considered specifically is indifferent, in
regard of object or matter may in it is individuals and singulars be looked upon
two manner of ways. 1. Inadequately only as touching matter, or object. 2.
Adequately in regard of all circumstances.

1. If an humane action be considered specifically indifferent as touching
matter or object, then all the individuals or singulars of that action are
indifferent too, not simply and absolutely, but secundum quid; that is only as
touching their object, and matter: But notwithstanding this, if we consider
them adequately in respect of all circumstances, they are either good, or
evil: for either they are clothed with all circumstances required in a
rational action, and then they are good: or else they want some, or one of
these circumstances, and then they are evil and sinful, for malum fit ex
quovis defectu.

The second is out of a modern Thomist; Respondeo, posse aliquid esse
indifferens dupliciter. 1. Quod Indifferentia fit de ejus essentia. 2. Quod
ipsi conveniat per accidens, and ab extrinseco. Si sit indifferens priori modo,
necesse in inferioribus salvari istam in. differentiam, quia tota essentia
superioris reperitur in inferiori, siquidem essentia consist it in
indivisibili: si sit indifferens posterio^i modo, non est necesse salvari
indifferentiam in inferiori: nam quae per accidens superiori convenient, sunt
ab ipso separabil^^^ ergo fine illis potest communicari inferiori. Si talia
accidentia repugnent inferiori. V. C. posse praedicari de multis numero
differentibus, convenit naturae humanae secundum speciem consideratae, sed per
accidens, and ab extrinseco, scilicet per operationem mentis eam abstrahentibus
a singularibus, and cum illis ipsam conferentis; talis autem operatio est mere
contingens tali naturae. Ex opposito, esse animal rationale convenit eidem
humanae naturae tanquam illius essentia. Ex quo fit, u^humana natura nequeat
communicari inferioribus, quin ipsis tribuat (...) animal rationale, sed non
ipsis communicate posse de multis numero praedicari, alioqui quodlibet
individuum esset species. Jam ut ad propositum veniam, Indifferentia actui
secundum speciem concessa non est ipsi essentialls, sed accidentalis per
abstractionem ab individuis: imo non est indifferentia moralis positiva: quasi
actus ille sit moralis, and indifferens: sed est moralis negativa, quatenus
actus ille non est moralis, sed caret ordine ad rationem morum regulam, ideoque
nec bonus est, nec malus moraliter. Unde patet non debere in ullo individuo
salvari talem indifferentiam, nisi forte in actibus indeliberatis, qui
similiter non sint morales; fed ipsi absunt a nostra quaestione. Ethic. cap. 3.
Sect. 2.
Irenaeus. A thing may be said to be indifferent two manner of ways. 1. When
indifferency is essential unto it. 2. When indifferency agrees unto it only
by accident, and extrinsecally, from something that is extraessentiall unto it:
If indifferency were essential unto an humane action, considered specifically,
then every singular, or individual thereof must be indifferent too; because
the essentials of every thing superior in point of predication are imparted,
and attributed unto every thing, that is under them in point of predication; as
every individual of the humane nature is a sensitive creature, a living body,
etc. But now indifferency is ascribed unto some humane actions (considered
specifically) only by accident, and extrinsecally, from the operation of our
understandings, abstracting, and devesting them from those circumstances good,
or bad, wherewith in their individualls they are apparel'd: and therefore
agrees not unto their individuals looked upon without such an abstraction.

By what has been said, Application.
you see that our most indifferent actions are liable unto sin; and therefore
afford matter of humiliation for the time past, matter of Caution for the
future.

1. Matter of humiliation for the time past: In their singular, and actual
existence they were morally either good or evil, sanctified or sinful; and
good they could not be, unless there did concur all requisites: And (alas,)
how seldom has there occurred in them such a concurrence? sometimes they have
risen from a wrong principle; other times they have been directed unto bad
ends: most times they have been faulty in regard of either measure, or manner:
It is very seldom, but there has been wanting in them some circumstance, or
other, that the word of God, or law of nature requires: And the total want of
one of the least of such circumstances will so vitiate indifferent actions, as
that it will not only render them sinful, but make them sins, meritorious
of all the flames, and torments in hell: and that which deserves so severe a
punishment, calls for a very eminent sorrow and contrition: God has set bounds
unto the use of our liberty in things indifferent, (as unto the waves of the
sea,) saying, thus far shall ye go, and no farther: He has commanded, that
it should be restrained by prudence, Temperance, conscience, Religion,
Authority, and charity; But we have transgressed these limits, and have
exceeded all bounds of moderation: We have used this part of our Christian
liberty very imprudently, and intemperately in regard of our selves;
irreligiously, and profanely in respect of God: against the dictates of our
conscience, a deputy under him; against the obligations of our oaths, and
vows unto him: disobediently against the lawful commands of our superiors:
uncharitably with the scandal of many poor brethren. And thus have we most
shamefully, and unthankfully abused this great privilege of Christianity, by
using it as an occasion unto the flesh, as a cloak of maliciousness; and so
have prostituted it unto the very service of Satan himself: When Job's Sons
and Daughters had feasted together, Job offered burnt offerings according unto
the number of them all: for he said, it may be that my sons have sinned, Job.
14.5. Their feasting was a thing indifferent, and very lawful in it self:
but, because it was obnoxious unto sin, therefore Jobe sacrificed in the
behalf of them all: It may be (says he) that my sons have sinned: The
possibility of sin in the indifferent things of others (especially such as
are nearly related:) stirs up in the godly a fear, and a holy jealousy of
them, and rowseth unto prayers for them: and therefore much more should the
certain, and undoubted assurance of the adhesion of sin unto our own
indifferent actions provoke us, with contrite hearts to deprecate the wrath of
God against us: All the indifferencies of unregenerate men are sins: Unto
them that are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, Tit. 1.15. the plowing
of the wicked is sin, Prove. 21.4. And however unto the pure all things are
pure. Tit. 1.15. that is, all indifferent things in themselves are lawful, yet
they may and do accidentally become sin, when they are not in all
particulars rightly circumstanced: And then they present us with fresh occasion
for the renewall of our repentance and faith in Christ Jesus: And how often
this happens, is a matter, that the most wakefull and quicksighted conscience
can hardly discern: so that the best of us may apply unto our indifferencies
that of David, Psalm. 19.12. Who can understand his errors: cleanse thou me
from secret faults.

Secondly, The liablenesse of our indifferent actions unto sin should be a
motive unto all possible caution and wariness for the future in them: There is
no humane action so indifferent, but it is capable of sin, nay (if it be not
in all particulars rightly circumstantiated,) it becomes actually sinful; and
therefore our hearts should be very watchful against sin in the use of all
indifferencies, in our meals, in our feastings, and merry meetings, in our
journey's, in our ordinary talk, and discourse, in our walks, in the actions
of our ordinary vocations: Indeed the rule of Gods word does not at all either
command, or forbid the matter of such actions: but the manner of performing
them comes under the rule: They are all to be done to the glory of God, in
the name of Christ: every good creature is to be sanctified by the word, and
prayer: That Command, which God gave Abraham (to walk before him) is not to be
straightened unto the ordinances of God, but to be extended unto all deliberate
acts of a man's life, and conversation, Genesis 17.1. Zechariah (in his prophecy of
the general call or conversion of Jews, and Gentiles) gives this for one
character of such, as shall be converted, that they shall have a sacred and
sanctified use of things common and indifferent: In that day shall there be
upon the bells of their horses, holiness unto the Lord, yea, every pot in
Jerusalem and Judah shall be holiness unto the Lord of Hosts, Zech. 14.20, 21.
Not only acts of immediate worship, but all rational actions, whatsoever,
should be offered up as spiritual sacrifices acceptable unto God by Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. The Apostle exhorts the Romans to salute one another with
an holy kiss, Romans 16.16. this kiss was no religious rite in Gods worship,
but a ceremony of civility; and therefore in it self a thing indifferent: And
yet the Apostle requires holiness for the qualification of it: All our civil
actions ought to be such, as becomes saints; that is, so far forth holy for
manner, that they be free from sin, and unto the glory of God: Indeed this is
a strictness impossible unto lapsed man: But though we cannot exactly and
perfectly observe it, yet we may sincerely and cordially endeavor it: And this
sincere and hearty endeavor is that, which God, for Christ's sake, will
accept, reward, and crown; and therefore it concerns us very much to use our
utmost diligence herein: and the rather, because we are (by far) more prone
and ready to slide into sin in things indifferent ere we are aware, then in
such things, as are for their nature, and matter sinful; for in such things
the danger is more apparent, and therefore the more feared, and watched against;
Whereas, if once we know, and are persuaded, that actions are indifferent, and
lawful, then we are apt to think that all is safe, and that we need not
trouble our selves with any farther considerations touching their expediency,
and edification; and tha^ there is no reason to perplex our hearts and
conscience with an anxious care of referring them to Gods glory, of walking
before God in them, and of putting holiness unto the Lord upon them. Now when
once such thoughts as these creep into men's heads, it cannot be imagined, unto
what excesses, and failings it exposes them: Add unto this: that look as the
consideration of the lawfulness, and indifferency of actions occasioneth a
surprizall many times with heinous sins: so also it proves (by accident) an
obstacle unto repentance for such sins: When the Godly fall into gross, and
acknowledged sins, either of omission, or commission; why, the checks of
their own consciences, the public ministry, the reproaches of enemies, and
the admonition of Christian friends will soon awaken them, and inform them of
their guilt: But as for the sins, that adhere unto their indifferencies, how
quickly are they hardened in them? For it is very seldom, that, either their
consciences, or their ministers, or their Brethren take notice of them; or if
they do, they are apt presently to hold forth the indifferency, and
lawfulness of such actions in themselves, as a buckler to ward off all
accusations of Conscience, all upbraidings of enemies, all reprehensions, of
either ministers, or private friends: Those, that are most lavish of their
time, and purses, in gaming, will plead; that they follow none, but lawful
sports: A Gentleman, that murders the greatest part of his time in hunting,
hawking, and the like exercises, and redeems but an inconsiderable portion of
it to do God, and his Country service, thinks, that he has enough to stopp
the mouth of all reproof, to say, that the recreations, which he pursues are
things indifferent: such riotous persons, as wast their precious hours in
joviallity, and goodfellowship, usually make this Apology for themselves: that
it is not unlawful to drink with a friend in a Tavern or alehouse. To awaken
from this licentiousness, and to quicken in us a careful watchfulness over
our hearts in the use of things indifferent, I shall, for conclusion of this
discourse, propound some examples of the severity of Gods judgments against the
sins of men's indifferencies: David's numbering of the people was a thing not
evil in it self; but his curiosity, pride, and carnal confidence in an arm
of flesh made it so; And God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote
Israel, 1 Chronicles. 21.7. with a pestilence, that devoured 70000. Doubtless most
of those feminine ornaments (mentioned, Esaias 3.) were in themselves lawful;
but the haughtiness, and wantonness of the daughters of Zion abused them unto
sin; And how severely this sinful abuse of them was threatened, you may read
at large from verse the 16 usque ad 25: for Hezekiah to show unto the
Babylonian Ambassadors the house of his precious things, the silver, and the
gold and the spices, and the precious ointment, and all the house of his
armor, and all that was found in his treasures, all that was remarkable in his
house, and dominion was in it self, but a civil entertainment, and not
unlawful: but because he did it out of vain ostentation, this turned it into
sin, and this was one of the sins, which God chastised with the captivity of
the whole nation, Esaias 39 2 Chronicles. 32. 2 Kings 30. To be clothed in Purple,
and fine linen, and to fare sumptuously were things in themselves indifferent;
but the excess of the rich glutton made it sinful unto him: and this sin,
not being repented of, was unto him a forerunner of hell torments, Luke 16.19,
23. They were the sins of things indifferent that had a great hand in, and
influence upon the drowning of the old world, and the burning of Sodom, Luke
17. verse. 27, 28, 29. In the days of Noah, they did eat, they drank, they
married wives, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered
into the arc; and the flood came and destroyed them all. Likewise also as it
was in the days of Lot, they did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold,
they planted, they builded: But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it
rained fire and brimstone from Heaven, and destroyed them all.

FINIS.
A TREATISE Concerning ABSTINENCE From all appearance of EVIL, In Doctrine and
in matters of practice, and that both unto our selves and unto others. WHEREIN
Diverse Questions and Cases of Conscience belonging unto the difficult matter
of scandal are briefly resolved.

By HENRY JEANES Minister of Gods word at Chedzoy in Somerset.

Bernard: ad Eugenium de Consideratione. Lib. 3. cap. 4. Sane interest tuae
perfectionis, and malas res, and malas pariter species devitare. In altero
Conscientiae, in altero famae Consulis. Puta tibi non licere (etsi alias
fortasse liceat) quicquid male fuerit coloratum.

OXFORD, Printed by Hen: Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY for Tho: Robinson, 1660.

TO THOMAS MOORE of Hauck-Church in Dorset-shire. ROBERT HUNT of Compton
Paines-Ford in Somerset-sh.
Esquires.
IT is unto your Mediation that I owe in great part that leisure, and liberty,
which I had for the compiling of this Book, and this has given you such an
interest both in it, and in me, as that it would be a high piece of injustice,
if no part of it should wear your Livery. This account that I have given,
touching the reason of my prefixing your names unto this work, may induce such
Readers, who shall reap any Benefit thereby, to Concur in their hearty
prayers, for the pouring down of Gods Blessings, Spiritual and Temporal,
Upon your Persons and Families with the poor Author, who shall ever rest

Your most truly devoted Servant HENRY JEANES.

1 These: 5.22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.


OUr Apostle directs us, in the verse immediately preceding this Text,
concerning Good; in this Text concerning Evil. Toward Good he exacts a
prudent warin^sse; toward Evil a scrupulous fearfulness. Toward good, a
prudent wariness, Prove all things, and then, hold fast that which is good.
Nothing, how colorable soever, is to be received hand over head, before trial
and examination by the balance of the Sanctuary: for, Vitia virtutes
mentiuntur (says Gregory) vice is maskt under the skin of virtue; falsehood,
disguised under the face of truth: so that one is often mistaken for the other.
The grossest enormities have been glast and colored over with the name, and
face of virtues: the most poisonous heresies have often gained the esteem and
applause of Orthodox Tenents^ and therefore as we must steadfastly retain that
which is truly true and good; so must we prudently discern, and carefully
distinguish between that which is so indeed, and in truth, and that which is so
only in show, and color; this we must reject, that keep, and hold fast: Prove
all things, hold fast that which is good. But he requires now toward evil a
far different carriage: there he looks for a scrupulous fearfulness. Though
we must not hold fast any thing that has but the appearance of good, yet we
must abstain from but the appearance of evil.

Abstain from all appearance of evil: or from every evil appearance: the
Words may be rendered indifferently, either way, both rendrings being equally
consonant to the truth, and Original.

In the words our Apostle meets with a cavil, rife among the Libertines of
our, and former times, who when their scandalous courses are charged upon the^,
baffle of all with this plea: that they are not intrinsecally sinful. Could I
(will the profanest Libertine say) once see such and such things proved to be
unlawful: why I would make no more words of the matter, but soon forbear
them. I, but have they the blush, the appearance of evil? that should be
motive enough to shun them.

Abstain from all etc. But are we sure this is the Apostles meaning? are not
the words capable of another interpretation? First, some mislike our
translation of (...), species, by appearance, and rather think it should be
meant logically, for sort, or kind. That it may be so, Mat. Flac. Illyricus and
Beza determine, That it is so the Syriack. Interpreter, and after him Faber,
and after them our own great and learned See his Annotations.
Doctor Hammond resolve. But I would feign know upon what ground they are thus
singular against the Current both of Ancient and Modern Expositors. Setting
aside this place the word occurres (as I think) in the whole new Testament but
four times, In Luke 3.22. and 9.29. John 5.37. 2 Cor. 5.7. And in none of
these places is it, can it be taken in a Logical notion. If not elsewhere, why
here? especially seeing such an acception is not enforced by the scope,
coherence, any other circumstance of the Text, or any absurdity otherwise
unavoidable.

But some dream of a foul absurdity, that would ensue upon translating (...)
species, appearance. If every appearance of evil should be abstained from,
then should good things, the best things be eschewed, for they commonly appear
to be evil unto sense, and carnal reason, that discern not the things of the
spirit of God. How easily may an acute wit set false faces upon them and work
a bad conceit of them into either weak or ill appre' hensions.

Unto this we may add that of Dr Hammond in his treatise of scandal. page
9.10. Appearance of evil (says he) is so uncertain and unconstant a thing,
that to abstain from it, universim, cannot be the matter of any possible
Command. This fear will quickly vanish and be discovered to be idle, and
vain, when anon we shall explain that distinction of appearance of evil,
into real, and imaginary: for the present therefore, leaving these men,
proceed we, secondly, to others, who agree with us in interpreting (...), in a
vulgar, familiar, and common sense, for appearance: but then their exposition
is not so general, as ours: for they restrain the place to matters of
Doctrine, and will not allow it to be extended to matters of practice: and
countenance, they think, the context gives their gloss: for the Apostle having
at the 19 verse exhorted not to quench the spirit, in verse 20. prescribes a
means for cherishing the spirit, viz: a reverent demean our toward the word
of God. If ye will not quench the spirit, despise not prophesying. And next,
lest that some should except: are we thus reverently to receive promiscuously
all prophesyings, and doctrines preached unto us, and not to beware of some, of
false prophesyings and doctrines? the Apostle, (say they) more distinctly
directs, how we should demean our selves. First, toward all prophesyings in
general: how, secondly, toward true: how, 3dly, toward false. First, all
prophesyings, and doctrines whatsoever must be diligently examined, Prove all
things. Secondly, all true prophesyings, sound, and orthodox doctrines are to
be embraced, with a firm, and unremoveable assent, Hold fast that which is
good. Lastly, as for false prophesyings and doctrines even their very
appearance is to be shunned. Thus they etc.

But first, I propose unto the consideration of the learned, whether or no an
exact and acurate coherence be to be looked for in most of those precepts,
delivered by the Apostle, from verse. 13. usque ad verse. 23. The loose and
abrupt manner of heaping them together persuade (me thinks) that there is as
little dependence of many of them upon either the foregoing, or following
precepts, as is to be expected between Solomon's Proverbs, or Bede's Axioms.
Hence is it that Neque necesse est hanc partem interpretari (ut quldam faciunt)
ut connexionem habeat eum iis, quae proxime praecedunt: nam potius videtur
Apostolus refricare memoriam ejus, quod praecipit cap^ superiori: ut honesti
ambulent, ad ecs, qui foris sunt, etc. Estius.
Estius holds it not necessary to interpret the place so, as that it should
have conne^cion with those duties that immediately precede: rather (thinks he)
the Apostle seems to rub up the memory of what he commanded in the former
chapter, at verse the 12. That ye may walk honestly toward them that are
without.

Secondly, Suppose a coherence of the words with the former, must it needs be
that which they obtrude? The words may sit under our interpretation, and yet
the Analysis of the Context run smoothly, as thus:

The Apostle having at verse 19. dehorted from quenching the spirit, next
advises use of means tending to the preservation of its gracious and glorious
residence in the soul: which means are either negative or positive: he
assigns but one negative means, viz: a removal of a maine bar and powerful
obstacle unto the presence of the spirit, contempt of preaching, Despise not
prophesying, verse. 20. of the positive means, two concern good, one evil: the
two concerning good, are boni diligens examinatio, constans electio: Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good. This respecting evil, est
universalissima ejus rejectio, an abstinence not only from all kinds, but even
from all appearance of evil.

Lastly, suppose the primary scope and intention of the Apostle be limited unto
matters of doctrine: yet because the maine reason, for which they themselves
conceive appearances of evil, even in matters of doctrine to be interdicted,
is avoidance of scandal, the precept of which is juris naturalis, and not only
doctrines but also actions are scandalous: justly therefore unto these, as well
as those, is the text appliable, and applied too, by all Schoolmen, or others
that ever I met with purposely treating on the point of scandal. Should we
then against the more generally received opinion of either former or later
times, admit of their narrow and curtaild interpretation for the clear, and
indubitate sense of the Apostle? Yet to make the words more instructive, their
use more general, we might warrantably put an enlargment upon them, and extend
them ad mores, as well as ad dogmata: ad agenda, as well as ad credenda: to the
decalogue, as well as creed; not only to doctrinall truths, but moral duties
also.

Use of a division here is none, but to bewray Logic: and therefore without
more ado we will roundly betake our selves to Limitation, Confirmation, and
Application of the plain point here commended to us: we are to abstain not
only from things intrinsecally sinful, but from all shows and appearances of
sin.

For Limitation, appearance of evil is either in positions or actions.

First then? it is questioned whether or no we are to abstain from all
positions, which have an appearance of evil: of falsehood.

For resolution we must distinguish, 1. Concerning appearance of evil in
positions. 2. Concerning abstinence from such an appearance.


Appearance of evil in Positions is twofold: 1. Either in regard of their
matter and substance. 2. Or else in the terms, and expressions used in their
proposal. That which is in regard of their matter and substance, is, either to
our selves or others.


Secondly, to distinguish concerning abstinence from the appearance of evil,
or falsehood in Positions: we may be said to abstain from doctrines false in
appearance, two manner of ways; either 1. When we abstain from assenting to
them. 2. Or when we abstain from publishing of them.


We abstain from assenting to them either positively, or negatively.

Positively, when by a positive, or real act of the understanding we dissent
from, we reject them. Now dissent from them is twofold, 1 Either absolute and
peremptory, 2. Or else but conditional, and cautionary.


Negatively, when we do not dissent from them, but only not assent unto them:
when we suspend our assent.

To apply these distinctions.

Note first, that though the substance or matter of Doctrines appear to be
false unto our selves, our own judgments, yet are we not bound to abstain
positively from assenting to them, to dissent from them, to reject them; for
this appearance may not be true and real, grounded upon the doctrines
themselves, which perhaps may not send forth the least color or shadow for
suspicion, but only put and fastened upon them by means of the error,
ignorance, and darkness of our understandings, that perhaps not with due care
and circumspection, but rather with much precipitancy have given their censure
of them: and therefore however at first blush they seem false, yet when once
the light of our reason is cleared from mists, and clouds, they may upon due
examination prove true: and to dissent from, and reject a truth would be a
foul error of, and blemish to our understanding. Obliged we are then, to
abstain, not positively but negatively from assenting to them: that is, not to
dissent from them, but only not to assent unto them, to stay our assent, to
demurre a while, before we give in our judgment, lest we receive any thing with
a doubtful, entangled, and perplexed Conscience.

Of this Calvin gives us an hint in his exposition on this place, Speciem mali
interpretor, cum nondum it a comperta est doctrinae falsitas, ut merito rejici
queat, sed tamen aliqua haeret sinistra suspicio, and timetur, ne quid veneni
lateat: ergo ab eo genere doctrinae, quod malum, etiamsi non sit, apparet,
abstinere praecipit, non quod in totum rejici permittat, sed quia recipi, aut
fidem obtinere non debet. Cur enim prius quod bonum est teneri jussit, nunc
abstinere vult, n^n simpliciter a malo, sed a mali specie? quia ubi
dijudicatione in lucem producta fuerit veritas, tunc demum ei fidem haberi
decet: ubi autem subest falsi metus, aut men's dubitatione est implicita, p^dem
refer, vel gradum suspendere convenit, ne quid dubia perplex aque conscientia
amplectamur. By the appearance of evil I understand (says he) when as the
falsehood of a doctrine is not yet so thoroughly detected, that it may be
deservedly rejected, but yet there sticks some bad suspicion of it, and it is
feared, lest poison lurk under it: therefore he commands us to abstain from
that kind of doctrine, which though it be not evil, yet appears so: not as
though it ought altogether to be rejected, but because it ought not to be
received, to be believed. For why does he before command us to hold fast only
that which is good, and here he wills us to abstain not barely from evil, but
from its appea^ance? Because when after a thorough sifting a truth is cleared,
it is fitting it should forthwith be believed: but when as the falsehood of it is
feared, or the mind with doubting is entangled, we must for a while withdraw
our assent, lest we embrace any thing with a doubting, and perplexed conscience.

But suppose I for mine own part am firmly persuaded of the truth of such, or
such a Tenet, or at least unconvinced, unperswaded of it is falsehood, and yet it
appear generally unto others to be false unto the judgments of the godly
learned, of most of the ancient Fathers, unto either general or provincial
Councils: in such a case, what course must I take, because it has appearance
of falsehood unto others understandings, must I therefore dissent from it, or
stop mine assent unto it?

For answer, take these four following rules.

First, we owe so reverend and humble an esteem of, and submission unto the
Spirits of the Prophets, to the judgment of learned, sober, and pious Divines,
unto the writings of the ancient godly Fathers, unto the Canons, and decrees of
Oecumenicall, and Provincial Councils, as that whatsoever Tenants the whole
Church representative, to wit, a general Council, or the greatest and
chiefest part of the Church most of the Fathers and Divines too, of later and
present times, have rejected and condemned for false, and erroneous, we should
abstain negatively from assenting to, that is, though not change, yet suspend
our belief of them, and not fully pass over our full and absolute assent unto
them, until by diligent inquisition, servent prayer, imploring the guidance of
Gods holy spirit, and use of all other good means, either their consonancy
with, or dissonancy from the truth, be clearly discerned, fully confirmed, and
manifested unto our Consciences.

But Christian modesty stays not here, but goes one step further, and in a
second exacts of us a conditional, probable, and Dr Jackson.
cautionary dissent from all doctrines thus generally suspected, and censured:
for upon general dislike of a doctrine, as upon a prudentiall motive, we may
ground a strong presumption, an high and probable conjecture of the falsehood of
it: so that hereupon we may reject it, though not in an absolute and
irrevocable way, yet with this limitation and caution: so the apparent verity
therein of it self do not force us to embrace it. So sottish I am not, as to
measure truth by multitude of voices: for errors I know that have grated upon
the foundation, nay heresies, that have raised the foundation, have had their
cloud of witnesses: yet I should so far honor a public testimony, as to
suspect mine own, and others private bare opinions, not backed by plain
scripture, with evident sense, or a full demonstrative argument, rather than a
general suffrage: for, nemo omnes, neminem omnes, fefellere, Pliny.
improbable as for one to deceive all, so for all to deceive one, River Nee
dubitamus caeteris quidem paribus, majorem and pleniorem mensuram communicari
publicis Ecclesiae administris five in una aliqua pa^ticulari Ecclesia munus
suum obeant; five in coe^u aliquo legitime and in Christinomine congregati de
vero scriptutae sensu inter se confe. rant quam sin gulis and privatis qui
neque tot donis instructi sunt, neque tot oculis vident, neque privata and
simplici meditatione aequare possunt multorum collationem and disquisitionem.
Isag. ad Scrip* Sac. cap. 19. Page: 272.
makes no doubt, but caeteris paribus, that is, if parts, prayer, diligence of
study after the truth, be equal, that then a greater and fuller measure of the
gift of expounding the Scripture, and deciding controversies thereabouts, is
communicated to the public ministers of the Church, (whether they execute
their function severally, and apart in some one particular Church, or else
jointly confer and discourse among themselves concerning the true and genuine
sense of the Scriptures in some assemblies called lawfully, and in the name of
Christ) than unto several private men, who are neither endowed with so many
gifts, nor see with so many eyes, nor by their private and single meditation
can equal the united consultations and enquiries after truth of many. And thus
you see how far Christian modesty requires us to abstain from assenting to
doctrines upon the appearance of evil, or falsehood, which they carry unto
those, who in interpeting scripture, and deciding controversies, have committed
to them the public office of direction and instruction of others: but yet it
takes not from us the judgment of private discretion; for Christian liberty
allows us such a freedom of dissenting from, or assenting unto, what the
Church, and her ministers say, as is to be specified in the next two following
rules.

In a third place therefore, although the Church, or the greatest and chiefest
part of her, charge error and falsehood upon such a doctrine, yet this bare and
single testimony, not seconded by any scripture or reason, is not to gain so
far upon our belief, as that thereupon we should presently reject, and
dissent from the doctrine thus generally censured with an absolute and
peremptory dissent. This were to give unto the Churches decisions as high and
overruling a suffrage in our hearts, as is only due to divine revelations to
receive them, not as they are indeed the word of men, but as if they were the
word of God: to yield unto them an absolute divine faith, and credence. This
were a mere Vassallage of our souls, understandings, faiths, unto the
authority of an humane testimony: a thing utterly unworthy the generosity and
freedom of Christian Spirits. If God has indulged to any the exercise of such
dominion over men's faiths, and consciences: alas! then to what purpose has he
placed that glorious lamp of reason in our bosoms? of what use are our
intellectualls? What place is there left for St Paul's proving of all things? St
John's trial of the Spirits? but the truth is, 1 John 4.1.
that God is so far from enslaving our understandings, or captivating our
belief unto the judgment of any mortal, as that he approves not only of a
forbearance from a flat, and absolute dissent from doubtful doctrines thus
publicly, and generally disliked, but also of a full and peremptory assent
unto doctrines manifestly true, though condemned in a general Council, as is
apparent from the fourth and last rule, which is:

If a doctrine be, as true in it self, so also clearly, and evidently by me
apprehended to be so, and yet appear generally to be false unto others, of
what degree, order, or condition soever; nevertheless it Commands absolute
subscription, and assent of the mind without contradiction, without hesitancy,
nay without so much as suspense of judgment. If the verity then of a doctrine
be apparent, it must overruled the assent of the understanding against the
testimony of the whole world. For the testimony of men, of the wisest, holiest
men, considered either apart, or assembled in a council, admits, as allwaies
of examination, and trial by the balance of the Sanctuary, and rules of right
reason, so likewise of contradiction and denial, when in it there is an
express, and evident variation from either reason, or divine authority. In
such a cause we may lawfully, and safely dissent from it; allwaies provided,
that it be not in an insolent manner, but with a reverend, child-like, and
respectfull bashfulnesse.

But to go on, if I am not to abstain from assenting to a doctrine manifestly
true, because it appears generally to others to be false, must I not yet
abstain from publishing, from spreading of it, either by writing or preaching?

For answer, thou must consider the general nature and quality of the
doctrine, thus wrongly either accused, or suspected of falsehood, and also of
what use, and importance it is in regard of the present times, and places,
wherein thou live, and if it prove to be a doctrine either fundamental, or
at least of such weight and moment that from the publishing of it, will spring
a greater good, more glory to God, and benefits to the Church then the trouble
and disquiet it brings can be an evil, thou art then at no hand to conceal
it, so should thou be unfaithful both to God and his Church, and become
accessory to the betraying, nay murder of the truth. Si de veritate scandalum
sumatur (says Gregory) melius est ut scandalum oriatur, quam ut veritas
relinquatur. If scandal or offense be taken at a truth which the estate and
exigence of those souls committed to a man's charge requires him to publish,
better suffer the whole world to be scandalized, than such a truth
disadvantaged, either by denial, or but a cowardly smothering, and
dissembling, thereof. Quemadmodum enim (says Calvin) Charitati subjicienda est
nostra libertas, Call. lib. 3. Just. c. 12. Sect. 13.
ita sub fidei puritate subsidere vicissim charitas ipsa debet: As our liberty
is to be subjected to charity, so also our Charity it self to faith's purity.

But now if it be a doctrine, either not fundamental, but of a lower rank and
quality, wherein both orthodox writers, and preachers may vary and abound in
their own sense, without prejudice to the foundation: or if it be of so small
use, that upon its divulgement, it is not probable there will arise so much
honor to God, and edification of the Church, as may preponderate those
mischiefs, that hurly-burly, those tumults, and contentions in the Church,
which in all likelihood will ensue thereby, thou must then forbear to vent it,
either from press, or pulpit; so shall thou best consult for thine own private
quiet, and public peace. And we must follow after things that make for peace,
and edification: Romans 14.19. About such matters to be contentious, we have no
custom, nor the Churches of God: and indeed about them to be contentious were
the right pranke of a Schismatic: for not only he is a Schismatic (says Non
enim Schismaticus eo agnoscitur, quod fovet perversum dogma, i no conting it
aliquando, ut sententia schismatici hominis verissima sit, tamen quia eam neque
loco neque tempore debitis, nullaque necessitate urget, Schismaticus est, and
scandalum objecit Dei popu^o^cum enim non agatur salus Ecclesiae, ostendit se
non adductum studio gloriae Christi, sed suae potiu; existimationis Ecclesiam
turbasse. Cameron in selectiora quaedam N. T. loca. Tom. 2. in Mat. c. 18. v. 7.
Cameron) who maintains a perverse Tenet: a man may hold a very true opinion,
and yet play the Schismatic, and give scandal unto the people of God by
delivering it in a rash, unpeaceable, and unseasonable manner, neither in fit
place, nor due time, no necessity urging thereunto* for seeing in determining
of his opinion the glory of God, and weal of the Church lie not at the stake,
he plainly shows, that he has troubled the Church, lead with desire of not
Christ's glory, but his own Credit. I confess indeed, that a controverted, and
suspected truth even of this low quality may be peaceably, and modesty
professed, and debated too in private, but a public promulgation thereof is at
any hand to be forborne, non sub intuitu mali, sed minoris b^ni, not under the
apprehension of any evil in the truth, but only as a lesser good, which will
not consist with a greater, the tranquillity of the Church; or if you will, the
public promulgation of such a truth is to be forborne, sub intuitu mali, etsi
non simpliciter, tamen per accidens talis: under the apprehension of evil, not
in the controverted truth, but in the promulgation thereof, which though it be
not simply evil, yet becomes accidentally so, to wit, by comparison, in
respect of a greater good then required, preservation of the general quiet;
with which for the present it cannot stand, unto the care of which it is
opposed, though not primo and per se, yet ex consequenti connexione virtutum,
as Suarez upon another occasion phraseth it. But I digress.

To go on to that appearance of evil in doctrines, which is in the
expressions used in their proposal, a thing I could wish it were not to rife
amongst many, who like no truth, unless delivered in heretical terms; men
wonderfully taken with the language of Ashdod, the Romish dialect. But let it
be our care to refrain all words, and phrases, which carry an appearance of
either heresy or schism; for though they may, and are by us meant in an
orthodox sense, yet carry they a shrewd show of evil, make others jealous, and
suspicious of our soundness, and therefore In rebus fidei verba debent esse
casta, and exacta. and quae rem ipsam proprie exprimant, and haereticis non
praestent occasionem calumniandi. Pet. Martinez, lib. 12. de locis cap. 9. ad
tertium.
Canus although he will by no means assent, absolutely to that usual saying;
ex verbis inordinate prelatis fit haeresis: yet he is content to approve of it,
if it be moderated with this caution, secundum praesumptionem audientium, and
judicum, qui per exteriora signa debent judicare de haeresi: if it be
understood according to the supposall of hearers, and judges, who ought and
indeed can judge of heresy only by outward signs. Between a minister and
Popery let there be a great Chasma, a distance as wide as between heaven, and
earth, nay heaven, and hell: yet if his phrase do but smell of Popery, if his
words, though not his meaning, trench near upon it, men will presently exclaim
that he has a Pope in his belly, at least that he sounds for a Parley, and
thinks upon conditions of peace with the Romish harlot. And besides as this
suspicious complying in phrase, and language with the known errors of
Popelings, or other novellers, and corrupt teachers grieves the settled and
judicious, so farther it staggers weaklings, confirms and hardens aliens, and
Apostates: rather opens than stops the mouths of gainsaying carpers, and
sooner disadvantageth the truth, than converts an adversary. So far is it
from effecting the usually pretended end, reconciliation; as that to use the
similitude of our Savior, Mat. chapter 9. v. 16. like the putting of a new piece
of cloth unto an old garment, it makes the rent worse, and wider. There goes
a manuscript from hand to hand, said to be penned by a learned Dr Sanderson.
Doctor of this Church, wherein (that amidst notwithstanding all the variety of
opinions there may be yet preserved in the Church the unity both of faith, and
charity) private men are advised in their own writings to observe formam,
sanorum verborum, and to abstain not only from suspected opinions, but as
much as may be also from phrases and speeches obnoxious to misconstruction and
exception.

For first, it is not enough, much less a thing to be gloried in, for a man to
be able by subtilty of wit, to find loop-holes, how to evade, and by colorable
pretenses, to make that, which through heat of passion, or violence of
opposition has fallen from him unadvisedly, to seem bowsoever defensible. But
he should have a care to suffer nothing to pass from him, whereat an ingenious
and dispassionate adversary (though dissenting from him in opinion,) might yet
have cause to take distaste, or exception.

And besides, it were a thing of dangerous consequence in the Church, if every
man should be suffered to publish freely whatsoever might by some strain of
wit be made capable of a good construction, if of it self it sounded ill, or
suspiciously. For so many erroneous, unhappy notions implicitly and virtually
serving to the patronage and protection of Schism or heresy, might be
cunningly conveyed into the minds of men, and impressions thereof insensibly
wrought in their hearts, to the great damage and distraction of the Church.

This last reason for the substance you may meet with in Aquinas 2. 2 dae. q.
11. a. 2. where (having told us out of Hierome, ex verbis inordinate prolatis
fit haeresis: that by unwary irregular expressions, by words disorderly spoken,
the most dangerous heresies have often taken their first rise, and original)
he afterward gives us the reason hereof: Similiter enim per verba quae quis
loquitur, suam fidem profitetur: est enim confessio actus fidei: and ideo si
sit inordinata locutio circaea quae sunt fid^i, sequi potest ex hoc corrupti^
fidei: Vnde Leo Papa quadam Epistola ad Proterium Episcopum Alexandrinum dicit,
quod inimici crucis Christi, omnibus and verbis nostris insidiantur and
syllabis, si ullam illis vel tenuem occasionem demus, qua Nestoriano sensui nos
congruere mentiantur. Likewise a man professes his faith by words, which he
speaks; for confession is an outward act of faith, and therefore, if there be
but an inordinate speech about matters of faith, the corruption of faith may
hereupon ensue.

Whence Leo the Pope, in a certain Epistle unto Proterius Bishop of Alexandria
says, that the enemies of Christ's Cross lie in wait for all our words, and
syllables, if in them we give any the least occasion, upon which they may feign
that we comply with Nestorianisme. Hence is it that Aquinas himself having
proposed this question, whether or no this proposition be true, Christ is a
creature in his answer thereunto tells us, first in general, cum haereticis
nec nomina debemus habere communia, ne little errori favere videamur, then more
particularly, unto the question; that the Arrian heretics have said that
Christ is a creature, and less than the Father, in regard not only of the
humane nature, but also divine person, and therefore resolves, that lest we
should seem to countenance their error, we must not say absolutely that
Christ is a Creature, and less than his Father; but only with this
limitation, according to the humane nature.

Ariani autem-heretici Christum dixerunt esse creaturam, and minorem Patre, non
solum ratione humanae naturae, sedetiam ratione divinae personae, and ideo non
est absolute dicendum, quod Christus sit Creatura, vel minor Patre, sed cum
determinatione, scilicet secundum humanam naturam. Nay not only Aquinas, but
generally all the Schoolmen, and Civilians too, are so precise in this
particular, as that among the degrees of damnable propositions are ranked by
them not only propositions down rightly heretical, or erroneous, but also
Propositio scandalosa, quae etiam male sonans, seu piarum aurium offensiva,
appellatur, quae praebet occasionem ruinae auditoribus, hoc est facilitatem
cadendi in haeresin, ut funt multae propositiones, quae licet cum modificatione
adjuncta, sunt verae, per se tamen and absolu^e sine modificatione prola^ae
videntur favere propositionibus haereticalibus. Ut si quis assereret
simpliciter Patrem majorem Filio, and Deum in incarnatione factum creaturam,
and similes, quae magis sunt exponendae, quam extendendae. Ar^oldus Albertinus
de agnoscendis assertionibus Catholicis and hereticis. quaest. 60. Propositio
haeesin sapiens, aut male circa ea, quae ad fidem pertinent, sonans, est illa
quae in prima significatio^e, quam verba prima facie ostendunt, sensum habet
haereticum, quamvis pie intellecta sensum liquem habet verum. Alphonsus a
Castro de justa haereticorum punitione: cap. 3.
propositio sapiens haeresin, propositio male sonans, every proposition, that
does but smell, that has but a smack of heresy, that sounds but ill or
suspiciously; and such are all propositions, that in the first signification,
which their words at first blush seem to import, have an heretical sense; all
propositions, that of themselves, that is, uttered absolutely without any
explanation, or qualification, seem to favor or countenance heretical
propositions, all though they be capable of a good construction, and with many
cautions, limitations, and restrictions might pass for current. And therefore
was it, that the Council of Basil condemned this proposition, Christ sins
daily, because taken properly it is false and against the faith, although perhaps
it may be freed from error, if expounded in a unproper sense, thus; Christ
sins daily, not in himself, but his members. Explicatur optime, modo supra
tacto de propositione aequivoca, quae in proprio aliquo ensu, potest esse
haeretica, and in alio etiam proprie Catholiea, nam illa absolute, and sine
distinctione, vel declaratione prolata merito dicitur male sonans, in quo
distinctio alia adh^beri potest. Nam quaedam propositio diciturab extrinseco
male sonans, alia ab intrinseco. Ab extrinseco ^catur, quando suspicio, vel
malus sonus, non ex propositione nude sumpta, sed cum circumantiis personae,
loci, aut temporis oritur. Suarez de triplici virtute Theologica tract. de fide
isp. 19. Sect. 7. Dicendum igitur est, quod propositio sap^ens haeresin illa
est, quae quamvis non opareat haeresis manifesta, quin potius aliquando poterit
habere aliquem bonum sensum, tamen (...) quibusdam circumstantiis, vel ex part
afferentis, vel ex temporum calamitate, faporem quen^m habet haeresis, and
suspicionis judicio prudentum and sapientum, id est, suspicionem quandam
^ajorem vel minorem pro qualitate circumstantiarum. Bannes.
Suarez says, that if an equivocall proposition having two proper senses, one
Cath^lick, another heretical be delivered absolutely without any distinction,
or declaration, in which sense it is meant, it is then deservedly said to be
propositio male sonans. The same author goes on and tells us, that a
proposition is said to be male sonans, not only ab intrinseco, but also ab
extrinseco when the suspicion or ill sound thereof arises not from the
proposition taken nakedly, as it is in it self, but considered jointly with
the circumstances either of the person delivering, or of the time and place, in
which it is delivered. Omitting his instance, I will give you others more true,
and savory. The word Sacrament with the ancients sounded no other, than an holy
significant rite; in those times then to have called matrimony, orders, etc.
Sacraments, had been (it may be) without all manner of offense. But now, since
the Church of Rome has peremptorily determined, that therebe Seven Sacraments
properly and strictly so called, seven outward and sensible signs, which by
divine institution, have annexed unto them the promise of justifying grace. He
that shall now term any thing a Sacrament, besides Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, renders himself thereby justly suspected.

In the writings of the Fathers, the words of satisfaction, and merit have been
of large use. Satisfaction signified every bitter afflictive acknowledgment, or
penitential mortification of our sins, whereby we prevent, and turn away
God's hand, and punishments for them. Merit, denoted only obtaining,
procurement, impetration, and according to this acception of the words, a man
might safely have heretofore affirmed, that our prayers, alms, and other good
works are satisfactory and meritorious. But now since some of the Romanists
have wrested these sayings of the Fathers unto a worse sense, than they were
uttered in: and hereupon taught that works are properly satisfactory, just
compensations for our sins, wherein we make recompense unto Gods wronged
justice, and redeem our selves at least from temporal punishments; that works
are strictly and properly meritorious of eternal life, deserving and earning
it ex condigno, in the way of condign wages; as if there were an equality or
due proportion between it and them, without all regard unto Gods gracious
acceptance of them; he that shall now aver these propositions, may without
breach of charity be justly thought to embrace them in that false, and
erroneous sense, which our adversaries the Papists take them in.

Hitherto concerning doctrinall appearance of evil, in Doctrines. Practical
appearance of evil in manners or matters of practice next follows; Dr Sclater
in locum.
and that may again be divided into Real or Imaginary. The distinction is the
same with that of others. Aliquid habet speciem mali, vel p^r se ex condition
operis, vel per accidens ex aliorum interpretatione.

The difference between these must be well weighed, else we may as foully be
mistaken, as once the Pontickes were, who, as Florus tells us, fighting in a
night with the Romans, per errorem longius cadentes umbras suas quasi hostium
corpora petebant: mistaking their own shadows projected long as at the going
down of the Moon, laid at them as at the very bodies of their enemies: or as
the Romans themselves, were, unto whom when Tiberius Gracchus touched his head
with his hand to exhort the people, as by a sign, to stand upon their guard
for their lives, it seemed as if he demanded a diadem. Cum plebem ad
defensionem salutis suae manu caput tangens, praebuit speciem regni sibi, and
diadema poscentis, Flor. lib. 3. cap. 14. To distinguish them then, a real
appearance of evil flows per seex natura operis, from the nature, and
condition of the fact it self: when that of it self, and in it is own nature,
is a very probable sign of evil: and so it is, when it is ordinarily done for
an evil end, when it is per se an occasion of Sin in our selves, and of
scandal unto others: it must be occasio data, non accepta.

First, when naturally, and not only casually, it may prove, and ordinarily
does prove an occasion of an incentive to sin in our selves.

Secondly, when it becomes an occasion of scandal or offense, of scandal
tending unto sin in the weak, of scandal tending unto sorrow and vexation
in the strong and discreet:

Such an appearance is there of adultery, in a man's lying in bed with another
man's wife, though he has no carnal knowledge of her.

Talis sc. materialis usus circumcisionis semper habet speciem mali, non ex
accidentia tantum, sed quasi per se supposito Eccesiae stau. Suarez. de legibus
lib. 9. cap. 14.
Such an appearance of Judaisme, (than which few greater evils) is there in
the (c) circumcision of those Ethiopian Christians, that live under Prester
John. Such was the appearance of evil in Christians sitting at meat in the
Temples of Paganish Idols, in Naamans bowing himself in the house of Rimmon,
however Cajetan excuse him with a pretty distinction, inter genu flexionem
imitativam, and genu flexionem obsequii. And such also is that appearance of
evil in a good man's intimate fellowship with bad ones, in a true and formal
compliancy with aliens in the signs of profession. As in a Protestants
presence at the superstitious, and Idolatrous worship of Papists, or in any
other complementings with them in the expression of that worship.

Now no actions that have this real appearance of evil are upon any pretext
whatsoever to be ventured upon, and for this I shall give two Reasons.

First, because in them there is allwaies a scandal given, an active scandal,
as is plain from Aquinas his definition of scandal, 2. 2dae. qu. 43. art. 1.
Scandalum (says he) understand it of an active scandal) est dictum vel factum
minus rectum praebens alteri occasionem ruinae. For a word or fact is Dicitur
autem minus rectum, and non absolute malum, aut non rectum, ad denotandum,
posse etiam scandali rationem esse in actu, qui non sit undequaque pravus, sed
tantum habeat speciem mali; aut qui duntaxat ratione effectus sc. ruinae
alterius, malus sit, licet alioqui per le omnino sit bonus. Itaque quamvis per
illam particulam, minus rectum significetur in praedicta ^^finitione actus, qui
ex aliquo capite careat debita rectitudine, atque ade^ simpliciter sit non
rectus, seu pravus, tamen propter dictam rationem merito hoc ipsum significatur
illo modo dicendi, scil: minus rectum. Non enim id duntaxat minus rectum
appellati so let, quod simplicitet rectum est, licet non adeo, comparatione
altetius; sed etiam id, quod propter aliquem defectum est minus rectum, quam
simpliciter debet, and quod ideo est absolute, and simpliciter malum. Juxta
illud D. Dionysii cap. 4 de divinis nominibus: Bonum consurgit e^ integra
causa, malum autem ex quocunque defectu. Greg: de Valentia Comment: Theo^ Tom:
3. Quest. 18. Punct. 1.
minus rectum some way or other irregular, not only when it is a sin in it
self, but also when it has a manifest show of sin; for the bare and naked
show of sin may (praebere alteri occasionem ruinae) morally lead another to
sin, may be the moral cause of another sin, as well as sin it self; the
actions, in which there is only an appearance of sin, may yet provoke
another unto the practice of sin, as the performance of the sinful action it
self: To see a Christian sitting at meat in an Idols Temple, at an Idols
feast, may tempt a raw convert unto Idolatry, as well as to behold him kneeling
before an Idol. For this I could muster up the suffrages of all the schoolmen,
a generation yet of divines, that are none of the precisest either in
positions, or practice. But I will not trouble my Reader with the testimonies
of above two of them. Opus malum (says Suarez) vel habens speciem mali, quod
de se inductivum est ad pecc andum, vitandum est; naem illud est vere scandalum
activum, ut patet ex definitione ejus, moraliter enim inducit hominem ad malum.
Quod vero non operteat esse vere malum, sed satis sit apparere, patet, 2 These.
5.22. 1 Cor. 12. Ratio est, quia tenemur recte operari, non solum coram Deo.
sed etiam coram hominibus. Secundo, quia cum opus habet speciem mali, inducitur
proximus ad malum opus, non solum sua malitia, sed etiam ex vi mei operis, and
ex quadam fragilitate. Suarez, op. de triplici virtute tract. 2 disp 10. sect.
3. Quotiescunque datur occasio scandali (says Vasquez) malo opere, aut habente
speciem mali, semper imputatur scandalum tribuenti occasionem, sive scandalum
sequatur ex malitia, sive infirmitate, aut ignorantia. Tunc enim qui praebet
occasionem scandali, peccat peccato scandali activi, quod nulla ratione licet.
Ratio vero est, quia nulla justa aut rationabili causa excusari potest aliquis
a peccato, qui coram alio peccat, vel exercet opus habens speciem mali: and
ideo jure optimo dicitur tribuere occasionem peccandi, quia tale opus ex se
occasio est peccandi. Vasquez opusculis Moralibus. tract. de scandalo.

But now (to proceed unto a second reason) besides the evil of scandal in
actions, that carry a real appearance of evil, there is also reductive the
guilt of that evil of which they have an appearance; for that command, which
forbids such a sin, forbids all the shows and occasions of it, all the
preparatives unto it; as is usually observed by Commentators upon the
Decalogue. Thus the prohibition of adultery takes in all the causes, and signs
thereof: by this rule to sit at meat in the Idols Temple, at the Idols feast,
was not only a sin of scandal, as being a provocation unto, and so a
participation of the sin of Idolatry in weak and ignorant spectators; but also
a sin of Idolatry by way of reduction, a sin against religion, a
transgression against that worship, which God requires. Suarez expresses
this, though somewhat obscurely, yet more fully: first he lays down this
conclusion; Quando aliquis indirecte inducit alium ad peccandum per actionem
malam, vel habentem speciem mali, etiam incurrit specialem malitiam scandali:
against this conclusion he propounds amongst others this objection; Sequitur
eum etc. per actionem non malam, sed habentem speciem mali contrahere duas
malitias. Vnam scandali contra charitatem: aliam illius speciei peccati, ad
quam proximus inducitur. Consequens est contra divum Thomam hic, et sumitur ex
Paulo primo ad Corinth. 8 and 12. Vbi manducantem scandalose sacrificata
Idolis, non reprehend reprehendit, ut Idolatram, sed ut scandalosum. Sequela
autem patet, quia ille est causa talis malitiae, ergo incurrit illam. Unto this
his answer is: that an action only evil in appearance may have a double
obliquity in it, to wit, that of scandal, and that of which it is an
appearance, unto which it induces Concedo, inquit, ibi esse duas malitias. Est
tamen advertendum, dupliciter contra aliquam virtutem peccari. Vno modo per se
primo, quia direct agitur contra objectum ejus, vel circumstantias illi ex se
debitas, and hoc modo actio solum mala in apparentia, nullam virtutem offendit.
Alio modo peccari potest tantum ex consequenti connexione virtutum. Nam ut
dictum est 1.2 quia actus virtutum sunt undique boni, quando hic, and nunc
actus alicujus virtutis potest esse contrarius alteri virtuti, (quamvis in suo
objecto, vel circumstantiis quasi intrinsecis non habeat defectum) non potest
prudenter fieri, atque adeo neque est actus virtutis simpliciter, and ideo
participat malitiam contrariam utrique virtuti, sed alteram per se, alteram
quasi p^r accidens, and consequenter. Sic etiam propria malitia scandali fere
semper fundatur in alia malitia, tamen ex consequenti, and per accidens, semper
habet aliquo-m^do illam conjunctam ex defectu circumstantiae debitae, saltem
propter aliam virtutem, propter quam non laed ndam prudenter cessandum ess^t ab
opere hic, and nunc, habente speciem mali, quamvis ex se esset alias honestum.
Suar: de triplici virtute Theolog. tract. de charitat: disp. 10. Sect. 2. It Is
of this real appearance I believe that the Apostle is here only to be
understood. But yet to make this our discourse complete I shall also take in
consideration that appearance of evil in an action which is but imaginary; and
this is ascribed thereunto from our own, or others misconceits and censures
thereupon.

First, from our own. And here, if a man be in his own Conscience steadfastly,
fully and firmly persuaded, that such an action is evil and unlawful, which
yet in truth is not so, but lawful: what ought he to do?

These times afford many instances by which we may exemplify this case: There
are many Sectaries that profess they think it unlawful to frequent the
public Ordinances, to pay tithes unto the Minister, Contribution unto the
Magistrate; and there be some, that think it unlawful to swear in any cause,
though called thereunto by a Magistrate; and yet all these particulars are not
only things lawful, but bounden duties.

For resolution we must premise two things.

First, we must take into our consideration, the nature of the action, and the
condition of the person that harbors this misperswasion of the action: the
action in its nature may be either necessary, or indifferent and arbitrary: and
the person misjudging it may be, in respect thereof, either sui juris, or
determined therein by the lawful command of some superior power.

Secondly, we must with Durand distinguish betwixt ligar^, and ^bligare, to
bind, and to bind unto. Sciendum (says he) lib. 2. did. 39. qu. 5. quod aliud
est ligari, aliud obligari, qui^n. obligatur debet, vel tenetur, id facere ad
quod obligatur, nec quantum est ex part sua aliter absolvitur ab obligatione.
Ligari autem dicitur m^raliter, qui sic dispositus est circa aliquod agibile,
quod non potest licite procedere, prout exigit natura illius agibilis, ad modum
illius qui ligatur corporaliter, nec p^test procedere etiam in recta and plana
via. Conscience is said obligare to bind unto, when it is a bounden duty to do
or not do what it dictates, when it is not only a sin to do any thing against
it, but also not to do according to it: Conscience is said ligare merely to
bind, when it is a sin as to act againstit, so also to act according to it.

Capreolus and others that follow him quarrel with this distinction that
Durand puts between ligare and obligare: But Capreclus himself laith down a
distinction of obligation, that will come unto all one: Obligatio (inquit)
potest referri ad du^. Primo ad conformandum se tali conscientiae, and ad nullo
modo discordandu^ illi, and ad non deponendum eam, secundo ad non discordandum
^i, sed non ad confermandum, nec ad non dep^nendum. Primo strictissime sumitur,
and illo modo Conscientia erronea non obligat. Secundo sumitur large, and illo
modo intelligitur conclusio nostra, quod conscientia erronea obligat, quia
habens eam tenetur non discordare illi, ita quod illa stante faciat oppositum,
quod illa dictat. Nec tamen tenetur se conformare illi, nec tenetur eam
conservare, immo potest, and tenetur eam dep^nere. Here his obligation largely
so called differs nothing from Durand's ligation; The Controversy then is but a
strife of words; and therefore not worthy the heeding.

These things thus premised I shall lay down four Conclusions. First
Conclusion.


First, if the action in its nature be not necessary, but indifferent, and
arbitrary, and the person mis^udging it, be in respect thereof sui juris, not
determined therein by the command of any superior power. Why then he is bound
in Conscience during this his opinion, to abstain from the action. (For we
suppose it indifferent; and a man may lawfully forbear action where there is
no necessity of doing, a licitis po^est absque p^ccato abstineri.) We suppose
it, although indifferent, yet against Conscience: and whatsoever is done
repugn^nte consci^ntia, with a settled reluctance of a man's own judgment, and
conscience against it, cannot be of faith, and whatsoever is not of faith is
sin See Dr Sanderson in locum.
Romans 14.23. That is whatsoever action is done without a firm persuasion of
the lawfulness thereof, let it be quoadrem, and essentially, in it selle
lawful, nay necessary, yet it becomes qu^ad hominem and accidentally evil,
unto him it is sin. Now that action may lawfully, must necessarily be forborne,
that can be omitted, but cannot be committed without sin.

But now on the contrary (to come to a second Conclusion) if either the action
be in its nature necessary, Second Conciusion.
or the person entertaining this misprision thereof be justly enjoined
performance of it by some superior power, that can herein lawfully challenge
obedience from him by a law, not me^rly p^nall; and so the action too, though
indifferent for its nature, be yet in its use, and unto him become necessary.
Why then this misperswasion of its unlawfullnesse cannot bind to abstain from
it; for so it should oblige unto either omission of a necessary duty, or else
disobedience unto lawful authority, both great sins. And n^lla est obligatio
ad illicita. There is no obligation unto things unlawful can lie upon us.

For, first, obligation is only to that which is a moral good; now nothing
unlawful can be a moral good; and therefore an erroneous Conscience cannot
oblige unto it.

Secondly, no command of an inferior power can oblige, if it be contrary to
the command of a superior power; But if an erroneous Conscience should bind
unto things unlawful, it should oblige against the commandment of God, whose
Vicer^y Conscience is, Indeed Conscience is the next rule of voluntary actions:
But

First, it is a well- informed conscience that ought to be this rule, the will
is not bound to follow a blind guide: for then being of it self coeca
potentia, it must needs fall into the ditch.

And secondly, conscience is but a subordinate rule unto the Law, and Word of
God; and therefore its power to oblige is derived there from: it obliges not
therefore, but by virtue of some command of Gods Law, or word; and Gods Law
cannot command things unlawful, for then it should clash with it self. (f)
Diversimode amen ligat Conscientia recta and e^ronea, rect^ simpliciter ligat
and per se, erronea aute^^ secundum quid and peraccidens. Dico autem rectam
ligare fimpliciter, quia ligat absolute and in omnem eventum. Sienim aliquis
conscientiam habet de vitando adulterio istam conscientiam sine peccato non
potest deponere, quia in hoc ipso quod eam deponeret errando graviter peccaret.
E^ autem manente non potest praeteriri in a ctu sine peccato. Unde absolute
ligat and in omnem eventu^: sed conscientia erronea non ligat nisi secundum
q^id, and sub condition. I^le enim cui dictat conscientia, quod tenetur
fornicari, non est obligatus ut fornicationem sine peccato dimit^ere non
possi^, nisi sub hac condition, si talis conscientia duret. Haec autem
conscientia removeri potest absque peccato, unde talis conscientia non obligat
in omnem eventum. Potest enim aliquid contingere, scilicet Depositio
conscientiae, quo contingente aliquis ulterius non ligatur. Quod autem sub
condition tantum est, secundum quid esse dicitur. Dico etiam quod conscientia
recta per se ligat^ erronea vero per accidens. Quod ex hoc pate^, qui enim vult
vel amat unum propter alterum, illud quidem propter quod amat, reliquum per se
amat, quod vero propter aliud, quasi per aceidens, sicut qui vinum amat propter
dulce, amat dulce perse, vinum autem per accidens. Ille autem qui conscientiam
erroneam haber credens esse rectam, alias non erraret nisi inhaereret
conscientiae erroneae propter rectitudinem, quam in ea credit esse, inhaeret
quidem per se loquendo rectae conscientiae, sed erroneae quasi per accidens^in
quantum hanc conscientiam quam credit esse rectam, contingit, esse erroneam. Et
exinde est quod per se loquendo ligatur a conscientia recta, per accidens vero
ab erronea. Capreol: Ex Aquinate Lib. 2. sent. Did. 39. Quest. 1. Ar. 1.

Nemo potest obligari ad malum sub rationem mali, sed been ad malum, quod
invincibiliter judicatur esse bonum, and quod proponitur sub ratione boni. Nec
conscientia obligat contra legem Dei per se formaliter, sed solum per accidens,
and materialiter. Becanus Sum: Theol: Scholast: T. 2. Tract. 1. chap. 4, Q. 7.


Capreolus, Becanus, Raynaudus with many others resolve that however a right
and well informed Conscience only binds unto a thing per se formaliter and in
omnem eventum; yet an erroneous conscience, denominated such from an invincible
and involuntary error, may oblige unto a thing materially, per accidens, sub
condition, and secundum quid. It obliges per accidens as it is apprehended
and believed to be right, and well informed; so that an erroneous Conscience is
adhered unto, for the rectitude supposed to be in it. It obliges sub
condition upon condition that such error of Conscience lasts: for it may be
removed without sin: and when it is removed the obligation cease; and then,
that which obliges conditionally, obliges only sceundum quid, and not
absolutely.

Unto this I have three exceptions.

First, they limit themselves to error invincible and involuntary, which is
not imputable or blameworthy.

This error may be conceived to be; either in matter of fact, or in matter of
rule.

Error in matter of fact, as when Jacob mistook Leah for Rachell; as when a
poor subject, that cannot judge of the titles of primes, thinks a usurper to
be his lawful Sovereign, or as when a man takes goods left unto him by his
Parents to be truly his own, though perhaps a great part of them were gotten by
fraud or oppression, without any knowledge of his: These and the like
particulars are all impertinent unto our present purpose; and therefore I shall
not stay upon the consideration of them.

Error in matter of Law, right, or rule is again twofold, either in regard of
law natural, or law positive. Now unto all that have actual use of reason,
The error of the law of nature is vincible, and voluntary; because the law of
nature is sufficiently promulgated unto them, it is written in their hearts,
Rom: 2.15.

And we may say the same of Christians, that enjoy the plenary promulgation of
the Gospel, and are capable of understanding it: for the Gospel sufficiently
reveals all divine positives; so that a rational man may know them, and is
bound to know them; and Aquinas states it rightly. 1.2 dae. q. 19. art 6.
voluntas concordans rationi erranti circaea, quae quis scire tenetur, semper
est mala: If a man err concerning such things, as he may know, and is bound to
know, such an error is (at least indirecte) voluntary, and sinful, and cannot
oblige.

A Second exception: Conscience has no power to oblige, but what it deriveth
from God: and therefore what it obliges unto, God also obliges unto: and God
is the m^rall eause, and consequently the Author of whatsoever he obliges to:
but he cannot be the moral cause, and author of that which is sin, and
unlawful, either perse, or per accidens and therefore neither he, nor his
deputy Conscience can oblige so much as per accidens unto that which is
unlawful.

A Third exception shall be the objection of Durand in the place above quoted:
Sola vera notitia de re obligationem non t^llit, ed magis confirmat: sed vera
notitia de eo quod errenea conscientia dictat, tollit obligation^m, ergo
obligatio nulla fuit. To be well informed, and to have a true knowledge of a
thing cannot take away any obligation to it; But to be well informed, and to
have a true knowledge concerning that, which an erroneous Conscience dictates,
takes away all obligation to it; Therefore there was never any such thing as an
obligation to it.

The most considerable objection is that of Becanus [Sum: Theol. 2. part. p. 1.
tom. 2. tract. 1. cap. 4.] Durandus concedit illum p^ccare, qui operatur contra
hanc conscientiam: Ergo debet ^tiam concedere, hanc conscientiam obligare. Nam
ubi non est ^bligatio, ibi nec peocatum. Durand grants, that he sins who
acts against an erroneous Conscience: therefore he ought also to grant, that an
erroneous conscience obliges: for where there is no obligation there can be no
sin.

But the answer hereunto is very easy by distinguishing concerning obligation,
which is twofold either as touching the matt^r, or manner of actions. Though
there be no obligation, as touching the matter of such actions, concerning
which an erroneous Conscience dictates: yet there is a general obligation as
touching the manner of all actions, that they be done without the Contempt of
conscience: and therefore in every action where conscience is contemned, sin is
committed: Quaevis voluntas (says Aquinas, 2 dae. q. 19. art. 5.) a ratione
five rect a five errante discordans semper est mala.

Which brings me unto my third conclusion. Third Conclusion.
Allthough this erroneous conceit of the unlawfullnesse of this action,
suppos^d to be necessary either in its nature, or at least in its use, because
lawfully commanded by authority, does not obligare, that is, so bind, as that I
must fol^ow it, yet it does ligare, so entangle and perplex, as that I cannot
without sin oppose it, and for this I shall allege these following reasons.

First, because whosoever goes against his Conscience, (whether ill or well
informed it matters not) goes against the will of God, although not for the
thing he does, yet for the manner of doing it, although not mat^rially, yet
formally, and interpretatively: because whatsoever the Conscience dictates, a
man takes for the will of God: each man's Conscience being a Deputy God to
inform, and direct him. Look as he who reviles, wounds, kills a private man,
mistaking him for the King, is guilty of high treason against the King
himself: so, he that 'thwarts the judgment of even an erroneous Conscience,
fights against God, wars against Heaven: because what his conscience says,
he thinks to be the voice of Heaven.

Thus you see, that he, who acts against an erroneous Conscience in such an
action, carries himself as disaffected toward God* for he knowingly
adventureth upon that, which he thinks will infinitely displease him.

And in a second place: such an action is an argument of disaffection toward
that rule of our moral actions, which God has appointed: he that has an
erroneous Conscience, supposes it to be right and well informed: and
therefore, if he act against it, he slights that, which he takes to be the rule
of his working: and therefore his action is, for the manner of it, lawless,
and irregular. Velle aliquid contra Synteresin naturalem rationis^id est,
contra primum aliquod principium m^r^le a synteresi dicta^um, omnino est malum
and peccatum. Sed qui vult id, quod ratio judicat esse malum and fugiendum,
five id vere, five fallo judicet, vult aliquid contra synteresin: Ergo omnino
peccat. Major est evidens. Adversatur namque id imprimis legi naturali, quae
potiffimum sucet in principiis primis meralibus. Minor probatur. Nam principium
illud primum, scilicet, malum non est prosequendum, sed vitandum: inprimis
vetat, ne quis, quantum in ipso est malum consectetur. Ut enim praeoepta
naturalia affirmativa jubent inprimis ut homo, quantum in ipso est, bonum
prosequatur; sic etiam praecepta negativa p^ohibent imprimis, ne homo quantum
in ipso situm est, sectetur malum. Qui autem seu vere seu fal^e judicat ali^
quid esse malum, and nihilominus illud prosequi vult, is hoc ipso, quantum in
se est, sectatur malum. Nam quod objectum ipsum per se sit revera bonum aut
malum, hoc quidem non est in bominis voluntate situm, sed illud solum, ut quod
ipse malum judicat vel bonum, id vitare, aut pro^equi velit. Quocirca qui
judicans aliquid esse malum five ve^e, five false, illud nihilominus vult, is
quantum in ipso situm est, vult malum, and proinde direc^e violat legem illam
naturalem synteresis, quae id ipsum inprimis vetat. Greg. de Valentia tom. 2.
disp. 2. q. 14 punct. 4.


Thirdly, in such an action there is a depraved, affection toward sin: and
that in Morals is the fountain of all illness: If a man's conscience be right,
and well informed, and he act against it, every one will grant, that such an
action proceeds from the love of that which is sin: and there is the same
reason to say as much, of that action, which is against the dictate of an
erring Conscience.

Besides these reasons I shall allege Scriptures (to omit Rom: 14.23. already
spoken of) B^canus quotes also Romans 14.14. To him that este^meth any thing to
be unclean, to him it is unclean. The learned Dr Hammond alleges for the
same purpose the 1 Cor. 8.7. For some with (h) Conscient^^m Idol^ vo^cit
Aposto^us non sc^en^iamqua quis recte de sim^la^^s sentiat:ut male
interpretatur and male probat Cajetanus; ea in re singularis: sed judicium quo
quis existimet Idolum esse aliquid, id est a^icujus vittutis: ac proinde cibos
immolatitios ab idolo pati mutationem aliquam, sicque afficere and co.
inquinare posse edentes. Quod quidem judicium erroneum est: atque ex ^o
sequitur ut talem habens conscientiam, fi edat idolothytum, ed at illud
quasi^ido^ lothy^um: id est quali immutatum aliquo mo so per hoc quod idolis
sacrificatum sit ut eius opinione tam idolum qua idolothytum sit aliquid.

Et conscientia ipsorum, cum sit infirma, polluitur. Illative pats haec
exponenda est: ut sensus fit^atque ita animus eorum erronea hujusmodi
conscientia imbutus, cum sit infirmus, eo quod scien^ta, qua fidem unius Dei
quam habe, tapplicet ad particulates conclusiones, ut supra dictum est,
polluitur peccato: dum videlicet contra conscientiam quam idolothyto habent,
existimantes edentes contaminari, de illo edunt. Estius in locum.


Conscience of the Idol, i e. b^ing resolved in mind that it is not lawful to
eat or taste of any (...) or (...), part or portion of the Idol-feast, (whether
(...), at the idol table, or having bought it at the shambles (as it seems was
the fashion of those (...), to be sold there at second hand, chap. 10.25.)
accounting it unlawful to eat any meat consecrated to that use, do yet eat
that which is of this nature, and by so doing, their weak i. e. uninstructed
Conscience, is polluted, i.e. they sin against their Conscience, do that which
they are persuaded they may not do, which although it be never so innocent and
harml^sse thing in it self (an Idol being simply nothing) yet to them which
do it, when they think it unlawful (and all have not knowledge, says he in
the beginning of the verse, i. e. are not sufficiently instructed in their
duty) it is pollution or sin.

I shall proceed unto the fourth, and last conclusion. The only way then for a
man to rescue himself out of these difficulties is to rectify his Conscience,
to depose, and correct the error thereof, so he shall escape contempt of the
judgment of his own Conscience on the one hand, and breach of either Gods or
man's laws on the other.

This Rayunaudus (from whom I know none do dissent) expresses as follows [
Moral. disc. did. 4. q. 3. art. 1. n. 247.] Vnum igitur illud subsidium
superest, ut judicium de malitia vincibiliter errans, abjiciatur: Si enim neque
adhaerere ei licet, ut primo loco monstravimus: neque illi obsist^re, ut nunc
diximus; non aliud superesse potest, quam ut homo errorem depellat, quod posse
supponitur, alinmque de malitia sensum induat: alioqut quocunque se vertat, in
culpa erit.

An imaginary appearance of evil issues, Secondly, from the supposals of, not
only our selves, but others that censure it, whose judgments are either misled
by ignorance, and weakness, or else blinded through pride and prejudice: such
was that in the moving of Hannah's lips, not afforded by her fact, but only
fastened on it by old Eli his hasty censoriousnesse: no other appearance of
evil was there in our Saviors healing the diseased, his Disciples plucking
and eating of the ears of corn on the Sabbath day; 'twas not grounded on
their actions; but only fancied by the Pharisees swelling uncharitableness.
What other was that appearance of evil, with which the Gentiles charged the
primitive Christians, lifting up of their hands in prayer, when they accused
them for adoration of the Clouds? as appears by Tertullian, and by a Poet of
their own, qui puras nubes and coeli numen adorant. Parker part 2. page 63.


This imaginary appearance of evil proceeds, from either supposals of
wilful, or weak ones: The censures and supposals of wilful, proud, and
wicked ones, and the scandals thence arising, scandala Pharisaeorum, I
determined (in my first Edition of this book) that we might slight our warrant
(said I) is our Savior's president. When his Disciples told him, that the
Pharisees took offense at his speech, he made no reckoning thereof, but
answered, let them alone, Matthew. 12.13, 14. and we, warranted by his example,
may th^n be secure and regardlesse of many calumnies, and groundless
exceptions against the government, discipline, and ceremonies of our Church:
for th^re has been so much spoken and written concerning these subjects, as
that the pretense of weakness is quite taken away from those that are capable
of information.

First, here my censure of the non-conformists to be wilful, proud, and
Pharisaicall was very rash, and uncharitable: all that I can say in excuse for
my self is: that when I wrote this, I was a very young man, and conformity
unto the Ceremonies established by Law was then generally embraced, without any
of the least contradiction, for ought I knew; nay stoutly and zealously pleaded
for by men, whom I admired for the general report that went of their sanctity,
and Learning v.g. Dr John Burg^sse, Dr Sclater, Dr Sanderson and others: And
then I had read but one side, being an utter stranger unto what the
Inconformitants could say for themselves: and their adversaries represented
their objections, and answer, to be so weaks: and ridiculous: as that it is no
great wonder, that I was prejudiced against them: But, about the beginning of
the long Parliament, being awakened with the general complaint of the Godly
against the Ceremonies, I began to think a new of the controversy, and out of
my former prejudice intended a full vindication of the discipline, and
Ceremonies of the then Church of England: and in order hereunto I read all such
books of the non-conformist's as I could procure: for I knew well by
experience, that a controversy can never be well handled, unless all
dissenting opinions thereabouts be weighed: but upon perusal of the
non-conformists I soon found: that their adversaries most disingeniously
misrepresented all that they said: that they resused to join issue with them
in the state of the Question: that they came not up to an orderly grapple with
their arguments: and that they seldom regularly replied unto the solutions,
which were given unto their objections: and this quickly produced an alteration
in my judgment, and I believe it will do so too in all, that will make such an
impartial search into the matter, as I have done.

But Secondly, to come unto the examination of that aspersion: that the
scandals of the malicious, of Pharisaicall, and wilful spirits are not to be
regarded, so as to forbear that, by which they are scandalized.

Gregory de Valentia: though he lay down the affirmative in the general, yet
afterward he delivers it to be his opinion: that we are to do what lies in
us to prevent the scandals of even Pharisees, so it may be done without any
great loss, or notable damage unto our selves. Existimo etiam, si quis cum
nullo suo, vel pene nullo detrimento posset impedire scandalum proximi
Pharisaicum, aliquid faciendo vel omittendo, debere ipsum facere. Nam ut
tradidimus supra in quaest. de correctione fraterna, etiam is qui ex malitia
^eccaturus alioqui est, est in aliquali necessitate spirituali, ac proinde ut
(illic vidimus) debet ex charitate corrigi, vel aliter a peccati scanda^o
impediri, quando^id sine detrimento proprio fieri potest. tom. 3. disp. 3. q.
18. punct. 4.

For the better stating of this Question, I shall premise some distinctions of
scandal: a scandal is either active or passive.

An active scandal is in all such words, or deeds, as culpably occasion the
fall of another into sin: and this is again by Gregory de Valentia [tom. 3.
disp. 3. q. 18. punct. 1.] rightly subdivided into that which is per se, and
into that which is per accidens.

An active scandal perse is in such public acts, as either by the express
intent of the agent, or from their nature, and in themselves, are inductive
unto sin: and they are again twofold:

First, all public sins, or sins committed before another:

Secondly, all such public actions, as carry a real and manifest appearance
of sin.

An active scandal per accidens is in such things, as are not in themselves,
and in their own nature occasions of sin unto another: and this is, either in
an unseasonable performance of positive duties, commanded by affirmative
precepts, which are not necessary hic and nunc: or else by an unseasonable use
of our liberty in things indifferent.

A Passive scandal is the fall of another into sin: and this (by the author
but now mentioned) is subdivided into given, and taken.

Scandalum datum, a passive scandal given, is that which arises truly from
the active scandal of another, as from its moral cause.

Scandalum acceptum, a passive scandal that is only taken, is that which is
only the fault of the party scandalized, and cannot be imputed to any other,
as a moral cause: the words or deeds of another may be an occasion of it, but
not a culpable occasion.

I desire that these distinctions of scandal may be well heeded: for the want
of Consideration of them has occasioned a great deal of confusion in men's
discourses about scandal.

First, many exclude from active scandal all things that scandalize per
accidens: and then, what will become of those scandals Paul speaks against?
Romans 14.1 Cor. chapter 8. chapter 10.

Secondly, most confound a passive scandal with scandalum acceptum, a scandal
that is only taken, and make them to be of an equal extent: whereas a passive
scandal may de distributed into both given, and taken: if it be culpably both
given, and taken: then it is scandalum datum: if it be culpably taken, and not
culpably given, then it is scandalum acceptum.

Well, these distinctions being thus premised: I suppose it will be agreed upon
by all sides: that the question is to be understood. First of active scandals,
our scandalizing of the wicked: or Secondly, (which comes all to one) of such
passive scandals of them, as are given by us, as well as taken by them: Not,
thirdly, of such passive scandals, as are only taken by them, not given by us:
for from the guilt of these we may wash our hands, so that there is no
obligation upon us to forbear those things, by which they are in this manner
scandalized.

My Conclusion shall be: that we are to eschew the active scandals, and
consequently scandala passiva data, of the wicked, and malicious, those that
are Pharisaicall and wilful spirits: this is apparent: First from Paul's
prohibition of scandal, 1 Cor. 10.32. Give none offense neither to the Jews,
nor to the Gentiles, etc. he spoke of unconverted Jews, and Gentiles, such as
were enemies unto the Christian faith: and the Jews were of all men the most
malicious enemies thereof.

Secondly, from our Saviors denunciation of a woe unto the world by means of
scandal, Matthew. 18.7. Woe unto the world because of offenses; which undeniably
is to be extended unto all sorts of men.

Unto these two arguments we may add four other, taken from, First, the
distribution; Secondly, relation; Thirdly, effect; Fourthly, opposite of an
active scandal.

First, from the distribution of an active scandal, and perusal of the
members thereof: An active scandal (as I showed but now) is distributed into
scandalum per se, and per accidens: now there is no doubt, but that we are
carefully to avoid such things as scandalize the wicked, and malicious per se,
of themselves, and in their own nature, public sins, or such words, and deeds
as have a real appearance of sin: all the question will be concerning such
things as scandalize them only per accidens, our duties, and our
indifferencies: and by these they are frequently scandalized, and that out of
an erroneous opinion concerning their unlawfulness: in which regard the
resolution will be pertinent unto the matter in hand.

First then: duties, that are commanded by affirmative precepts, may be
forborne, hic and nunc, sometimes, and in some places, to avoid the scandal
of the wicked, and malicious. The usual instances are in reproof, admonition,
punishment of sin, and the like: and this is warranted

First, by the precept of our Savior, Matthew. 7.6. Give not that which is holy
unto the dogs: neither cast ye your pearls before swine: lest they trample
them under their feet, and turn again and rent you.

Secondly, by the example of David, Psalm. 39.1, 2. I will keep my tongue with a
bridle, while the wicked is before me: I was dumb with silence, I held my peace
even from good.

Thirdly, by that rule in Divinity; affirmativa praecepta obligant semper, non
ad semper; they always bind, but not to always: they do not oblige to do the
things required at all times, but only, when they are expedient for the glory
of God, and the good of others: To reprove, and admonish sinners is a duty
commanded by God, Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart:
thou shall in anywise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin upon him. But
now this duty is not to be performed unseasonably, when it is likely to bring no
glory to God, nor good unto others, but rather likely to scandalize them. Thus
every private man is not bound to run into an alehouse, or tavern, there to
reprehend a company of desperate drunkards, who would look upon his
reprehension as an act of pragmaticalnesse, and insolency, and for it be ready
to quoite him down the Stairs, or run him through with their swords: and as
imprudent an act would it be, in Spain, to run into their Churches, and there
to cry against the Idolatry of the Mass; and in the Streets of C^nstantinople
to declame against the impostures of Mahomet; for hereby we should scandalize
them indiscreetly, and foolishly occasion them, as to blaspheme our religion,
so to cut us in pieces.

Unto the forementioned rule in Divinity I shall add another out of Logic;
finis dat mediis amabilitatem: it is the end only makes the means desirable:
Now reproof, admonition, punishment, and the like duties are enjoined as
means, in order to the reformation, and bettering of others: when therefore
they are not likely to conduce unto this end, but rather to oppose and hinder
it, prudence in such a case dictates an abstinence from them. But let us take
two exemplifications of this out of Aquinas 2. 2 dae. q. 43. art. 7. The first
is concerning the punishment of sin: dicendum, quod poenarum inflictio non est
propter se expetenda: sed poenae infliguntur, ut medicinae quaedam ad cohibenda
pecc. ta, and ideo in tantum habent rationem justitiae, in quantum per eas
peccata cohibentur. Si autem per inflictionem poenarum manifestum sit plura and
majera peccata sequi, tunc poenarum inflictio non continebitur sub justitia. Et
in hoc casu loquitur August. in lib^o contra epistolam Par, men^an^ docet, quod
ubi schismatis periculum timetut, a punitione peccatorum cessandum est.
August quando scilicet ex excommunicatione aliquorum imminet periculum
schismatis: tunc enim excommunicationem far n^n pertinet ad veritatem
justitiae.

The second is concerning brotherly reproof: dicendum quod correptio fraterna
ordinatur ad emendationem fratris: and ideo in tantum computanda est inter
spiritualia bona, in quantum hoc consequi potest. Quod non contingit si ex
correptione frater scandalizetur, and id^o si propter scandalum correptio
dimittatur, n^n dimittitur spirituale bonum.

But to proceed next to the scandal of the wicked by our indifferencies: That
we are to forbear things indifferent when they scandalize the wicked, and
malicious. Parker [in his treatise of the Cross part. 2. page 57.] proves by
many instances: when the thing was indifferent, does not our Savior foregoe
his liberty, to please the malicious? as when he paid tribute lest he should
offend them? Matthew. 17.27. They were malicious at Corinth, and seek^rs of
occasion against Paul, that were likely to be offended by his taking of wages
there: yet the thing, being no necessary duty, he thinks it his duty to
forbear his power therein, 1 Cor. 9. The Heathens are malicious to take
offense, when Christians go to Law for their own: yet, because going to law is
not a duty necessary, it must be forborne, and Christians rather must loose
their own, then give occasion of scandal to them, 1 Cor. 6. v. 6, 7. Unto
these examples let me add another (quoted by the same author elsewhere) out
of Ezra 8.22. I was ashamed (says Ezra) to require of the King a band of
Soldiers and horsemen, to help us against the enemies in the way: because we
had spok n unto the King, saying, the hand of our God is upon all them for
good, that seek him, but his power and his wrath is against all them that
forsake him Here for Ezra to have asked of the King of Persia, a Heathen, a
band of soldiers, and horsemen for his safe conduct, was a thing lawful: and
yet he forbore it, lest he should scandalize him by begetting in him a
suspicion, that that was false, which he had told him concerning Gods power,
and justice.

A second argument is drawn from the relation of an active scandal: it is the
moral cause of a passive scandal; so that he who scandalizeth another,
partaketh of, and is accessory unto the sin of the party scandalized, and we
are not to partake of, or be accessory unto the sins of any, 1 Timothy 5.22. We
must have no fellowship with unfruitful works of darkness in any whomsoever,
Eph^s. 5.11.

A third argument is fetched from the effect of an active scandal: it is of a
soul destroying nature, and so a kind of spiritual murder: destroy not him
with thy meat for whom Christ died, Romans 14.15. for meat destroy not the works
of God, verse. 20. and who should not tremble at the guilt of the murder of any
soul whatsoever? for there is no soul so wicked, but may (for ought thou
know) be one of those, for whom Christ shed his most divine, and precious
blood.

The last argument is taken from the Opposite of scandal, Charity, and its act
beneficence: We are to love all, even our most malicious, and persecuting
enemies, Matthew. 5.44. We are to do good unto all, though especially to the
household of faith, Gal. 6.10. We are to exercise patience, and meekness,
toward even those that oppose themselves, 2 Timothy 2.14, 15. And from this it
will inevitably follow, that we are to scandalize none.

Here we have usually objected the example of our Savior, who slighted the
scandal of the Pharisees, Matthew. 15.12, 13, 14. Then came his Disciples and
said unto him: know thou that tho Pharisees were offended after they heard
this saying? but he answered and said etc. let them alone they be blind leaders
of the blind etc.

The objection concerns only the scandalizing of them in things indifferent;
and unto it I shall give an answer in the words of Parker part 2. part. 57. If
this be all the warrant we have, not to forbear in a thing indifferent for the
malicious, then have we no warrant at all, because the scandal (there) not
cared for, is when the Pharisees are offended, at his abstaining from their
washings, and his preaching of a true doctrine: both of which were necessary
duties for him to do. And when he defends his healing on sabbaths, and his
Disciples plucking ears, upon this reason they are duties of necessity and
charity, he plainly insinuates, there is no defense for deeds unnecessary,
when the malicious are scandalized.

In a second place I shall allege the Objection of the Schoolmen which by
Gregory de Valentia is thus urged [ Tom. 3. disp. 3. q. 18. punct. 4.] Nam qui
non ex ignorantia, aut infirmitate, sed ex malitia scandalizatur, non laborat
tali aliqua necessitate spirituali, cui non possit ipse sine open alterius
proximi facile prospicere mutando pravam suam voluntatem. Ergo alter non
tenetur tunc cum ali quo suo detrimento prospicere. Pharisees, the wicked, that
are scandalized out of mere malice, and not out of ignorance, or weakness are
not in any such spiritual necessity, or danger, but that they can easily
provide for the safety, and indemnity of their souls, without the help or
assistance of others, by changing their depraved will: and therefore others are
not bound to incur any detriment for the prevention of their scandal.

The answer unto this may easily be foreseen, for here is nothing but
Jesuiticall dictates, that are altogether proofelesse.

First, Pharisees, the wicked, that are scandalized out of malice, are in a
greater spiritual necessity, and danger, then those, that are scandalized out
of ignorance, or weakness: for, they are in the snare of the d^vill, taken
captive by him at his will. 2 Timothy 2.16.

And therefore, Secondly, they are more unable to help themselves, and prevent
their own falling into sin; for their hearts are altogether destitute of any
gracious habits: there is not in them the spirit, a renewed principle, to make
head, or resistance against the flesh, the sinful corruption of their natures:
there is need then of all help possible to keep them from falling: and all
will be uneffectuall, unless God also put in his helping hand.

Whereas he talks: that it is an easy matter for a wicked, and malicious man to
provide against all danger, and need of his soul, by changing his perverse,
and naughty will: this is a very gross Pelagian conceit: for it ascribes
that, unto the power of man's corrupt will, which can be wrought only by the
omnipotent grace of God.

By this time (I hope) the Reader is sufficiently satisfied that the active
scandals of the most wicked, and malicious are not to be contemned.

But yet there remains a great difficulty in the point to be cleared; and
that is, when an active scandal is committed toward them, in our duties, and
indifferencies?

First, we actively scandalize them by our duties, when they are not rightly
circumstanced, seasonably performed, in due time, and place: when they are not
expedient unto those ends, for which God enjoined them: now when this is,
cannot be determined by any general rule, but every one must be left to be
guided by his spiritual prudence, and wisdom. [But for this hereafter I shall
allot a peculiar digression by it self.]

Secondly, we actively scandalize them by our indifferencies, when it is
probable they will occasion their passive scandal, their falling into sin; But
now this general rule is to be limited, and I shall give you three limitations
of it.

The first limitation: this rule is to be understood, when the use of our
indifferencies is likely to prejudice, and obstruct the propagation of the
Gospel, and the forbearance of them will in all probability conduce unto the
advancement of the Credit of the Gospel, and not otherwise, ordinarily: upon
this account, it would have been scandalous in Paul to have received
maintenance from the Corinthians: but it is now unscandalous in Ministers, to
accept, and challenge that maintenance, which is due unto them by the laws of
the land; for a general forbearance thereof now would soon be followed with
the utter ruin of the Gospel.

A second limitation: the forementioned rule is to be understood, when the
forbearance of our indifferencies is likely to win upon the wicked, and
malicious, so as to further their conversion, and not otherwise, when it only
exposes unto their contempt, scorn, and derision, 1 Cor. 9.19, 20, 21, 22.
Though I be free from all men (says Paul) yet have I made my self servant
unto all, that I might gain the more. And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that
Imight gain the Jews: to them that are under the law, as under the law, that I
might gain them that are under the Law. To them that are without Law, as
without Law (being not without Law to God, but under the Law to Christ) that I
might gain^ them, that are without Law. To the weak became I as weak, that I
might gain the weak: I am made all things to all men, that I might by all
means save some. Here it is very remarkable, that Paul was made, in things
indifferent, all things unto all men, only in order to their salvation, to
gain their souls unto Christ; and why should we abridge our selves in the use
of our liberty, in things that are of great expediency and convenience unto us,
when such a restraint of our liberty, is not a probable means of reaching the
said end? what reason can be given, why we should incommodate our selves, by
forbearing all such indifferencies, that wicked men are scandalized at, when
such forbearance is unprofitable unto their spiritual good, and unlikely to
bring them any jot the nearer unto God and Heaven?

A third limitation: the forementioned rule has not place, when by the
forbearance of our indifferencies, at which some wicked men are scandalized,
there is incurred as great, if not a greater scandal, then that by their use:
as when they are hereby confirmed, and hardened in their error, and sin; and
others are hereby drawn into the like: prudenter advertendum est (says
Bernard) scandalum scandalo non emendari, qualis emendatio erit, si ut aliis
scandalum tollas, alios scandalizas.

Thus you see how the rule is to be limited; and without such, or the like
limitations, rigidly to press it, would make against both the liberty, and
peace of conscience.

First, against the liberty of Conscience: for it would in great part evacuate,
and annull the grand charter of our Christian liberty in things indifferent, it
would (as Peter says in another case) put a yoke upon the neck of the
disciples, which neither our Fathers were, nor we are able to bear, Acts
15.10. All things are lawful for me (says Paul) But I will not be brought
under the power of any, 1 Cor. 6.12. But now if we must forbear all our
lawful conveniences, at which wicked men perhaps will be purposely
scandalized, we should be brought under the power of them, we should be little
better then their slaves; and what an unspeakable, and intolerable vassalage
would that be? Quoties scandalum passivum alterius futurum est, ex malitia
nullus debet omittere opus, quod nec est malum, nec h^qet speciem mali propter
malitiam alterius, quando opus illud utile est temporaliter, vel spiritualiter
operanti, quia non postulat ratio, ut malitiae alterius cum damno nostro
succurramus, alias quilibet malitia sua possit nobis vocere, ut omitteremus
opus nobis utile: malitia autem alterias nobis vocere non debet Lucssius
Turrianus.


Secondly it would make against the peace of Conscience; for it would so
perplex men's consciences with doubts, and uncertainties; as that they would
hardly know when, and how to act in the use of things indifferent, for wicked
men are very prone to be scandalized at the lawful conveniences of the Godly:
and there is no doubt, but many are so wicked, as that they would of set
purpose nourish, and cherish such scandals in themselves, if they thought that
the Godly would hereupon forbear such their conveniences: there be some
people of such malevolent spirits against Ministers, as that they are
scandalized at the decent apparel of them, and their wives, at their competent
fare, and moderate housekeeping: and, if they must make the humor, and opinion
of such men the rule of their walking in all things indifferent, it will be a
very difficult matter for them to know how herein to carry themselves* But this
doctrine, that we are to forbear all indifferencies, at which wicked men are
scandalized, if it be unlimited would create perplexities, not only unto
Ministers, but unto all sorts of men, especially such as have any thing due
unto them from others: for grant this, and how often will a Landlord be at a
loss to demand his rent? a Creditor his debts? and the magistrate his tribute
or contribution?

Add unto this, thirdly, that this doctrine, without limitation, will tend
unto the overthrow of public peace, and order, and brings in nothing but
anarchy and confusion: for public peace and order depends much upon the
preservation of propriety: and upon what a ticklish point would propriety
stand, if we must forbear to exact, or receive all such temporals, at which
wicked men are scandalized, that can be forborne without sin? unto what wrongs,
and injuries would this expose such, as are well affected? for there be some
men so wicked and malicious, as that they would be scandalized at their
temporals for the nonce to deprive them of them. I shall conclude this
particular with the resolution of Aquinas 2. 2dae. q. 43. art. 8. Propter eos,
qui sic scandala concitant, non sunt temporalia dimittenda: quia hoc and
noceret bono communi: dar tur enim malis rapiendi occasio, and noceret ipsis
rapientibus, qui retinendo aliena, in peccato remanerent. Vnde Greg. dicit in
Moral. Quidam dum temporalia a nobis rapiunt, solummodo sunt tolerandi: quidam
vero aequitate servata prohibendi: non solae cura, ne nostra subtrahantur,
sedne rapientes non suae, semet ipsos perdant.

But what if this imaginary appearance of evil flow from the supposall of a
weak one, yet an holy one.

Why then it must be omitted, but with this caution, so it may be without sin,
or as the ordinary gloss upon that 15 of Matthew. v. 12, 13, 14. resolves it,
Salva triplici veritate, vitae, Justitiae, Doctrinae, so the threefold verity
of life, justice, and doctrine be preserved safe: Nam per hanc triplicem
veritatem (says Gregory de Valentia), intelligitur omnis rectitudo, and
immunitas a peccato in actionibus humanis. Veritas namquevitae continetur in
actionibus rectis, quas quis in seipso exercet convenienter rectae rationi, and
appetitui recto, atque ad^o vere veritate quadam practica: Veritas autem
justitiae rectis actionibus quae exercentur erga alterum similiter,
convenienter rectae rationi, prout vere and absque peccato oportet: veritas
denique doctrinae continetur fide vera, and minime erronea: By this triple
verity is understood all the rectitude and freedom from sin, that is in
humane actions, for the verity of life is contained in those regular actions,
which any one exercises in, and toward himself agreeably to right reason,
and a well governed appetite, etc. The verity of justice consists in those
regular actions, which are performed toward another, likewise sutably to right
reason, as it behooves, truly and without sin.

And to conclude, the verity of doctrine consists in a true, regular, and
unerring faith: if these three verities be kept inviolate, every thing must be
abstained from, upon which follows scandalum pusillorum, a scandal springing
from either the ignorance, or weakness of our brother: but, because this
resolution may be thought both too general, and obscure (the Schoolmen
themselves sumbling much about its explication,) we will therefore go to work
more distinctly, and particularly.

Consider whether or no the action, in which this appearance of evil is
imagined to be, is necessary, or indifferent.

If it be necessary, and commanded by God, it must not be omitted, though all
the world be offended: For evil must not be done, that good may come thereof.

Galvin. l. 3. Inst. c. 19. Sect. 13.
Calvin, telling us, regard ought to be had of charity, limits how far, usque
ad aras, that is, so for our brothers sake we offend not God: I may add, so
for our brothers sake we endanger not our own souls. Scandalum quod oritur ex
rebus perse bonis, and necessariis non licet evitare: quia non est faciendum
malum, ut evenia^ bonum. Bonum enim est expetendum, q^atenus bonum est, non
expetitur autem quatenus bonum est, si malum simul expetitur. Nam qui expet^t
bonum, abhorret a malo^qui autem abhorret a malo, qua malum est, is nullo malo
quodcunque sit, non potest allici. Jam vero nullae sunt res plane necessariae
praeter eas quae sunt in se bonae, atque eiusmodi, ut nisi voluntas illas
expetat, a suo vero, and proprio obiecto abhorret* it a que ut maxim
tumultuetur mundus, tamen omnia, etiam extrema quaeque subeunda sunt, ut fiet
illibata Dei gloria. Cameron, in electiora quaedam N. Test. loca* Tom. 2. in
Math 18.7.
To prevent scandal and sin in our brethren, we may not run upon sin our
selves: for a well ordered charity, as Aquinas gives the reason 2. 2dae. q. 43.
a. 7. begins ever at home, making a man chiefly desire and endeavor the
salvation of his ownsoule, and consequently more sollicitous to avoid sin in
himself then to prevent it in other: I may not then omit or neglect necessary
duties, because to some they seem but needless niceties; I must not fly true
holiness, and the power of Godlin^sse, because unto the world it appears but
brain sick peevishness, and an irrational preciseness: others error should
not be seconded, and countenanced with mine impiety, and disobedience.

Scandalum, nisi fallor, non bonae rei, sed malae exemplum est, aedificans ad
delictum, Bonae res neminem scandalizant, nisi malam mentem. Si bonum est
modestia, verecundia, fastidium gloriae, soli Deo captans placere; agnoscant
malum suum, qui de tali bono scandalizantur. Quod enim si and incontinentes
dicant se a continentibus scandalizari, continentia revocanda est? Tertullian.

Here it will not be an unprofitable, A Digression.
nor much impertinent digression, to give you the sum of what Thomas and his
Interprerers say upon this Question, An bona spiritualia sint propter scandalum
dimittenda?

Not to mention their rotten distinction between matters of counsel, and
matters of precept, we will only out of them take notice, that there is a
difference between transgression of a precept, and a temporary, partial, or
occasional forbearance of the matter commanded by a precept.

No pre^ept whatsoever, whether of the Law of Nature, or else but p^sitive, is,
for eschewing the scandal of any whether weak, or malicious, to be truly
broken or transgressed. And a precept is transgressed whenever what is
enjoined in it is omitted at such a time, and in such a case, when all the
particular circumstances, which we ought to regard, being considered, we are
tied to all performance of it.

But yet however upon emergency of scandal, that which is commanded by some
precepts Opera divi^^ praecepti affirmativi, quod non pro semper obligat,
debent aliquando deferri pro aliquo tempore, quando causarent pusillis
scandalum, donee illi sint melius instructi, sed circumstantiae illius scandali
sint mutatae, ita ut conting at praeceptum affirmativum etiam iuris quasi
naturalis, aliquando hic and nunc non obligare propter concursum negativi
praecepti de non ponendo offendiculo pusillis. Joan^^es Wiggers.
may pro hic and nunc, in some times, and at some places, be omitted, may for a
while be forborne, until the scandal taken thereby can be removed by
information, or instruction, or until the circumstances of the scandals be
some way or other changed. Promulgation of a truth, and Christian reproof, are
duties commanded by God, and yet are to be sometimes abstained from, for
scandals taken by, not only the weak, but all malicious. Reprove not a
scorner lest he hate thee, Prove. 9.8. Speak not in the cares of a fool, for
he will despise the wisdom of thy words, Prove. 23.9. Give not that which is
holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest they
trample them under their feet, and turn again and rent you, Matthew. 7.6.

To explain this farther, recourse must be had unto that old and golden rule.
Affirmativa praecepta semper obligant n^n ad semper. Affirmative precepts do
always bind, but not to always: so that we are not bound to perform always
what they enjoine, but only loco and tempore debitis, when we have due time and
place. Now as by the intercurrency of other circumstances, so especially by
occurrence of the scandal of weak brethren there may not be opportunity, and
seasonablenesse of doing what we are urged unto by some affirmative precepts;
and so those precepts may pro his and nunc cease to be obligatory: For when the
obligations of two precepts seem to meet together at the very same time, that
which is of greater obligation tieth us, and so consequently we are for the
present freed from the obligation of the other. Now the negative precept of
eschewing the scandal of the weak is more obligatory than many affirmative
precepts; and therefore (to use the words of Malderus,) contingit aliquando
praeceptum natural affirmativum, hic and nunc non obligare, propter concursum
negativi praecepti naturalis de vitando scandalo pusillorum: For example,
vindicative justice binds a magistrate to execute wrath upon him that does
evil: Charity on the other side obliges him to hinder, as much as he can, the
scandal of the weak: now Charity is a virtue, of an higher note and nature,
than vindicative justice: the precept belonging unto charity (hinder as much as
you can the scandal of the weak) does more strictly tie us, than that
pertaining unto vindicative justice, (punish the guilty). And therefore, if it
be probable, that a great and spreading scandal will be taken at the punishing
of delinquents: a Magistrate may not transgress against justice, and yet
defer the execution thereof.

But so manifold and different are the degrees of obligation in affirmative
precepts: such is the variety of circumstances appertaining unto the matters
commanded by those precepts, and constancy of alterations about those
circumstances, as that I do not see, how any unvariable rules, or constant
directions can be given for Christian carriage in this case. For particulars
then, every man is to be left unto the guidance of his spiritual prudence and
wisdom, which is to direct him in a right apprehension, and discretion of
circumstances: to define the opportunity, and seasonablenesse of practicing
what is commanded by affirmative precepts: and to compare them and the precept
of eschewing the scandal of the weak together: and thereupon to determine,
which is hic and nunc, most obligatory, or does most strictly tie us to the
obedience of it, as being of greater moment. Only in the general we may
safely say thus much: that whereas we have said, that for shunning the
scandal of the weak, we may forbear the practice of things commanded by
affirmative precepts, Hic and nunc, in some places, and at some times, it must
always be taken with this proviso, that there be not incurred a greater, and
more perilous scandal, by forbearance, then would probably be occasioned by
practice of the thing commanded; which is done, when either first, more are
scandalized by the forbearance, than in all likelihood would be at the
practice: or else, secondly, when the body in general, the Church and Common
wealth, or the greatest, and chiefest part of either is scandalized at the
forbeareance, and only some few particular private persons stumble at the
practice: or else, thirdly, when others take occasion by this partial and
temporary forbearance of what is commanded by affirmative precepts, to contemn
the precepts themselves, as being by this our carriage induced to believe that
we verily despise them, and do not so much, for a while forbear, as utterly
disclaim the practice of what they command.

Thus you see, that, according to the common opinion of the schoolmen, things
commanded may in case of scandal for a while be omitted or forborne; but
Vasquez and Becanus dissent from them in this particular: the explication and
confirmation of their opinion I will propound, and then breifely pass my
censure thereon. Sum. Theol. Schol. 3. par ca. 27. q. 5.
Becanus, to make way for his opinion premiseth, that there is a difference
between natural precepts, for some says he bind simply, and always
whatsoever circumstances intervene, and their obligation never cease, such
like are those that forbid lying, perjury, hatred of God, Idolatry etc: for
these facts are so intrinsecally sinful, as that they cannot by any
circumstances be made lawful: others now bind not simply, and absolutely, but
with certain circumstances, and therefore they bind as long as those
circumstances remain, they cease to bind when those circumstances are changed:
Such is the precept for bidding to kill: for that binds with these
circumstances, that we kill not by our private authority, except in case of
necessary defense. Take away these circumstances, and it binds not, for it is
lawful to kill upon the command of authority, or in our necessary defense:
such also is the precept of eschewing scandal: for, however it be dictated by
the law of nature, yet it obliges not absolute and quomodocunque: but with
certain circumstances: and one circumstance necessarily requisite to make it
bind us is, that there occur not any other precept, either natural, or
positive. The reason is, because every one is bound to have a greater care of
his own, than others salvation, and consequently, rather to avoid sin in
himself, than to prevent it in his brethren. And therefore that precept which
is given us for the prevention of sin in others, is but of a secondary
obligation. Now the precept of eschewing scandal is imposed, only for the
hindering of sin in others, and therefore does not tie us, when there occurreth
any other precept, which is given for the avoiding of sin in our selves. But
it may be objected, that the precept of shunning scandal is of the Law of
nature, and therefore is more obligatory than those precepts that are but
positive. Unto this Becanus answers, that a natural precept is more
obligatory, than that which is positive, caeteris paribus, that is, if each
precept, both that which is natural, and that which is positive, be primarily
reserred unto the furthering of our own salvation, unto the preventing of sin
in our selves: But now if on the other side the primary scope of the natural
precept be to hinder sin in others, as it is in the precept of scandal; and
the principal end of the positive precept be to shun sin in our selves, then
that precept which is positive does more deeply bind us, than that which is
natural.

Again, secondly, it may be objected: that if the obligation of the natural
precept of eschewing scandal cease upon occurrence of but a positive
precept; why, then it seems, this positive precept detracts or derogates from
the natural precept of avoiding scandal: as being of greater force, and
validity? In no wise, only it takes away a circumstance requisite to make the
precept of avoiding scandal obligatory, quare cum dicimus (says Vasquez) non
esse omittendum praeceptum positivum propter vitandum scandalum proximi, non
dicimus praeceptum natural derogari pracepto positivo tanquam fortiori; sed
dicimus occursu praecepti positivi cessare quandam circumstantiam necessariam,
ut ^blig^t praeceptum de vitando scandalo etiamsi natural sit.

But all this labor would have been saved, if the question had been rightly
stated: for, whereas it is said, that one circumstance necessarily requisite to
make the precept of eschewing scandal bind us, is, that there occur not any
other precept either natural or positive: this is to be understood cum grano
salis, with this limitation, in case such precepts bind (all circumstances
considered to the performance of what they enjoyne) hic and nunc, at such a
particular time and place; for then omission of what they enjoine would be
sinful, and we are not sinfully to omit any thing, for prevention of scandal
in our brother: Unto the proof of which the reason of Vasquez and B^canus may
be applied.

But, the obligation of affirmative precepts is not universal ad semp^r, but
only l^co and tempore debitis: and therefore what they enjoyne may sometimes,
in the case of scandal, be prudently omitted; but perhaps this which I say is
all that Vasquez and Becanus aim at; and then they have no adversary that I
know of; Every one will grant unto them, that one circumstance necessarily
requisite to make the precept of eschewing scandal bind us, hic and nunc, in
such a time and place, is, that there occur not any other precept binding us
to what it enjoyneth at that very instant time, and place: for it is evident
unto all, that upon occurrencie of such obligations, though scandal ensue, it
would not be on our parts a culpable scandal, an active scandal. But it may
be thought that I have stayed too long upon this digression: to return
therefore where we left.

Secondly, if the action in which this appearance of evil is supposed to be,
be but indifferent: why then, the best direction that we can have will be from
what the Apostle Paul writes unto the Romans chap. 14. and unto the
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 8. and chap. 10. of converts amongst the Romans there were
some strong, and knowing ones, that were well principled, and so knew very well
their deliverance from the yoke of the mosaicall Law: and hereupon, without
any scruple, did eat such meats as were prohibited thereby, perhaps Swines
flesh, or the like: Now at this their practice, several weak Christians, who
were as yet ignorant and uninstructed touching the latitude of their Christian
liberty, were in several regards scandalized, as I have shown in a foregoing
treatise: But yet here the practice of the strong was a thing indifferent in it
self verse. 14.20. and the appearance of evil (to wit, a profane, and
irreligious contempt of the Law of Moses) was only imaginary, arising from the
ignorance, and error of the weak, who thought that Law of Moses to be still in
force, and unabrogated; and the scandal consequent hereupon was only p^r
accidens, flowing not from the nature of the action in it self, but from the
misapprehension of the weak: and yet the Apostle blames the strong for
scandalizing the weak: and therefore in this their action, though indifferent
in it self, there was an active scandal, a scandal culpably given, as well
as taken. The Apostle gives the same resolution unto the Corinthians concerning
things offered unto Idols; to eat them at the Pagan religious feast, and in the
temple of an Idol, carries a real appearance of communion with, and
approbation of an Idolatrous worship of the Idol, and so is scandalous per se,
of it self, and in its own nature, 1 Cor. 8.10. cap. 10. verse. 20,21. But now
to eat these same meats when sold, and bought in the shambles, or set before
them in private meetings, the Apostle resolves to be a thing lawful, and
indifferent, 1 Cor. 10. v. 25, 26, 27. And indeed it could not carry a real,
but only an imaginary appearance of evil; for they were the good creatures of
God, and so incapable of any moral pollution, and they had no religious use,
and so did not reflect any glance of the least honor, credit, or countenance
to the Idol. The scandal then, accrewing by them, was only per accidens; and
yet they were by the Apostles advise to be forborne, if such scandal were
likely to ensue upon the use of them. But if any wan say unto thee, this is
offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat not for his sake that showed it, and for
conscience sake, 1 Cor. 10.28. Here we have a general rule, together with
three limitations thereof.

First, a general rule: if any man imagine evil, and sin to be in an
indifferent action, and hereupon be scandalized, that action is to be abstained
from; if any man say unto thee, this is offered in sacrifice unto Idols, eat
not, for his sake that showed it.

But now here are couched three exceptions.

First, we are not bound to abstain from things indifferent, unless the
scandal consequent be probable; if any man say unto you, this is offered in
sacrifice unto Idols etc. if he say nothing, but smother his opinion, and
dislike in his own breast, we may be guiltless and blameless. And indeed, if
we are to forbear all indifferent things, in which there is only a mere
possibility of scandal, we should be at an utter loss, and uncertainty in our
actings in things indifferent, and never know what to do, we are obliged then
to abstain from things indifferent, only in the case of Quando attentis etiam
omnibus ci^cumstantiis actus inordinatus unius non est ta lis, ut pr^babiliter
putar^ possitasteri futurus occasio ruinae, non eri^ peccatum scandali, nec
distinctum, nee non distinctum, ut sentit etiam Bannes hic art 4. in fine. Nam
tune nonpotest quis censeri causa moralis ruinae alterius. Gregor. de Valentia.
tom. 3. q. 18. punct. 2.
scandal probable, and not in the case of scandal merely possible, and so
much is observed by Calvin upon the 1 Cor. 8.13. Deinde non jubet nos Paulus
divinare nunquid offendiculo futurum sit quod facimus, nisi cum est praesens
periculum.

A second exception is; that we are not required to abstain from things
indifferent, in which our weak brethren imagine that there is evil and sin,
and thereupon are scandalized, unless they have some probable ground for their
imagination: for though the eating of the Idolothytes at a private feast was
not an action in it self scandalous, or inductive unto sin; as being free from
both sin, and all real appearance of it, yet the Corinthians scandalized
hereat had a probable ground why they conceived it to be unlawful and sinful,
the late moral or religious relation that the Idolothytes had unto an Idol:
this is offered in sacrifice unto Idols; Mr Rutherford [in his treatise of
scandal page 53, 54.] expresses this limitation as follows; we read not of
scandals culpable in Gods word, but there be some moral reasons in them; and
he apply eth it unto the offense, that is taken, at tolling of bells, at a
ministers gown, when he preaches: there is no apparent moral reason why the
tolling of a Bell, or a ministers gown should scandalize; for they are of
mere civil use, and have no moral influence in the worship; for the same
tolling of bells is, and may be used to convocate the people to a Baron Court
to hear a declamation, to convocate soldiers. This exception, that I have
laid down, is, I conceive, grounded, as upon what the Apostle says; so also
upon the reality, and truth of our Christian liberty in things indifferent,
which otherwise would signify nothing; for if we are to abstain from all
indifferent things, in which another without probable ground imagines that
there is sin; the servitude of Christians under the Gospel would be far
greater, and more intolerable, then that of the Jews under the mosaicall
administration.

A third exception; which we may gather hence, is, in great part, coincident
with the first, and it is; that the abstinence unto which we are obliged, in
things indifferent, in the case of scandal, is not universal, and total, but
limited ad hic and nunc, those times, and places in which there is danger, or
likelihood of scandal: the Corinthians were, in their private feasts, to
forbear eating Idolothytes, only in the presence of persons apt to be
scandalized, and might elsewhere use their liberty without regret of Conscience.

Unto these exceptions insinuated here by the Apostle we may add diverse
others, of which, some may be collected from what we above said touching the
scandal of the wicked in things indifferent mutatis mutandis, and by and by I
shall add others; but first I shall examine some restrictions, which I gave in
a former edition of this book.

Former Edition.
But now, if the action in which this appearance of evil is supposed to be, be
but indifferent, then these two following things must be pondered. First,
whether, or no it be annexed with a necessary duty, or not? Secondly, whether
or no it be undetermined, left to our own liberty and choice, or else by
authority either Oeconomicall, Political, or Ecclesiastical?

If it be annexed to a necessary duty, we must not omit this, to abstain from
that: So to fly the shadow of sin, we should embrace the body of sin, a sin
really so, a sin of omission; for what is not good, if to omit a duty be not
bad? Good must not be left undone, though evil per accidens come from it, much
less, when only an appearance of evil is joined to it. We must not then shun
the Lords table, because some weaker judgments have imagined in the act of
kneeling, a show of Idolatry. So to avoid but an imaginary appearance of evil
unto men, we shall appear indeed unto God to be evil. A Minister must not
neglect the discharge of his duty, because some have supposed a show of
superstition in some harmless Cerem nies annexed to its performance. So, to
avoid m^ns unjust censures, he should incur a just woe and curse from God:
woe be to me (says the Apostle) if I pr^ach not the Gospel.

Answer.
This first limitation I borrowed from Dr Sclat^r upon the text: for the
examination of it we must distinguish of humane Ceremonies; they are of two
sorts, Circumstantiall, or Doctrinall.

First, circumstantiall, such are the Circumstances of time or place, matters
of order, decency, and the like. Now these are necessary in the general, and
the particulars may be determined by the Magistrate, or Church Officers v. g.
that the public assemblies be at such a convenient time of the day, in such a
place, and that they be convocated by tolling of bells; that the Minister
officiate in a grave habit, gown, cloak, or coat, etc. Now though some of
these may be by some causelessly imagined to be evil; yet they are not
therefore to be forborne, if they be by lawful command of the Magistrate, or
Church, to be annexed with necessary duties; for necessary duties are not to be
omitted for mere circumstances connexed with their performance.

Thus we are not to forsake, or refrain our public assemblies, because some
think there is some superstition in the places of them, our Churches, and the
Convocation of them by bells, upon this ground, that both our Churches and
bells have been abused by Papists. Dr Heylin [in a former edition of his
Geography] relates this following story of Peter Du Moulin; that hearing how
diverse English Ministers scrupled to officiate in a Surplice, he said, that he
would willingly preach at Paris in a fools coat, if leave could not be gotten
of the King, upon any other condition. If this great light of France ever
dropped such words, he had in them doubtless a very good, devout, and zealous
meaning; but yet (under correction) I cannot see how his resolution can be
accorded with that rule of the Apostle; Let all things be done decently; for it
cannot as yet sink into my foolish head, how that a fools coat is a decent
garment to preach in. But this on the bie.

To proceed unto a second sort of Ceremonies, which we may call, for
distinction sake, humane, Doctrinall, Ceremonies; such as men institute, by
their moral signification, to teach, v.g. the Cross, Surplice etc: if these
might lawfully, by any humane authority whatsoever, be unavoidably annexed with
necessary duties, we should then soon resolve, that we are not then to abstain
from them; but the non-conformists ever held that no mortal wight whatsoever
could lawfully urge, or press the unavoidable connection of such Ceremonies
with necessary duties: and indeed they have very good reason against the
Command of such a connection; because it would have been against religion, and
against charity.

First, against religion: they never granted them (as is still supposed) to be
indifferent, but always arraigned them as guilty of superstition, and
will worship; and so, manifest transgressions against the second commandment,
presumptuous additions unto the word, and ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ,
a setting of man's threshold by Gods threshold, and their posts by Gods posts,
Ezekiel. 43.8. and the justice of their accusation will be soon confessed by all
learned, and unprejudiced men, that will with patience, and impartiality read
the reenforcement of their arguments by Parker, Didoclave, and Ames against all
answers and replies whatsoever. The Prelates connexing of humane symbolicall
ceremonies with duties and ordinances that are necessary, and commanded by the
word of God, brings into my mind an artifice of Julian the Apostate: in the
market places of Cities, he set up his own image, with the Effigies of the gods
of the Heathen pictured round about, to the end, that whosoever should do
civil reverence to the Emperors Image, might also seem to worship the gods of
the Gentiles: and by the contrary, they who would not bow to the Gods of the
Gentiles, might seem also to refuse all due reverence to the Emperor. -- Thus
the Prelates, of their own heads, most presumptuously have set up in Gods
worship, and service, their own inventions, and have commanded them to be
joined with the ordinances of Christ: so that hereby they drove many
conscientious Ministers into a great strait, if, out of a lothnesse to loose
the exercise of their Ministry, they conformed unto their Ceremonies, this they
interpreted to be an approbation of them; and, if to avoid their Ceremonies,
they did forbear to baptize, to administer the Lords supper etc. then they
accused them for neglect, and contempt of Gods Ordinances.

Secondly, it was against charity for the Prelates, so rigidly, and
peremptorily to press their paultry Ceremonies, as that unless men observed
them they would not suffer them, by their good wills, to enjoy the precious
Ordinances of Christ Jesus; and this can reasonably be denied by none, who
think, that the souls of men may be damnified by the want of such ordinances:
But to proceed unto a second restriction in the former edition.

Former Edition.
If we are not, secondly, nostri juris, but restrained; and determined by
authority, we must not disobey that, to satisfiea Brother; transgress duty, to
express charity: So to please men, we should displease God. So we should do
evil, that good might come thereof. When the Obligation of two precepts
seemingly lies upon us at the same time, and impossible for both to be at once
obeyed, in such a case, because there is no clashing between Gods precepts,
neither does God by them impose upon his creatures any necessity of sinning,
therefore one of these precepts must give place unto the other; to wit, that
which enjoyneth a less duty, unto that which prescribes a more weighty and
pressing one. Now the duties of Justice ( as a learned Inconformitant, even
Amesius himself, med: Theol. lib. 2. cap. 16.. 62, 63, will tell us) are of
stricter obligation then those of charity. We are more bound to pay our debts
then to distribute Alms. He that has trespassed against another, is more
strictly tied to sue for reconciliation, then the party who has received the
injury. Now to hinder the scandal of the weak, is a duty of Charity; to obey
the lawful commands of authority, a duty of justice; and therefore of the
greater obligation and moment, unto it then the other must give place. I would
have traveled farther in this argument, but that I am anticipated by the
learned, and reverend Professors of Aberdene in their Duplies to the second
answers of the Covenanting ministers, who from page 65. unto 75. have purposely
discussed this very question, whether the precept of obedience to Superiors, or
the precept of eschewing scandal be more obligatory, and have there proved by
many unanswerable arguments, that the former precept, that of obedience to
Superiors is of the twain more Obligatory. Those then that desire larger
satisfaction concerning this matter, I shall refer unto the perusal of them.
How ever in the mean while let it not be thought troublesome, if I insert,
what I judge in them, if not most, yet very r^markeable. It Is this, Debitum
obedientiae, the debt of obedience, which we owe unto superiors, is ( say they
pa: 74) not only debitum morale, a debt or duty unto which we are tied by
moral honesty, and Gods Commandment: but also debitum legale, or debitum
justitiae, (quod viz: fundatur in proprio jure alterius) a a debt grounded upon
the true and proper right which our Superiors have to exact this duty of us,
so that they may accuse us of injury, and censure us, if we perform it not.
There is a great difference b^twixt these two sorts of debts, and the last is
far more obligatory than the first; as for example: A man owes mon^y to the
poor by a moral debt, but to his Creditour he owes them by legal debt, or
debt of justice: and therefore he is more strictly obliged to pay his creditor,
than to give alms. So by moral honesty, and Gods precepts also, a man owes
to his neighbor a pious car^fulnesse to hinder sin in him, by admonition,
instruction, good example, and by omission, even of things lawful, when he
foreseeth that his neighbor, in respect of his weakness will be scandalized
by them. But his neighbor has not such a right to exact these things of him,
neither can he have action against him for not performing of them, as our
lawful superiors have, for our due ob^dience. Thus they.

Hence then may we shape an answer unto that same frequent clamor of some
tumultuous spirits, that our conformity forsooth, is wondrous offensive to many
of our weak brethren.

First, suppose it be so, better they without thy fault be offended,
scandaliz^d at thee, than that the Magistrate be with thy fault disobeyed by
thee. It is no safe course to provide for the peace of thy brothers conscience,
by wounding thine own with the sin of disobedi^nce against authority, to
which for conscience sake thou art to yield subjection: we must not, to comply
with men's humors, resist the ordinance of God, despise the voice of the
Church, rather than a weak brother should be offended, scandalized: we may,
and sometimes must part with our own right; but we ought not to rob the Church
of hers, by b^reaving her of her power, by denying her our obedience. Nay
farth^r, I confess that rather than a weak brother should be scandalized, we
may pro hic and nunc in some particular times and places, pretermit what
superiors prescribe, provided they take no distaste thereat, and others by our
example be not encouraged to contemn their persons, callings, commands: for so
a greater and more pernicious scandal will be incurred, than was declined. But
we are not upon occurrence of any scandal whatsoever, taken by whomsoever,
either absolutely to deny, and utterly r^fuse obedience to the lawful
injunctions of our public governors, whether temporal, or ecclesiastical:
or so much as contemptuously and scandalously for a while omit the practice of
what they enjoine. And omission of what they require, is than contemptuous,
when they p^remptorily urge the practice of it, then scandalous when it
heartens others to a contempt of their authority. To grant any of these
lawful, what were it, alas! but to license confusion both in Church and
Commonw^alth?

Secondly, I demand whether or no the offense given to, or taken by a
Magistrate, who is a bro^her, and withal a magistrate, be not greater than
that which is given to, or taken by one, who is only a brother? An impartial
Judge will soon determine, that the double relation of brother and magistrate,
weighs down the single and naked relation of a brother. Howsoever I am sure,
that the whole exceeds the parts s^verally c^nsidered: the relation of mother
exacts more at our hands than that of brother, and therefore, in warding a blow
from my brother, I am to take care, that thereby the same stroke light not
upon the head of my mother the Church. Whereupon, as Paul exhorts to give none
offense, neither to Jew, nor Gentile, so he Bishop Morton.
: adds in a furth^r specialty nor to the Church of God, 1 Cor. 10.37. The Jews
and Gentiles were but parts, the Church of God the whole, they but brethren,
she the mother. Si ne^as sit vel pusillum quempiam scadalizare, and
praestiterit alligata collo mola afinaria demergi quempiam in profundum, ma^is
quamscan dalizare unum ex pu^^llis Christianis: quam est horrendum fl^gitium
and quam atroci supplicio vindi. candum scandalizare ^os* quorum unius offensio
magis pe^iculoia qua aliorum multorum, etc. Forbefius I^enic. page 405.
If then it were better to be thrown into the bottom of the sea, with a
millstone about ones neck than to offend a little one, a poor and illiterate
artizan, what expression shall we then find answerable to the hainousn^sse of a
scandal given to a pious Magistrate, to a religious Prince, to a Parliament,
and Convocation, to a whole Church and Commonwealth?

Examination.
First, it cannot be denied, but that diverse indifferent things may be hic and
nunc of such weight, and moment, of such necessity, or at least expediency, and
convenience, as that the just commands of our lawful superiors may render
them our duty, and omission of them would be sinful: of subjection unto such
commands the Apostle speaks, Romans 13.5 Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Where by wrath is understood
Metonymically punishment: we are therefore to obey the Commands of the
Magistrate, not only for fear of punishment, but also for fear of sin: lest
we wound the Conscience with transgression of the fifth Commandment. To assert
the contrary, (that it is not a sinful disobedience to violate the Commands of
Superiors concerning some things indifferent in their general nature,) tends
apertly to the dissolving of all government, and stocks up the authority of
Magistrates, and masters of families by the very roots.

Secondly, it is as unquestionable, that all omissions of what is commanded by
humane laws are not sins, unless they be out of contempt of authority: for

First; otherwise (as Aliae leges humanae, quia possunt esse vel justae vel
injustae, idque ratione efficientis, materiae, formae, finis, and hujus aut
illius subjecti, vel adjuncti; idcirco non ita simpli citer alligant, ut earum
quaelibet violatio culpam lethalem inducat. Si enim sic esset, tum quot sunt
leges, tot essent laquei animarum, and qui sub legibus vivunt, pluribus multo
peccatis essent obnoxii, quam qui in barbaris gentibus, vel absque legibus, vel
cum paucissimis transigunt vitam. Ames. de Consc. call. lib. 5. cap. 24. Number. 22.
Ames rightly says) as many laws as there were, so many snares for souls
there were, and they that live under laws, should be subject to many more
sins, then they who live among barbarous people, either quite without laws, or
with but a few.

Secondly, there be diverse laws, that be Multae leges sunt pu^e poe^^les, i^a
ut ipsis plane satisfiat, (...) poena solvatur. Rat. 1. Quia legis finis est
deterrere homines a communi and frequen^i usu hujus aut illius rei, ad quem
finem sufficit constitutio poenae. 2. In talibus etiam legibus est ^acita
conventio and pactum, d^ poena ferenda si contra fiat: Contra leges autem
conventionales, aut sub condition latas, venire quis potest absque peccato. 3.
De talibus legibus, intelligentes homines nunquam faciunt scrupulum
conscientiae, si absit contemptus, scandalum, and notabile damnum. Tales sunt
leges de non ven^ndo, de non piscando, de volucribus aut feris non capiendis,
de non utendo hoc aut i^lo genere vestium, ciborum etc. number. 28.
purely penal, and the intent of such laws is satisfied, when one patiently
submits unto the punishment inflicted for the breach of them; such are several
laws of our Land putting restraints upon some men in fouling, fishing,
hunting, and the like: as also that statute, which prohibited the eating of
flesh, at such times upon politic respects, for the breed, and increase of
cattle, as also for the encouragement of fishing, Now no man can reasonably
hold, that every breach of such laws is a sin, especially when it is not
contemptuous, and scandalous: I put in that limitation, because contempt of
authority, and scandal unto others will make a very small, and otherwise
inconsiderable violation of a mere penal law, to be a very heinous sin.

Thirdly, the omission of what is commanded by humane laws is in many cases
Obligatio legis non potest extendi ultra intentionem, and mentemlegislatoris,
eamque Justam. Praesumendumautem est nullum hominem velle su. os subditos ad
^ethalem reatum and damnat^onem obligare, propter quemlibet suae voluntatis
neglectum. Imo si in aliquo casu magnum damnum, scandalum, aut incommodum ex
observatione quarundam legum sequuturum esset, praesumitur non inte^disse
legislatorem, ut in illo casu observaretur. Ames. de Con. lib. 5. cap. 24. n.
22.
agreeable unto the presumptive will of a just magistrate. It is to be
presumed, that if he knew the cases, he would tolerate the omission, and
therefore such a bare omission would not be a sin: Of this Ames speaks very
well: the obligation, says he, of a Law, must not be stretched beyond the just
intention, and mind of the lawgiver, but it is to be presumed, that no man
would oblige his Subjects to a mortal guilt, and utter damnation, for every
neglect of his will and pleasure. Nay if in some case, the Law cannot possibly
be observed, but some great damage, scandal, or inconvenience, must needs
follow, it is to be presumed, that the Lawgiver never intended that the Law in
such a case should be observed. We would reckon him a very cruel Magistrate
that should be implacably angry at a sick man for eating flesh in a time of
Lent, and can we think then, that there was any such thing as Christian pity
and commiseration in the breasts of those men whom nothing could atone for the
omission of the Cross, Surplice, etc? while they scandalized, that is
destroyed, the immortal souls of many for whom Christ dyed. Suppose the
greatest Monarch upon the face of the earth should command the meanest, and
lowest of his slaves upon some important affair to ride post through such a
City, without any of the least stay or diversion, and then it should happen,
that a company of little children should be playing in the streets, can this
slave think, that he is obliged to ride over them? Nay, unless we imagine his
Master to be a most bloody Tyrant, we must needs think, that he will be highly
displeased at so horrid a cruelty; and can any man then make any tolerable
apology for the tyranny of our late Prelates, who commanded all to drive on
with a furious career in the course of conformity, without any the least stop,
though hereby were hazarded a world of souls, purchased at no lower a rate
than the divine blood of our blessed Savior?

It is the will and pleasure of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that
matters commanded by his affirmative precepts should be, for a while, forborne,
in case of the likelihood of scandal consequent; but these men (in imitation
of him that exalted himself above all that is called God 2 These. 2.4.) could
not be persuaded to dispense with a temporary forbearance of any ceremonies
they enjoined: though they well foresaw, that the sequel of them was likely to
be a very great, and spreading scandal.

But now the non-conformists might spare all this discourse touching the
obligation of humane laws in general: because they hold that humane,
religious, Doctrinall Ceremonies the matter in question, cannot be lawfully
determined by the authority of either Political, or Ecclesiastical
superiors: and for this they have two, as I take it, very convincing arguments.

First, because all such Ceremonies are Saw^y additions unto the word, and
ordinances of God, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and cap. 12.32. strange fire which the Lord
commanded not, Lev. 10.8.

Secondly, because suppose they be indifferent (which was a thing never
granted) yet they are unnecessary toys, and trifles: and therefore it is not
lawful for our superiors to command them, when, from the practice of them, it
is very probable, that scandal will arise. For

First, every power is the Minister of God to thee for good, Romans 13.4 the
power of the Magistrate is like that of the Minister, only for edification, and
not destruction, 2 Cor. 10.8. and cap. 13.10. but now if he should have power
to command humane symbolicall Ceremonies (that may be well spared in Gods
worship and service) when there is likelihood of the consecution of Scandal:
then he should have power to do mischief, to enjoine things hurtful, and
destructive unto the souls of men.

Secondly, our Saviors commination against scandal, Matthew. 18.7. (Woe to that
man by whom the offense comes,) reaches Magistrates, as well as private
persons: and we may say the same of the Apostolical prohibitions of scandal
both to the Romans, and the Corinthians, Romans 14.13, 15, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 8.9.
and chap. 10.32.

Unto these prohibitions add we Paul's resolution to avoid scandal arising
from the use of things indifferent: if meat make my brother to offend (says
he) I will eat no flesh while the world stands, lest I make my broth^r to
offend, 1 Cor. 8.13. For

From this resolution the unlawfulness of the injunction of such ceremonies as
ours will undeniably follow.

To clear this I shall presuppose that, which cannot (with any color of
reason) be denied: to wit, that, that, which Paul held unlawful for himself
to practice in his own person upon a general account belonging to all
Christians, could not by him be lawfully imposed upon others by an
Ecclesiastical Canon; but now Paul held it unlawful to eat flesh in case of
scandal probably consequent, and this was upon a general reason belonging to
all Christians: and therefore he thought it utterly unlawful to impose any
such matter upon others when scandal was likely to follow.

From this thus premised, I shall hence thus argue Syllogistically, against our
Prelates imposition of our Ceremonies.

If it were unlawful for Paul to impose upon the Corinthians such ceremonies
as ours, then it was unlawful for our Prelates to impose such upon us.

But it was unlawful for Paul to impose such Ceremonies as ours upon the
Corinthians.

Therefore it was unlawful for the Prelates to impose such Ceremonies upon us.

The sequel of the major is evident: because the Prelates could not pretend
unto so much authority in matters Ecclesiastical as Paul had: for in each of
the Apostles there was a greater fullness of jurisdiction then in any that
succeeded them.

As for the Minor that may be confirmed by this following Syllogism.

If it were unlawful for Paul to impose upon the Corinthians the eating of
flesh when scandal was likely to ensue, then it was unlawful for him to
impose upon them the use of such Ceremonies as ours.

But the former appears to be unlawful by the 1 Cor. 8.13.

Therefore the latter was unlawful also.

There is nothing here can be questioned but the Major, and that is easily
confirmed from a just comparison of flesh with such Ceremonies as ours.

First, the eating of flesh was undoubtedly a thing more clearly indifferent,
then the practice of such Ceremonies of ours.

Secondly, flesh was necessary unto the maintenance of the life of man by
disjunction: that is, flesh, or some other meat: but now such Ceremonies as
ours are not necessary unto the worship and service of God by disjunction: for
God may be worshipped without them, or any others in their stead: a surplice
(says Rutherford is not necessary by way of disjunction, for neither is
surplice necessary, nor any other white or red habit, that has some mystical
signification, like unto Surplice: So kneeling to the elements is neither
necessary, nor any the like religious honoring of them by prostration before
them, or kissing them.

But against this accusation of our Ceremonies for scandal there are objected
two Comparisons.

First, of the duties of justice and Charity together: the duties of justice
are more obligatory then the duties of charity, as being not only a moral, but
a legal debt: Now to hinder the scandal of the weak is a duty of charity,
only a moral debt, to obey the lawful command of authority in things
indifferent a duty of justice, a legal debt; and therefore of the greater
obligation, and moment: I shall the rather insist on this argument, because it
is of late so much stood on by Dr Sanderson [in his last Sermons printed 1656.
page 249.] where we are not (says he) able to discharge both: debts of justice
are to be paid (says he) before bebts of charity. Now the duty of obedience is
debitum justitiae, and a matter of right: my superior may challenge it at my
hands as his due; and I do him wrong, if I withhold it from him. But the care
of not giving offense is but debitum charitatis, and a matter of but courtesy.
I am to perform it to my brother in love, when I see cause: but he cannot
challenge it from me as his right, nor can justly say I do him wrong, if I
neglect it. It is therefore no more lawful for me to disobey the lawful
command of a superior, to prevent thereby the offense of one or a few
brethren, then it is lawful for me to do one man wrong, to do another man a
courtesy withal, or then it is lawful for me to rob the Exchequer to relieve
an Hospital. Quis est, qui dicat, ut habeamus quod demus pauperibus, faciamu^
furta divitibus? August. ^ont. Mendac. cap. 7.


For answer: First, if this argument be applied unto our Ceremonies there will
be in such application a mere begging of the question; for that our Ceremonies
were things indifferent, the command of them lawful, the practice of them a
duty of justice, a legal debt, is the maine thing in controversy betwixt the
conformists, and non-conformists; and therefore all this should be proved, and
not barely presupposed as it is. But

Secondly, the fore mentioned rule is to be understood with this limitation,
caeteris paribus, if the terms of the comparison be equal: and equal they
are not, when the minims of justice are put into the balance with the
weightiest duties of charity: and so it is in the present comparison, though we
suppose our Ceremonies to be indifferent, and the practice of them a duty of
justice: for of what importance is such practice in comparison of the not
scandalizing of our Brother? Who, that is not extremely transported with
prejudice, will think, that the commands of the Prelates to wear the surplice,
to sign children with the sign of the Cross in Baptism etc. carry any
tolerable proportion with those precepts of the Apostle, destroy not him with
thy meat, thy indifferencies, for whom Christ died; for such things d^stroy not
the work of God? Romans 14.15, 20. What laws, of any earthly wight whatsoever,
concerning ceremonies, can be more obligatory, than the Commands of God
touching the externalls of his worship and service? and yet it is his will, and
pleasure, that these externals of his worship should be laid aside for the
performance of outward works of mercy? I will have mercy and not sacrifice,
Matthew. 12.7. Thus are we to leave our prayers, both public, and private, to
forsake a Sermon, for to save the life of our neighbors, to quench the firing
of his house, to help his cattle out of the ditch: now, if the sacred
Ordinances of God are to give way unto works of mercy unto the bodies of men,
surely then much more is the trash of humane inventions to yield unto a work
of mercy toward the souls of men: This answer which I now give was made by
Ruth^rford in his dispute of scandal unto the Duplies of the Doctors of
Aberdeen pa. 50, 51, 52, 53. his discourse there is so satisfactory, as that I
have thought fit to transcribe what he says; and I hope the reading of it will
not be irksome unto the Reader.

It is true these duties which we owe to others by way of justice, are more
obligatory then those, which we owe only by way of charity, caeteris paribus:
When duties of the Law of nature, and moral Law, are compuned together, then
indeed the duties, which we owe both by the tie of justice and charity, are
more obligatory then the duties that we owe only by the tie of charity. As for
example, My Father is in danger before mine eyes to be drowned, in one d^ep
water, and before my eyes also my neighbor or friend is in danger of the like
kind: the two ties and bands of justice and charity, both by the fifth and sixth
Commandments, are more obligatory, hic and nunc, and do more strictly oblige,
that I run to succor and preserve the life of my Father, than the life of my
neighbor: f^r the obligation to my neighbor, is only Charity, by the
obligation of the sixth Commandment, which obligation cease, hic and nunc,
at this time, when my fathers life is in hazard: and thus far the Doctors
argument goes for strong, as Schoolmen, Casuists, and Divines teach. But it
is not to a purpose for the Doctors: for all offices and duties generally, and
universally, of what ever kind, which we owe by may of Justice, are not more
obligatory, than duties which we owe only by way of charity: as when duties of
a positive commandment of God, enjoined by our superiors, and duties which we
owe by charity only, are compared to either, th^n the Doctors Major proposition
is not clear of it self, as they dream, neither do Casuists, or Amesius, or
Divines say with them; but truth, and all our Divines say against them. Let us
suppose that the King, and Convocation, and Assembly of Priests and Prophets of
Israel make a Canon according to Gods word. That no manner of man presume to
eat shewbread, save the Priests only. All men owe obedience to this, both
because it is Gods express Law, and by the band of Justice the Eld^rs and
assembly of the Ancients have forbidden it. But if our Doctors argument stand
strong, David at the point and hazard of famishing for hunger, sinned in eating
shewbread, yet Christ acquitteth him of all sin, and says Matthew. 12.5. he
and his followers are (...), blameless. Now David was under a duty by mercy,
and love to his own life, and the lives of his followers, to eat show bread,
and he was under the band of Justice, by the Law of the Ancients of Israel, and
Gods law, not to eat. Therefore in some cases when our superiors commandments
are only positive Laws, they are not more obligatory, than duties of Charity,
only commanded in the Law of nature. I clear it further thus, I see my
^^ighbour in danger before my eyes of drowning, and my father commands me to
go and labor, or sow his farm in that time, while I am to preserve the life
of my neighbor, in present danger, to loose his life in a great water. By the
Doctors maxim, I am under the higher obligatory tie of Justice, to obey my
father, who commands a thing both lawful and necessary, by virtue of the
higher commandment, to wit the first of the second Table, than I am obliged by
the sixth Commandment, and of charity only, to give present succor and help
to my dying neighbor, so I must let my neighbor dye in the waters, to give a
duty of Justice to my father of far less necessity. I would not commit my
Conscience to such Casuists, as are the Doctors of Aberdeen. But if the Doctors
would see with some new light of reason; it is clear that not only, the tie of
justice makes the precept more obligatory, but also the weightin^sse of the
thing commanded; yea, and if the positive Commandments of the Lord our God,
who of Justice, and Kingly sovereignty has right to ask obedience of us above
all earthly Superiors, do yield and cede as less obligatory, then
commandments of love only, that are commanded in the Law of nature. What do
our Doctors clatter and fable to us of a right of Justice, that mortal Rulers
have to command in things indifferent, from which the destruction of souls
does arise? for these commandments of Rulers, (Kneel religiously before
bread, the Viceger^nt image of Christ crucified) (keep humane holy days)
(Cross the air with your thumb above a baptized infants face) at best, are
but positive Commandments, not warranted by Gods word. But shall they be more
obligatory by a supposed band of Justice that Prelates have over us to command
such toys, than this divine Law of God, and Nature, Romans 14. For indifferent
days, meats, surplice, destroy not him for whom Christ dyed? All the Casuists
and Schoolmen, Navarra, Sylvester, Sanchez, Raphael dela Torre, Meratius,
Duvallius, Thomas, Scotus, Bona^entura, Suarez, Vasquez, Greg: de valentia,
Albertus, Richardus, Biel, Corduba, Angelus, Adrianus, Alphonsus, Becanus, Yea,
and all the h^st of our Divines cry with Scripture, that mercy and the precepts
of love, and of the Law of nature are more obligatory, than sacrifice, burnt
offerings, and Gods own positive Laws, yea, and that positive Laws loose
their obligatory power, and cease to be laws, when the laws of nature and
necessary duties of mercy, and love (as not to murder our brother) (not to
scandalize) stands in their way. I might weary the Reader here with
citations, and be wilder my self also, but it is a point of Divinity denied by
none at all. 3. What we owe of Justice to our Superiors, is indeed both a
moral debt of obedience, and a debt of Justice and law, which Rulers may seek
by their place, and ex jure, as Aristotle says, but this right is limited:
Rulers have no right to seek absolute obedience, but only in the Lord, not
against charity. And though the place of Rulers be authoritative, yet their
commanding power, as touching the matter of what they injoyne is only
Ministerial, and they cannot but in Gods place exact, that which is Gods due,
and seeing God himself, if he should immediately in his own person Command, he
would not urge a positive commandment, far less the commandment of light
and vain Ceremonies, against and beyond the precept of love, not to destroy a
soul for whom Christ dyed. Ergo, Superiors under God, who borrow all their
light from God, cannot have a higher right, than God has. 4. The comparison of
a man who owes moneys to a Creditor, and owes moneys to the poor, is close
off the way, for he is obliged to pay the Creditour first, but the case h^re is
far otherwise; the debt of practicing indifferent feathers, and straws, such
as kneeling, crossing, wearing Surplice, is neither like the dept owen to the
poor, nor to the Creditor; For natures Law, and Gods word, 1. Cor. 10.18.19.
makes the Non-practise, non-murthering obedience to God, when the practice of
indifferent things is a soul stumbling to the weak, and the practicing is but
at 'its best obedience to a positive Law, and ought to stoop, and go off the
way, and disappeare, when natures Law (murder not) does come in 'its way. When
the Doctors put Loyalty above Charity, they suppose obedience to Commandments
commanding scandalizing of souls to be loyalty to Superiors; which is
questioned, it being treason to the sovereign of Heaven, and Earth, to destroy
his Image, it is taken as loyalty by our Doctors, but not proven to be
loyalty, and so a vain question here, whether Loyalty be above Charity or not.

This dispute of scandal is annexed unto his divine right of Church
Government, which was published 1646. since that Dr. Sanderson 1656 (as I
showed you but now) propounds the argument a new, with a great deal of
triumph, but without any considerable reinforcement; and withal he takes no
notice of Rutherford, his answer, from whence I gather that he never read it:
and indeed it is a thing very incident unto the greatest Scholars of that
party to censure, but never to read their adversaries.

Thirdly, to say something unto Dr. Sanderson as well as unto the Duplyers, I
must needs confess, that I am transported with a just admiration, that so
great a scholar should so extenuate, as he does, the guilt of an active
scandal; for he makes the care of not giving offense to a brother to be a
matter but of courtesy; he cannot, (says he) justly say I do him wrong, if I
neglect it: But first, the Apostle Paul speaks another language, in his
account to make brethren to offend is to sin against them, to wound their weak
consciences, and so to sin against Christ. 1 Cor. 8.12. Compared with ver.
11.13. and Romans 14.15.20. he resolves, that it is a destroying of a brother for
whom Christ died, a destroying of the work of God in him: whereupon Divines
generally determine, that it is soule-murther: Now, in wounding the weak
conscience of our brother, in murdering his immortal soul, there is
doubtless some wrong committed against him: not to destroy him for whom Christ
dyed etc. is more than a matter of mere courtesy unto him.

Secondly, suppose the care of not giving offense be, in respect of our
brother, but debitum charitatis; yet in regard of God it is debitum justitiae, a
legal debt: he may, and does challenge it as due, and we do him wrong if we
disobey him. Our Savior thundereth a woe against such disobedience; Woe to him
through whom offenses come, Luke 17.1. and in the second verse this woe is
aggravated by comparison with a very grievous punishment, it were better for
him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the sea,
then that he should offend one of these little ones.

But to proceed unto the second comparison on which I insisted out of Bishop
Morton and Dr Sanderson: a Comparison betwixt a scandal given to a Magistrate,
and a scandal given to one, who is only a brother: I demand whether or no the
offense given to, or taken by a Magistrate, who is a brother, and withal a
Magistrate be not greater, than that which is given to, or taken by one, who is
only a brother? an impartial Judge will soon determine that the double
relation of brother, and Magistrate weighs down the single, and naked
relation of a brother etc. ut supra.

For answer unto this, distinguish we of a two (...) acception of scandal.
Primary, and Secundary.

First, Primary, and so it is an occasioning culpably the fall of another into
sin.

Secondly, Secundary, and so it is only the angring, vexing, displeasing of
another.

This distinction premised; the comparison may be understood; either of the
scandal of a Magistrate in a secundary acception, with a scandal of one, who
is only a brother in a secundary acception of the word too; or else of the
scandal of a Magistrate in a secundary acception with the scandal of a
brother in a primary acception; or 3. of the scandal of a Magistrate in a
primary acception with the scandal of a brother in a primary acception also.

First; if the Comparison be on both sides to be understood of scandal taken
in a secondary sense, there is no doubt, but the scandal of the Magistrate is
more dangerous, than that of one, who is only a brother: for the wrath of the
supreme Magistrate is as the Messengers of death, Prove. 16.14. as the roaring
of a Lion, Prove. 19.12. In indifferent things then it will be our safest course
to anger a brother, rather then to displease the Magistrate. But this acception
of scandal is impertinent unto our purpose, and so much is confessed by Dr
Hammond in his treatise of scandal page: 23. To be angry, grieved, troubled, at
any action of another, is not (to be offended) in the scripture sense, nor
consequently does it follow, that I have done a miss in doing that which
another man is angry at, unless my action be in it self evil. The scandal
we speak of is culpable; but to displease a magistrate is not always a sin:
the mistake of scandal for the angring of one is taken notice of by Calvin
also upon 1 Cor. 8.13. having affirmed, that some corrupted the doctrine of
scandal with foolish glosses, and others with their impious calumnies, he
shows the original of both their mistakes touching the meaning of offense in
the Apostle. Vtrique errant in verbo offendendi. Nam offendere accipiunt, pro
incurrere in odium, vel offensionem hominum, aut quod idem fere est, facere
quod ipsis displiceat, vel minus arrideat. Atqui clarissime patet ex contextu,
nihil esse aliud quam malo exemplo tanquam obice fratrem impedire a recto
cursu, aut illi praebere causam lapsus. Non ergo hic disputat Paulus de
retinenda hominum gratia, sed de sublevandis infirmis, ne concidant, and
prudenter rege^^^^, ne a rect a via deflectant.

Secondly, if the comparison proceed of the scandal of the Magistrate in a
secondary sense with the scandal of a brother in a primary sense, doubtless
the scandal of a brother is more to be declined: it is far better to anger,
and displease a pious Magistrate, a religious Prince, a Parliament, a whole
Church, and Commonwealth, then culpably to occasion the fall of the meanest,
poorest, and most illiterate artizan into sin: and this will be denied by none
who know, that it is more dangerous to displease God, than man.

Thirdly, if the comparison be to be understood of the scandal of the
Magistrate in a primary acception with a scandal of a brother in a primary
acception too: then I should think, that the scandal of the Magistrate is the
greater, and more to be eschewed, it is a greater sin culpably to occasion the
fall of the Magistrate into sin, then the fall of a mere brother: because the
falls of Magistrates are of a more pernicious example, giving greater
countenance, and encouragement unto sin.

But this will no ways advantage our Sticklers for Ceremonies: for the
non-conformists deny, that their forbearance of Ceremonies did culpably
occasion the fall of the Magistrate into sin: and the contrary they expect to
have proved and not barely dictated.

One thing let me observe on the bie, before I pass on: and it is: that, if
those who make this comparison of the scandal of a Magistrate with the
scandal of a brother, take scandal on both sides in the primary acception
thereof: then they seem to intimate, that there may be a case wherein a man
may be necessitated culpably to occasion the fall, either of a Magistrate, or
of a brother into sin: Of a Magistrate if he forbear what he commands, of a
brother if he practice it: But this is not casus dabilis, for God by his
providence, can never necessitate a man unto sin: of this Rutherford speaks
very solidly in his refutation of the Dupliers page 41, 42. You shall (says he
unto them) be forced to give a case, wherein we are necessitated by Gods
providence, and that by way of contradiction, whether we forbear, or forbear
not to murder either the souls of some weak ones, or the souls of
superiors, by our forbearance of the practice of things judged expedient by
superiors: You make us to murder the souls of Superiors, by the
non-forbearance, or you will have us to murder the souls of weak brethren,
if we practice. This is a wronging of providence, and a Manichean tenent, that
we can be under such a necessity of sinning. Yea, there must be two contrary
revealed Wills in God, Commanding, by forbearing the Ceremonies, not to murder
Superiors, and commanding by not forbearing, not to murder weak brethren:
and so God commands both to forbear and also not to forbear. Mr Tombs [in
his treatise of scandalizing p. 266, 267, 268.] quarrels with Ames, for
affirming, that there can be no such perplexity, that it should be necessary
for a Godly man, whether he do this or that, or not do it, to scandalize some
one: But Dr Ames is to be understood of a scandal in the primary sense, a
culpable occasioning the fall of another into sin: and the objections of Mr
Tombs proceed only concerning scandal in a secundary acception thereof, as
will be apparent unto any one, that will be pleased to peruse them.

There be two things more I shall take notice of in my forementioned discourse.

First, I suppose all along that the Convocation was our Mother, and the Church
of England: but surely she was a step mother unto diverse of the Godly, using
toward them far more rigor, then unto such whom profanesse rendered
obnoxious unto their Courts: if any indifferent man look upon their Canons he
must needs confess, that one of their chief designs was to crush, and
persecute such religious persons, whom they nicknamed Puritans, to destroy with
their Ceremonies such among them for whom Christ died. But I wonder upon what
account, I, or any man else, could think it to be the Church of England. If in
any sense it can be called the Church of England, it was because it represented
the Ministry of England, and that it did not; because the far major part of
it were Cathedral men, Bishops, Deanes. Archdeacons, and such as were chosen
by the respective Chapters of each Cathedral: it might then be a
representation of the Cathedral Ministers, but not of the ministry of England:
and that I shall make good by two parallels.

The first shall be, betwixt our Convocations, and the Council of Trent: many
sober, and moderate Papists accused this to be a packed assembly, a
representation, of, not the Catholic Church, but the Court of Rome; because
the greatest part of it were of the Popes faction, and depended wholly upon him:
So the Major part of our Convocations were of the Bishops faction, and minded
chiefly the interests of Cathedrals: and therefore were not a representative of
all the Ministers in England. I shall exemplify this by instancing in the
Diocese of Bathe, and Wells, wherein I lived: In this there were members of
the lower house of Convocation, one Deane, three Archdeacons, and one chosen by
the Chapter of Wells: and to balance these there were but two Clerks chosen
by the Ministry of the whole Diocese: Now what impartial man, but will
determine that these seven could be no due representation of the Ministers of
the Diocese of Bathe and Wells, as long as five of them were members of the
Cathedral, in whose election the Ministers of the Diocese had no hand at all.

A second parallel shall be betwixt our convocation, and a civil assembly:
wherein we will suppose, that the Prince chooses three hundred, who are his
Courtiers, or else such as have their dependence, either wholly, or in great
part upon him: and the nation choose only a hundred: you may call this assembly
a Parliament, or what you will; but surely no rational man can think it to be
a representation of the nation: and as irrational were it to call the
Convocation a representation of the Ministers, of England, seeing those chosen
by the Ministers were an inconsiderable part of the Convocation.

And unto this we may add; that there was seldom a due, and regular choice
made of the Clerks of the Convocation: I was present at the last election, that
was at Wells: and then Bishop P^irce told us, that it was an unquestionable
privilege due unto his See for him to propound unto us the Clerks that we
should choose, unto which he expected our conformity, tacitly menacing all that
dissented.

And when yet, by all this violence, he was unlikely to carry it for such as he
had nominated; why then, he had another shift, that was (I believe) never heard
of before: he enabled the Pluralists, of whom either all, or most were his
favorites, to voice it in several capacities: to give as many double voices,
as they had dignities, and benefices: his Son gave at that time eight single
voices, two as he was Archdeacon of Bath, two as he was Prebend of Cudworth,
two as he was Parson of Bucklan-Mary, two as he was Vicar of Kingsbury: Now, to
say that such an election was regular, and lawful is as ridiculous, and
senseless, as if a man should say, that in the Choice of Knights of the Shire
for Parliament; men may give as many double voices, as they have Farms and
Livings.

A second thing I shall take notice of, in the now mentioned discourse, is my
misinterpretation of the 1 Cor. 10.32. Upon which I thus descanted: as Paul
exhorts to give none offense neither to Jew nor Gentile, so he adds in a
further specialty nor to the Church of God: The Jews and Gentiles were but
parts, the Church of God the whole, they but brethren, she the mother. Here was
a gross mistake, in thinking, that the Jews and Gentiles here spoken of were
members of the Church: whereas, by the Apostles distinction of them from the
Church of God, it is plain, that they were not as yet converted unto the
Christian faith, but were as yet enemies thereunto, and consequently strangers
unto the Church: And thus having finished my examination of the two limitations
that I gave in a former edition of this treatise. I shall go on to that which
follows.

But suppose the action in which this appearance of evil is imagined to be as
indifferent in it felfe, so also not annexed unto a necessary duty, and we also
left to the use of our liberty, what then?

Two-things are here especially to be considered: first, the quality of the
action excepted at; secondly, the difference of times, and places.

To begin with the first, the action (at which thy brother is scandalized, by
his groundless imagination, that it is evil, or carries a real appearance of
evil) is either of none, or great importance to thee.

If it be of none importance, but weightlesse, as affording thee either none,
or but small benefit: offend not thy brother by an unseasonable exercise of thy
liberty. Know that as authority, so charity should also restrain it: consider
that by this undue use of thy liberty thou sinnest against thy brother, and by
sinning against him thou sinnest against Christ. 1 Cor. 8.12.

But now if it be of some weight, and moment, as yielding thee some great
profit, why thou must a while forbear it, until thy brother may be better
informed, and to inform him that the action is lawful which offends him, thou
must take care too, otherwise thou will prejudice the truth, through thy
regardlesse silence, and also continue his weakness, and foment in him a
negative superstition. Let every one of us, (says the Apostle, Romans 15.2.)
please his neighbor for his good unto edification, And for a man to humor his
neighbor in an erroneous and superstitious opinion, however it may please him,
yet not for his good unto edification: Upon which ground I take it, that the
Apostle Paul, as he refused maintenance at Corinth, to avoid appearance of a
coveteous intention, and mercenary affection in preaching; so also his just
title, and unquestionable right thereunto he at large both professes, and
proves.

But now if thy brother refuse, and contemn information: Tunc desinit esse
scandalum pusilli ex insirmitate, aut simplici ignorantia, et incipit esse
scandalum Pharisaei ex pura malitia, aut ignorantia affectata, and crassa. The
shelter of weakness is thereby taken from him, his judgment being now
overshadowed no longer with a mere weakness arising out of simple ignorance,
but with a proud, and wayward, if not envious and malicious perverseness, that
is accompanied with a gross, wilful, and affected ignorance, He is no longer
then to be accounted a weak one, but a proud and wilful one, and for his
peevishness thou may choose, whether thou will forgo thy liberty. Calvin
upon the 1 Cor. 8.13. tells us of some foollish interpreters, that leave unto
Christians almost noe use at all of things indifferent, upon pretext to avoid
the offense of superstitious persons inepti sunt, inquit, qui nullum prope usum
rerum indifferentium reliquum faciont Christianis, ne superstitiosos offendant,
And he discovers the ground of their mistake to be; because they do not
consider, that Paul here inveigheth against those, who unseasonably abuse their
knowledge before such weak ones, whom they neglect to inform, or instruct
concerning the matter, at which they are scandalized: therefore there will be
no place for reprehension if such information preceed, In hoc hallucinantur
inquit, quod non considerant Paulum hic invehi adversus eos, qui scientia sua
intempestive abutuntur coram infirmis, quos docere negligunt. Ergo
reprehensioni amplius locus non erit, si praecedat doctrina. Mr Tombs [in his
treatise of scandalizing, page 233, 234.] quotes Peter Martyr, and Bucane for
the same purpose, and this what they say is generally, ordinarily, or for the
most part true; for if we are to forbear all our conveniences, and matters of
expediency, when men are scandalized at them, after we have given them, or
offered to give them full information; our Christian liberty in things
indifferent would in these our times come to be just nothing: nay our servitude
would be greater, and more unsupportable, than that of the Jews under the
Leviticall Ceremonies.

However yet information does not always alter the nature of scandal; for the
scandal of the weak may sometimes last, Postquam reddita est ratio facti,
after a reason of the fact, whereat they are scandalized, is rendered to them.
For, by reason of their extreme ignorance, and slownesse of understanding,
they may be utterly incapable of information, and instruction; or else some
opinion, or practice, whereunto they have been long accustomed, may cast such a
mist before their weak judgments, as that they may not be able presently to
apprehend the reason that is given of the action, at which they stumble. And we
should so far pity the simplicity of such poor souls, as to abstain from
that which scandalizeth them, if by such abstinence there accrue not to us any
great loss, or inconvenience.

This is observed by Cajetan upon Aquinas 2. 2 dae. q. 43. art. 7. Vbi dicitur,
inquit, articulo 7 mo. de scandalo pusillorum, si autem post redditam rationem
hujusmodi scandalum duret, jam videtur ex malitia esse; adverto, quod author
non assertivo verbo utitur, sed opinativo, dicendo, jam videtur ex malitia
esse; potest siquidem contingere, quod pusilli non sint capaces rationis
redditae, vel propter pristinam consuetudinem, quae facit apparere dissonum,
quod veritati consonat, vel propter rationem apud eos magis apparentem, vel
aliquod hujusmodi: and tunc quia malitia non facit scandalum, sed ignorantia
vel infirmitas, quamvis reddita sit ratio, cessandum est ab hujusmodi
spiritualibus non necessariis. Cajetan. in 2.2.0.43. etc. Whereas it is said in
the 7th article, touching the scandal of the weak, if after a reason given,
the scandal do still remain, it seems to be of malice; you must note the
Author does not use (verbo assertivo, sed opinativo) saying, it seems to be
of malice. For it may fall out that the weak are not capable of the reason
that is rendered, either by reasen of his former Custom, which makes that to
appear discordant with the truth, or for some reason which in his eyes is more
apparent, or by reason of some such like cause, and then it is not out of
malice that he is offended, but out of ignorance and infirmity.

After Cajetan, Petrus de Lorica does roundly and fully express the matter.
Verum est (says he) quod Cajetanus advertit, scandalum pusillorum perseverare
posse adhuc, postquam reddita est ratio facti, vel quia rationem non capiunt ob
mentis tarditatem, vel ob consuetudinem diu firmatam: in quo casu docet
Cajetanus omittendam esse actionem, ex qua scandalum accipiunt; vel
differendam, donec ad saniorem mentem venerint. Quod solum verum, si actio
omitti potest sine jactura nostrae utilitatis. Si enim magna utilitas
temporalis vel spiritualis interveniat, contemni potest scandalum pusillorum,
postquam sufficienter admoniti sint. In the next place I will recite a
limitation of Gregory de Valentia, that comes under this head, and is very
remarkable.

Having laid down a rule, that for avoiding the scandal of our neighbor,
which springs, either from his ignorance, or weakness, it behooveth us by
the obligation of Charity, to do, or omit, that which may be done, or left
undone without sin: he afterward puts this exception. Est autem
animadvertendum hanc regulam intelligi debere de omni eo, quod sine peccato
fieri, aut omitti possit, non quom docunque, sed moraliter, attenta suavitate,
quae est in jugo legum divinarum: id est, quod sine peccato fieri, aut omitti
possit, sine maxima etiam aliqua, and pene intolerabili difficultate, spectata
quoque in hac condition personae etc, And indeed (me thinks) he speaks
reasonably. For improbable seems it, that the sweet moderation, which is in the
yoke of divine laws, should consist with so great a rigor, as in all matters
whatsoever, not simply unlawful, to exact, not only a brotherly, but also a
servile compliancy with every supposed weak one, whose weakness may be but
pretended by those, that are willing to speak favorably of them. For the
humouring and contenting of every supposed weakling in all matters at which he
takes offense, I conceive not my self bound to endanger my life, to hazard my
estate, and fortunes, or to incur any other great, or notable inconvenience:
for that would truly be durus sermo, an hard saying: who were able to bear it?

But now against this may be objected the resolution of the Apostle, 1 Cor.
8.13. if meat make my brother to offend, I will eat no flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my brother to offend: flesh is of great expediency for
the nourishment of man's life, and yet Paul resolves upon a perpetual
abstinence therefrom in case of scandal Consequent; and this example of Paul
is obligatory unto all Christians.

For answer, first, this flesh may be understood only of such as was sacrificed
unto Idols; for words in scripture usually are to be restrained unto the
subject matter spoken of, and the meat, and flesh, here spoken of in the
Context, was such as had been offered unto an Idol.

Secondly, Calvin resolves that it is an Hyperbole: est, inquit, hyperbolica
locutio, quia vix possibile est, ut quis a carnibus tota vita abstineat, si
remaneat in communi vita significat tamen se nunquam usurum potius sua
liberate, quam ut fit infirmis offendiculo. Nunquam enim licitus est usus,
nisi moderatus ad charitatis regulam. This Hyperbole of Paul's you may Parallel
with that of our Savior, Matthew. 5.39, 40, 41. whosoever shall smite thee on
thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. And whosoever
shall compel thee to go a mile, gee with him twain.

Thirdly, Paul is to be understood, only upon supposition that the Gospel
should not be fully promulgated, and brethren should remain uninstructed
concerning the nature of Christian Liberty; for usually it is in this case only,
that to eat flesh involves in the guilt of an active scandal, makes a brother
to offend: hence the Apostle exhorts the strong amongst the Romans to abstain
from meats forbiden by the Law of Moses, for prevention of the scandal of the
weak: but amongst the Galathians, and Colossians he dislikes such an
abstinence, and dehorts from it: and the reason, of this his different
carriage, was: because the weak amonst the Romans were not fully taught the
doctrine of Christian liberty, and the Galathians and Colossians were Julian,
mistaking the Apostles doctrine of scadall, thought to make use of it for the
starving of the Christi^s, and therefore, in Antiochia, and in the region round
about, he dedicated all the fountains to the Goddesses of the Gentiles, and
caused all the victual, that was to be sold in market places, to be sprinkled
with Ethnic, holy waters, thinking that some would be scandalized at the
drinking of the water of such fountains, and at the eating of such victual,
and that the Apostles doctrine obliged all to forbear any thing in the case of
scandal: never-thelesse Christians, without scruple of conscience, drank of
the water, that was in the Wels, and ate of the meat, which they bought in the
market; being, since the full publication of the Gospel, fully persuaded,
that to the clean all things are clean. Rutherford determines; that, since
the plenary promulgation of the Gospel, we are not obliged to forbear the
good Creatures of God, things good, fit, and useful for the life of man, or of
physical use in the worship of God, though men be scandalized at such things,
and the reason of their scandal be, because they have been abused unto
Idolatry, and superstition: he instanceth in Churches, abused unto the saying
of Mass, and unto the Idolatrous worship of Saints, and in bells that have
been abused by Papists by being consecrated, baptized and used to chase away
devils: and for this his determination you may gather out of him [p. 69, 70,
71, 72, 75, etc.] these two reasons.

First, because abstinence from such things, (upon a religious account, for
avoidance of scandal, because abused to Idolatry, and superstition,) would be,
(after a full publicatio^ of the Gospel) a Judaizing, an external Co^formity
with the Jew, a betraying of our Christian liberty, a co^firming and hardening
the Jews in their Apostasy: it would make, as Paul says, Jesus Christ of no
effect, it would make us debtors to Circumcision, and to all the Ceremonies of
Moses, Ga. 5.3, 4.

Secondly, the practice of such things, since we are fully possessed in that
liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free, is morally and Theologically
necessary, for the asserting of our Christian liberty: to show, that every
Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, 1 Timothy 4.4. That unto the
pure all things are pure, Titus 1.15. that we dare not call that unclean which
God has cleansed, Act. 10.15.

But there is one passage in this author concerning scandal, which I cannot
in any ways approve of: it is page 58, 59. where he averreth, that things of
mere civil use, that are necessary with a necessity of convenience are to be
forborne, if scandal follow, if they be not convenient in the highest degree.
And that no man may think I misreport him, take his own words. There be some
things of mere civil use, as Bells, gowns, Pulpits, preaching on Tuesday or
Thursday. These be considered two ways. 1. As necessary with necessity of
convenience simply. 2. With necessity of convenience secundum praevalentem
gradum, as convenient in the highest degree of necessity, or that moral
maximum quod sic. In the first degree, what scandalizeth, is to be rejected: in
the last respect they oblige, and if any be scandalized thereat, it is taken
and not given.

But sure this doctrine if embraced will put and hold men's Consciences upon a
perpetual rack: For it will be a matter of great difficulty especially for
some men allwaies to determine what in their indifferencies is convenient in
the highest degree.

Secondly, we must put a difference between times, and places: for however they
be but circumstances of actions, and therefore extrinsecall to them, so that
they cannot cause any such essential variation in them, as to make those
actions materially good, or sinful, which are of themselves in their own
nature indifferent: yet notwithstanding the public and ordinary abuse of an
action at such a time, or in such a place, may make it then and there, in that
place and for that time appear to be evil; although the same action at
another time, and in the same place; or in another place, at the same time, may
not be obnoxious to any such censure.

First then, time may alter this imaginary appearance of evil in an action.
Reservation of the brazen serpent, as for other ends and purposes, so for
commemoration of that miraculous deliverance of the Israelites thereby, from
the stings of fiery Serpents, was for a while free from all suspicion, either
of Idolatry or superstition: but when once it became the general, ordinary,
nay daily occasion, and object of Idolatry, of the grossest, and most palpable
kind of Idolatry that can be, when incense was offered to it: then if the
public Magistrate had not demolished it, he might justly have been thought to
favor that Idolatry wherewith it was polluted. And therefore commendable was
Hezekiah his zeal in breaking it in pieces, 2 King. 18.4.

In the former Edition it was observed out of Morton that the same Hezekiah did
not destroy the high places, which Solomon had built for Astoreth, the
abomination of the Sidonians: and for Chemosh, the abomination of the Moabites;
and for Milchom, the abomination of the Children of Ammon, and yet was never
taxed for countenancing of Idolatry. For in his days the Idols there erected,
were disregarded no man worshipping them, and therefore might safely be
suffered to stand: but when afterward they were generally and usually adored,
then the good King Josiah justly demolished them: and indeed should he have
permitted them then when the Idolatry wherewith they were defiled, was flagrant
at the height, he might justly be suspected to be a favourer of that Idolatry.

But unto this observation of Mortons, Ames thus replyeth. He propounds, as
very observable, that Hezekiah did not abolish the Idols, which Solomon
suffered to be set up, because they were neglected. But. 1. it may well be
thought that those idols were destroyed by Hezekiah, and set up again before
the time of Josiah, as many other superstitions were. 2. It cannot be doubted
but they should have been destroyed, even though they were for the time
neglected: because either Hezekiah had as good cause to destroy them as Josiah;
or else he might have prevented that cause which Josiah had: and to prevent
evil, we are as well bound, as to correct it.

Unto this Reply of Ames, Dr Burges rejoineth, whose Rejoinder and Ames his
Triplication I shall rather transcribe then Epitomize.

Dr Burges his Rejoinder unto the first part of the Reply.

Say you so? then belike it may be well thought that the holy Ghost knew not so
well as you what was done, for the text says, that Josiah destroyed those high
places, which Solomon King of Israel had set up: and then describes by the very
place, where, and by name those same Idols, which Solomon had set up for his
outlandish wives, 1 King. 11.5, 7. I hope you will repent this rashness, I am
sure you should.

Ames His Triplication.
Because the Defender did make this one ground of denying our consequence from
Hezekiahs zeal against the monuments of Idolatry, that he did not abolish the
Idols which Solomon suffered to be set up in favor of his strange Wives:
because they were (at that time) neglected Idols. It was replied, that it may
be well thought, they were destroyed by Hezekiah, and set up again before the
time of Josiah. This the Rejoinder calls rashness to be repented of: because
it is said (2. Reg. 23.13.) that Josiah destroyed those high places, which
Solomon had set up. And was it such a rashness, to say that it may be thought
so? the phrase is more modest then theirs, who peremptorily affirm those Idols
to have been neglected, until after Hezekias time: when the Scripture
testifies plainly, that Ahaz Hezekias his father worshipped Molech (which was
one of those Idols) by making his son to pass through the fire: and was so
madly given to superstition, that he sacrificed under every green tree. 2. Reg.
16. Nay less was said, then some learned have with great probability affirmed:
Existimamus etiam, vivo Salomone, omnem illam daemonum officinam disruptam
fuisse, dilaceratam, atque disperditam. Videnturque referendae illae statuae,
and luci, and ^rae and reliqua Idolatriae monumenta (2. Reg. 23.13.) ad
Manassem, and Ammonem (qui excitaverant illa in eodem loco and su^ pra eadem
funda^enta) non ad Salomonem, ante annos 250. extinctum. Incredibile dictu est,
tantum scandalum ab Asa, Josaphato, Joiada, cum late idolatriam disperderent,
in oeulis ipsis positum, non vidisse, aut non auso^ attingere, and ad annum
3406. Mirum profecto si Idola illa post tercentos 50. annos subsisterent, quae
Solomon ipse poenitens, and caeteri reges boni sustuliffent. Utique dicendum
videtur, ab impiis regibus extructa fuisse ejusdem generis fana, and Idola,
quae olim Solomon in iisdem locis extruxerat: ut illud quae aedificaverat
Solomon, sit idem ac si dixisser, qualia aedificaverat.
Namely, that those Idols with their appurtenances were first defaced by
Solomon himself, after his repentance; and being restored after by Idolaters,
were again defaced. Salianus ( in his Annals ad an. 3309.) says thus: we
think^ also that while Solomon lived, that while shop of Devils was broken up
and ruined. And withal the statues, the groves, and altars, as also the rest
of Idolatrous monuments. 2. King. 23.13. to have reference to Manasses, and
Ammon (who had set them up in the same place, and upon the same foundation) and
not to Solomon, who dyed 250 years Before. It is incredible to speak, that
when Asa, Josaphat, and Jehoiada did far and near destroy idolatery, they
notwithstanding suffered a scandal so apparent. And to the year 3406. It were
very strange if those idols after 350 years should yet remain, the which
Solomon after his repentance, and other good Kings had abolished. So that it is
probable that such like temples, and Idols were repaired, and built up again
by other succeeding ungodly Kings, which Solomon in former time had made: that
that which Solomon builded should be all one with such like as he had builded.

Where he shows by diverse instances, both out of scripture, and out of common
speech, how that word which, does not always note the same singular substance;
therein confuting all the ground that the Rej. had for censuring the Repl. of
rashness to be repented of. This sentence is the more also to be favored;
because according to the other, which our Def. and Rej. maintain, it will be
very hard to answer that objection against Solomon's repentance, which Solomon
de admiffo Idolatriae scelere, nunquam per. fecte paenituit. Nam si fractus
paenitentiae dignos faceret, satageret ante omnia, ut idola quae aedificave^at,
^ollerentur, and non in scan^alum stultotum, quae ipse ^um fuisset
sa^ientissimus, ^tronea fecerat ^uasi sapiente ^c recte facta ^elinqueret.
Rabanus on 2 Reg. 23. groundeth on that supposition: Solomon never truly
repented of his Idolatry: for if he had manifested fruits worthy repentance, he
would have taken order with those Idols, which he had set up by remooving them,
and (being so wise a man) never have left them to stand for stumbling blocks
to fools, as if what he had erroneously devised, had been well and wisely
done. Beside all this, it is not credible, that the same individual Temples
stood by Jerusalem from Solomon's time to Josias; if it were but for this, that
the Assyrians came even to the gates of Jerusalem, spoiling and breaking down
all costly buildings, ( Such as Solomon's Temples were) not sparing, but
deriding the Gods of nations. 2. Reg. 8.

Unto the second branch of the Reply Dr. Burges thus rejoineth

Burges his Rejoinder,
This prooves not that they were, nor is it likely that God himself would have
vouchsafed such through praises to Hezekiah, as he does, 1. Kings. 18.5. If
Hezekiah had been bound to destroy those neglected Idols, as well as others
then taken in the manner, and did not say, why he was bound to do that which he
did not.

Because either Hezekiah had as good cause to destroy them as Josiah; or else
he might have prevented that cause which Josiah had; and to prevent evil, we
are as well bound, as to correct it.

If Hezekiah had as good cause to destroy those high places, which stood
neglected, ( and had done perhaps about three hundred years, even since the
death of Solomon's wives, whose Chapels they were) as Josiah had, when
Manasses, or Ammon had, after Hezekiah his time, revived that Idolatry; the
holy Ghost would have taxed Hezekiah for not doing that, for doing whereof he
commends Josiah; or at least, not have left his integrity crowned with like
praises, as he does, 2 Kings, 18.5. nor was Hezekiah bound to prevent the cause
which Josiah had, unless he had suspected it. For though we are bound to
prevent evil which we foresee, so far as we well can, yet are we not bound
to foresee all that may happen. Neither are the same means always requisite
for prevention, which must be used for recovery. If you think otherwise, burn
all your popish books, lest they fall into the hands of popelings, and do
mischeife; for you are bound to prevent evil, as well as to correct it.

Ames his Triplication.
It was added by the Repl. that those Idols should have been destroyed, (though
they had been for the time neglected) because that evil for which Josiah
destroyed them, ought as well to have been prevented as corrected. To this the
rejoinder answers, that this is not true, except Hezekiah had suspected that
evil. And who will say, that there is no cause to suspect evil of an Idol,
though it be for a time neglected? or can any man think, that if the
Israelites had neglected them, no Sydonian, Moabite, or Ammonite gave occasion
of any evil to be suspected by those Idols? The Spanish and French Papists (to
say nothing of English) when they in passing by the Cross in Cheape-side, do
reverence unto it, give they not cause to suspect some evil to cleave unto it?
The same means (says the Rejoinder) are not always requisite for prevention,
which must be used for recovery. Yes truly, about Idols (if we judge out of the
Scripture) the very same means. Burn then (says the Rejoinder) all your
Popish books, lest they fall into the hands of Popelings to abuse them. So will
I certainly, if you can show me, that they must be burned, when Popelings have
had them in their hands, and abused them, which here you grant concerning these
Idols.

Here is nothing of the Rejoinder left unexamined, but his quotation of the 2
Kings 18.5. and how impertinently that is alleged will appear by comparison
of it with 1 King. 15.5. David did that, which was right in the eyes of the
Lord, and turned not aside from any thing, that be commanded him all the days
of his life, save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite. For from this
commendation of David we may as well conclude, that his numbering of the
people, and his purpose and attempt to revenge himself of Nabal by destroying
him and all his, were lawful; as we may infer from the praises of Hezekiah,
that his omission in not demolishing Solomon's outlandish Idols, must be
unlawful: See Rutherford page 90.

Secondly, we must distinguish of places. That which in some places carries a
show of evil, elsewhere perhaps is not suspected thereof. According to places
therefore, in indifferent matters we may vary our practice. It was the advice
of Ambrose unto Austin, and Monica, respected by Austin, as if it had been the
answer of an heavenly oracle; Ad quamcunque Ecclesia^ veneritis, inquit, ejus
mone^ servate, si pati scandalum non vultis, aut facere. Aug. Ep. 86.
unto whatsoever Church ye shall come, observe the manner or custom thereof,
if ye will neither give nor take scandal. Which advice if restrained unto
things indifferent is very good: and besides we have Paul's precept, and
president for it: his precept, 1 Cor. c. 10. v. 32. Give none offense, neither
to Jew, nor Gentile, which could not be done, but by complying with them in
indifferencies. His president also answers his precept; To the Jews he
became a Jew, to them that were under the Law, as under the Law; to them that
were without the law, as without the Law; to the weak, as weak, 1 Cor. 9.20,
21, 22. Amongst the Jews he shaved his head, made a vow, Acts 18.18. and
Circumcision was then indifferent, but after the full promulgation of the
Gospel it became to be not only mortua but mortifera, not only dead but deadly,
as being an interpretative deny all of Christ's coming in the flesh.
circumcised Timothy, Acts 16.3. and yet amongst the Gentiles, where these
actions bore an appearance of Judaisme, he withstood Peter for them even to his
face, Gal. 2.11. There be three other instances in the former edition, which
because they are questionable I shall wholly wave, and pass on unto the
examination of my vain triumph over the non-conformists, wherein, as the
Proverb is, I reckoned without mine host.

Former Edition.
After these limitations of the duty of abstinence from all appearance of
evil; I cannot but wonder at our irregulars misapplication of it. They hence
eagerly cry down the laudable discipline, and lawful Ceremonies of our Church.
What fearful outcries do they make concerning their appearance of Idolatry,
superstition, will worship and Popery? Terms you see by the exceptions put to
this precept, Hooker.
as much too big for our innocent, and harmless Ceremonies, as Hercules shoe,
for a child's foot. Indeed our Ceremonies, for example, the Surplice, Cross in
Baptism, kneeling at the Lords Supper, may have a material semblance with
those that in Popery have been abused to Idolatry, and superstition, and so
consequently taken materially, in respect of their materials, may have an
outward show of Popish Idol. try, or superstition; but consider them as imposed
by our Church, and generally used by her members, so they are formally differ
need from those which Papists have applied to Idolatrous ends and purposes. For
our Church publicly professes a quite contrary use or application, end, or
intention of them. And external actions have their specification, and
consequently distinction from their end, and intention, from it they take their
species, or kind, and accordingly are distinguished. Now since all Popish,
whether superstitious, or idolatrous abuses of our Ceremonies, are publicly
disclaimed, and their right use explained; who can justly imagine any show of
Popery in them? An Israelite was not to be smitten for an Egyptian, because for
a while he once sojourned in Egypt, if afterward he had his constant abode in
Canaan. The garment spotted with the flesh was no longer to be hated, than
spotted: being once washed, it might again be used. Our Ceremonies were
defil^d in Egypt, in Popery, with superstition, and Idolatry; but our Church
(God be praised) has washed them from both in her public, and professed use
of them. And therefore now they stand above either calumny or suspicion.

Examination.
First, our non-conformists will tell us, that there was betwixt our
Ceremonies, and those of the Papists, even a formal conformity, inadequate,
and in part, though not total and adequate. For though our Prelates disavowed
many, nay most of those superstitious and idolatrous ends, unto which the
Papists applied our Ceremonies, yet they still professed one end and intention
of the Papists in the use of them, to wit, mystical signification; and this to
be a Popish and superstitious end, the non-conformists prove at large in their
books.

Secondly, a material conformity in Ceremonies, carries many times a real
appearance of evil, and scandalizeth actively. It does not appear that the
Altar which Vriah erected, was formally the same with that Ahaz saw at
Damascus, that it had the same use and intention, the worship of a false God.
The text mentions only a material conformity unto it, and for this reason
it is condemned, 2 King. 16.10, 11. Peter's conformity with the Jews Gal. 2. was
only material, not formal, for a Jewish end and purpose, and yet it is blamed
by Paul as guilty of an active scandal, verse. 11, 12, 13, 14. Suppose a
timorous Protestant in Spain or Italy go to Mass, and there bow before their
breaden God, not out of any intent to honor the Idol, but only for
preservation of his life; his presence and bowing will only be materially the
same with that of Papists; but will any man think that this can acquit him from
the sin of Idolatry? Indeed Aelian var. Histor. lib. 1: cap. 21. excuses
Ismenias a Th^bane from adoring the King of Persia, because though he stooped
down before him, yet it was not to worship him, but to take up a ring that he
had for the nonce let fall at his feet: but no rational man will admit of this
his apology, because this stooping in common use was the adoration of the King,
and interpreted to be such by the King himself, and by the spectators.

Some think that though a different end and intention from Pagans, Jews, and
Heretics in the use of their Ceremonies, cannot legitimate them and free them
from scandal; yet that profession of such a different end and intention, is
sufficient for such a purpose. But

First, the primative Church was of a different opinion. Ames dispute about
humane Ceremonies page 127.
The story of Origin is well known, how he delivered Palm to those that
offered it to the image of Serapis, with this expression of his intention: come
and receive the boughs, not of the image, but of Christ. Yet was he therefore
censured as a worshipper of that Idol.

Secondly, if this were true, then we might lawfully use circumcision and the
passover, so we disclaim the Jewish end of them, to signify Christ to come;
and profess that our intention, was by them only to signify, that Christ was
already come in the flesh.

Thirdly, a material conformity with Papists in their Ceremonies, has
nourished in them a hope of our coming up to them, but not inclined them in any
degree unto us: for they have still protested that they would not step so much
as one foot to meet with us: and if my memory fail me not, there is some such
thing in Franciscus Sancta Clara.

Indeed experience has always showed, how uneffectuall a means such a
compliance has been for the conversion of Papists. Whom of them has it ever
won over unto the Protestant party, but Spalato, and others of the like
temper, who (as Mr Fuller speaks of some Italians that pretended unto true
conversion) were neither good dough, nor good bread, but like Ephraim a Cake
not turned?

There was a greater material conformity with Popish Ceremonies in Cathedrals,
then in other Churches; but how thin a harvest of converts can they produce?
Nay it is observed by some, that near them, Popery thrived more then in other
places. I heard a Knight of the royal party once affirm, in the presence of
many persons of worth, that he thought there were more Papists in Wells then in
all the County of Somerset besides: and yet of late years that Cathedral
outstripped most in England for Ceremoniousnesse. In the times immediately
preceding the late troubles, not only the former Ceremonies of the
Common Prayer book were urged with more violence than before, but diverse
others quite antiquated were revived. But though Popish Ceremonies were
increased, we do not find that the number of Papists was hereby any thing
diminished. I shall conclude this with that of Didoclave page 540, 541.
Formalistae se retinere quosdam ritus Pontificiorum, ut eos lucrifacere
possent, and reducere in rectam viam. Deus in dirigendis suis prudentissimus
aliam praescripsit rationem, long diversam, ut nempe ab omni gentium
superstitione and idolatria essent, quantum fieri posset, remotissimi. Nam
species conformitatis, aut reservatae reliquiae superstitionis and idolatriae
illaqueant pios, and confirmant idolatras in sua superstitione and idelatria.
Gloriarentur Judaei, ut supra dixit Constantinus, si viderint religionem
nostram non p^sse subsistere absque illarum ritibus. Et Hieronymus ait,
Judaicas Ceremonias in Ecclesia Christiana retentas non efficere Judaeos
Christianos, sed Christianos Judaeos. Augustinus secundum regulam illam a
legislatore prudentissimo datam populo su^ sic consulit. Si quaeritis, unde
vincantur Pagani, unde illuminentur, unde ad salutem vocentur. Deserite omnes
solemnitates ipsorum. Deserite nugas eorum. Etsi non consentiant veritati
nostrae, saltem pudeat paucitatis suae.

But I pass on to the second thing I proposed, the confirmation of the point,
where my proofs shall be applied some to real, some to imaginary appearances
of evil.

First, See it backed by consonant places of Scripture. Solomon advises his
young man to walk caute, as well as cast, not to come nigh the door of the
strange woman's house, Prove. 5.8. This had not evilnesse real, but only the
appearance of evil, as being in a corrupt mind an incentive to uncleanesse,
and in beholders an occasion of jealousies and suspicions. Now from Solomon's
interdicting this appearance of evil in special, we may be way of Analogy and
proportion inf^rre a fitness of forbearing all in general. Unto this is
anagogically applied the Nazarites precise abstinence from wine, Number. 6.3, 4.
The Nazarite, as you may see there, was to abstain from wine, from vinegar of
wine, from any liquour of grapes, from the materials of wine, grapes, from
moist grapes, from dried grapes, from all that is made of the vine tree, from
not only the kernel, but even the husk of the grape. The Jews have added,
they were not to come nigh a vineyard. With a semblable strictness are we to
separate from sin, from all sin, not only from the kernel of sin, from a
sin really so, but also from the husk, the appearance of sin.

The Children of Israel were charged not to do like the Heathen that were
round about them, 2 King. 17.15. where they are interdicted not only samenesse
with, but also likeness unto their fashions: they were forbidden the fashion
of rounding their heads, and cutting their flesh, of marring the corners of
their beards, of making any baldness upon their heads, or between their eyes,
Lev. 19.28. and chap. 21. ver. 25. Deuteronomy. 14.1. Not because so to do was simply
in 'its own nature a sin, but for that it gave show of a sin, of inordinate
sorrow for the departed; of which 'twas then an expression much in use amongst
the heathen. Hugo Cardinalis upon the text alleges Hosea 2.16. Thou shall
call me Ishi, and shall call me no more Baali.

The Gentiles gave the title of Baal, so also of Baalim unto their great and
common Idol-God, supposed to be the Sun, and to all the several images, and
representations thereof. And therefore God prohibited application of that title
unto himself, in worship and invocation: Thou shall no more call me, o my
Baal^ for though there be no harm in the word (it signifying in Common use
husband, as well as Ishi) yet by reason of the ordinary application thereof
unto Idols, there would have been in invocation of God by that name, a gross
and palpable appearance of Idolatry. Dico Sacerdotibus Judaeorum fuisse
prohibitam rasuram Ezekiel. 44. non quod in se mala sit, sed ne viderentur similes
Sacerdotibus Gentilium, in quorum vicinia habitabant, qui toto capite raso
idolis sacrificabant. Ut ex Epist. Hieremiae apparet. Quod ex se non es^et
malum patet, quia Ezechiel, qui Sacerdos erat, jubetur a Deo radi. Ezech. 5.
and praeterca Numb. 6. Nazaraeus completo tempore consecrationis suae, jubetur
radi. Unde Paulo dicit Jacobus Actor. 21. sunt nobis viri quatuor habentes
votum super se, his ergo assumptis sanctificato te cum illis, and radant capita
sua. Solum ergo propter viciniam Idolatrarum prohibeba^tur Sacerdotes Judaeorum
radi quae forte causa erat, cur Optati, Hieronymi, and Ambrosii, tempore
Christ^an^ facerdotes non raderentur, sed ^onderentur. Nam ad huc ip^orum
tempore erant Sacerdotes Isidis qui caput radebant. Ut Ambrosius Epist. 36. and
Hieronymus in c. 44. Ezechielis testantur. Bellar: de Monachis lib. 2. cap. 40.
In Ezekiel 44.20. the Priests of the Jews were prohibited the shaving of
their heads, not because it was a thing evil in it self, but only that they
might not seem to be like unto the Priests of the bordering Gentiles, who were
usually shaven, as appears by Baruch cap. 6. v. 31. But because it may be
excepted, that most of these rigid, and severe prohibitions, were given unto
the Jews under their pedagogie of ceremonies, and time of bondage, and
therefore farther then in a moral admonition lay no restraint upon us
Christians. See therefore all this seconded in the New Testament by Locus hic,
qui obscurus alioqui videtur, nihil habebit difficultatis, metaphora bear
explicata; vult fideles, non tantum cavere a vitiorum contactu, sed ne qua ad
eos contagio pertingat: quicquid affine est ac vicinum fugiendum esse admonet,
quemadmodum si de pudicitia sermo habetur, dicemus tollenda esse omnia
libidinum irritamenta, id etiamnum clarius fiet, si amplietur oration, nempe ut
oderimus non carnem modo, sed tunicam, quae ejus contactu infecta fit. Nam
particula^^ ad ampliationem valet, ergo adeo non permittit indulgentia fovere,
uti omnes praeparationes, omnia que accessiora (utvocant) potius resecari
jubeat, Calvin: in locum.
St Jude ver. 23. Where in reference to that legal pollution, which came by
touching the garment of one that was Levitically unclean, he exhorts
Christians to hate the garment spotted by the flesh, that is, says Gualter,
quicquid ingenium carni^ sapit, whatsoever has but a smack or relish of the
flesh, all preparations and acc ssaries of evil, any thing that is necre of
kin unto, or but bordering upon vice, thinks Calvin.

Observe here the emphaticall gradation of the Apostle, hate not only the
flesh, but the garment spotted by the flesh, not only the garment overspread,
quite covered, but the garment that was but here and there a little spotted by
the flesh. Out of Christ's garment there issued virtue, which cured the woman
that had the bloody flux; but contrary wise out of this garment, but spotted
with the flesh, exit vis quaedam maligna, there goes a poisonous kind of
infection, which soon will stain a soul with the leprosy of sin.

Unto this place of Jude I shall add another out of the Apostle Paul, Heb.
4.1. Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being left us, of entering into his
rest, any of you should seem to come short of it. Hence Dickson collects, that
we must not only fear, by misbelieving to come short; but to seem, or give
any appearance of coming short. Pareus also has the like note upon the place,
verbo (...), videatur, sollicitudine tanta hic opus esse innuit, ut non modo
quae revera nos frustrent, sedetiam quae videatur frustratura provide caveamus.

But because (as the old saying runs) praxis sanctorum est interpres
praeceptorum, I shall entreat you next to take notice, how this precept has
been exemplified, The Church. Those words Cant. 1.7. as one that turns aside,
may be rendered, as one that is recovered or veiled. This sense the Greek
version gives, according to the usual signification of the Hebrew word: and
this covering either is asigne of sorrow and shame^ as mourners used to cover
their faces, Ezekiel. 24.17. or of lightness and dishonesty, as Thamar was
thought to be an harlot because she had covered her face Genesis 38.14, 15. So
here the spouse desires to know where Christ feeds, lest she should wander
about and seek him with sorrow, and be by others reputed an harlot, for she
would eschew all appearance of evil. Ainsworth in locum.
Cant. 1.7. professes against, even all show of communion with false Churches
that pretend unto fellowship with Christ, Why should I be as one that turns
aside by the flocks of thy companions?

But to come unto particular examples, and here in the times before Christ, is
very remarkable the courageous and undaunted resolution of Eleazar, against
but the appearance of an evil. 2 Mac. c. 6. v. 18. usque ad finem: When he was
besought to bring flesh of his own provision, such as was lawful for him to
use, and but make as if he did eat of the flesh, taken from the sacrifice
commanded by the King. v. 21. Why? even this evil appearance, this seeming,
this making as if he did eat of the flesh taken from the sacrifice commanded by
the King, so deeply disrelished him, as that he chose death before it. For it
becomes not our age (says he) in any wise to dissemble, whereby many young
persons might think that Eleazar being fourscore years old and ten, was now
gone to a strange religion, and so they through mine hypocrisy, and desire to
live a little time, and a moment longer, should be deceived by me, and I get a
stain to my old age, and make it abominable. v. 24 25. But why mention I
Eleazar? behold the example of one greater then Eleazar, the example of the
rule and pattern of holiness unto the Church, Christ Jesus God blessed for
ever! whose example, in Morals and matters of ordinary obedience, amounts ever
unto the authority of a command. How exemplarie he was in this particular you
may read Matthew. c. 17. from v. 24, unto the end of the Chapter. There you have
him performing an action, not for that omission of it would have been evil,
but because in opinion of the Jews, it would have given show of evil. For if
first, you understand the words, as most Interpreters do, of the tribute to be
paid unto the secular Magistrate, then sinful it had not been in our Savior
to have refused payment of tribute unto Caesar. For how could the Son to the
living God (who was King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, King of heaven, and
earth, whose the earth and all the fullness thereof was,) be justly tributary
unto any mortal? The Kings of the earth take tribute, or custom, not of
their own children, (however they expect obedience from them) but of
strangers; because paying of tribute denotes some degree, or kind of
Servitude. The children then are free, verse. 25, 26. Therefore from all taxes
and impositions, justly was to be exempted Christ, the Son of David; there was
no reason he should pay tribute unto Caesar: nay more reason (he being of the
blood royal) should receive tribute from the Jews, than Caesar, a forrainer,
having no title to the Crown, but that which the sword gave him. Not payment,
constant denial of payment, had not been (you see) morally evil in our
Savior; and yet because it would have borne appearance of an evil, of
disloyalty, and disobedience, and so have drawn prejudices against, and
scandal upon his unspotted person, holy and heavenly office, and doctrine:
because seemingly it would have crossed a doctrine he afterward delivered,
Render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar's: therefore he stands not to
plead his privilege, but voluntarily parted with his right, paid the
tribute, and to pay it wrought a miracle: notwithstanding, Peter, lest we
should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish
that first comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of money, that take, and give unto them for me and thee, verse. 27.

Or if secondly, with the learned Cameron, you rather conceive to be here meant
the half shekell, which by prescript of the Ceremonial Law, Exodus 30. was by
the Jews to be paid for the use of the Sanctuary. Why yet so also sinful it
had not been in our Savior to have refused paying of it: for first, it was a
Ceremony, and the Ceremonial Law Christ was above, Lord he was of the
Sabbath, Matthew. c. 12. ver. 8. Mar. c. 2. v. 28. where it is manifest (thinks
Cameron) the Sabbath should syn^cdochically signify the whole Ceremonial Law.
Then secondly, this Ceremony, together with Sacrifices and all other Legal,
typical Ceremonies, presupposed sin in the party, to whom they were commanded,
and were a note, or badge contracted by sin; and therefore reach not unto
Christ, a man without sin. Thirdly, as our Savior well argues, even as Kings
of the earth take not tribute of their own Children, so neither the King of
Heaven of his Son, therefore seeing this half shekel is a tribute to be paid
to the King of Heaven, for the Tabernacle of witness. 2 Chro 24.6. Christ was
certainly free, and so might lawfully have refused to pay it: Yet because the
Jews would have taken offense, and umbrages at such his refusal, and charged
it with appearance of a profane contempt of the Law of Moses, and the
Sanctuary, therefore he voluntarily paid it, and so became a Jew to the Jews,
as under the Law to them that were under the Law. Notwithstanding lest we
should offend, etc. And if this be the sense of the place, what is said of this
one Ceremony, may be applied unto all; for one of the reasons, and ends, why
Christ observed the whole Ceremonial Law was, to prevent scandal, to abstain
from all appearance of evil. In nature (says Cameron) there is, appetitus
quidem unionit, which causes things to be moved, and to rest often, besides
the proper condition of their particular nature, whence sometimes light things
are moved downwards, heavy things upwards. Unto this appetite of union in
nature, there is answerable in grace, the desire to promote Gods glory, which
often inclines and carries the Godly beyond and besides the ordinary
obligations, arising out of their particular and personal condition; and
relation^ And unto the measure of grace is proportionable the degree of the
desire of Gods glory, so that the holier any one is, the more vehemently he
desires the promotion thereof: and if it require any thing to be done of him,
why he will do it, although otherwise by virtue of his particular, and
personal condition, he be not bound thereunto. Therefore although Christ,
secundum specialem rationem personae suae, if we eye the special
consideration, and dignity of his person, was not tied to keep the Ceremonial
Law, yet he kept it, in as much as the Glory of God required him so to do. If
you demand how the glory of God exacted this at Christ's hands, why Christ
himself tells us, Ne simus illis scandalo, lest we should offend them; for if
Christ had not observed the Ceremonial law, he had doubtless wonderfully
estranged the Jews from him.

In observing it then he did but as Kings often do in stooping to many things,
unto which they are no ways obliged, for to win the hearts and affections of
their humorous subjects. This example of our Savior, was followed by the
Ap^stles, and elders in the first gen^rall Council at Jerusalem, where they
imp^sed upon the Gentiles abstinence from meat offered to Idols, from things
strangled, and from blood, Acts 15.29. Not for that these meats were in
themselves unclean, and abominable, but because they appeared to be so to the
froward and peevish Jews, who were kept off from Christ, because these meats,
in which they supposed to be such abomination and uncleanesse, were usually
eaten by the Christians. But this was but a temporary injunction they gave to
others. Let us view their own practice. Maintenance for preaching was due unto
Paul, from both the Corinthians and Thessalonians, and yet he did forbear
exacting it, 1 Cor. 9. 1 These. 2. that so he might take away all color for
suspicion of any mercenary or greedy appetite after gain, to be in his
preaching, and quite cut off all scandalls thereby, which in that dawning of
Christianity upon them, would have put a rub to the progress of the Gospel,
and have made his ministry to be evil spoken off. And of St Paul, the Saints
in succeeding ages were followers, as he of Christ. Those Lib^llatici, so
often, and sharply censured by St Cyprian Epist. 15.31.52. lib. de lapsis. lib.
de exhortatione Martyrum, Scriptit etia^ Secundus and ad scipsum mis^os a
Curar^re and ordine Centutionem and Beneficiarium, qui peterent divinos codices
exurendos, eisque respondis^e, Christianus sum and Episcopus, non traditor: Et
cum ab eo vellent aliqua ecvola (per ecvola intelligit res ejectas, nempe
quatum nullus est usus, ab, (...), quod est ejectio, seu expulsio) a^t
quodcunque accipere, neque hoc eis dedisse, exemplo Eleaza^i Macchabaei, qui
nec fingere voluit suillam car^nem se manducare, ne a^is praeberet
praevaricationis exemplum. Vid. Aug. in Brevic. Collat. die. 3. cap. 13.
Damasc. Hist. page 578.
Though they did not sacrifice, or directly deny Christ, were yet by the Church
put to their penance, for seeming to deny him, because they either by
themselves, or others, at least accepted from the Magistrate bills, or scroules
testimonial of their abnegation. Secundus (as Parker relates out of Baronius)
was commanded to deliver his bibles, he makes answer, Christianus sum and non
Traditor. Hereupon he is commanded to deliver aliqua Ecvola, that is certain
stuff which was cast aside for that it had no use. Will he not deliver this to
save his life? no not this. It was lawful, but it had a show of their sin
whom the Church called Traditores for their delivering the holy books to be
burnt by the officers of the Tyrant Dioclesian. Baronius out of Soidas.
Auxentius being commanded by Licinius to set a branch of a Vine-tree laden
with Clusters at the feet of Bacchus his image, presently shaped him this
round, and resolute answer, God forbid, O Emperor, that I should do it, for I
am a Christian. The matter was not great in it self, yet because it would have
favored Idolatry, or given manifest appearance of it, rather than do it, he
chose banishment from the Court, and loss of the Emperors service. As
Theodoret. l. 3. c. 15. Nicep. l. 11. c. 1. S. Zo. l. 6. c. 6.
Valentinia^, afterward Emperor, went before Julian the Apostate into a
Temple of the Goddess Fortune, one of the Priests besprincled Julian with a
kind of purging, or holy water, a drop of which by chance fell upon
Valentinian, at which he was so extremely incensed, as that he stroke the
Priest, tore, and rent in pieces that part of his garment on which it fell with
a great disdain, and holy indignation; throwing it away from him, that so he
might avoid the least tincture of their superstitious, and idolatrous religion.
But above all, very remarkable is the zeal of the Th^od. l. 4. c. 15 Niceph.
l. 11. c. 21.
boys of Samosatene, who because a tennis-ball, with which they played, had
but touched the foot of the ass whereon Lucius rode, their Heretical Bishop,
they presently cried out that it was defiled, (although indeed it was not
capable of any moral pollution) and therefore to purge or expiate it, threw it
into the fire in the midst of the Market place. This may be thought, but a
Childish pranke, and therefore not imitable, however yet it aptly serves to
demonstrate that their education, framed them unto a hatred of whatsoever had
any remote reference, unto either evil actions, or persons. St Ambrose forbad
Monica the bringing of wine and cakes to the Celebrities of the Martyrs, ne
ulla occasio se ingurgitandi daretur ebri^sis, and quia illa quasi parentalia
superstitioni Gentilium essent simillima, as St Austin lib. 6. Confess. c. 2.
lest occasion of excessive quaffing should be given to drunkards, and because
those parentalia, funeral feasts, were very like to heathenist superstition,
the offerings of the Pagans which were made at the Tombs of their parents, and
to their ghosts. Bishop Morton assigns another reason, because this custom,
had some resemblance of those superstitious, and idolatrous Colorydians,
mentioned by Epiphanius, who offered cakes to the Virgin Mary, in imitation of
that heathenish custom condemned by the prophet Jeremy chap. 7. ver. 18. of
such as did offer cakes to the Moon, as unto the Queen of heaven. Now when
Monica understood that Saint Ambrose had forbidden this, tam pie, atque
obedienter amplexa est, ut ipse mirarer, says St Austin in that forecited
place, quod tam facile accusatrix p^tius consuetudinis suae, quam disceptatrix
illius prohibiti^nis effecta sit: she so piously, and obediently embraced this
prohibition, as that I my self, says Austin, wondered to see her so easily
rather accuse her own custom, than dispute his command. When once the custom
of thrice dipping or sprinkling in Baptism was used by Heretics, to signify a
trinity not of persons, but natures in the Godhead, then Saint Gregory thought
fitting that it should be left off, not because it was evil, but for that it
might seem to counterance their damnable heresy: his words are these, De
trina vero mersione baptismatis nihil responderi verius potest, quam quod ipsi
sensitis, quod in una fide nihil officit sanctae Ecclesiae consuetudo diversa,
etc. sed quia nunc hucusque ab haereticis infans in baptismate tertio
mergebatur, faciendum apud vos esse non censeo, ne dum mersiones numerant
divinitatem dividant, dumque quod faciebant faciunt, se morem nostrum vicisse
glorientur, lib. 1. Epist. 41. Gabriel Biel lectione 38. says, that the Church
of Rome thought it meet to use common leavened bread in the administration of
the Eucharist, lest in using unleavened bread, they should be deemed to imitate
Ebion the heretic. Nay Bellarmine in his recognition of his book de verbo D^i,
admonishes the Reader, that in the title of the third Chapter of the first
book, Divi Pauli is put for Beati Pauli, for in making mention of the Saints, I
never approved (says he) the use of the word divus, or diva, and one of his
reasons, is; because amongst the Heathens, 'twas usually ascribed to their
false, or fained Gods.

To heap up other, either testimonies, or instances, were to prejudice, if not
the authority of those before mentioned, yet your esteem of them, as if you
were not by them sufficiently persuaded and convinced. My labor (I suppose)
will be better spent in demonstrating unto you the expediency of that, which
may seem rigor in this Doctrine, in discovering unto you what good reasons
Saint Paul had to exact so great a measure, and so high a pitch of abstinence
from sin. Those that I will specify shall be drawn from God, from Satan,
from our selves, from our brethren, First, from God, we have these two, our
relations unto him, our danger in offending of him.

First, our Relations unto him, he is our Father, our Sovereign, Christ Jesus
is our spiritual husband. Now a dutiful child declines not only disobedience,
but whatsoever has the color of it; and obedient, and loyal subject startles
at not only treason, but also whatsoever may occasion suspicion thereof: a
faithful and chaste wife abhorres not only adultery, but whatsoever may make
her husband justly jealous, others but suspicious of her chastity. And shall
not every child of God, every one that professes subjection unto heaven, be
fearful of the appearance of disobedience, and undutifulnesse to so indulgent
a father as God, of the appearance of Treason and Rebellion against so Almighty
a King as God? Does it not befit the Spouse the Church, every member of Christ
to dread all shows, and signs of disloyalty, and unfaithfulness to so
loving a Spouse as Christ Jesus? Did Julius Caesar, but an earthly potentate,
think it not enough that his wife was without a fault, unless withal she was
without so much as the suspicion of a fault? And will not Christ (think you?)
who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, expect as great unblameablenesse in
his Spouse? Plutarch.
Theophan^s Lesbiai to dissuade Pompey from flying into Parthia, tells him, that
his wife would be liable to a great deal of danger amongst those barbarous
people; and though (said he) they proffer no villainy unto her, yet it is an
undecent thing to think that the wife of Pompey might have been dishonored:
To dissuade us from the appearances and occasions of sin it should, (me thinks)
be an effectual argument, that our souls, which are married unto Christ in
righteousness, judgment, and holiness, will hereby be obnoxious unto danger
of pollution. What though they be not actually defiled? yet it is an undecent
thing to think, that the Spouse a member of Christ might have been dishonored,
might have been foild with a lust, ravished, vanquished by Satan, defiled with
sin.

If from these appearances of evil, our relations to God cannot draw us, yet
(me thinks) in the second place, our danger in offending of him, should drive
us: for he is a consuming fire unto, as the Works, so also the workers of
impiety: and how can we then but be afraid to venture on not only that we know
does, but what we fear others suspect may, deserve the wrath of so sin
revenging a God?

That we should abstain from all appearances of evil, may, secondly, be
gathered from Satan, from the consideration, First, of his cruelty and malice
against us, Secondly, of his temptations of us.

First, from the consideration of his cruelty and malice against us, which the
Scripture shadoweth out by terming him, the enemy by way of excellency, the
envious man, the accuser, the tempter, the destroyer, the devourer, a murderer
from the beginning: as also by comparing him unto a roaring Lion, unto a great
red Dragon, and an old Serpent.

Now me thinks we should fear to come, not only under the power, but also into
the sight of such an adversary: and yet by rushing upon the shows, the
occasions of evil, what do we but hazard the surprizall of our souls by him?

This will be more apparent from the consideration,

2. Of Satan's temptations of us: of his temptations of us to sin, of his
temptations of us to despair, or at least discomfort, for sin: because in
both sorts of temptations he goes about by these appearances of evil, to wreak
his malice upon us.

For first, in his temptations of us to sin, they are, first, the bait by
which he allures: Secondly, an argument by which he persuades us thereunto.
Thirdly, an encouragement, whereby he is heartned to persist in tempting of us.

First then, the appearances of sin, are a bait whereby Satan allures us
unto sin, which if we bite at, our consciences will soon be enlarged to
swallow sin it self. Satan well knowing that Gods Children would even
startle at your gross, and more hideous sins, such as are, Idolatry,
Adultery, Drunkenness, and the like, therefore chiefly plyeth them with
enticements to the signs, shows, and occasions of them; for these will smooth
the passage unto the sins themselves. Of this we have a remarkable instance in
Alipius, who (as St Austin relates Confess. lib. 6. cap. 8) being drawn by his
friends importunity to accompany him unto the Roman Gladiatorie Games, yet
resolves though he were present with his body, to be absent in his heart, and
for that purpose to keep his eyes shut, that he might not defile them with so
barbarous a sight: yet at last upon a great shout, that the people gave at the
fall of one of the Combatants, his curiosity made him behold the occasion, and
thereupon he presently became an applausive spectator of that bloody and
inhumane spectacle. An Italian, as Holerius writes, by his often smelling to
the herb Basile, had a scorpion engendered in his head: even so we by our
often dallying, and tampering with things that carry a show of unlawfulness,
may have Satan, as I may so speak, even formed in us, for as St Hierome says
upon Ecclesiastes the ninth, Diabolus serpens est lubricus, cujus si capiti, id
est, primae suggestioni non resistitur, totus interna cordis, dum non sentitur,
illabitur, that is, the Devil is a slippery serpent, and if we do not keep out
his head, that is, his first suggestions, it is not to be doubted but that he
will stealingly slide into the most secret corners of the heart: and so we
actuated by him, shall at last proceed from things only appearing finfull,
unto the practice of most horrid and ghastly crimes.

Secondly, the appearance of evil is an argument by which he persuades us unto
what is in its own nature evil, for if a man have but slipped into such actions
as the best minded judge to have a real appearance of evil, Satan forthwith
will suggest unto him, that he has by this quite cracked his credit amongst
those that are accounted religious: by them (will he say) thou art as much
suspected, and as deeply censured for thy seeming evil, as for thy being so:
were thou not better therefore, be as thou seem, for they cannot think worse
of thee then they do, thy shame, and disgrace, their jealousies, suspicious,
and censures cannot be greater for sin it self, than it is already for the
show of it. Now this temptation of Satan, receives great advantage from our
nature, for we naturally are addicted to society, and therefore if we find
that upon the signs and shows of such and such sins in our practice, good
men condemn us as guilty of the sins themselves, and therefore begin two
reserve and estrange themselves from us, refusing any longer to reach out unto
us the right hand of fellowship, why, then we will presently have fellowship
with the unfruitful works of darkness, and couple in with loose, carnal and
formal men, whose conversation will quickly infect us, so that it will not be
long e're we run with them to the same excess of riot.

And thus you see how Satan takes occasion from the appearance of sin, to
draw us on unto sin it self, which me thinks should be sufficient to
dissuade us from them. For is Satan so backward in tempting, or is his
invention grown so barren, as that our lives and practice must put arguments
into his mouth? is the purchase of hell and damnation so difficult, as that we
must needs furnish the Devil with baits to allure us, with reasons to persuade
us unto our everlasting perdition, this were folly and madness that would want
a name.

But in the third place, the signs and appearances of sin are not only a
bait, by which he enticeth us, an argument by which he persuades unto sin,
but withal an encouragement, by which he is heart'ned to go on in tempting of
us, for they make him gather heart, and hope that we are coming on to sin it
self; and this hope will breed diligence, make him a more importunate
solliciter, make him to double and strengthen his assaults, to plie us even
thick and threefold with temptations: A dog will not run from a man as long
as he throws bread unto him, and can any man suppose the Devil will fly, so
long as he gives place unto him, as long as he throws himself upon
temptations, by practicing such things as have a manifest show of evil? for
though in themselves they be never so small, yet will they serve to usher in
farther and greater matters: being then preparatives unto sin, they cannot be
(as some have imagined) good fences against sin: seeming to be evil is not,
cannot be a means to shield us from being so, no more then the opening the
Gates of a City can be the way to raise the seige of it, or letting go the
sluices of a river can be the course to stop its current.

You have seen arguments from Satan's temptations of us to sin^ take next one
from his temptations of us to despair, or at least discomfort for sin, a
temptation of so hideous a nature, as that, me thinks, our actions should not
lend it the least advantage. His First labor is by the appearance of sin to
make us offend God, but when he cannot proceed so far, his Second endeavor
will be, to make us disquiet our selves: when he cannot wound us by them, he
will vex us for them; for he will wrest and misconstrue all that we have done
unto the worst sense, he will swell motes into beams, mole-hils into
mountains, appearances of evil into realities, and thunder unto us that there
is not a pin to choose betwixt those and these; unto which our souls being
distracted by the violent importunity of this temptation, will be over apt to
give credence. And for a man to be thus tossed between Satan's powerful
suggestions, and his own fears and suspicions cannot but even crush his
spirits, and quite eclipse the peace and joy of his heart.

Abstinence from all appearances of evil is, thirdly, needful in regard of
our selves, for by them we may incur a double danger, a danger of being
infected with, a danger of being punished for sin.

First, a danger of being infected with sin: what Bern: tract. de grad.
humilititatis.
Bernard spoke of Eves beholding the forbidden fruit, is true concerning every
appearance of evil: Et si culpa non est, culpae tamen indicium est, and si
culpa non est, culpae tamen occasio est, indicium commissae, and causa est
committenda. Although it be not in it self a sin, yet it is a token, yet it
is an occasion of sin, a token that finne has been committed, a cause of
committing it for the future. Now our natures are strongly bent to evil, when
this (then) our natural inclination, is furthered by outward occasions, we may
soon be led to the realities of sin, though the occasions of themselves are
weak, they working but as objects, and the objective causality being of all
most imperfect, ye^ Satan is strong, our lusts are strong, these occasions are
suitable to our lusts: our souls therefore, by a little help from Satan will
quickly catch infection from them. For this reason were the Israelites, in the
time of the passover prohibited not only the eating, but the very having of
leavened bread in their houses. For this reason too were the Nazarites
forbidden to eat so much as the husks of the grapes, for if that had been
permitted, they would perhaps have soon proceeded to the eating of the grapes
and thence to drinking of the wine it self: hence also grew that precise
resolution of David, Psalm. 101.3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes:
well may the world, and Devil set wicked things before mine eyes, but for mine
own part I will not invite temptations, I will set no wicked thing before mine
eyes, as much as I can I will decline the objects, examples, and shows of
wickedness: do but put fire unto flax, and it will presently be on flame: so
present we unto our loose and corrupt natures the shows, (which (as you have
seen) are also the occasions of evil) and how suddenly will they take fire?
This Joseph knew, and therefore when his Mistress solicited him to that foul
act of uncleanness, he harkned not unto her to lie by her, or so much as to be
with her, Genesis 39.10. but fled, and got himself out of her presence, ver. 12.
doubting lest the very sight of her might kindle lust. Nay to the shame of many
secure and venturous Christians, of this even Scipio an Heathen, and Soldier
too, was apprehensive and fearful, and therefore would not suffer certain
captive Virgins, though of an exquisite beauty, to be brought so much as into
his presence Ne quid (says Florus) de virginitatis integritate delibasse,
saltem vel oculis videretur. That he might not seem to have sipt, or skimmed
the honor of their chastity, so much as with beholding them. As Apelles then
by drawing the picture of Campaspe fell in love with the pattern of his work
Campaspe her self, so we from retaining, from affecting the show of sin, will
soon proceed to a delight in sin it self.

Some indeed are so strangely confident of their abhorrencie from sin, as
they doubt not infection from appearance of it: they can venture into the
loosest company, yet so bridle their appetite, as that they fear no excess;
be present at an Idolatrous Mass, and yet be in no danger of being affected
with it, unless it be with dislike of it.

Surely these men are dropped from Heaven, never borne in sin, or conceived in
iniquity: for they, whose original is from men, may possibly be drawn away by
sinful objects, and shows: but these men (forsooth) are above gunshot,
beyond the reach of temptation; Their professed hatred of sin brings me in
mind of Pigmalions averseness from women; he was a professed, almost a sworn
enemy to woman kind, yet drawing but the picture of a woman, he fell in love
with it, and he hugged, and kissed it so long, till at last by the power of Venus
(as the Poet fables it) it became a woman: Their case is like; they profess
detestation of sin, and yet delight in some things, that have the appearance,
the resemblance thereof: let them take heed they dote not so long upon these,
as that at length by the power of Satan, and the strength of their own lusts,
they be transformed into real sins. I will end this reason with that of
Chrysostom, in his fifteenth Homily unto the people of Antioch.

(...), etc.

(...).

It will be to us the occasion, or ground of greatest security, if we do not
only flee sins, but such indifferent things also, which are means whereby they
do supplant us: for as he who goes upon the edge of a steep, and craggy
rock, though he falls not, yet with fear trembles, and so falls through his
trembling, so he who leaves not sin a loofe, and a far off, but
approaches close to the brink of it, has just cause to live in fear, seeing
he has just cause to fear to fall into it.

Secondly, danger of being punished for sin, not by God, for he is an
Omniscient Judge, and therefore cannot mistake the appearance of evil for
evil it self: he is a just Judge, and therefore will not punish the
appearance of evil, for evil it self: but by man, by the Secular Magistrate
with temporal punishments, by the governors of the Church, with
Ecclesiastical censures, and by all men generally with shame and obloquie.
J^hosaphat you know in the apparel of Ahab, was like to have been killed for
Ahab. Plutarch.
M^gacles having on the Cloak, and armor of Pyrrhus, was flame for Pyrrhus:
even so many times some men, for the bare appearance of some crimes, are as
hardly thought of, and as severely handled, as if they had committed the crimes
themselves. Florus l. 3. c. 14.
Tiberius Gracchus was butchered by the Romans, because it seemed unto them,
that by touching his head with his hand, he had demanded a Diadem, when he
thereby as a sign only exhorted them to stand upon their defense. Because the
Island of Creete seemed to have favored Mithridates, for this seemings sake,
the people of Rome took revenge by the sword, Favisse Mithridati videbatur,
hoc placuit armis vindicare. Indeed the Lord sees not as man sees, he looks
on the heart, and thereunto squareth his judgment, but man looks on the
outward appearance, 1 Samuel 16.7. and according to it censureth, and so he may
do, and yet often times judge righteous judgment. For if when there is wanting
sufficient evidence of fact, Judges, and Juries should not sometimes proceed
upon pregnant signs, and strong presumptions, how many villainies would pass
unpunished? And if Ecclesiastical Governors, should not take the same course
too, how could they possibly stop the spreading mischeifs of scandal.

This abstinence from appearance of evil, is lastly expedient in regard of our
brethren, to avoid scandal unto them.

First, as it is taken by Thomas, and the Schoolmen, for that which
occasionally leads unto sin, which puts a stumbling block, or an occasion to
fall in the way of others, Romans 14.13. for so do all evil shows, and that
both in the way of the weak, and in the way of the wicked.

First, in the way of the weak, for they are misguided, and drawn unto the
practice of that evil, the appearance whereof they see in us,

Secondly, in the way of the wicked, for first, hereby the obdurate are
heartened, confirmed, and comforted: secondly, hereupon adversaries take
occasion to speak reproachfully of that holy name, and profession which we
bear, to blaspbeme the Cross, Truth, and Gospel of Christ.

Secondly, as it is used vulgarly, and commonly for sorrow, grief, dislike, or
displeasure at an action, for it matters not much whether our facts be evil,
or bear show of evil, they equally would wound the hearts, and vex the
righteous spirits of the Godly, and therefore are both violations of Saint
Paul's precepts, Romans 15.2. Let every one of us please his neighbor for his
good to edification. Valerius Publicola (says Florus) ne specie arcis
offenderet, eminentes aedes suas in plana submisit: he levelled with the ground
his high and lofty building, lest he should offend the people with the
appearance of a Cittadell: and wilt not thou throw aside a vanity, an
excrement, some idle if not monstrous fashion, rather than offend thy brother
(for whom Christ died) with the appearance of an evil? A foul shame were it,
that popularity should prevail more with a Roman, than Charity with thee, who
art a Christian.

But some will be ready to object, that this doctrine is prejudicial to our
Christian liberty. For that reaches to the use of all things that are of an
indifferent nature, and such are these actions charged with the appearance of
evil, and therefore if you streighten us in the use of them, you injuriously
deprive us of that liberty which we have in Christ Jesus unto the use of all
indifferent things. For answer,

First, those actions, in which there is a real appearance of evil, are not
indifferent in their nature, but evil, and sinful, forbidden, first, by the
general prohibition of scandal, they are per se scandalous of themselves and
in their own nature, and therefore allwaies, for a per se ad de omni valet
argumentum: prohibited, secondly, by those precepts which are against those
evils of which they have a real appearance, because they are a step unto, and
occasion of them, whereas it is usually said that they are evil only in
appearance, this is not to be understood so as to exclude evil from them, but
to restrain the evil of them unto this particular: that they have a real
appearance of evil, the meaning is, they are evil in no regard but this, and
this regard, for the reasons abovesaid, is sufficient to denominate them evil:
they are allwaies temptations unto evil, so that there is allwaies committed
in them an active scandal. This was the opinion of the vulgar translater, who
translates, 1 These. v. 22. ab omni specie malaa abstinete vos, abstain from
every evil appearance, this reading Cornelius a Lapide and other Popish
Expositors think equivalent with our translation abstain from all appearance
of evil, according to it then every appearance of evil is evil, if it be
real and not merely imaginary. Unto this let me add that of Suarez already
quoted, an action, says he, only evil in appearance transgresses some
virtue, though not per se primo, yet ex consequenti connexione virtutum, by
reason of the mutual connection and commerce of one virtue with, and dependence
upon another.

But to come to, secondly, those indifferent actions in which there is only an
imaginary appearance of evil, two things are here to be answered.

First, however they be in thesi in their general nature indifferent, yet they
do in casu and in hypothesi become to be accidentally evil, because done
against Conscience, when they appear to be evil to our selves; against
charity, when they appear to be evil unto others: and then we are bound to
abstain from them, though not lege communi, yet lege particulari, by reason of
particular circumstances.

Secondly, Although our Christian liberty extends to the use of all things
indifferent, yet ought we in godly wisdom, and discretion to abridge our
selves of the outward exercise of this our liberty, whenever it is very
probable that it will become dangerous to our selves, or scandalous to others.
Ye have been called unto liberty, only use not liberty for an occasion to the
flesh, but by love serve one another, Gal. 5.13. As free, and not using your
liberty for a cloak of malitiousnesse, the 1 Pet. 2.16. Now we use or rather
abuse our liberty for an occasion to the flesh, for a cloak to malitiousnesse,
by practicing such indifferencies, as have show of evil; for they, (as I have
shown at large) are likely to prove, as occasions of sin unto our selves, so
also active scandalls to misguide our brethren, and therefore, though they be
not absolutely, and simply in their nature unlawful to be done, yet they are
by accident unlawful for me to do, as long as they carry show of evil. All
things (indeed) are pure (says the Apostle) but it is evil for that man, who
eats with offense: It is good neither to eat flesh, nor drink wine, nor any
thing whereby thy brother stumbleth, or is offended, or is made weak, Romans
14.20, 21. Infirmitas nominat prom^p^itudinem ad scandalum, of^fensio autem
nominat indignationem, etc. scandalum autem importat ipsam impactionem ad
ruinam, Aquin. 2. 2 dae. q. 44 art. 1.


What remains then but that all be admonished in the Lord Jesus to take to
heart a matter so deeply concerning them, both in conscience as a duty expressly
enjoined by God, practiced by Christ, his Apostles, and Saints; and in
consequence, as befitting us as the Sons, subjects of God, as the spouse,
members of Christ, as being needful to defeat Satan's malice, to cut off his
temptations unto sin, and unto discomfort for sin, to avoid sin, etc. in
our selves, Application.
scandals unto others, unto the weak, obstinate, and strong. If therefore there
be in you any love of God, any care to walk worthy of those high relations you
carry to him, any regard to the safety of your own souls, any fear of Satan,
sin, or punishment, any compassion over the Consciences of your poor
brethren, keep a loofe from whatsoever neighbors, and borders upon sin,
whatsoever has the blush and show thereof: hate, as Ambr. l. 6. Hexaem.
Ambrose exhorts, not only sin, but the coat of sin, the garment spotted
by the flesh. Even an heathen will advise, you hereunto. Quint. l. 2. cap. 3.
Carendum non solum crimine turpitudinis, verum etiam suspicione.

Want we inducements, take we these three. It will be a course, First, Safe,
and Secure: Secondly, Comfortable: Thirdly, Honorable.

First, Safe, and Secure, by it sin and Satan shall be stav'd off, kept out
at daggers end, your own souls secured, kept out of gun shot either of
infection or punishment, so that they shall not come nigh, scarce so much as
the confines either of Sin, or Hell.

Secondly, Comfortable: For what an unspeakable comfort will it be unto thy
drooping soul in the hour of death, or in the time of spiritual desertion,
when thy Conscience can truly suggest, that thou have been so abhorrent from
sin, as that thou have shunned whatsoever has been homogeneall thereunto,
whatsoever has looked but like unto it, it must needs stop Satan's mouth, and
make thine own triumph in the calmnesse of a clear, and good conscience.

Thirdly, Honorable, for 'twill gain thee esteem amongst both good, and bad
ones, with those 'twill make thy name precious, twill muzzle the mouths of
these, when they behold such uprightness in thy life, as that thou shunnest
not only downright irreligiousnesse to God, injustice to men, but even their
very picture and resemblance, this cannot but extort from them, though never so
malicious, an ingenious acknowledgment, that thou art a true Israelite, a
sincere Nathaniel, in whom there is found no guile. Now though our maine and
first endeavor must be to keep a good Conscience, yet is not the jewel or
precious ointment of a good name, to be in the mean while neglected; our care
should be to preserve that likewise unspotted, St Paul, ( Acts 24.16.)
professes that he exercised himself to have always a conscience void of
offense, as toward God: so toward men; and he advises us to provide things
honest in the sight of all men, Romans 12.17. To walk honestly toward them that
are without. 1 Thessalonians. 4.12. To strive for a good report of them that are
without, 1 Timothy 3.7.

I will but prescribe two cautions directing how we are to abstain from the
appearance of evil, and then I shall have done with the general application
of the words. We are to abstain neither only nor chiefly from the appearance
of evil.

First, not only, that were foul Hypocrisy of which yet there are even a
generation guilty, who only combat with the shadow of sin, and in the mean
while embrace the body of sin, real sins: who abstain from the show of
every evil work, and yet remain reprobate to every good work, who profess
destation of gain by gaiming, because they conceive it to be an appearance of
theft, and yet make no conscience of fraud, deceit, and cousenage in their
dealings, who stand at defiance with all shows of uncleanesse, and yet make no
scruple of the grossest acts thereof.

Secondly, not chiefly, that were a great incongruity, for so care of the
means should be greater than that of the end, because abstinence from the
appearance of evil, is enjoined as a preservative against the evil it self.
The evils themselves therefore should cheifely be avoided, the body of sin
should be opposed more than the shadow, than the shows of sin. The flesh
should be abhorred in a higher degree, than the garment spotted therewith.

You have seen the point pressed generally as it concerns all men's abstinence
from the appearance of all evils. I will only crave your pardon to call more
particularly.

First, upon all men for abstinence from the appearance especially of some
evils.

Secondly, upon some men especially for abstinence from the appearance of all
evils, and then I will put a period to my meditations upon these words.

First, We must decline the shows of some evils above others, of our Master,
our bosom evils. For from them is most danger to be feared, they having
commonly most strengh from our natures: and Satan besides knows but too well
how our tide stands, he quickly acquaints himself with our predominant lusts,
and most raging corruptions, and unto them especially fits and accords his
temptations: as Tacitus, Suetonius.
Agrippina, when she poisoned her husband Claudius, mixed the poison in the
meat which he most loved.

Secondly, some men above others are especially to decline the appearance of
all evils. All public men should do so, but especially we of the Ministry. The
high Priests and Nazarites, under the Law were not to come nigh a dead body,
Lev. 21.11. Numb. 6.6. And in imitation of them among the Romans, the Priest
might not touch the dead, nay they might not see the dead: for if a Priest
pronounced a Funeral Oration, 'twas not without a veil drawn betwixt him and
the Corpse. Nay a Flaminian Priest might not hear the sound of pipes used at
Funerals nor come into a place where there was a grave. Was theere such rituall
purity under the Law? such Ceremonial strictness in heathenish Priests? and
shall there not be found an answerable degree of moral preciseness in the
ministers of the Gospel? shall they be willingly within sight, sent, and
hearing of impiety, except to reprove it? Dr Ed. Reyn^ Psalm. 110.
As a woman big with Child, for fear, and danger of miscarrying forbeareth
Physic, violent exercise, and many meats and drinks, which otherwise she might
freely use: even so those who travel in birth with the Children of Christ, are
put to deny and abridg themselves of many indifferencies. I will eat no flesh,
says St Paul while the world stands, rather then make my brother to offend,
1 Cor. 8.13.

Reasons enforcing their abstinence after an especial manner from the
appearance of evil are two: Because in them they occasion: First, greater
looseness in bad ones: Secondly, more heaviness to good ones.

First, Greater looseness in bad ones. Strange it is how the lower, and more
ignorant rank of men will be hereby strengthened in their downright sinful
courses; Nay if a Minister do but wisely, and lawfully use his Christian
liberty the rude vulgar will thereupon open themselves a gappe unto all
licentiousness. If he be but innocently pleasant, think they we may be mad. If
he but sip, we may carouse. If he spend but some few hours, in his honest, and
harmless recreations, the common gamester presently concludes his mispense of
both time, and patrimony in gaming to be thence justifiable.

Secondly, more heaviness to good ones: it grieves the spirits of the
righteous to see them in any, it wounds their souls, it makes their bloods,
their hearts rise to behold them in a man of God. It becomes not my weakness
to advise, only in mine own and others behalf, I unfainedly wish, and pray,
that this were seriously thought upon, and practiced by us all, that all of us
in a tender regard to the reputation, and honor of our high calling would
walk with great surcumspection, make strait steps unto our feet, tread every
step as nicely, as gingerly, as if we went among snares, walked upon ropes, or
pinnacles.

I will conclude with that of Bernard to Eugenius, lib. 3. de consideratione,
cap. 4. which though written particularly unto him, may yet fittingly enough be
applied to every Minister, nay every Christian. Interest tuae perfectionis
malas res, and malas pariter species d^vitare, in altero conscientiae, in
altero famae consulis. It becomes your holiness to decline as evil things, so
also evil appearances, in that thou consult'st for thy Conscience, in this for
thy fame* nay (indeed) if it be not presumption to add unto the Father, in
this thou providest both for Conscience, and Fame: for Conscience first; for
the purity, for the peace of thy Conscience; for the purity of thy Conscience,
to keep it void of offense both toward God, and toward men, for the peace of
thy Conscience, to preserve it from the violence of Satan's temptations, from
the vexations of thine own fears, and jealousies. Secondly, for fame, so to
hedge it in from scandal, as that it shall be above the reach of suspicion.
Therefore to go on in the words of the Father. Puta tibi non licere, ^^tsi
alias fortasse liceat, quicquid male fuerit, coloratum, non sit in fama naevus
malae specisi. Think not for the lawful, though perhaps otherwise lawful,
whatsoever shall be evil colored: In thy fame let there not be so much as a
spot of evil appearance, so shall thou follow things, that are of good report,
Phil. 4.8. and thereby quite take off all private prejudices, all open
calumnies against either thy person, or profession. However thou shall procure
the testimony and approbation of God, and thine own Conscience, and be
presented unblameable, clear from offensivenesse before men, from faultiness
before God, at the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father,
and Holy Ghost, be ascribed by us, and the whole Church, the Kingdom, the
Power, and Glory, from this time forth for evermore. AMEN.

FINIS.

