JUDGE IENKINS REMONSTRANCE To the Lords and Commons of the two Houses of
Parliament, At WESTMINSTER, the 21. of February, 1647.

By DAVID IENKINS, Prisoner in Newgate.

Printed in the Year, 1647.

Judge Jenkins Remonstrance, etc.
I Desire that the Lords and Commons of the two Houses, would be pleased to
remember, and that all the good people of England do take notice of an Order
of the house of Commons this Session, for publishing the Lord Cooks books,
which Order they may find printed in the last leaf of the second part of his
Institutes, in these words, (viz.)

Die Mercurii 12. May 1641
Upon debate this day in the Commons House of Parliament, the said house did
then desire and held it fit that the Heir of Sir Edward Cook should publish
in print the Commentary upon Magna Charta, the Pleas of the Crown, and the
jurisdiction of Courts, according to the intention of the said Sir Edward
Cook; and that none but the Heir of the said Sir Edward Cook, or he that
shall be authorized by him, do presume to publish in print any of the foresaid
books, or any copy thereof.

H. Elsynge Cler. Dom. Com.

And I do further desire them that they would read and peruse Mr. Solicitor
Saint-Iohn, and Mr. John Pym, their books, published likewise this Session,
whose titles are as follows, (viz) An Argument of Law concerning the Bill of
Attainder of High Treason of Thomas Earl of Strafford. Saint-Iohn His
Majesty's Solicitor General. Published by Order of the Commons house. LONDON,
G. M. for Jo. Bartlet, at the sign of the guilt Cup, near St. Austins gate in
Paul's Churchyard, 1641. And the Speech or Declaration of John Pym Esquire,
After the recapitulation or summing up of the charge of High Treason, against
Thomas Earl of Strafford, 12 April, 1641. Published by the Order of the
Commons House. LONDON, Printed, for John Bartlet, 1641.


1. NOthing is delivered for Law in my books, but what the House of Commons
have avowed to be Law in books of Law, published by their command this
Sessi^n, and agreeable to the books of Law, and Statutes of this Realm, in
all former times and ages.

2. The supposed offense charged on me, is against the two Houses; and none
ought to be Judges and parties, by the Law of this Land, in their own case.

3. I desire the benefit of Magna Charta, the Petition of Right, and other good
Laws of this Land, which ordain that all men's trials should be by the
established Laws, and not otherwise: They are the very words of the petition
of Right.

An Ordinance of both Houses is no Law of the Land by their own confession; ^^
Part col. of Ordinances, fol. 7^8. 2. Part instit. fol. 47 48. 157 647. 4. Part
instit. 23. 232. 298. 4. H. 7. 18.
and by the books of the Lord Cook, published by their Order as aforesaid
this Session in six several places.

For Sedition, in my books there is none, but such as they have authorized
this Session, to be published, and printed: To publish the Law is no sedition:
These Positions following I do set down for the Law of the Land in my books,
and they themselves have justified, and avowed them as aforesaid, we agree the
Law to be, and to have been in all times in all the particulars following, as
here ensues.

1. To imprison the King is High Treason. 3. Part instit. page 12.


2. To remoove Counselors from the King by force is High Treason. Mr.
Solicitor. page 12. 3. part instit. page 9. Mr. Pym, page 28. 3. Part instit.
3. 10. 12 16. 3. Parts instit. page 9.


3. To alter the established Laws in any part by force is High Treason.

4. To usurp the Royal power is high Treason.

5. To alter the Religion established is high Treason.

6. To raise rumors and give out words to alienate ^he peoples affections from
the King, is high treason. Mr. Solicitor. page 30. 31. 36.


7. To sesse Soldiers upon the people of the Kingdom without their consent,
is high treason. Mr. Solicitor. page 9.


8. Mr. Solicitor. page 9.
The execution of paper orders by Soldiers in a military way, Mr. Soliciter.
page 24. 4. part. instit. p. 125. Justice Huttons argument, fol. 39, 40.
is high treason.

9. To counterfeit the great Seal, is high treason.

10. The Commission of Array is in force, and none other.

11. None can make Judges, 4. part Instit.
Justices, Sheriffs, etc. but the King: The King makes every Court.

12. 2. part instit. articul. super charta^ cap. 5.
The great Seal belongs to the Kings custody, or to whom he shall appoint, and
none other.

13. 1. part. Coll. of Ordin. and Cool^ ut supra.
Ordinances of one or both Houses are no laws to bind the people.

14. 4 part instit. 25.
No Privilege of Parliament holds for treason, felony, or breach of the peace,
not for twenty Parliament men, forty, nor three hundred.

15. M. Soliciter. page 8. 70. M. Soliciter page 12. 27.
To subvert the fundamental Laws, is high treason.

16. To levey war against the person of the King, is high treason.

17. M. Soliciter page 26.
To persuade Forreiners to leavy war, within this Kingdom, is high treason.

18. M. Soliciter page 35.
To impose unlawful taxes, to impose new Oaths, i^ high treason.

19: M. Pym page 8.
The King can do no wrong.

20. M. Pym page 17.
It is a pernicious doctrine to teach subjects, they may be discharged from the
Oath of Allegeiance. The what means the Doctrine of the Votes of both house of
the 11. of Febr. 1647.

21. M. Pym page 24.
A necessity of a man's own making, does not excuse him. The requiring and
forcing of the Militi^ brought the necessity of arming upon the Houses.

22. 3. part instit. page 9.
None can leavy war within this Realm, with out authority from the King for
to him only it belonge^ to leavy war, by the Common Law of the Land, to d^
otherwise, is high treason, by the said Common Law. The only quarrel was and
is the Militia; for the which so much blood has been spent and treasure.

At whose door does the sin lie.

23. No Parliament without the King, M. Soliciter 70. 71. 4. part instit. page
1. 3. 4. 4. part instit. 41. 356.
he is Principium caput and finis.

24. Presentment or trial by Jury, is the birthright of the Subject.

There is no doubt but that many in both Houses are free from this great sin;
and that most of the prevailing party, had at first no intentions to proceed
so far; but the madness of the people (who are very unstable, and so they
will find them) and the success of their arms (having this great rich City
to supply them, with all accommodations) have so elated them, that the evil is
come to this height.

For my self, to put me to death in this cause, is the greatest honor I can
possibly receive in this World: Dulce and Decorum est mori pro patria. And for
a Lawyer and a Judge of the Law, to dye, Dum sanctis patriae legibus
obsequitur; for obedience to the Laws; will be deemed by the good men of this
time, a sweet smelling sacrifice; and by this, and future times, that I dyed
full of years, and had an honest and an honorable end: And posterity will take
knowledge of these men, who put some to death for subverting of the Laws, and
others for supporting of them, etc.

Yet Mercy is above all the works of God, Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 9. page 107.
4. part instit. 342. 343. Stanford. 99.
The King is Gods Vicar on earth. In Bracton, who was a Judge in Hen. 3. time,
you shall find the Kings Oath; To show mercy, is part of it: You are all his
children; say, and do what you will, you are all his Subjects: and He is your
King, and Parent: Pro magno peccato paululum supplicii satis est patri: and
therefore let not the prevailing party be obdurate, out of a desperation of
safety: That which is past is not revocable; tak^ to your thoughts, your
parents, your wives, your children, your friends, your fortunes, your country*
wherein foreigners write there is mira aeris suavitat and rerum omnium
abundantia: invite them not hither, the only way to be free of their company
will be, (...) restore his Majesty, and receive from him an act of Oblivion, a
general Pardon, assurance for the arreares of the Soldiery, and meet
satisfaction to tender consciences.

God preserve the King and the Laws. Da. Ienkins Prisoner in Newgate.

FINIS.

