THE BLIND OBEDIENCE OF AN HUMBLE PENITENT. THE Best Cure for Scruples.

AN. DOM. M.DC.XCVIII.

Imprimatur.

D. A. 19. A. School.

A. H. L. C.

TO THE READER.
SCrupulosity is a Disease of the Mind, which many people have more or less of;
although few believe it, and fewer are willing to own it. The greatest part,
and the wisest, are commonly ashamed of it. But yet there are some (the fewer,
the better) who think it a fine thing to be longer than ordinary, in
consulting, in preparing, and confessing. The more they outdo their neighbors
in these matters, and the more they are taken notice of for being singular, so
much more they admire themselves for being skillfull, careful, and exact. They
seem to affect these tedious and tormenting Scrupulosities, as if they thought
them to be the Modish Distemper of the Saints: And, if one may judge by
appearances, they are like a certain Lady, who having entertained the company
with a long history of her Vapors, could not endure to hear a Gentlewoman,
inferior to her self, begin to complain of the same indisposition. Marry come
up, says her Ladyship, we shall have every body, one of these days, take upon
them to be troubled with Vapors, if such as you pretend to it.

It Is hard to determine which is greater, the Folly or the Mischief of
Scrupulosity. Take it one way, there is no subject more serious: take it the
other, there is nothing more ridiculous. My chief design is to prevent the
Mischief of it, without sparing the Folly, when it happens to lie in my way.
And truly, when people are so fond of their Scruples, I am apt to think, it is
not amiss to let them see how silly the humor is. There is always a secret
Pride lies lurking in the bottom, when they are so stiff in their opinion; and
a little sense of shame is in some measure a remedy for it. If one always treat
these follies with respect and gravity, it will only serve to confirm them in
a vain belief, that their mistakes are wise ones: And this being wise in their
own conceits is the chief part of their Disease.

In fine, well or ill, I have now done Scribbling: And, upon second thoughts, am
in some admiration how I ever prevailed with my self, to begin. But, being once
entered, and having already published A Contrite and Humble Heart: Three
Sermons upon the Sacrament: A Letter concerning the Council of Trent: etc.
some small Pieces, I was not willing to leave off, till I had made a present
of this little Treatise to my Friends; to whom if it prove acceptable and
useful, I shall not think my labor lost: And, for the rest, the care is taken.

Mean time I keep my name to my self: And my reason is, because I love a quiet
life. I ever looked upon it as the greatest blessing which a bad World can
afford: and am persuaded that being Private is the easiest and securest way of
being Quiet. Besides, I see no good there is in being talked of; either well, or
ill: The one is good for nothing but to make a man Vain; the other is as apt to
make him Vexed; and All to no purpose.

ERRATA.
Page. 40. line. 23. dele we. page. 84. line. 20. dele the, page. 90. line. 21.
read get. page 92. line 1. read harmony. page. 135. line. 15. read they. page.
167. line. 1. dele they. These, and such other over-sights of the Press, the
Reader (I hope) will easily pardon.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THe Character of Blind Obedience, and of Scrupulosity which is humble
and submissive. page 1. CHAP. II. The true Causes of proud and wilful
Scrupulosity. 7 CHAP. III. The extravagant Effects of Scrupulosity, when it is
proud and wilful. 10. 1. The extravagancy of their Curiosity. 12. 2. The
extravagancy of their Examens. 20. 3. The extravagancy of their Fears. 25
CHAP. IV. The pernicious Consequences of the same Scrupulosity. 28. 1. The
difference betwixt Servile Fear, and Loving Confidence. 31. 2. The mischief of
long Examens. 36. 3. Blind Obedience the best Remedy. 44
CHAP. V. Nothing more unreasonable than a boundless Liberty of reasoning. 47
CHAP. VI. The difference betwixt a Philosopher and a Christian, concerning the
Submission of Humane Reason. 56 CHAP. VII. The different Sentiments of a Proud
and an Humble Penitent, concerning Blind Obedience. 60 CHAP. VIII. A
Scripture-Objection answered. 69 CHAP. IX. Pretenses of Reason answered. 75
CHAP. X. Pretenses of Conscience considered. 96. 1. The two sorts of Practical
Certainty explained. 101. 2. When we rely upon our Confessor's Authority, our
Certainty is Absolute. 103. 3. When we depend upon the Probability of our own
Reason, our Certainty is only Conditional. 118. 4. Objections of pretended
Conscience answered. 138
CHAP. XI. The Security of Blind Obedience proved by Scripture. 153 CHAP. XII.
Maxims of S. BERNARD concerning Blind Obedience. 169 MAX. I. We ought to look
upon our Confessor as a Vicegerent of God, without considering his faults. 171
MAX. II. We ought to look upon him as our Judge, without examining his reasons.
184

APPROBATION.
I Have read this learned Treatise, concerning Blind Obedience, which I judge
very useful; and observed nothing in it, but solid and orthodox. Dat. Lovanij.
17. Aprilis. School.

FRANCIS MARTIN. Doctor and Royal Professor of Divinity in the University of
Lovain.

THE BLIND OBEDIENCE OF AN HUMBLE PENITENT.
CHAP. I. The Character of Blind Obedience, and of Scrupulosity which is humble
and submissive.
BLind Obedience is an ill name which the World has given to one of the best
things in it. I do not call it so, because I think it is so; but because the
custom of speaking will have it so, and many people will not understand me if I
use another term for it. However I shall endeavor to do it so much justice, as
to show plainly in a familiar example, that so good a thing does not deserve so
bad a name.

Let us suppose two Travelers in the same way to the same home, and that their
lives and fortunes depend upon their coming timely thither. The one goes slowly
on, and oftentimes stands still to satisfy his curiosity, either in looking
back to take a prospect of the Country which he leaves behind him, or else in
studying whether the foot-way on the right hand or the left be better than the
way he is in: Whilst he is thus amused with idle fancies, time runs on, the day
is spent, he is benighted before he is aware, and begins to repent when it is
too late. His fellow-traveller considers that all these vain amusements are
nothing to his purpose, he is full of concern for the great affair he has in
hand, and therefore he marches diligently on, minds carefully the way before
him, and never stops to look behind, or gaze about him. Will any body say, this
man is blind, because he does not see backward? or because he does not stare
about him, on the one side, or the other? All his business is to go forward, he
sees the way before him as well as any man living, he sees all that he has need
to see, and therefore, whosoever says this man is blind, must excuse me if I
cannot believe it.

The Case of these two Travelers is daily verified in scrupulous persons, of
which there are two sorts: the one proud and wilful, the other humble and
submissive. Those rely upon themselves, and these upon their Guide. Those
always are disturbed with idle doubts and fears which are not worth a serious
thought: These never trouble their heads with any thing but their chief
business, which is to march diligently on, for fear of coming late; they never
stop to look backward, for fear of having dropped something behind them; they
never stand still to observe the different paths on either side of the road;
they carefully observe the sure direction of their Guide, and, without
disputing the matter with him, are contented to follow wheresoere he leads.
This is the true character of the Obedience I speak of: It is always ready to
march at first word of command; it never pauses to gaze behind it, or on either
side; it clearly sees the way which it is bid to take, and never perplexes it
self with any doubts about it, because it is self-evident there can be no other
way for true Obedience. What a spiteful thing it is, to say, that this
Obedience is blind, when it sees its way so clearly, and is so certain of it!

This humble and submissive Scrupulosity is rather to be envied, than be
pitied. To these there is no need of preaching Blind Obedience. They are very
well acquainted with it: it is their daily practice, and perpetual comfort: it is
by this they overcome their doubts and fears; and though they are not quite so
easy as they would be, yet they are contented and resigned. Their Scrupulosity,
though sometimes painful, is always advantageous to them: the experience of
their weakness humbles them, and fortifies them in the practice of Obedience,
it not only puts them in the way to Heaven; but it helps to keep them in it;
and therefore I have no more to say to them at present, but only to wish them
a good journey. The proud and wilful Sinners are the persons, I have now to
deal with: Those Sinners who are not contented to be Saints according to God's
heart, but must and will be Saints according to their own.

CHAP. II. The true Causes of proud and wilful Scrupulosity.
OUr Doctors and Divines, who treat of Scruples, observe several causes of
them: 1. Melancholy, which is sometimes cured by physic: 2. Suggestion of the
Devil, against whom the best defense is prayer: 3. Conversation of Scrupulous
persons, whose needless discourses of their inward troubles, ought to be
shunned as infectious: 4. Reading of casuistical books, which are to be avoided
as remedies unfit for the disease: 5. Excess of servile fear, which daily
diminishes as the Love of God increases. These are the Causes which they
commonly take notice of; but they are nothing to my present purpose: because a
complication of them all together, may consist with being humble and submissive.

The true and proper Causes of our being proud and wilful in our Scruples,
are the Esteem of our Judgment, and the Love of our Liberty, which we derive
originally from the Sin of our first Parents. We are curious of knowing good
and evil: we are ambitious of being like the Highest: we are desirous of being
absolute and independent in all our thoughts and actions: we would willingly be
uncontrollable in both: we would fain do what we think, and think what we
please: in a word, we would gladly choose our own way, and be our own Judges
whether we have chosen right or wrong.

It Is obvious to every body's natural reason, that Scrupulous persons would
never be proud, if they had not an esteem of their judgment; neither would they
be wilful in their Scruples, if they did not love the liberty of their
humor. They esteem their judgment, and are therefore so proud, they cannot
endure to submit it: they love their humor, and therefore are so wilful,
they cannot abide to cross it. To abate this love, and to correct this vain
esteem, I know nothing more proper than to expose the folly and the mifcheif
which attend them: and therefore shall endeavor in the two following chapters
to show the extravagant effects, and the pernicious consequences of them.

CHAP. III. The extravagant Effects of Scrupulosity when it is proud and
wilful.
It Is no wonder that humane Reason is extravagant, when Scrupulosity on the one
side, and obstinacy on the other, conspire together to confound the notions of
it* The one frights it out of the way; the other hinders it from coming in
again: The one warps it; the other makes it stand bent: And how is it possible
for any body to square their actions by such a crooked Rule. All that I wonder
at, is this; that when people find, and feel by sad experience, the folly and
extravagancy of their following such a Rule, they are yet so proud and wilful
as not to make use of a better, which God himself has recommended to them.

There are such a vast variety of follies and excesses which their pride and
willfullness betray them to, that I should never make an end, if I pretended to
take notice of them all: and therefore, to bring my matters into as little
compass as may be, and to make them as plain and self-evident as I can, I shall
reduce them to three general heads, by considering the principal duties of
Temperance, and by comparing that of the Body with the other of the Mind, which
has most need of it, and suffers most for want of it.

SECT. I. The extravagancy of their Curiosity.
THe first and least degree of Temperance obliges us to abstain from all those
things, which in the common opinion of the world are poison to us, and will
certainly destroy us. A man must needs be very intemperate indeed, who longs
for a belly-full of Arsenick, as much as a child does for a lump of sugar.
Would you not think a man strangely wilful, who will not believe it is poison,
till he has tried it? Such is the folly of many scrupulous penitents, who long
to know some secret truths, which if they knew for certain, the very certainty
would be enough to ruin them. They fright themselves almost out of their wits
with thinking, that their Confessions never are exact, that they never love God
above all things, that they never do sufficient penance for their sins, that
they are not in the state of Grace, and that they are not in the number of
God's Elect. How happy should they be, in case they did but know assuredly the
truth of these important matters! If they knew only these two things, 1. that
they are at present in God's favor, 2. that they always shall be so, How
cheerfully and unconcerndly would they then march forward in the way to Heaven!

I confess, they have all the reason in the world to wish these things were
true: Their Eternal happiness or misery depend entirely upon the truth of them:
But, since they may be true, without their knowledge, it is evidently unnecessary
to know it, and unreasonable to be so eager for the assurance of it. Alas! all
this is nothing but the weakness and faint-heartedness of an infirm and
cowardly Spirit, which makes them over-covetous of their security: a Security
which would eternally undo them, if they had it. They are terribly afraid: this
Fear makes them very uneasy: and this Uneasiness creates an earnest desire of
an imaginary Certainty, which may exempt them from all fear, and make them be
at ease. In this proceeding there is great appearance of Humor, but not one
jot of Reason: and because they are such great pretenders to reason, I shall
take the pains to prove that nothing can be more unreasonable.

I. It Is impossible for any body to desire sincerely the Salvation of their
Soul, without desiring at the same time to comply with all those duties, which
are requisite to save it. One of these duties is Fear: we are commanded to
Philip. 2.12.
work our Salvation with Fear and Trembling: How then can they pretend to go to
work without it?

II. It Is certainly a foolish thing to avoid one mischief, by incurring another
equal to it. A wise man, if he were obliged to pass twixt fire and water, would
be sure to mind the middle-way: he would neither burn himself for fear of
drowning, nor drown himself for fear of burning. This is the present case. The
way to Heaven is the middle-way betwixt Presumption and Despair: two dreadful
precipices which descend as low as Hell. To save us from falling on either
side, the way is fenced with Hope and Fear: Hope, that we may not despair,
Fear, that we may not presume. The blood of our veins, and breath of our
nostrils, are not more requisite for the life of our bodies, than Hope and Fear
are necessary for the saving of our Souls: How then can they imagine that it is
reasonable, to desire to be exempt from either?

III. The only true Security, which can be expected in this world, is that
which is grounded upon Fear. It Is Fear that makes us humble and diligent. By
making us humble, it prepares us for the grace of God; 1. Pet. 5.5.
He gives his grace to the humble: and by making us diligent in complying with
his grace, it helps us to secure our Salvation; 2. Pet. 1.10.
Use diligence, says the Apostle, to make your calling and election sure.
Besides, it is Fear that makes us Math. 26.41.
watch and pray, that we enter not into temptation. By watching we put our
selves upon a close guard, and by praying we obtain the assistance of Heaven
against all our enemies on earth. When 1. Pet. 5.8.
our Enemy the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking to devour us, an
unconcernd assurance is apt to lull us asleep: There Is nothing like Fear, to
make us watchful. Psalm. 69.1.
O God incline unto my aid; O Lord, make have to help me. A man, who is afraid,
will say this prayer heartily: but he, who thinks himself in safety, will
either say it very tepidly, or not at all. To conclude in a few words; Watching
and Praying are our best Security: Fear is the best thing in the world, to make
us watch and pray: And therefore, they who are so fond of being Secure, How can
they think of wishing to be free from Fear?

IV. The Fanatics pretend to the very same assurance, which our Scrupulous
people are so fond of: and Experience plainly teaches, that it only serves to
make them proud and negligent. When once they are deluded with a strong
persuasion that they are God's Favorites, They take no further care: The Lambs
of the Lord may play what tricks they please. If this be the effect of
unconcernd Security; if it poison and ruin the Soul; what reason can any body
have to wish for it?

V. As long as the Devil is not dead, and as long as this sinful flesh of ours
is living in a wicked world; so long it is impossible for us to be free from
three implacable enemies, the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. Heaven is the
only place of Peace, such as excludes all war, all danger, and all fear: Job.
7.1.
Upon Earth our life is a continual Warfare: and every body knows very well,
there can be no War without danger, nor Danger without just reason to fear. A
true Security of being Happy, without any fear of being otherwise, is
undoubtedly a very lovely thing; and Heaven it self is lovely, for the very
sake of it. I do not wonder that good people are in love with it: and that they
long to be in Heaven, to enjoy it. But to wish to have it, where we know it is
not to be had, is an extravagancy which I never can sufficiently admire.

SECT. II. The extravagancy of their Examens.
THe second degree of Temperance obliges us, not only to abstain from poison,
but also from all excess in such meats and drinks as are good and necessary for
us: and the reason is clear; because although they are good, if moderately
taken, yet every great excess is hurtful, and next door to poison. Let a man
be never so temperate in the choice of his diet: though he be never so cautious
in consulting his Physician concerning the quality of it; yet, if he exceed in
the quantity, if he eat all day and drink all night, he is certainly guilty of
a very notorious intemperance.

This is the case of those Scrupulous Penitents, who are too proud to submit
their judgment, and too wilful to cross their humor. To examine their
Conscience, is a very good thing, and necessary for the health of their Soul:
but yet there is moderation in all things; and it is an unpardonable extravagancy
to spend the greatest part of day and night, in spelling upon sins and
circumstances, and putting them together. If it were only so much precious
time so idely spent, they would be more excusable: but to employ their time so
busily, not only to do themselves no good, but even to do themselves a great
deal of harm, is a folly which I take to be matchless. They torment themselves
continually: they neglect all other duties, they bring a public scandal upon
the very character of devotion: and all this to no purpose, but only to try to
pacify the fears of a cowardly Spirit, which has no reason in the world to be
so fearful, but because it wants a little courage to be quiet.

I must needs own, that when people are ready to sink under the weight of their
uneasiness, it is natural to seek for comfort; but however it is not rational to
seek it where Experience proves it is not to be found. They cannot easily
submit their judgment to their Confessor; and therefore in all their doubts
they labor to suppress their fears, by satisfying their own Reason about them:
But the more they range in the Wood, the more they confound and lose
themselves. They can neither endure the thought of danger, nor the sense of
fear; and therefore, though they really believe it is to little purpose, yet
they still are tempted to go on, and easily yield to the temptation. If
experience did not teach them that they try in vain, they might have some plea
their practice but to examine barely for examen sake, is a groundless fancy
without the least color of reason; and looks (if I may borrow the wit of a
pleasant modern Poet) As if Confession had caught
The itch, on purpose to be scratcht;
OR As if Confession were intended,
For nothing else, but to be mended.


They think that if they examine no longer, they shall be mightily disturbed in
mind; and they always find, that the longer they examine, the more they are
disturbed. They trouble themselves for fear of being troubled: and by their
wilful disobedience, in this very point, they lose God's favor, for fear of
losing it. An extravagancy much like that, which the Poet describes, of one
Fannius, who took the pains to kill himself, for fear his Enemy should save him
the labor, and do it for him* Hostem dum fugeret, se Fannius ipse peremit: Dic
mihi, quis furor est, ne moriare, mori?


He fled from death, and killed himself in flying:
What madness is it, to die for fear of dying?
SECT. III. The extravagancy of their Fears.
WHereas the Duties of Temperance extend themselves alike to all particular
matters which regard our health, and consequently oblige us to observe a
proportionable equality and regularity in all our measures: On the contrary,
these proud Penitents are unequal and irregular in every thing. They are
terribly fearful, where they need not fear; and where there is most danger,
they are least concerned for it. Excessively sollicitous in the Examen of their
Consciences; and supinely careless in the Amendment of their lives.

They are frighted into a dread full apprehension of some trifles, which are
little or nothing to their purpose; and whilst they are so steadfastly attentive
to these needless points, they are insensible and stupid as to all things else.
They will be their own Guides; and by God's just judgment upon them, they are
blind ones. They are like the blind Guides in the Gospel, Math. 23.24.
who strein at a gnat, and swallow a Camel. They startle at every
inconsiderable difficulty invented by their own imagination; and, in things of
great importance, go on as boldly and as unconcerndly as if they did not see
Hell gaping under their feet. Their stomach rises at the very thought of
resigning their judgment in doubtful cases; and in things which are
undoubtedly hurtful, even to the degree of poisonous, they sit down to them
with a very good appetite. All the Severities of exterior mortification, as
watchings, fastings, hair-cloths, and the like, are commonly welcome to them:
because they are well enough pleased with any thing that feeds their pride, and
helps them to a false persuasion of their being in the high road of the Saints.
These things they will practice, even when their Confessor forbids them. But, as
for the Ephesians. 4.23.
renewing of their Spirit and their Mind, the best and most important
mortification, which is that of the Soul, by crossing of their humor and
submitting of their judgment, They hate the very thought of it: Not a word of
that; as you love them. If all this be not extravagant, Pray tell me, What is?

CHAP. IV. The pernicious Consequences of the same Scrupulosity.
IF people might play the fool, as they please, in the way to Heaven, without
being ever the worse for it: then indeed the Scrupulosity, I speak of, would be
an innocent sort of Folly, without any Mischief in it. But surely, if what we
believe of Heaven and Hell be true, there can be nothing more pernicious and
more fatal to us, than that sturdy and resty Scrupulosity, which will neither
lead nor drive, but will be always either standing still, or looking backwards,
to observe the way behind it. At this rate of going to Heaven, How is it
possible for us ever to get thither?

S. Paul compares the way to Heaven, to the running of a race, in which we
strive to win the prize of everlasting Glory. Consider only what a
disadvantage it is for a man to look behind him all the way he runs. Without
question he who looks before him, advances with much more ease, much greater
speed, and much less danger: whereas he who looks behind him, must needs move
very slowly and uneasily, besides being exposed every moment to a double
danger, either of falling, or of missing his way. If these people thought the
way to Heaven easy, they would not be so much afraid as they are: and, if they
think it hard to find, why are they always gazing backwards? The way lies
before them; and looking forward is the surest way to find it.

Our Savior bids us Luke. 13.24.
strive to enter in at the strait Gate: for many will seek to enter in, and
shall not be able. We must strive to enter: We must not lose time: we must make
what have we can: and how can we make have, if we are always looking behind us?
Besides, the Gate is strait: If it were wide enough, one might hit it without
aiming at it: but, being so strait as it is, if we are always looking behind
us, it is impossible to hit it. And therefore it is no wonder that our Savior
adds, Many will strive to enter in, and shall not be able: because many will be
always puzzling their brains with making, or mending, their general
confessions; and always looking whence they come, without minding whither they
go.

SECT. I. The difference betwixt Servile Fear and Loving Confidence.
ONe of the principal causes from whence this great disorder proceeds, is
nimiustim or servilis, quem generat nimiusamor proprius, quemque diminuit
perfecta charitas, ex qua and ex timore filialiraro nascitur haec affectio.
Suaraz 1.2. disp. 12. sect. ult. n. 1.
an excess of servile Fear; and it is a thousand pities they are so much
overpowered with it. It Is true; Fear is good; and it is Psalm. 110.10.
the beginning of wisdom: But what is the Beginning good for, if it never bring
them to the End? 1. Tim. 1.5.
The end of the Law is Love. When servile Fear is grown to a very great excess,
it is like the winterseason of the Soul; it is a certain chilliness of Love,
which makes them quake and tremble, whether they will or no. If they had but
time to breath a while; if they had any respite to consider the Divine
Goodness; if their continual fears would give them leisure to Psalm 39.9.
taste and see how sweet God is; the Love of him would soon improve in their
hearts; it would be like the Sun's approaching nigher their Meridian; it would
warm them, quicken them, and drive away the chilly coldness of their Fear.

True Friendship naturally inspires a loving Confidence in our Friend. The more
we love him, the more we confide in him. And if we love him very much, we are
apt to have so much confidence in him, as to think it almost impossible for him
to find in his heart to hurt us. If this be so, even amongst us mortals,
notwithstanding our ill nature and our being subject to mistake, surely the
self-same reason is of much more force, when it is applied to God. Our friends
on earth may be misstaken, and suspect our love; or else may possibly be so
illnatur'd as to slight it, though they know it. But our God can neither be
illnatur'd to us, nor mistaken in us: if we love him, we may be assured, he
always knows it, and he never slights it.

It Is S. Austin's Maxim: Love, and Do what you will. Do but love God, and
whatever you do, under the direction and influence of this Love, will never
disturb your peace. Do but love him heartily, and then you will never purposely
and deliberately design to offend him: your chief design will always be to
please him: and, whatsoever frailties or surprises happen, as long as this
design subsists, you need not doubt but that they always will be pardonable. Do
but love him above all things, and all your imperfections, whatsoere they are,
will only serve to humble you, they never will incline you to despair.

S. Peter tells us, that 1. Pet. 4.8.
Love covers a multitude of faults. Consider only the imperfections of little
children: how frequent, and how troublesome they are: And yet the tenderness of
any loving Parent covers all. These children are dutiful in the main: they
love their Parents better than any other friends: and are sorry for nothing
more than for offending them. On the other side, their Parents, who see it, are
satisfied in the main: They are content to bear with other daily failings: They
correct and chide them for their lesser faults: But, though they are frequently
displeased, there is no danger of their children being disinherited. The more
we see, and the more clearly we discover, the guilt of all our daily
trespasses, the more we ought to humble our selves in presence of our God, and
love him so much more for loving us in spite of all our faults, and for
assuring us that if our Love persever to the end, we shall never lose our right
to the inheritance of Heaven. Is not this enough to moderate and govern all our
fears? What need we wish for more?

SECT. II. The mischief of long Examens.
IF Scrupulous people would but find a little leisure to consider seriously
such comfortable truths as these, they would soon find benefit by them: but
their mischief is, they have always something else to do, when they should
think how good God is. Instead of calling to mind how kind and tender a Father
they have in Heaven, their busy thoughts are entertained with fancies of his
being a severe and cruel Tyrant upon Earth. A Tyrant that exacts more from them
than their utmost diligence is able to perform: an Enemy that always watches to
destroy them, and delights in laying hold of any opportunity to ruin them: a
Master so intolerably rigid in exacting his accounts, that when his Slaves have
done whatever they can, it is all in vain, there is no possibility of ever
making even reckonings with him. I will not say, they absolutely are of this
opinion: but this I am sure of, they behave themselves as if they were. It Is
hard to determine what opinion they are of; or whether they have any opinion at
all. The only conjecture which I dare rely upon, is this: that where their
Fears prevail, they are little better (if not worse) than Infidels. They dare
not believe the Church of God, nor even God himself: and therefore it is no
wonder, if they dare not trust their Confessor.

The Word of God himself assures them in general, that 1. Jo. 5.3.
his Commands are not grievous: and yet they cannot believe it. They think the
obligation of confessing is the most grievous thing imaginable; and that it is
morally impossible to be complied with.

The Council of Trent assures them in particular, that this Command is not
grievous. It declares, that Sess. 14. cap. 5.
it is an impious thing, either to say it is impossible, or to call it a
Torture of Consciences. They do not believe this neither. They find by
experience that their Spirits are upon the wrack, and that it is a Torture to
them, whenever they prepare for Confession. It Is true; it is their own fault,
who are wilful in over-doing their duty. But this is another truth, which
they believe no more than the rest. They are too proud to blame themselves; and
therefore lay the fault upon their obligation.

The Council declares that constat enim, nihil, aliud in Ecclesia a
poenitentibus exigi, quam ut postquam quisque diligentius se excusserit ea
peccata confiteatur, quibus se Dominum and Deum suum mortaliter offendisse
meminerit: reliqua autem peccata, quae diligenter cogitanti non occurrunt, in
universum, eadem Confessione inclusa esse intelliguntur. ibid.
NOTHING MORE is required in the Church from Penitents, than that after a
DILIGENT EXAMEN every one confess those sins in which THEY REMEMBER themselves
to have offended mortally the Lord their God: and that THE REST of their Sins,
whatsoever they are, which after a diligent examen DO NOT occur to mind, are
ALL understood to be INCLUDED in the same Confession. This Declaration would be
as comfortable as their hearts can wish, if they did but believe it.

Nothing more is required, than to confess those Sins which they remember; not
which they can, but which they do remember. From when it plainly follows, that,
if they do not remember, they are altogether as secure as if they could not. If
we we were obliged to examine till we remember all; then indeed our proud
Penitents, who wilfully torture themselves with long and tedious examens,
would be very much in the right of it: But, on the contrary, it is evident the
Council does not oblige us to remember; it only obliges us to examine. Neither
is it in the power of any Council to command a man, to have a good memory: but,
such as it is, a good one, or a bad one, we are commanded to be diligent in
calling it to an account. This done, We neither are the better, if we remember
all, nor worse, if we forget the greatest part. If we remember our sins
exactly, all and everyone of them, What greater advantage can we expect, than
to have them all and every one forgiven us? This is certainly All: and this
advantage is the very same, to all intents and purposes of pardon, although we
forget the greatest part, because the Council has declared, they are all
forgiven as fully and as entirely as if we had remembered and confessed them.

To what purpose then is all this torturing of their minds, when it manifestly
does more harm than good? It disturbs their thoughts, it robs them of their
peace, it dries up their devotion, it deprives them of all comfort, it renders
them excessively uneasy, it tempts and leads them to impatience and despair.

To what purpose is all this pudder of examining? Is it to please God, or your
self? To please your self, is a dangerous business: for, although your
disobedience may be pleasing here, it is much to be feared the punishment of it
will be very unpleasant hereafter. And, as for pleasing God, it is certain he is
equally pleased, when he has equally forgiven us: and the Council assures us,
He equally forgives what we forget, and as perfectly, as what we remember.

Let us now compare the doctrine of the Council, with the practice of these
people. According to their practice, there is nothing more necessary than this
endless diligence: and according to the Council, there is nothing more
needless. From whence I leave you to conclude, whether or no these examining
creatures are those who hear the Church, or whether they are not in some danger
of being, one day, reckoned amongst the Heathens and the Publicans.

SECT. III. Blind Obedience the best Remedy.
AN humble Penitent is free from these disorders. His scrupulosity may be
fearful; it is the nature of it to be so: but it never is incurable: because
it is truly humble and submissive. The remedies of it are always at hand; And,
with his Confessor's advice, he is always ready to apply them. His Confessor
needs only say the word; he never asks a reason why. He has a general reason
for all doubtful cases whatsoever; a reason which he always carries about with
him; an everlasting reason which is ever the same, and which he is infallibly
assured of, that in doubtful cases nothing is so reasonable as Obedience. He
never has any troublesome doubts, to vex him or molest him. He knows for
certain, what he is bid do, and that he does, without ever doubting of it. He
fears nothing but himself; he fears his frailty; he fears his being
disobedient: These are the only things he fears: And therefore he is fearful
without discouragement, careful without anxiety, and diligent without any
trouble. He is as diligent in the examen of his Conscience, as men of business
are in any serious affair. More than this, he is not obliged to: and so much as
this, is as easy to him, as it is ordinary to every body else. He is so humble,
as to enquire of his Confessor, what length of time he pleases to allow for his
examen; and so obedient, that he has no inclination to exceed his allowance. He
begins his work, goes on with it, and ends it, all with the same ease.

He knows very well that the general reason of his Obedience is grounded upon
as firm a foundation, as the rock it self, upon which the Church is built: and
therefore he never enquires after any particular reasons, why his Confessor
allows him no more time. He not only despises all these curiosities, but even
hates them: because he firmly believes, they are as pernicious as they are
superfluous. Nor is it any wonder he believes it, if it be true, that seeing is
believing; for he plainly sees the sad experience of it, in his proud and
wilful neighbors, who are never quiet, but are always restless and uneasy;
never contented, but always laboring in vain to build Security upon the sandy
foundation of their own weak Reason. A Foundation which is never firm; but
either flies like dust before each puff of Wind, or else is washed away, and
changed with every Tide.

CHAP. V. Nothing more unreasonable than a boundless Liberty of reasoning.
IT happens very unluckily for us, that the chief Faculty we have, which God
has given us to govern all the rest, is sometimes the most ungovernable of them
all: and that our Reason, which calls them all to an account, is sometimes the
most unaccountable it self. Our Savior says Luke 14.34.35.
Salt is good: but if the Salt have lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
seasoned? It is neither fit for the Land, nor for the Dunghill, but men cast it
out. In the same manner, Reason is good: it is good, to oversee our Appetites,
our words, and Actions: it is good, to watch them, and to keep them within the
bounds of Temperance and Moderation: it is good, to summon them before the Bar,
examine, reprehend, and punish them for their transgressions: All this, right
Reason is good for. But if our Reason it self be the greatest transgressor, the
most intemperate, the most extravagant of all; What is it good for, but to be
cast out of doors, and Math. 5.13.
trodden under foot by men? This, I confess, is a hard saying; a severe
Sentence: but yet, by what has been already said, it plainly appears, it is not
more severe than it deserves.

Humane Reason is the best thing in Nature, if rightly managed; and the worst,
if a proud wilful creature have the keeping of it. It Is commonly said, that
Pride will have a fall: Nor is it any wonder, if it be always true; because it
looks too high to see the way before it. It Is like the Philosopher who fell into
a ditch whilst he was gazing at the Stars. The Reason which God has given us,
if rightly employed, would make us humble and submissive; it would open our
eyes, to see how fallible we are; and open our ears to hear the advice of
others, who are wiser than our selves. But, on the contrary, when Reason is
abused, and ill applied, it makes us proud and wilful: it puffs us up with a
vain esteem of our own judgment; and the higher it raises us, the greater fall
it gives us.

The fall of our first Parents had an influence upon the Understanding as well
as the Will of their posterity: and a great part of our original disease
consists in an insatiable Curiosity, by which we aim at being like the Highest.
We would know all things, and have a reason for every thing. This is the
desperate condition of those scrupulous persons, to whom I here address my
self. They are brainsick with too much reasoning. They thirst after reason, as
dropsical people after drink: and, the more you give them, the more you
increase the distemper. Reason without submission, is the very thing which
makes them sick: and nothing will ever cure them, but an universal Submission,
in all doubtful cases, without any particular reasons for it. Their
Understanding raves continually after an infinity of idle and unnecessary
notions: and, to make it sober, there is nothing like darkening the windows;
for, whilst you let the light break in upon it, you will never bring it to it
self.

At this rate, you will say, God gave us our Reason to little purpose; if, in
doubtful cases, it be better to resign it, than to use it. I beg your pardon.
Our Reason is given us, to as much purpose as our other Faculties are: It is
given us, to make right use of it; and not to enjoy the pleasure of it at our
own discretion. We are as much obliged to observe the Rules of Temperance in
reasoning, as in eating and drinking: and our Curiosity of knowing too much is
oftentimes as dangerous as either Gluttony or Drunkenness. There are many
things which are not proper for us to eat: and there are many more, which are
as improper for us to know. But a proud Mind is like a depraved Appetite, and
both are most inclined to what is most pernicious to them. Such was the disease
of our first Parents, which still runs in the blood of the whole Family. They
had knowledge enough to serve their turn, but were not contented with it: they
were curious to try the experiment of what was meant by knowing good and evil:
they knew it to their sorrow, and paid dearly for it. A little Blind Obedience
would have kept them in the state of Innocence: but, to obey without a
particular reason why, was more than they were willing to support. They would
not endure to be kept in any degree of Darkness. Their insatiable Curiosity
allowed no terms of moderation to their Use of Reason. They would have their
eyes opened: they would be as Gods: they would either know All or Nothing. See
here an early example of the Intemperance of Humane Reason. See how speedily,
and how severely it was punished. And learn from thence this useful Lesson;
that we are as much obliged to observe the rules of Temperance in Using of our
Reason, as we are to keep a Moderation and Decorum in the Use of meat and drink.

All or Nothing, is the Motto of a Libertin. All that lies in his way, is
lawful to him. What was it All made for? What was He himself created for, but
to enjoy the faculties which Nature has bestowed upon him? He values no other
use than the enjoyment of them. When he plays the Glutton, or the Drunkard,
etc. he justifies himself with asking, Is it not lawful for a man to eat, and
drink, etc. What were All these things made for? What were his Appetites and
Reason made for, but to pick and choose, love and hate, think and do, whatere he
pleases? The thinking part of him (which is a thing he scarce knows what to
think of) seems capable of knowing All things: and Why should any Laws of God
or Man pretend to limit it? So unreasonable is the Use of Humane Reason, when
it is a Slave to Pride and Willfullness which commonly are the keepers and
disposers of it! My Reason is my own, say they; God did not give it me for
nothing. What matter is it, how dark and doubtful these things are? My Reason
is my Judge. My boundless Reason is capable of knowing All things: Why should
any body stint it? The proud and boistrous Sea when it swells high, and with a
full tide rushes in upon the shore, if it could speak, might say the same thing
with as good a grace: My boundless waves are able to oreflow the Earth: and Why
should I stop here? Proud Creatures! It Is in vain to lift up your rebellious
hands against the Hand that made you; Prove. 16.5.
Though hand join in hand, you shall not be unpunished. He who has Job. 38.8.11.
shut up the Sea with doors, and said, Here shall thy proud waves be stayed;
He, I say has shut up Humane Reason within the compass of its Duty, and said,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further.

CHAP. VI. The difference betwixt a Philosopher and a Christian, concerning the
Submission of Humane Reason.
THe Liberties of natural Reason are as large as those of Nature it self: and
as we know no certain bounds of natural causes and effects, so we prescribe no
limits to our natural Reason in endeavoring to discover them. All this visible
World, and even the Maker of it (so far as we can trace his footsteps, and
understand him by the things which he has made) are the object and the subject
of our speculations. It Is like a Garden of Delight, where Humane Reason may
divert it self; and ramble up and down without ever finding any end of it. It Is
a place of Pleasure, where a Philosopher daily meets with fresh discoveries of
entertainment for his curiosity, which is the only greedy Appetite he has. His
business does not lie in Action, but in Contemplation: and, in this respect, he
may truly say, the Natural World is all his own: He may think, and judge, and
reason, as he pleases, concerning all, and every part, of it.

The Supernatural World is quite another thing. The great and glorious End,
which all good Christians aim at, is Supernatural: and to make our natural
reason the supreme Judge of matters relating to this End, is a thing manifestly
unreasonable. For, although it be excusable in a Philosopher, to take nothing
upon trust, it would be evidently unpardonable in a Christian. Of all the four
last things, which Christians ought to remember that they may never sin; Death
is the only thing we naturally are assured of. No body's natural reason can
demonstrate what we believe concerning Judgment, Hell, or Heaven. And yet, to
prepare for this Judgment, to avoid this Hell, and to enjoy this Heaven, a good
Christian sacrifices all things here, his fortune, his life, his friends, and
whatsoever is most dear to him. At the approach of Death, he resigns his Spirit
into the hands of God: and although he does not see in what his future
Happiness consists; he puts his Confidence in God, who has revealed his Mercies
to us; and in the Church, who has assured us of his Promises. He joyfully
relies upon these great assurances of more than he is able to conceive: and is
content to take them upon trust.

I do not wonder, that no body is worthy of Heaven, who dares not take God's
word for it. But this I admire, that they who can trust God with their Souls,
with their Eternity, with their unseen and unknown hopes of Happiness in
Heaven; nevertheless cannot submit so far, as to trust him with their conduct
upon Earth, and to rely upon the Guides which he has given them. If we can
follow God so cheerfully into an unseen World: Why can we not follow him as
cheerfully through an unknown Way? The Danger surely is the greatest in the
End: and, if we can trust him when we part from hence, I know no reason why we
may not trust him all the while we are here.

CHAP. VII. The different Sentiments of a Proud and an Humble Penitent,
concerning Blind Obedience.
HAppy are they who are blindly Obedient, without demurring, reasoning, or
disputing. They are embarkt in a Vessel, where they may sleep secure: they
need not take any further care, they have Jesus Christ for their Pilot. All
that we receive from God, we ought to Sacrifice to him; and consequently our
Understanding as well as our Will. If we fail in this one point, our being
exact in all the rest will signify little or nothing. The fall of Lucifer, and
his companions, is a sufficient proof. They were Angels in all other respects,
and never had been Devils, if they had submitted their Understanding and their
Will to him who made them. That Pride which alone was enough to cast the Angels
out of Heaven, That alone, though we were Angels in all things else, is enough
to hinder us from ever going thither. Our best way to secure our selves, and to
discover the artifices of an Enemy who is as cunning as he is malicious, is to
look upon Obedience as the touchstone of all the virtue and perfection which we
aim at. The Devil can counterfeit all other virtues, but he could never
counterfeit Obedience. Had he at first submitted his Will and Understanding to
his great Superior, who made him; had he but been Obedient while he was an
Angel, he had never been a Devil. If Obedience be our Rule, in all our Actions,
and in all the circumstances of them; if it be our daily business to improve
and grow more perfect in complying with this Rule; it is impossible that we
should ever err. We cannot but know what we are bid to do; and, if we know
that, we know the highway to Heaven: Let us only do as we are bid, and we
shall certainly go thither. As long as the Sheep follow their Shepherd, they
are safe: but, if any of them go astray from the Flock, it is no wonder they are
devoured by the Wolves.

These are the Sentiments of an humble Penitent. But they who are proud and
wilful, are not so easily satisfied concerning these matters. The very
thought of Blind Obedience is like news of death, to their beloved Curiosity,
and darling Humor, which they are so desperately fond of. If Death it self
should come within their view, and show his Sithe, and only some few Sands at
the bottom of the Glass, it would not chill their Spirits more than it does to
think their Curiosity must be buried alive, and their Humor lie as low as
dust, without ever rising again. If they were truly Penitent, the Spirit of
Repentance would inspire a holy revenge in punishing those Faculties of the
Soul, which were the instruments of Sin. They would punish their Will, by
restraining it in things which are indifferent, and mortify their
Understanding, by resigning it in matters which are doubtful. If they
considered seriously the extravagancies which attend their Pride and Curiosity,
and the pernicious consequences of their Wilful Humor, they would hate them
now, as much as heretofore they loved them: they would not suffer them so much
as to see the Light, which they are so unworthy of, but willingly condemn them
to the Darkness of a Dungeon, during life. It Is a severe Sentence: But what have
you to say against it, that it may not pass?

What am I the better for my Reason, if I may not act according to it?

In doubtful cases, you never act more conformably to your own right reason,
than when you renounce the probability of your Speculations, and submit them to
your Judge without reasoning the matter with him.

My Confessor may be mistaken.

Very well: He may so. But does not God know that as well as you? And yet he
has appointed him to be your Judge.

I really believe he is mistaken.

You may believe the contrary, if you please; as long as you are not certain of
it.

I have a great many reasons to think him in the wrong, and no particular
reason to think him in the right.

Put all your reasons in one Scale: put his Authority in the other: And, if it
have as much weight with you as it ought to have, 'twill over weigh them all.
His Authority is from God: Your reasons, which tempt you to despise it, are no
better than Suggestions of the Devil. His Authority is absolutely certain and
secure: Your reasons (if there happen to be any reason in them) are but
doubtful and uncertain. Put all this together: Consider it well: And you will
soon be ashamed of disputing such matters any longer with your Confessor.

Is not This being what they call Priest-ridden?

The Wits of our profane Age are pleased to call it so. But some people are too
witty, to be wise. Their business is not so much to understand any thing, as to
laugh at all things. Whatever comes in their way, if it furnish matter for a
jest, they take no further care. They have a merry time, while it lasts. But,
when their Life's in danger, there are none more tractable in the hands of a
Physician: They Will be Doctor-ridden as much as you please. Nay, if it be only
their Estate which is in jeopardy, They Will be Lawyer-ridden too. They pin their
their faith upon their Lawyer's sleeve. They argue not the matter with him.
They suffer not their Reason to come in competition with his Skill. He tell's
them, This is Law. They do not conceive how it comes to be so. It seems
unreasonable to them. And yet they believe him: they submit: and blindly follow
his Advice. Besides, when all is done, they are Judge-ridden whether they will
or no; and neither dare nor can complain of it: because they know very well,
that no body is fit to live under any Form of Government, who will not submit
to such Judges as are appointed by the Law. And truly, with all submission to
his Majesty, I see no reason why we ought not to have some respect for God's
Judges, as well as for the King's.

CHAP. VIII. A Scripture-Objection answered.
It Is written in Scripture, that Math. 15.14.
if the Blind lead the Blind, they both fall into the Ditch. But however, this
Text, if rightly understood, is no good argument against Blind Obedience.

I. If both are innocently blind, it is certain that neither of them will fall
into the pit of Hell, which here is represented by the Ditch. Because the
Divine Justice cannot punish Innocence, or condemn the Blindness of those who
are not guilty of it.

II. If a Confessor be proud and careless, so as to be guilty of his Blindness,
nevertheless the Penitents who (in doubtful matters) humbly and sincerely
follow his Advice, will never be punished for his fault, but be rewarded for
obeying him. It Is written in Scripture that the Soul which commits the Sin, the
same shall die; and no, other shall suffer, either for it, or with it. The
words are plain; Ezekiel. 18.20.
The Soul that sins, it shall die: The Son shall not bear the iniquity of
the Father, but the wickedness of the wicked Father shall be upon him only.
From whence it evidently follows, that although the Ghostly Father be wilfully
and wickedly Blind, yet all Sincere and Humble Penitents (in all their doubts)
may innocently and securely submit to him: because, not being partners of his
Guilt, they cannot possibly be made partakers of his Punishment.

III. If both are criminally blind; that is, if they love darkness, if they
shut their eyes against the light, if they are blind because they have no mind
to see, in a word, if they are proud and wilful, as the Pharisees and their
Disciples were; Then indeed, they both deserve to fall into the Ditch.

For example: You have no mind to obey your Confessor, and therefore you will
not believe him: You have a mind to follow your own humor, and therefore you
hearken to those little reasons, which you seem to have for it. In this case,
you you are not sincere, you are partial in your own favor: you are more
willing to believe your self than to believe your Guide, and more desirous to
please your self than to please God. This is the wilful part of your
Blindness. Let us now consider the pride of it it. You are naturally curious in
what belongs to you: you are wise in your own conceit, and puffed up with the
thought of being so: you think it very hard for any body else to understand you
better than you understand your self, and therefore you value your own judgment
too much, and your Confessor's too little. But yet your Pride and Willfullness
are no excuse for your Blindness. One fault is no excuse for another. Your
wilful Pride is a notorious fault: it is visible to every body else: and, if
it did not blind you, it would be visible to your self. It Is in your power to be
humble and submissive, if you please. It Is a virtue, which if you seriously
endeavor to practice, God will help you: and, if you heartily beg it of him,
he will not fail to give it you. Mean time, as blind as you are, you are not so
thoroughly confident of your own opinion, but that you would be glad to have it
seconded by the Authority of your Guide. For this reason, you are so eager to
discourse with him; not to know his mind, but to let him know yours: not to
submit to what he says, but to make him subscribe to what you think: not to
learn his opinion, but to teach him your own. If you cannot prevail; you
consult another; and another: And your business is to find, either a Guide that
will be guided by you (which is no Guide at all) or else a Guide as much
mistaken as your self, who is contented to lead you your own way; and then, to
be sure, your Blindness will not excuse you, because it is your own fault from
the beginning to the end. Had you humbly and sincerely relied upon the Guide
which Providence appointed you, You had been certain, either to be in the right
way, or to be blameless, if in the wrong. But since you proudly and wilfully
left a Guide according to God's heart, to take another according to your own,
You sought for darkness, and for your punishment you found it: and then indeed,
you may be sure, if your Blind Guide fall in to the Ditch, you will fall in after
him.

CHAP. IX. Pretenses of Reason answered.
ONe would think, the bare consideration of the follies and the mischiefs which
attend the pride and willfulness of weighing and comparing every trifling
reason pro and con, in every doubtful matter, One would think, I say, that
this alone were more than abundantly sufficient to satisfy any reasonable
person, that nothing is more rational, than to silence these impertinent
reasons, and to turn them out of doors. I am sure there is very good reason for
it: and, if Reason does it, it is enough; the Enemies of Blind Obedience have no
reason to complain.

And yet it is commonly their custom, not only to complain but to object a
great many odious things against it, which look as if they were a little
spiteful in misrepresenting it. Has not God given us our Reason? Are we not
accountable to him for it? And are we not bound in Duty to make the best use we
can of it?

It Is easily answered: We certainly are so: and because our blind Submission is
grounded upon the best Reason we have, therefore it is certain that we make the
best use we can of it, when we blindly submit. It Is true; if a man pretended to
banish all reason whatsoever, and to submit himself universally without any
manner of reason for it; Then, I must, needs confess, our blind Submission
would be the most unreasonable thing in the world. But this is never practiced
or advised by any that I ever heard of.

Whenever we submit our speculative reasons to the Authority of a Confessor,
it is always under the conduct and influence of our chief practical Reason,
which is superior to them, and has a legal jurisdiction over them. Our
speculations are numberless: and, in deciding doubtful matters, if we give
them audience, our labor is in vain. For, either we hear them all together,
and then there is nothing but confusion: or else we hear them one by one, and
then there is no end of them. Our practical notions lie within a little
compass: they are given us by God himself as rules of life and action: they are
few, and easily understood; they are plain, and easily applied; and, which is
best of all, the operation of them is every jot as safe, as the understanding
and applying of them are easy. These practical principles are the best Reason
of Mankind. By these, in wordly affairs we behave our selves like Men; and by
the same, in spiritual matters, we act like Christians; And therefore, if by
these very principles we suspend and silence all those needless speculations,
which are only fit to trouble and molest us; if we command them to retire; and
order them to give place to Authority: Where is the harm? Can you blame us for
following the best Reason we have, and making the best use we can of it? When a
man takes aim, and shuts one eye; you may say, he is blind, if you please: but
the truth is, he only winks with the left eye, that he may see much better
with the right.

If this were well considerd, it would pacify a little the minds of those
people, who pursue so fiercely their pretensions to a boundless liberty of
reasoning. They would soon discover, not only that the Obedience, which I
plead for, is not so blind as they are willing to represent it; but also that
it allows them as much liberty as any reasonable man can wish for.

1. In things which are evident, or absolutely certain, no body questions but
that our Reason has free room to exercise it self without restraint. No body
ever goes to a Confessor to consult him, whether or no they ought to believe
their Creed; whether the seven deadly sins be lawful or not; or whether the
ten Commandments ought to be observed. They have no need of troubling their
Guides about those things which every body knows that all the Catholic world
agrees in.

2. In matters which are dark and doubtful, where Authority has hitherto been
silent, and where we have not the opportunity of consulting it; we enjoy the
self-same freedom, with all the rights and privileges of exercising our Reason
and Judgment.

3. In lesser doubts, which we can easily determine, we are not used to go to
any man for counsel: it is only when we are a little puzzled, when we are
uneasy and perplexed, it is only then we have recourse to those who are
commissioned to direct us. When we begin to spell and pudder upon difficulties,
whether we may or may not, whether we ought or ought not; when we plainly find
our selves at a loss, and know not how to satisfy our mind about the matter
before us; when we begin to want a little help, and are glad with all our
hearts to call for it: Pray tell me, is there any thing more reasonable than to
refer these doubtful cases to the arbitration of a Confessor, who is
expressly deputed by God and his Church, to judge for those who are not
capable of judging easily and clearly for themselves? Is not his advice worth
our taking, when it is worth our asking? When we know not how to choose for our
selves, and therefore prudently resolve to let our Confessor choose for us, Why
should we quarrel with the same Prudence for obliging us to approve his choice?
It would be a strange unreasonable perverseness indeed, if when we could not do
the work our selves, we would not suffer any body else to do it for us.

When both parties are weary of an expensive suit of Law, and by common consent
agree to make short work of it, and refer it to the arbitration of a neighbor;
If it were your own case, and the Sentence were given against you, Would you
presently fly back from your bargain, and refuse to stand to his Judgment? I am
sure no man of Honor would do it. In the same manner, when a case is
doubtful, when your speculative reasons are not able to decide it to your
satisfaction, when you grow quite weary, and despair of ending the dispute; you
cannot think of any thing better, than to appeal to the Authority of your
Confessor; nor can I think of any thing worse, than to refuse his Arbitration,
when you had not only accepted, but desired, it. You know very well, that in
any temporal matter, it would not be looked upon as fair and honest dealing.
What have you to say in your defense?

Is it fitting that I should submit without a reason?

Pray, what reason had you to consult him? Was it not because you found your
self unsatisfied with all your own particular reasons, and therefore wisely
abandoned them to appeal to his Authority? If this were a good reason, to
appeal; why is it not a good one, to submit? Is it not a shame, to put such an
affront upon the Common Reason of mankind, as to use it like a bauble, only
fit for childrens-play? and to be always shisting backwards and forwards, first
from reason to authority, and then from the the same authority to the same
reason again? This is never the way to end any dispute, but always the way to
make it endless.

I do not fly back from Authority to my own reason, but only am curious to
know his reasons, because I believe they may be better than mine.

And yet, after all, if he should tell you his reasons, you would not be
satisfied with them, till you had well examined them, and made them your own.
His Authority would signify nothing at all; nor his Reason neither, any
further than your own reason approves it. So that, from the Authority which you
appealed to, you manifestly fly back to your own reason again. The proudest
creature in the world, would do as much as this: nor can you show me the least
appearance of Christian Humility, in this way of proceeding.

Well; but when I am once convinced, I shall be quiet ever after.

It seems you are vain enough to think so, in spite of all your daily
experience to the contrary. You know very well, that the April-Sun-shine is not
more unconstant, than the clearness of your reasons. One moment they shine
bright, and the next they are under a cloud. How often have you thought your
self convinced? How often have you rejoiced at it, and thanked your Confessor for
it? and presently after, you have been much more in pain, and more tormented
than before. Your speculations, which appeared to be entirely routed, rallied
up again with double forces of recruits, and with a fresh assault broke in upon
your mind, ruffled your thoughts, and riffled all the treasure of your peace.

It Is very true; but I beg one answer more; only to this one question: and then
I Am confident I shall be satisfied.

It Is a thousand pities, you should not be satisfied, upon such easy terms. But
pray, consider how many thousands of these one-questions you have had an answer
to already; and all to no other purpose, than to render your condition daily
worse and worse. Reason to Scruples, is like Oil to Fire: Water may put it out;
but Oil will rather feed it, and increase the Flame.

It Is Charity in a Confessor, to instruct me: Is he not my Teacher, as well as
my Judge?

Yes: And he is your Judge as well as your Teacher. His Charity does not oblige
him, nor his Prudence permit him, to teach you any thing, but what he judges
fitting for you. There are a great many truths, which are only proper to feed
your Curiosity, and very unfit to nourish Piety, much less, to improve your
Humility. When your Confessor has judged the case, if you ask his reasons for
it, and will not submit till you are thoroughly satisfied that he is certainly
in the right; it is no longer He that judges for you: he only instructs you,
and helps you to judge for your self. To what purpose are you so inquisitive?
It Is a thing not only needless, but dangerous. For, 1. If it be useful to you,
he will instruct you, of his own accord: it is his Duty so to do: and, if he does
not, it is his fault, not yours. 2. Although his Conscience tells him, that it
is a great deal better and safer for you, not to know his reasons: yet perhaps
his complaisance, or (if you please) his good nature, may incline him to hazard
the peace of your Soul, by gratifying of your Curiosity: And then you are both
to blame; you, for asking; he, for condescending.

If Reason be a good thing in it self, why may I not ask its And, if my Motive,
of desiring it, be also good, why may I not have it for asking?

You have already too much reason: you have a great deal more than you well
know what to do with: and therefore, though it be good in it self it is far from
being good for you. And truly, if it be not good for you, if you know not what
to do with it, if you have already too much of it, I do not easily conceive
what sort of good motive you can have, to wish for more.

I am very uneasy with fears and apprehensions of doing amiss: this uneasiness
is a great hindrance to me, in my duties and devotions; and therefore I am
always busy, either studying or enquiring, to find out a clear and certain
reason, to secure me from all fear.

I understand you very well. You are like a Gentleman who was very uneasy for
fear of wanting money. He thought that if once he could yet the Philosopher's
Stone, it would change all things into Gold, and therefore was always busy in
studying how to find it out: but 'twas his misfortune, that the thing he sought
for, was not to be found. A speculative certainty of the goodness and
lawfullness of every particular action, and every circumstance of it, would be
a fine thing indeed, if it were to be had. But before you inquire any further
after it, I beg you to consider how manifestly impossible it is to dissect one
single action into all its parts, and to read particular lectures of morality
upon them, with as many demonstrations to confirm the truth and the exactness
of them all. 1. In one single action, besides the substance of it, our Divines
observe no less than six or seven general circumstances, as Person, Time,
Place, Motive, Means, and Manner of doing. The harmomy and due proportion of
all these must first be well observed and clearly proved, before it is possible
to form a speculative Judgment of the Whole, especially a certain one, which
may exclude all fear. 2. These general circumstances are like spawners, and
often have a great many little particular ones within them. 3. Even these
little ones, which hardly are discernable by common eyes, may be dissected too,
and still afford new matter for a Scene of fresh discoveries. 4. Some of these
circumstances, even those of the greatest importance, are such thin vanishing
things, that it is impossible for any body's thoughts to lay fast hold of them.
The Purity of our Intention, the Sincerity of our Endeavors, the Exact
proportion of our Diligence, etc, are things which all the natural Reason in
the world is never able to demonstrate. 5. Although the general Maxims of
Morality are clear and evident, yet nevertheless the use and application of
them oftentimes are hid and wrapped up in obscurity and darkness. They are like
those subterraneous secrets which lie too deep for humane industry to reach
them. The Art of Man can neither fetch them out, and place them in the open
light: nor can it contrive a way to go and see them where they are; because, in
such a deep descent, the Lamp burns blew immediately, and soon goes out. Did you
ever hear of a man so foolish, as to attempt the digging of a staircase to the
Center of the earth? It Is every jot as impossible to make a clear discovery of
Secrets which lie hidden in the center of our Hearts.

Is not this enough to drive a fearful Soul into Despair?

It Is very well, if it does so. It Is the very thing I would be at. Despair is not
always bad; but sometimes absolutely necessary. Many a man has ruined a good
estate, for want of a little despair. The Gentleman, I spoke of last, who was
so fond of trying costly experiments, to find out the Philopher's Stone, if in
good time he had despaired of finding it, he might have saved his labor, and
his estate too. The sooner you despair, the better, provided you despair in the
right place. There are many Souls in Heaven, who would never have been there,
if they had not despaired here. They would never have been so much in love with
the next world, if they had not despaired of being happy in this. They would
never have prayed so heartily and so devoutly for the assistance of God's
grace, if they had not despaired of being able to work their Salvation without
it. And I verily believe that You your self will never submit so humbly,
readily, and cheerfully, as you ought, to the Authority of your Confessor, till
you despair entirely of ever finding any comfort in your own fantastical
speculations.

CHAP. X. Pretenses of Conscience considered.
It Is impossible for a Timorous Conscience to be quiet without being certain.
It Is also impossible, in the darkness of moral doubts, to find out any
speculative certainty. And consequently it highly concerns us to consider what
practical certainty may be had, and to make the best markets we can of it.

I have, in the beginning of the last chapter, already observed; that in the
decision of moral doubts our speculative reasons are always subordinate to the
practical principles of our Prudence. Our speculations have no right to any
share in the Government of our lives, any further than our Prudential Reason,
which always ought to have an inspection over them, approves them as rules to
walk by. They have only a consulting voice in all deliberations, when and
where they are summoned to appear: Our Sovereign Reason still presides in the
Assembly: It determines all things, at its own discretion, not theirs: And, if
they happen to grow tedious and impertinent, as oftentimes they are, it has the
power to prorogue them, or dissolve them, as it pleases; and decide the matter
without them.

So that here are two paths before us, and only two, which lead us to a
practical certainty: the one, by way of speculative reasoning; the other, by
way of Authority: and the main question is; which of these two is best?

When we ground our practical certainty upon the probability of speculative
reason, we commonly meet with some difficulty and danger by the way, before we
come at it. A long examen oftentimes is necessary, to weigh each grain of
probability; whether it be more than it need be, or less than it should be, or
just gold-weight. It Is true; a man of sense and sound judgment, may make a very
good shift to overcome the difficulty and the danger too: But how these
troublesome circumstances will agree with the temper and constitution of a
timorous Conscience, I do not so easily conceive.

On the other hand, when all our doubtful and uncertain speculations are laid
aside, and our practical certainty is grounded wholly and entirely upon the
Authority of a Confessor; the case is quite altered: it is no longer, either
difficult or dangerous. There Is no examen requisite: no weighing of Authority
by grains: the least commission from God, and patent from his Church, is
equally easy to be known, and equally secure to be relied upon. It Is a rule
which never varies: it is applied the same way, to all doubts whatsoever: and
the very A, B, C, of practical Reason, is enough to teach us the application of
it. 1. In all doubtful cases I may securely rely upon my Confessor's
Authority, without examining his reasons. 2. My present difficulty is a
doubtful case: 3. And therefore, in my present difficulty, I may securely
rely upon his Authority, without examining his reasons. This is the whole
lesson: there is no need of any more: and it is a lesson so short and so plain
that a body must be very dull indeed, who can be long in learning it. It
includes only three points: 1. the universal principle; 2. the application;
and 3. the conclusion. The last follows evidently from its premises: the second
cannot fail: the first is absolutely certain: And what can any reasonable
person wish for more?

In the next chapter, I shall make it my business to prove by Scripture, the
absolute certainty of it. Mean time I shall apply my self to consider the two
sorts of practical certainty: 1. in what they agree; 2. in what they differ; 3.
which of the two is better, and more favorably calculated for the ease and
comfort of a timorous Conscience.

SECT. I. The two sorts of Practical Certainty explained.
THey both agree in being equally obscure, and leaving us in the dark, without
satisfying us whether or no the Action or Omission be lawful in it self. They
only undertake to assure us that whether it be lawful in it self or not, it is
certainly lawful to us: and truly this is as much as a wise man would wish
for, or a good man needs to care for. Whether or no it be lawful in it self,
is only a speculative doubt; and the decision of it, is not necessary for our
practice. It Is enough that we have done our duty in enquiring after it: and that
we have either well considered the sufficient probability of our speculations,
or more wisely consulted the sure Authority of our Confessor. This done; we are
as secure, as we are sincere.

Although we are not speculatively certain of its being lawful in it self; we
are practically certain of its being lawful to us. We hope the thing is
lawful in it self. If we knew for certain that it is not so, we would not do
it. We have done what is fitting for a good Christian to do in doubtful cases*
More than this we are not obliged to: And therefore we securely lay aside all
further care. We are practically certain that, if we are mistaken, we are not
guilty of it. Our God, who sees our hearts, is as well pleased with us, as if
we had not been deceived: He will not fail to reward the Sincerity of our good
intentions: And when the Humility of blind Obedience goes along with them, they
will be acceptable to him upon more accounts than one, and receive a double
recompense.

SECT. II. When we rely upon our Confessor's Authority, our Certainty is
Absolute.
ALthough both sorts of practical certainty agree in being equally obscure, on
the one side; they do not so well agree in being equally clear and comfortable,
on the other: and the difference is the greater, because it lies in the very
foundation of them. The one is grounded upon the Probability of speculative
reason: the other upon the Authority of a Confessor: and betwixt these two the
difference is greater than many people imagine.

When a Penitent judges for himself according to the Probability of his own
speculative reason, he must take great care to proceed prudently in his
determinations. For,

1. If he be rash or negligent, if he use not the caution and circumspection
which is requisite, if he do not well consider the sufficient probability of
his reasons, He is sure to be guilty, whether the thing be lawful in it self
or not. For, if it happen to be lawful, it is better fortune than his Rashness
deserves: And, if it be unlawful in it self, it is certainly so to him, because
his Negligence, which he must one day answer for, can never justify him in it.
He may thank himself for being mistaken: it is his own fault, that he is so: and
it is impossible for one fault to be a just excuse for another.

2. If he be partial in examining the probability of his opinion, if any
criminal inclination make him more attentive to the one side than the other, if
he have not patience to consider the full strength of the reasons against him,
but chiefly apply the whole force of his wit, to magnify the reasons which are
favorable to his Passion, Interest, or Humor; his Blindness is wilful: and
all the world agrees, that wilful Ignorance is no excuse. It Is a common case,
which daily happens. We frequently take notice of it, and clearly see it, in
our neighbors, though we are not willing to observe it in our selves. But the
more common it is, the greater is our obligation to consider the difficulty and
the danger to which a Penitent is always exposed, when he pretends to judge for
himself, and to build his practical certainty upon the sandy ground of his own
probable reasons, without removing the rubbish, and examining well the
foundation, before he ventures to raise his edifice upon it.

He who builds upon a rock, is free from all this trouble. He needs not dig
deep to search a foundation, which (without examining) he knows to be as firm
as he can wish it. Such is the advantage of that practical certainty which is
grounded upon the Authority of a Confessor. And to confirm this truth, which is
of such importance: to all Penitents, I have amongst our Doctors and Divines
made choice of one beyond exception, who not only teaches it himself, but says
it is the common doctrine of the rest. He proposes, and proves, three duties of
Blind Obedience, from whence I have drawn three general rules, which are
undoubtedly as lawful and as commendable in secular Penitents, as in religious
Persons; whosoever is the Superior of the one, or Confessor of the other.

I. Although Etiamsi absolute falli possit Superior, id tamen non est unquam in
particulari praesumendum, nisi de eo constet. Lessius de Just. and Jure. lib.
2. cap. 46. dub. 5.
in general we know our Confessor may be mistaken; yet, in particular, we never
are to suppose He is so, unless we are CERTAIN of it. If therefore we are not
certain of his being in the wrong, we may lawfully suppose, he is in the right:
and by consequence,

II. We need not Debet esse coeca ad rations praecepti scrutandas; nempe ut
non velit scire causas cur quid praecipiatur; sed satis ei sit, praecipi vel
imponi ab eo qui locum Dei tenet, nec consset per se esse illicitum. ibid.
search into his reasons, nor know the causes, why he bids us follow his
advice. Because, if we may lawfully suppose him in the right, it is evident we
need not be inquisitive about the matter, for fear of his being in the wrong.
And hence it follows also, that

III. We need not Caeca ad imperfectiones and vitia Superioris, ut haec non
consideret, nec ob haec minus ad obediendum parata sit; sed solum consideret
eum cujus locum tenet, ibidem.
consider his imperfections and his faults; nor be therefore less ready to obey
him. Because although his Ignorance or Negligence may possibly mislead him,
yet, since it is none of our business to enquire about it, we are every jot as
safe, as if an Angel came from Heaven to assure us of his being in the right.

If you ask me, Why then does S. F. Sales advise us Introduct. part. 1. chapter 4.
n. 5.
to choose one amongst ten thousand? Why does he tell us, he must be replenished
with Charity, Knowledge, and Prudence: and that if one of these three parts be
wanting in him, there is danger? How shall we choose a Confessor, without
considering his imperfections and his faults? The Answer to all this, is easily
found in the same chapter.

1. When B. Sales speaks of choosing one in ten thousand, he no more intends
that we should enter into a strict examen of our Confessor's capacity, than he
means that we should abstain from Confession, till we have ten thousand
Confessors at our service. The number and the choice are neither of them to be
understood in the rigor of the expression: because it would then follow, that
none but some few Sovereign Princes could ever be able to go to Confession, for
want of number enough to choose in. But nevertheless, this way of expressing is
very proper to undeceive some people, who are not at all sollicitous what
Confessor they have; provided he be a man for their purpose, a man of their own
humor, or a man who is easily prevailed with, to let them do as they please.
As for his Charity, they do not desire it; his Knowledge, they do not want it;
and his Prudence also may be spared, because they have enough of their own. To
oppose this pernicious maxim, our Saint assures us, there are fewer to be found
than men imagine, who are fit and capable of such an Office; and that there is
danger, if by our fault these parts are wanting in him; that is, if we
purposely make choice of a man, for this very reason, because we believe him
deficient in these excellent Qualities, and because we are so proud and
wilful that we cannot endure to deal with a man whose Knowledge and Prudence
may enable him to direct us, or a man whose Charity may easily inspire him with
sufficient courage, when he is obliged, to contradict us. They who know their
Passions are strong, and think their Reason is so too, are little desirous of
being directed, and less of being contradicted. And therefore B. Sales takes
notice that ibid. n. 1.
one of the last advices of the great S. Lewis to his Son, was in this kind:
Confess often, and choose a Confessor of learning and discretion, that can and
dares advertise thee, to do such things as are necessary for thy Salvation. If
all the world would follow this advice, there would not be so many as there
are, who purposely avoid those Confessors who can and dare advertise them.
Their ignorance, when they mistake, is wilful and cannot excuse them: but on
the contrary, they deserve to be abandoned in their darkness, because they
purposely took care to avoid the light.

2. B. Sales says not one syllable of a Penitent's being obliged to make a
strict enquiry into the Knowledge Charity and Prudence of a Confessor. He knew
very well that such a method would expose them to an infinity of rash
judgments, and that God would never give a blessing to such a way of
proceeding. It Is true; we cannot help seeing and hearing: neither can we avoid
thinking of what we see and hear: and, if the appearances are very great, we
may make a reasonable use of them, by way of a prudent caution: we may wisely
and safely choose the man who seems the better qualified and fitter for the
Office: but all this while, we need not form a peremptory judgment in the case;
and after all, we may perhaps be grievously mistaken in the matter. For which
reason B. Sales is so far from advising us to consider well the faults and
imperfections of a Confessor, before we choose him, that he only sends us to
our prayers, to ib. n. 5.
demand him instantly at the hands of Almighty God; and, having once obtained
him, he bids us bless his Divine Majesty for so great a benefit. He tells us,
that the way to find a good Confessor, is to ib. n. 3.
fear God, and with an humble mind affectuously desire our advancement in
Piety. He tells us, that we ought to pray to God with very great instance, to
furnish us with one according to his heart. He tells us moreover, for our
comfort, that, although it were needful to send an Angel from Heaven, as he
did to young Tobias, he will not fail to supply our want, but that he will
undoubtedly give us a good and faithful Guide.

3. He expressly teaches, that we ib. n. 4.
ought to hearken to our Confessor, as to an Angel descended from Heaven, to
conduct us thither: And any man who has his thoughts about him, must needs
perceive that, if this be true, the rules of Lessius cannot possibly be false.
For, if we were once assured of an Angel being sent from Heaven to direct us,

I. We never could suppose that God, who sent him, had permitted him to mistake
his message, unless we were CERTAIN of it.

II. The respect we owe to an Ambassador from Heaven, would not suffer us to
question any of his orders, by searching into the reasons and endeavoring to
know the causes of them.

III. Though nothing be good and perfect but God, yet nevertheless it would be
a very absurd thing, if we were therefore less ready to obey him, because, with
curious observation, we may possibly discover imperfections, even in an Angel.

My veneration for S. F. Sales has led me a great deal further than I first
intended: but however it has not led me out of my way; because I was going to
prove, that the practical certainty which is grounded upon the sure Authority
of a Confessor, is absolute; without requiring any terms on our side to support
it: whereas the other, which is grounded upon the Probability of speculative
reason, is only conditional, and always supposes some certain articles to be
observed exactly on our part; so that if we fail in the performance of these
conditions, all our appearances of practical certainty will never be sufficient
to excuse us.

SECT. III. When we depend upon the Probability of our own Reason, our
Certainty is only Conditional.
IN the last Section I compared that practical certainty, which is grounded
upon a Confessor's Authority, to a building which is raised upon a rock: But as
for the other, which is grounded upon Probability, I cannot compare it better
than to a building erected upon a floating island. Such an edifice, may be made
as strong as one pleases, and as well compacted in it self: but the foundation
is naturally a little suspicious; it may break; it may sink; and either the
one, or the other, is enough to ruin the inhabitants. If the Foundation never
fall to pieces, if it never be swallowed up; All Is well. But how shall a body
do to be thoroughly satisfied concerning these matters? Such if's as these are
a little troublesome to a man's thoughts; and very well deserve to be
considered, before one ventures to dwell in such a wandering and uncertain
habitation.

For the better understanding of the whole matter, I shall endeavor to give a
short and familiar account of the common notions of Probability. There are two
sorts of it: the one, intrinsecal; the other, extrinsecal: Intrinsecal
Probability is when we consider the real merits of the cause, the principles
and consequences of it, the arguments and reasons which have a particular
relation to it, or a natural connection with it. Extrinsecal Probability is when
we have no regard to any of these things, but only consider the personal
merits of the author who has credit with us. We have some particular reasons,
best known to our selves, which make us think him wise and good, and the
greater the appearances are of his being wise enough to know the truth, and
good enough to tell it us sincerely, the greater is the probability of his
doctrine being true, and the more we are contented to rely upon it, without
enquiring into the reasons of it. We suppose his reasons are good, because they
are his, And because his personal merits are altogether foreign to the merits
of the cause, therefore this sort of probability is called extrinsecal.

When I speak of authors, I mean books as well as men, For we converse with
both, and value them more or less, according as we fancy they deserve it. Some
there are, who are much inclined to prefer the dead authors before the living
ones: But I am much afraid, they have no great reason for it. A book, say they,
is free from passion interest and humor. Very true, it is so: and so is the
man himself, when he is dead: But he was alive, when he was writing; and, for
ought we know, his passion interest and humor might be then alive, as well as
he. Be it how it will, I am sure the living authors have some very considerable
advantages over the dead ones. 1. The living can speak for themselves; and, if
they are not rightly understood, they can explain the difficulty more clearly.
The dead can speak no more; and, if we do not understand the text, they are not
now in a capacity of putting a comment in the margent. 2. We may acquaint a
living author with the particular circumstances of our case; but a dead one has
no ears to hear us. We may read his writings, and observe what general
doctrines he lays down before us: But, as there are few rules without some
exceptions, we may still be in a doubt; and, if we are, he is not able to
resolve us. So that upon the whole matter, there appears to be as much
difference, as betwixt a Doctor and a Dispensatory. And I am very confident,
that several people have lost their lives by tampering with Dispensatories, who
otherwise might have enjoyed both life and health, if they had but, in time,
consulted their Doctor. In fine, whether the Author be living or dead, it is
certain that we either consider the merit of his reasons, or the merit of his
person. If we rely upon the merit of his arguments, having examined them,
possessed them, and made them our own, our probability is what they call
intrinsecal. But if we wave his reasons, and rely entirely upon the merit his
person, because we are persuaded that a wise man is not easily mistaken, nor a
good man easily prevailed upon to tell a lie, our probability is merely
extrinsecal.

Let us now apply these notions to our present purpose. It Is certainly lawful
to follow a probable opinion: and, whether the probability be intrinsecal or
extrinsecal, it is no great matter, provided it be sufficient. We are are only
obliged to look before we leap, and to consider well the ground before we offer
to go upon it. I have already explained the difficulty of examining, and the
danger of choosing our opinion: I have also intimated, that any judicious person
may easily make a very good shift to overcome the difficulty and the danger
too; in confirmation of which, I shall only add one plain reflection. We are
not obliged to use any extraordinary care and diligence in considering and
searching the probability of our opinion: it is enough that we proceed with the
same seriousness and industry of endeavor, which we commonly use in worldly
affairs, such as are of some importance to us. For example: If we seek truth
with the same ardour and vigor, as we seek a temporal advantage; if we go to
look for it, with as good a will as men go usually to their markets or their
fairs; if we are in as good earnest, and as careful about it, as we are in
driving a bargain; if we reject the plausible suggestions of our passion,
interest, or humor, as we do the flattering words and kind insinuations of a
person whom we verily believe to have a design of overreaching us: If we do
but this (and all this is no more than what we daily do) We need not fear: We
are Secure.

Whenever a man has done as much as I have here described, the lawfullness of
following his opinion is very certain, although the truth of it be only
probable. He has a practical certainty that the thing is lawful to him,
although he only has a speculative probability of its being lawful in it
self. And this alone is enough to pacify the minds of all considerate persons:
for they will easily assure themselves of having done as much as I have here
explained; and then, although their certainty be only conditional, yet being
well assured of having performed the conditions, they are as safe and as much
at ease, as if their certainty were absolute.

But it is not so with scrupulous people who are always more or less confounded
and amazed with too much fear. Nothing but an absolute certainty will do their
work, a conditional one will never serve their turn. Neither is it any wonder,
that Scrupulosity and Probability can never agree; because Probability is
naturally more or less defective, and Scrupulosity is always so uneasy, so
exceptious, so unreasonable in its expectations, that it is impossible to
please it. It Is a peevish sort of Humor, which is always finding fault, and
always suspecting the worst; and when things are as well as they need be, it
quarrels with them because they are not better than they can be. In these
occasions, Probability is blamed, without deserving it. For, in moral doubts
where speculative certainty is not to be found, a reasonable probability is as
much as the matter will bear, it is as much as all our speculations can
discover, and therefore is a very good thing in it self. But, as good as it is,
it is not so good as Scrupulosity would have it be. Scrupulosity would fain be
speculatively certain; and Probability can never be so: and therefore they can
never agree upon the point. Now, for my part, I cannot but look upon this, as a
very extravagant humor: For, although a man may possibly be so covetous, as to
wish he could make a groat of twopence; yet however, it is evidently an
unreasonable thing, to refuse a good twopence, because it is not worth a groat.

If scrupulous people could possibly content themselves with a reasonable
proportion of Probability, there might be some hopes of their finding comfort
in it. But they are so excessively fond of certainty, that they can never rest
without it; and would be almost ready to die with despair, if they did not live
in hopes of it. For this reason, they are so very busy in searching for the
greatest probability, as being the nearest to it: and indeed they are not to be
blamed for thinking that the greatest is the best: but, on the contrary, they
very much deserve to be commended for being most pleased with it, and for
making it part of their chief business to find it. But the truth is, all excess
is blameable, even in things the most excellent: and the justest cause in the
world can never justify the intemperance of any passion in the prosecution of
it. Their fault lies in their being overmuch concerned, and being blinded with
too much fear; which undoubtedly displeases God, as much as a loving confidence
would please him. They are like a man, whose master sends him to the wood; Go,
fetch me, says he, the best stick you can find. If he had said, a good one, the
work had been easily done: but because he said, the best, therefore the poor
man is so terribly afraid, he scarce knows where to turn himself: first, one
stick pleases him: and then another; and another: the more variety he meets
with, the more he is confounded with it; and, the more he is sollicitous to
choose the best, the less he is able to do it. Thus he wanders up and down,
Ioses his labor, loses his patience, loses himself; and, by the time that he
has found himself again, he has lost his Masters favor, by staying so very
long, and choosing the worst stick at last.

This immoderate solicitude were yet more pardonable, if when they find the
probability they seek for, they would persuade themselves to be contented with
it. But the same cowardly Spirit which puzzles them in the pursuit of it, does
as much discourage them even when they think they have found it. When they have
overtaken it, and see it fall quite short of their beloved certainty, they
reckon all their labor lost, and are as much unsatisfied as ever. They are
utterly disappointed in their expectation. They thought to arrive at
speculative certainty by the way of probability: But they only wearied
themselves with trying the experiment, and found themselves as much mistaken,
as little children are, who looking upwards from the bottom of a great
mountain, are apt to imagine it is as high as Heaven; and that, if they were
once at the top of it, they could touch the Sky with their hands: Pleased with
the fancy, they resolve to try: but the higher they climb, the less hopes they
have, and when they come there, they find the Sky as much above their heads as
ever.

It Is in vain to tell such scrupulous persons that, although Innocent XI. has
condemned the Generatim dum probabilitate, sive intrinseca, sive extrinseca,
quantumvis tenui, modo a probabilitatis finibus non exeatur, confisi aliquid
agimus, semper prudenter agimus. Prop. 3. inter 65.
least probability, yet Alexander VIII. has approved the Non licet sequi
opinionem, vel inter probabiles probabilissimam. Prop. 3. inter 31.
greatest. Nor is it to any purpose to talk to them of a middle way, and to let
them know there are degrees of greater and lesser betwixt the two extremes of
least and greatest. If you tell them that, although the lesser be warmly
disputed, yet both parties are agreed that the greater is sufficient. All this
will never pacify their minds: because the greatest probability is always mixed
with some little degree of uncertainty; and this uncertainty though never so
little, is a breach which they find wide enough for thousands of fears to
enter, and rush in upon them. Their fears are as unaccountable as those of
little children, who are terrified with wonderful stories of Apparitions and
Spirits: though you shut the door as close as ever you can, yet if once they
get a fancy in their head, that the bug-bears can creep in at the keyhole,
they will quake and tremble as much, as if the door were wide open.

It Is no less in vain to assure them that, although the case in question may be
sinful and unlawful in it self, yet having taken such pains to find the
truth, it is impossible that this may-be should ever do them the least harm:
because, although their probability falls short of speculative certainty, yet
shey are practically certain that the case is innocent and lawful to them, if
they have not been negligent in examining it, or if they have not been partial
in approving it. A Security upon doubtful conditions, is no security at all;
and the conditions here specified, are always doubtful to them. Alas! They
never think themselves sufficiently Sincere and Diligent: and therefore these
if's can never comfort them, because these if's are the very things they are so
much afraid of. Their first apprehensions are, that the thing perhaps may be
unlawful in it self. Afterward, when they begin to aim at a conditional
certainty, and to consider well the aforesaid if's; their fears are now
doubled, instead of their being double-guarded from them. They are now alarmed
with fresh recruits of new-raised reasons, which assault them in two several
places at once, and with greater numbers than before. And now their thoughts
are busy and uneasy with endless doubts and suspicious, that maybe they have
been negligent, and may-be they have been partial. So that all the comfort,
which their conditional certainty affords them, serves only to furnish them
with two may-be's instead of one: which is just a downright Tinkering of the
matter, by mending one hole, and making two in the place of it. And therefore I
need not add a word more, to prove that the absolute practical certainty, which
is grounded upon the sure Authority of a Confessor, is the better certainty of
the two, and much more favorably calculated for the ease and comfort of a
Timorous Conscience.

SECT. IV. Objections of pretended Conscience answered.
It Is high time now to answer the objections of pretended Conscience. I call it
it pretended, because it goes by a name which it does not really deserve, a
name is none of its own. It Is a pretense which people make use of, when they
have a mind to think what they will, and do what they please. A pretense, by
which they cheat themselves, as well as their neighbors; and endeavor to
avoid private remorses, as well as public censures, by calling upon the sacred
name of Conscience.

The main Objection, which gives ground to all the rest, is this. Although the
practice be lawful in it self, yet, if I think really it is a Sin, my thinking
so is it not enough to make it a Sin?

In answer to this, I frankly own, that Conscience, rightly understood, is the
true Judge of our Actions: but scrupulous persons are grievously mistaken in
it. All their speculations pass for Conscientious: all their upstart fancies
usurp the title of Conscience: Humility, Obedience, and all the train of
Virtues which attend them, must now and then be turned out of doors, to make
room for a Sin-making thought, which they are pleased to dignifie with the
venerable Character of Conscience. The Government of Reason would be a pretty
sort of a thing indeed, if every thought, which occurs to our mind, were the
right rule of our morality. It would be just like a non-sensical Monarchy,
where every body is King de jure. It Is true; our Conscience is always our
immediate Judge: but then there is scarce one thought in a hundred, which is
really our Conscience: and, if they are not our Conscience, it is no matter what
they are, or how many. There may arise in our minds a thousand of them (if you
please) one after another; and every one of these thoughts may really think it
is a Sin; and yet, if it is not a Sin in it self, these thoughts will never be
able to make it a Sin.

Well. But how shall I discern that thought, which is my Conscience, from all
those which are not?

How do you know the difference betwixt the Judge who sits upon the Bench, and
the Lawyers who plead at the Bar, We have every one of us a Court of Judicature
within us, where all our doubtful cases are tried and judged. All our thoughts
which are concerned in any thing belonging to the Trial, are summoned to appear
in Court. Our speculative Thoughts are the Lawyers, which open the Case,
explain the circumstances of it, and propose the reasons which are either for
it or against it. Whilst the matter is thus under debate our Thoughts are
divided upon the point: One way, they plead it is a Sin; the other way, they
plead it is not. Mean time, these thoughts are merely speculative; because they
are not rules to walk by, but are only the opinion of the Lawyers, whose
business is to dispute the question, and not to decide it. Amongst all the
Thoughts which are employed in the whole Trial, there is only One, which
finally determines and judges the Case. This Thought is practical, because it
is the Opinion of the Judge, the Sentence of the Court, and the Rule of our
Practice. And This is the only Thought which deserves the name of Conscience.

I purposely make use of this Allusion, to avoid School-terms; because I write
for those who commonly are not well acquainted with them. And, for the better
understanding of the main point, I shall endeavor to give a familiar account
of three general cases which usually occur in the aforesaid Trial.

I. It happens sometimes, that the Lawyers, who plead it is a Sin, are able to
prove it so plausibly, and with such strong appearance of Reason, that the
adverse party is quite confounded and silenced. And then indeed, the Court
being free from noise, the Judge's voice may easily be heard: and we may be
assured it is our Conscience which tells us, it is certainly a Sin.

II. Sometimes it happens that the Lawyers, who plead it lawful, have the
greater probability on their side: But yet the others are obstinate in
maintaining the probability of its being a Sin. In this occasion, there is a
great noise in Court: The Judge pronounces sentence, that the thing is lawful:
The Lawyers are impertinent, and the same time cry, it is a Sin: And in this
confusion we may easily mistake a Lawyer's voice, and think it is the Judge's.
Our Conscience thinks it lawful: and at the same time these unmannerly
Thoughts continue clamorous, and still think really it is a Sin. But let them
still think on; as long, and as really, as they please; it is certain they are
never able to make it really be one.

III. At other times it commonly happens, that the Lawyers, who plead it
lawful, although they have great Probability on their side, yet they do not
insist upon it: they wave all probable reasons, as being more or less
defective: and only ground their defense upon a practical principle, which is
an undoubted maxim of the Law, that in all doubtful cases one may securely
rely upon a Confessor's Authority, without examining the reasons. In this
case, the Lawyers, who plead it is a Sin, are bafled and quite put out of
countenance. As for speculative certainty, which now is necessary to gain their
point, they frankly own they have it not about them; And, as for probability,
although they have abundance of it, yet the best being manifestly uncertain,
the others despise it, and will not take the pains to answer it, but only
oppose the certain rule of a Confessor's Authority against it. When things are
in this posture, the Trial is soon ended. Our Conscience immediately pronounces
Sentence, that the thing is certainly lawful: and the Equity of this Sentence
is so visible, that it is impossible to be mistaken in it.

According to these three cases, it is easy to give a short and plain Answer to
the Question here proposed: If I think really it is a Sin, is not my thinking
so enough to make it a Sin?

1. In the first case, you think it is certainly a Sin; you do not doubt the
least but that it is so: And then indeed, although it be not a Sin in it self,
This thought, as long as it continues thus certain, is enough to make it one.

2. In the second case, you have two thoughts in your mind at once: one way,
you think it lawful; the other way, you think it a Sin: And, if the first
Thought be your Conscience, the second cannot make it a Sin. But if you are not
able to discern, which of the two thoughts is the dictate of your Conscience,
you must be content to suffer the mortification of being in a doubt, whether it
be enough to make it a Sin, or not. But you have still this comfort left, that

3. In the third case, when you lay aside all these uncertain probabilities,
and ground your self entirely upon the sure Authority of your Confessor, This
mortifying doubt is easily and clearly resolved. For, whilst your Conscience
relies upon the certainty of his Authority who tells you it is lawful, it is
manifest that all your other thoughts can never be enough to make it a Sin.
They may be clamorous, they may be troublesome, they may afright you with more
or less probability of its being unlawful: But as long as you rely upon a
certain rule, which always is a just excuse, and always makes your practice
certainly lawful to you; What signify the vain appearances of probability,
which always is uncertain, and never can amount to more than this, that perhaps
it is really unlawful in it self? Will any body in their right senses, quit a
certain hold, to fasten upon a mere perhaps?

But may I then safely follow my Confessor's Advice, when my own opinion seems
to me more probable?

Who doubts it? His Advice is a certain rule: your opinion contrary to it,
though never so probable, is still uncertain: And therefore it is an undoubted
Truth, that you may Parum refert quod opposita sententia ipsi operanti videatur
probabilior speculative: Speculativum enim illud judicium, eo ipso quod forte
incertum and falsum sit, non debet esse regula operationis; cum operans aliam
regulam, eamque certam habeat, quam sequatur, Busenbaum. l. 1. tr. 1. c. 2.
dub. 2. Quando Religiosus dubitat utrum sua infirmitas sufficiat ad non
jejunandum, vel ad non legendum horas; non solum ad mandatum, sed etiam
consilium sui Praelati secure potest abstinere a jejunio, vel ab horis.
Sylvius. in 1.2. q. 19.25. d. 8. c. 1. Praelato praecipienti Religiosus tenetur
obedire contra suam propriam opinionem, etiamsi probabiliorem. ibid. d. 9. c. 4.
safely follow his advice.

But what if I am still uneasy in my self, and terribly afraid it is a Sin? May
I securely follow his Advice; in spite of all my fears?

Undoubtedly you may. Is it not evident, that we may always follow a certain
rule, in spite of all the uncertainties in the world? And have not we just
reason to Potest firmiter operari contempto scrupulo, etiamsi perseveret.
Suarez. in 1.2. disp. 12. sect. 4. n. 5.
contemn our fears, when we are sure of being more afraid than hurt?

My fears, you will say, are grounded upon a great many particular reasons: And is
it not an unreasonable thing to turn these reasons out of doors, without first
confuting them?

Pray, is it not an unreasonable thing to undertake the needless labor of an
endless work? Are they not abundantly confuted by their own confession? They
only boast their probability; they do not so much as pretend to a speculative
certainty: And nothing less than that can ever be allowed to take place of a
certain practical direction.

The whole truth of the business is this. Our speculative thoughts are proud
and impertinent. They would fain usurp the whole conduct of our life and
actions: and This is what they were never made for. They are like a factious
House of Commons, who are always quarrelling with the King's Prerogatives,
under the odious name of Arbitrary Power: and if care be not taken to keep them
within their due limits, they will soon subvert the Government: they will convene
without being called, and continue sitting even when they are prorogued. From
whence it plainly follows, that our Practical Reason is never more Prudent, and
more like it self, in the lawful exercise of its Sovereign Power, than when it
silences and dismisses these pragmatical Scruples and rebellious Speculations,
which cannot endure to have Authority reign over them. Then it is that our
Practical Reason is like an Absolute Monarch, who governs as he pleases,
without consulting his Parliament. And here, I hope you will not say, that
Reason is Tyrannical, unless you have a mind to have it said, that Tyranny is
reasonable.

CHAP. XI. The Security of Blind Obedience proved by Scripture.
A Pretended Conscience which claims a liberty of thinking what it pleases, and
pleads a necessity of doing what it thinks, is as mischievous a Tool as the
Devil himself would wish to go to work with. All the Laws of God and his Church
would signify just nothing, if every body might pretend to say, My Conscience
tells me another thing, and Who shall control or judge my Conscience? It Is
evident that whenever the Law says one thing, and our pretended Conscience
takes upon it to say another, or whenever there arises any dispute, which of
the two is in the right, We do not live in conformity to the Law, if we despise
such Judges of the Law, as the Law it self has appointed.

My business therefore at present is to prove by Scripture, that our Confessors
are appointed by God, to be the Judges of the Law. From whence 'twill clearly
follow, that in all doubtful cases we may securely rely upon our Confessors
Authority, without examining their reasons. For surely nothing can be more
self-evident than this, that the Law of God can never punish us, for submitting
humbly and sincerely to those Judges, which God himself has appointed.

There are several Texts of Scripture which plainly represent unto us, how
unfitting and how unsafe a thing it is, to take upon us to be our own judges in
all things. Prove. 3.5.7.
Rely not upon your own Understanding: Be not wise in your own eyes. And again
Prove. 26.12.
. There is more hope of a fool, than of one that is wise in his own conceit.
Such expressions as these are very proper to awaken some people, who are so
strangely fond of their own fancies, that they cannot endure to submit them to
any Confessor whatsoever. They love dearly to rely upon their own understanding
in every thing, although the Word of God expressly advises the contrary. They
are so Wise in their own eyes, that they never think their Confessor wise
enough to direct them. And, let them say what they will, it is manifest they are
not guilty of too much Humility. For, if they thought their conceits were
silly, they would easily submit. But the true reason why they are so stiff in
their opinions, is because they always are inclined to believe that their
conceits are wise ones. And how does this agree with the Word of God, which in
Prove. 26.12. Romans 12.16.
both Testaments admonishes them not to be wise in their own conceits? But a
word is enough to the wise; and therefore I shall say no more upon this
subject, but shall chieflly insist upon those Texts, which tell us plainly who
they are, whom God has appointed to be our Guides and Judges: our Guides, to
choose our way, and our Judges to determine all our doubts concerning it.

I. The Malach. 2.7.
lips of the Priest shall keep Knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his
mouth: for he is the Angel of the Lord of Hosts. And the reason holds good,
although his wickedness (which God forbid) should ib. v. 9.
make him contemptible before the people. His personal failings do not lessen
the Authority of his Character. He may know the Law as well as those who
observe it. And although his actions discover the corruption of his Heart which
contradicts his Judgment, yet perhaps he may not labor under any temptation of
belying the Law with his lips, or contradicting it with his mouth. In the old
Testament we read that 1. Kings. 8.1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
when Samuel was old and made his Sons Judges over Israel, they walked not in
his ways; for which reason the Elders of Israel, being offended at the
wickedness of his Sons, gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel, and
said, Now make us a King to judge us, like all the Nations. Whereupon Samuel,
being displeased with their petition, prayed to God to direct him, and God
himself expressed his displeasure in these terms, They have not rejected thee,
but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. And in the New
Testament we read, that Jesus said to the multitude Math. 23.1.2.3.
The Scribes and Pharisees have sitten in Moses seat; All therefore whatsoever
they say to ye, that observe ye, and do ye; but do not square your actions
according to their works; for they say, and do not. And indeed our Natural
Reason is enough to teach us the Equity of this Truth. For, when once a Judge
is appointed by the Law, although a private person at the Bar may justly hope
himself to the better man of the two; yet, if he should therefore offer to
justle him off the Bench, and disown the Authority of his Commission, such an
insolence would never be endured in any Form of Government.

II. He Luke 10.16.
that hears you, says Christ to his Disciples, hears me: and he that despises
you, despises me. This Text shows plainly that Heb. 1.1.
God who spoke, in time past, to the Fathers by the Prophets, and in these last
days spoke unto us by his Son, now still continues speaking to us by our
Confessors, who though they 2. Cor. 3.5.6.
are not sufficient of themselves, yet God has made them able Ministers of the
New Testament; 2. Cor. 5.9.20.
and has committed to them the word of Reconciliation, So that we ought to look
upon them as Ambassadors for Christ, as if God himself did exhort us by them.
If we had been present at the Transfiguration of our Savior, and had heard
that Luke 9.35.
voice which came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son, Hear him:
What a mighty influence would it have had upon our Minds and Hearts? And ought
not we as much to reverence the voice of Christ, as if we heard a voice from
Heaven? When our Savior tells us, He that hears my Ministers, hears me;
although our fears may raise a mist, and quite surround us with a cloud, yet
still these words of his are like a Voice out of the cloud, and a Voice as easy
to be understood, as if he had said, Those are my beloved Ministers, Hear them.

I shall only take notice of one particular circumstance, which I hope will
help to make some people sensible of the importance of this Text. I mean those
who are so strangely terrified with thinking, that their Confessions never are
exact, that they never love God above all things, that they never do sufficient
penance for their Sins, that they are not in the State of Grace, and that they
are not in the number of God's Elect. If they are so terribly afraid of being
1. Pet. 2.25.
like Sheep which are going astray; if they are sincerely desirous to return
unto the Shepherd of their Souls; Let them harken seriously to the voice of
Heb. 13.20.
that great Shepherd of the Sheep who says, Jo. 10.14.
I am the good Pastor. ib. v. 27.
My Sheep, says he, hear my voice, and they follow me. We cannot follow Christ
unless we hear his voice: But, if we hear his voice, and follow it, This is the
certain mark, that we are in the number of his Sheep. My Sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me; ib. v. 28.29.
and I give unto them Eternal Life; and they shall not perish for ever; neither
shall any one pull them out of my Father's hand. My Father, that which he has
given me, is greater than all: and no one is able to pull them out of my
Father's hand. What a comfort is it, to be thus assured, that if we hear his
voice, and follow it, he will not fail to give us Eternal Life! What a joy, to
think that we shall never perish! And how does it transport and ravish us, when
we consider that although the World, the Flesh, and all the Devils in Hell
conspire against us, yet our Father in Heaven is greater than all; and, if we
hear the voice of his Son, No one will ever be able to pull us out of our
Father's hand? What would we give, what would we do, what would we suffer, to
be sure that we are in the happy number of those who hear the voice of Christ!
Remember therefore, and consider what he says; If you hear his Ministers, you
hear him; and if you despise them, you despise him.

III. When our Savior ascended Ephesians. 4.8, 11, 12, 14.
he gave Pastors and Teachers, not only for the work of the Ministry, and for
the edifying the body Christ, but also that we henceforth be no more children,
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine. And
certainly, unless they were appointed by Christ to be our Guides and Judges,
it is very hard to understand, how they should hinder us from being tossed to and
fro, and carried about with what wind of doctrine we please. But the thing
which here is most remarkable, is this: Before he went Jo. 16.5, 7.
his way to him that sent him, He said, I tell you the truth, It is expedient
for you that I go away. Which words being extended to the generality of the
Faithful, to whom the Comforter was sent as well as to the Disciples, it is
hard to forbear the starting of a very material question: How? Is it expedient
for us to exchange an infallible Guide, for a company of Confessors, who are
every one of them fallible? Yes. It certainly is so. For, 1. Our Submission is
equally secure, and that is as good: 2. Our Obedience is more humble, and that is
a great deal better.

If you ask me, By what Authority we can be so secure under the direction of a
fallible Guide? Pray, is not his Authority sufficient who will, one day, come
to judge the quick and the dead? Can you imagine, he is so unjust, as to
condemn us for submitting humbly and sincerely to his own Authority? And, if he
cannot possibly condemn us for it, are we not secure? It Is he himself (who knows
a great deal better than we do, how fallible they are) it is He, I say, who has
appointed them to be our Judges; and therefore it is by his appointment, that in
doubtful matters we submit our judgment to them. Hear what he says himself:
Jo. 20.21, 23.
As my Father has sent me even so I send them. Whose soever they Sins they
remit, they are remitted unto them; and whose soever sins they retain, they are
retained.

I shall add no gloss to this Text. The Church of God is the best interpreter
of his Word. She is 1. Tim. 3.15.
the pillar and the ground of Truth. If we believe our Creed; if we believe the
Holy Catholic Church; If we believe the solemn declaration of a General
Council approved and universally received, There is nothing more certain than
that our Confessors are by Christ appointed Judges to discern and to determine
all matters belonging to Confession. The words of the Council of Trent are
these. Dominus noster Jesus Christus, a terris ascensurus ad coelos, Sacerdotes
sui ipsius Vicarios reliquit, tanquam praesides and judices, ad quos omnia
mortalia crimina deferantur; quo, pro potestate Clavium remissionis aut
retentionis peccatorum, sententiam pronuncient, Sess. 14. cap. 5.
Our Lord JESUS CHRIST before he ascended from Earth to Heaven, left Priests
his Vicegerents, as Presidents and Judges, to whom all mortal Sins are to be
declared, that they may accordingly pronounce Sentence. So plain it is, that
our Ghostly Fathers have their Commission from God, and Patent from his Church,
to be our Judges in matters of Conscience; and consequently to pronounce a
final Sentence upon all our doubtful cases.

CHAP. XII. Maxims of S. Bernard, concerning Blind Obedience.
I Have now done with Scripture: and, to give an account of the Fathers, I have
made choice of S. Bernard, whom I look upon as the last Father of the Church,
and the best able to express the sentiments of all the rest who went before
him. His eminent Learning and Virtue were the Oracle as well as Miracle of the
twelfth Age. His Doctrine and Example were the greast Instruction and the
Admiration of all: when in the darkness and the coldness of those times, which
were the winter-season of Devotion, he unexpectedly appeard, like fire
expressly sent from Heaven to enlighten and inflame the minds and hearts of
ignorant and tepid Christians.

He has written a whole book particularly upon this subject: and, the whole
care of his life being chiefly employed in cultivating and improving the Virtue
of Blind Obedience, we may very well allow him to have rightly understood it.
He discourses, for the most part, concerning the blind obedience which is due
to a Prelate or Superior, addressing himself particularly to Religious persons,
who by vow are bound to observe it. But nevertheless the Submission, which is
due from all Penitents to their Confessors, is a Case exactly parallel to it,
and is directly comprehended under the general notion of it. And besides, it is
obvious to every body's common sense, that those practices which are
universally reputed virtuous in a Cloister, can never be justly censured as
unlawful in the World: but whatsoever the Religious must do, the Seculars may
lawfully do it, if they please.

MAX. I. We ought to look upon our Confessor as a Vicegerent of God, without
considering his faults.
WHether Sive Deus, sive homo Vicarius Dei, mandatum quodcunque tradiderit;
pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia deferendum. S. Bern. lib.
de praecept. and dispen. cap. 9.
it be God, or Man his Vicegerent, who imposes an obligation upon us, we are to
obey with the same care, and submit with the same respect. Quid enim interest,
utrum per se an per suos ministros, sive homines sive Angelos, hominibus
innotescat suum placitum Deus? Quamobrem quicquid vice Dei praecipit homo, quod
non sit certum displicere Deo; haud secus omnino accipiendum quam si praecipiat
Deus. Praesertim cum teneas de Scripturis, quia Labia Sacerdotis custodiunt
scientiam, and legem de ore ejus requirunt; quia Angelus Domini exercituum est.
Requirunt, dixerim, Legem; non quam ratio manifesta probaverit, sed quod ita
latere aut obscurum esse cognoscitur, ut in dubium venire possit, utrumne Deus
sic an aliter forte velit, si non de labiis custodientibus scientiam, and ex
ore Angeli Domini exercituum certum reddatur, ibid.
What matter is it, whether God impart his will and pleasure to us, by himself,
or by the Ministry of Men, or Angels? Whatsoever it is that Man prescribes, as
Vicegerent of God, unless it be CERTAINLY displeasing to him, we ought to
accept it in the same manner, as if God himself had ordained it. Especially
since we read in Scripture, that the lips of the Priest keep knowledge, and
they require the Law at his mouth, because he is the Angel of the Lord of
Hosts. They seek the Law, says he, not in things which our Reason proves
MANIFESTLY to us, but in matters which are so hidden and obscure, that we might
possibly DOUBT, whether God would have it so, or not; unless it were MADE
CERTAIN, by those lips which are the Keepers of Knowledge, and by the mouth of
the Angel of the Lord of Hosts.


Can any man speak more plainly than S. Bernard does, upon this occasion?

And now, perhaps, some body may be apt to say; If I had but such a man as S.
Bernard, for my Confessor, I could rely upon his word as confidently as if God
himself had said it: but when I consider the weakness and the indiscretion of
my Ghostly Father, I dare not venture to trust him.

To this Objection a learned Divine returns this Answer, that Penitents do not
rely upon their Confessor Dicet fortasse quispiam, si talis mihi esset
Praelatus, qualis erat S. Bernardus, facile acquiescerem: nunc vero dum
Superioris mei parvam sapientiam aspicio, non audeo ei acquiescere. R.
Inferiores non obediunt Praelato, quia sit doctus, quia prudens, quia Sanctus,
sed quia vicem Dei gerit, hoc ipso quo est legitimus superior Sylvius. in 1.2.
q. 19. a. 5. d. 12. c. 8.
because he is LEARNED, PRUDENT, or VIRTUOUS, but barely because he supplies
the place of God, who has appointed him to be their Judge in all doubtful
matters relating to Confession. But since you own so frankly, that if you had
S. Bornard for your Confessor, you could easily rely upon him: Hear what S.
Bernard says himself. Non te moveat Magister imperitus, indiscreta potestas;
sed memento quia non est potestas nisi a Deo, and qui resistit potestati,
resistit Dei ordinationi. S. Bern. Sermon. 41. de diversis.
Be not afrighted at the unskillfullness of his Teashing, or the indiscretion
of his Authority; but remember that there is no power but of God; and that they
who resist Authority, resist the ordinance of God.

It Is true, This Maxim of S. Bernard allows of one exception from the general
rule, which is, that when we are absolutely certain of our Confessor's being
mistaken, we may lawfully refuse to submit to him. De hujusmodi nec praeceptor
expectandus, nec prohibitor auscultandus est. S. Bern. lib. de praecep. and
dispen. cap. 9.
In these things, says he, we neither expect any body's Teaching, nor mind any
body's Forbidding. But here it is that all Timorous Consciences must have a
great care, of not being mistaken themselves, when they think their Confessor
is so. The Exception is very true, but they must be careful not to destroy the
Rule with it. They are apt to fear on the wrong side; and Fear is a strange
Passion, which commonly misrepresents whatever comes in its way. They look at
every thing with a pair of spectacles made of false glasses, the one magnifying
the Sin, the other multiplying the circumstances, and both conspiring to
deceive them. In this condition they consult their Confessor, and tell him a
terrible Story, which, by their good will, they would never make an end of.
Their Confessor, who is generally well acquainted with these humors, and soon
sees what they would be at, begins to cut them short: And it is no wonder he
does so, because he sees things plainly, with his own natural eyes, and will
not be prevailed upon to use their spectacles, because he knows what glass they
are made of. Now, this offends them strangely; and without any more ado, they
think they have all the reason in the world to conclude. He Is certainly
mistaken. He allows them, may be, only half a quarter to examine; and they are
certain that three or four hours are too little, for the purpose. They are
certain they ought to confess some things, which he forbids them to speak of.
They are certain they are obliged in Conscience, to make a general Confession;
although he tells them, they need it no more than they do the head-ake.

Poor Creatures! In these perplexities they mean very well; but they do very
ill. For, even in things which seem evident to them, they ought to beware of
being mistaken, and of making things matter of Conscience which are far from
being so. They ought to beware the setting up of a false God to themselves, and
sacrificing all the Duties of Obedience to an Idol of their own invention.
Their pretended Conscience is neither better nor truer for the heat and zeal
with which they maintain it. Even Heathens themselves are oftentimes more
zealous than Christians: And (the Devil helping his servants) it is commonly
observed, that men are fiercer in the wrong than in the right. Who would set up
a fallible Guide against an infallible one? This Conscience of theirs is
fallible, not only in it self, but also to them, because when, by their fault,
it is erroneous, is does not excuse them. But their Confessor is always
infallible to them, although he never is so in himself; because it is
infallibly true, that they are always excused, when in any doubt they humbly
and sincerely follow his advice.

When nothing else will do, They chiefly insist upon this; that they are very
certain their Confessor does not rightly understand them, because they are sure
that, if he did, he would certainly be of their opinion. But surely such a
pleasant argument as this, is little better than that of Poet Bays. When I
have a mind, says he, to know whether a man be a man of parts, or not; What do
me I, but give him one of my Plays to read? He reads it. If he likes it; Well.
If not; I know what to think of him. Much at this rate, these people go to
their Confessor, with one of their huge and mighty Scruples. He hears it. If he
approves their opinion; All Is well. If not; They know for certain he must needs
be grievoussly mistaken.

It Is very hard, you will say, for people to think otherwise: Especially when they
can almost swear, they are in the right.

The prouder they are, the harder it is: but if they were sufficiently humble,
it would be a very easy matter. Especially, when they cannot quite swear. For
if their heart goes pit a pat with fear of being perjured, when they think of
laying hand upon the Book and making a solemn Oath; Then they may very well
assure themselves, that there is still some little doubt lies lurking in their
Minds, and that therefore they may boldly reckon it amongst the doubtful
cases, in which their Confessor has full Commission to direct them.

S. Teresa was certainly so fully persuaded of her Visions being true and real,
that she could almost have sworn, they were so: And yet she would not therefore
venture to disobey her Confessor. Hear how F. Crasset describes her behavior
in this case. Consid. surles F^stes. October. 15.
JESUS appeared to S. Teresa two several ways; in his own person, and in the
person of her Confessor. Jesus himself teaches her infallible truths: Her
Confessor, who represents him, tells her, they are so many lies. What shall
Teresa do? Whom shall she believe? She never deliberates upon the matter: She
chooses rather to obey Jesus in the person of her Confessor, than in his own
person. I may be mistaken, says she, in believing these Visions; but I shall
never be mistaken in obeying my Directour. I am not absolutely certain that it
is the Son of God who appears to me; but I am certain that it is he who speaks
to me by my Superiors. If they tell me otherwise than he does, I Will believe
them sooner than him, because he commands me so to do.

MAX. II. We ought to look upon him as our Judge, without examining his reasons.
It Is Imperfecti cordis est, and infirmae prorsus voluntatis, haerere ad singula
quae injunguntur; exigere de quibusque rationem; and male suspicari de omni
praecepto cujus causa latuerit; nec unquam libenter obedire, nisi cum audire
contigerit quod forte libuerit, aut quod non aliter licere seu expedire
monstraverit vel aperta ratio, vel indubitata authoritas. Non plane haec est
illa quae ex Regula traditur, Obedientia sine mora. S. Bern. lib. de praecep.
and dispen. c. 10.
a Sign of an imperfect Heart, and of a very weak Will, to demurr upon every
thing that is enjoined; to exact a reason for every thing; to think ill of
every precept which we do not know the cause of; and never to obey willingly,
unless we bear what pleases us, or unless the necessity or convenience of it,
be proved by manifest reason or by some unquestionable Authority. This is far
from the Obedience which the Rule requires: OBEDIENCE WITHOUT DELAY. Subditi
and obedientes esse debem us ad nutum Praepositorum, nihil interrogantes
propter conscientiam. S. Bern. Sermon. 41. de diversis.
We ought to be Submissive and Obedient, without asking any question for
Conscience sake.
These words of S. Bernard are too plain to need any Comment, and therefore I
shall only endeavor to show the evils which infallibly attend those people,
who will never submit to their Confessor in any particular difficulty, unless
he first give a satisfactory reason for it, and convince them by mere dint of
argument.

1. To avoid the fear of an imaginary Sin on the one side, they put themselves
evidently into a real danger of Sinning on the other.

2. They affront Christ himself, by rebelling against his Government.

3. They wilfully oppose the kind designs of God's great Mercy to them, in
allowing them a Guide.

I. To avoid an imaginary Sin, they put themselves evidently in a real danger
of Sinning. My Confessor, you will say, is fallible: How dare I rely upon him?
Pray, are not you fallible too? How dare you rely upon your self? If he
mistake, it is his fault: but if you mistake, it is yours. If you depend upon him
without examining his reasons, the danger is only his; But if you are
inquisitive and will depend upon your self, you bring the danger to your own
door; and, if there be any mistake, you are justly accountable for it. You may
even thank your self; You sought for danger, and you found it; You loved it,
and who can help your perishing in it?

But am not I to take care, that my Confessor be not mistaken?

Are not you ashamed to ask such a question? God and his Church have both
appointed him to be your Guide: And must you therefore take upon you to be his?

But whilst my Confessor directs me, it were to be wished that some body would
direct him.

That Is God's care. He himself takes that upon him, and excuses you from
troubling your head about it. If you cannot help suspecting that your Confessor
is a bad man, and that therefore God will not direct him: You may make amends
for it, by taking what care you can, to be as good, as you should be, your
self: And then (if you humbly desire it, and heartily pray for it) God will be
sure to direct him for your sake, although he would not do so much for his. B.
Sales advises you Introd. p. 1. chapter 4. n. 3.
to pray to God with very great instance, and afterward ibid. n. 4.
not to regard him simply as a man, nor to trust in him, nor in his human
prudence, but in the Providence of Almighty God, who will undoubtedly favor
your endeavors, and speak to you by the interposition of this man; putting
into his mind, and into his mouth, those things which shall be most expedient
for your spiritual advancement. In short, there is nothing more certain, than
that God will either direct him or excuse you. Be it which way it will, your
Soul can never be in danger, upon this account. For, as long as you cannot
swear, your Confessor is mistaken; so long you may lawfully swear, you are
Secure. S. Bernard proposes the same Objection: Sed homines, inquies, facile
falli in Dei voluntate de rebus dubiis percipienda, and in praecipienda fallere
possunt. Sed enim, Quid hoc refert tua, cui conscius non es? S. Bern. lib. de
praecep. and dispen. c. 9.
When matters are doubtful, Men may easily deceive themselves in discerning
the will of God, and deceive others in prescribing it. To which he roundly
answers, What Is that to you, as long as you are not certain of it?

II. They affront Christ himself, by rebelling against his Government. He gives
their Confessor a full Commission, to be their Judge in all doubtful cases.
They will not acknowledge him, under that character. They Will hearken to him, as
to a Lawyer at the Bar, if he pleases: But, as for the Bench, they question
very much whether he be either good enough, or wise enough, to deserve that
place, so well as they do. They Will hear his reasons, and consider them: but,
when all is done, they are freeborn Subjects of the Almighty, and are always
resolved to judge for themselves. S. Bernard speaking of this Elatio
contemnentis, atque impoenitentis obstinatio, in minimis quoque mandatis culpam
facit non minimam, and convertit in crimen gravis rebellionis culpam satis
levem simplicis transgressionis. S. Bern. ibid. c. 11.
proud Contempt, and Obstinate continuance in it, says that even in little
precepts it amounts to more than a little fault, and changes a small
transgression into a grievous Crime of Rebellion.

III. They wilfully oppose the kind designs of God's great Mercy to them, in
allowing them a Guide. By giving us a Guide, he puts into our hands the best
means of saving our Souls; he supplies us with perpetual opportunities of
practicing the best of moral virtues, Humility and Obedience; he leads us into
the best and readiest way of following Jesus Christ the Captain of our
Salvation, who humbled himself and became obedient; for which reason God
exalted him, and will exalt us too, provided we follow his example.

These were the virtues He required from our first Parents: and to make the
practice more easy, He was pleased to be their Guide himself. He was every way
Infallible: his infinite Wisdom on the one side, and his no less infinite
Goodness on the other, were Vouchers for his Infallibility: And yet their Pride
and Disobedience found a way to rob them of their Innocence.

To repair this fault of theirs the Eternal Truth becomes Incarnate, the Word
is made Flesh, and dwells amongst us: He comes to enlighten all the World, and
to take care that those, who follow him, may never walk in darkness. And here
indeed the terms of our Obedience and Humility seem something harder than
before; because we cannot now be saved, without submission of our Understanding
and our Will to Man as well as God. It Is true; This Man is God, He is infinitely
Wise and Good, He is therefore every way Infallible. But all these great and
glorious advantages are Objects far too bright for our weak eyes, we cannot see
these dazzling and amazing truths, but are forced to believe without seeing.
Here it is, we humble our proud thoughts, and captivate them to the obedience
of Christ: And it is the first Cross we take up, when we begin to follow him.

But yet this is not all: Neither is it just that this should be enough. If we
intend to be exalted, we must humble our selves, and be obedient one step
further. Our Parents would not submit to God himself; and we, who have the same
blood in our veins, must now submit not only to Man who is God, but to Men who
are no more Gods than we are; to Men who are as fallible as our selves. This is
the Cross which we must of necessity take up, if we intend to follow him. We
must be thus far humble and obedient, if we design to be exalted with him. To
follow him, we must Jo. 10.27.
hear his voice: And, being gone himself so far before us, What could he
contrive better for us, than to leave his Ministers behind him, and to give us
all the encouragement that can be, to rely upon their word; by assuring us,
that if we hear them, we hear him? It Is evidently just that this same proud and
stubborn Nature of ours, which once aspired so high as to defy the Highest,
should now bow down its head, not only lower than its Maker, but even lower
than the dust of which he made it. It Is just, I say, in things indifferent, to
resign our Wills, and in doubtful matters, to submit our Understandings, even
to our fallible fellow creatures who are made of the same dust with us.

It Is hard indeed, at first, for so much Pride and Stubbornness to yield without
some little resistance. But however, we are in the hands of a God and a Judge
from whom we cannot make our escape, and therefore we have reason to be glad to
kiss the Rod, although we are not fond of it. Nay, we have reason to be fond of
it, if we rightly consider our interest. Our Savior himself was pleased to
tell us, before he went, it was expedient for us he should go away. For
although there may be more Difficulty in submitting to his Ministers, yet the
Benefit of it is incomparably greater. The self-denyals of our Understanding
and our Will are more acceptable to God, when they are offered to him in the
person of a Minister who represents him. They are more humble, and therefore
more acceptable. And here I know not which to admire most; the Equity of his
Justice, in making this the punishment of our Sin; or the Kindness of his
Mercy, in making it the best, the easiest, and the most effectual means of
purchasing our Everlasting Happiness: Our Cross indeed, is heavier; but the
Reward is greater. The occasions of taking it up, are more frequent; but they
only serve to multiply the glories of our Crown, when we shall, one day, be
exalted for it.

This is One kind design, which God has laid in order to our future Happiness:
And this we wilfully oppose as often as we refuse to submit, without a
particular and a convincing reason for it. There is certainly no Humility in
never submitting, but when our natural Reason is convinced; nor is there any
Obedience in never complying, but when we naturally have a mind to it. The very
worst of Atheists and Libertins are every jot as humble and obedient as this:
They never make any difficulty, of Believing what they see, or Doing what they
please.

A Second design of the Divine Providence in allowing us a Guide, is to make us
truly Happy, not only hereafter, but even here. Now this is a double Kindness,
and the greatest that can be imagined; that God is not contented to crown our
Happiness at our journey's end, but desires to give us a taste of it before
hand, and offers us as much of it as we are able to carry with us thither. By
leading us into the way of Blind Obedience, He removes the causes of our inward
trouble and disquiet, and lays a sure foundation of interior comfort and
tranquillity of mind. And this I shall endeavor to give a particular account
of, out of pity and compassion to those Timorous Consciences, who make it their
great design to please themselves, but know not how to go about it.

One would admire to see the strange perverseness and frowardness of people,
when they are possessed with panick fear. Every thing lies cross in their way.
The very shadow of an obligation is enough to put them in a fright* What ever
it is, they think it morally impossible to be complied with; and therefore hate
the very thought of it. God gives them a Guide: and because this looks as if
they were obliged in Conscience to follow his direction, therefore they start
back, and cry, What is our Reason good for, if in doubts we must submit it to
our Guide? And yet, if God had bid them rely entirely upon their Reason, they
would perhaps have thought it the harder measure of the two, and would have
argued the contrary way, What is our Guide good for, if we may not safely rely
upon him? They would fain be doing their duty; and for fear of doing it the
wrong way, they never do it right. They are too wise to trust their Confessor;
and yet they are not wise enough to trust themselves. They are desperately fond
of speculative certainty: but the mischief is, it is not to be found.
Probability sometimes flatters them with hopes of absolute certainty; but
always deceives them, and puts them off with doubtful if's and and's, which
are never able to give them any satisfaction. This is the reason why they are
always fearful, and always inquisitive to find out reasons to appease their
fears. But after all their vain endeavors to confirm and settle their opinion,
they can never attain to a steady and unshaken persuasion of it. Their
Conscience ever and anon recoyls upon them; and all their plausible reasoning
is still born down and confuted by a strong suspicion which they can never get
out of their minds, that perhaps they are still mistaken.

But that which I most admire, is the strange obstinacy of their humor, who
after long experience having felt the smart of their miserable condition, are
still resolved to continue in it. They daily find themselves at a loss: They
have all the reason in the world to conclude they are in the wrong way: And yet
they still go on. A Traveller is wiser than so. As soon as he finds himself out
of the way, he presently stops his course, he turns toward the right way with
all the speed he can, and has not the least inclination to go wrong any
further. But the minds of these people are so hurried away, by their
unreasonable prejudices, that though they find themselves in the wrong, they
cannot endure to return to the right. They expect to see an end of all their
fears, and then they intend to be as obedient as you please. Mean time, they
beg pardon, if they defer their Obedience till the practice of it be a little
more easy to them. Now this is a fancy which is every jot as extravagant as
that of the Idiot, who being come to the river side, and being obliged to pass
over, durst not venture in a boat, but resolved to expect till the water was
all gone, and left the channel dry. He observed the swiftness of the stream,
and fancied it would soon run quite away, and leave him a free and easy
passage. But the river runs, and still runs on, and though he should expect a
thousand years, 'twould never leave off running. And so it is in our present
case. Their doubts and jealousies, their reasonings and disputings, will still
run on, and never have an end. It Is impossible they should ever have any
tolerable enjoyment of themselves, or ever be able to shake off these
tormenting fears, but by submitting to the easy yoke of Jesus Christ, and by
securing themselves under his protection, whom hitherto they have affronted, by
despising of his Ministers. Nothing but Blind Obedience can free them from all
this misery, by removing the causes of their inward trouble and disquiet, and
by laying a sure foundation of interior comfort and tranquillity of mind.

The principal cause of their inward trouble, is this. They rely entirely upon
their own judgment: and therefore have just reason to conclude, that they are
unavoidably accountable for every mistake they commit. And this is abundantly
enough to make them always jealous, that, for ought they know, God's Justice
may be making toward them, and his Anger levelled against them. But this cause
ceases immediately, as soon as they entertain the principles of Blind
Obedience: Because it is evident, when God has given them a Confessor to direct
them, it cannot be his will and pleasure that this Guide should be directed and
guided by them. It Is true; He may be mistaken: But let him look to that. It Is
none of their business to examine him: On the contrary it is commendable in them
to submit S. Bernard. sup.
without asking any question for Conscience sake. And therefore, although his
mistakes may perhaps be fatal to himself, it is as clear as the Meridian Sun,
that they can never be fatal to them, nor can they ever be accountable for any
thing which he advises.

Another more secret cause of their inward disquiet, is well expressed by S.
Austin, who says, Thou have made us, O Lord, for thy self; and our hearts are
always restless, till we rest in Thee. All creatures are uneasy when they are
out of their natural Element. Nothing is at rest, but whilst it is in that
state which Nature intended for it. Obedience is the natural state of the Soul:
it was made to obey its Maker: and the constant practice of this Virtue, is the
condition to which God designed it. He gave us our Reason; not to make us
Rebels, but to make us reasonable Subjects: and therefore all our acts of
Submission to the Authority of his Government, are rational and suitable to the
first institution of our Nature. Our Reason is a Ray of the Divivinity; it
imprints the image of our Maker on our Souls; and writes the fundamental laws
of our Submission, in so plain a character, that though our Passions now and
then obscure it, yet they never can efface it. As long as Romans 13.1.
our Souls are subject to the higher powers ordained by God; Hebr. 13.17.
obeying them that rule over us, and submitting our selves to those who watch
for our Souls; so long our Souls are in their natural temper, and are in very
good health, because they are in that State in which they ought to be,
according to the primitive intention of their Being. But when we resist the
power of Authority; when we Romans 13.2.
resist the ordinance of God; when we revolt against the Government of
Jesus Christ, by despising the Commission he has given to our Confessor, and by
refusing in doubtful cases to acknowledge the sufficiency and safety of his
Direction; then it is that we act contrary to the inward light of our minds,
our Conscience checks us, and makes us uneasy. And how can we hope to be at
ease, as long as we have poison within us, which puts us in a sickly and
diseased condition? Our Pride and Willfullness put all our spirits in a
continual fermentation. Our minds can never be serene, as long as they are
clouded with the fumes of our distemper. All the common arts of diversion will
never avail us: we may change our place, our posture, our physic, and our
Physician too; but we shall still be restless, till the cause be removed, which
creates our disturbance. Isai. 57.21.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked. But, as in our body we find an
unexpressible ease and pleasure, when it is in perfect state of health; So when
Obedience corrects the proud and wilful humors of our Soul, restores the
even temper of our Mind, and smooths the way before us; Then it is that All is
easy to us. We easily know what we are bid to do: And, being humble, we as
easily do it.

The Obedience, which I speak of, not only removes the causes of our inward
trouble and disquiet; but lays a sure foundation of interior comfort and
tranquillity of mind, by affording us the best Security, that we can wish for,
during Life; and the greatest Joy, that we can think of, at the hour of Death.
What greater Security can our hearts desire, than to be under the protection of
God himself, the Shepherd of our Souls, who knows a great deal better, than we
do, what is good for us, and will not suffer us to go astray, because he loves
us better than we love our selves? He was our Enemy before; whilst we rebelled
against his Government: But, by detesting our past pride and folly, and
submitting to his Ministers, he now becomes our Friend. All Friendship is
comfortable: but this is the best of Friendships, and therefore is the greatest
and divinest comfort. It Is a great satisfaction, to feel that we our selves love
God: and a double satisfaction, to hope that He himself loves us. Then it is,
that we may say to our Soul, as David did, Psalm. 114.7.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul; Psalm. 26.1.
My God is my Light, and my Salvation; Whom shall I fear? My God is the
Protector of my Life; of whom shall I be afraid?

As it is our best Security; during life; so it is our greatest Joy at the
approach of Death, and yields most comfort then when we stand most in need of
it. It Is a terrible thing to a departing Soul, when it looks back upon a proud
and wilful course of life, which instead of being spent in the service of
God, has been perpetually employed in idle reasoning and disputing, how to
serve him, when to serve him, and whether to serve him or no. What can such
people plead in their behalf? It Is certainly no good excuse, to say, Lord, we
have always been rebellious against thy Government; but the reason was, because
we were afraid to rely upon it; and indeed, we durst not take thy word for it,
because we thought it fitter for us, in all our doubts, to govern our selves
according to our own fancy. It Is true, we have seldom, or never, done our Duty;
but we hope thou will please to pardon our wilful omissions of it, because we
were always so mighty busy in thinking and considering of it, that we could
never find time to do it. Here it is, their guilty Conscience lies in wait to
accuse them, and never is more fierce than in the day of adversity. When
Eternity, that terrifying object, at the hour of death, presents it self before
their thoughts; when they feel themselves beginning to sink into the regions of
darkness; when they are ready to die at the amazing apprehension of their final
Sentence; How will the Guilt of all their Disobedience then stare them in the
face! With what regret and terror will they then behold it, in its own true
shape! What tumults and convulsions will it raise within their breasts, when
they observe a long black train of proud and wilful practices, which very
well deserve to be attended with a longer and a blacker train of everlasting
miseries!

But it is not so with those who have in time repented of of their folly, and
have proved sincerely humble and obedient. In their greatest temptations, all
is calm and serene within, when there is nothing but darkness and clouds about
them. All their their acts of Submission are so many seeds of peace and comfort
sown in their Consciences* which never fail to spring up, and flourish most,
when the day of distress approaches. When the pangs of Death are ready to lay
hold of them, and they are just going to step into the other world, What a
seasonable refreshment is it to their thoughts, too look back upon an humble
and obedient course of life? Then it is that the pleasure of it over-flows
their minds, the joys of Heaven begin to spring up in their hearts, and are a
true and solid comfort which will stick close to them and stand faithfully by
them in the day of Trial, when they have most need of it. O what a Joy it is,
to consider that their greatest Friend, who has been heretofore the Shepherd of
their Souls, is now the Judge of their Actions! to reflect that their Humility
in hearing his Voice, and their Obedience in following it, are the certain
marks by which he knows the happy number of his Sheep! and to remember that he
will not fail to set them on his right hand, when He comes in glory to
pronounce the Sentence of their Everlasting Happiness! To hear his Voice was
once the Security of their life: And to hear the same, is now the Joy of their
death. My Sheep, says he, hear my Voice, and they follow me: and I give unto
them Eternal Life: and they shall not perish for ever. Come ye Blessed of my
Father; Come and inherit the Kingdom, which was prepared for you, from the
foundation of the World. Amen.

FINIS.

