Heaven won by Violence: OR, A TREATISE Upon MAT. 11.12. Compendiously
containing very nigh The Whole BODY OF Practical DIVINITY; And showing What a
Sacred Violence is, and how it must be used and offered in Believing,
Repenting, and all the Duties of your High Calling.

Together with A New and Living Way of Dying, upon Heb. 11.1. added thereunto.

By Christopher Jelinger: And Published, with the Dedications thereof, by some
Christian Friends.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

To the Right Worshipful ANTHONY REEVE* The Mayor, And his Brethren The
MAGISTRATES, And to all the Inhabitants of the populous Town of TOTNES; Mercy
and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
I Have been much solicited, and earnestly written to, to communicate these my
Labors; because when I preached them first at your Town, it pleased God of his
infinite Mercy, thereby to convert a poor soul then present, and one more
elsewhere, from Darkness to Light, and from the power of Satan to God; which
has occasioned the coming forth of this Treatise, unto the public view of the
World, by a Friend, whose desire it was to publish the same: For who can tell
whether it may not be the Beneplacit, and will of God, that more souls be
thereby won to God? The subject matter thereof, you see, is as apt as any, by
the good blessing of God, to subject souls to the mighty Power of that Word
which here I hold forth, and press, to make you press toward the Mark, for the
Price of the High Calling of God in Christ Jesus, to strive that you may enter
into the narrow Way, which leads to Life, to offer a Sacred Violence to Heaven,
to your selves, nay, to God himself, blessed for ever, to take, to win, to get
that great, that glorious, that spacious Kingdom of Heaven by Force; forcing
your selves to leave the World, to abandon Sin, to fight against Satan, and to
lay hold on eternal Life.

O Sirs, here is work for all your Town, for all this Country, for all England,
for all your days. The Ancient of days so diffuse his holy Spirit into your
hearts, that you may all become men of another spirit, laboring for Heaven:
Heaven is worth the striving, the struggling, the pains-taking, which in this
Treatise is required, that you may be saved. Townsmen commonly are more at
leisure to listen to such a discourse as this is, because they are not under
such a pressure of worldly work, as those are which mansion in the Country; and
therefore I hope you will afford some of your spare hours, to read that Lecture,
which here is read from so precious a Scripture; and that you will not put off
these tenders of my Love, and such a Theme as this is; like that unwise King of
Macedon, who, when one tendered unto him, a Treatise tending to Immortality,
said, (...), that is, I am not at leisure.

I beseech you, Sirs, by the Mercies of God, in the Bowels of Christ Jesus,
that you will be serious once, and set your selves in earnest to that great
Work which is here proposed, working out your Salvation with fear and
trembling; for your time runs out apace in the Glass of time: and I have this
confidence in you all, (2 Cor. 2.3.) that you would not willingly have the
silver Cords of your lives broken, before your hearts, with sorrow for sin, be
broken; nor would depart this evil world, before ye depart from sin, and have
left the vanities of the world, and gotten a sound assurance of an other better
world; nor yet cease to be retainers to the Sun created, before ye be retainers
to the Sun of Righteousness; nor take your farewell of the Elements, before you
have bid farewell to this present life's Allurements: And therefore why do ye
linger? why do ye not break away from Satan by force? why do ye not once begin
to have a low and abject esteem of this common way of existence, this retaining
to the Elements, and become the Servants of Holiness? why do ye not strive to
be the Children of Light, before ye cease to be maintained by the usury of
light? Usura Lucis.
why do ye not set all things apart, to have your part in that holy taking of
that great and glorious Kingdom of Heaven by Violence? I for my part, when I
take a full veiw and circle of my self, do conceive, that without this I am
nothing, my life nothing, my performing of duties nothing. Do you conceive so
too, and then be doing as well as reading the things in this Book contained.
Nay, my Beloved, do this especially; before ever you take this Treatise in hand
to peruse it, resolve to be Assaulters, urgers, Pressers, Forcers of your
selves, and of Heaven by it: but withal, beg and pray before you read one line,
and that upon your bended knees, seriously and ardently, that the great God of
Heaven himself, will write these lines in your hearts, which I have written in
this Book, that you may do them. O that you would hear me in this! For how many
Books have been read in vain without this! This, this must make this my labor
of love auspicious, your reading prosperous, and your laudable endeavors
salutiferous. But I also my self will pray for you.

O my God, bedew theresore these silent lines with thy Benediction, so as that
this populous Town of T -- may consider in this her day the things which belong
to her peace, and tend to immortality, as they are tendered to it in this Book
for all eternity.

So prays Your most humble Orator to the Throne of Grace, Christopher
Jelinger.

ORATION, SIVE POEMA Authoris (...), Ad Jesum Christum Regem Coeli ac Terrae
Potentissimum, Dominum suum Clementissimum.
MAgno Nate Deo, Magni Dominator Olympi,
Verbum subsistens, et Patris ore potens,
Summum Sanctorum, Caput, Illustrissime Regum,
Qui Mundum fulcis Numine perpetuo;
Irrecitabiliter manans de Cord Parentis,
Quo Mundus sumpsit Principe Principium;
Ut Philomela suis attemperat Organa Cannis,
Fitque repercusso dulcior aura melo:
Sic mea Musa cupit te decantare per Orbem
Terrarum totum, Divitiasque tuas:
Non me linque ergo, Rex Prestantissime Regnam,
Qui praesto es Sanctis, dasque Salutis opem:
Sed me sustenta dextrae virtute potenti,
Quae fulcit Sanctos angelicosque Viros:
Et mihi Dux esto Cortus, Cursumque per auras
Dirigito in Caelos, Christ beat, Tuos:
Ut, ceu constructura favos apis, omnia linquens
Floribus Instrepitans poplite mella rapit,
Sic rapere ipse queam Coelestia mella, beatis
Promissa in Coelis, Optime Christ, tuis.
Pierides, Christo nune vestras dicite lauds,
Qui Sermo est Magni Progeniesque Dei:
Christo, Cujus amor suavis mihi Crescit in horas,
Dicite, sit semper Gratia Magnatibi;
Sit lans excellens, celebris sit fama per Orbem,
Atque in perpetuum Gloria summa tibi.
Aliud ejusdem Authoris POEMA Ad Lectores Benivolos Eruditosque.
O Fratres Chari, Coelestia quaerite Regna,
(...) Seeds, Coelicolumque domos:
Suffician^ Menses, atque irreparabile tempus,
Quod male praeterit, sufficiant que dies:
Tempus quod vestat Vrbis, vivatur in altis,
Cum Christo Coelis, angolicisque locis:
Morbus ubi est nullus, nec egestas obsita pannis,
Nec Mors Crudelis, nec violenta fames:
Nec scelus infandum, aut languens maerensque Senectas,
Aut Mars, aut ardens caedis amore furor:
Nec tristis Metus, aut nummum Vesana Cupido,
Nec gelido terram rore pruina tegens:
Sed fons in Medio quem vinum nomine dicunt
Perspicuus, lems, dulcibus uber aquis:
Osratres Sancti, huc spectent sitientia Corda,
Atque oculi vestri, nocte dieque simul:
Huc tendant cunctae vires vestrae, at que labores
Ut vobis dentur Gaudia magna Poli:
Vi rapitur Coeli Regnum, vi vincimur ipsi,
Vi magna ipse Deus Vincitur Omnipotens:
Propterea ingenti vi vim depellite, vestras
Cogentes animas, ne pereant miserae,
Sed potius penetrare que ant in Gaudia Coeli,
Quoe Sanctis tribuet Filius ipse Dei.
Heaven won by a Sacred Violence.
MAT. 11.12. And from the days of John the Baptist until now, the Kingdom of
Heaven suffers Violence; and the Violent take it by force.


THe Field which at present I desire to walk in, is this precious Scripture,
chosen for the carrying on of the Work of the Lord among you.

The Lord of Life put life into the handling of it, that we may all thrive by
it abundantly. So be it.

The Coherence.

In the words foregoing these, we may see what Care, what Diligence, what Means
Divine Providence did adhibit and use, to notify the Messiah of the World, to
the World; by Prophets, first, in old time; and then by the Baptist in Christ's
time, whose powerful and piercing Ministry, what effects it produced is here by
my Text opened, and most clearly evinced.

In a word, these words are a special Commendation, ushered in by a suspensive
Conjunction.

And, which connects the words here used, with those which are premised, and
adds Light to Light, Luster to Luster: for in the words preceding these, the
Greatness of the Baptist is generally only asserted, ver. 10. In these more
especially, and that from the Power and Prevalency of his Min^stry, which comes
next to be viewed, in the special Commendation it self, comprised in the words
following, From the days of John the Baptist, until now, etc. Where,

1. We have Circumstances of Time, and of a Person.

2. A Substance to be considered.

First, Circumstances of Time; both from which, and to which.

1. A Circumstance of Time, from which.

[From the Dayes] not Years; for it was not long, nor many years, but some few
only; and so but some days, as it were, rather than years, during which the
Baptist preached; this wicked World not being worthy, nor willing of his
Ministry. Briefly thus.

From the Beginning of his preaching. For from that time, there was more
laboring for Heaven than ever Some did strive to enter Heaven before too, but
not so generally, as you may see, Luke 16.16.
before.

2. The Time to which, [Until now]: Not for a little while only, but for some
continuance; even till that very time wherein these words by Christ were spoken.

Secondly, A Circumstance of a Person; of [John the Baptist.]

1. Of John, which signifies Grace; and therefore a name well becoming him
that bare it; his Person as well as Preaching being so full of Grace, all
favoring of Christ, savouring of Heaven.

2. The Baptist; so called because of his Baptista a (...), made, facere and
lavare aqua. See Mark 7.4.
dipping in, and baptizing with * water; water being the element, for which was
destinated, and about which was most employed, this glorious Instrument.

Thirdly, A Substance, even the Substance, of the said Baptists great
Commendation, which, as you see, is a most rare and singular setting forth of
the most powerful effect of his Ministry, in these words, The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, etc. Where we have,

1. A Passion. 2. An Action.
I. A Passion; The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence.

Where we have again,

1. A Patient. 2. The Passion it self, to consider.
1st. A Patient, The Kingdom of Heaven.

1. The Kingdom. A Kingdom properly is an Langius, in sua Polyanth.
ampliated Commonwealth on Earth; but here no such thing is meant, as is
earthy, but an heavenly; even a Kingdom, whose King is Verity, whose Law is
Equity, whose Life is Felicity, whose Age is Eternity: for so it follows,

2 Of Heaven, or Heavens.

1. Heaven in the singular, because a Heaven Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 5 p. 157
Aug. Conf. l. 8. c. 1. Lyra in Loc. Musc. in Loc. Rich. Baxter in Saints Rest,
p. 19.
is meant, which indeed is singular, it being a body all made of Glory, Glory
made of Brightness, Brightness streaming from Happiness, Happiness destinated
for Holiness; Holiness, I mean, elevated to that height of Splendour, which is
over all the surface of that huge and shining place, which from every point
does pour forth whole Rivers of purest Light, for the Children of Light. Cyril,
Alex. These. l. 2. c. 4.
Cyril by Heaven, here understands Regeneration; But I do not see how he can
make his Exposition hold.

2. Of the Heavens, in the plural, as it is in the (...).
Original; where note, that there are two sorts of Heavens,

1. Visible. 2. Invisible.
First, Visible; as,

1. The airy Heaven, where the Fowls flee; which therefore are called, Mat.
6.26. (...).
The Fowls of Heaven.

2. The starry Heaven, where the Stars are, Genesis 15.5. a Body which is so
clothed with shining Light, so beautified with a Canopy of gayest Colors, so
embossed with glorious Jewels, so bespangled with sparkling Diamonds, the Stars
I mean, whose Pulchritude is so admirable, Altitude so unmeasurable, Magnitude
so unimagnible; and which is properly called, (...), from (...), I see, because
it is to be seen, and so eminently to be seen.

Secondly, Invisible, namely, to us now; I mean that highest Empyraean Heaven,
with all its glorious Mansions, and their Dimensions; which also may be called
Heavens, as part of the whole; by a Rule which we have in Keckerm. in suo Syst.
Log.
Logic, That which is competent to the Homogeneous whole, is also competent to
the Homogeneous parts: So we call the parts of the great Sea, Seas; as the
Balthick Sea, the British Sea: and so every arm of that Sea of Happiness, every
branch of that endless Bliss, every beam of that Luster, which is in that Mass
of shining Light, every Mansion in that heavenly Fathers House, and every part
of that infinite Glory, which is over all that Kingdom of Glory, is a Heaven:
And so Heaven above (here Ut supra.
meant or the Empyraean Heaven, is a Kingdom of Heavens.

Secondly, The Passion it self, [suffereth Violence.]

1. Suffers; Strange! can Heaven suffer? I answer, Not properly, but as it
were,

2. Violence. And what is that? It is a motion Tho. Aqu. in 5 Met. l. 6.
proceeding from an exterior agent, tending to that which by its own nature, it
has no aptitude unto: as here, what Aptitude has any of us naturally, to win
Heaven by force?

II. An Action, [And the Violent take it by force.] Where we have,

1. Actors. 2. The Action it self to be viewed.
1. Actors; [And the Violent.] In the (...).
Original, the Violent (so called in the English) are also invaders,
endeavourers, urgers, and such as press hard; as these do, who are bent for
Heaven, pressing and urging with the strongest arguments, and with all their
might, and utmost endeavors, the God of Heaven.

2. The Action it self, [Take it by force.]

1. Take it.] The word in the (...)
Original properly is spoken of wild Beasts, which take their prey; which here
is applied to Men, who take Heaven as a prey, which they pursue till they have
it.

2. By Force.] To take a thing by force properly, and commonly, is take it by
wrong. Whence in the (...)
Hebrew, Force is called by a name, which also signifies wrong and injury; and
yet here is no wrong done to any, when Heaven is taken by the Saints forcibly,
for it is their proper portion by Adoption, that glorious Habitation; and
therefore when they seize on it by might, they do what they do in it, in their
own Understand a right derived from Jesus Christ, who has a double right to
it. Author vit Bern. l. 1. cap. 12.
right, 1 Pet. 1.3.

But I desire now after all these Divisions, and Subdivisions, to come to some
Compositions, or Conclusions. And,

1. Let this be one.

1. Doct. A powerful right Teaching, and Christ-preaching-Ministry, does very
much advance the winning of Heaven by a sacred Violence.

2. Then take an other.

Heaven must be taken by an holy Violence.

For the first.

I shall raise and resolve about it these two Queries.

1. What such a Ministry is?

2. Why such a Ministry does so advance the winning of Heaven by an holy
Violence?

To the first I answer.

It is a Ministry which pours out it self in torrents of affection, lists up
its voice like a trumpet, comes to the heart in the demonstration of* the
Spirit; thunders out the Judgments of God against all that is called flesh,
and not spirit, strikes at the very root of every tree which brings not forth
fruit to God; labors mightily to desponsate souls to Christ, and therefore
holds forth none, and nothing so much as Christ.

To the second Query I answer thus, in seven Grounds.

1. Such a Ministry will cry down sin.

2. Will cry up Heaven.

3. Will cry up Zeal.

4. Will take away the Vail which is over all men's faces.

5. Will take away all excuses and vain conceits.

6. Will acquaint men with the absolute necessity of believing.

7. Will inform them of that strictness of living which Christ requires of all
that will enter into Life everlasting.

1. Ground. It will cry down Sin, according to that of Isa. 58.1. and Mat.
3.10. as thus; it will tell men, that they which do such things as they do,
commit adultery and whoredom, and all manner of uncleanness, and
lasciviousness, with greediness; do lie, steal, pour in strong drink, and will
be drunk, and glut themselves with excessive eating, live in usury, in the sin
of covetousness, of anger, of envy, of pride; without fear, without remorse,
without repentance; are worthy of death, worthy of damnation, and shall never
inherit the Kingdom of God; according to that dreadful Scripture, Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Thus such a Ministry cries out against all sorts of Sins and Sinners;
who when they hear them cry out so, what sins will they not rather miss, that
eternal Life they may not miss? And what evils will they not forsake, that
Heaven they may take? When a man understands, that either he must lose his
life, or his leg, or arm, or right hand, or right eye, though his leg be dear
to him, his arm dear, his right hand dear, his right eye dear, yet will he lose
any of these dear things, or all, rather than life; because his Chyrurgion
tells him, that else he must die: So poor Sinners, when they are told by the
Chyrurgions of their souls, that either they must lose their best beloved Sins,
which are as dear to them as their legs, their arms, their right eyes, right
hands, or lose Heaven if they will keep them; they will, with God's blessing,
do any thing rather than die; forgo any sin rather than go to Hell; lose any
profit rather than Heaven; Heaven being infinitely, absolutely, indisputably
better than both their eyes, both hands, both legs, both arms; in a word, than
all that is near or dear to them in all this worlds circumference.

2. Ground. It will cry up Heaven; as the Baptist came crying, and saying,
Repent; the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Mat. 3.2. and as Christ himself came
preaching, and saying in my Text, The Kingdom of Heaven suffers Violence; and
Rev. 21.17. which when poor souls hear, how they will be startled with Gods
Blessing; how they will come, as those, Mat. 3.6. confessing their sins, and
acknowledging their former of citances and neglectings of Life and Salvation,
and being ready to do any thing to do well hereafter, and to be saved, as
those, Luke 3.12.

Beloved, if this were a Sea-town, and a Vessel should arrive here from beyond
the Seas, and a Crier should be sent up and down to cry, That if any will buy,
and take estates worth thousands, in a goodly Country, for a small matter, yea
for nothing upon the matter, he may now be carried over in that Vessel, and
buy, and take as much Land as he will, and as cheap as he can desire; O! how
would those of your Town, who have but little or no estates, and are in want,
and have but little or no money, with both hands embrace such an opportunity,
and take such a proffer and advantage, and embark themselves to be gone, and to
take such estates in so goodly a Country, and to inhabit such stately Seats?
This now is the case of poor souls, we Ministers arrive with our Vessels, I
should say our Gospel-preaching, which we carry in earthenvessels, at your
Towns, at your Parishes; at your Temples we turn Cryers, being for that end
sent, Isa. 58.1. and bid to cry; and cry up and down in your Towns and solemn
Assemblies, Isa. 55.1. Ho, if any man will buy cheap, and take Heaven cheap, or
an estate in Heaven, worth not only thousands, but whole worlds, and desires to
have a goodly seat indeed, let him come with us, and sail with us, and go, and
take Heaven, and take it freely; or thus (as I alleged the words above) Let
him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of Life
freely: and therefore how may we suppose that poor needy souls, and such as
have no money, that is, nothing of their own to stand upon, Isa. 55.1, 2. and
have any desires to be saved, and to be so well seated and provided for, will,
by God's blessing, going with our preaching, strive and stir, and use all means
possible, to purchase such an estate, and such a stately seat, at so cheap and
easy a rate, going with us, and going away from all that they have, and from
whatsoever is near and dear to them, to be so near to God.

3. Ground. It cries up Zeal; saying, as it is written, Enter ye at the strait
Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad is the Way that leads to Destruction; and
many there be which go in thereat: because strait is the Gate, and narrow is
the Way which leads to Life; and few there be that find it, Mat. 7.13, 14. And,
so run, that you may obtain, 1 Cor. 9.24. and, be zealous and repent, Rev.
3.19. which when it is earnestly and powerfully preached and pressed upon a
people, and sounds into their ears, so awakeneth their slumbering Consciences,
as that they cannot sleep, as they were wont in their Pues, nor be quiet, but
must needs stir, and needs look about, and begin (with God's blessing) to take
the same course that Saints take, that they may take Heaven; it being with them
then, as it was with those dead dry bones in Ezekiel, for as there, when the
Prophet prophesied, There was a noise, and behold a shaking, and the bones came
together, bone to his bone, ver. 7. So here, when God's Ministers prophecy,
and preach with power, there usually will be a noise; whereas before all was
quiet, one crying one thing, another another, and behold a shaking; for such
Ministers make Drunkards, and Usurers, and unclean persons, and careless ones
shake, in their seats; and then bone comes to his bone: my meaning is this, men
come together, crying, and saying* What shall we do to be saved? as the Jailer,
Acts 16.30. Again, bone comes to his bone, in that those which are out of
joint, and out of order, and out of the Body of Christ, come to be restored,
joined, jointed, united with God, with Christ, with Christians, I mean good
Christians, that they may be saved: or thus, as when there is a fire in a
house, seen, and cried by night, men will be startled at it, and roused, and
raised; so when the Fire of Zeal is kindled in God's House, and cried, and seen
by such as were asleep, it being night and dark with them, by reason of the
darkness which is in them, they must needs be awakened, excited, troubled; like
those in Acts 2.37.

4. Ground. It will take away the For all men before they come to Christ, are
veiled; us Rebecca before she came to Isaac. Genesis 24.65. and like the Jews. See
2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16.
Vail, which is over all men's faces, in that it will make men see what they
never saw, by reason of that blindness and ignorance which was in them, opening
their eyes through the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, Acts
26.18. by the plain and light-bringing Manifestation of the everlasting Gospel,
preached as it ought to be preached, that all men that hear it, may see clearly
what they are, and how it is with them, and especially showing them the Lord
Christ, with these or the like words; Loc, the fairest of all men, Psalm: 45.2.
or, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the world, John 1.29.
which when poor sinners hear, and see, O how they are taken with it! O how it
works upon their spirits! O how they begin to long, to love, to desire to be
with the Father of spirits! and how they be ravished with the Beauties of
Christ, seeing what had not been shown and told them so before, and
considering what they had not heard so before; as it is written, For that which
had not been told them, shall they see; and that which they had not heard,
shall they consider, Isa. 52.15.

5. Ground. It takes away all excuses, vain conceits and opinions, which hinder
the coming of Christ into their hearts; for some will say, that they cannot yet
come to Christ, to be saved by Christ, either by reason of business, or because
they are entangled with a wife, I mean Mistress Pleasure or Lust; like those,
Luke 14.13, 19, 20.

And besides these, there are many in many places, who have a conceit and
opinion, that they are come to Christ already, and do believe in Christ when
they do not, but are deceived by a mist, or black ibi oculus qui per nebulam,
aut aquam inspicit, res metitur falso modo, sic animus qui per opinionis nubem.
Lips. de Constable. l, 1. cap. 5.
Cloud of confused knowledge, and mistaken grounds; now this is done away in
Christ, by a Christ-Preaching-Ministry, which brings them to, yea, into Christ,
2 Cor. 3.19. For this Ministry tells them, that no such excuses, pretenses,
lets, will serve to keep them from Jesus Christ; who is better than Ground,
better than Cattle, better than all the profits of all the world, and is
infinitely to be preferred before Wives, Sons and Daughters; for he can save
us, but they cannot, so that he may better say the words of Elkanah, than any
man breathing, or thing existing, Am not I better to thee than Ten Sons, and
better than Ten Wives, and better than Ten Livings, nay, better than Ten
thousand Worlds, if there were so many. See 1 Samuel 1.8.

Again, says this Ministry, to take down their high Conceits and good Opinions
of their present estates and conditions; You are merely deceived, as those, 2 Timothy 3.13. for you As the Disciples took Christ to be a Spirit; so they
contrariwise take that evil spirit, and his deceits, to be Christ, Mat. 14.26.
take Satan's delusions to be Christ, and a temporary or dogmatical faith for
saving Faith, having your minds and consciences defiled, and denying God in
your deeds, though you be Professors, and because you are to every good work
Reprobates, as those who want that true saving Faith, which is so far above
your temporary and dogmatical Faith, as Heaven is above the Earth, Tit. 1.15,
16.

Moreover, says this Ministry to such as think that they are in the state of
Salvation, when they are all the while in the state of Hell and Damnation; Be
not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor
Effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with mankind, nor Thieves, nor ^tous, nor
Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor ^tortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. and such are some of you. And it come to pass, says this
Ministry further (if there be any Wine-bibber in the same place where it is
exercised) When be bears the words of this Curse, that be blesses himself,
saying, I shall have peace though I walk in the imagination of my heart; to add
Drunkenness to Thirst; The Lord will not spare him, but then the Anger of the
Lord, and his jealousy shall smoke against that man, and all the Curses that
are written in this Book shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his
name from under heaven, and the Lord shall separate him unto evil, Deuteronomy. 29.19,
2021.

Now Drunkards, says this Ministry, and all ye that live, and lie in any of
the sins forementioned, Can you say, and say it truly, that such as you are in
the state of Life, when God, who is Truth it self, says you are in the state
of Death? will ye say that ye are blessed, when he says, that ye are accursed?
will you harbor a conceit that ye shall be saved, when he tells you, that ye
shall be damed? will you entertain an opinion, that Heaven is, and will be
yours without contradiction, when the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it, that
that glorious Place and Kingdom, which we call Heaven, will be kept from you to
an endless duration? O men befooled and unwise! You go to Heaven! says this
Ministry; if Toads, if Vipers, if Devils may go to Heaven, you may, continuing
in your sins, wherein hitherto you lie wallowing, as so many Sowes wallowing in
the mire, 2 Pet. 2.22. which when it fills the ears of deluded souls, it also
fills them with horror, with anguish, with grief, with trouble of mind, and
vexation of spirit, and makes them cry out as a woman in travel, desiring to be
delivered, and that by Jesus Christ, that they may be saved; and so such a
Christ-preaching-Ministry, does mightily advance the winning of Heaven by a
Sacred Violence; Understand still, if God's Blessing go with it.

6. Ground. It acquaints men with the absolute necessity of believing, I mean
of believing savingly; for says this Ministry, as Christ said once, Except you
eat the Hesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, namely, spiritually, and
by a lively Faith, ye have no life in you, John 6.53. And be that helieveth not
(namely, savingly) shall be damned, Mark 16.16. whatsoever the man be, learned
or unlearned, bond or free, rich or poor, young or old, professor or no
professor, for there is no respect of persons with God; so that if a man, being
a professor, should give all his goods to the poor, pray and prostrate himself
at and before the Throne of Grace oftimes in a day, peruse those sacred leaves
which are in the Book of God, beyond all his neighbors, soar up by his strong
elevations and high contemplations beyond the Moon, and beyond the Cassiopeia
it self, into Heaven it self, as he supposes, and talk like an Angel; yet if
he want true saving Faith in Christ, he can never live, nor be, nor mansion
hereafter with Christ, but must be without, where Whoremongers, and Sorcerers,
and Liars are, as being unworthy of Lise, unworthy of Salvation, Rev. 21.8.
which when it drums in peoples ears, they are astonished at this Doctrine; as
those, Mat. 7.28. and cry out, saying, O then, what will be come of us that
believe not! O what shall our poor souls do! O that we had Faith! O that we
could believe as these, and these, in the Son of God! O that God would look
upon us, and deliver unto us such a Faith, as he has to others! Jude 2. O that
we could obtain like-precious Faith with others! 2 Pet. 1.1. O that God would
help our unbelief! Mark 9.24. O that the time were come for us to come to the
Faith of God's Elect, which they have in Jesus! Tit. 1.1. O that by Faith we
could eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, that we also, as
well as others who believe in Jesus, might be saved! Joh. 6.53. And so such a
Christ-preaching Ministry mightily advances the winning of Heaven by a Sacred
Violence.

7. Ground. It will inform them of that strictest way of living which Christ
requires of all that will enter into Life everlasting; For, says this
Ministry, as Christ said once, Except your Righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (who yet fasted twice a week,
compassed Sea and Land to make a Proselyte, made long prayers, were no
Extortioners, no Adulterers, no unrighteous persons, such as Thieves, and
Defrauders in bargaining, and Usurers are; nay, as some write of them, lay upon
boards, not beds, by night) ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of God:
Mark; in no case, if you would give all your substance for it, would seek very
much after it, would go so far to enter into it, as that it might be said of
you, as Christ said to that young man, Thou art not far from the Kingdom of
God, Mark 12.34. so you are not far from the Kingdom of God, yet shall ye in no
wise enter, unless ye go farther, unless you go through, unless ye do more than
Hypocrites do, and be more holy, more humble, more just, more heavenly, more
patient, more devout, more meek, more sober, and more truly pious than they are.

Again, says this Ministry with St. James, James 2.10. Whosoever shall keep
the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all. Observe;
whosoever, without exception; whether he be a Jew or Christian, Minister or
Hearer, a great man or a poor man, how big soever he look, how high soever he
esteem and think of himself, nay though he be a man that is well esteemed by
all his neighbors in the place where he lives, for his almsdeeds, for his
kind carriage, for his peacemaking among them, for his square dealings with
every man, and especially for the good order he keeps in his own family, for
praying much and often, in and with his family, and apart; for reading, for
repeating of Sermons, and for catechizing his Sons, and Servants; yet if he
offend in one point, if he omit or neglect any one needful Duty, live but in
any one known sin, that one but will spoil all, and he will be guilty of all,
and so die for it without mercy; As if a man should keep all the Laws of our
Land, but kill one man, he dies for it, if he had a thousand lives, by the
Laws of the Land: So strict, says this Ministry, is the Law of God; which when
poor sinners are acquainted with, O what fears! O what doubts! O what
stirrings! O what cares it raises and causes in men's and women's hearts! and O
what sorce will not they use? and what pains, besides all them that they have
taken, will they not take, that Heaven by Violence they may take? Some have
made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, Mat. 19.12. And so I
do verily believe, that some rather than they will be cut off from their hopes
of Heaven, they will after they have heard and imbibed all this into their
hearts, and ears, cut off all their members which they have upon earth, Col.
3.5. I mean their dearest sins; as Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate
affection, evil concupiscence and Covetousness, which is Idolatry; and that
they will go as far as their legs, I mean the legs of Faith, will carry them,
even so far as to the loving of their very enemies, the giving of their bodies
to be burnt, the losing of their estates, their ease, their sinful and sensual
delights, and the incurring of the hatred of all their friends, yea, of all the
world, rather than go from Christ, and go from Life, and go from the World
which is to come.

The uses of the point will be these.

1. use, will be one of Information.

Then how desirable must needs such a Ministry be? You do all desire, and covet
to have such servants and workmen as do their work so faithfully, so painfully,
and so well, as that you may perceive, and see your selves, how much they do
advance your estates on Earth; and if so, how much to be desired then is that
painful and powerful Ministry, which does so labor to advance your spiritual
estates, and your souls, that they may win Heaven? We read, John 5.4. that An
Angel went down at a certain time, into that Pool, and troubled the waters, and
that whosoever then first after the troubling of the water, stepped in, was
made whole of what disease soever he had; and how much longed for the coming
down of such an Angel was to the people then, especially to the lame, and to
the blind, and to the impotent, and to the withered, ver. 3. I leave to you to
judge. Now every powerful and Christ-preaching-Minister, is such an Angel: so
he comes into the Pulpit; so he troubles the water, making the Word which he
preaches, to be troublesome to obstinate and impenitent sinners; and so he
causes it, by God's blessing, to become wholesome to many a poor creature, that
is blind, or lame, or impotent, or withered, which then and thereupon can, and
will, being made whole and sound, even offer a Sacred Violence to Heaven it
self, and strive to take it by force; and therefore O how lovely! O how
amiable! O how desirable! O how much to be loved and longed for, must needs be
a powerful and Christ-preaching-Ministry, and those Gospel-Angels which come to
us in the Name of the Lord! O how welcome must they needs be to sin-sick and
sin-lame souls, though they trouble them a little first, because they come with
healing in their preaching, and cure them at last, and make them to make out
for Heaven.

2. Use, is one of Exhortation.

Is it so? Then, 1. Encourage such a Ministry.

Quest. How?

I answer:

1. Hear it carefully; as Mat. 3.5. they came from all parts to hear the
Baptist preach, even from Jerusalem, and from Judea, and all the regton round
about Jordan: So when such John's teach, let all the people that can, come and
hear them, stirring up one another, as those in Isaiah, saying, Come ye, and
let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and
he will teach us his ways; for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem, Isa. 2.3.

2. Follow, and do what such a Ministry teaches; according to that famous
Scripture, Jam 1.22. But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only,
deceiving your own selves: Mark; deceiving your own selves; so that you do but
deceive your own souls, when you but come and sit before us, and do none of the
things which are taught by us; when you say, What will this babbler say? when
having heard us press the forwardness of the Saints, ye will not live as
Saints; when having been told, how ye must force Heaven, ye mind nothing less
than Heaven; when after ye have drunk in our Sermons tending to Life and Glory,
ye will not so much as wag one foot, nor stir at all, that ye may drink in
those ineffable Pleasures which flow and stream from Jehova's Face in the
Kingdom of Glory. And besides, what encouragement do ye give us, as long as ye
regard our words no more than fables, after they have been with all seriousness
and sadness, tenderness and trueness, earnestness and eagerness, powerfulness
and piercingness, faithfulness and ferventness, delivered, uttered, and
preached by us. O it must needs be a deading of our affections, a cooling of
our courage, a stupifying of our spirits, when after all our Gospel-Reports
made by us, we must take up that sad complaint of Isaiah the Prophet, Who has
believed our Report? Isa. 53.1. Wherefore as those Sorcerers which heard Paul
preach, were so affected with, and wrought upon with his preaching, as that
they kindled a fire, and burnt their books before all men, not at all regarding
the price thereof, which amounted to fifty thousand pieces of Silver, nor the
loss which thereby they sustained, because they would rather lose their Books,
and lose their Gain, and lose all their Silver, than lose their Souls, and lose
Life, and lose Heaven; Heaven being far more valued, more esteemed, more prized
of them, than all their books which were burned by them. So do ye now go, and
do likewise; ye need not kindle a fire for it, for I have kindled a fire for
you already by this my preaching; for, is not my Word like Fire, says God?
Jer. 23.29. Do ye only bring, I Will not say your books, but your sins, which I
have preached against in this Sermon, and burn them before all men; that is,
let the Word which I have taught you now, so burn them up, as that we may see
them no more, hear of them no more, be troubled about them and with them no
more; as when a thing is burnt, we are troubled with it no more: O Sirs, where
are those your books, I should say yoursins, which must be burnt? bring them
hither, and burn them here before me, in and by this Fire which I have made for
you; bring hither your Usury, your Pride, your Lusts, your Uncleanness, your
Lasciviousness, your Anger, your onvious dispositions, your idle courses, your
Drunkenness, your Gurmandizing, your Laziness, your Slothfulness, your
Covetousness, which is Idolatry, and all the evils of your tongues, which,
though little, are such unruly members; and let them all be eaten up by this
Fire which I have now kindled, crying, and saying, Lord burn up these our
Corruptions by this Sermon. O Sirs, do not your hearts already burn, as the
Disciples hearts, when Christ opened the Scriptures to them? Luke 24.32. Do ye
not feel this Fire? O that God would work now upon your souls! O that he would
blow this Fire! O that he would cause his holy Spirit to blow upon your
spirits! O that he would by his cooperation, make this Word of his, which I
preach, and which is indeed like Fire, effectual to your salvation! O that he
would make it burn up all your corruptions; and O that you would throw them all
into the midst of this Fire, to be rid of them for ever, O for ever, and would
never rake them up more! O happy day, that this day would then be for, and to
your souls! O souls, souls, now stir, now struggle, now strive to be saved,
though it be with the loss of your dearest and best-beloved sins; better, a
thousand times better will it be, to suffer such a loss now, than to sustain a
far greater, even the loss of your immortal souls* hereafter; and infinitely
better it is, not to go home with your darling-Lusts, and bosome-Corruptions
now, than to go to Hell for your sins hereafter for ever.

But I must hasten to a second Exhortation.

2. Exhortation. Esteem powerful and Christ-preaching-Ministers very highly
then, for their works sake, and love them dearly. We have a notable place for
this, 1 These. 1.12. And we beseech you, Brethren, to know them which labor
among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake. Catherina Senensis, did so prize, so
estimate, and so affect such Ministers, as that she would kiss their very
Vestigiaes, and the ground whereupon they did go, as they passed through the
streets: I do not say that you must do so too, but only that you may do well to
afford them the embraces of your love, and the honor of your high esteem,
according to the aforementioned Apostolical Speech; which may command the
obedience and submission of you all thereunto.

3. Exhortation. Let them do nothing else then, or but little else than preach,
and do you free them from all worldly cares, and distractions, by a sufficient
maintenance afforded unto them, and by taking care for them, that they may take
the more care for you, and that without distraction; it is pity, a thousand
pitties, that that Pilot which has carried many Ships to Sea, and over the Sea
safely, securely, successfully, should do any thing else, but carry Ships to
and fro, from Port to Port, from Country to Country, from Land to Land; so it
is great pity that that Minister, which powerfully and successfully preaches
Christ, and thereby advances much the taking of Heaven by a Sacred Violence,
filling his Sails, I mean his Sermons, with the choicest Matter that he can
possibly sind out by the reach of his invention, and bringing many souls to
Glory, should do any other thing than preach, and teach, that so doing, he may
carry many a Vessel of Mercy, and many a Vassal of Sin and Misery, over those
Seas of Duties, which they must sail over to that Haven of Happiness, which is
called Heaven: Into which God of his infinite Mercy, bring us all. To himself
alone be all Praise and Glory.

The second Doctrine follows.

2. Doct. Heaven must be won by an Holy Violence.

For the illustration whereof, I shall propose, and resolve these two Problemes.

1. Prob. What an Holy Violence used for Heaven is?

2. Why Heaven must be won by an Holy Violence?

To the first, I answer.

That it is a forcing of Nature against Nature; a laying hold on God; a
pressing into the Presence of God for God; it is praying with all our might;
grapling with Satan to overthrow all his might; militating with Heaven for
Heaven, that we may tower up into Heaven, and win Heaven, there to sing, there
to rejoice, and there to triumph, for our there-enjoyed Felicity to all
Eternity; we being taken up, when we have taken it, into that glorious KINGDOM,
which surpasses all the Kingdoms of the world for its Puissance, Grandeur,
Magnificence, Splendour and Glory, it being the very Kingdom of Glory.

2. Prob. To the second, I answer.

That it must needs be so.

1. Answer or Reason. Because Heaven lies so far away from us, and the King
thereof is as a Man of War; Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a Man of War. Now, were a
little Army to march as far as China, which is Fifteen times as big as all
France, and is part of the East Indies (which is a great way off) and whose
King never takes the field, as they Speed reports this of him.
write of him, under Five hundred thousand men at his heels, I say, were this
little Army to take that great Kingdom, what need would there be of forcing the
men of that little Army to make them go! scarce any would go, unless he be
pressed, and forced to go: and again, how would those that go, be forced to
force themselves, and to force that King, and to force his Kingdom to win it.
This is our case; Heaven is much like that Kingdom of China, for it is a great
Kingdom also, nay far greater, it lies a great way from us; it has a King
which is called The Lord of Hosts, it is wholly at his command, and it cannot
be overcome unless he be overcome; nor won, unless he be won; and we that are
to take it, are but a little Army, called a (...).
little, little Flock, Luke 12.32. and therefore you may well imagine, what
striving, what forcing, what urging, what presling, what contending there is
required of all us that will be saved; and what a Violence we must offer to
Heaven, before we can win Heaven; and how we must be forced to go, before we
will go to Heaven: O Sirs, do not you find it so by your own experience? do ye
not see how ye must constrain your selves to Duties, and in Duties many times?
do not ye take notice of it, how you must even frequently, and most earnestly
wrestle with the King of Heaven for Heaven?

2. Answer. By reason of the many Enemies that lie betwixt us and it; as namely,

1. High soaring and self-exalting imagination are betwixt us and it, 2 Cor.
10.5. which will keep us low, unless we bring them low, and will not suffer us
to ascend, unless we make them to deseend.

2. Powers and Principalities, Ephesians. 6.12. Mark: Powers; not weak ones, but
strong and mighty Adversaries; again, not petty ones, but Princely ones, and
Proud ones, as standing upon their Greatness, even Principalities; which is
more than if the Apostle had said, Princes; and those must be vanquished by
such weak, silly simple creatures as we are; O the striving then! and O the
stirring that will be required of us, if Heaven shall ever be taken and
conquered by us!

3. Rulers of the Darkness of this World, in Ephesians. 6.12. which will absolutely
keep us out of that other World, unless we put and keep them down in this
World, and will rule us, so as to mke us lose Heaven for ever, unless we
overruled them, and so take Heaven by force.

4. Ephesians. 6.12. (...).
Spiritual wickedness in High places. The Original is, Wicked Spirits in
Heavenlies; which some understand of our Heavenlies; that is, in our heavenly
Duties of Prayer, of Fasting, of Meditating, and the like; for in and about
these heavenly Performances, those wicked spirits are most busy with us,
either to hinder us in them, or from them, or to make us proud upon them; all
which Spiritual Wickednesses must go down, if we shall go up.

The Uses of the Point will be these.

Then, 1. Be informed. 2. Be convinced. 3. Be startled. 4. Be diswaded. 5. Be
persuaded.


I. Use. Be informed. And,

1. Of the Power of Religion; for one should think that the hearing of this
should quench Religion, and put it down; as one would have thought, that the
fire which fell from Heaven, would have been quenched by the water which was in
the trenches. 1 Kings 18.38. but as that Fire was not put out by all that
abundance of water; so Religion will by no means be extinguished, or put out by
all that abundance of difficulties, of oppositions, of powers, of enemies,
Superbia tumidis invidentia lividis, fallacia callidis a justitia penitus
alienis. August. de Civ. Dei. l. 8. c. 22.
proud and crafty, and fraighted with envy and malice, which it meets with, and
must overcome by force to win Heaven; no, no, but it will bear up for all that,
and stand to it, and even dare to look the proudest and the stoutest enemy it
has in the face, to encounter him, and to overpower him; For it is of the same
resolution, that famous Captain Paraenetical Treatise to the Princes of Europe,
page 26.
Ferras was of, always bearing arms against the greatest Emperor of the
world: O it is a strong, a stout, a mighty thing, this Religion! neither Men,
nor Devils, nor Death, nor things present, nor things to come can overmatch it.

2. Of the strange Wisdom of God. A Father does not count it wisdom to tell his
Daughter, whom he intends to prefer to a rich Man, that he is hardly to be
pleased, and very strict, and one that looks narrowly after every thing (and of
the troubles of such a marriage) though he hear so much of him, because that
would discourage her utterly. So Generals are not wont to tell Novices, and
young Soldiers, of the dangers and hazards of War, of the impregnableness of
their Enemies Towns, of the height of their Walls, which they must scale, of
the puissance, multitude, and sierceness of their Enemies, but rather of their
weakness, and effeminateness (as Curtius.
Alexander the Great did, when he encouraged his men against the Persians) lest
they should be disheartened: But the Wisdom of God is wiser than the wisdom of
men; for he, because he knows that hardships and difficulties foreshewn, do put
men on hazardous, bold, and venturous attempts; therefore tells us beforehand,
that it is no easy thing for a man to please God; that he does most narrowly
look after every Soldier of his, and after all his doings; that Heaven cannot
otherwise be taken, but only by Violence; and that therefore it is one of the
hardest things in the world for any man to go about it. O Sirs, observe then,
this great, this strange, this to be admired Wisdom of our God; who knows full
well, that if he should not foretell us so much, we would be apt to say then,
when we meet with dangers, with enemies, with difficulties, Non putaramus; that
is, We did not think so; and so would basely and cowardly turn faces about, and
run away. It is said of Laban, that when Jacob expected to have Rachel to be
given him, to be his wife, and found that it was Leah, he told him, It must not
be so done in our Country, to give the younger before the firstborn, Gen,
28.26. So, whereas men look for Rachel still, that is, all things fair, God
contrarily tells them of Leah; that is, of things which are not so pleasing to
them, not being so fair in their eyes; and says in plain terms, as Laban said,
It must not be so done in this Country, or in this world; to give men Rachel
(I should say Heaven) before Leah; that is, before they have been matched up
first to hardships, and used to things which they like not: Rachel is reserved
for the last place, and Leah for the first. O the infinite and incomparable
Wisdom of God in all this! for he knows that plain-dealing is best: Satan deals
with the Sons of men far otherwise, for he tells them of nothing, but of all
fair first; and afterward, when he has them at an advantage, and thinks that
he can make them irrecoverably fall, of all bad, all lost, and therein he
places and centers a great deal of his Serpentine wisdom: but the most wise God
holds it better, and takes it to be far greater Wisdom, to tell men of the
worst first, and of the best next, because that usually speeds best; and
therefore let us here take up that rare Admiration and Exclamation of the
Apostle, of and about the Wisdom of God; Romans 11.33. O the Depth of the Riches
both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments,
and his Ways past finding out!

3. Be informed, that no wonder it is therefore that so few are saved; as it is
asserted, Mat. 7.13. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which
leads to lafe; and few there are that find it.

Some wonder, that of six hundred thousand men, that went out of Egypt, but two
should enter into the Land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 1.36, 38. Numb. 14.38. But a wonder
it is rather, that any did enter; for there, they heard were Anakims, huge
Giants, Walls reaching as it were to Heaven, Chariots of Iron, Deuteronomy. 1.28.
Josh. 17.16. And so it is more to be admired, that any one man is saved, and
enters Heaven, than that but a few; for between us and it there are Giants
also, that is, tall and mighty enemies, stronger than we; and men whose teeth
and necks are like Iron; like those in Dan. 2.19. Isa. 48.4. and whose brows
are of Brass; ibidem; and there are betwixt us and it, Walls, as it were,
reaching to Heaven; that is, such difficulties, and such obstacles, as seem to
be insuperable, and such as cannot be overcome by us. When Chrysostom. ad pop.
Ant. hom. 40.
St. Chrysostom preached once at Antioch, he had these dreadful words in his
Sermon; How many do ye think there may be in this our City (now Antioch was an
exceeding great and populous City) which shall be saved? it will be very
offensive what I shall say, but yet I will speak it; There may not be among
these thousands, one hundred; nay; of them I doubt also. And what would he say,
if he did now live and preach among us?

Augustine in Psalm. 48. p. 528.
So blessed Austin, in one of* his Sermons upon the Psalms, makes this speech,
This People which in the midst of God's People, obtained mercy of what number
was it? O how few are they! scarce any. And will God be contented with so few,
say some, and destroy such a multitude? this they say, who promise themselves
that which they never heard God say. How many be they that seem to keep God's
Commandments? scarce will one, or two, or exceeding few be found; and will God
save only these few? and damn all the rest? Far be it, say they, when he shall
come and see such a multitude before him, and at his left hand; he will show
mercy then, and grant his indulgence. Truly this same thing did the Serpent
once promise the first man; Thou shall not die. Thus that holy Man. And no
wonder that both he and we say so, for as much as you see what a Force and
Violence is here required of every man and woman that will be saved. But I had
almost forgotten here to insert that dreadful Relation which one makes touching
this matter, saying, Considerat. of Eternity, p. 285.
Hieronymus Plautus reports of a certain woman, that hearing Bertoldus, a
powerful man in the Pulpit, inveigh very much against a sin that she knew her
self guilty of, fell down dead in the Church; after a while, by the blessing of
God upon the Prayers of the Congregation, coming to her self, related unto them
what she had seen in this trance, saying thus; Methought I stood before Gods
Tribunal, and sixty thousand souls more with me, called together from all the
parts of the world to receive their final sentence; and they were all judged
and condemned to eternal torments; but only three excepted. O what a fearful
thing was this! I should hardly believe this woman's relation, but that I
believe Christ, Mat. 7.14. O Sirs, do ye not tremble at this? do ye not fear
then what will become of you for the most part? are ye not ready to cry out,
saying as they said, Mat. 19.25. Who then of us will be saved? But do not
marvel at it, that this is so reported, considering what a Force and Violence
there must be offered to Heaven, by every one that will win Heaven.

II. Be convinced. Whereof? That if ye take no pains, are not in trouble as
other men, Psalm. 73.5. do not strive, do not stir as for Life, to enter into
Life, but live in ease, live in delights; if you be not acquainted with the
Saints most mighty wrestlings with Jesus Christ, both night and day; if their
pressing and pricking themselves forward toward the Mark for the Price of the
high Calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.14. be a strange thing to you; if
our telling of laying siege (as it were) to Heaven, be a mere Riddle to you; if
you do not know what a life it is, which Heaven forcing-Saints live, and what
pains they ^ake, what trouble they undergo, what labors they exantlate, and
what endeavors they use to win Heaven by Force; then be convinced, I say, that
except you wheel about, and betake your selves into an other narrower circle,
and live a stricter life, you will never enter into Life. Here let me use this
fit Comparison; Were a Traveller, being purposed to travel into a goodly
Country, told by a skilful Guide, that in the way to it, there are many
Mountains which he must go over, raggy Rocks which he must climb over, huge
Waters which he must pass over, and withal, whole Brakes of Pricking Thorns,
and piercing Briars which he must make his way over, and instead of all this,
should find the quite contrary in the way which he takes and chooses, should
meet with no such Mountains, no such Rocks, no such Waters, no such Thorns,
should see nothing but pleasant Meadows, fair Gardens, fragrant Roses, and all
plain, would he not say, Surely I am out of the way, for this is not the way I
was told of, here is no such thing as was declared unto me? Now, my Brethren,
ye are purposed to go to that goodly Country, which is called Heaven, or
Heavenly, Heb. 11.16. are not ye? But do ye know the way, and what a way it is?
if not, I will tell ye; It is a way bestrawn with Thorns, and not with Itaque
ne imposterum quidem Lipsi rosas cogita Sosamum, aut papaver, sed spinas,
sicas, absinthium, et acetum. Lips. de Constable. l.1. c. 10.
Roses; with labors which are like Briars that prick, and not with Lillies
which toil not, Mat. 6.28. a way full of Mountains; that is, of high and
mountainous services; of Rocks, that is, of difficulties; of Rivers, of Waters,
that is, great tribulations: and therefore if any of you meet with nothing
here, but with pleasures, with delights, with ease, with all fair, all plain,
all sweet, and with no wormwood, no bitter, no gall, no difficulties, no
thorns, and live a lazy life, let him say likewise, Truly I am out of the way
which I should go; for this is not the way which was shown me; sure, sure it is
not the way to Heaven; and therefore if I go on thus, I shall never come to
Heaven. Thus be convinced.

III. Nay, be startled and astonished; as the Disciples, Mat. 19.25. when they
heard what a hard thing it was for a Rich man to be saved; the Text says, They
were exceedingly amazed; saying, Who then can be saved? So be you, because it
will go very hard with you, and because you must sweat and toil, and labor
very hard before you can possibly be saved. Beloved, were ye in a deep and
desperate Consumption, and to go against a hill as high as Caucasus, that
highest Mountain of Asia; were ye like Pigmies, and yet to sight with a great
Dragon; were ye as little Lambs, and yet to graple with Lions; were ye, being
so little, to take a City kept by a mighty Warrior; were ye told by the way,
that ye must in your way, or march, break through an Army of Giants, who have
destroyed thousands and thousands, and that very few have yet escaped them
alive, how would ye be startled at it; saying, O how shall we poor silly
creatures escape those mighty creatures whom they call Giants! O we shall
never! This is just our case; we here present are, as it were in a deep
Consumption, and have but little flesh, I should say, strength about us; as it
is written, Thou have a little strength, Rev. 3.8. and yet must go against the
highest hill that is; I mean that holy Hill spoken of, Psalm. 15.1. We Pigmies
are to wrestle with a Dragon, I mean that old Dragon, the Devil, who of a
Serpent is become a Dragon by his long standing, and growing in subtilty, and
cunning; for he has had almost six thousand years experience, and thereby has
gotten a Cui mill nocendi arts. Hieron. ad Hesiod. de vita Eremit.
world of skill and cunning to hurt us: We Lambs are to graple with Lions;. I
mean Satan's Angels, and must take Heaven kept by a King, who is styled a man of
War, Exodus 15.3. and break by force through an Army of Giants; I mean spiritual
Wickednesses in High Places, Ephesians. 6.12. who have slain millions, and few yet
did ever escape their hands; and they that freed themselves from them, and were
saved, were delivered and saved merely by a miracle of mercy: wherefore be out
of measure astonished, especially if you be far from being such Wrestlers, and
Pain-takers, and Force-inferring, and Violence-using-Christians as ye ought to
be, and cry out, saying, O then, who of us can be saved! who, O who of us that
live such an easy life can enter into Life! And as for you that take pains,
and use violence to take Heaven, yet be amazed at this, and say, O how hard
will it be for us also to be saved, for of the very Righteous it is written,
that even he is scarcely saved! 1 Pet. 4.18. O the Dissiculties that we must
pass through before we can, or ever shall pass into Life, even. Life Everlasting!

IV. Be diswaded.

1. From rash censuring; If a Brother be fallen, be foiled, be overtaken in a
fault, be not too bitter against him, nor too censorious; for we walk in a very
narrow, narrow way, nay but upon the edge and brink, as it were, of a Hill, or
Rock; yea, if we be such as we ought to be, and do as we ought to do, we do not
only travel in such a narrow way, but meet with those that will jet us, and go
to throw us down; I mean those Powers, Ephesians. 6.12. and therefore even a godly
man may be soon down, and fall grievously; witness David; so that we must not
be so forward as we are apt to be, in Non sic judices proximum, sed magis
excusa, et dicito apud temet ipsum, vehemens fuit nimis temptatio. Basil. Sermon.
40. super Cant. fol. 145.
judging. See Mat. 7.1.

2. From s^aring. And,

First, If ye be Aliens yet from that strictness of living, and from that
Forcing which here is required, and fearful withal, then cease to be so; for
fearful ones are not fit for such an employment, nor indeed can be saved, if
their fear be slavish only, and bear sway; as you may see Rev. 21.8. But the
fearful shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone.
And therefore as Gideon made a Proclamation in his Camp, Judge. 7.3. Whosoever
is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from Mount Gilead; So I
proclaim this day, and here in this place, and in these your ears, Whosoever
among you is fearful, and yet hopes to vanquish all his enemies, which are
many, and mighty, being Rulers and Princes, which as Princes have many
soldiers and subjects under them, Ephesians. 6.12. even Improbos spiritus et
homines pessimos. Aretius.
wicked spirits, and most wicked men, and to win Heaven, let him early and
betimes depart from his hopes, unless he will depart from his fears.

2dly, So if you be of the number of true Forcers and Endeavourers to take
Heaven by Violence, but are pestered with a multitude of fears mixed with your
confidences, though not allowed, I shall say unto you as Christ to his
Disciples, Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers pleasure to give you
the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. even that very Kingdom which you are going to take by
Violence; for the Violent, says Christ in my Text, take it by Force. Your fear
is that you will not be able to hold out; but what says the Apostle, Being
confident of this very thing, that he which has begun a good work in you, will
perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.6. And besides, rather than
you should fail, or fall away, I say moreover, that God will either end your
Aut cito mors veniet aut victoria laeta Horat.
days before, or your dangers, and then you will be no longer Soldiers in
Armor, but Gown-men in long white Robes, Rev. 7.9. having Palms in your hands,
and Crowns on your heads, as Conquerors; according to that of Paul, I have
fought a good fight, and have finished my course, from henceforth is laid up
for me the Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall
give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them that love his
appearing, 2 Timothy 4.7. O Sirs, how should this cast out Fear? It is true, we
deserve no such thing, no, no; and our Doings and Wrestlings and Forcings come
infinitely short of that height and heat of Zeal which is required of us: but
let us comfort our selves with this, that by his Mercy he saves us, and not by
works of righteousness which we have done, Tit. 3.5. For my part, when I take a
full view of my self, and consider my ways, and my great and mighty failings,
am forced to say this, That I obtain Heavon and the Bliss thereof, as a
felicity which I can neither think to deserve, nor expect as my due; For these
two ends of us all, either as rewards, or punishments, are mercifully ordained,
and disproportionably disposed unto our actions; the one being so far beyond
our deserts, the other so infinitely below our demerits.

V. Be persuaded then, if you would win Heaven, to force, 1. Your selves. 2.
The Kingdom of Heaven it self. 3. The King thereof himself.


I. I do not intend by this, to sow the seeds of Pelagianism, as if man had
free will and power in himself, and of himself to believe, to repent, etc. but
only to put men upon endeavors to be used with God, for God; according to
Phil. 2.12, 13.
Your selves, in, 1. Believing. 2. Repenting.


Quoties enim bona agimus, Deus in nolis atque nolis cum ut operemur operatur.
Council. Araus. 2. Can. 9.

3. All the Duties of your high Calling.

First, Believing, for there you must begin, because Faith is the mother-Grace,
and the mother-Vertue, from which all other do spring; and without which our
best actions are all sins, Romans 14.23. When Lucianus in Scytha.
Toxants saw his Countryman Anacharsis in Athens, he said to him, I will at
once show thee all the wonders of Greece, Viso Solone vidisti omnia; that is,
In seeing Solon, thou see all, even Athens it self, and all the Glory of
Greece. Semblably, whereunto I may say to you, That if you have Faith in
Christ, you have more than all the Wonders of Greece, even all the wonderful
Gifts of Grace. Grace your souls therefore, O dear Christians, with this rare
and heedful Gift; and begin here, striving and laboring mightily to believe in
Jesus, that you may be saved by the Faith of Jesus: O cry for this great Grace,
as Children cry for Milk, because they live by it; cry and say, Lord help us to
believe: And then strive more particularly to believe verily, and forcibly;
that is, whether the flesh will give way to it, or no, that Christ will I use
this expression the rather alluding to our Marriages, because God himself uses
it to set forth believing, and because it is most taking.
marry you to himself, and thereby save your souls; for that is one of the
principal acts of Faith, to believe this, in that we are said to be married to
God in Faith, Hos. 2.30. and by it, come to be one with God, and God in Christ
with us, that we may be saved; even as two married persons, by marriage come to
be one: See John 20.21. where this Oneness, or Unity, and Believing, are so
conjoined.

But here I must resolve a great Question.

Quest. Suppose we should be persuaded by you to force our selves thus to
believe, will Christ have us if we will have him?

Sol. O yes, for you have his Promise for it, which brings me to the principal
thing that * begets Faith, and without which we cannot To expect Faith without
a Promise, is as if we should expect a crop of Corn without seed: For the
Promise, is an immortal Seed, whereby the Spirit begets Faith. The Author of
the Poor doubting Christian drawn to Christ.
expect any true Faith, even the Word of Promise.

Quest. Where is that Promise?

Answ. In the Prophet, Hos. 2.9. And I will betroth thee unto me for ever: And
ver. 20. I will even betroth thee unto me in Understand the Grace of Faith
bestowed upon us. Jun. Tremel. in loc.
Faithfulness. Do ye hear this, O poor souls? In the Uses premised, I suppose
ye were startled, and troubled not a little; for, for that end they were
fitted, that thereby you might be For none can prove or show president, that
Faith was wrought in an instant at first, without any preparation going before.
Rogers of Dedham, in his Doctrine of Faith. p. 63.
prepared for this, which puts you upon believing: But now be comforted, and
now be persuaded, that Christ will have you, if you through the Riches of his
Grace will have him: O Sirs, you may believe him, that what he promises, he
will do, for it is impossible son God to lie, Heb. 6.18. Now here, you here and
see his Promises; here it lies in this Book; here I show it to you, showing
you the Book, the Chapter, the Verse wherein it lies, and shines and sparkles
above the brightness of any Ruby or Diamond. O believe, believe only; for why
should ye not? If a woman have a man's promise that he will marry her, she
believes him because of his promise; and will ye not believe God; having his
Promise? Man may lie, and often does lie; but God cannot, therefore give credit
to his Word, and be married to him in Faith, and so make an end once of that
great match which has been so long hanging betwixt Christ and you. O cry to
him, and say, Lord, I see thou will needs have me, and therefore I will have
thee, and no other, for my dear and everlasting Husband; O come Lord Jesus, and
marry me this day in Faith and for ever; O for ever, for so thou have promised
me.

Here give me leave to give you a Caveat about the Lord's Promise. The Promise
is likea Staff; and you know the backside of a man's hand cannot take a Staff,
but let him turn the palm of his hand to the Staff, he may take it; so turn the
right-side of your souls to the Lord's Promise, forcing them to believe, as
Abraham, against hope, Romans 4.18. that is, though you have but little, or no
hope, when you look upon your selves, and upon your great unworthiness, yet in
hope, when you look upon God's unparalellable Goodness, and his, by you,
undeserved Kindness, and you may take it; but we turn the backside of our
hearts to the Promise, when the heart says, O my stubbornness! and O my
unworthiness! this is the wrong-side of the heart; and this will never let you
take Christ, but rather be a let to you, which will ever hinder you from
marrying Christ, and from believing in Christ; therefore beware of it. But I
desire to use one artifice more, to draw you unto Christ, so as that this very
time, you may by God's Blessing come to believe in Christ. I Will deal with you,
as they dealt with Rebecka, when Eleazar was come to her to have her married
unto his masters Son, they called for the Damsel, and asked her, Will thou go
with this man, Genesis 24.58. So will I call to you now, being come for you to
marry you to my Masters Son, even to Christ, that heavenly I saac, will you go
with me? will you follow me? Will you come after me to my Masters Son, Christ?
I mean the Son of God; Formerly I did but persuade you, but now I come nearer
home to your hearts and bosoms, and ask you what you will do, expecting an
answer: answer therefore, O ye men of T -- and all you that hear me; and answer
every one of you in his heart, what ye intend to do; lo, I give you time, what
say ye? will ye go, or not? believe, or not believe? be married to Christ, or
not be married? if you have a mind to it indeed by an overruling hand, and
Power of God upon you, though flesh and blood be utterly against it, and say
nay to it, yet do you say as Rebeccka, now after all this, every one of you, I
will go, I will go. ver. 58. come what will come, though all my friends be
against it; though my unbelief do gainsay it; though my sluggish flesh do
diswade me from it; and though sin and devils do as much as they can oppose me
in it, O sweet Jesus, lo I come, though it be long first, yet now at last I
come to take thee for my most dear and only Savior, Lord and Husband; O take
me sweet Savior, and let me be thine, and be thou mine; as it is written, My
Beloved is mine, and I am his; yea, and feed me among the Lillies; that is,
with thy Lillies; or celestial Consolations, which for their cooling and
refreshing, are like Lillies, Cant. 2.16. O souls, souls, is this your mind?
your purpose, your resolution this day? if it be, then say all of you Amen to
it, in your hearts, I entreat you, and bespeak you about it once more. O my
God, if this people have such an heart given them this day, then blessed be thy
holy name for it, now and for ever; if not, give them such a heart now, before
I leave them, that by believing and loving, they may be in thee, and thou in
them, I humbly and heartily obsecrate and beseech thee.

II. Repenting; that is, sorrowing for sin, and confessing, and forsaking of
sin: which parts of true and sound repentance in this place, I chiefly aim at,
the one making us lower then we were, the other better, both are bitter; but
better it is for all to taste of their bitterness now, than to suffer for the
want of them hereafter.

1. Force your selves therefore to mourn, to grieve for your great and grievous
sins now in this world; according to that in Joel 2.12, 13. that ye may not
suffer for them in the world to come: nay, come, let us all weep and lament
together, as we have all sinned together, that God may comfort us at that day,
and wipe away our tears from our eyes; as it is written, Blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted, Mat. 5.4. and God shall wipe away all tears
from their eyes, Rev. 7.17. Now, our tears may do us good, being shed for sin;
but if we forbear weeping till we come to the place of weeping, Mat. 24.51.
what will that weeping then avail us? O nothing, nothing. When that great
sinner, Mary Magdalen, wept, it was here, and it was for her great offenses;
and that made her so famous as she is, Luke 7.38, 50. O let her fame inflame us
therefore, that we may weep so likewise, and that our end may be like hers,
though she was a sinner, Luke 7.37. When Amphilochius, apud Vossium de vita
Ephr. p. 16.
St. Basil asked Ephreem, why he relused to be a Preacher, he said, Because he
was a sinner; unto whom St. Basil replied, I would to God I were such a sinner:
And so well were it for we, if we were such sinners as she, and others were,
who so wept, and so repented.

Again, Now force your selves to leave what formerly ye did love, your sins I
mean, which were as dear to you as your lives; and to confess them, according
to these noted Scriptures, Jer. 3.12. Only acknowledge thine Iniquities: and
Isa. 1.10. Cease to do evil. I join both Confessing and Leaving together: for
so does God himself, Prove. 28.13. and therefore do not you put them assunder,
but confess and forsake. Among Men, he that confesses, dies; but here, and
before God, he that confesses, lives. So he that forsakes; Prove. 28.13. He
that covers his sins, shall not prosper; but he that confesses and forsakes
them, shall have mercy.

Now, when I say confess, I desire to be understood thus; confess with A
Corollarie for Deprecations to be added to our Confessions.
Deprecations, added to your Confessions as a Corollary; like Daniel, who so
confessed, Dan. 9.4, 19. As thus, Go and spread a Catalogue of all your main
and known sins (having one in readiness before the Lord) and say, thus and thus
we have done. Here descend to Particulars; and when you have so done, cry and
say with Daniel, O Lord hear, O God forgive. And it shall come to pass, that if
you shall so confess your Iniquities, and the Iniquities of your forefathers,
and your uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled, that the Lord will remember his
Covenant made with, and Promise made to his People, that he will forgive their
Iniquity, and remember their Sin no more, Lev. 26.40. Jer. 31.31, 34. 1 John
1.9. Your fleshly hearts will be drawing back, as being very unwilling to
confess so, even so much, and all that they know, for that is tedious to them;
but do ye make them stand to it, and to hold out to the end of this great and
mighty Work, and so labor to take Heaven by Force: And when that is done
according to your minds, then forsake what you have confessed; according to
that fore-alleadged passage, in Pro. 28.13. and do even with much indignation,
and detestation, cast off the works of darkness, and walk for the future
honestly, as in the day; not in Ryotting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and
Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying; for it is high time to awake out of
sleep; the night is far spent, the day is at hand; according to that of the
Apostle, Romans 13.11, 12. O precious! O blessed! O wonder-working Scripture! for
this Scripture it was which so much advanced blessed Aug. Confess. 1.8. c. 1, 2,
3, etc.
Austin's to-be-admired Conversion; when in his Hoast's Garden, he heard a
Voice, saying, Turn and read; and he had turned to that place, and read it, and
wept, and cried, and was fallen all along under a Figtree, and had said, Why
not now Lord? why not now? O my Brethren, as he did then being moved by that
Voice, so do you, turn to this Scripture; read it; and having read it
deliberately, either in a Garden, or in your Closets, and Chambers, fall all
along upon your faces (I have done so my self in the like case, and in the
beginning of my Conversion) and cry, and weep, and say, How long, Lord? how
long? Why not now? why not now? O let this be the last day of our shame: O now
let us be converted, now changed, now metamorphosed, now altered: Here be
extraordinarily earnest; for the Conversion of a Sinner is a greater work than
that of the Creation, as August. apud vegam in Jer. 31.18.
Divines affirm, and no less than a miracle, even a stranger miracle than it
was in the beginning to make the World; for there was nothing to hinder God in
creating the great World; but in renewing this our little World, besides our
own natural corruption, all things on earth, all Devils in Hell, are ready to
withstand him. Therefore cry again, and say with Ephraim, every one of you,
Lord turn me, and I shall be turned, Jer. 31.18. And if your sluggish hearts
would have you to make an end before you have your errands end, and would be
gone, force them to stay, and make them to make an end; that is, do not give
over crying, and praying for your Conversion, till you be converted; nor let
your hearts depart from the place, till you can and do depart from sin, and so
cast off sin, which else will cast off you; and put off the works of darkness,
which else will throw you into utter darkness, where there is weeping and
gnashing of teeth for evermore. O Sirs, I have put you upon a hard task, but
For it is like necessity, which (...); as Thales.
Force will go far with it; and therefore force your selves to it. O my God,
work upon this Peoples hearts, and take them into thine own hand, like a
Potters vessel, and break them in pieces; and when thou have so done, new-make
them, and new-create them, effigiating them after thy own Likeness, and turning
them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, I humbly
entreat thee, Acts 26.18.

III. All the Duties or Discharges of your High Calling.

1. In Resolving. Of this Resolution depends all our whole Service of God. Edm.
Bunny, p. 1.
Resolution is a mighty thing, and puts us upon action, and brings mighty
things to pass; and without it, little or nothing will be done. Beloved, What
is the reason why so many men do not travel so far as others do, nor go to wars
as thousands do? is it not because they are not resolved as others are? So that
so many thousands do not travel to Heaven, nor will war for Heaven, it is
because they are not yet resolved; For he that never resolves himself to do
well, and to leave the dangerous state of sin, wherein he lives, is far off
from doing the same: but he that sometimes resolves to do it, although by
frailty he performs it not at that time, yet is that Resolution much accepted
with God, and his mind the readier to return to the like Resolution, again to
put it manfully in execution. Wherefore as the Lord by the Prophet Hosea, bids
Israel to say, We will not ride upon Horses, nor will we say any more to the
work of our hands, Ye are our gods, Hos. 2.3. As if they should say, we will
never more be so swift, and hasty, as to rush into sin, like a Horse into the
battle, nor will we have any more to do with Idols. So do I bid you to say, and
to resolve now, here before the Lord, after all your former endeavors used,
and forementioned in the preceding Uses and Directions, We will never more, by
the Grace of God, be so wild, so fierce, so hasty, so eager in the pursuit of
sin and lust as we have been, nor will we have any more to do with those
sensual delights, those filthy and lascivious courses, those unlawful sports
those inordinate passions of anger and revenge, those vile thoughts, those vain
and unclean communications, those covetous desires and practices, those bloody
Oaths, those impure touches, those wanton gestures, those monstrous fashions;
those scarlet and crimson abominations, which were our Idols hitherto, and to
whom we said upon the matter, Ye are our God's. I add: neither will we walk one
day or hour longer in that broad way; which is, as it were, between the two
posts of delight and ease, and leads to destruction. I spoke but now of two
posts; for so some Jun. Tremel.
Expositors and Translators render and expound that place in Mat. 7.14. Enter
ye at the strait Gate; for wide is the Gate, and broad (...) Way which leads to
destruction, and many g^ in thereat; or In Sir. Translation.
per medium ejus, through the midst thereof; that is, say they, through that
space which is betwixt two posts: In which sense the Hebrew word which the
Syriack Translation here answers, is (...) apprimitur a Rab. Davide Kimchi.
Hebraorum doctissimo.
read Zach 4.12. Again, Resolve, and say here in the presence of God, and of
his holy Angels, every one of you, as Joshua once, As for me, and my house, we
will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.16. Or thus; Let all this People say in their
hearts, as God's People once with their lips; We also will serve the Lord, for
he is our God, Josh. 24.18. Nay, but we will serve the Lord, Josh. 24.21. As if
they should say, Nay, we will stand to it. O my Brethren, such Promises and
Resolutions will put a mighty tie upon your consciences; for when a man makes a
promise, he is bound, and his promise becomes a debt, which must be paid. So
that though in my former direction, I persuaded you to leave Sin; yet now again
I fall upon Sin, but in an other manner, showing how by the help of Resolution,
you may be rid of it: and the same design I have for that, which I shall speak
hereafter, concerning all those Duties which I shall press upon your
Consciences, to tie you thereunto by such a Promise and Resolution as here I
persuade you to. The Lord direct ye, and the Lord assist you in the making of
it, that ye may not only make it, but also keep it. Amen. So be it.

2. In Resisting. For though you do cry against Sin, and cry to be converted,
and resolve against sin, never to commit it more, yet will it, like an
Improbitas Muscae.
improbous, and impudent Fly, return again; and therefore must be still
resisted; as well as Satan, 1 Pet. 5.9. O dear Christians, do not you find by
experience, how since you took that great work of Resolution in hand, which I
formerly spoke of, and since you began to take Heaven by Violence, you met with
open war, as it were, within your selves, Sin warring against you in your
members: as Paul also found it in himself, Romans 7.25. and as most of the Cypr.
l. 1. c. 1. Aug. l. 1. doctr. Chr. c. 23. Greg. Mor. 4. c. 23. Cyril l. de
orat. Orighom. 30. in Exo. Hilar. in Psa. 118. Bern. in Psalm. 90.
Ancient Worthies can and do speak of it in their Books? and the reason of it
is this; for that the Devil possessing quietly your souls before, lay still,
and sought only means to content the same, by putting in new and new delights,
and pleasures of the flesh; but when he sees that ye offer to go from him, he
begins strait to rage, and to stir up your selves against your selves, and to
move sedition within your selves. This in figure was shown by the Example of
Laban, Genesis 31. who never so persecuted his Son-in-Law Jacob, until he would
depart from him. And therefore I must needs put you upon resisting. O Sirs, as
the Apostle said once to the Hebrews, Heb. 12.4. Ye have not yet resisted unto
blood* striving against sin; so may I say to most of you, with a little
alteration; Ye have not yet resisted to the utmost, and as ye ought, striving
against sin; and therefore I may well stir ye up as I do, even most earnestly,
to resisting; saying, O strive, O stir as for Life against Sin; I mean against
Pride, and against Lust, and against Passion, and against Worldliness; for all
these sins will trouble you again, and again, and again; and therefore you must
resist them again, and again. If you ask me, How? I answer as the Apostle, in
the Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. Believing verily, that God for Christ's sake will subdue
them in you, and for you: for ye have a precious Promise for it, Romans 6.14. Sin
shall not have dominion over you.

3. In Reading. Search the Scriptures, says Christ, John 5.39. and that
requires labor: for so much the Original emphatically does imply [(...);] and
that our sluggish flesh does not like: and therefore Reading and Searching is
so much neglected by us: for where be the men that will not only read, but
search the Scriptures daily? Acts 17.11. It is well if we read daily; many will
not do that.

Again, where be the Christians that will read the Scriptures in their
journies; as the Enuch; Acts 8. (who was but a Jew) in his Chariot? it is well
if we read them at home: And therefore I must needs stir you up as much as I am
able, to this most excellent Duty, persuading you all, that after you have set
up your Resolution for Heaven, and Eternal Life, you will also read as for
Life; for therein is to be had Eternal Life, John 5.39. If the flesh draw back,
do ye prick it forward; if it will not follow you, do ye follow it; if your
eyes be heavy, and will not look into God's Book as you would have them, force
them, and by that make them lively by compulsion, to read and to peruse the
Book of Life, and of Salvation. O this kind of Reading and Searching, and
Forcing! How will it Like the men of Berea, who so became Nobles, Acts 17.11.
enoble then your blood, and enable your minds to mind heavenly things? for
such are the things comprised in this Book, called the great things of the Law,
Hos. 8.12. Put your selves to it therefore, and force your minds to this most
noble exercise which will so enoble your souls.

4. In Relieving. And Relieving, 1. The Bodies. of others. 2. The Souls. of
others.


First, Their Bodies, with Food and Raiment, and such other necessaries as they
do want; according to that noted Scripture, Heb. 13.16. But to do good, and to
communicate, forget not; for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased: And that
of our Savior; Sell that ye have, and give Atms; provide your selves bags
which wax not old, a Treasure in the Heavens which fails not, where no Thief
approaches, neither Moth corrupts, Luke 12.33. Where note, that in the
(...), a nomine (...) quod ab altero nomine (...) misericordia derivatur.
Original, there is a word for Alms, which (by a Metonymie) declares the
Benefactors and Almes-givers merciful Disposition shown by his Donation, and
that he gives his Alms as he ought; who by his giving, ostends and shows
that he is affected with the misery of the Relieved: and therefore how few give
Alms, and relieve the Needy as they ought.

Again, Note here, that the Chaldeans and Syrians, and Hebrews, call Alms,
Righteousness. Which (...).
name is also retained in the Greek Testament, 2 Cor. 9.9. as it is written, He
has dispersed abroad; he has given to the poor; his Righteousness remains for
ever; to show, that Almes-giving is a piece of Justice; and that he who gives
Alms, is to observe the Rules of Justice; and to distribute to every one
according to his need: as it is written, Acts 4.35. And Distribution was made
to every man according as he had Need. And who do so? not one of an hundred. A
little will serve with many, for many. Few will do as Clerk in his Life, p. 251.
Luther; who when a poor Student came to his door begging an Alms, and his
Wife pleaded Penury, gave him a Silver Bowl: and as Idem in his Life, page 760.
Bernard Gilpin, who when he saw naked People, would pull of his Clothes, and
cloth them. Ministers had need therefore to call upon men frequently, Give
Alms, gives Alms; and give to every man as he has need. And you had need to
call upon your own souls for it; for O, how backward are they! and how
unwilling to be drawn to it! With many, every penny of money which they give,
when pressed to it, is as a drop of their blood, and they are as loath to spare
the one, as the other. But I pray you consider this, you that are so backward
to this.

That man's Estate consists of three parts.

1. Necessaries. 2. Decency. 3. Superfluity. God allows you the two former,
but requires the third for the poor. If a man refuse to part with it, he
forfeits the former too; and God oft-times takes the forfeit. But I cannot yet
so leave Charity, for it is so lovely, so comely, so exceeding goodly; O it
ravishes with its Beauty, replenishes with its Bounty, and cherishes with its
Benignity all that, need it, and come near it, where it is in truth; for it is
just like fire, for so it warms the naked, makes lightsome the sadded, and with
its comfortableness cherishes the destituted; and therefore make much of this
Fire; O let it not by any means go out, but rather go and kindle it, go and
feed it, go and keep it in; and let many be fed, be filled, be refreshed by it:
nay, let it set your selves on fire, that your hearts may burn with it like
fire, which else will be as cold as a Key, and had need therefore to be heated
with it, and inflamed by it.

Secondly, Their Souls, you must feed with your lips; according to that in
Prove. 10.21. The Lips of the Righteous feed many; namely, with wholesome
admonitions, seasonable instructions, profitable reprehensions, and comfortable
communications. O Beloved, what cause have we to inculcate this, such a time as
this, wherein so many, who profess much, yet express little of that Goodness,
that Sweetness, that Delightfulness, that Riches, that Happiness which is in
God, in Christ, in his Word, in Heaven. So as that I may well and seasonably
here take up that sad complaint which Isidore made in his time, speaking of
Heaven; Though this Kingdom be Eternal, not a word of that; for what man is
there, that spends the least part of a day in meditating upon that? that once
makes mention of that? that instructs his Wife and Children of that? all our
talk is but vain. But let this be mended; and because our bashful natures are
utterly averse from such talk, let us oppose Grace against Nature, and force
Nature, let us offer an holy Violence to our selves, and constrain our selves
to talk better, and to talk more of Heaven.

Evagrius, 1.4. c. 14.
One Writes of some Martys, that though their Tongues were cut out, yet they
did speak; and shall not we, that have our Tongues, and the use thereof lest
us, speak? Oh speak, speak one to another, and that often; as those in Mal.
3.16. and when you do speak, speak the wonderful Works of God; as the Apostles
did, Acts 2.11. or as Nil nisi castum, vel Sermo Dei ex ejus ore processi^.
Author vitae Hieronymi.
Jerome, of things chaste, and of God's Word* and begin so to do this very day,
and after this very Sermon, as they at that day. O, do not defer it any longer,
the sooner the better; the Matter in hand will furnish you with Matter, for it
is of the great Kingdom of Heaven, which must be taken by Force; and therefore
stir up one another, talking of it with your Wives, Children, Servants,
Neighbors, Fellow-Hearers, saying one to another, as Aug. Confess. 1.8. c. 1.
Austin once said to Alipius his friend, after he had heard much of some men's
taking of Heaven by Violence; What is this? What suffer we under the Tyranny of
Sin? Unlearned men (such as Authony, and others in Egypt, and Milan) do take
Heaven by Violence; and we with all our Learning without Hearts, behold how we
lie grovelling in flesh and blood; so, what do we suffer, say Heaven suffers,
and suffers Violence, and we suffer it to be taken by others, and will not take
it our selves. O! come, come, let us also offer Violence to it, that by force
we may take it, Heaven is high, but not too high for Forcers, Forcers will
carry it; Thesore let us force our selves, and do our utmost to win it. Thus
talk and speak one to another.

5. In Fasting. For turn to me with Fasting, says God, Joel 2.12. And what
eminent Fasters have most of the Lords most Renowned Saints and Servants been?
David, that man after God's own Heart, how did he chasten his flesh with
Fasting, though it was to his reproach, Psalm. 69.10. So Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles.
20.3. how did he seek the Lord with Fasting? So Daniel, Dan. 9.3. how did he
set himself to call upon his God with Fasting? So that great King of Nineveh,
how did he humble himself before the King of Kings in Sackcloth and Ashes, and
with Fasting, Jona. 3.6, 7. And what shall I more say? For the time would fail
me to tell of Joshua, Josh. 7.6. of Samuel and all Israel, 1 Samuel 7.6. and of
Esther; and of Anna, which being a Widow of four-score and four years, (to
shame many of our young and lusty people, that will not fast a day, unless it
be by constraint, and by a command from the Higher-Powers) departed not from
the Temple, but served God with Fastings and Prayers, night and day, Luke 2.37.
The like instances could be given in many others, who lived since Christ, and
flourished in his Church like the Trees of Eden; but Clerk in his life, p. 932.
Calvin only shall serve, who for ten years togegether fasted daily, and made
but one meal a day, at night, spending all his time in and about the Things of
God, and in Prayer; insomuch as that a very Rivetus reports it.
Papist writing of him calls, him in Friend Un grand jeuneur, that is, a great
Faster; and shall we spend our time in eating and drinking, and neglect so
famous a Duty? Is that the way to Heaven? Is that to offer Violence to the
Kingdom of Heaven? Because fasting is unsavory to the flesh, as making the
Belly to suffer, therefore forsooth we will not fast; but had we that sweet and
gracious appetite which the prementioned Saints had, then fasting would be as
pleasant to us as feasting; For it is the Souls feasting, because it brings
gracious Souls to the greatest dainties, and they to a taste, with which no
savouriness of Meats, no variety of Dishes, no sweetness of Wine, or Women can
be paralleled. O sweet feasting then that comes by fasting; Fast therefore, and
thereby feast your Souls often; O Beloved, and if the flesh draw backward,
force it forward, and make it to suffer; for Heaven suffers, and suffers
Violence, and why shall not our sluggish flesh?

6. In Considering, or Consideration which differs from Meditation; thus
Meditation is an Agitation, and repetition of things Langius in sua Polyanth.
p. 296. Aquin. 2, 2. q. 18. a. 3.
proceeding from reason, and piece by piece, and tending to happiness to be
enjoyed in the enjoyment of the everlasting Verity. Consideration is a more
Omnis operatio intellectus, Langius. p. 257.
general operation of the Intellect, whereby she looks and dives into things
deliberately, to find out what she desires and ought to know.

Now this consideration how needful it is, you may perceive partly by God's
express Command, in Psalm. 45.10. Hearken O Daughter, and consider; and partly
by her Operations and Properties, for she is the Key which opens the Door to
the Closet of our Heart, where all our Books of Account do lie; she is the
Looking-Glass, or rather the very eye of our Soul, whereby she sees her self,
and looks into all her whole estate, her riches, her good gifts, her defects,
her safety, her danger, her way she walks in, her pace she holds, and finally
the place, and end she draws to; and without which, in short, she runs on
blindly into a thousand brakes and briers, stumbling at every step into some
one inconvenience or other, and is continually in peril of some great and
grievous sin: and a thing much to be admired it is, that whereas in all things
else, men confess, and see that nothing can be either begun, prosecuted, or
well ended without consideration; yet in this great business of the Kingdom of
Heaven, E. B. p. 12.
no man almost thinks the same necessaty. Were a Mariner to make a Voyage from
England to Jerusalem, albeit he had made the same once or twice before, yet
would he not now take such a great Voyage in hand again without consideration,
whether he were in the right or no, what peace he held, how near he were to
Rocks and Sands which he must shun, and how near to his Voyages end; and think
you dear Friends to pass from hence to the Heavenly Jerusalem, from men to God,
from this miserable world, into that other blessed and pleasant world, and that
by so many Hills and Hells; so many Gulphs and Quicksands; so many Rocks and
dangers never passed before, and this without consideration at all; ye are
utterly deluded, if you conceive so, for this passage has far more need of
consideration then that, being much more subject to miscarriages, every sinful
pleasure, every sensual delight, every vain thought, every idle word, every
wanton look, every enticing sound, every provoking and unclean touch, and every
temptation of men or Devils, being a Pyrate lying ready to surprise, ready to
spoil your poor Souls in their Voyage toward Heaven; wherefore let me persuade
every one of you that would take Heaven by force, to force his Soul to
consideration, for the Soul is, and will be as unwilling to it as some Debtors,
who are deeply indebted, are to cast up their Accounts, to avoid trouble; for
so men count it great trouble, to enter into a serious consideration of their
estates, and of such like things, which is one of their greatest Follies; for
as in things of this Life he were but a foolish Factor, who would never look
into his own Account-book, whether he were beforehand, or behind; and as the
Mariner were very much to be blamed for his folly, that for shunning of care
and trouble, would go into his Cabin, and be merry, eat, drink, play, not
caring for his Ship which way it did run, and letting it go whither she would:
So it is madness and folly in the highest degree to shun consideration because
of trouble, and to make good cheer instead of making Heaven by consideration
sure, and to be negligent when you should be diligent; to get all things by
consideration ready against the day of your account, which you must give to
God, that you may give it up with joy, and mansion for ever with God. O good
God, stir up this peoples Hearts, that they may stir within them, yea boil, as
it were, and boil over, so as to make them considerate; and be you, O my
Brethren, now like a good Factor, who when he is sent by his Master beyond the
Seas to a place of Traffic, there to trade for his Masters benefit, does not
spend his time in eating, drinking, gaming, dancing, and such like things, but
rather goes, and considers, wherefore am I here? am I not here to do my
Masters service? And so goes about his Masters business; so you being sent by
your great Master in Heaven into this World to Traffic for him, as you may see
Mat. 25.14, 15, etc. do not spend your time idly, or doing worse; do not
drink your selves drunk with the Drunken; do no glut your selves with the
Glutton; do not dilapidate and mis-spend your precious time with Carding,
Dicing, courting of Wanton Women; do not give up your selves to Chambering, and
Lasciviousness, but rather retire your selves, and consider every one of you
with himself, Wherefore am I here? here in this place? here in this Town? has
not my great Master in Heaven sent me hither to look after his business, and to
do him service in this place, and shall I do the Devils business, and serve
him? O God forbid: Or thus, as Author vitae Bernardi.
St. Bernard was wont oft-times to call upon himself, saying to himself, Adquid
Bernarde venisti; that is, Bernard, for what art thou come hither? menning to
Claravall is, where his business lay. So say thou that hear me this day, to
thy self every day, calling thy self by thy name, John or Peter, Wherefore art
thou come hither to this Town, or Parish? Came thou not hither to serve thy
God in this place, and in this Generation, that having door the Will of God
here, thou may life with God hereafter; and so go about thy business, and
his business; thine in the second place, and his in the first; and with all
earnestness and eagerness, laboring as for life, to obtain by Force that
ever-during Happiness, and ever-blessed Life.

7. In Meditating. Meditation is with a man, as he that smells the Violets, the
Roses, and the Orange-Flowers in a bundle; which is elegantly set forth in the
Canticles, where the Spouse plaits up her Hair, trussing it up into a knot, to
show, that we should not diffuse our thoughts into variety of conceptions, nor
yet consider of diverse things only, but should recollect our conceptions,
rather into a Knot; the Knot I mean of Meditation, which I am now to speak of,
and which is so much commanded, and commended to us in sacred writ; as Josh.
1.8. This Book of the Law shall not depart out of thy Mouth, but thou shall
meditate therein day and night: and 1 Timothy 4.6. Meditate upon these things. And
you know what the blessed Man's Commendation is, Psalm. 1. That he Meditates in
the Law of the Lord day and night: Which because it is a most difficult thing
so to do both day and night, makes Meditation so rare as it is: For we
Ministers can persuade, ten, twenty, nay, hundreds, to pray, to read, to give
Alms, before we can make one to Meditate but one hour of the day; So rare is
Meditation, and so rare Meditators. David tells us, that the Law of the Lord
was his Meditation all the day long, Psalm. 119.97. And Mathias Prideaux, in his
Introduction.
one writes of one of the ancient Kings of England, that he spent Eight hours
in Meditation every day. But where are such David's, such Meditators now? Where
shall we find them, where? So that we Ministers had need to press this also
upon our People very much: and you had need to urge, to force, and to reinforce
your dead and backward souls to this very much, and often; saying every one of
you to his own soul, O my soul, Why art thou so averse from so high and
heavenly a Duty? Is this to labor for Heaven? all the day long, not so much as
to mind or mention Heaven? Is this to take it by Force? to let day pass after
day, week after week, opportunity after opportunity, and yet never once to lay
hold on any, or to redeem any part or portion of so much precious time, for any
serious thoughts to be bestowed upon Eternity?

O my Brethren, will ye therefore be discouraged from meditating, because it is
difficult work, and because few there are that do it? O far be it from such as
some of ye be, Pretenders, I mean, to the taking of Heaven by Violence: The
more difficult the work is, the greater will be your glory, if ye set your
selves in good earnest to it, and the greater your reward; for by it we turn
Eagles; and like Eagles, towr up, and draw night to the very Sun it self; the
Sun, I mean of Righteousness, the Lord Jesus; nay, by it we are even clothed
with the Sun; I mean, that Sun, like that Mystical Woman in Rev. 12.1. to whom
were given two wings, as of a great Eagle, having about us the unspotted
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus to cover our nakedness and unrighteousness; and
by it we out-soar all humane blandishments, overlook all earthly contentments,
transcend all sublunary Paradises, and emparadise our selves in the Paradise of
God, Where Fullness of Joy is, and Pleasures are for evermore, Psalm. 16.11.
Betake therefore your selves to your wings of Meditation and Contemplation
(which some say, is somewhat more and higher than Meditation) and fly aloft
like so many great Eagles, even beyond the Moon, and beyond the Clouds, nay
beyond the Sun it self, which is higher than the Moon, yea sar above all
Heavens, I mean inferior Heavens; as Christ did, Ephesians. 4.8. and strive to be
there, even by force, where he now is, having your minds, your hearts, your
conversations in that highest Empyrean Heaven. Heaven your selves thus as dear
Saints, and as other Saints have done before you, whose Conversation was in
Heaven, Phil. 3.20.

8. In Fimshing or Persevering. Be thou faithful unto Death, says Christ, and
I will give thee the Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10. and, I have fought a good sight,
says Paul, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.7. Which therefore puts me upon
Finishing: for it is not enough for a General to go into the field, and to
charge an enemy; no, but he must overcome him, to win a Crown: So we, to
overcome, and so to win the Crown of Heaven, must persevere, and hold out to
the end of our Militia; for, he that shall endure to the End, the same shall be
saved, Mat. 24.13. Hence Victory in the Hebrew, is called Netsach, [(...)] from
Nuseach; signifying he has insisted eagerly, urged vehemently, and continued
indesinently to the very end of his undertaking; for Perseverance is needful in
wars: Persevere therefore, most dear Saints, to the end, if you will have your
errands end: It is confessed, that ye will meet with many lets, many
discouragements, many taunts, many reproaches, many enemies, especially at
parting; For as a Pyrate will set upon a ship, then most, and soonest, when it
is richly laden, and near its Haven; so will Satan set upon us most busily and
eagerly then, when we being fraighted, and filled with the Fruits of
Righteousness, are near* our end: but all this must not emasculate, nor dismay
us, no, but we must keep on our pace, hold up our heads, pursue our intentions,
be instant in our prayers, be constant in all our Christian Duties, and
maintain our holy and pious Resolutions in despite of all, and be retarded by
none of them all. Our own lazy souls will draw back most, and soon grow weary
in every one of the several duties which I have mentioned formerly; but we must
not cease to put them forward still, and that by Force: imitating in this that
eminent Convert, mentioned formerly, blessed Austin I mean; whose words are
these (after he had heard so much of those Worthies, which one Potitian, a
Courtier, and a Captain, had spoken of to him, how they did take Heaven by
Violence, leading constantly a most strict, austere, and virtuous Life, and had
withdrawn himself a little) what did I not say against my self in this conflict
(for he was put thereby into a grievous strait) How did I beat and whip mine
own soul to make her follow thee, O Lord? namely, constantly; for many were her
fits; but she held back, she refused, and excused her self; and when all her
arguments were convicted, she remained trembling, and fearing, as death, to be
restrained from her loose custom of sinning, whereby she consumed her self,
even unto death. As he thus whipped and forced his own soul, so let us ours; for
have not ours their many sits and shists too, drawing back, when we are almost
persuaded, and make us give over in our several Performances of the Duties of
Prayer and Meditation, and suchlike, when we are almost over; but hold them to
it, as he did his, though they be never so averse, nay, though they do even
tremble at it, and pine at it, and would rather not be, than lose then lo^se
courses. O Christians, our Constancy will coronate all our labors, and
remunerate all our good Endeavors used for Heaven; Heaven at last will pay for
all* Wherefore let us neither faint nor fail, though never so much either
discouraged or opposed.

For a farther, manifestation and prosecution of all this that I have spoken,
I Will use this familiar Comparison; There is a Rock in the midst of the vast and
boisterous Ocean Sea, the proud Waves of which beat upon it, the fierce Winds
beat against it, those immeasurable Seas of water which are in it, encompass
it; but do either Winds, or Waves, or Waters move it; or are they able to
remove it, or to break it? No, no, they cannot; they cannot. Now a true
Christian is such a Rock: like Peter; whose Name signifies a Rock; and
therefore no Winds of Persecution, no Waves of Temptation, no Seas of
Affliction, should turn him aside from his Stedfastness, nor from his holy
Conversation, nor from his going to take Heaven by Violence; but he ought to be
as steadfast and unmovable, as others be unstable, vain, light, and variable.
We have a notable place for this, 1 Cor. 15.58. Therefore my beloved Brethren,
Be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as
much as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord. Do ye hear this
Sirs, what is required of you? do ye see what ye must be? I believe you do; and
therefore let every man here present, prove a constant man, and hold out firmly
and strongly till he be unmann'd by death, that he may be saved, and heavened
after death everlastingly; which God in mercy grant.

2. Be persuaded to force the Kingdom of Heaven it self.

Q. If you ask me How?

I answer; By a forcible Entry; striving,

1. To enter in at that strait Gate; which is called Christ.

2. To press through that narrow Way, of the difficultest and strictest of all
good Works.

3. To break through the Ranks and Files of your great and mighty Enemies, which
are betwixt you and it.

4. To pass with Courage and Patience through great Tribulations.

1. Striving to enter in at that strait Gate; which is called Christ, Mat.
7.13. compared with John 9.10. where Christ himself says, I am the Door. Many
think that it is the easiest thing in the world to come to Christ, and by him
to Heaven; but they are utterly deceived; for so strait and strict is Christ,
as that he will not allow us so much, as a look cast upon a woman to lust aster
her in our hearts, Mat. 5.28. nor any thing more in our ordinary
communications, to bind them, than Yea or Nay; saying, Whatsoever is more than
these, comes of evil; that is, as Expositors say, of an evil Conscience, or of
the Devil, ver. 37. nor any private resistance to be made against evil; for
That is, resist not out of revenge any evil offered to you.
resist not Evil, says he, ver. 39. nor any miscalling of any man, by the name
of Fool, or the like; nor yet any passionate sit of anger, or the like; ver.
22. nor any one sin, else whatsoever it be; for Sin no more, says he, John
9.11. and if thy right eye offend thee; that is, cause thee to sin; for the
Original is, Scandalize thee; and sins are Scandals; that is, Jun. in loc.
Stones at which we stumble, pluck it out, and cast it from thee; and if thy
right hand offend thee, cut it off, and cast it from thee, Mat. 5.29, 30. to
show, that Christus hyperbolice docet resecandum quicquid nos impedit, ne
obsequium Deo praestemus. Idem in loc.
any sin, though it be as dear or near as ones right eye, or hand, must be cast
away from us, if we would not be Cast-awayes our selves, nor have the doom and
sentence of Damnation past upon us. And besides, O! what a hard thing it is by
Faith to go into Christ, and to lay hold on Christ, to believe Christ, or a
Christ is nothing to that? That poor man in the Gospel, Mark 9.24. how he wept
and cried when he was to Believe in Christ? Take one Comparison more from a
Rock. A man is Ship-wrackt at Sea, but sees a fair great Rock in the midst of
the Sea, and strives to get upon it; but the Rock is high, and he can sind
nothing to hold by; and besides, when he comes very near it, the winds and
waves of the Sea beat him from it; and if with much ado he get upon it, one
wave of the Sea raketh over his head, and another, and another, and is like to
wash him clean away, and to cast him back again into the midst of the Sea. This
man is every man that goes by Faith to lay hold on Christ; for he is one that
has suffered Shipwreck, as well as others, in our Father Adam; and Christ is
like a Rock in the midst of the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.4. which this poor
Ship-wrackt-man espies, and whom to he draws, and swims, and makes to lie hold
on by Faith, to save himself in him, and by him; but Christ is high in his
terms upon which he will be taken, as ye were told just now; and besides, when
this poor man comes to fasten himself upon him, and to hold him, he can find no
Faith to hold by, and so cries out, and says, O I have no Faith, not so much
as a grain of mustard seed, and therefore how can I lay hold on Christ! O I
must needs be cast away, and be suffocated, and drowned in those merciless
waters of woe and misery which are about me, and are even ready to swallow me,
ready to drown me! O woe, woe is me because of Unbelief! for I cannot believe
that ever Christ gave himself for me: If this man be told by one of a thousand,
that he hopes better things of him, and that his striving to come to Christ, is
an argument that there is Faith in him, though it be so little as that he sees
it not; he says and replieth again, Yes, I cannot but acknowledge that some
Faith there is in me, but I fear that it is but a dogmatical or historical, or
temporary Faith, and so will by no means own any other true and Saving-Faith,
which he says still he wants: and if at any time he come somewhat near that
great Rock, Christ, and begins to have some hopes, and some confidence that
Christ dyed for him, and that he shall be saved by him, he is beaten off again
by and by, either by Satan's suggestions, or his own doubting hearts
tumultuations, so as that he is where he was again, and denies again all that
ever he spoke and thought be o^^, concerning his Faith, and Christ; crying out,
and saying, That he has no pa^ (...) Christ, because he cannot believe in
Christ* and if afterward he get with much ado ^^on that Rock, and begin to
rely upon him by Faith, and think himself sure, there comes upon him, within a
short time, such trouble of mind, and such a variety of new temptations, and
doubts, which, like the waves of the Sea, are like to take him clear off, and
to cast him back again into the Abyss and depth of that Sea of misery which he
was in before; and that makes (...) cry out again, O I shall never be saved!
for whereas I thought verily I had Faith, true Saving-Faith, I now see clearly
that I have none; and therefore must die, and be damned, and perish, and be
engulphed in an Ocean of trouble and tribulation, anguish and affliction, to an
endless duration.

This has been my very case once, and therefore I know all this to be so by
mine own experience; and I do appeal for it to your experiences also, whether
some of ye do not find it so in like manner, that it went with you when first
you believed, as with that poor man in the Gospel, whose doubtings were such,
and so many, as made him cry out with tears, Lord, help thou mine unbelief,
Mark 9.24. So that it is one of the hardest things in the world to come to
Christ by Faith, and at, and through Christ, to Life and Salvation; because
strait is the Gate which leads to Life, Mat. 7.13. Strive therefore, O strive
to enter in at the strait Gate, strive to lay hold on Christ; strive to get
Faith, saying as that poor man said, Lord help our Unbelief: nay, with tears in
your eyes, with sorrow in your hearts, with zeal as hot as fire, in your
prayers, approach to the Throne of Grace for this Grace, and never let God go,
till by Faith you can go, and go to Christ, and by Christ to Heaven. Heaven is
large, that is certain, and a man shall have room enough when he is in it: but
the Gate to it, I mean Christ, is so strait, so strict, so hard to be entered,
as that without much striving, much stirring, much struggling, no flesh can be
saved? Wherefore gird up the loins of your minds, elevate the thoughts of your
hearts, and bestir your selves at this Gate to enter; for there is no other
Name under Heaven given among men, whereby we must be saved, Acts 4.12. As for
Works, and Duties, and Performances formerly spoken of, they must all say,
Salvation is not in us: so Resisting must say, It is not in me; so Reading, It
is not in me; so Fasting, It is not in me; the like may be spoken of all the
rest. Neither is there Salvation in any other, Acts 4.12.

Object. You will say to me, Did ye not tell us of Believing, and Christ,
already in a former direction; and therefore why do ye tell us of the same now
again?

Sol. I answer: When I spoke of Believing, and of Christ formerly, my design
was to let you see the Necessity of Believing, and so to persuade you to it;
but now my purpose is to make you see the Difficulty of it especially; that
seeing what a hard thing it is to come to Christ, and by Faith to enter into
Christ, and by Him into Heaven, you may strive the more, both first to lay hold
on Christ, if never yet ye entered into Christ, and also afterward and always,
even after all the duties premised, that you may not be deceived, thinking that
thereby you may be saved; which is more than was yet declared by all that which
has been said of Faith and Christ, in the direction formerly mentioned.

2. To pass through the narrowest way of the difficultest and strictest of all
good Works; for, narrow is the Way which leads to Life, says Christ. Mat.
7.13. And do not ye find it so? What a hard thing it is to pray continually,
and without distraction; and to lift up holy hands, and without wrath and
doubting, 1 Timothy 2.8. we being so apt to defile our hands with unclean touches,
and to be at variance, and to fall out, and to be angry one with another, and
so full of doubts.

Again, What a difficult thing is it to love our Enemies, and our Neighbors as
our selves? Mat. 5.44. and 12.39. and to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is
perfect? Mat. 5.48. O Sirs, all this goes against the stream, and against
nature, and against flesh and blood; flesh and blood cannot endure it, say
carnal men; nay, even good men say as those Disciples of Christ, John 6.60.
This is an hard Saying: who can hear it? So these are hard Sayings; who can do
them. But let them be never so hard, ye must do them: and do as they do in a
certain Country, where with Horses they draw their Ships against the streams,
and against that great River of Rhine; So, I say, ye must carry on these great
Works against Nature, and against all objected and pretended Difficulties, with
Resolutions and Endeavors suitable thereunto. I speak the less here, because
this does somewhat border upon that which has been spoken already, though it
be not altogether the same, because I aim at Difficulty most in this place.

3. You must strive to break through the Ranks and Files of your great and
mighty Enemies, which are betwixt you and Heaven.

Q. What Enemies?

A. The Devil. The World. The Flesh.

1. The Devil with all his Powers, Ephesians. 6.12, whom you must oppose and overcome.

1. By the Word of Promise, Romans 16.20. And the God of Peace shall bruise (or
as the Original has it) tread down Satan under your feet shortly. Mark, 1. The
God of Peace, and yet here is War; but the God of Peace makes peace, and
therefore is called so. Again, Shall bruise Satan, according to that sweet
promise, Genesis 3.15. The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents Head; which
our first Parents so relished and esteemed, after they had once tasted it, as
that they wrote it upon Pillars, as Josephus and Melancthon in Chron. Char.
Josephus relates it, and from time to time resorted to it and them, as to
their Meeting Place, for their Souls refreshing: Or, Shall tread down Satan
under your feet; as the Elders of Israel upon the Necks of the Cananean Kings,
as Conquered. Again, Shortly; ye fear ye shall never be freed from such and
such Temptations, and from such Blasphemous Thoughts as are injected by him: It
was my case once, for I thought so too, that I should never be delivered, but
you shall, says God, and I found it so. Make much of this promise therefore,
and prize it above fine Gold, and above Rubies, and above Pearls, for it is
more worth, and more then all England is worth, and embrace it, and be
persuaded of it, Heb. 11.13.

2. By the Word Promised, I mean Christ the Word Substantial, and God blessed
for ever, for he is that Seed of the Woman which shall bruise the Serpents
Head, Genesis 3.15. He it is that has spoiled Principalities and Powers, and has
made a show of them openly, Triumphing over them in his Cross, Col. 2.15. He it
is, of whom it is said, that those which are now in Heaven, which they have won
by force, have overcome him by his Blood, Rev. 12.10, 12. And he it is, which
covers us in our Warfare against Satan, from top to toe, even throughout, with
himself, as with an Armor of Proof, Romans 13.14. It is said of Xiphilin in vita
Trajani.
Trajan the Roman Emperor, that he would cut in pieces his own Garments rather
then his Soulders should want a rag to cover their Wounds. Semblably whereunto
Christ our Emperor so covers his Soldiers with himself, lest they should want
an Armor to cover their Souls in the day of Battle; Take therefore, dear
Christians and fellow Soldiers, the Lord Christ along with you as you go to
encounter Satan, and go sprinkled with his precious Blood, and when he tempts
you, and tells you that ye shall be damned, and also entices you to
uncleanness, to lasciviousness, to wrath, to envy, to malice, to revenge, to
swear, to lie; Oppose him with Christ, and show him his Precious Blood; Saying,
Lo here is Christ, who will bruise thy Head; Lo the Blood of Christ which does
wash away all my sins, and cleanse me from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. And
lo, the mighty Power of Christ, whereby I trust that I shall overcome all thy
power, having put about me that strong and mighty Lord, that I may vanquish
thee, and conquer all these thy Temptations, in the power of his Might, Ephesians.
6.10. O Sirs! after (...) mode and method deal with Satan, and he will slay
from you. For he cannot endure the sight of that precious blood, but must needs
pass by us, and let us alone when he sees it; as that destroying Angel passed
by those Houses, whose door-posts were sprinkled with the blood of the Paschal
Lamb, Exodus 12.23. It is reported, that Satan one time came to a poor sinner
diguised, as if he had been sent by God, and told him that he must confess to
him all his sins, and that he is to write them down, and to carry them up to
God; whereupon the poor man confessed as many as he knew; but told him withal,
Write this too underneath, The Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God cleanses
us from all sin, 1 John 1.7. which when the Devil heard, he vanished
immediately: So powerful is that Precious Blood to profligate that potent
Adversary; which caused me therefore to write that very Sentence upon my Desk,
when I was under great trouble of mind, that I might always view it in my
Studies, and be comforted by it in my distresses.

2. The World. The whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. which in Latin
is rendered thus; In Maligno positus, quasi in Royard hom. 2. in Ephesians. 6.
malo igne positus; that is, Is placed in an evil Fire, set on fire by the
Devil, here called Evil: and therefore we must needs oppose it, and by no means
agree with it, though we must pass through the fire, as it were, to overcome
it: As some brave Warriors have charged their Enemies through the very Fire, in
Towns set on fire.

Object. You will say, That the World is strong and mighty, and that you find
it so by woeful experience, what a mighty enemte it is; and that therefore you
know not what to do to overcome it:

Sol. To this I answer. 1. Remember what was said by Christ, John 6.33. Be of
good cheer, I have overcome the World: So that you have to do with a conquered
slave; and therefore fear not little Flock, for you shall overcome it, because
Christ has conquered it already for you, to make your conquest easy to you.

2. Ponder the words of St. John, This is the Victory which overcomes the
World, even our Faith, 1 John 5.4. Mark; He does not say, it will, but it does
overcome the World. O the Power! O the Strength! O the Puissance of
Saving-Faith! which is so victorious, says he, as that it is a Conqueror over
the World wheresoever it is; nay, is Victory it self. If then you have Faith,
fear not, but use it, and use it against this vast, this vile, this vain, this
false, this wicked World, believing verily, that it shall not prevail against
you, because that Faith which is in you, is stronger than the World which is
against you.

3. The Flesh. For O, what an Enemy is it to all Flesh! O how it wars, how it
combats, and, how it fights against the Spirit, that the best of us cannot
do as we would! So that needs we must fight against it, and break by force
through all the allurements and oppositions of it.

Object. You will say, Why then says the Apostle, We wrestle not against Flesh
and Blood? Ephesians. 6.12.

Sol. I answer. His meaning is, as Zanchius in loc.
some say, not simply; or, as others, not Petr. Lombard, Thom. Aquin.
only; for then one Sword should be as long as an Marlorat in loc.
other, and one man so strong as an other. The Flesh then must be conquered as
well as Satan; for it is as great an Enemy to the poor soul, as he, if not
greater: which caused the Apostle Peter to write thus; Dearly Beloved, I
beseech you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from Fleshly Lusts, which war
against the Soul, 1 Pet. 2.11. O the poor soul, how it is pestered with it! For
when it would fast, and humble it self before God, the Flesh says, I must
feast, eat, drink, and be merry; when the Soul would sill it self with Heavenly
Meditations, the Flesh says, I must fulfill my Lusts, I must fill mine eyes
with Adultery, and fulfill my desires with this and that woman's company,
Embraces, Solaces; and I must be a little wanton, lascivious and extravagant
this time, solacing my self with Loves: so that this lascivious and luxuriant
Flesh of ours, must be curbed, overcome, and mastered.

Quest. You will say, But how?

Answ. By Chastity and Sobriety; For Contraries are expelled by Contraries:
Contraria, contrariis expelluntur.
Be saber therefore, I say, with the Apostle Peter, 1 Pet. 5.8. The like may be
said of Chastity, Be chaste; according to that of Paul, 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. But
I desire to insist on Sobriety most; for he that is sober, will be Sobrietas
est mentis, and sensus membrorum omnium corporis quo tutel^ castitatis;
pudicitiaeque mun mentum. Aug.
chaste also, because Sobriety is nothing else but a Sobrietas virtus est
appete^t^s per quam pra^^e voluptates, ne appetuntur quidem. Aristot. de vi^t.
et vit. Divis.
Virtue, whereby corrupt and depraved Pleasures are not so much as desired, but
rather restrained. And therefore O blessed Soberness; how my soul is enamoured
with it! O I love thee with my very heart, dear Soberness, for thou have
ravished me with one Chain about thy neck; and that Chain is a Concatenation of
all manner of rare and ravishing Excellencies, which are all linked together in
love, and make thee so exceeding lovely! O thine is freedom, and with thee is
contentment; and by thee comes a most sweet immunity from great offenses;
offenses else will come, if thou do not come, come, I mean, to keep them off.
Come then, my Brethren, and become as sober as ever were any Saints; and sober
in diet, sober in marriage, and sober out of marriage; and sober in apparel,
apparelling your selves with Humbleness; for that is well-pleasing to God. God
grant that my speech may take, so as that Heaven at last you may take.

4. You must strive with Courage and Patience to pass through fiery Trials, and
great Afflictions: for, We must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom
of God, Acts 14.22. And of the Saints in Heaven, clothed with white Robes,
says one of the heavenly Elders, These are they which came out of great
Tribulation, Rev. 7.14. And when blessed Bradford was to go to the stake, to
sacrifice his life to God by Fire, he took a Faggot in his arms, and embracing
it, said, Strait is the Gate, and narrow is the Way which leads to Life,
meaning fiery Trials, and great Tribulations. It is not so with the Wicked,
which offer no Violence to Heaven; for their way is broad; which leads to
Perdition, Mat. 7.13. God deals with them, as men with Gregor. in Job.
Oxen; as the Oxen appointed to the slaughter, are by them let run a fatting at
their pleasure, when others are kept hard to daily labor. In like manner the
Tree that bears no fruit, is not beaten (as we see) but only the fruitful; and
yet the other, as Christ tells, Mat. 3.7. is reserved for fire. The sick man
that is past all hope of life, is suffered by the Physician to have whatsoever
he lists after; but he whose death is not despaired, cannot have that liberty
granted.

To conclude, The stones that must serve for the glorious Temple of Solomon,
were he wed, beaten, and polished without the Temple, at the Quarry side, 1
Kings 6.7. that no stroke nor hammer might be heard within the Temple. Now S.
Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.5. that good Men are chosen Stones to be placed in the
glorious Building of God in Heaven; where there is no beating, no sorrow nor
crying, nor cross, Rev. 21.4. Here then, we must be beaten and he wed, and
squared in the Quarry, of this World, here we must be fined, here polished;
here we must feel the hammer, and pass through great Tribulations: and that
requires our Courage and Patience upon the consideration of Heaven, which will
make amends for all. Be patient, says St. James, Jam. 5.7. and, Be not
dismayed, says God, Isa. 41.10. Which the Lord adds for our encouragement.
When thou passes through the Waters (namely, of Affliction) I will be with
thee; and through the Rivers they shall not overflow thee: when thou walk
through the Fire, thou shall not be burnt, nether shall the flame kindle upon
thee: For I am the Lord thy God; the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior, Isa. 43.
Which for our encouragement was even literally fulfilled in the three
Children, upon whose Bodies the Fire had no power, nor was an hair of their
head singed; neither were their Coats changed, nor the smell of fire had passed
on them, Dan. 3.27. And in Eusebius. l. 4. c. 14. Clerk in his Life, p. 7.8.
Polycarpus, who was so patient and courageous, and whose body would not burn,
when he was to be burnt with fire, the Lord having caused him to hear a Voice
from Heaven, saying, Be of good cheer, O Polycarp, and play the Man: which
Voice his hearers heard; who write this of him; The Speaker no man saw; but the
Voice many of us heard, say they. Let us be patient therefore, and courageous
also in all our Afflictions which we suffer: And the Lord give us patience and
courage, that we may run through all these fiery Trials, which are to try us;
and after we have been tried, as Gold is tried in the fire, we may obtain the
Crown of Heaven, which is set before us; and which otherwise than by Fire and
Violence, cannot be had by us.

3. You must force the King thereof himself.

Quest. If you ask me, How?

Answ. By uncessantly violent Entreaties.

This Answer consists of two Branches.

1. By Violent Entreaties.

2. By uncessantly Violent Entreaties.

1. By Violent Entreaties; for the Eff^ctual Fervent Prayer of a righteous Man
availes much, Jam. 5.17. O it presses into the Presence of God; it breaks
through whole Hosts of hostile Powers; it charge through the thickest Troops
of Oppositions; it mounts up beyond the Stars; it penetrates the Heavens; nay,
it towrs up beyond all aspectable Heavens, and never ceases towering, till it
enters the very Heaven of Heavens; where it wrestles with the God of Heaven for
Heaven, and never gives him over, till by Force it has won Heaven. And
therefore let this mighty Champion, which we call Wrestling, enter the Lists
with God for you, that Heaven may be taken by you. Which God in mercy grant
unto you.

2. With Uncessantly Violent Entreaties: For, Pray continually, says Christ,
Luke 18.1. and With all Perseverance, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.18. which is
much more; For in this Direction is a Climax, or Gradation, from much, to much
more; For to pray Uncessantly, is as much beyond Violent Entreaties, as the Sun
is beyond the Moon; in that as the Moon can have no light without the Sun, so
we, without Perseverance in Prayer, can see no light of God's Countenance
beaming upon us, no help to assist us, no strength to enable us, for high
things to be attempted by us; there we may cry and roar in prayer, and yet in
vain, unless we continue in prayer; and though we contend never so much, yet is
it to no end, unless we contend so long by our violent Entreaties with God,
till we have our errands end; O my Brethren, this is the very Life, the Soul,
the Art, the Master-peice of right Praying; by it we must needs carry Heaven;
nay, with it we shall win the very God of Heaven, even by Force. Force your
selves therefore my Brethren; so to invocate the Name of God, and to draw near
to the Throne of Grace, for Grace, even Grace to help in a time of need, Heb.
4.16. nay, go and strive by many Prostrations before the Throne of Grace, and
mighty and uncessant Encountrings with God, to become Overcomers of God; saying
to God, as once Jacob said, I will not let thee go, tili thou bless me, Genesis

1. By Violent Entreaties; for the Effectual Fervent Prayer of a righteous Man
availes much, Jam. 5.17. O it presses into the Presence of God; it breaks
through whole Hosts of hostile Powers; it charge through the thickest Troops
of Oppositions; it mounts up beyond the Stars; it penetrates the Heavens; nay,
it towrs up beyond all aspectable Heavens, and never ceases towering, till it
enters the very Heaven of Heavens; where it wrestles with the God of Heaven for
Heaven, and never gives him over, till by Force it has won Heaven. And
therefore let this mighty Champion, which we call Wrestling, enter the Lists
with God for you, that Heaven may be taken by you. Which God in mercy grant
unto you.

2. With uncessantly Violent Entreaties: For, Pray continually, says Christ,
Luke 18. 1. and With all Perseverance, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.18. which is
much more; For in this Direction is a Climax, or Gradation, from much, to much
more; For to pray uncessantly, is as much beyond Violent Entreaties, as the Sun
is beyond the Moon; in that as the Moon can have no light without the Sun, so
we, without Perseverance in Prayer, can see no light of God's Countenance
beaming upon us, no help to assist us, no strength to enable us, for high
things to be attempted by us; there we may cry and roar in prayer, and yet in
vain, unless we continue in prayer; and though we contend never so much, yet is
it to no end, unless we contend so long by our violent Entreaties with God,
till we have our errands end: O my Brethren, this is the very Life, the Soul,
the Art, the Master-peice of right Praying; by it we must needs carry Heaven;
nay, with it we shall win the very God of Heaven, even by Force. Force your
selves therefore my Brethren; so to invocate the Name of God, and to draw near
to the Throne of Grace, for Grace, even Grace to help in a time of need, Heb.
4.16. nay, go and strive by many Prostrations before the Throne of Grace, and
mighty and uncessant Encountrings with God, to become Overcomers of God; saying
to God, as once Jacob said, I will not let thee go, tili thou bless me, Genesis
32.26. When a City or Citadel is beleagured, the great Guns go off often; and
when they cease, the Country concludes that it is taken. And so must our
Prayers, which are our Canons, as Bombardae Christianorum Luther.
Luther was wont to call them, go off often, when we go to win Heaven; that is,
even indesinently the same time when we are about it; crying, as the little
Children did once, Mat. 21.9. Hosanna, Hosanna; that is, Now save, now save,
even again and again; first here in this Temple, from your very hearts; and
when ye are come home, from your Closets, your doors being shut; and never give
over crying so, and discharging your great Canons so, till you have won Heaven;
that is, never come out of your Chambers, after they have been shut, till you
have gotten some assurances from Heaven, that you shall have Heaven; concluding
so, because God has heard them, and as it were told them, that Heaven is taken
by them.

But here I must resolve two Cases of Conscience.

1. Case. The first is; Sir, we have heard all this, and yet there is no
stirring after all this, some will say; and therefore what shall we do in this
Case?

To this I answer in four Conclusions.

1. There may be no stirring with some of you, because you are not yet
effectually called, and spoken to, nor yet blown upon by the Spirit of God,
John 6.44. like those dry bones in Ezekiel. 37.2. even very dry, so as that there
was no stirring among them at all; till after, when the Prophet prophesied to
them, and the Wind, that is the Spirit of God, which is like Wind, did breath
upon them.

2. Conclusion. There may be no stirring with some of you as yet, because your
time is not come yet; some are called the third, some the sixth hour, some the
ninth, some the eleventh hour, Mat. 20.3, 5, 6.

3. Conclus. If there be no stirring with you, because you are not yet
effectually called, nor have been blown upon by the Spirit of God, then you
must pray to the Lord, that this my preaching now at last, may work upon you,
and there may be a stirring among you: as thus; O our God, say, Let this man's
preaching to us belike Ezekiels prophesying; For Lord, have not thou sent him,
saying, Go and prophecy to these dead dry bones, which are in that Town of T
-- that they may live? and wilt not thou bless his prophesying to our souls? O
that there were a shaking among us, as there was among those bones! O most
mighty God, let there be such a shaking, and such a stirring among us, now at
last, after all this prophesying, that we may stand upon our feet, as a great
and terrible Army with Banners, Cant. 6.11. and take Heaven by Force. Or thus,
As Moses prayed, Numb. 14.17. And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord
be great, according as thou have spoken: So let every one of you now cry, and
say to Lord, And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord be great,
according as thou have spoken. So let every one of you, now cry and say to the
Lord; And now I beseech thee, let the Power of my Lord be great, according as
thou have spoken, saying, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall
live, Ezekiel. 37.5. and, Verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming, and
now is, when the dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God; and they that
hear, shall live, John 5.24. Lord, I am dead; cause me to hear his Voice, this
hour, this time, that I may stir, and live: O this stirring, it is that which
must work, must move our hearts, must remove our affections, must elevate our
spirits, must collocate our souls in a capacity and ability to attain to high
atchivements; and therefore I advise you so much, and persuade you so earnestly
to beg it.

4. Conclus. But if your time be not yet come; as it is said of those Figs,
Mark 11.13. For the time of Figs was not yet; then you must even wait, till
that Gospel-Angel shall come, which shall move the Waters; that is, your
affections, so powerfully, as that you may stir; as those blind, and lame, and
impotent ones, at the Pool of Bethesda, John 5.3, 4. and till the Spirit of God
himself shall come, and move upon the waters of your affections effectually; as
he did, Genesis 1.2. to produce and to bring forth a new Creation, even your
Regeneration; which God in mercy grant.

2. Case. The second Case is this, But suppose there be a stirring amongst us
since you preached thus, so as that many of the things which you pressed, have
been done among us; may not all that be in vain? and if so, what shall we do in
such a case?

I answer three ways.

1. Granting. 2. Discovering. 3. Advising.
1. Granting that you may stir, and do many things in vain; for, Many shall
seek to enter, and shall not be able, says Christ, in Luke 13.24. And did not
Herod stir, and perform and reform many things in vain? Mark 6.20.

2. Discovering; namely, the Causes why you may stir, and do many things in
vain:

For first, You may build without a foundation; that is, you may want a due
deep and sufficient Humiliation, so much required, Joel 2.13. Jam. 4.9, 10. 1
Pet. 5.6.

Secondly, You may refuse to go thorowstitch: As Herod, who kept his Herodias,
Mark 6.22.

Thirdly, You may trust to your doings; as the Pharisee did, Luke 18.12. Which
you may know by these two Signs:

1st. If you be proud upon your doings, as the Pharisee, who so boasted of his
fasting twice a week, and of his paying of tithes duly, Luke 18.12.

2d. If you presume upon your doings, so as that you make bold thereupon with
one sin or other; as the Pharisees, who trusting in themselves, despised
others, Luke 18.9. That sin of despising others, went with their trusting to
their doings, and in themselves. Beloved, if a base fellow abuse a Kings Son,
men are apt to say, Surely some body upholds this fellow, and he trusts to
that, else he durst not do so: So we may say of men and women, that abuse the
Son of God, with one sin or other, whether it be some base lust, or passion, or
usury, or pride, or wrong, thereby doing despite to the Son of God, Heb. 10.29.
and and to the Spirit of Grace; certainly those men trust to their doings, to
their prayers, to their going to Church, that upholds them, and upon that they
are so bold to do as they do, else they durst not; they hope that these their
doings and duties will bear them out: as doubtless Herod thought so too, when
he kept his Herodias, Mark 6.22.

Fourthly, You may depend upon your sayings: As for example; Because you can
say, and have said, Lord we believe; help our unbelief; and our Beloved is
ours, and we are his: As I taught you in the foregoing directions to say, you
may think that therefore you do believe, when you do not, but only say that you
do believe. This is notably set out by St. James, What does it profit, my
Brethren, though a man says that he has Faith? Jam. 2.14. Mark: Though he
say; Which shows, that, as it is now, so it was then; there were men, who
thought that they had Faith, because they could say, and did say, that they did
believe: That was their Faith; and that is most men's Faith now The World is
now, as it was in Ages past. Rel. Medici. p. 12.
: And therefore, O the infinite Deceits, and Fallacies of that old Serpent! O
the unfathomable Mazes of his Devices! O the abyss and depth of his Subtilties!
Thousands have been so deluded by him: and millions there are now in Hell,
suffering the Vengeance of eternal Fire, because they have hearkened to him.

3. Advising, I say Advising you, that,

It, 1. You want Humiliation, and have not yet been duly, deeply and
sufficiently dejected, and so have built without a good foundation, you lay
such a foundation yet, for else how can your building stand? If a House or
Castle be not founded upon a sure Foundation, we know it cannot stand, but must
needs totter, and come down: And so must all that which you do, come to
nothing, if this Foundation be wanting; l^ke that Seed which wanted deepness of
earth; whereby we may understand depth of Humiliation, Mat. 13.5. and therefore
be humbled, nay deeply and sufficiently humbled, for all the evils of your
ways; nay, for the evil even of your holy things, and doings, and be not quiet
till you be unquiet, nor rest till you cannot rest, nor give over, I mean
humbling your selves, till you be come over to that depth of sorrow, which your
horrid miscarriages, and misdemeanors call for; In a word, as David and his
men wept, till they could weep no more, 1 Samuel 30.4. So do you grieve till you
can grieve no more; for Nam ultra posse fiery, Non vult lex ulla requiri.
then God will require no more. See 2 Cor. 8.12.

2. If you never went thorow-stich yet, then go farther, and through yet; for
how many have come short of Christ, and Heaven, because they would not do a
little more? even as some miss sometimes, and go without a good bargain, or
purchase, because they will not give the other pound, or piece; nay, sometimes
some part for a groat: O do not you so too; but if any thing be yet wanting,
add it, if a little more be required, do it; if a little more must be given for
Christ and Heaven, give it; O do not go without it for a small matter, give the
other groat, I pray you; and let it not be said of you, that you left Christ,
Life and Salvation for a groat, that is, for a small matter, because you would
not do a little more, and go a little further; pray a little more, meditate a
little more, and do somewhat else more, which ye never did yet. O Sirs, I must
needs press you to this; for so runs my Commission, Teach them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you, Mat. 28.20. So that needs you must do
all that, which in my former Directions I have taught you, and which Christ our
Savior has any where enjoined you, though it be never so cross, and contrary
to your depraved natures, if you would be saved.

3. If you formerly trusted to your doings, do so no more, but say as Israel
was taught to say, Ashur shall not save us, Hos. 14.3. So Prayer shall not save
us, Fasting shall not save us; could we speak with the tongues of Men and
Angels, could we set open our eyes, like Sluices, with weeping, could we soar up
in the pensiveness of our thoughts like Eagles, and thereby even peep into
Heaven, yet should we not be justified thereby: And therefore we trust to be
saved only by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and by his infinite, and by us
undeserved, Mercy, Tit. 3.5.

4. If you relied on your sayings, go farther hereafter, and do not only say,
that you do believe, but labor to believe indeed; that is, never be satisfied
in that point, nor think that yo do believe, till you see Faith to be in you,
by its effects wrought in you; I mean, 1. Love. 2. Holiness. And, 3. Pureness.
For it is like Sarah, it will have out Hagar; that is, slavish and servile
Fears, and all the Lusts of the Flesh, with the Affections thereof; and like
Solomon, it will overlay the Temple of the holy Ghost all with Gold; that is,
it will make us all glorious within, nay, throughout, both within and without;
even glorious in Holiness, Acts 26.18. and glorious in Love, Gal. 5.6.

Need you Incentives after all my Directions, and Solutions given you? then
take these.

Consider that that Kingdom of Heaven, which I persuade you so much to take by
Force, is a Kingdom which is, 1. Very High. 2. Very Great. 3. Very Rich. 4.
Very Pleasant. 5. Very Glorious. 6. Very Durable.


1. Very High.

1. For its Distance from us.

2. For its Terms upon which it must be taken by us.

First, For its Distance from us: For how sar is it think you, from the Center
of the World, to the Sun only? Minima solis distantia a centro mundi continet
semidiametrum terrae millies and septuagies. Lambert. Dan. in Phys. Chrysostom. p.
2. tract. 4. c. 18. p. 160.
Astronomers tell us, that the Distance which is between them, contains the
Semidiameter of the Earth, One thousand seventy times. And how far it is from
thence to the Empyrean Heaven, who can tell? no man living. The Scripture
therefore calls Heaven, Heights, Psalm. 148.1. and says further, that Heaven
for Height is unsearchable, Prove. 25.3. So that no Thieves can approach it, no
Enemies assault it, no Wars reach it. There may be another reason given for
this, why Heaven is above the reach of all its opposites, because it is not to
be seen, being far above all aspectable Heavens, Ephesians. 4.8. The Fratres Roseae
Crucis.
Brethren of the Red Cross, as they call themselves, give out (as I have read
it in one of their own printed Books) that the house of their meeting is not to
be seen, which I question, whether they speak true in it (though they say, that
they are of the purest Protestants) But this is undoubtedly true, that the
Heaven of Heavens is a place which by us here cannot be seen; for, the eye has
not seen the things (whereof this Heaven is one) prepared for those that love
him, 1 Cor. 2.9. If then, ye will be a in safe and secure place indeed, which
may not be liable to surprizals; then labor for this Kingdom, to take it by
force.

Secondly, For its Terms, upon which it must be taken by us: For what are the
Terms upon which it stands, think ye? the Terms of it are such as these, They
that will enter me, says this Kingdom, must exceed in Righteousness, even the
strictest Pharisees that ever lived; For except your Righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, says Christ, Mat. 5.20. and ye must be perfect, as God is
perfect, says this Kingdom, according to Mat. 5.48. Now, if some men were to
serve as Soldiers under a Captain, or General, who promises them, that they
shall have for their Service, whatsoever they take, though it be a Kingdom, but
that they must do more work than all other ordinary Soldiers, must wake when
others sleep, must fast when others feast; they would all say, O what high and
hard terms be these! And yet to win a Kingdom, be persuaded to serve such a
General, and even force themselves to it, and take extraordinary pains for it,
because the Terms proposed are so high, as that otherwise they cannot have it.
And so should we force our selves to win the Kingdom of Heaven, and take
extraordinary pains for it, because of the high Terms of it, and because else
we shall never enter it, unless we do more work than all other common Sonldiers
among men, and keep our selves waking, when other men are sleeping, and abstain
from all manner of meat many times, and from all excessive eating and drinking
at all times, and that even then, when others at their feasts are inebriciting
themselves with strong drink, and glutting themselves with creature-delights,
and varieties of dishes and dainties.

2. A very great Kingdom. The World with the Kingdoms of it, is an
extraordinary great thing: They write that the Mr. Bolton in his direct. for a
comf. walk. p. 13.

So Speed, Ambitum ejus quidam esse volunt Leucarum Gallicarum novem millium et
amplius. Lamb. Danaeus in sua Phys. Christ. p. 2. tract. 3. c. 23.


compass of it is about one and twenty thousand English miles, and somewhat
more: but Heaven is infinitely greater; for, Behold! Heaven and the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain Thee: as if he should say, though it be so extraordinary
great, how much less this House which I have built, says Solomon, 2 Chronicles.
6.18. Now there is a time when we may not seek great things for our selves,
Jer. 45.5. but at all times we may and should seek after the great Kingdom of
Heaven, and now more especially, having been so much persuaded to it; and
therefore go forth, O my Brethren, in the greatness of your spirits, and
height of your hearts, to win, to take, to force this great Kingdom of Heaven,
which I have so much extolled, and which cannot be otherwise taken, but only by
Force. The Lord help you in the doing of it.

3. A very rich Kingdom, for in it are Streets of Gold, and Gates of Pearls,
Rev. 21.21. So as that that Mr. Fox in his Acts and Mon.
blessed Woman-Martyr of Exceter might well say; when one offered her Money,
and she refused it, I am going to a place where Money bears no mastery: all the
Wealth of England, all the Gold of both Indies, all the Pearls in the Erythean
Seas, are not to be compared with the Riches of it. Now if Riches be any thing
esteemed by you, and ye desire to be rich indeed, then strive to win this
Kingdom by Violence; for then you are made rich for ever by it, unutterably
rich; for all the Riches of Solomon, all the Treasures of Hezekiah, nay, all
the Treasures of Egypt, were as nothing to the Riches of it, 1 Kings 10.23.
Isa. 39.2. Heb. 11.26.

4. Very Pleasant, for there the Sun shines always, I mean the Sun of
Righteousness, which is the Light thereof, Rev. 21.23. and besides, there are
Pleasures for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. Mark; For evermore; and therefore far
better Pleasures than here; for the Pleasures of Sin, and of this life, are but
for a season, Heb. 11.25. like Jonas's Gourd, soon come, soon gone, Jonas 4.10.
yea, like Lightning, which is gone sooner. No longer than meat is in the
Glutons mouth, and drink in the Drunkards throat, the Pleasure thereof lasts,
when both are down, the sweet gust thereof vanishes; and therefore if you
would enjoy better Pleasures, labor for Heaven, where there are Rivers of
rarest Delights, Seas of sweetness, and Paradises of Pleasures for evermore.

5. Very Glorious. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of God, says
David, Psalm. 87.3. So I, glorious things are spoken of thee, O Kingdom of
Heaven, for in thee are those glorious Mansions which Christ has prepared for
his; in thee those glorious Saints, which shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom
of their Father, Mat. 13.43. in thee those glorious Teachers, Virgins and
Martyrs, which wear their Crowns and Aureoales upon their heads, like crowned
Kings for ever and ever; in thee those glorious Armies of Christ's valiant
Soldiers, who have in the strength of his Might, overcome and vanquished so
many thousands of the terribly enraged Enemies of their souls; in thee those
faithful men, whom all the delights of this World could not make so effeminate,
as to draw them from the strength of their holy and heavenly Manhood; in thee
those holy Women, who together with the World, have superated and overcome
their own Sex; in thee those Children who have by their holy manners
transcended their years; in thee those old men and women, whom here age had
made weak, and yet the strength of their Virtues and Graces did not forsake;
all wearing their Diadems of Glory, in the Kingdom of Glory: in thee those
glorious and blessed Seraphims, who chant forth their melodious Ditties to the
Sacred and everto-be-adored Trinity to all Eternity; in thee those glorious
Joys which stream from Jehovah's never-failing Love; in thee those glorious
Rays, which beam from the Light of his Pleasant Countenance, to refresh all
those blessed and crowned Inhabitants, who mansion and dwell with Christ in
Glory; in thee is that glorious Body and Person of Christ himself, which is so
decked with Majesty, and does so shine and glister above the Splendour and
brightness of that Fountain of all created Light, the Sun, I mean, in the
spangled sky. O ye that love now glittering Glory, labor therefore for this
Glory, for this is Glory indeed: Nay, all ye that hear me this day, whatever ye
be, be for this Glory, let this Glory keep you waking, let this Glory set all
your Brains aworking; for Glory is a mightily working thing, O it will, like a
Immensum Gloria Calcar habet.
Spur, even spur us on to high Achievements: And therefore O let this Glory
prick ye forward, beyond all earthly things, toward Heaven, that by Violence
ye may take it, with all the Glory of it. And thou, O sweet Jesus, do not let
this People sleep, or slumber, till they have put themselves upon the taking of
it, by a Sacred Violence.

6. Very Durable, for it is an Everlasting Kingdom, Dan. 4.3. and chap. 7.27.
even the Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, so called, 2
Pet. 1.11. in which regard, it also exceeds and excels all the Kingdoms of the
World, even infinitely and unspeakably: for they all shall have, and most have
had their Changes, their Ends, their Zeniths, their Quoniam in genium hoc
omnibus creatis ut insita quadam vi; ad mutationem forantur et casum ut ferro
consumens quaedam rubigo agnata est, ligno exaedens caries aut teredo, sic
animalibus, opidis, regnis internae, et sue causa pereundi. Lips. de constable. l.
1. c. 15.
Periods, but this shall have none. So the things thereof, and the happiness
centered therein, shall have none; For my Salvation shall be for ever, Isa.
51.6. And the ransomed of the Lord shall return, and come to Zion Cum venerint
in caelestem Jerusalem. Lyra in loc. sic Cyril Alex. in loc.
with Songs, and everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads, Isa. 35.10. The
like is said of the Glory of it, that there is, and will be an Eternal weight
of Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. And blessed are they that dwell in thy House, they will
be Hebrew (...) quod est sicut (...) et significat Aeternitatem.
still praising Thee, Selah, Psalm. 84.4. and therefore shall the People
(namely, thy People) praise Thee for Quod extendendum ad beatitudinem Electorum
in Coelis Lorin. in loc.
ever and ever, Psalm. 45.17. which puts me upon Eternity; a Type whereof was
once set forth at Constantinople, in the year 459. after this manner; A certain
Fraternity was set up, called by the name of Acaemets, who were so called for
their not sleeping, because they were always to praise God, both day and
night, being divided into three companies, so as that when the first had made
an end of singing, the second was to begin; when the second had done, then the
third; according to that fore-alledged place, Psalm. 84.4. And therefore O
blessed Kingdom, which is thus Eternal, and in which there is singing for ever
and ever; O incomparable Kingdom! for what Kingdom else is like to thee? in
thee is Life without Death, Gladness without Sadness, Consolation without
Perturbation; Stability without Mutability; O Kingdom to be desired of all men!
as which has no O Regnum vere beatum carens morte, vacans fine, cui nulla
tempora succedunt per avum. Aug. in med.
end; no night, no adversary that can destroy it: therein, O my soul, thou
shall enjoy Rest without labor, Joy without dolor, Life without end, and
felicity through all eternity: O endless Kingdom! I can hardly make an end of
praising thee; I must needs speak a little more yet of thee, saying, Yesterday
was with thee (never, But to day is present ever.
Non est in te heri, nec hesternum sed est idemhodiernum.
Tibi Salus.
Tibi Vita.
Tibi pax Infinita.
Tibi Deus omnia.
Thou have Peace that ever lasts,
Health and Life that never wastes.


O that this people were so affected with thee, as they ought to be; but herein
appears most men's extremest both misery and folly, that whereas all men, or
most, are for Land, rather than for Lease, if they can reach to it, because it
is, as they say, for ever; and whereas they will be sure to have a pennyworth
for a penny, and will give so too, yet they are not so wise, nor will be, in
heavenly things; for this heavenly and eternal Kingdom they care not for; they
prefer their holdings for their frail lives, and mere trifles, before Land for
ever; and this Heavenly and Everlasting Kingdom, is worth nothing with them,
nor will they give or do any thing considerable for it, as if it were not worth
looking after, which makes me the more earnest to press this matter so as I do
upon your Consciences, using such Incentives as these be, and especially this
last. O my God, do thou work upon this peoples hearts, and let the Spirit of
Life come into the wheels of their souls; let him so move their affections, as
that they may be lifted up; like those Wheels in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 1.20, 21.
because the Spirit of Life is in them. O let not all these my labors be
utterly lost, but let some poor souls be now won to the Shepherd of souls.

O Souls, Souls, are ye nothing moved yet with all this? I hope you are; nay,
methinks you are by your attention; if ye be, then move, and move indeed; I
mean so strongly, so vigorously, so effectually toward Heaven, to take it by
Force, as that the world may see your change, your zeal, your forwardness, your
laboring for Heaven; Heaven ye see is even at hand; as the Baptist said once,
The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, when he so preached it up, Mat. 3.2. it was
so, and so it is now, and diverse enter into it; nay, take it by Force; O do you
so likewise, and so live for ever. So be it.

To God alone be all Honor and Glory.

A New and Living Way OF DYING: OR A TREATISE, Showing how Saints, after they
have comfortably overcome Sin and the World by Faith, and after a New and
Living Manner have lived an Holy and Heavenly Life by Faith, may die at last
after a New and Living Way, by, in, and according to Faith; Upon that Famous
Scripture,

HEBREWS 11.13. These all dyed in Faith. --

And provided especially, for Preparation to be made by all men, against the
Approach of Death, in these Sickly Times.

By Christopher Jelinger.

And Published by some Christian Friends.

London, Printed in the Year, 1664.

To The Virtuous Lady The Lady ANNE SEYMOUR, Grace and Mercy be multiplied.
MADAM,
MY great Respect, and thankful Mind which I bear to your Worthy-Self, and to
your, Noble Family, for many Favors received, has caused and compelled me to
Dedicate this Tract to your much-honoured Name: and if it may but find
entertainment and acceptance, I shall count my labor well bestowed.

Only give me leave, Much Honored Lady, to give you a short Account of this my
present Undertaking. These late Times are and have been very sickly, and many
every where are fallen asleep; and when the time of our departure will be, the
Lord only knows: and we our selves also know this, that it cannot be long
before we likewise shall go to our long home, and be no more seen at our present
homes, because our life is but a vapor, Jam. 4.14. and we fly away, Psalm.
90.10. which not with standing, how few are there which prepare themselves for
that time; Cogitantes de fine infinito, ut vivant in infinitum: Whence it
comes to pass, that most men, when after they have lived a careless life, they
come to be unmanned by Death, they go Imparati in locum paratum, Unprepared to
a place prepared, idque in aeternum, and that for ever; for that which ends
All, is without end. And their nearest friends are much the cause of it; for
the common fashion of Friends is to put their friends in mind of Death, when
they doubt that they can live no longer; Zenas the Lawyer, and Luke the
Physician, must have given them over, before they will send for Barnabas to
give them good Counsel and solid Consolation against their dissolution. But I
for my part will not deal so with my Christian Friends.

My design in this Tract is this, To tell men plainly that shortly they must
put off their caribly Tabernacles, and show them evidently, How they must die
whilst they live, that they may live when they die; dying in, by, and according
to Faith. This, this I aimed at when I penned this Treatise; which, if it be
acted by Faith, will so work upon men's and women's precious souls, and do them
so much good, as that they will even long to enjoy the chiefest good; and when
their work here is done, will show them Heaven open for them; where there is
health only, and no sickness; living, and no dying; incorruption, and no
corruption; ease, and no pain; singing, and no sorrowing; For the former things
are passed away, Rev. 21.4.

Many, I confess, have written on this subject of Death, but you will find,
that I have left the common road, as much as I might; for my principal aim in
this Tract is, To put men upon that New and Living Way, which the Apostle
speaks of, Heb. 10.20. and which must be taken by Faith; according to which we
must die, to live for ever.

That Great God, and Savior, who can do whatsoever he will in Heaven and on
Earth, so bless these my Labors to you, Madam, and to all that shall read them,
as that both you and they may fare the better for them here, and hereafter, for
ever.

So prays Your Ladyships Most humble Servants, CHRISTOPHER JELINGER.

A New and Living Way of Dying.
HEB. 11.13. These all Dyed in Faith. --


ALmighty God (as one says well) has given to men three Mansions of a diverse
Quality;

1. The World, wherein they live.

2. The Grave, wherein they corrupt.

3. Either Heaven, wherein they are crowned; or Hell, wherein they are
tormented.

In the World, their Companion is Vanity; In the Grave, the Worms; In Heaven,
the blessed Angels; and in Hell, cursed Devils: I add, For like and like suit
best one with an other; Good Men, I mean, with good Angels, and evil Men with
Angels-Transgressors: and yet such is the folly of most men, that they would
have perpetual habitations, and an ever-during happiness in this vain World,
where neither such felicity, nor perpetuity is to be expected: for as all have
sinned, so all for Sin must be by Death dissolved, even the best not excepted;
as by those Worthies which my Text speaks of, it appears. So that men
should rather forecast, what course it were best for them to take, that being
thrust out of those earthly Tabernacles, in which now they mansion, they might
mount up into that most blessed and blissful House of God, which is not made
with hands, Eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1.

What this Course is which men should take, you will understand by my future
Discourse, wherewith I shall, God willing, entertain your Christian Patience,
declaring FAITH to be that most happy Instrument, which must bring you to such
a firm, durable and glorious settlement, This ushered and conveyed those
gracious Saints which my Text speaks of, out of their earthly and unstable
habitations, into those heavenly Mansions above, and places of unexpressable
Delights; for they all dyed in Faith; and the end of Faith is, as St. Peter
tells us, the salvation of our Souls, 1 Pet. 1.9. I shall therefore call the
whole ensuing Discourse, A New and Living Way of Dying, and show therein, how
we may in a most sweet and comfortable manner, after an holy and heavenly
walking, die at last, by, in, and according to Faith; Faith, I mean, unfeigned,
lively and saving; In which the ancient Patriarchs dyed, according to my Text,
These all dyed in Faith.

In the beginning of this Most Excellent Chapter, the holy Apostle describes
Faith by three several Effects.

The first is, That it procreates and begets a sure and certain hope of things
promised by Almighty God, ver. 1.

The second is, That by Faith men please God, ver. 2.

The third is, That we believe things to humane reason incredible, ver. 3.

Which done, he illustrates and brighteneth the said Effects by Examples
prompted out of the Sacred Book of God.

And first of all, he produces some Believers, who flourished before the
Flood; as Abel, Enoch, Noah, ver. 4, 5, 6, 7. to prove both the second and
third effect; the second by Abel and Enoch, the third by Noah.

Afterward he descends to a second Class of Examples, reckoning up such
ancient Fathers as lived after the Flood, before Israel went down into Egypt;
Abraham, I mean, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, to confirm the first Effect, ver. 8,
9, 10, 11, 12.

Having explained the said Examples, he super-adds an Amplification, which
begins with the words of my Text, declaring that the forementioned ancient
Patriarchs and Believers, were both most certain in their Hope, and constant in
their Expectation of the Impletion of the Lord's Promise which he had made unto
them; For they dyed in Faith, says he, such was their constancy.

And thus you may see the coherence of these words with the former.

Two things we may note in the Text it self, which is a Sacred Narration. 1.
Qui. 2. Quid.


That is, 1. Who they be that are spoken of. 2. What is spoken.


1. Who? All these. And who be these? I answer; We may understand Eagnejus in
loc.
either Abrabraham, Isaac, Jacob and Sarah, living after the Flood (for of such
he spoke before;) Defuncti sunt omnes isti] quipest diluvium fuerunt, vel omnes
praeter Enochum translatum. Dionys. Carthus. in locum.
or all those Patriarchs which lived both before and after, Enoch excepted.

2. What is spoken of all these? That they dyed in Faith.

Where observe with me again, two things.

1. Quod. 2. Quomodo.
Or, 1. That they dyed. 2. How they died.


1. They Dyed. This puts me upon Death. Aphilosopher called Secundus, being
asked of the Emperor Trajan, What Death was? described it thus; Death is an
eternal sleep, he should have said a long sleep) the dissolution of our bodies,
the fears of rich men, the desire of poor men, an mevitable event, an uncertain
Pilgrimage, a Robber of Mankind, the Mother of sleep, the passage of Life, the
departure of the living, and a dissolution of all; thus he: But we may more
briefly term it a departed breath, enlivened at first by breath cast upon it.
Thus they dyed, and yet they were very good, gracious, and most eminent Saints;
for Death favors none, but like a cruel Mower, cuts down flowers, even the
fairest and goodliest; the very best and Holy Men, I mean, which are the very
Stars of the Earth, as well as common grass; ordinary and common men, I mean,
in the spacious and capacious field of the world.

Doct. 1. Good Men then (as you see) must die, like other men. Death, like
those merciless and inexorable Creatures, Fire and Water, spares none, Omnia
sub leges Mors vocat atra suas.
all must away, both good and bad.

This is the point which I will, 1. Confirm and fortify. 2. Vindicate. 3.
Explicate. 4. Apply.


I. I Will confirm it, 1. By Scripture. 2. By Experience. 3. By Reason.


1. By Scripture, which is full of such sad Examples, as will sufficiently
evince the truth of this Assertion. Pervolve but the 5th chapter of Genesis,
and you shall find that all those good Patriarchs that lived before the Flood,
dyed as well as other wicked and ungodly men. And then search for those that
lived in succeeding Ages, besides those whom my Text makes mention of, as
Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Samuel, David, Josiah, Hezekiah, Isaiah, etc. and you
shall find them all dead, Acts 7.15.

2. Nay do you but ask Experience what is become of such holy and heavenly men
and women as you knew in your time, and it will tell you, they are all dead; or
if you will August. l. de Not. et great.
view but the Graves and Monuments that are in this Church and Churchyard, and
they will affirm the same.

3. But I suppose that some of you do rather wonder why it should be so, than
doubt whether it be so, seeing the truth of this assertion is so manifest and
apparent; and therefore understand,

1. Reas. That when Adam fell, it was not the man that fell, but mankind, Romans
5.19. so that all, both good and bad, must therefore taste of deaths cup; as it
is written, Wherefore as by one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by
Sin, so Death passid upon all men, for that all have sinned, Romans 5.12.

2. Reas. It is a favor afforded by Nature, Quod gravissimum fecit, fecit
commune, ut crudelitatem fati consolaretur aequalitas.

That she has made that common which is most grievous, that so Equality might
solace the Cruelty of that fate which is altogether inevitable. And,

3. Reas. That which thou sowest, is not quickened except it die, 1 Cor. 15.36.
So that the Godly cannot be raised according to the order and method which God
has decreed and ordained in his Wisdom, for their entrance into his heavenly
Kingdom, unless they be first by Death dissolved, and like seed, sown and
interred in the ground from which they were first extracted. To this purpose
also is that, 1 Cor. 15.50. Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God;
that is, Calvin in loc.
our Bodies, as now they are corruptible, unless they die, and so be changed,
being raised again by the Power of God, and made incorruptible.

4. Reason. God's Word must needs be verified; Now God has said, In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die, Genesis 2.17. So that even the
best must needs die one way or other, that God may be true; but eternally they
cannot die, because Christ dyed for them, to exempt them from that Death, Romans
5.10.21. they must needs die temporally, though they neither can nor shall be
under the tyrannizing power of Death eternally.

5. Reas. The Godly are compounded of Elements, as well as others; And there is
a Rule in Philosophy, That whatsoever is made up of Elements, must be dissolved
again into the same; for Composition is a beginning of a Combat, a Combat of
a Separation, a Separation of a Solution; so that needs they must die as well
as others.

6. Reas. Christ himself, the eternal Son of God, died a temporal Death, to
bring them to everlasting Life, John 3.16. and therefore how unreasonable a
thing would it be, if themselves should be exempted from that Death, of the
which he himself tasted? shall the Physician taste of a bitter cup for the
Patients sake, and shall not the Patient also himself drink of the same Cup too?

7. Reas. Nay, how can they be conformable to the same eternal Son of God,
their Lord and Savior, as they must be even by the unalterable and eternal
Decree of God, Romans 8.29. if they should not die as he dyed, leaving us all an
Example to follow after: As if he should have said, as much in effect, as once
Gideon said to his followers, Judge. 7.17. As I do, so shall ye do; or, rather
(mutatis mutandis) as I die, so shall you die after.

The Third Prosecution.
Object. You will say unto me, Why then was Enoch translated before the Flood,
and Elias after? and why says the Apostle, We shall not all sleep, 1 Cor.
15.51. if good men must die as well as others?

To this I answer.

Sol. Their very Translation was not without a kind of Death, for they were
changed; and Death is but a change, Job 14.14. The same may be said of those, 1
Cor. 15.51.

2d. Object. If you reply, But what means then the Apostle by this
Antithesis, when he says expressly, We shall not all sleep, but we shall be
changed?

Sol. I answer. These words have troubled some not a little; and therefore we
shall find three differing Latin Translations.

1. Some read the words thus, We shall not die, but we shall all be changed.

2. Others read them thus, We shall all rise, but we shall not all be changed.

3. Others thus, We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed.

The Cause of which diversity I conceive to be this, Because some were offended
by the Greek Copies, as (...) they did contradict that in Heb. 9.29. but we
need (...) go so far as they, a Distinction (...) all

There is a twofold Death; 1. Ordinary. 2. Extraordinary.


1. The Ordinary is a Solution of the Soul from the Body.

2. The Extraordinary is an Abolition of man's corruptible Nature.

Now then when the Apostle tells us, We shall not all die, but we shall all be
changed; the sense of his words is not, that therefore some shall not die at
all; but only that some shall not die an ordinary death, because their souls
shall not be severed from their bodies; which notwithstanding it may be said,
that they shall die a kind of death; which we call Extraordinary, because there
cannot be a change without an abolition of the former corruptible Nature.

The Third Prosecution.
I should now set sail, and lanch forthwith into the deep of your hearts, by
some powerful Application, but that I must clear all things first behind me,
before I can comfortably commit my self to such a vast Sea of Matter as is now
before me, declaring what I mean by the Death of the Godly, when I say, They
must die like other men.

1. Some things their death has common with the deaths of the Ungodly.

2. Some thing it has peculiar.

I. The Commonness of both Deaths consists in six Respects.

1st. Respect. As the Souls of the Ungodly are separated from their Bodies, so
the Souls of the Godly; unless God take them away by a Death Extraordinary,
like Enoch and Elias, Ecles. 12.7.

2d. Respect. As the Dissolution, being natural, and not violent, follows in
the one, when natural heat fails, the radical humor being by heat dried up
and exhausted, like Oil in a Lamp, which also thereupon goes out, and is
extinguished, so in the other. Hence it is that the Grecians have called the
dead (...), because they are humourless.

3d. Respect. As this Dissolution, when it is Cic. l. 1. Tuscul. Quaest.
violent, happens in the one either by a casual substraction of the radical
humor, or by a suffocation of the natural heat upon some opposition made
inwardly or outwardly, so in the other. See 1 Samuel 31.6.

4th Resp. As the dissolution of the one (if it be not sudden) happens
Suarez. Metaphys. Disputat. 11. to. 1. sect. 3. fol. 232.
two ways;

1. By diverse Alterations and Dispositions which precede the instant of Death,
and corrupt the subject.

2. By that destruction which it causes in the very instant of death. So the
other.

5. Resp. As the Dissolution of the one is not only a separation of their souls
and bodies, but also a dissolution of those things whereof their bodies were
compounded; which also is aptly called, Corruption, 1 Cor. 15.12, so the
Dissolution of the other.

6. Resp. As the one leaves this world, and goes hence to some other place,
so the other, Psalm. 39.13. Acts 1.25. So that Socrates apud Plat.
Socrates's description of Death, may well be received as very proper and
pertinent; Death is the souls change of one place for another.

II. The Peculiarity of the Death of the Godly, consists or will appear in
sive things.

1. Though the Souls of the Godly be dis-joyned from their Bodies, like the
souls of others, yet are they not so violently taken away like the souls of
others, Luke 12.20. but rather surrendered with their good will and liking, Mat.
27.50. Acts 7.59.

2. The death of the Godly is not only a dissolution of the soul and body, but
also a separation of both from Sin, Romans 6.7.

3. It is an abolition of all humane Frailties, Rev. 11.4. so that one may
truly say of it, as a Martyr said to his fellow-Martyr, of that bloody Bishop
of London, My Lord of London will be our good Physician, and cure us both, etc.

4. It is but an (...), or Peregrination, as Socrates calls it; or a Transitus,
and an Exodus, a going over, and coming out; not an Interitus, or going down;
I say it is an Exodus, or going out; like the coming of Israel out of Egypt;
for so the Godly do but leave this World, which is like Egypt, full of toil,
and pass on even triumphantly, through the abhorred Confines of the King of
Fear, being carried upon the wings of Joy, and in the arms of Angels, into the
Celestial Canaan, which is full of unknown Delights, and endless bliss, Luke
23.43. Rev. 14.13.

5. Nay it is a making, rather than a marring of them; a reparation, and not a
destruction; In a word, a state of Perfection, and not of Perdition; for being
dead, they are said to be made perfect, Heb. 12.23. So that the Hebrews have
aptly termed Death in that regard, (...) and (...) which words being inverted,
are (...) and (...) which words signify Perfection, and Innocence, to show
that Death shuts up and sinisheth all Imperfection, and makes complete and
perfect. When therefore I say, that the Godly also must die like others, I
regard those six Respects, which their death has common with the death of
others; for otherwise, though they dye as well as others, yet do not they die
like others, in regard of those five Peculiarities, which here I have purposely
specified, that the vast Difference which is between the Death of both, might
appear, and be evidently seen of all.

The Fourth Prosecution.
Now for Application.
1. Use. This may inform us of the Greatness of the Wrath of God against Sin,
seeing that the very best cannot be exempted from Deaths Tyranny, which God's
flaming Wrath against and for Sin has subjected us all unto. It is almost 6000
years agone, that Adam sinned by eating of the forbidden Tree, and yet could
not all this length of time, make him forget that one Offense; no, no, Manet
alta mente repostum judicium Paridis, said Virgil in another case; and we may
say as much in this, The Lord remembers that Sin still, and keeps his Anger
against it still, so as that no intervening Grace or Goodness in the holiest
person, can make him let go his Wrath, or remit his first Mulct or Penalty,
Death, I mean, once menaced and decreed: and yet as Moses complained once,
Psalm. 90.11. so may we now, Who knows, or understands, considers and
believes, as Luther in Dutch renders the Original, the power of thine Anger,
though we be even consumed by it, ver. 7. Wherefore in the first place let us
learn, and lay to heart, the Power of the Lord's Anger; for you see by Moses's
complaint, that scarce any knows it, or considers of it:

Whereupon it comes to pass that Sin is,

1. So slighted as it is in your Judgments.

2. So embraced in your Affections.

3. So multiplied in your Conversations; because you do not once seriously
consider the Powerfulness and Greatness of God's Wrath, by which we are
consumed one by one, the very best not exempted.

The Second use.
Must godly Men, who are like precious Wheat, die like other men? Then woe to
the Ungodly, which are but Chaff; for what will become of them? if God so deal
with the green wood, what will he do to the dry? if he be so severe against his
own, for that old sin of Adam, how rigorous then will he be against Aliens? if
they that are reconciled unto him by the death of his Son, yet must taste of
Deaths cup, what will be the end then of you that are yet unreconciled?
Certainly my tongue is not able to express that unutterable and unspeakable
Wrath, which will most certainly seize on you unreconcil'd Adulterers,
Boasters, Idolaters, Liars, Cozeners, and on you, fierce, proud, envious,
worldly and covetous Men and Women, for you must taste of a double Death, the
first and the second, Rev. 21.8. Now how fearful and formidable the very first
Death is, you know all, who ever saw a man unmann'd, and laid in the dust to
putrify, and to be meat for Worms, whereby you may easily conceive, how
dreadful needs must be, and will be both, when one after another, as it were,
shall require your souls, as it is written. Luke 12.19, 20. Thou fool, this
night they shall require thy Soul from thee, as the Original has it: Mark;
They shall require it; and who be They, but the first and the second Death? as
I conceive, one seconding the other.

O think on this double Death, all ye Drunkards, and Fornicators, Swearers,
Usurers, Epicures, Gurmands, Atheists and Hypocrites; and imagine in what a
woeful plight your Souls will be, when those two Deaths shall so require them,
and they shall be forthwith thrown and cast into that formidable Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone, which is the second Death, Rev. 21.8.

Lamentable was the case of the Men of Sodom, when suddenly they saw and felt
both Fire and Brimstone dropping down from Heaven upon their Bodies; but
infinitely more grievous, woeful and deplorable will be your condition then,
when these your immortal Souls shall begin to feel in a moment after their
departure, that ever-during Fire and Brimstone, which the Lord in his Fury will
rain upon them in that infernal Pit: for as the Bonavent. Brevis. cap. 6. page
7.
peccant Spirit or Soul of man, subjects it self to the baseness of sin,
perverting the Dignity of its Noble Nature; so the order of God's Justice
requires, that it, as well as the Body, should burn in the very dregs of
worldly bodies; corporeal Fire and Brimstone, I mean, which never shall be
quenched.

This will be the Catastrophe of all your sports and delights, and profits of
your sinful Life.

It was a witty saying of a learned man, That Marriage was a short and sweet
song, but that it has a long and doleful close.

So of all the Pleasure we take in sin, we may truly say, that it is a Song
short for the time, and sweet for tune, as long as it lasts, for it runs
much upon Quavers and Semiquavers, of Mirth and Jubilation, but the time
suddenly changes, and the tune is altered, for then follows, without rest,
the Sarges and Songs of sorrow and lamentation, which cannot be measured by any
time, or uttered by any humane tongue: Hence when one who had lived but a lewd
and ungodly life, was departing, as one Doctor Hill in his Direction to dye
well, p. 123.
relates it of him, he cried out even in this World most lamentably, O
lamentable Destiny! O infinite Calamity! O Death without Death! O those
contiual Cryings, which shall never be hearkened unto! our eyes can see nothing
but sorrowful Spectacles, and intolerable Torments, our ears can hear nothing
but Woe, Woe, without end woeful. O thou Earth, why do not thou swallow? O ye
Mountains, why do not ye cover us from the presence of the Judge? How far do
the Torments of Hell exceed all the tortures of this Life! O ye bewitching
Pleasures of this World, how have ye led us blindfolded to the Horrors of Hell?
Woe, woe for ever unto us, who without hope are cast from the Favor of God, so
that after ten thousand years we might be delivered! O that in any time we
might have an end! But it cannot be; Our Temporal Pleasures have Eternal Pains,
our Mirth is now turned into Mourning, and we are cast into Everlasting Fire.
Thus he. I do not speak this to drive you to desperation, but to persuade you
to an alteration, that you may change your Estates and Lives for better;
praying God, All-powerful, to turn you, that you may be turned from your sins;
and he from the fierceness of his Wrath, and so consequently may not come into
that woeful, woeful place of Torments, which shall never have an End.

The Lord touch your Hearts, that you may consider both your own Misery, and
this blessed Remedy, and so may fly from that wrath which is to come.

The Third use.
If the Godly must die like other men, then let every one of us that is Godly,
be more mindful of his own death, then usually the very best are; and let him
make his particular application to himself; Then I also must die as well as
other men, and moulder away into rottenness and dust, see Deuteronomy. 23.29.

Plato that Princeps Philosophia, or Prince of Philosophy says, There is Nulla
Salutatis Philosophia, no wholesome Philosophy, sed perpetua Mortis Meditatio,
but a perpetual Meditation of Death. It is, says Scipio, The most honorable
Philosophy to study a man's Mortality.

The Meditation of Death, is the Life of the Wise; nay, it is the very Life of
a Christian Life, say I, and the greatest wisdom of the Godly who is truly
wise; And therefore (to help our selves herein.)

The First Help.
Let us now and often pray with Moses the man of God, Lord teach us to number
our days, that we may apply our Hearts unto Wisdom, Psalm. 90.12.

The Second Help.
Let us take an occasion by every thing we see, to remember our latter end; for
as King Philips Remembrancer told him every day, Philippe memento Mori, Philip
remember that thou must die; so every Creature almost that comes to our view,
minds us of our Death, saying as much to each of us in effect, Remember man
that thou also must die.

I Will instance in Particulars.
The First Instance.
Our very Shoes we wear, being made of Skins of dead Beasts, tell us so much,
and therefore when we put them on, let us remember that we also must die.

The Second Instance.
Our Victuals we eat, being the flesh of dead Beasts, say so much, and
therefore we need not then a Deaths-head to put us in mind of Death, Lang. Pol.
as in ancient time among the Egyptians, Deaths Picture was showed to men at
their Feasts* to mind them of Death: the Meat it self representing the Image of
Death, is a sufficient remembrancer, whereby we may, if we will, yea, ought to
remember our Mortality.

The Third Instance.
When we walk in the colored Fields, and view the gay Diaperie of the Earth,
we may thereby be put in mind of Death; for every Pile of Grass, and every
fading flower there, tell us of it; so as that we might, if we did not turn our
deaf ear to such Powerful Lectures, hear as it were, a Voice behind us, saying,
All flesh is as Grass, and all the Goodliness thereof as the Flower of the
Field; the Grass withers, the Flower fades, because the Spirit of the Lord
blows upon it, Isa. 90.6. I pray you therefore take notice of this Lesson.

The Fourth Instance.
The Earth we tread on preaches the same Lecture, telling us, that being
compounded of that Element, we must needs return again unto it, according to
that Damasc. l. 1. de Fide. c. 4.
Philosophical Axiom, Whatsoever is compacted of Elements, must needs be
dissolved again into the same; Wherefore as often as we do but look on the
Earth, let us remember the Word of the Lord, Dust thou art, and to dust shall
thou return, Genesis 3.19.

The Fifth Instance.
The Corpse, Sepulchers, and Monuments of the Dead tell every one of us so much,
saying as it were, Hodie mihi, Cras tibi, To day it is my turn, to morrow it
may be thine; Wherefore I advise you to walk now and then up and down in a
Church, or Churchyard, and to view such Sepulchers and Monuments of the
deceased deliberately; for then you cannot but mind your own Mortality, reading
theirs upon their silent Tombs, and memorials engraved with most legible
Characters; not so much in Marble, as in the very dust wherein they lie, and
unto which they are returned.

The Sixth Instance.
Your own frail Bodies consisting of contrary Elements, as Fire, Air, Water,
Earth; I mean the four Humors, Choler, Blood, Phlegm, Melancholic, which are
like them, combating and fighting one against another, can tell you, that needs
there must follow a dissolution; for, as I told you, Composition is the
beginning of a Combat, a Combat of Separation, a Separation of a Dissolution.

Wherefore, as in old time, one came after the ancient Emperors, riding in
their Tryumphant Chariots, crying with a loud voice, Tertul. in Apol. adv.
Gentes. cap. 33.
Respice post te, Look behind thee: So let me now come after all those high and
hurtful conceits which you have had of your own Parts, Worth, Strength, Youth,
Wealth, Health; and after all those applauding Flatterers, which have made you
often too secure, saying with a loud Voice,

Look but upon your selves, and behold your Bodies, which a thousand ways may
be on a sudden dissolved, though but one way they entered into this present
World; for whilst you are speaking, walking, eating, writing, thinking, or
sleeping; these four contrary Elements are ever fighting, whereupon, as in
other Battles, one party may prevail in an instant, and cause a great
slaughter; so one of them may prove predominant, and cause a final dissolution
of your weak and mortal Bodies; and this may fall out so, even suddenly and
unexpectedly; as experience has taught us by the sudden Deaths of many, who
had not so much leisure as once to speak one word more after they were so
suddenly and violently assaulted.

The Seventh Instance.
When you go to bed, you are even by that silent custom of yours thought and
told you of your Mortality; for how can there be almost a more lively emblem of
Man's dying, than

1. His unraying of himself? which may mind him of the putting off his Body of
Earth, 2 Cor. 5.4.

2. His Cum in lecto cubas sit tibi ipse jacentis habit is figura in Sepulchro
Clausi. Isid. de summo bone.
lying down upon his Bed; which may put him in mind of his lying down in the
Grave, which will be his Bed.

3. His very sleeping, which may call to his mind his last and longest sleep,
when he shall sleep in his Death, and rise no more till at that great and
dreadful day of the last Doom, the shril and loud sounding Voice of the Son of
God shall awake him out of his sleep, saying, Surgite Mortui, venite ad
Judicium, Rise O ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Hence the very (...). Homer.
Iliad. 14.
Heathen, as well as the Chron. 21.1. Acts 1.60.
Penmen of Gods Holy Spirit have resembled Death to a sleep, and called sleep
Deaths (...). Mnesimachus Com.
Mystery, and Death, Sleeps Brother. So In Filiavel scient. been moriendi. Fol.
47.
Synopa the Cynick, being nigh his end, and very sleepy, said to his Physician,
awakening him, Ne mireris, frater fratrem autevertit, Wonder not at my
sleeping, one Brother preceds another.

Pausan. in Lacon.
Pausauias in like manner writes of the Laconiens, that they set up two
Simulachres, for Death and Sleep as two Brethren.

Wherefore I beseech you, that as often as you are going to bed, to take your
natural rest, you will constantly remember by these three things, that one
needful thing, which is Death, making a particular application of each emblem,
as thus; let a Godly man say to himself,

As now I go to my bed, so I must go to my Grave; and as I put off my Clothes,
so ere long, nay this night it may be, I must put off my Earthly Tabernacle,
which is my Body; and as I shall fall asleep, and know nothing that is done
while I am asleep, so must I very shortly sleep up, and die, not knowing any
thing that shall be done here about me, or with me, or to me; nor can or will
any Sanctity or Godliness that is in me, be able to deliver me from the fatal
stroke of Death, which will steal upon me like sleep; for the very Godly must
die as well as others.

And here let me press upon you a few Perswasives to this remembrance, which is
so rare in the very best.

The First Persuasive.
Consider how secure the best of us are without it, like the people of Lais,
before the Damtes came upon them and slew them, Judge. 18.27. so are we; no
longer then death is before us, does any thing almost go near us, or move us,
as appears by many things. The instance but in a few:

1. When the Plague does cease in a place near us.

2. When any other common sickness does leave us or ours in our Families.

3. When Wars or rumors of Wars threatening us do surcease among us.

4. When a Funeral, which did mind us of Death, is forgotten again by us; how
secure grow we by and by and slow to good! whereas as long as we were in some
fear or danger, and so consequently mindful of our latter end, we were mightily
stirred up to Duties.

And therefore should we not for this very cause strive to remember our
Mortality more then we do, that so doing, we might shake off that gross
security, which is so common among us.

The Second Persuasive,
And do ye not see how strongly sin does prevail against you, when such holy
thoughts of Death are departed from you? Just as it was in the days of Moses
with Issrael, so it fares with us now, when Moses was but gone out of their
sight upon the Mount, they presently fell to Idolatry, and made a Golden Calf,
Exodus 31.3, 4. So soon as Death is but a little departed out of our mind, we
fall to Spiritual Idolatry, and make a God of the Belly, Phil. 3.19. Or of out
Parts, or of our Money, Ephesians. 5.4. Or of our Children, or of our Gardens,
Houses, Walks, Friends. In a word, how foolish and vain are we, as Moses
implies, Deuteronomy. 32.29. Psalm. 90.12.

Do ye not find it so? can ye deny it? and had we not need then to keep Moses,
I should say death, ever with us, and not to let him go out of our minds, that
we might not so soon and easily fall to such Idolatry?

The Third Persuasive.
Consider we likewise how unquiet and how dubious we are most times, when we do
put off the most needful remembrance of death. For, as thereupon it comes to
pass that we grow secure and backward in Duties, and prone to sin; (as I have
already showed) so can we not but (after that) even question our estates to
Godward, and interest in those unknown and unexpressable joys, delights and
pleasures, which attend the Godly after Death, in Heavens Kingdom: like
Aristotle, who said, when he was dying, Anxius vixi, dubious morior nescio quo
vado; so should we be forced to say in a manner, if in that Case, we should be
assaulted by Death, Anxiously we have lived, doubtfully we die, we know not
whether we shall go to Heaven or Hell.

So true is that excellent saying of a wise man, that sine Meditatione Mortis
tranquillo esse Ammo nemo potest, That without this Meditation of Death, none
may be quiet or enjoy true tranquillity in his Mind.

Let none therefore that is Godly, either refuse to pray (as I said) with
Moses, Lord teach us to number our days, that we may be more wise and sober,
or to be beholding to any Creature to be put in mind by it of Death.

Forasmuch as you all see what need we had all so to do, that we may not be so
secure, so prone to sin, and so doubtful as many times we are and have been.

The Fourth use.
Must Godly men dye as well as others? then let none of us that is Godly build
Tabernacles here, but rather let him live as a Pilgrim upon Earth, like those
ancient Believers, Heb. 11.13.

And as the Chrysostom. in Matthew. 22. hom. 70.
Scythiens, who travel up and down, not having any fixed or certain
mansion house; so let him be in this present World, as without a House, without
Lands, without Money, without a Wife, without Children, and without Friends;
that is, if he have an House, Land, Money, Wife, Child, Friend, let him be so
loose, so indifferent, so free, so un-engaged, un-intangled, and untyed in his
affection, as if he had none, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. because he may, yea, must ere
long be Habui enim illos tanquam amissurus. Seneca Epist. 64.
without them: And if he have no great means, let him rather pass by them
valiantly, than peruse after them inordinately, or wickedly; for if he had
them, he would be forced very shortly to leave them, and to be gone, though he
should be never so holy and godly; according to my Text, Those all dyed.
Guerrius Considerat of Eternity.
hearing these words read in the Church, Genesis 5.5, 6, 7, 8. And dyed, and dyed,
was so wrought upon thereby, that he retired himself from the world, and gave
himself wholly to his devotion, that he also might die the death of the godly.
Let these words of my Text work in like manner upon you, I pray you, and then
your hearing will make you as happy as his did him.

How they dyed.
2. You have heard of the death of these holy Patriarchs that lived before and
after the Flood; would you know how they dyed? then mark what follows, [In
the Faith,] or rather, According to Faith, as the (...).
Original has it, and both ancient and modern Interpreters translate it; and
the meaning of this speech is, as Gagueius in loc.
Expositors say, they dyed Lyra in loc.
by and with Calvin in loc.
Faith; that is, being Piscat. in loc.
constant in the Faith, and laying hold on the Promises made to Faith: where by
Faith, we must understand likewise not a dead, or historical, or temporary
Faith, but a lively, saving, justifying Faith; which is first discribed in the
very front or first verse of this Chapter; and then exemplified by so many
Instances in the residue to the very end and period of it.

Whence resultes this most profitable and useful Observation.

The Second Doctrine.
That the Saints of God being true Believers, do not only live by Faith, but
also die in, by, with, and according to Faith.

So did all those holy Patriarchs that are mentioned by the holy Apostle, in
the beginning of this Chapter; and so did the test whom he reckons up in the
middle and ending of it; as you may note, ve^se 21, 22, 31, 39. So did Stephen
the Proto-Martyr, uttering, when he was dying, with much considence these very
words, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: Mark; first he calls Christ Lord,
implying him to be his Redeemer, and Owner, that bought him.

Secondly, He commends into his hands his spirit, being persuaded that he was
able to keep it, and to restore it. So Such Examples are superadded for
Illustration.
Babylas of Antioch, the Martyr; for he said when he was dying, Return, O my
Soul, unto thy rest, because the Lord has blessed thee; because thou have
delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, my feet from falling, I
shall walk before the Lord in the Land of the living.

So Dr. Hill in his direct. to dye well. p. 179.
Peter Martyr, for he said, My Body is weak, but my mind is well. There is no
Salvation but only by Christ, who was given of the Father to be a Redeemer of
mankind; this is my Faith in which I die.

So blessed Bagshaw in the life and death of Mr. Bolton. p. 34.
Bolton, who when he was dying, said to his hearers, I feel nothing in my soul
but Christ, with whom I heartily desire to be.

So Pareus (as the Preacher relates it in his Funeral-Sermon, which I heard my
self) wrote to the same effect, when his speech was gone; This Catarrh has
taken away the use of my speech, but he shall never rob me of my Faith in
Christ.

The first Reason.
And it cannot be otherwise.

For,

1. Their Faith can never fail them, Luke 21.32. being like mustardseed indeed,
Luke 17.6. which being ing once Hemin. l. 3. c. 24
sown in a garden, can hardly ever be rooted out again; so that needs it must
show it self in death as well as life.

The second Reason.
2. In death the Saints of God had most need of the use of their Faith; by
reason of,

First, Satan; who then will be sure to sift them as he sifted Peter, Luke
22.31. and to bend all his forces against them, to make them either presume or
despair.

Secondly, Carnal Reason; which then will most of all discourage them,
suggesting such reasonings as these;

Bernard Sermon de Parm. 7 miserecord.
Who art thou, or how great is that Glory, and by which works think thou to
obtain it?

Thirdly, Their own self-accusing Consciences; who then above all times, will
most accuse them, Romans 2.15. being stirred up by Satan; who is called the
Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12.10.

So that they cannot but then especially exercise their Faith: even as
Soldiers in assaults, and sharpest conflicts, and battles, when they must
either conquer, or die, will then use their chiefest weapon most of all, and so
even die fighting, if they must needs die: like Plutarchus.
Epaminondas, who so ended his days in a fight. I say, the Saints cannot but
so in like manner, use their Faith, as their principal weapon, then most of
all, and so consequently die in, with, by, and according to Faith.

APPLICATION.
For Application, I Will now deduce hence three Inferences.

1. The Excellency of SavingFaith.

2. The Nullity of many men's pretended Faith.

3. The Duty of all that will be counted godly, and to be truly ennobled with
Saving-Faith.

Of these in order.

The first Inference.
1. Great then is the Excellency of Saving-Faith, which holds out in death it
self, when Strength, Physic, Friends, and all things else fail us. Saul and
Jonathan, (said David after their death) were lovely and pleasant in their
lives, and in their Death they were not divided, 2 Samuel 1.23.

The same may be said of all the Godly, and their Faith, after their departure,
that they were lovely and sweet companions in their lives, and that in their
very death they were not divided; for, These all dyed in the Faith, says the
Apostle of the Godly; that is (as I showed in my former Exposition) with Faith,
having Faith for their companion in their death and expiration.

And therefore what do we talk of Silver, Gold, and earthly Jewels, that they
are excellent and precious things? here is a Jewel indeed, a most excellent and
precious thing, without all comparison, even Saving-Faith, which in death it
self stands by us, and tells us in a manner, that whilst we breath, it will
never leave us nor forsake us; yea, abides with us, (in some sort) as Est
etiam fides rerum, quando non verbis sed rebus ipsis praesentibus creditur,
quod erit cum per speciem manifest am se contemplandam praebebit Dei sapientia.
Aug. 2. quaest. Evangel. cap. 39.

Est enim duples sides; 1. Verborum in hac vita. 2. Rerum in futura. Vid.
Lombard. 1.3. did. 24. Ames. Medulla Theol. lib. 2. c. 6.


some say, even after death, which is more; whereas neither Silver, nor Gold,
nor Gemmes, nor any other earthly thing can then stead us, when the last breath
leaves us, and the pangs of death are upon us: O Faith, Faith, how admirable
and amiable art thou therefore, and must needs be in the eyes of him that has
thee! for if heaps of Silver, and Gold, and Pearls, which in death we must
leave behind us, be so precious, as usually they are in the estimation of those
that possess them, thou must needs be, or should be infinitely more precious
in the judgment of him who so has thee, as that in death it self he cannot
lose thee!

O that my soul were but condignly affected with thy transcendent Excellency,
that so I might accordingly set that value and price upon thee, as befits thy
most rare and admirable Eminency!

And O that you also, my Beloved, were but thoroughly convinced of this
stupendous Excellency of Saving-Faith! For then there is no question but you
would labor more after so rare a Jewel as Faith is, if you did want it, and
make more account and use of it then you do, if you have it.

The Lord open your eyes, that you may see the Orient Splendour, and matchless
worth of this rarest Pearl, which in death it self will not depart from ye.

The Second Inference.
2. This shows the Nullity of many men's pretended Faith; for who will believe
it, that they have or ever had true Saving-Faith, who before they come to die,
live so loosely, as that Heathens and Turks themselves, who are professed
Infidels, cannot well live more licensiously!

Of this sort are they that,

1. Hate and despise so the Power of Religion in all those that are most
happily ennobled with it, 2 Timothy 3.12.

2. Live so profanely themselves, as that Esau himself in his Profaneness,
could not outstrip them, Heb. 12, 16. caring neither for God, nor Church, nor
Teacher, nor Prayer, nor Bible, nor Sabbath, nor any other part of God's most
holy Worship.

3. Tear so the sacred Name of God with their bloody Oaths.

In a word, those that are so disobedient to Parents, Husbands, Masters, and so
angry, fierce and passionate in their speeches, so unfaithful, unjust and
deceitful in their dealings, so mendacious and false in their communications,
so envious, covetous and ambitious in their hearts, and so lascivious, filthy
and wanton in their lives; these, even all these (questionless) neither have
now, nor ever had yet that true and Saving-Faith, in which, by which, with
which, and according to which, the Godly, who only are true Believers, both
live and die; for they rather live in their sins in general, and by their
cozening, cheating, usurious lending, and lying in special, and according to
their envious, lustful, covetous, ambitious, profane and atheistical hearts
desire, than in, by, with, and according to Saving-Faith; and as they live, so
they will die (unless God grant them Faith and Repentance before) in, with, and
according to their sins. ( Nam qualis vita, finisita; For as men live, so they
die, usually.)

My meaning is,

1. As here they have no Faith, so in death they shall have no Comfort, nor
Joy, nor Peace, Isa. 48.22.

2. And as here they could not live without scoffing, deriding, swearing,
cursing, cozening, lying, contending, whoring, and profaning of God's Sacred
Name, Word and Sacraments; so after their death they shall not be able to live
without suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, for their boldness in sinning,
Romans 2.8, 9.

3. And as here they did even exceed in their drink, pride, malice, envy,
wrath, strife, contention, lust, avarice, atheism, authotheism, polytheism and
epicurism; so God will exceed in punishing, adjudging and condemning them to so
much greater torments than others, as they have been greater and more heinous
offenders than other; for God will render unto every man according to his
deeds, Romans 2.6. Mark; According; that is, proportionably. Hence Bonaventura
Brevil. p. 7. c. 7.
Bonaventure, because that infernal Fire burns not, but according to the
disposition of sin, and of that guilt and spot which preceding the improbity of
lust, has contracted: and because that is not equal in all, therefore it is
that some are more burnt than others, in the same. This will be the
catastrophe, end, and period of all such as do not, or will not live and die
according to Faith, but according to their sinful desires: He that suffers
least in that Infernal Lake, suffers more pain than all they together; who
either were troubled with the Stone, Gout, Cholick, Strangury, or else were
racked, skinned, boiled in Oil, roasted upon a Spit or Gridiron, burnt, starved,
or buried alive: Haec omnia quae hic patimur merus lusus ac risus sunt sicum
illis suppliciis in contentionens veniant. Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. hom. 49.
all these things which men here suffer, are but a mere play, sport, a
laughingmatter, being compared with those unutterable, unexpressable, and
unconceivable Tortures, which by any damned wrecth are to be endured in that
horrid Dungeon, called Hell, to all eternity.

And therefore conceive proportionably, how grievous, and how insufferable will
be the burning of some among us, who having outmatched others in sinning, shall
suffer to the very uttermost the vengeance of that merciless Fire, without ease
or end. O my Brethren, how can you sit here so quietly under your Ministry, you
that are guilty of such sins, as convince you to be both void of Saving-Faith,
and also to be the persons that shall endure those unspeakable Tortures, and
burn in those merciless Flames, which will torment you for ever and ever, so as
that you shall have no rest, or ease neither day nor night?

The third Inference.
3. If godly men, being Believers, do not only live by Faith, but also die in,
with, by, and according to Faith, then it behooveth us to die so too,
whenever we shall be called to that state, if we count our selves to be of
the number of the Godly, and will be certain of it.

To help those which heartily desire to be informed herein, I Will in the next
place set down such Principles as are most necessary to the right happy
attaining to such a blessed Death.

Four Principles.
1. These two Principles, the first and second, make mightily and mainly for
that Preparation which is to be made against the day of Death.
They that will die so, must first live so, as that they may die so.

2. These two Principles, the first and second, make mightily and mainly for
that Preparation which is to be made against the day of Death.
They must make comfortable provision for death.

3. They must be sure that they have Faith.

4. They must use their Faith according to that condition in which then they
are. Of these methodically.

For the first.

1. They must live so; that is,

1. As Abraham (who dyed in the Faith) left his own Country, and died Mors
Civilis nihil aliud est quam exilium civis. Dr. Vulteius Jurispr. l. 1. c. 24.
Civilly before he died Corporally, verse. 8. So must they leave their native
soil, which is the Country of sin, and die to sin; mortifying the Body of sin,
before Death approaching dissolves the body of earth, Col. 3.5.

I am not ignorant of the extreme difficulty of this heavy Task, unto which I
persuade the Godly; and therefore I Will labor to facilitate it as much as I
may, affording a few Subsidies; which I desire God to bless unto you.

The first Subsidy.
1. Set Faith on work, that mighty Conqueror, and then the conquest will be
very facile and easy; for, This is our victory that overcomes the World, even
our Faith, 1 John 5.4.

Quest.
How shall I overcome sin by Faith?

Answ.
Believe verily that sin shall not overpower thee, though it trouble thee;
Because,

1. God has promised thee that it shall not have dominion over thee, Romans 6.12.

2. Christ himself has died for thee, that sin might not live, but die in
thee, Tit. 2.14.

2. Unsheath against sin (when it assaults thee) the Sword of the Spirit, which
is the Word of God: as Christ himself did, Mat. 4.

3. Discharge the great Ordnance of Prayer against it: as Paul did, 2 Cor. 12.8.

4. Famish it by detaining and withholding all such occasions from it, as
usually feed it: like Joseph, Genesis 39.10.

5. Overawe it and affright it continually with the gresly remembrance of
Death; for then, as all the men of Israel fled when they saw Goliath, that huge
lump of flesh, with his deadly weapons about him, 1 Samuel 17.24. so all your
sins will flee, as not daring to show themselves in the presence of death, who
with his deadly arrows, may shoot you, and cut off the silver Cords of your
precious and dear Life, in the very act of sin. So as that you may do well to
reason thus with yourselves when fin does entice you; would I do so if I were
now to die? No, no; and therefore why should I yield to such an evil, in the
which it may please God to cut me off by death, so as that I shall not be able
to say so much as God be merciful unto me a sinner. See Eccles. 7.33.

6. Assure your selves that nothing will plague you more when you come to die,
than such sins as did not die before you; for Satan will then be sure to muster
them up before your face, when he comes up with you to have his last bout with
you, being indeed the craftiest and subtilest Adversary you have, Rev. 11.12.
Brethren, what I tell you now of this Adversary, before you come to die, the
Dying have found by experience, and confessed it as an infallible truth. O God,
said the Earl of Essex, at the point of death, and Judge of all men, thou have
let me know by warrant out of thy Word, that Satan is then most busy, when our
end is nearest.

Moriantur ergo ante te vitia tua, Let thy sins die therefore before thee, that
when thou art dying, they may not so torment thee.

7. Mortify your sins by degrees one after another, for then your conquest
will be far more easy than if you should set upon all at once. Nam virtus
unita fortior; For united Forces are ever stronger. If you take a bundle of
Arrows, you cannot easily break them, but take one by one, and you shall burst
them quickly. It is proportionably so with your sins, which are like Arrows
piercing the very soul, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. and therefore take one, and one, and
break them by degrees, and then it will be an easy matter for you to burst the
necks of all your sins in time; that is, as you are tempted now to one, then to
another; being bent nevertheless against all in the purpose of your hearts.

8. You must make this account, that you can never attain to a wellgrounded and
comfortable assurance of everlasting Bliss to be enjoyed after death, unless
you may see the death of your sins in a competent sort before you; no, no; for
he that will live when he dies, must die while he lives; die, I mean, to sin,
and to the world, Gal. 6.14. and therefore what certainty can you have of such
a life, if you be not sure of a such death?

9. On the contrary; persuade your selves, that dying after the death of your
sins, you may be sure you shall die as Conquerours; nay, shall live most
certainly, and be new born, rather than forlorn; Like valiant Epaminondas, who
dying after the conquest and slaughter of his enemies, said to his victorious
Soldiers, Nunc Epaminonda vascitur, quia sic moritur. Valor. Max.
Now Epaminondas is born, because he dies after this manner.

Die, die therefore, before you die, that you may be sure you shall not die,
but live when you die: which the Lord in mercy grant unto you.

2. As the Patriarchs, Heb. 11.4, 8. so must you correspond with the Will of
God in all good things.

Particularly.
1. As Abel offered, and offered a more acceptable Sacrifice than Cain, Heb.
11.4. so must you offer, and offer more acceptable Sacrifices and Services to
God, than others; that is, you must pray, fast, sing, read, hear, visit, speak
and give, etc. in a better manner than common, profane and civil men, and
hypocrites, which you must transcend.

2. As Abraham being commanded to go into a strange Country, went he knew not
whither; so must you go even about those many strange duties unto which God
leads us; as he sent him to a strange place: As for instance.

1. The Duty of Reconciliation, Mat. 5.25.

2. The Duty of not resisting Evil, ver.26.

3. The Duty of suffering evil men with patience, ver.39.

4. The Duty of loving our Enemies, ver.44.

5. The Duty of laboring after that Perfection which is in God himself, ver.
48.

6. The Duty of not carking and caring so much for the things of this life,
Mat.6.25.

7. The Duty of entering into the narrow Way which leads to Life, Mat. 7.13.
With none of these we may dispense, but we must put our selves upon them all,
being called thereunto by that great God and Savior, who can command all.

3. As Abraham, being in a strange Country, dealt justly, paying for what he
bought, and purchased most exactly (For the sacred Story relates, that he
weighed his Silver to Ephron for a burying-place, that it might not want
anything, Genesis 23.16.) so must you, 1 These. 4.6.

As he instructed his household in the fear of God, Genesis 18.19. so must you,
Ephesians. 6.4.

5. As he was liberal, expressing so much by his ready and cheerful
entertaining of strangers (for he sat in his Tent door at noon, which was
dinner time, looking out for strangers; whereas some will rather hide
themselves from strangers, Genesis 18, 1.) so must you, Heb. 13.1,2,16.

6. As Isaac was wont to exspatiate, and to walk out into the field to
meditate, Genesis 24, 63, so let us in like manner duly and daily, either at home
or abroad, John 1.8. 1 Timothy 4.15.

More particularly let us meditate, on these four last things.

1. Death. 2. Judgment. 3. Heaven. 4. Hell.
7. As those ancient Believers, who dyed in the Faith, did what they did in
Faith, and by Faith, Heb. 11.4,8, etc. so do you; for whatsoever is not done in
Faith, is sin, Romans 14.23.

Quest.
If you ask me, How must we do things in Faith?

Answ. Believing,

1. That God will assist you, as he has promised you, Ezekiel. 36.27.

2. That he will accept of your good Deeds in and for Christ, in whom he is
well pleased, Matthew. 17.5.

3. That he will graciously reward you, Heb. 11.6.

Of these three Acts of Faith, together with your good Works, make a
Confection, like that of, 1st. Stacte, 2ly. Onicha, 3ly. Galbanum, and 4ly.
pure Frankincense, which after the art of the Apothecary was to be made in the
time of the Levitical Law, Exodus 30.34, 35. that it may yield a sweet savor
unto the Lord, who takes delight in Faith, which must be the chief ingredient
in so sweet a composition.

The Second Principle.
You must make comfortable provision for the day of Death, like Mariners, who
against a long and troublesome Voyage, provide sundry strong and Cordial Waters
which may strengthen them when they navigate over the great Ocean, and meet
with grievous Storms and Tempests.

Quest.
If you demand what I mean by this Comfortable Provision?

Answ.
Such seasonable and suitable Sentences as shall be able to support your
fainting Hearts in that last and forest conflict, as Hos. 13.14. Luke 12.32.
and 23.43. Romans 14.7, 8. 1 Cor. 15.41, 42, 43. 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
Rev. 14.13. Rev. 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8.

These precious Cordials, being well digested, will make us even long for
Death, and cause us to be cheerful in Death; Like a Kings Son, who being sent
for to come home from a far, cold and barren Country, into which he was
formerly banished, to take possession of a most rich, most spacious, and most
flourishing Kingdom left him by his Father, cannot but take his journey, and go
on in his way with much rejoicing.

For so we are but sent for, when we must die, to come away from the barren and
uncomfortable soil of this world, to be enstated in the most Glorious and
Capacious Kingdom of Heaven.

And therefore imprint them all in your memories, that so those everlasting
Spirits of yours, breathed into your bodies by the All-powerful God, I mean
your Souls, may feed on them, and sill themselves with them, and be revived by
them; and so consequently with such Honey-sweet-Cordials strengthening them,
may go hence, when the time of their departure is come, to God your Heavenly
Father, as Sampson to his Father, with Honey in his mouth; for he came eating,
Judge. 14.9.

The third Principle.
You must make it sure, that you have faith by an infallible Trial (2 Cor.
13.5.) trying your selves often by these three neverdeceiving Signs.

1. A through Humiliation, Acts 2.37.

2. A through Purgation from sin, even every known sin, so as that none reigns
or rules in the heart, Acts 15.9.

3. A through Sanctification, Acts 26.18. manifesting it self by a constant and
earnest endeavor to walk in all God's Holy Commandments in general, Luke 1.6.
and by love unfeigned in special, I mean that singular Love which the true
Believer bears to God in Christ above all, seeking his Glory in all things, and
more then all things; and to the Ch^^dren of God, for God, Gal. 6.5. 1 John
3.14. Of which love St. Aug. de Trin. l. 8. c. 7.
Austin says truly, That a man knows more the love with which he loves,
then his Brother whom he loves.

The Fourth Principle.
You are to make use of your Faith, when death approaches, as the state of a
dying Believer requires it; observing these ensuing Rules.

The First Rule.
A dying Believer must set his House in order, Isa. 38. and if he be free and
of ability, and have not done so before, make his last Will and Testament,
according to Faith, believing verily that God will be a Father to his Children
(if he be a Father) and a Husband to his Wife (if a Husbard) and that he will
bless that well-gotten Estate which he leaves to his God-fearing Posterity,
whether it be much or little, so as that they shall find content in it, and so
far forth as his blessing of it shall make for their good.

The Second Rule.
He must according to Faith possess his Soul in Cum e^i^^ and Deus sit qui nos
castigat and is misericordiae suae non obliviscatur, cur it a nos conficimur
marere? cur solvimur in ejulator? Cur murmuramus and fremimus? Doctor Daniel
Tisianus in Lament. 4.39.
Patience, eying by Faith such places as these, Isa. 26.3. Romans 8.18. 2 Cor.
4.17. The consideration whereof caused an ancient Aug. in Psalm. 36. Cenc. 2.
Doctor to say most aptly, When thou do consider what thou art to receive,
all the things that thou suffer here, imagine the most bitter pains and
pangs which thou must undergo in thy last and sorest sickness, will be vile
unto thee, neither will thou esteem them worthy for which thou should receive
it: Thou will wonder that so much is given for so small a labor. For indeed
Brethren, for everlasting rest, everlasting labor should be undergone; being
to receive everlasting felicity, thou ought to sustain everlasting
sufferings: but if thou should undergo everlasting labor, when should
thou come to everlasting felicity? So it comes to pass, that thy tribulation
must needs be Temporal, that it being finished, thou may come to infinite
felicity. But yet Brethren, there might have been long tribulation for eternal
Felicity. That for example; because our felicity shall have no end, our misery
and our tribulations (add sickness in special) should be of long continuance;
for admit they should continue a thousand years, weigh a thousand years with
eternity! Why do thou weigh that which is finite, be it never so great, with
that which is infinite? Ten thousand years, ten hundred thousand, if we should
say, and a thousand thousand, which have an end, cannot be compared with
Eternity.

So Macarius the Eygptian Anchorete, (...). Macar. Hom. 15.
Touching the Gift which Christians shall inherit, this a man may rightly say,
that if any one from the time Adam was created unto the very end of the world,
did fight against Satan, and undergo afflictions (add, or should be so long
visited with the most grievous sickness) he should do (or suffer) no great
matter in respect of the Glory that he shall inherit; for he shall reign with
Christ without end.

3. Let him give good instructions to the Survivers according to Faith; like
Jacob, Genesis 49.2, 3, 4, etc. and like Dr. Hill in his Directions to die well,
p. 129.
St. Austin, who being near his end, said, Nature compels me to be
dissolved; I according to the Scripture phrase, am to go the way of my
Forefathers: Now Christ inviteth me; now I desire to see celestial Sights. O
keep you the Faith, think you also that ye are mortal men. Let this be your
care to keep the Commandments of God, if you regard me, or keep any remembrance
of me, your Father, think of these things, savor these things, do these things.

4. Let him take his fill and farewell of Repentance, viewing, confessing and
lamenting his sins as much as he can according to Faith; and in Faith; that is,
believing verily, that he shall see them no more again for ever; even as the
Children of Israel saw the Egyptians (of whom they were so much afraid) no more
again for ever, Exodus 14.13.

5. When he is brought to the very confines of that King of fear, so as that
now forthwith he must yield up his Ghost, then let him even sleep up in Faith,
and die in the Lord according to Faith, Rev. 14.13.

I Will explicate my meaning herein by these few Directions.

1. Let him now eye the Promises, formerly gathered for the same purpose; like
those ancient Believers, Heb. 11.13.

2. Let him labor to be persuaded of them, as they were. Ibidem,

3. Let him even embrace the Lord Christ in the arms of his faith, as old
Simeon embraced him in the arms of his body, believing verily,

1. That he died for him in particular, that he might not die the death which
is eternal, Gal. 2.20.

2. That he purchased Heaven for him in particular, as the Author of his
Salvation, Heb. 5.9. like sweet Guillermus de vita St. Bernard. l. 1. c. 12.
St. Bernard, who when he seemed to stand before God's dreadful Tribunal in a
grievous sickness, told Satan, accusing him, That he for his part, was not
worthy indeed of everlasting Life, but that his Lord and Savior, Christ,
having a twofold right to it, by inheritance, and by virtue of his passion, was
contented with the one, and did impart unto him the other. So let him persuade
himself in like manner, and answer the same Accuser of the Brethren in the same
words, if he trouble him, as at such a time he is wont to do, with his
accusations to drive him to desparation.

3. Let him pray in Faith to the Lord, saying either with Stephen, the
Proto-Martyr, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. or with Christ himself,
Father into thy hands I commend my Spirit, Luke 23.46. and if God seem to be
angry at that time, then let him interpose the Death of his Son between his
Wrath and his own soul in his last prayers, saying, Hosius in Confess.
petrocoviens. c. 13.
I enterpose the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, betwixt me and thine anger; no
otherwise do I contend with thee. And if he say to him, Thou art a sinner; let
him answer, Lord, I put the Death of the Lord Jesus Christ, betwixt thee and my
sins. If he say, Thou have deserved Damnation; say, I set the Death of our Lord
Jesus Christ betwixt me and my bad merits, and I offer his Merits instead of
the merits which I ought to have, but yet have not.

Thus I instruct the dying Christian to pray, as men were taught many hundred
years agone; and therefore I beseech you, that you will lay up these sayings in
your hearts; as Mary, the thrice blessed Virgin, the Shepherds words, Luke
2.19. that so you may be able, with much readiness, to prompt them, and to make
use of them, according to Faith, and in Faith, to your unutterable and endless
Comfort; which the Lord of Life in mercy grant unto you.

Let me add a few Incentives, and then I have done.

So doing (as has been showed in all these Rules and Directions) you shall
purchaseto your selves, 1. Much Boldness. 2. Much Quietness. 3. Much
Cheerfulness.


1. Much Boldness.

There is a twofold Boldness; 1. A Well-grounded. 2. A Groundless.


The one is good, the other is bad.

1. The good and Well-grounded, I mean, which proceeds,

1. From Righteousness, and an holy walking with God, which makes a man as
bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. For as the Hemin. l. 1. c. 105.
Lion, being pursued by the Hunter, does not hide, but rather show himself, and
counts it a great shame to flee; yea, Isidore, Etymol. l. 6.
looks the Hunter in the very face, and is not affrighted or daunted, but
rather encouraged. So, careful holy Walkers, do not fly, or shrink, or fear,
or hide their faces, but show themselves most when death is nearest, and are
bold even to look him in the face; as we may note in the three Children, when
they were threatened with death, yea, with a most grievous and extraordinary
Death, Dan. 3.18. and in diverse holy Martyrs: I Will instance but in one;
Ignatius Epist. ad Pim. de Smyrna per Ephesians.
O that I might but once enjoy those Beasts, said Ignatius, which are prepared
for me, and which I wish may quickly consume me, and not being terrified,
abstain from me as they did from others; and if they will not touch me, I Will
impel and urge them. Forgive me. I know what is expedient for me; let the Fire,
the Cross, the constancy of Beasts, Abscision, Separation, confraction of all
my Members, and a dissolution of my whole body, and all Satan's whips come to
me, that I may win Christ. Thus he.

2. From a holy Confidenc in God upon former experiences; for such as be so
careful to walk so holily (as has been formerly showed) cannot but find much
sweetness in God, and receive many tokens of love and favor from God, Psalm.
31.19, 20. so that needs they must be very confident in their lives, and bold
at last in their death. The Hebricians call therefore Boldness, Betac,
Confidence, because it proceeds from it: and the Aqum. 2. Sent. did. 26. q.
1. a. 3.
Schools define it by Considence.

II. Much Quietness; For,

1. There can be no such discord, as is, and must be in careless providers for
Death, between,

1. The Law of God, and their own Consciences, because they strive to the
utmost to agree with it, that it may not prove in the end their greatest
adversary. So Austin understands our Saviors speech, Mat. 5.25.

2. Hope and Reason; for Reason it self cannot but reason for them upon such
grounds drawn from holy Writ, as cannot be denied. For instance; that one
pregnant passage 2 Pet. 1.10, 11. cannot but afford such a Premise, as must
needs infer for them a most firm Conclusion, that entrance shall be ministered
unto them (upon their diligence in making their Calling and Election sure by an
Holy Walking) into the everlasting lasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior,
Christ.

3. God himself, and them: for, In every Nation, he that fears him, and
works Righteousness, is accepted with him, Acts 10.35. and as without Faith
its impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. so with and by Faith a man cannot but
please God, and so be at peace with God, Romans 5.1.

2. They that shall follow these Rules, shall fix their minds upon the Lord's
never-failing Promises, according to one of the said Rules; and therefore they
must needs be very quiet, stayed and firm, for the Promises are most firm, even
Yea and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and therefore they that stay themselves in
them, must needs be so too; even as he that builds upon a Rock builded
firmly, and as he that stands upon a Rock stands firmly: Hence, when an holy
Man was asked how he could pass his last sickness so without any trouble? he
answered, That he did ever eye that excellent promise, in Esa. 26.3. Thou will
keep him in perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because be trusts in
thee.

True it is, that some holy Walkers and eminent Believers, as Mr. Glover, Mr.
Peacock, and others, have been much troubled for all this in their latter end,
which may seem to cross what I have said, but their trouble was not perpetual.

For first, They had comfort at last.

2. Was rather a kind of peace, then a war; for their trouble was a war with
Satan. Now our war with Satan, as Tertullian says truly, Is our peace, because
it brings peace at last.

3. Was extraordinary, whereas ordinarily an holy walking and confidence,
brings quietness; and so I desire to be understood.

I close up therefore the prosecution of this second Incentive with a Speech,
like unto that which an Hebrew Interpreter made to King Ptolomy, asking him,
How he might be at rest when he Dreamed? Let Piety be the scope of all thy
sayings and doings; for by applying all thy Discourses and Works to excellent
things, whether thou sleep or wakest, thou shall have quiet rest in regard
of thy self. Thus he. And as he said to him, so say I unto you; would ye die
and sleep up quietly? then do as he advised him, and put your trust in the Lord
withal, and it will be so.

3. Much chear^ulness (which is a higher degree of comfort, being Positive;
whereas quietness is Negative comfort) I or,

1. There is not such cause and matter of discomfort and sadness in such as do
so carefully provide for death, and labor to die in and according to Faith, as
in other loose and careless persons, who

1. Quench the Spirit that should comfort them.

2. Grieve the Spirit that should comfort them.

Whereas careful providers for death rather,

1. Blow up the good motions and workings of the Spirit, as much as in them
lies, by their careful and holy walking, and applying of the Lord's Promises;
so that needs they must feel more joy and comfort then others that do not so,
even as one that blows up Coals does feel more heat then he which suffers
them to go out.

2. Please the Spirit of God, and cherish his motions by their conformity to
his Nature, in that they labor to be as Spiritual as possible they may, and so
consequently to partake of his Nature; so as that the Spirit, being pleased and
cherished, cannot but please and cherish them again, as they please and cherish
him; for if we that usually are very unkind and ungrateful, yet cannot but be
kind to those that be kind to us, and make much of them as they make much of
us; how much more will that most kind and holy Spirit of God cheer up those
that cherish him, and make much of them as they make much of him? See Acts
9.31. how therefore they that walked in the fear of the Lord, are also said to
walk in the Comforts of the holy Ghost.

2. Such are most fit for comfort and joy. For,

1. The muchness of Grace which is in them, and proceeds from them, cannot but
be evidently seen and observed by them, and cause them to joy in it, and to be
even exceeding glad for it, like a man that has and finds a treasure that was
hid in his field, see Mat. 13.44. Now the finding of such a Treasure will cheer
up the heart.

2. The enlargment of their holy desires and endeavors cannot but procure joy,
which is an Laetitia quasi latitia.
enlargement of the Heart, Psalm. 119.32. and is given to holy and careful
walkers, as a gracious remuneration from God, Psalm. 97.11.

3. Holy walkers and careful providers, for death cannot but attain to a most
happy consecution of that good which they desire, even the enjoying of Christ
by Faith, and a cognition or knowledge of the same consecution, which is
Delectatio requirit consecutionem boni convenientis et consecutionis
cognitionem. Tho. Aquin. 1.2. q. 32. a. 1.
required unto delectation, as well as the consecution it self; so that they
cannot but rejoice more or less, sooner or later, with that joy which is
called, Unspeakable, and full of Glory, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. or at least with a
lesser degree of joy, if God, for causes best known to himself, be pleased to
suspend and to deny that higher degree of rejoicing.

4. They are in a manner in Heaven already, and Heaven is in them, in that they
mind nothing almost but Heaven, as I showed that men ought so to do, so as that
they cannot but joy in that which is so full of joy (enjoying the very same
objective Happiness with the Saints in Heaven, though not the same subjective
Happiness, as not being yet capable of it) for if he that is but in a
Goldsmiths shop, cannot but receive some splendour from the Gold that is in it,
how much more shall they that mind nothing but Heaven, and so have their
conversation in Heaven, partake also more or less of that Joy and Blessedness
which is in Heaven, and which the true Believer sees, as it were, and beholds
by his Faith; and seeing, admireth; and admiring, in a manner, possesses; for,
by Hope we are saved already, says the Apostle, Romans 8.24. Arist. 2. Rhetor.
11.
Aristotle says expressly, That Admiration is the cause of Joy and Delectation,
because it makes us hope, that we shall acquire something which is delectable
and joyful. And therefore conceive ye what Joy the vision and taking possession
of Heaven it self, which is so rare and so full of admiration, must needs cause
in a truly serious and savingly believing mind.

For your greater delight and encouragement, I Will here set down some of those
triumphant passages which some careful Providers for Death have uttered to this
purpose, a little before they were by Death unmanned. I feel a light, said, Fox.
Justus Jusbery, one of Christ's blessed Martyrs, which refreshes me with joy,
far above that which I am able to express, desiring nothing more now then to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.

So Adolphus Clarebachius, Martyr, at his death; I believe there is not a
merrier heart in the world at this instant than mine. And for my part, said Mr.
Deering, as concerning death, I feel such joy of spirit, that if I should have
the sentence of lise on the one side, and the sentence of death on the other
side, I had rather choose a thousand times (seeing God has appointed the
separation) the sentence of death, than the sentence of life.

So Mr. John Holland, a fruitful Minister of God's Word, having the day before
he dyed, continued his Meditation and Exposition upon Romans 8. for the space of
two hours, or more, said on a sudden, O stay your reading; what Brightness is
this that I see; have ye lighted any Candles? No, said one, it is the
Shunshine: Sunshine, said he? No, it is my Saviors Shine; Now farewell world,
welcome Heaven; the Day Star from on high has visiced my heart: O speak it
when I am gone, and preach it at my Funeral (for he spoke to a Minister, Mr.
Leigh in his Sermon, entitled, The Souls Solace against Sorrow, p. 17.
who relates it) God deals familiarly with men: I feel his Mercy, I see his
Majesty, whether in the body, or out of the body I cannot tell, God he knows,
but I see things unutterable; O what a happy change shall I make? from night to
day, from darkness to light, from death to life, from sorrow to solace.

Thus joyful holy Walkers, and true Believers, have been at their departure;
and therefore be ye persuaded to trace their steps, and to follow as ye ought,
those most needful Directions and Rules which were formerly delivered, that so
living and so dying, by, with, and according to Faith, you may also be mounted,
as the said Believers were, upon the wings of Joy, and feed as they did, on
those ravishing and transcendent Comforts which God, like Manna, is wont to
rain down upon his holy Walkers in this men devouring Wilderness, the World I
mean, from which God in mercy bring us all, in the end of our days, to a World
of Joy and Glory which shall never have an end. Amen.

Soli Deo Gloria.
FINIS.

