A LIVELY TESTIMONY TO THE Living Truth, Given forth by Robert Jeckell upon his
Deathbed.

In the presence of many eye and ear Witnesses whose names are subscribed.

Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, etc.

London, Printed in the year 1676.

A Relation of Robert Jeckells Death, and his Testimony for Truth before his
Departure.
RObert Jeckell of New Castle upon Tine, having a desire to come to
Swarthmoore, began his Journey in company with several other Friends, and began
to be sick the same day that he came from home, and was sick at several places
by the way: But still pressed forward to his Journeys end, and would not be
satisfied, to stay short of Swarthmoore, where he came the 2d. of the 5th.
month 1676. and went to his Bed presently after he came in, where he lay sick 9
days, and then dyed upon the 11th. of the same month, and made a Comfortable
end, being all the time of his Sickness, in perfect sense and memory, as may be
seen by the following words, which were spoken by him a little before his Death.

Two days before his Death, he said, Well Friends, it is the belief of my heart,
that the Lord will raise me up, to bear a faithful Testimony for God and his
Truth.

In the Evening before his Departure, when Friends stood about him, expecting
him to give up, (according to the belief of his heart) he was raised up, by the
power of the Lord, and spoke with an audible voice as follows.

No separation like unto this, Soul separated from the Body, the Spirit
returning to God that gave it, and the Body to the Earth from whence it came.
For great has the loving kindness of the Lord been unto me, not unto me only,
but unto you all my dear Friends, who are faithful unto Death; I can speak it
to his praise, and unto his glory for evermore: and in it can bid you
everlastingly farewell.

I have always been faithful to the Truth, as to what was manifested, for God
has loved me from a Child. And he said, spreading out his arms, Oh the blessed
precious Truth is above all the World! and this is my living Testimony, I have
to bear for the Lord and his Truth: For always I loved Truth, and preferred it
before all the World; for Truth is precious, and to be valued before all things
below it: Therefore oh dear Friends prize Truth, this precious Truth, for it
lives for ever. Let nothing divert your minds from that sense of Truth you
have, for as that is kept too, Truth answers Truth in every heart.

As to the principle of Truth, it will reign over all; though strange things
may happen in this Nation, yet the Lord will crown his blessed Truth, and his
Glory over all: Therefore all my dear Friends, be faithful to that
manifestation in your own particulars, for a Profession will stand none in
stead, unless they live in the life and power thereof; for this is an
everlasting Truth that will live for ever: all that feel Gods love let them
prize it, for it is better then words.

And it was the desire of my heart, to come and visit my dear Friend Geo. Fox,
and I am very well satisfied therein; and it was the travail of my soul a long
time before I came, and now I am come to give up all, and herein I am fully
satisfied.

At another time he said, Though I was persuaded to stay by the way, before I
came to this place; yet this was the place where I would have been, and the
place where I should have been, whether I live or die.

And dear George, I can add nothing unto thee, for thou want nothtng of the
good Spirit, for thou art in God and God in thee; but let us give all the
praise and the glory to God: but I pray unto God that he may preserve thee,
from all evil spirits.

Another time G. F. spoke to him and said, he might offer up his Spirit and
Soul to the Lord, who gives breath and life to all, and takes it again; and he
lifted up his hands and said, The Lord is worthy of it, and I have done it. G.
F. asked him if he could say, Thy will O God be done, in Earth as it is in
Heaven; And he lifted up his hands and eyes, and cheerfully said he did it. And
he said, he had been faithful in a Profession to what he knew, until the
manifestation of the Truth broke forth. And his mouth was often filled with
praises to the Lord, and said, though he had had multitude of business, yet the
Lord had carried him over all.

And dear Friends, dwell in love and unity together, and keep out of all jarrs,
strife and contention, for the Enemy lies near to draw out; And if you be
divided one against another, then you will come to a loss: Profession will
stand none in stead, for alas any may make a Profession, but it is those that
live the life of Truth, and dwell in the obedience of it, that obtains the
Crown. For alas a silly woman may say, Lord, Lord help me, when the ditch is
before her; but the Lord does not bid her fall into it, but there is that near
that will manifest, and open the eye, and preserve out of it. That Living
principle of Truth, which will preserve all that dwell in it.

And Friends, be sure to continue faithful unto the end, and be not weary in
well-doing, for that is a good testimony, they that continue faithful unto the
end shall be saved.

At another time he said, all deceit and fraud will come to nothing, I am an
innocent man, and clear of all men, upon the face of the Earth.

If there be any bad Spirits, (that under a pretense makes a Profession of
Truth) do take occasion to speak evil of me when I am gone, you are Living
Witnesses, and can bear a Living Testimony, (speaking to Bridget Pindar and
Elizabeth Hopper) that I am an Innocent man, and that the Lord has cleared me,
and I lie down my head in peace.

And Bridget and Elizabeth, you are my Neighbors: As to my dear Wife, I give
her freely up to the Lord, for she loved the Lord, and he will love her; and I
desire she may be kept faithful to the Truth in all things; and that you may
advise her, and be assistant to her (...) what you can. And I have often told
my dear Wife, (...) what we have in outward things, it was the Lords first
before it was ours, and in that I desire that she may serve the Truth to the
end of her days.

And I desire those Friends, whom I have entrusted in my Will, (naming them
all) to see my Will truly performed, and to be faithful to their Trust, that
so they may discharge a good Conscience in the sight of the Lord; And that they
may see all things cleared and discharged, for I am well able to discharge
those things.

And now my dear Friends, in the everlasting power of God, I commit you all to
the Lord, to be preserved and kept, in his everlasting power, and bid you all
everlastingly, yea everlastingly farewell.

All is done: And to the Lord I leave you all, unto him I commit you all.
Farewell.

Let me go hence in peace, for I shall go hence and be no more seen in
mutability.

About two hours before he died, G. F. took him by the hand, and asked him if
he was satisfied of his seeing him; And he lifted up his eyes, and with a
gladness of heart and smilingly he praised the Lord, And said that his Comfort
flowed in as a flood. And G. F. asked him, what he said; And he spoke those
words over again. And G. F. said unto him, thy everlasting peace and rest is in
Christ, that bruises the head of the Serpent, who is over all from Everlasting
to Everlasting, who is the Everlasting food of Life, for thy Soul and Spirit,
and in him thou will lay down thy head in peace, who is the Crown of life: And
many other words he spoke to G. F. and G. F. to him, which would be too large
to mention.

These words before written, were spoken in the hearing of these witnesses, and
several others: Isabell Yeamans. Bridget Pinder. Elizabeth Hopper. Sarah Fell.
Susanna Fell. Rachel Fell. Agnes Ormandy. Edw. Brathwaite. Edw. Haistwhittle.


ANd also dear Friends, this lives in our hearts as a Testimony concerning our
dear Friend Robert Jeckell, that Gods power was with him, and his presence did
attend him, and in much patience the Lord preserved him, in the time of his
Sickness, from day to day; and he was in perfect sense and memory, all the time
of his weakness; he often saying to us, Dear Friends, give me up, and weep not
for me, but be willing to bear a part with me, for I am content with the Lords
doings, (and leave me not, till you have seen all finished concerning me;)
which he has done to the praise of the Lord, and to the great comfort and
refreshment of our immortal Souls.

And he often declared, That he had no pain, but that he saw how he went away
by little and little, always lifting up his hands while he had strength,
praising the Lord.

And this is our Testimony, that he is entered into the everlasting fullness of
Joy, where there is pleasures for evermore.

For at the time of his Departure, Gods heavenly power did fill our hearts, to
our great peace and satisfaction: Insomuch that we can say, Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord, for they shall be had in everlasting remembrance;
for the Lord sealed it upon our hearts, at the time of his separation, that he
had received ^is own with increase. -- Praises be to the Lord for ever, who
has been our support, and borne us up, in this our great Exercise; so that we
can give encouragement, to all that may meet with the like trial, not to be
bowed down, under any Exercise which the Lord may call unto, nor let it into
their heart, to question why the Lord does it; for he is able to sanctify
every Exercise, and to make all things easy to them that love and fear his
name; to whom be the glory of all for evermore.

Swarthmore in Lancashire, 14 d. 5 mo. 1676. Bridget Pinder. Elizabeth Hopper.


