THE EXCELLENCY OF CHRIST, OR, THE ROSE OF SHARON: Showing THE ART OF TAKING
CHRIST AS THE ONLY SOVEREIGN MEDICINE OF A SIN-SICK SOUL.

ACCOMMODATED BOTH for those that are without, and for those that are in Christ,

Who are thereby instructed how they must be fitted to apply Christ unto
themselves.

In 25 Cases upon that excellent Text in CANT. 2.1. I am the Rose of Sharon.

BY CHRISTOPHER IELINGER, Minister of Gods Word at Stonehouse in Devonshire.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Fran. Eglesfield, and are to be sold by William
Russell Bookeseller in Plymouth, 1641.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Master WILLIAM BIRCH, Mayor, together with his
Brethren, and the rest of the inhabitants of the famous town of Plymouth.
The best blessings of this life, and everlasting blessedness in the life to
come.
THe In hac Dominica (quae septima est ab illa quae septuagisima vocatus)
Romanus Pontifex celebraturus ad Ecclesiam pergens and rediens ab eadem, auream
in manu sub aspectu populi fert rosam, etc. Durand. Rational D^in offi^* ^6 f
120
Pope of Rome is wont to exhibit, and to show forth once a year on a Lords day
unto his Roman people, a certain glistering, and glorious Rose to signify the
LORD JESUS, who in my text resembles himself to a Rose most fair and fragrant.

The consideration whereof (I confess ingeniously) moved me not a little to
think more seriously of this most excellent comparison, then ever I did before;
for a man (being a Minister) cannot but reason thus with himself: if he whom we
Protestants judge to be against Christ take it upon him thus solemnly to put
men in mind of the Lord Christ, by showing unto them a Rose emblematizing
Christ, how much more should we Evangelicall Teachers, who profess our selves
to be all for Christ, show forth unto our Christian people their Lord and
Master Christ not only once a year, as he his Golden Rose, but as much as
possibly we can, by our often preaching, and publishing the Gospel fo Christ
(that most sweeet and redolent Rose of Sharon) whereby we may hope to do
infinitely more good unto Gods Orthodoxe people, then he by showing a Rose
artificially unto his super-stitious Romans.

For the Triplex autem est in h^c flore materia, aurum videlicet Muscus and
Balsamum. Idem fol. 121.
matter of that Rose is but, 1. Gold. 2. Musk. 3. Balsame.


But the matter of the Gospel, (which he preaches not) is Not signified only
but proffered whereas the Popes Rose is but significant as they say.
Christ himself the Rose celestial, which is more fragrant then Musk, and more
medicinal then Balsame, as I have endeavored to make it appear, as evidently
and manifestly as I could in this Treatise, which through importunity) I have
been animated to publish, and now am bold to tender unto you first, because you
heard me preach first (in your own Parochial Temple the last Winter) of this
most delicious Rose, which is Christ himself blessed forever.

To say no more now of the said Rose it self, because I affect brevity in a
Preface, I shall but crave the good blessing of our good God upon my poor
endeavors, that they may prove as beneficial unto you as my enlarged heawrt
toward you, my most respected, kind, and loving neighbors, does desire it.

Yours in Christ, C.J.

To my much respected and dearly beloved friends, The Inhabitants of the town
of Stonehouse.
Grace, Mercy, Peace and comfort from Jesus Christ the most precious and
comfortable Rose of Sharon.
SEeing it has pleased the Lord Christ first to move me to select this
subject, and to spend my Meditations upon it, and good Christians next again
and again to desire it, while I was yet teaching of it, before I could finish
it, that it might be copied out, and communicated unto themselves and others, I
could not well with a safe conscience detain i^. For if he that reserves corn
and will not spare it to those that need it, be liable to a Prove. 11.26.
curse. I might justly fear lest I also keeping back the spiritual food of
the soul-fatting word of God, when it is thus earnestly craved, should incur
the same horrible danger of being accursed. Better it was therefore and safer
for me to expose my self to a censure (which being a stranger and most
insufficient, I cannot well avoid) then to a curse.

And now for as much as those hungry souls have moved me at last to impart it,
as not daring to deny it, I could do no less then express my singular care
for you, and great love, which I bear toward you, by sparing the same
spiritual alimonie unto you in special, and making you partners with those,
who were served first, because they came first, and heard me first, when I
distributed and divided the word of truth first, touching that most sweet and
medicinal Rose of Sharon Christ Jesus blessed for ever.

Nor may you be offended with me for making you partners only, and not sole
owners, for

1. You loose nothing by that, having as much as they.

2. Besides that sweet Rose, of the which I treat here, is a Rose of the field,
and not of a garden, and therefore ought not to be enclosed, as garden Roses
are and reserved by a few, but rather as common be imparted unto many. And
therefore it is my hearty vote, and the thirsting desire of my soul, that not
you only, and those to whom I dedicate this book as joyntpartners with you,
but also all others, that shall read it, may take and own that most needful
and wholesome spiritual food, the preaching I mean of Christ, the sweet Rose
of Sharon, and most nutritive bread of Life, who in those Sermons made public
for the good of all, is proffered and tendered unto all.

Your loving Friend and Minister, C. I.

THE EXCELLNCY OF CHRIST, Or THE ROSE OF SHARON.
SECT. 1. That Christ is like a Rose in Sharon field, Cant. 2.1.
[ I am the Rose of Sharon.]

I Have been long enamored with this most fragrant and precious Scripture,
beholding in it a more then ordinary beauty and shining eminency, and now my
love breaks out by this my choice, because I was not able to keep it in any
longer, and I do wish from the very bottom of my heart, that you also, my
dearly beloved, may affect the same: ^rue it is, that carnal love cannot
endure a corrivall, and fellow-lover, but the love wherewith I love this text
is of another nature, spiritual, and not carnal, and therefore as Moses said
once upon another occasion, when Eldad and Medad prophesied in the Camp, and
Joshua envied at them for Moses sake, would to God that all the Lords people
were Prophets, Numb. 11.27, 28, 29. so say I, would to God that all this people
may not only love this text with me, but also may choose and love him who is
enclosed in it, even Christ Jesus himself, who as he shines with
unconceivable spendor above the brightness of the sun it self in heaven
above, so likewise does he even spread and dart forth some rays of his
glorious beauty here below in the most delicious garden of my text, where his
most amiable person is most aptly assimilated to a rose fair and ruddy, by
this most sweet expression, I am the rose of Sharon.

This whole song, whereof these words are but a little piece, is transcendental
and mystical, composed by Solomon the wisest King (so honored and titled by
the spirit of God) and most Nec vacat mysferio quod liber bic ternus ponitur in
operibus Solomonis, etc. Greg. in proleg. super. cant
aptly placed after the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, for whereas in the Proverbs
there is set forth and pressed the moral life of man, and in Ecclesiastes the
life natural, subject to vanity, the consideration whereof may aptly moove a
man to the life moral: here in this love-song is expressed the life
contemplative, for the which Ecclesiastes unvailing and representing to the
life, the vanity of the life natural, and by that means weaning and divorcing
man's affection from terrestrialls, makes way in a mystery; for as much as
none is fit for contemplation, until his mind be taken off from earthlinesse
and convinced of that nothingnesse, which is in all things created under the
sun. The matter of contemplation therein contained is Connubiall, touching the
mystical union and communion between Christ the Celestial bridegroom and the
Church his spouse, set forth in a Origin. hom. 3. in Cant.
dramaticall style so sublime and elegant, as that the whole treatise might
well be styled The Vocatur enim ideo Canticum, quia est omnibus canticis
sublimius. Gregor.
song of songs which is Salomons, who was a King of Kings, as being more
excellent then all Kings, and most able to compile a canticle more high and
lofty then all other ordinary canticles, by reason of his most excellent
wisdom. The occasion of the words, The occasion of these words.
which (being the first piece of the first member of the former part of this
bipartite Chapter, containing a mutual commendation, in the 1, 2, 3 verses) I
have singled out from among the rest, you may observe in the precedent chapter,
verse 16. where the spouse of Christ having obtained her beloveds presence, 12,
13, 14. utters these words. Also our bed is green, Conscientia bonis reserta
operibus. Bern.
bestrawed as it were with flowers of grace; for answer whereunto, Ad hoc
respicere puto quod sponsa de spa^sis lectulum floribus commendat. etc. Bern.
ser. 47. super. Cant. in Loc.
as S. Bernard aptly conceives, Christ here takes her off from all self
conceitednesse, saying J am the Rose of Sharon, as if he should say: But think
not, O my sister, and dear spouse, that such flowers of grace grow in natures
garden, arrogating them unto thy self. No, but know that all that shining
beauty and ravishing excellency, wherewith thou say and see that thy bed,
or heart is crowned, is of me, J am the Rose of Sharon; in which words, two
things are mainely considerable, 1. Their nature. 2. Their parts. For the
first, you see that for their Nature they are comparative, for Christ compares
himself to a Rose, and therefore we will term it a comparison, and such a
one, as Logicians call contracted, as being most breife, without any large
deduction after the manner of plenarie resemblances so called.

2. And it consists of two parts, or terms, as they term the parts of a
comparison. The first term is a person, which is here compared. Secondly, a
thing, unto which the person is resembled.

1. The person compared is employed in the pronowne I, that is, I Christ, and
not the Church as most Origin. hom. 3. in Cant Theodor. in los. Bern. in Loc.
Tremell. in loc. Thomson in loc.
interpreters new and old do herein unanimously agree, and that rightly, for
modesty will not suffer a mere man to call himself thus, the Rose of Sharon.
True it is, that the spouse is called a lilly, as Christ in this same verse,
but she does not call her self so: for Christ himself puts that style upon
her. Not I, is a more fitter speech for a sinful man in a matter of praise and
commendation, Gal. 2.20. and therefore let Christ, who is God and man, and
whose name is I am, be the I here.

2. Rose of Sharon] where first two things are to be understood. Secondly, two
things are expressed. For the 1. the two to be understood are. 1. Am. 2. like.

1. Am, which being omitted in the original, must necessarily be understood,
because Christ not only was, and will be, but also in very deed is such a
rose, for the original is indefinite, see Revel. 1. 8. J am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the ending, says the Lord, which is, and which was, and
which is to come.

2. Like] J am like a rose: for we must not think that Christ properly is a
rose, fading and corruptible. No but only respectively or comparatively,
wherefore I said that this speech is a comparison contracted, or tacit, because
the note of similitude is omitted.

Secondly, the two things expressed come next to be viewed, namely,

1. quid or substance, unto which Christ is resembled.

2. quale, or quality of that substance.

First the substance is a Rose, or a flower; for the (...)
original signifies both, and therefore Saint Hierom and the rest of the
Latin Fathers, and some Luther in Bibl. Germ. So Tremelius likewise renders
the word. Egosum rosa.
modern translators do so translate it, I am the flower, which not
withstanding I must tell you, that I for my part like your English translation
far better, as being far more significant and emphaticall then the other,
yea comprizing and enclosing the other too; for every rose is a flower, whereas
every flower is not a rose.

2. quality, this rose is said to be a rose of Sharon or the field or plain,
or of a field called Sharon, for the (...)
original bears all these significations.

1. Of the field or plaine] whereby Origin in loc.
Origin understands the Jews, whom God by his Prophets did husband, like a
field, but others more aptly affirm that for some other very pregnant
considerations, which shall be hereafter declared, mention is made of the
field. Sharon a special field or region Hierom.
situated between the Taborine mount and the lake of Tyberias, and extending
it self from Cesarea to Joppa, mentioned 1 Chronicles. 27.29. Esaias 33.9. a field in
which the Thomson in Loc.
fairest and most fragrant roses were wont to grow, unto which Christ is
pleased to resemble himself, for such reasons as are to be given hereafter.

Hence then springs up this fair and cordial flower,

Christ Jesus our Savior is most like unto a goodly Understand a red double
rose as being most fair and useful, and so more significant then a common
field rose, for such double roses and the fairest indeed did grow in that
field as Authors write. 1. Prosecution. 1. Branch 1. Reason 2. Reason
rose in Sharon field.

For the prosecution of which point I will first produce sundry grounds and
reasons of it.

2. Propound and resolve some necessary Queries.

3. Press home diverse profitable uses.

For the first, I affirm that Christ is 1. Most like unto a Rose, partly by
reason.

I. Of those secret virtues which are in him, like unto those of a Rose, as is
to be showed hereafter.

I. By reason of his blood shed, which makes him as red as a Rose, see Esaias
63.2. wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and Rev. 19.13. And he was
clothed with a vesture dipped in blood.

III. By reason of his fragrancie, Psalm. 45.8. Reason


2. He is not only like a rose, 2 Branch 1 Reason
but like a rose in the field.

I. Because he suffered in the Heb. 13.13.
field, without the gate, that he might be the pattern of sufferours usually
dying in the field, even as he is the glory of triumphers.

2. Jude 3.

3. Bernard in Loc.
one says, to call forth his spouse out of her bed of ease into the field to
fight.

3. He is like a rose in Sharon field. Branch


1. By reason of his excellency in general, Reason
for there the most excellent roses did grow, see Cant. 1.10.

2. Cant. 5.16.

3. Romans 5.8.
love of God, as the roses of Sharon spring out of the hottest soil.
Prosecution.


If you ask me whether God the Father and God the Holy Ghost may not also be
said to be like a rose in Sharon field.

I answer, these three are one says Saint John, 1 John 5.7. Doctor Boys in Loc.
One in Essence, and one in Attributes, and therefore as the one is all fair,
so the other two persons must needs be so too.

2. But in a stricter sense, as Christ is like a Rose in regard of his
bloodshed, so he is the Rose of Sharon singulariter and proprie, Tho. Aqu. 3.
p. q. 16. a 1. See also Lombard 1.3. did. 1.
that is, singularly and properly: for only Christ who is the second person in
the Trinity called the word incarnate shed his blood, and in that respect is
as red as a Rose, Reve. 19.13.

2. If you demand whether a true believer may not also be said to be like
such a Rose?

I answer, that derivedly and respectively he is a Rose likewise, and may be
called so, as being all fair, Cant. 4.7. but not such a Rose as Christ, who
primarily, peculiarly, originally, and transcendently is only such a Rose of
Sharon, yea the Rose indeed, as being infinitely fairer then the sons of
men, Psalm. 45.2. And having trodden the winepresse of Gods wrath alone, as it is
written Esaias 63.3. I have trodden the winepresse alone, and of the people there
was none with me; the original is more emphaticall, for therein Christ speaks
of more then one people, in the plural that not one man among all people did
help him, least men should construe his words against his meaning, as if he
did only speak of the Jewish people, which did crucify him, and therefore
were rather agents against him then patients with him, so that Psellus and Lyra
understanding the Church by this Rose of Sharon must needs be mistaken.

SECT. 2. Of Christ's fairness, usefulesse, Desirablenesse.
FOr application. Prosecution. The application of this point.
Now as Roses and flowers are good for the head, for the brain, for the heart,
and for many things: so is the Rose-like Doctrine or flower which this next
affords good and useful

1. For the understanding of man to inform it.

2. For the conscience to satisfy and to convince it.

3. For the affection or heart to moove it.

4. For the will to incline it.

Of these in order.

First, Use 1.
it is useful for the understanding to help it, and to inform it, and that
of 3. things.

1. Of Christ's fairness; 2. usefulness; 3. desirablenesse.

First I begin with the first of these, inform you of Christ's admirable
fairness, Christ's fairness
forasmuch as himself compares himself to a Rose, which is one of the Vnde
Rosa olim propter pulchritudinem and suavem odorem veneri saera fuit Calepin.
Thomson in loc.
fairest flowers among all flowers, yea to a Rose of Sharon, which of all roses
are held to be the most fair and fragrant, by reason of the sun which
shines so much upon that soil, and heateth it, and makes the roses prosper
as Authors write of it, see Psalm. 45.2. How David in that song of loves (for so
that Psalm is entitled) sets forth the beauty of this sweetest rose, saying
thou art fairer then all the children of men, Pulcher admodum fuisti.
yea thou art exceedingly fairer then the children of men. For the original
imports so much and more too; even more then I able to express, for as much
as the Holy Ghost does even ingeminate the ordinary word here, speaking of a
more then ordinary-beauty to make it more significant, and it must needs be
so, whether we do reflect the eyes of the mind upon his Deity, or upon his
Humanity.

I. To begin with his Deity, how can he but be fairer then all the children
of men, who is not only a son of man, but also the natural son of God,
even God of God, and coequall with God his father, who as God himself makes
all men, and all things fair that are fair, for the sons of men, and
therefore must needs be infinitely fairer then all; for it is a true ground in
Philosophy that that thing for whose sake an other thing is thus qualified or
such and such, must needs be more such, and more so qualified, so as that we
may truly say of Christ that sweetst rose of Sharon, that he is not only
fairer then all men but even Beauty it self.

I. As man so he is most fair, first in regard of his soul, Col. 2.9. for in
him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, so that needs he must be
Durand. Rat. Div. offic. l. 6. f. ^06.
void of sin and full of grace and therefore all fair.

III. Christ is fairer then all the sons of men in respect of the exact
beautifulness and comely lineaments of his body, whether we look upon it as
it was in the state of humiliation, exaltation.

First in the state of humiliation: for all deformities of the body proceed
originally from enormities of the soul, and therefore Christ being exemped
from the one, must needs be far too from the other, as in his mind so in his
body, whose glorious and most excellent beauty even Eutropius in Annal.
Senatorum Roonr. Cent. 1. l. 1 c. 10. p. 34. Cassanaus in Catalog. part. 4.
Consid. 6.
Lentulus a Roman in his Epistle to Tiberius the Roman Emperor describes
after his manner; that he was a man goodly to behold, having a reverent
countenance, his stature some what tall; his hair after the color of the ripe
hazelnut, from his ears downward somewhat curled, parting it self in the
midst of the head, and waving with the wind, after the manner of the
Nazarites; his face without wrincle mixed with moderate red; his beard somewhat
copious, tender, and divided at the chin; his eyes gray, various and clear;
but what need we go so far as to allege the Roman writers, having a far
more ample and surer description of Christ's most admirable beauty nearer home,
even in this same sweetest love-Song, out of which my text is taken, the words
are these. My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand; his
head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black as a raven; his
eyes are as the eyes of doves by the river of water washed with milk, and
fitly set; his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers; his lips like
Lillies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh; his hands are as gold-rings set with
the Beryll; his belly is as bright yvory overlaid with saphires; his legs are
as pillars of marble set upon sockets of fine gold; his countenance is as
Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars; his mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether
lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend O daughters of Jerusalem. Now
I am not ignorant of that sense which some put upon these words, understanding
them altogether of Christ's spiritual and inward beauty, and I do willingly
assent unto them in this, that that fairness is And therefore I do so expound
it in the first let or impediment, that keeps men from Christ, where this whole
description is largely ^pened. Sect. 12.
chiefly meant: But yet I hope I shall be suffered to extend the largeness of
so rare an expression to his body also in some sort, even so far forth as to
conceive that his body also must needs be passing fair, as well as his soul,
even by virtue of this description, which his fair Spouse ends with this
Epiphonema; or sententious close: He is altogether lovely, or throughout and
wholly lovely, or delectable, for so much the Tetus ipse and in universum
delactabilis and desiderabil^s.
original does more significantly import; he is throughout and wholly lovely
says she, whereupon it follows necessarily, that his body must be so lovely
too: for else it cannot be said that he is wholly lovely, and throughout
delectable; and hence it is, as I conceive, that Tremellius who has been a Jew
converted, being most expert in the holy language does understand many passages
in this description literally, and not he only, but others also, who yet in
many things are very mystical.

If it be objected that in Esa. 53.2, 3. Toms in ver 13.
he is said to have neither form, So Chrysostom in Psalm. 45.
nor beauty.

I answer first with Saint Hierome, that the Prophet speaks so of Christ, as he
was abased and abused upon the cross, and before, when Pilat brought him
forth, and uttered these words: Ecce homo, Behold a man; and I add, Theodoret.
in text.
that in regard of some he is said to have no form, because they then could
not, nor would not see any such beauty in him; Hieron. Epist ad Pri^cip.
for otherwise the godly see comeliness enough in him, as I noted before out of
the 45. Psalm. 2. Thou art fairer then the children of men, on which words one
of the Augsin l^^.
ancient paraphrasts most sweetly: Unto us who believe, the heavenly
bridegroom seems to be every way most fair; fair in heaven, fair on earth,
fair in the womb, fair in his mothers arms, fair in his miracles, fair in
his stripes, fair upon his cross, fair in his very grave.

2. But especially in the state of Exaltation, his body must needs be fairer
then the sons of men: for if the face of Moses did shine so, after he had been
with God upon the mount, where nothing but lightening and thundering was to be
expected, how must needs the precious body of the son of God now shine with
incomprehensible splendour, being next to Gods own right hand in that holy hill
above, where there is nothing but light; and bliss, brightness, and
blessedness to be enjoyed for ever and ever. See Phil. 3.20. How therefore
that holy and blessed Apostle calls his body a glorious body, (...).
or, a body of his glory, which is more, according to the original, as if he
should say, a body all full, or made of glory; and of his glory, which is the
glory of the only begotten son of God, whose bright shining Deity does so
illustrate, clarify, and glorify all his body, as that every part and member
of it must needs be infinitely more resplendent and bright then that of the
sun, which yet is far more glistering and glorious then the burnished gold of
Ophir; And therefore, O my soul, do thou elevate and lift up thy self above
thy self, and consider this ravishing and transcendent beauty of thy most
dear and glorious Savior, so as that no creature under the sun may be fairer
and dearer in thine eyes then he, who is fairer then all.

2. This informs us of Christ's usefulness. The second thing.
Seeing he compares himself to A Rose, which how useful and medicinal it is
all men know in some sort; but Physicians, and such as have any skill in herbs
know it in an especial manner. Petr. Andr. Matthew. l. 1. Diosc. c. 112.
There is scarce any herb or flower to be named, which for its virtue and
usefulness goes beyond it. Now Christ is like it, as he says himself, yea
transcendently more medicinal and useful then it: For he can heal all our
inward and outward, spiritual and corporal diseases, Psalm. 103. when Roses
though never so fair and good, yet cannot cure so much as one sin, which is a
most dangerous gangrene and leprosy of the poor soul. And therefore O that
the besotted souls of men were but sensible of so great a worth and
inestimable good, as is to be had in so precious a Rose, as Jesus Christ is,
blessed for ever! and o that they did but weigh it, and firmly believe it; for
then they could not, nor would neglect so great salvation.

3. And must not Christ be very desirable, The 3. thing.
seeing he compares himself to a Rose (which is as desirable a flower as any)
both for her fairness, and usefulness formerly mentioned. See John 1.47. how
desirous therefore Nathaniell was to see him; and Luke. 19.4. how Zacheus
climbed upon a tree to look down upon him that was higher then the heavens;
and it was the chiefest of Saint Austines three wishes, that he might have seen
Christ in the flesh, whom he now beholds in glory. And therefore, O that men
were but wise, and had eyes to see, and ears to hear! for then would they
resort, and flock from all parts to Jesus Christ the rose of Sharon, to he are
his voice with gladness, and to see his fairness, and to taste of his
goodness; yea then would they out of some experience doubtless say with his*
fair spouse, Cant. 5.16. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely
(...)
or desirable.

SECT. 3. Satisfaction for the Consciences of Christ's people.
1. THis fair flower, and most useful point is good for the conscience two
ways. (...) Which is also a part of the understanding Tho. Aqu. 1. p. q. 79.
a. i. 1. This serves to satisfy the conscience.


1. It will serve to satisfy the Conscience of those men who would feign know
whether Christ is in them or no: For they may know it now by such marks and
signs as may be derived from this present comparison; our Savior you see
assimilates and resembles himself to a rose, and therefore,

I. Those that are inhabited by Jesus Christ, Mark.
may know it by the mightiness of his purging Virtue. If one take but fading
Damask-Roses conserved, they will purge and cleanse the body, you know; much
more does Christ the soul, that most medicinal Rose of Sharon, whose words
falling from him like leaves of Roses, and being taken inwardly, did once so
purify his best beloved disciple, as that nothing in this whole world could
make them cleaner; for so says Christ himself, John 15.3. Now ye are clean
through the word which I have spoken unto you; and hence is that Apostolical
conclusion, Gal. 5.24. And they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lusts thereof.

But I now not what here will be objected by a scrupulous Christian,

For Answer, Sol.
whereunto I must tell you, that when we affirm that Christ does purge out
sin, and that they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh. We must not be so
understood, as if Christ did take away sin quite, and that they that are his,
are without sin; No, 1 John 1.8.
for if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us, says S. John, and he that thinks he lives without sin, does not avoid
sin, but rather excludes all pardon, says S. Austin; and you know your selves
how between the very rocks some weeds do usually grow and spring up, Aug l. 14.
c. 9. de Civ. Dei.
which may teach us, that though a man be in the rock Christ, and Christ in
him, yet some weeds of sin may ill be seen in his life and conversation, as
Paul testifies of himself, that even in the estate of his regeneration, Sin
did dwell in him, Romans 7.20.

In what sense then is a man in Christ said to be purged from sin,

I answer, first, when Sin is resisted, For the flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the
other. Not to sin, is to stir against, and resist sin, and so to study to be
pure.

2. When Sin is hated, Beza in Psalm. 119. Dicuntur non peccare, quia peccato
non consentiunt, quin potius luctando luctantur. Calvin in 1 John 3. Piscat in
locum.
Romans 7.15. Psalm. 119.104. like an enemy, who invading a people that desires to
live quiet and unmolested, is detested of all the country.

3. When it is not usually practiced, as it is written, Whosoever is borne of
God, does not commit sin, that is, he does not make a trade, or usual practice
of sin, as learned Interpreters expound that hard and difficult sentence; and
the reason of it is, because his seed remains in him, says the Apostle
there, that is, Rey^olds.
the word of promise, as some say, or the Ames. in Coron.
principle of external perseverance, or the Piscat. in loc.
spirit of Christ, as others take it, because Christ himself has said, that
he shall abide with us, and in us, and that for ever, John 14.16, 17. So as
that sin cannot possibly live nor enthrone it self there, where he is thus
resident; but rather must be weakened, and die, and decay more and more, and
become unable to do the hurt which it did once in him in the state of
unregeneracy, and does still in others, who are yet enslaved by it. Cypr. l. 4.
Epist. 7.
Saint Cyprian compares sin and Satan with his angels in this respect most
aptly to scorpions and serpents, who being precipitated into the water, can do
no hurt there; for so they can do no damage, neither much less destroy such
as are regenerated by the Spirit of God, who is like to the water; and
remains in the regenerate, that such scorpions or serpents may not prove
hurtful nor deadly unto them, nor have dominion over them.

Q. But here it may be you will reply, inward sinful motions, whether you do
not inwardly practice one sin or other; for many such motions, because they do
not break out, but both arise and die within, can hardly be discerned, when
they prevail, and when not: how shall one know say you, that such inward evil
motions do not prevail within, though they do not manifest themselves in our
lives without us?

For Answer, Solut.
whereunto I must tell you in the first place, that most certainly this case
which here is propounded is very difficult; and therefore I desire the all
wise, and all-gracious God so to enlighten my mind with the rays and beams
of his holy Spirit, as that I may be able to resolve you as I ought. according
to the rule of his holy and heavenly oracles, and everblessed word of truth.

2. flying, and staying, immanent, Transiet thoughts.
and transient; the one, that is, transient or flying. We shall never be able
so to know, as that we shall be able fully to resolve our selves, whether or
when we do prevail against them; for of such it may be truly said, Who can
understand his errors, Psalm. 19.12. If we first mislike them in general;
dilecta peccata, or beloved sins, though they be our Delicta, all pray God to
pardon them, saying with holy David, Psalm. 19.12. cleanse thou me from my
secret sins; then must we rest therewith contented, and satisfied, as Paul in
the like case, whom the Lord, upon his earnest suit for his freedom and
exemption from the prick in the flesh, gave no other answer but this, My grace
is sufficient for thee, 2 Cor. 12.9.

2. But whether the other sort of thoughts, and inward evil motions, Immane^t
thoughts.
which we call immanent and staying for some time, do prevail, or not against
us, that we may know by these ensuing evidences.

1. When we do not regard them, Evidence
while they stay with us, according to holy David's most gracious speech, Psalm.
66.18. If I regard iniquity in my heart; that is, when we do not honor them:
for so much the original does import, but slight and vilify or despise them,
like a stranger that intrudes upon us; and therefore is not esteemed, nor made
much of, but rather to be farther off.

2. When we take no such delight in them, as Non-beleevers do in many of them;
and as one that looks on a woman with delectation, lusting after her in his
heart, Mat. 5.28. for so much the same original word implies.

3. When they leave us upon such terms as these, Evidence.
or after this manner.

1. After they be espied and Prove. 4.23. Where the original is. (...) That is,
keep thy heart with all observation, noting thy thoughts, as it were.
noted, like a thief, that flies when he perceives that he is discovered and
taken notice of when he comes to steal.

2. opposed, and struggled withal by the force of faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. applying
the word of promise, and by the mighty power of prayer, Ephesians. 6.12, 13, 18. Iam.
4.7.

Where note by the way, that a sinful motion may make a longer stay in a man
inhabited by Christ, A Note.
then in an other, who is possessed and beslaved of the devil, because it
meets with more opposition; whereas the devils vassals, whether they be
hypocrites or profane Esauites, yield quickly to sundry pleasing and
profitable motions; though they be never so bad and entertain them, though
they break not out for the present, whereupon it comes to pass that Satan
leaves them seeing them secretly to give way even to his first motions: So as
that he needs not to press them more, as he is forced to urge, and often to
assault and to reassault the believing soul, wherein Christ dwells, Ephesians.
3.17. Like a General, or war-making King, who will tarry longest where he is
resisted most: And leave that place soonest, where he is least opposed; because
he sees that he needs not much to infest or batter that fort which yields and
surrenders it self upon his very first summons, without any great deliberation
or reluctance.

Q. If you reply,

I Answer yes, by virtue of that power of the soul, which by the learned is
called Est autem (...) ea p^rs animae quae semper resistit vitijs.
(...); but it is so weak, as that it cannot last long, but is and must needs
be vanquished quickly, because Satan who usually suggests and follows evil
motions most violently, is stronger then that natural power of Conscience; and
therefore they a^e said to be overcome for all this 2 Pet. 2.19. and to be led
captive by the devil at his will, 2 Timothy 2.26.

3. relinquish us, after they have been condemned, reproved and well checked for
their over-bold obtrusion and stealing in upon us, like Rogues and vagabonds
who are taken up, and well whipped for their coming into a well governed Town
or City. See Psalm. 42.11. how David there corrects his turbulent thoughts, and
finds fault with his own soul for letting them pass freely; saying, O my
Soul, why art thou so disquieted within me? or why make thou such a noise,
or art so loud, raising thoughts as loud and boisterous as the waves of the
sea, when it is tempestuous.

4. When the Conscience is calm, Evidence
quiet and cheerful, or well comforted after they be gone. Like a country,
that having been much infested by a foreign enemy, finds it self on a sudden
delivered from such a hostile invasion. See Psalm. 42.11. how David's heart at
last did even dance, as it were for joy after that resistance which he made
against the commotions and boisterous thoughts of his troubled and perplexed
soul; saying, Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, who is the health
of my countenance, and my God.

Q. But may not an incredulous person find his heart quiet too when evil
thoughts are past away?

I answer, yes, Solut.
but then there is much difference, and discrepancie between the calmnesse of
that happy soul which Christ inhabiteth, and that which he inhabiteth not.

Q. What difference?

Answer 1. The one, Solut. 1. difference
I mean the unbeleeving, may be quiet not knowing wherefore; but the other he
can tell, if he be asked, that it is upon his manly resistance and opposition,
which he made against sinful motions, of which his own conscience bears him
witness, that he did neither love them nor like them, Psalm. 119.104. as the
unbeleever does, who finds much Job 20.12
sweetness in them. Whereupon it follows that the quietness of the former,
or the one, is but carnal security, and the calmnes the other, a gracious and
grounded Tranquillity.

2. The unbeleeving may be quiet, difference
because other thoughts concerning his temporal affairs, and employments may
interrupt evil motions, and take up his mind in such a manner as that he
cannot think upon the ^llnes, and danger of such motions, and so consequently
neither is, nor can be troubled about them; but that blessed soul, which
Christ inhabits, is not so wholly possessed and drawn away with the cares and
thoughts of this life; but that it reflects withal upon the inordinatenesse of
such evil motions, as make some stay in the mind; notwithstanding, is well
comforted in God, who did send it a most happy deliverance. See Romans 7.24.

5. We may know that we do prevail against such evil motions, when, Evidence
being tried and provoked afterward, we can stand out like a Rock unmovable,
and impenetrable, and do not as we would do, if it were not for Christ's
dwelling in us by his holy and blessed Spirit, Gal. 5.17. wherein such gracious
souls mainly differ from all unbeleeving persons, who being without Christ,
though they may keep in, and seem to have overcome their evil motions, yet
will be ever ready to discover themselves in time of trial, and provocation;
for they are but like Leopards chained and kept in a den, who being let loose,
and meeting with a prey, will manifest the cruelty of their natures forthwith.
See Ier. 13.23. So as that thereby we may easily conceive how fitly also, even
then, when they do not break out, they are resembled to an Oven heated by the
Baker, Hos. 7.4. that is, the devil, who is the baker that heats their hearts;
so as that, like an oven stopped, they are so much the hotter within; their
hearts do even burn with envy or pride, and wrath, and lust, and the love of
money.

6. We may understand that evil motions reign not in us, Evide^ce.
though they rage when we do lament them after we have been foiled and
vanquished by them at any time, giving way to them, and taking pleasure in any
of them against the study, bent, and purpose of our hearts: Like Tamar, who
though she had lost her virginity, being forced by her brother Ammon; but
secretly and closely in a close room; yet did afterward most lamentably
bewail and bemoane the same. See Romans 7.23, 24. how the Apostle himself, who
being forced, like Tamar, 2 Samuel 13.19.
and brought into Captivity to the Law of Sin, by sin dwelling in him, and
prevailing now and then against him in his mind and soul, did bemoan himself,
saying; O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? and how he did prevail for all this, and was respectively delivered, as
he implies in the words following: I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
So then with the mind; that is, the part regenerate, I my self serve the Law
of God, but with the flesh; that is, the part unregenerate, the Law of Sin.

2. Those that have Christ in their hearts truly, Mark general.
may know it by the very smell and sweetest fragrancy, which he sends forth out
of the heart into every part and member of the body. So as that their thoughts
must needs even smell as it were of Christ, Ephesians. 4.29.
most sweetly, and their words likewise, and works must be most pleasant,
gracious, and savoury: For if there be but corruptible and withering roses in a
close room, you know how sweetly and strongly all that room does smell of
roses; how much more must the hearts and the lives of those be most sweet, and
fragrant, who have and carry within them the Lord Jesus Christ himself, that
sweetest rose of Sharon, whose s V. stimenta ej^s, sunt sancti ejus, electi
ejus. t^ta Ecclesia ejus. Aug. in loc.
garments smell all of Myrrh and Aloes, and Cassia, Psalm. 45.8. When
Polycarpus was to be sacrificed unto the Lord by fire, by the hands of his most
bloody persecutors (who not being able to burn him, because the fire would
not touch him, did at last kill him with the sword, as he was standing in the
midst of the fire, all resplendent Eusebius. Ecc. hist. l. 4 c. 14.
like shining burnisht gold) his body did send forth such an odoriferous and
sweet savor, as they of Smyrna record it in an Epistle of theirs, as if it had
been perfumed with incense, or some other fragrant and aromaticall Essence. Now
though every other ordinary Christians body do not yield such a miraculous
odor, yet you may read as much in effect of a most gracious perfume, which the
precious souls of all Christ's believing members, his mystical Spouse, do
send forth in a most sweet and pleasant manner, Cant. 3.6. Who is this that
comes out of the wilderness, like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh
and frankincense, with all the powders of the Merchants? Mark, Who is this]
says Christ, the celestial bridegroom of his fair Spouse, the Church, and
her members, That comes out of the wilderness) that is, Greg. in loc.
out of this world, which is like a wilderness.) Like pillars of smoake] that
is, having an aspiring and ascending mind. Perfumed with myrrh and
frankincense, and with all the powders of the Marchant] that is, being
perfumed, and sweetened with all the most fragrant and sweet smelling graces of
the Spirit of Christ, who being the Merchant here spoken of, does so perfume
and grace the same.

SECT. 4. Conviction for such as want Christ.
2. THis point may serve to convince the Consciences of all carnal, This point
serves to convince the conscience.
civil, and hypocritical men and women, that Christ is not in them: For
Christ is like a Rose, wheresoever he is, yielding a most sweet and fragrant
sent; but they do even stink by reason of their abominable thoughts, words,
and deeds; Like the snuff of an extinct candle, as the Apostle does mostaptly
describe them, Tit. 1.15. affirming that such as are unbeleevers, are also
abominable, or execrable, odious, and stinking-persons, as the (...), i.e mal^
o^^tes, a (...), i.e. foetor extinctae lucernae.
original plainly shows. Say therefore, or think what you will of your
estates, you that are so bad; I must needs tell you to your faces, that Christ
is not in you: For if Christ did inhabit in you, your thoughts, words, and
works, would be as sweet and savory as Christ is, that most sweet and fragrant
rose of Sharon; but now thy words and works, O thou profane Esauite, are
detestable; and though thou hypocrite, and civil honest man make a fair show
without, and profess much, yet are thy very inward parts, reserved
imaginations, and closest thoughts most execrable; for they smell altogether
and stink of hellish pride, and devilish envy, of filthy lusts, and dunghill
covetousness; and therefore who will believe any of you, that Christ that is
in you? you your selves will never believe a man, though he should swear that
there are roses in his closet or chest, if when he opens it, you smell in
stead of roses nothing but dung and stinking carrion. Now this is just your
case, O ye carnal, civil and hypocritical men and women; you may think or
say Christ is in you, and so consequently, that you have saving faith in
Christ; but when you do but open your mouths, and disclose your thoughts,
unlocking the chests and closets of your hearts, by your deeds, then we can
smell nothing but the ill savor of boasting, or lying, or railing, or cursing,
or banning, or swearing, or coveting, or lusting, or ryoting, which stinks
worse then any dung: And when you keep in such stuff, and do not break out,
then your evil thoughts do stink within you; Like the dead corpse of Lazarus
in the grave, John 11.39. So that you shall never make me believe that Christ
is in you, though you should even swear by your faith, as some do, who even
thereby testify to the world that they have none at all, being so free and
prodigal, as to swear away even that faith which they say or think they have.

And therefore be convinced of it, all you that are thus abominable, and say no
more, that Christ is in you, and that you have saving faith in Christ, seeing
you cannot make good what you say, and so consequently neither are nor can be
credited or believed, what ever ye say and protest of it. What does it profit,
my brethren said Saint James once, Iam. 2.14.
though a man say he has faith, and has no works, can faith, that is, such a
verbal faith save him? And so say I, what does it profit you, though you say
that Christ is in you, when as the Savior of your thoughts words, and works is
so ill, and the purple spots of your foulest sins and enormities so many? Can
your saying save you? or bind others to believe you though you say it? No, No.

SECT. 5. Matter of fear for such as reject Christ.
3. THe point is useful and good for men's affections to work upon them. This
serves to work upon men's affections: and 1. To make men fear.


And first of all, to terrify those who refuse and reject the Lord Christ,
preferring with those base spirited Gadarens, ( Mat. 8.32.34.) their Swine or
swinish lusts, and brutish desires and filthy sins before him, whereas they
should rather infinitely desire and esteem him, even above pearls and
diamonds, and rubies, and the burnished gold of Ophir, and the whole world, if
it were all turned into one entire mass and lump of gold, seeing he is so
fair and so useful, and so desirable, as I showed you, being like a rose, a
Rose indeed, outmatching all other roses, for beautifulness, usefulness,
medicinalnesse, and desirablenesse, and so consequently worthy to be esteemed,
and to be preferred before all things: So that all such sordid and detestable
Gadarens amongst us may well even tremble and be astonished at it, that they
do so despise and trample under the feet of so monstrous contempt, the Son of
God, that most glorious Rose of Sharon: For what will you say another day, you
that are so vile and so base, why you did not embrace the Lord Jesus, forgoing
and forsaking all your bosom sins, though never so delightful, dear, and
desirable to your corrupted and depraved natures? Nay, I demand again, What
answer will you return unto him whom now you do so vilify and lightly
esteem, when he shall come in the rolling clouds of heaven to judge you, and
all men else both quick and dead; and shall question you, as he did once those
stiffenecked Jews, ler. 2.5. What iniquity or fraud, as the original has it,
could you find in me, that you went so far from me, or stood at such a
distance with me, and would not approach and draw near unto me, but have
walked after vanity, that is, as the original intimates, after things of
naught, and which did soon fade away; and in the which you could find nothing
but a mere emptiness, and became so vain your selves, as that you were but
like so many empty caskes, ecchoing, and sounding loud enough, but containing
not so much as one drop of grace, and goodness, as being wholly sequestered and
alienated from me, who am the fountain of goodness, John 1.16. What can you
say then, say I, for your selves, why you did so shamefully forget your selves?
will you say that Christ was not desirable, or useful, or fair enough for
you? then my text will stop your mouths that you shall not be able to justisie
nor maintain your saying: For therein you see Christ himself resembles
himself to a Rose right fair and good, and desirable, saying, I am the Rose
of Sharon; so as that he may well answer you then after this sort: If I were
and had been like a tearing bramble, or a nettle which will sting those that
touch it, you might have had some excuse for your abhorring and rejecting of my
glorious person; but now I have made my self otherwise known unto you, I have
told you that I am like a rose, to comfort, and to revive, and not to sting,
nor to tear those that come unto me; and therefore now you have no cloak for
your detestable and horrible sin of despising me, and neglecting so great
salvation. See John 15.22. Whereupon shall I tell you what you may be like to
say: O bedlams, that we were, when we despised and rejected so glorious a
Savior, we fools then could see no beauty in him, nor comeliness wherefore we
should desire him, Esa. 53.2. but now how fair and glorious is his body, which
there we see upon that white and glorious throne; and how desirable is his
sacred person, which is crowned with such Majesty? Oh how does he shine now
with incomparable splendour above the brightness of the sun; and oh! how
amiable is his countenance; and therefore, oh! how have we wronged our own
souls, whom we have bereaved and deprived of so beautiful, blissful, and
delightful an object, as this most glorious and sweetest Savior is, whom now
we behold with most bitter grief, and unutterable vexation of heart, because
we have so wilfully, disdainfully, and obstinately withstood and lost so great
salvation: If now we had time and leave to make our choice, we would prefer
this glorious Savior, whom we have once so despised, before ten thousand
worlds if there were so many, and before more then ten hundred thousand
pleasures and sports, and pastimes, and carnal oblectations; but alas we
cannot, the time of mercy is expired, and the time of justice, wrath, and
vengeance, so much spoken of by our faithful pastors, has appeared, and we
must now be judged, and adjudged to the easelesse, remediless, endless
torments and flames of that infernal pit; and all our pleasures, Wisd. 5.
profits, and delights are passed away from us. Like a shadow and a poast, that
hasted by; and there is nothing of all things we ever enjoyed and possessed,
that can solace and comfort us now in that merciless flame in all eternity;
and therefore, O that we had never been borne, oh! that we had been but so
happy as our cattle, horses, oxen, dogs, swine, beasts, birds, which died but
once, and feel no more pain for ever; whereas we must be ever dying, and yet
shall ever be living in pain, in woe, and misery. Oh woe, woe, woe unto us
that ever we were borne to see this day, and to die this death, and to live
such a life, which will be unto us a perpetual and everkilling destruction.

SECT. 6. Matter of shame for careless and loose Walkers.
2. THis may serve to shame many of us, who profess our selves to be Christ's
espoused members, and yet are so regardlesse of our selves many times, and do
so disfigure, defile and stain our selves with such a numberles number of sins
and transgressions, which are the very excrements of abused and polluted
souls, as that both at home and abroad we do even disgrace our holy
profession, and dishonor that King of glory, Jesus Christ, our dearest Savior,
who is most like unto a Rose fresh and fair; and therefore requires a singular
fairenes of carriage and conversation of all those who call themselves after
his name, and will be reputed to be his mystical Spouse. If a poor maid
should be married to a Lord or knigh^, as fair as Absalom, and as wise and
rich as Solomon, able and willing to provide her the richest clothes, and
bracelets, and jewels, as if she were a Queen; and yet she should not carry
her self somewhat accordingly, neatly and decently at least, nor make some
advantage unto her self of so great and good a husband, according to her
degree; but should come before him, like a beggar in filthy rags, and all
besmeared, and go likewise abroad thus among the people, would not all that
know her, cry shame on her, that having such an excellent husband, she should
disgrace both him and her self? well, if we do indeed belong to Christ, and
believe in Christ, then are we espoused unto Christ, who is fairer then
Absalom, being the rose of Sharon; and is also both able and ready to clothe
us, even as Saul the Lords anointed did clothe the daughters of (...) in
Sharle^; I mean the skarlet (...) of his own righteousness, and to put on
even ornaments of gold, (of grace) upon our apparel, 2 Samuel 1.24. that we may
be all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. and therefore how can I choose but cry
shame upon all you that are loose and careless professors; who take your
selves to be thus richly and happily married, and yet are not ashamed to come
in the glorious presence of that goodliest and fairest bridegroom of all
bridegroomes, Christ Jesus, with hands and mouths, and hearts all soiled, and
beslubbered with sin, which is that abominable and hateful thing, Esa. 1.14.
And so in like manner dare even to go abroad among men of all sorts, with such
foul mouths, and filthy hands, and polluted hearts, to the great dishonor of
so great a king, and the almost irreparable and irrecoverable damage of your
own souls, whom hereby you expose to his fierce and flaming wrath, for the
time present; and likewise, y Defraud and disposs^sse your selves.
defraud and dispossess your selves of all those rarest and richest comforts,
which do so happily replenish, and revive the blessed hearts of other careful
and gracious Christians, who do always industriously labor to be fair, even
as he is fair, and glorious, even as he is glorious, and pure, as he is pure,
1 John 3.3. be ashamed therefore of your selves, all you that are so
regardlesse of your selves, that dare presume to bring even into Gods own
house and presence such foul and filthy souls as are altogether stuffed and
topfull with most horrible and execrable thoughts; that embolden your selves to
lift up there such contaminated and defiled hands, as have touched many unclean
things but a little before; yea, and moreover, to open such filthy mouths as
have exhaled and uttered so many vain, impure, and unseemly speeches, when you
were even ready to enter the Congregation. Assure your selves, that if you
shall not henceforth labor with all possible care to carry yourselves more
fairly then hitherto you have done; that this very performance, the word you
hear, the prayer you make, will be a means even to increase and to aggravate
those stinging tortures, wherewith the most jealous, most just, and righteous
God will vex and plague those foul and filthy souls of yours here in this
present life, though he do not cast and throw them into hell hereafter, in
case they belong unto him by the irrevocable degree of his eternal
predestination.

SECT. 7. Comfort for Gods careful people.
3. THis point may serve to cheer up all Gods people, This serves to comfort,
and to cheer up Gods people.
that their dear Savior is thus pleased to compare himself to a Rose: For as
roses are able to comfort the very heart, and to Tho. Hill in his art of
gardening, p. 88.
rejoice the blood: so Christ must needs be very comfortable too, yea
transcendently more.

1. I say Christ must needs be much more comfortable, refreshing, and reviving,
and that in a twofold respect:

For 1. Respect. b^ R^sa r^f^igerat. Dioscor. l. 1. c 112. de medica materia.
Id. c. 113.
as roses do * refresh and cool men's bodies in hot diseases * and sweats, and
allay the heat: So Christ is able to allay the burning heat of hell fire,
though you should feel it sweating, as it were, in your very soul, as he sweat
blood himself in the anguish of his soul, Luke 22.44. to deliver us from the
horror and fire of hell, and to make us glad.

2. Respect. c Petr. A^dr. Mattbiol. in Dioscer. l. 1. c. 112.
As roses do revive men when they are taken with dead palsies: So Christ will
restore his to life again, Ioh. 6.54. Who so eats my flesh, and drinks my
blood, has everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.

2. I affirm that Christ is transcendently more comfortable then a rose. For
as much as every D^onys. Areopag.
excellency and goodness which is in any creature, is is still after a more
excellent manner in the Creator.

And here that you may see this transcendency, as much as I am able to make you
see it, I pray you take notice of these following disproportions.

1. Disproportion.
Sometimes, I mean in the wi^ter there is not a fresh rose to be seen nor to
be had in all the fields of c I say our land, because about Carthage there are
fresh roses all the winter long, as Petr. Andr. Matthew. in l. 1. D^^s^. c. 112.
affirms it.
our land, if one would give never so much for any to smell to it; but Christ
is ever to be found, and never wanting unto those that seek him, neither
winter nor summer, that is, in adversity as well as in prosperity, yea, most of
all, and chiefly then, Esa 43.1, 2. and therefore how much more comfortable
must he needs be then all roses?

2. Disproportion.
And though also other corruptible roses may be had and used, yet can they not
administer comfort unto us at all times, even whilst we have them, how ever
they may exhilarate the heart at some times; but Christ as he is always to be
found in a time of need, so is he always able to comfort us in a time of need,
Heb. 4.16.

3. D^sp^^portion.
When other roses do yet comfort the heart, alas how cold and weak is that
comfort, being not able to penetrate and reach to the soul? For the operation
of roses is but physical, and not metaphysicall, corporal, and not
spiritual; but Christ the rose of Sharon comfort the very soul of a man,
as you may see, Psalm. 103.3. where David communs with his soul, saying; Who
heals all thy diseases, mark, all thy diseases, O my soul; and in Esa.
66.13. where God (and so consequently Christ also, who is God) promises us
most graciously, that he will comfort us; as one whom his mother comfort,
mark, as a Quae amore liberos in sinu nutriens omnem superat charitatem. H^yme
in loc
mother who most affectionately comfort the very soul of her child,
whereas the rose does but comfort the body; and therefore how ravishing and how
great must needs be that comfortablenesse, which is in the Lord Christ; the
comforts of a mother we know are exceeding great and sweet, and do a child
more good then honey or sugar. And such are Christ's; nay, I dare say as
insinitely greater as himself, being an infinite God, is infinitely greater in
compassion then any mother. See Esa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking
child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb, yea, they
may forget, yet will not I forget thee.

4. Disproportion.
And though roses do sometimes revive men, being faint, yet can they not take
away the sting of death it self; nor comfort us after death, though many do
bestrow the dead with roses; but Christ can do both:

1. O death I will be thy plague, Hos. 13.14.
O grave I will be thy destruction: repentance shall be hid from mine eyes, or
though comfort be now hid from mine eyes, says the Lyra in loc.
Prophet, for the Hebrew is Nocham, which signifies comfort as well as
repentance; and therefore it is so translated both by Saint Jerome, and Doctor
Luther. And hence it was that Bainham, that blessed Martyr, uttered those most
comfortable words in the midst of the fire, * O ye papists, M Fox.
behold you look for miracles, and here you may see a miracle; for in this
fire I feel no more pain, then if I were in a bed of Down, but it is unto me
as a bed of roses. This he speaks when his legs and arms were half burnt.

2. Rev. 2.10. and comforting them in Abraham's bosom, Luke 16.25. which is a
place of bliss and everlasting wealth, and of Cyril. Alex, hom pasc. 11
unexpected delights, even Origin Dial 2 contra Marcion.
heaven it self.

5. Disproportion.
Other roses can do us no good in losses and reproaches, and in other
external afflictions, though they may comfort our heatts in some diseases; but
Christ can and does solace his then too, as you may read, Acts 5.41. how the
blessed Apostles did even rejoice, when they were most reproachfully used, and
shamefully beaten, because they were worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name.
So Heb. 10.34. you may note how those believing Hebrews did even joyfully
endure the spoiling of their goods. The like is reported of Paulinus Bishop of
Nola, that having lost all, at the taking of Nola, he uttered these words: Let
me not be afflicted and vexed, O Lord, for gold or silver, for thou art all in
all unto me; and of the people of Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 1. c. 10. k M. Fox in
his Acts and Monuments.
Merindol, that when they saw their houses burnt before their eyes, they
rejoiced at it greatly, being honored so highly, as to suffer that loss for
Christ his sake, who enabled and caused them so to do.

If any of you that are held to be of the number of Gods people shall object,

I answer,

1. Some are Christians in show: 2. some in deed.

The former are such as have a form of godliness, Christians in show.
and deny the power thereof, loving their pleasures, sports, lusts, pride,
money, friends, or belly more then God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Now if some of you be such,
then never complain or wonder, that you can find no such comfortablenesse in
Christ; for you are dead like the widow. 1 Timothy 5.6. which living in pleasures
is dead while she lives: and as the Rev. 3.1.
Angel of the Church of Sardis: So you have a name that you live, being called
Professors of the Gospel, but you are dead. Now though one should even fill
the mouth of a dead corpse, and cover it all over with roses; yet can that same
take no comfort in them, because it self is void of life; So you, what comfort
can you take in Christ, the rose of Sharon, though we do even fill your ears
with the preaching of Christ, seeing that you be dead and destitute of the life
of Christ; and that Christ himself has said, that whosoever loves father and
mother more then him, is not worthy of him; and that he that loves son or
daughter more then him, is not worthy of him, Matt. 10.37. Whereupon it
follows, that all you who love worse things then father and mother, son or
daughter, even base and filthy lusts, and bosom sins, more then Christ, must
needs be unworthy also of Christ himself, and so consequently of the comforts
of Christ, which he never can or will throw away and bestow on such unworthy
hypocrites, and selfe-lovers as you are, who have nothing but a mere form and
shadow of piety without any substance or reality; and therefore my advise and
counsel is, that you do labor for the power and life of godliness, and
prefer the love of Christ before all things, if you desire to find that
comfortablenesse, which is in Christ, or else never look for it.

2. Christians indeed.
As for Christians indeed, they are of 2. sorts again: 1. some somewhat
careless, 2. others very careful.

1. 1 Careless Christians.
Some are somewhat careless, sometimes I mean: 1. diet, wherein they do not
keep a golden mean; and 2. apparel, wherein they show too much conformity to
the monstrous fashions of this world; and 3. sleep, wherein they take up too
much time; and 4. worldly cares, unto which they give too much way; and 5.
company, which they do not so distinguish, as to avoid those which are most
dangerous enemies to their poor fowls; and 6. duties, which they do not so
heedfully perform, as they ought, daily prayer I mean, and holy meditations,
and deep humiliations for daily sins, and continual applyings of Christ, and
the like. Such careless Christians were the Corinthians once, 2 Cor. 7.11.
as the Apostle implies, when he says; Behold this self same thing that you
sorrowed after a godly sort, what carfulness it wrought in you, says he, to
show that there was none such in them before, and that they did not grieve so
before. Now if some of you that cannot find so much comfortablenesse in Christ,
as was spoken of here, be such, then never wonder at it: for what comfort can a
man take in roses, if he will not take the pains to fetch them, or to apply
them; or if he be asleep, how can he smell them, though his chambers were full
of roses? well may others that wake, be refreshed with the sent of them, and
take delight in them; but he cannot, so long as he sleeps: So you that are so
careless, what comfort can ye take or find in Christ, as long as you will not
take the pains, to draw what comfort you can from Christ in that careful
manner, as you ought? yea, are in a manner asleep, in that you be so drowsy,
dead, dull, backward, and careless in the doing of your duties; and do so
seldom humble and afflict your souls for your manifold exorbitancies, slips,
failings, and grievous sins. God comfort those that are cast down, says
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 7.6. but you are not so dejected; Tame^ quod divinas
cousolation^s non habemus, aut rarius sentimus, nos in culpasum^s; quia
co^punctione^ cordis non quaerimus. Tho a Kempis, de Imit. Christi, l. 1. c. 21.
and therefore, what wonder is it to hear that you are not comforted: So that
I for my part do not intend to cast away the precious comforts of Christ upon
you, that are so careless, preaching comfort to Gods people; for you are not
capable of comfort in this case, and we ministers wrong both our selves, and
you too, when we do promiscuously pronounce, and preach comfort to Gods
people: For then you careless ones, persuading your selves to be Gods people
as you may be, do snatch at such comforts, and apply them, though you do not
feel them, nor indeed are then fit for them; and therefore, I must and will
distinguish between you that are careless, and those that are careful,
telling you that you for your part, being so secure and undejected, you may
not, nor must not look for any sensible comforts from Jesus Christ, the rose
of Sharon, as long as you are, and shall be so carelessly disposed.

But secondly, Careful ones.
as for those that are careful among us of every thing, and humble themselves
much continually, and are dejected, and yet find or feel no comfort for the
present, they must not therefore be disheartened, because that he which should
comfort them, is far from them as they conceive; for they may take comfort in
this, that either,

1. They have in times past sat down under Christ's shadow with great delight,
tasted of the sweet comforts of Christ, wherewith he is wont to refresh young
beginners, especially in their minority, and in the infancy of their
conversion, Cant. 2.3.

2. Or if they have not yet been made partakers of the sweet consolations that
are in Christ, That is, When you shall have most need of it; either when the
spirit would tail else without it. Esa. 57.16. Or against some great
affliction approaching, or some great encounter with the world for the name of
Christ. Goodwin in his return of prayers, p. 152.
Lords good time they shall feel them, as he who upon a great stoppage, not
being able to smell roses, may and shall smell them in time, when that stoppage
is gone. For so it is written, Esa. 54.6, 7, 8. the Lord has called thee as a
woman forsaken, and grieved in spirit; and a wife of youth when thou wast
forsaken, says thy God: for a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with
great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee;
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord thy
Redeemer: But when it will be, that he tells us not, but keeps it to himself;
and therefore you must live by faith, you that complain of the want of
comfort, and stay upon God, even in the want of comfort, as a man, who in the
want of bodily strength stays himself upon a staff; Esa 50.10
for so says God, Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the
voice of his servant, that walks in darkness, and has no light, Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and stay upon his God, (...)
Esa. 50.10. the baculus sic appellatus quod illi ho mo inmtatur.
original is, let him lean upon his God, as upon a staff, which will be a
comfort to him for the present, by a gracious supportation of him in the want
of comfort, and in the end by a most sweet and sensible distillation of comfort
into his sad and pensive soul, as it is written: Thy rod and thy staff they
comfort me, Psalm. 23.4. that is, as Chrysostom. in loc.
one of the Ancient expounds that place; thy Christ (who is my rod and my
staff, in that he came in the old age of the world) does comfort me as a
staff, (which is a comfort and supporter to old age.) A Note.
Where note by the way, that Christ is a staff to comfort old age, that is,
such as wait with old Simeon for the consolation of Israel, Luke 2.25. and
make not too much have to have comfort by and by; and hence it is, that some of
the most eminent Saints of God felt most comfort a little before their
departure, in the very last age and end of their days; hear their own words.

Dear wife, Fox in his Acts and Monuments, p. 1361.
said M. Sanders, that blessed Martyr, riches I have none to leave behind me;
but that treasure of tasting how sweet Christ is to hungry consciences, whereof
I feel a part. I bequeath unto you. I am merry, and I trust I shall be merry,
maugre all the devils in hell.

And when Ier. Burroughes in his Grac. spirit, p. 77. alleges this speech.
Oecolampadius lay sick, and his friends did ask him whether the light did not
offend him, he clapped his hands on his breast, and said, Hic sat lucis est, here
is light enough, meaning comfort enough.

So Edward Bagshaw, in the life and death of M Bolton, p. 34.
blessed M. Bolton said to some of his parish that came to visit him when he
lay a dying: I am by the wonderful mercies of God as full of comfort as my
heart can hold, and feel nothing in my soul but Christ, etc.

If you shall reply, Ob.
that you fear you shall never feel the like comfort in Christ, because these
men were so eminent, and you so pestred with a number of corruptions, which you
cannot master yet to your content.

I answer, Solut.
1. That they also were subject to infirmities as we are; for we may not think
that they were holier then Elias, who was a man subject to like passions as we
are, James 5.17. and therefore why may not you feel some true comfort too at
last, though not so much as they.

2.

If you say you fear you do; Ob. Solut.


I answer: do not you build upon needless and groundless fears, but examine
your hearts, and they will tell you, that you do what you can to purify your
selves, and to avoid sin, and all the occasions of it, shutting the very
windows on high, you eyes, and stopping the fountains of sin below in the
heart, by a holy and careful watching over your own hearts, thoughts, and
motions, even as God himself did then stop the fountains of the deep, and the
windows of heaven, when he would dry up the flood, Genesis 8.3.

And therefore what should let you, why you should not cheer up your hearts
with the serious consideration of this most comfortable doctrine that I have
delivered unto you, touching the most sweet and comfortable rose of Sharon?

Will you say that you meet with so many troubles, crosses, afflictions, Ob.
reproaches, calamities, losses, and the like, that you cannot be cheerful?

Then I answer, Solut.
that all these things should not shake nor move you so as to make you refuse
comfort, and to walk sadly and dejectedly, to the great disheartening and
discouraging of others, and the hurting of your own souls, whom you torture
more then needs by a number of self created vexations and troubles, which by
your pensiveness and heaviness you draw upon them: for,

1. All your afflictions of what sort, Ground. Heb. 12.11, 12.
kind, or degree so ever they be, what are they but purgations to take away
sin? When God opened the windows of heaven, and powered down seas of water,
even immeasurably and most dreadfully, down went all stately towers, and lofty
buildings, and sumptuous monuments; but as the waters rose, so the Arc rose
higher and higher still, and was so much nearer heaven: So when God sends
floods, and seas of troubles, down goes our pride, security, carnality,
impurity, and a number of aspiring and rising corruptions; and in stead thereof
Christ rises, and the poor soul rises, like unto the Arc, ever higher and
higher, sleighting and despising the world. Like that woman clothed with the
Sun (whereby we may understand Christ with his cross and afflictions, as hot
as the Sun) is said to have the Moon, that is, all sublunary earthly things
under her feet, Rev. 12.1.

2. They are but like those charets and wagons, Ground.
which Joseph sent for Jacob, Genesis 45.27. for as they revived Jacob, and
brought him near unto Joseph: so do afflictions revive and quicken us, being
dead and dull, and bring us nearer unto Christ, who is our Joseph, then we were
before. See 1 Pet. 1.7, 8.

3. As Jacob made his son Joseph a coat of diverse colors, Ground.
because he loved him best, Genesis 37.3. so Christ bestows such various and
sundry afflictions, like a coat of many colors, upon those whom he loves
best. See Rev. 3.19. As many as I love I rebuke and chasten; and therefore I
say, they are but signs of his dearest love.

4. But last of all, Ground.
Christ himself the rose of Sharon, I dare say is more sweet then all your
inward or outward troubles can be bitter, for he is as a sweet rose among all
such thorns, or thornlike like afflictions; and he sweetens them, though other
roses cannot so sweeten the thorns among which they grow: even as that Tree
did sweeten the bitter waters of Meriba, which otherwise no body could drink,
Exodus 15.25. for he assures us, that how ever we speed here and may be
entertained in this world, we shall rejoice in him, and live with him in glory
at the last, as you have heard that he will quicken us as a rose, and revive us
after death, which is more then a rose can do: So as that needs we must gain
infinitely more by Christ then we can possibly lose by him.

And therefore as you take delight in a rose, though it be among thorns, so
take comfort and joy in Christ, though he be a rose among thorns, that is,
surrounded with a number of pricking, piercing, and heart-cutting vexations. If
one should rob you of all that you possess, and you were made sure at the same
time of an orient Jewel in a sure and a safe place, more worth a thousand
times then all that you lost, I suppose you would not be so foolish, as to take
on, and to vex your selves about your loss; but rather rejoice at so rare a
Jewel, whose prize does so far surmount the worth of all your other goods,
which are nothing at all comparable to so precious a Jewel* And did not I
assure you but now of Christ, the rose of Sheron, whose prize is above rubies
and precious stones, and whom ye can never lose again after ye have made him
once your own? and therefore I hope you will not be so foolish again
hereafter, as to grieve immoderately at any afflictions or losses of goods or
good name by wrongs or revilings; but rather rejoice in Christ, who being that
Mat. 17.45, 46.
pearl of inestimable prize, is better then a thousand livings, and ten
thousand earthly contentments, and millions of gold; and sweeter then all the
pleasures, all the friends, husbands, wives, fathers, mothers, brothers
sisters, etc. in the world, for they are many times rather bitter then sweet,
and do more grieve then relieve us; but he is ever sweet, and is ready even
then, when they or any other thing does cross us most, sweetly to comfort us,
being altogether as sweet and comfortable as a rose, nay much more, as has
been largely showed already.

SECT. 8. An exhortation to such as want Christ, to seek him in the Law and
Gospel.
4. THis point may serve to incline the wills of those men and women that
formerly were averse from Christ, to be for Christ: Use general, serving to
incline the wills of such as hitherto were averse, and far from Christ to
seek after Christ.
For he is most like unto a rose in Sharon field, and so consequently most
desirable, as you have heard, wherefore as in the summer time, when roses are
plentifully to be had, every body almost will have a rose in his hand: so let
every one of you that hitherto wanted Christ labor to get him into his heart..
But this is too general, and therefore I Will descend to particulars,
instructing you of five things; as namely, 1. Where this rose is to be sought.
2. Where with it is to be taken. 3. When it is to be sought. 4. Wherefore, or
upon what grounds. 5. What impediments must be removed, that it may be sought
and taken.


For the first: I say that Christ is to be sought for 1. In the Law. be sought
for 2. In the Gospel.


1. This Rose of Sharon is to be sought for in the Law preached; Dilatation of
this use.
for so says the Apostle, Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster, to bring us
to * Christ, Gal. 3.24. Whereupon it follows, that as he who will gather
roses, must seek for them among Nam ^osa ex spina nascitur, Pl^n. not. bist.
l. 21*
thorns: So he that will come to Christ, must come to him by the pric* king
thorns of the law, as those converts, Acts 2.37. who were sore pricked in
their hearts before they could be so happy as to enjoy Christ; and the reason
of this assertion is most evident and plain.

For as long as we are not to some purpose terrified by the law and made
sensible of our own misery, we will not care for Christ, even as scarce any
body would have cared much for the brazen serpent, lifted up in the
wilderness, if it had not been for the fiery serpents, which having stung men
unto death, compelled them to look up: so we would hardly make account of
Christ, if the terrors of the law, like fiery serpents should not sting us to
death, and make us afraid of death, death I mean everlasting: Simile.
Or, if you will take this comparison, Men by nature are like mariners and
passengers in a ship, which is in great danger, not far from a great rock, as
long as they have the least hope that they may escape, and be saved in the
ship, they will not leap into the sea, and swim; but when they are told by the
skillful shipmaster, that there is no hope of life, unless they do so, then
they will rather swim and try, whether they may come to the rock, there to be
saved, then die and sink in the ship: So as long as men in the state of nature
(which is like a broken ship, very dangerous) may have any hope to go up to
heaven, and do well enough, abiding where they are, i.e. in the state of open
prophanenes, or civil honesty, or pharasaicall hypocrisy, and keeping their
bosome-sins, they will not wagge one foot to go to Christ thus as they ought,
forgoing and forsaking all their darling delights, and sinful profits,
honors, and contentments; but when once they are absolutely and roundly told
by that skillful schoolmaster or shipmaster, whose name is Law, that if they
abide in that state, and forsake not their forlorn hopes, and sweetest sins,
which are like greatly desired goods in a broken ship, they must perish and
sink, and be engulphed in that formidable lake, which burns with fire and
brimstone, Rev. 21.8. then, then will they rather do so then dye; rather swim
to Christ, who is like a 1 Cor. 10.^^
rock, upon any terms, then perish with their goods; I should say profits,
pleasures, honors in hell for evermore. And therefore if any of you all that
want Christ, do in good earnest desire to get Christ; Let him not refuse to
hear the law, and to think on it seriously, that so he may be thereby
terrified and urged effectually to go to Christ, even speedily, that he may
not be damned eternally. But hereof more is to be said hereafter. This is but
to make way for them.

2. This rose of Sharon is to be sought in the Gospel preached, In the Gospel.
which is like a field for its largeness, because therein Christ offers
himself to as many as will come to him; saying, Come to me, all you that
travel, and are heavy laden, and I will ease you, Matt. 11.28. so as that he
might well compare himself here to a rose in Sharon field, which is not so
enclosed, and reserved as your garden roses are; but may be had of any that
travelleth by, and has a mind to it; for do but mark his speech, and you
shall see it, Come unto me, all ye that travell] mark all, as if he should
say; I do not either reserve my self to my self, or deny my self to any
that would have me. No, but I am ready and willing to ease and to embrace even
with the dearest embraces of my love any poor traveling soul that comes to
me; and therefore, come hither all ye poor sinners, that groan under the
burden of your sins, and seek Christ in this sweet and gracious promise; for
here you shall undoubtedly find him, he cannot go from it, because he is
faithful.

SECT. 9. Faith must be gotten for the taking of Christ.
2. ONly I must tell you, Dilatati^ of this use. Get faith.
that as he will pluck a rose, must have a hand to pluck it with, so you must
have the hand of faith, wherewith you may and must lay hold on Christ,
believing verily, that according to his faithful promise he will be a Savior
unto you, and refocillate you, and ease your poor souls of the most heavy and
grievous burden of sin, and that you shall have rest by him here and hereafter
eternally in the heavens. See John 6.37. Him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out.

But how shall we get faith? Sol.


I answer, Christ himself is the author of it, Heb. 12.2. and he works it by
his word and spirit, Romans 10.17. 1 Cor. 12.9. and therefore go to him by
prayer, and cast your selves down before the throne of his grace, both before
and after the hearing of his word, and beg of him, that as he has given you
hands to take your meat with, and to gather and pluck roses for the good of
your bodies in sickness, that you may live the life of nature: so he would
give you the hand of faith, wherewith you may take and apprehend him, being
that most sweet and medicinal rose of Sharon, for the good of your souls,
that they may live the life of faith here, and the life of glory hereafter.

Now it may be, that Christ will not hear ye by and by, because you would not
hear him, when he did seek after you in the preaching of his faithfullest
messengers; but let not that dismay you, for he loves to be importuned, and
therefore solicit him again and again; and be ye as earnest with him, as
once Rachel was with Jacob, when she said; Give me children, or else I die,
Genesis 30.1. so say ye unto Christ, O Lord Jesus, who art the author of faith,
and can give it to whom thou will, even as thou can give children when, and
to whom thou will give us faith, Lord, or else we die and perish for ever; or
else, as once a good old Ioh. Badly bornt in King He^y the 4. time. Anno 1409.
Martyr cried out in the fire, saying, Mercy Lord, mercy; so cry ye (as being
in the estate of hell fire by nature, so as that needs you must needs burn and
frye for ever, if ye have no saving faith, wherewith you may take Christ who
must save you from hell) faith Lord, faith, even true saving faith let us have,
that we perish not in those merciless, easelesse, and endless flames of hell,
which our former unbelief has justly deserved.

SECT. 10. Christ must be sought speedily.
3. ANd that you may find Christ (as has been showed) in the Law and Gospel,
^ D^latatio^ S^^k Christ while he may be found speedily.
you must seek him while he may be found, as it is written, seek the Lord
while he may be found, Esa. 55.6. which saying of the Lords Prophet plainly
intimates that there is a time when he may not be found of some, who seek him
too late; where fore as they that gather roses take their time, and look out
for them in the summer, when they may have them: so do you look out for
Christ n^w in these warm summer days of the Gospel, which shines so fairly
and fully among us; yea to d^y seek him as it is written, Heb. 3*7. To day if
ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; for you know not how soon you
may be taken from the means, or the means from you; and whether the Lord will
then be found of you, when lying upon your death beds, you cannot hear his
word, after you have despised it a long time in your best health: As for Gods
people, they may be sure (as I told you formerly) that they shall always find
Christ in the winter of adversity, as well as in the summer of prosperity, and
upon their death beds especially, yea after death, but you cannot be certain
of it, that you shall find Christ at last, when you would, because you did not
answer his call when he would. See Prove. 1.24.25. late repentance may speed,
but early repentance is sure to speed, says Perkins in Gal.
one; and I say so too of seeking after Christ, adding witha^^, that however
late seeking after Christ: I am sure it speedeath so rarely, and so seldom, as
that I can read but of one that sought him so late, and found him, and that is
the thief upon the cross, and none else besides him; for God loves not such
night-birds, Levit. 11.19. he forbids his people the Jews to feed on bats
or flindermice, Cyr. in Lev. 17.
and those twilight birds signified putters of, and prolongers of repentance,
and of seeking after Christ, who think to flutter confusedly about Christ, and
repentance in the evening of their withered years, and in the night of their
latter end; so as that easily you may conceive how welcome most of them are
then to Christ Hear what a great ancient Aug. bom. 41. ^^^^erepaenitentibus.
Doctor says of such, if a man will in his last necessity obtain repentance,
and so departs, I confess we do not deny him what he postulates, and
desires, but we presume not neither that he dies well; whether he go hence
securely and safely I cannot tell, quoth he, and so he concludes at last, Vis
ergo a dubio te liberare, etc. will thou therefore deliver and free thy self
from doubting, repent while thou art in health: Thus he of repenting, and so
say I touching seeking after Christ, will you free your selves from the doubt
whether Christ will welcome you at last, after ye have wasted your best time,
and his best time, wallowing in sinful and sensual delights, then seek after
him, now to day, without delay, and say not either as they in Hagg. 1.2. the
time is not come for us to come to Christ, it is too soon yet, to morrow, to
morrow; For God Non quaerit Dous dilation^m in voce corvina, sed co f^ssionem
in gemitu columbino. Aug. in Psalm. 102.
seeks not after a dilation in the voice of the crow, but an humble
confession and groming after Christ in the voice and sighing of a dove, whose
tune is, Now, Now; and not as the voice of a crow, ^o morrow, to morrow; nay
come, you shall not go hence, but you shall promise first, and resolve within
your selves, that as God shall enable you, so you will now forthwith think upon
this matter seriously, and seek after Christ in the Law and Gospel earnestly;
and that you will labor for faith industriously, praying to Christ for faith
instantly, that so you may carry away Christ at last most happily, to be saved
by him eternally; I know the devil will be loath to let you go so, and to way
these things, which belong to your peace, he will rather solicit you to stay and
tarry a little longer with him, as Laban would have stayed Jacob to be his
drudge for a longer time; but do you not hearken unto him, nor be persuaded by
him, to stay a day or an hour longer with him, to be his slaves as you have
been, no; but rather hearken unto the Lord Christ, who in his word did now
appear unto you; and as once he appeared unto Jacob, saying, (as he said
then, Genesis 21.3.) Come unto me, and so consequently, come away from Laban; I
should say Satan, for he does but oppress you, but I Will ease you, yea come
presently, quickly, says he; for ^e speaks in the present time, Come, without
delay, mane, or early, which is Gods adverbe, whereas the Devil says, mane,
which is his verb, that is, tarry: well if I were but able to pull you away
from this cunning deceiver of your poor souls, and to enstate you in Christ
this d^y, you should not tarry with him one moment longer; but it is God who
must draw you, as it is written, John. 6.44. No man can come to me, except the
father which has sent me, draw him, John. 6.44. And therefore as the spouse of
Christ did once pray for her self, Cant. 1.4. draw me, and we will run after
thee: so will I pray for you, Lord draw those who of themselves cannot go,
that they may come to Christ, even as many as belong to Christ by the
unalterable decree of thine eternal predestination.

I for my part can but persuade you, and it may please God to bless my
persuasions, and to make them effectual unto your poor souls, who can tell?
and therefore;

SECT. 11. Four grounds which should draw men to Christ.
4. I Will show you what grounds should move you so to go to Christ, Dilatatio^
of this use.
and to get him into your hearts, as you were instructed.

1. Do but consider his admirable fragrancy and sweetness, 1 Christ's
sweetness. Me thinks there is no earthly thing that yields so perfect a
pleasure to any sense, as the odor of the first rose doth^o the sent. B. Hall
in his most: Excel. Occas. Medit. ^3.
for being like a rose, he must needs be as redolent as a rose (whose sent is
most sweet and pleasant) in regard of the sweet odor of his gracious words and
works of obedience active and passive, and in regard of the sweetness and
fairness of his person formerly mentioned; and therefore how* o how should ye
be moved with this transcendent sweetness of that sweetest rose of Sharon, to
seek after it, and to get it? how far do men go for fragrant spices; and
how do they adventure their lives, sailing in the Indies, and the spicy
Islands? but ye need not go so far for Christ, who is sweeter then all
spices; for he is nigh unto you, even in the word, which we preach unto unto
you. Again, ye need not leave your house and home, and friends, as men that
are bound for the Indies, but only your sins, and you shall not need to
adventure your lives, if you go to Christ; for then you shall find them, and
save them; and should ye not be willing then to go to Christ, which is but a
little way, forsaking your best beloved sins, which can yield but little
comfort?

2. Consider his delightfulness: Christ's delightfulness.
For being like a rose, he must needs be as delectable as a rose, which
delights our eyes as much as any flower. John ^arion, Ch^on. l. 3 p 130.
Some write of Titus the Roman Emperor, that he was of so sweet and amiable a
disposition, as that he was commonly called, delitiae generis humani, the
delight of mankind, which might be but a flattering speech of men; but of
Christ Jesus, that high and mighty monarch of heaven and earth, we may truly
say so, without flattering, that he is indeed the very delight of mankind: See
Cant. 5.16. how he is said to be altogether lovely or delectable, as the *
Hebrew has it, mark, he is altogether delightful; delightful I, namely in
his person, Psalm, 45.2.

2. of men, John 1.4. Now all know how delectable and pleasing the light is, as
the light of the sun, the light of the stars, and the light of a candle, even
little children do rejoice at the light of a candle, and desire to play with
it, because they see a delightfulness in it, and we do all take great delight
in the shining sun, and shall take a far greater delight in that mass of
shining light, which we shall see another day in the highest heaven, which for
its brightness may be truly Z^sth de coe^o ^e^t. c. 4
termed (...), hat is, all light; and therefore how delectable must Christ
himself needs be, who is the Light, and that light, (...).
even that transcendent light, John 1.8. and that true light which
enlighteneth; that is, Scilicet rationts, se^^ intellig^^^^^ Pis^. (...) loc.
endueth with reason, Every man that comes into the world, or is borne into
the world, and is the cause of another light, for as much as all things were
made by him, ver. 3. yea, the very perfection of all created light, which
Plato^ 7. d^ A^ima.
Plato terms the perfection of shining bodies.

2. T^t. (...) 13
Savior, and the Savior of all men, 1 Timothy 4.10. which title of his is so
delightful, as that it should even cause your hearts to leap within you, when
you hear it as Saint John did leap in his mothers womb for joy, at the voice
of the blessed Virgins sweetest salutation, Luke 1.44. yea, should even
forthwith pluck your hearts out of your breasts and bosoms, to transplant them
into the bosom of Christ; for how delightful is the very naming of a
temporal Savior unto them that are in misery, when they understand or hear
of his willingness to deliver them; and therefore how can your hearts choose
but even dance for joy within you, whiles you hear me speak of such a Savior
as is called the Savior of the world, and of all men, and so consequently
willing to save you also, if you shall believe in him? for so the Apostle goes
on, who is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe, Pisc. in
loc.
because he saves them not only corporally, but spiritually and everlastingly,
whereas otherwise he does but Vade B^ze versi^. Co^servator om^iu^n*
preserve you and others corporally;

3. salvation it self, Luke 1.30. to show, says Heary Smith ^^his fi^^ s^m^^
of t^^^sang of Sim^on.
one, that there is no other Savior but this one; and this word salvation,
quoth he, is the sweetest word in all the scripture, and therefore how
delightful must he needs be, who bears this name, which is the sweetest word
in all the bible?

4. bridegroom, John 3.29. Matt. 9.15. in Latin sponsus, quasi promissus, as
being promised by his heavenly father, to be a husband unto all true believers.
Now how delectable is the name of a bridegroom to a virgin, especially it
being told her that she may have a bridegroom whose beauty and sweetness of
disposition passes all other men's? and therefore how delightful must Christ
needs be, who is fairer then all the children of men, and sweeter too, then all
other men, in regard of his disposition, and how should ye be delighted with
him, O my dearly beloved, when ye hear me tell of him desiring you even
forthwith to choose him for your bridegroom, forsaking all other sinful and
sensual delights, wherewith you have been hitherto too much enamoured and
fascinated, or bewitched? O consider of it, consider of it dear friends, you
can never make the like choice, while the world stands, the Lord open your
eyes and hearts, that you may see your own good, and may not let slip so fair
an opportunity to be so highly preferred, and for ever made!

5. friend, Cant. 5.16. This is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. Now how
delightful a good friend is you know likewise, the very sight of such a friend
is sweet Arist. l. 9. Eth c. 11. * Franciscus P^trar^bo, dial. 52.
says one; and he that has such a friend, says another, has the sweetest
thing that may be; nay, there is no thing better then it, next unto virtue
upon Earth, quoth he, preferring it before Parents, children, brothers, for as
shining bodies do even transfuse some of their light into those places which
are nigh unto them: so does a true and faithful friend send forth, and breathe
sweetness, and grace, and pleasantness, says Maximus monachus.
another; and therefore how pleasant must Christ needs be? who is that true and
faithful friend indeed, who being once befriended with any indeed, never
ceases, nor can he cease to be kind, and courteous, and affable unto him, and
to send and dart forth some comfortable beams of his pleasant countenance into
his believing soul, to make it lightsome, serene, and cheerful? You will have
all things common with you according to the Omnia amicorum communia.
nature of true friendship, which Arist. l. 8. Eth. c. 9.
requires a society, and consists of a society.

1. Ier. 23.6.1 Cor. 1.1, 30.2 Cor. 5.21.

2. John 20.17.

3. Ioh. 17.24 2 Pet. 1.11.

4. Rev. 1.11.

Now tell me what friend else can do so much for you, as this friend will do
for you. Is there any that you know among all the friends you have, and in whom
you take most delight? No, No, there can be none such, but Christ, none but
Christ; and therefore, O that you were willing to forget even father and mother,
brethren, and sisters, and all your kindred, yea, and all other friends
besides, that are carnal, for this dear friend Christ his sake as it is
written, Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear, and forget
also thine own people, and thy fathers house, Psalm. 45.10. The Lord incline
your hearts to do it, that so you also may be able to say in truth, This
Christ who is that pleasant rose of Sharo^, is our friend also as well as
yours, o ye daughters of Jerusalem, Cant. 5.16.

3. Christ's lovingnesse, who for being like a rose, Ch^^^^ lovingnesse.
and as red as a rose, in regard of his bloodshed, he must needs be most
loving, or else he would never shed his heart blood for us. See how the Apostle
reasons. 1 Ioh. 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God, that is, of Christ, who is God, as well as
man, because he laid down his life for us. Great was the love of these two
great friends, Val Max. lib. 4.
Damon and Pythias, who were even ready to dye one for another; but greater was
Christ's, who did lay down his Life for us, being then none of his friends, but
his greatest Enemies, Romans 5.10. and therefore how loving, o how loving a
Savior, say I, must Christ needs be, who out of his mere and free love would
even unsoule himself for us men by death, and depose his blessed life for us
rebels, that had justly expo^ed our selves to the stroke of death by our
sinful life!

O go, go then unto this loving and gracious Savior, ye poor sinners, go, be
not afraid of him, for if he would have you die, he would never have dyed
himself for you; and if he were minded to deny you that eternal life, which
every one of you should infinitely prefer before this present life, which is
but frail and mortal, and momentany, he would never have laid down his own
most precious life, to deliver you from that death which is eternal; or thus,
as Manoahs wife said once to her husband, when he was afraid that they should
should surely dye, because they had seen God; If the Lord were pleased to kill
us, he would not have received a burnt offering at our hands, and a meat
offering at our hands, neither would he have showed us at those things, nor
would he at this time have told us such things, as these, Judge. 13.22, 23. so
say I unto you, if happily you be afraid least you dye, and that for ever,
being damned by the Law of God for your sins in general, and for your
unbelief in special, because you have not yet by faith seen and beheld the
Lord Christ, as it is written, he that believes not is condemned already. John
3.18. if the were pleased to kill you, he would not have offered himself as an
offering unto God, his Father, upon the cross, neither would he have now
showed you all these things, which you have heard related of him, only Aug. in
Psalm. 148. Creed, Creed, etc.
believe believe on him, and then you shall not die but live. For so God loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish but have everlasting life, John 3.16. wherefore Ezech. 18.31,
32.
cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby you have transgressed, and
so going away from your sins go and draw near to Christ, by faith in his name,
which the Lord in mercy grant you. For why will you dye, o house of Israel. Or
thus, why will you dye, o ye poor sinners, the Lord has not pleasure in the
death of him, that dies, wherefore turn your selves, and turn in unto Christ
by faith, and live you, The Lord of life put life in you that ye may live; I
humbly beseech his Majesty.

4. Consider also, my dearly beloved, Christ's nee^fulnesse.
the needfulnesse of Christ, who therefore resembles himself to arose, that you
may see what need you have of him. For Roses, as you know, we can The rose is
chief of all flowers. William Langham in his garden of health, page 535.
hardlyest spare of all flowers, because they be so useful and so medicinal,
whereby you may easily conceive how needful then Christ himself is, in whom,
as the Creator, according to that often mentioned rule, there must needs be
more medicinallnesse and needfulnesse then possibly can be in a created Rose,
unto which he is pleased to compare his sacred self;

Take a view of some particular respects.

1. See how needful he is in regard of the life natural.

2. In regard of the life spiritual.

3. In regard of the Life eternal.

1. To begin with the life Natural, Inregard of the life Natural.
what is it without Christ, but a cursed death? for without him, you are still
under the curse, Gal. 3.10, 13* So as that your very meat and drink, and
wealth, and store, and fruits, and bodies are all accursed; see Deuteronomy. 28.15,
16, 17, 18. till Christ who was made a curse for them that believe, deliver you
from that curse, Gal. 3.10. and have you not cause enough to go to Christ to be
freed from such a curse? some Emperors and Kings have even prostrated
themselves before the Popes of Rome, being but excommunicated by Popes to be
freed from their curse. Lob. Corion C^^en, lib. 4 p. 217. Nicolaus Vigni^^, An.
11^77.
Frederick Barbarossa, that glorious and victorious Emperor of Rome, did even
suffer one of the Popes of Rome to tread upon his neck to have his absolution,
and to free his son, who was then the Popes prisoner at Venice. But you for
your part need not go to the Pope of Rome, but only to Christ, by faith, who
is in the midst of us, to be exempted from the curse of God upon your
estates, and b^dies, as well as souls, and you need not put your necks under
the odious feet of an imperious and in^^^ing Pope, but under the yoke of
Christ, who says, I am lowly, and my yoke is easy, and my burden is light,
M^^ b. 11.29, 30. and should ye not be willing to go to Christ, yea, into
Christ, believing on him, to free your selves from that curse, which lies so
heavy upon you, and upon all that you possess.

Secondly, In regard of the life spiritual.
Consider Christ's needfulnesse in regard of the life spiritual.

1. John 8.36. If the son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free
indeed, whereupon it follows, that if he deliver us not, we are in bondage
still, and are sick still, even very sick, irrecoverably sick of the most
dangerous and contagious leprosy of sin; nay, for ever sick, and for ever in
thraldom for the will of the damned will be ever perverse, says Lombard l 4.
did. 50. where he decideth the question, whether the damned shall sin in hell
also, yea, or no.
Lombard, Some sins, men may leave indeed, for want of means and opportunities,
or for fear, whereupon they may conceive that they are not so bad as they are.
Yea, may even justify themselves with the Pharisee, Luke 18.11. and conclude,
that they are indeed converted, and shall be eternally saved; but there is none
for all this of all those that are out of Christ, who lives not under the
power and predominancy of one commanding sin or other, inwardly, or
outwardly, or both, because Christ has said it, that he must make us free, if
we shall be free indeed, mark indeed, or substantially, really, existently, as
the (...).
original has it, and not imaginarily, verbally, seemingly, as many conceive
themselves to be, being lamentably deceived, and that either because they never
search themselves to any purpose, or because God has deservedly Quis enim
nesciat fieri ut humo detur in repr^bum sensum de m^^i^o praecedentium
p^^^atorum, ut non videat peccata sua. Gabr. Biel. in Can. M^s^ sae Lect. 8.
m^hi, sol. 11.
given them over, for their former delinquencies, and abhorred exorbitancies
into a reprobate sense, that they cannot feel, nor see their sins.

Take a Survey, if you will, of those several Lordly sins, which domineere
over them, and then their guiltiness, and filthiness, will appear as clear
as the noon day.

First, Some of them cannot deny, swearers; though perhaps they be no thieves,
or adulterers.

Secondly,

Thirdly, Ciconia enim fessos p^rentes fert humer^s, and ore jisdem suppeditat
cibos Gesnerus.
aged parents as much as much as they can, 2 Timothy 3.2.

Fourthly, others, Tim. 3.3.

Fifthly, others are most lascivious,

Sixthly, Prove. 30.15.
Horseleeches daughters, which ever cry, give, give, ^
sucking blood and vomiting it up again, to sill themselves afresh.

Seventhly, others most brutishly intemperate in eating or drinking, s^^etimes
breaking out by notorious drunkenness, and gluttony, and sometimes vailing
themselves with a kind of restraint, Tim. 3.4.

Eighthly, Saul, (...) Sam. 18.8, 9.
or as a Gemin. l. 4. c. 43.
Peacock, who out of envy, as it were, hides his own dung, which is most
medicinal, that man may not be the better for it.

Ninthly, applause, which they would fain have, and gain to themselves; or
thirdly, St. Basil Orat. de Invid and odio mihi, p. 823.
Panther, who if he do but see a man's picture upon a paper will tear it,
because he hates him most deadly, and cannot abide him.

Tenthly, Hoc enim sisriarum p^^prium est ant little qui fini^s ^^itantur. Calep.
fury so hunteth them, as that they do even all they do to Mat. 23.5.
be seen of men, who see but their glorious works, but cannot see their odious
pride, and abominable affectation and ambition. I should be infinite, if I
should nominate all the domineering sins which reign in the children of
disobedience, and convince them to be out of Christ, who makes men free, these
may suffice at present; only suffer me to persuade you, who live under such
tyrannous Lords, even therefore to get Christ, that by him you may be freed
from such an insufferable tyranny; or if you will have me speak more sutably,
to the metaphor of a cooling rose, from the foresaid burning Fit enim quaedam
lepra de cholera inficiexte sanginem ac d^^itur leonina, Gaemin. l. 6. c. 11.
leprosy of sin, we read, 2 King. 5.1.23. that Naaman the Syrian was a great
man with his master, and honorable, and a mighty man of valor, but a Leper,
which spoiled all, whereupon a little Hebrew maid, which waited on his wife,
said to her mistress, would God my Lord were with the Prophet that is in
Samaria, for he would recover him of his leprofie. Answerably whereunto say I
unto you, who may be ennobled likewise with many excellent natural parts and
endowments, but withal are stained with one kind of leprofie or other (for
there are sundry kinds of it) I mean one infectious reigning sin or other,
being either outwardly and notoriously spotted as Elephants, Distinguitur enim
a medicis quadruplex ^ommuniter lepra, Elephantia, L^onina, Tygria. Allopecia.
or inwardly ravenous as Wolves, or fierce as Lions, or deceitful as serpents
(that I may allude to all the four sorts of natural leprosy) whose heat and
power none but Christ the rose of Sharon can take away. To you I say, as that
damsel wished her master to be with the Prophet Elisha, so do ye heartily
wish and desire now that your souls may be with Christ, that sweet rose of
Sharon, Christ Jesus, that he may recover them of their spiritual leprosy.
Some write of Agath 79. papa vir fi^^t tantae sanctitatis ut leprosum obviam
factu^ os^ula suo statim liberarit. Gara^za. Summa Council* and po^tif. mihi.
so. 208.
Agatho, that he was a man so holy and gracious, as that with a kiss he did
cure a man of his leprosy, as soon as he met him, which relation whether it be
true or no, this I am most certain of, that Jesus Christ, the rose of Sharon,
both can and will free not one leper only, but every one of you whose souls
are leprous, from their most infectious and pernicious spiritual leprosy, if
you do but kiss him with the kiss of faith. See Act. 15.9. how he is said to
Hinc Amhros. in Psalm 118. ser. 10. Nisi per fiae^ diligatur, Deu^ non mundatur
cor ad sciend^meum.
purify the heart by faith; and therefore get faith first, and then kiss
Christ next, observing the instructions formerly tendered unto you, and praying
especially, or speaking as much to Christ, as the damsel to her mistress. O
that our poor souls also were with thee, as the souls of others are, sweet
Jesu! O let them come to thee, and that they may come, draw them, and then free
them, as Elisha freed Naaman from the leprosy of sin and corruption, we humbly
pray thee. This do, and then I dare secure you in the words of Christ, that ye
shall be all clean through the word of Christ, or by virtue of the word of
Christ, which I have preached unto you, John 15.3.

Secondly, it is Christ that must quicken you to live the life of grace: as
roses in vinegar especially do revive a man that is taken with dead pulles,
that he may live the life of nature, for therefore he is said to be the life of
believers, Col. 4.34. and to live in them, Gal. 2.20. and this life is so
necessary, as that without it we can do nothing, that is, nothing as we ought,
acceptably and sincerely, to the right end, and in the right manner: For
otherwise men may do many things, as Herod, Mar. 6.20. they may pray much,
hear much, read much, fast must, give much, repeat much, confer much, yea,
they may have shows of every grace, says Belton.
one, insomuch as that they may even deceive both others and themselves, as
those foolish parabolicall virgins, Matt. 25.11, 12. who, because they were
virgins, did make no question but they should enter into the celestial
marriage, as well as the wise; for therefore they said, Lord, Lord, open unto
us, but they could have no other answer but this, ver. 12. Verily I say unto
you, I know you not, for they wanted the oil of the life of grace, and held
forth only the empty Lamps of shows of grace. Again, they wanted Christ, who
is the life of the righteous, and the oil, or cause and ground of the light
and life of grace, and therefore he tells them, I know you not: so that needs
you must get Christ, if ye will truly live the life of grace, or else though
you make never so many shows, you will but deceive your selves, like those
virgins, or like those silly Sceleratae quaedam mulieres, daemonum illusionibus
seductae, nocturnis horis cum Diana paganorum Dea and innumera mul. titudine
mulierum creda^t se aequitare super bestias quasdam, and multa terrarum spatia
pertransire. Council Aneyr. con. 24.
women, who, in ancient time, being deluded by Satan, did verily think that
they did ride on beasts by night, and travel over many countries, when they
did not: so you will but imagine that you go I know not how far in the way
of life and true godliness, having a form thereof; whereas, for want of
Christ your hearts will not stir nor move a whit as they Nullus aut diligere
Deum sicut oportuet, aut credere in Deum, aut operari propter Deum quod bonum
est potest, nisi gratiae eum and miserecordia Dci praevenerit. Con. Trans.
(...) to 2 mih p. 23
ought, so as that you shall do what you do in sincerity, and truth, and to
the glory of God, because the truth has said it, without me ye can do
nothing: O go then and get Christ, what ever ye do in the manner and order
aforesaid, and let none of you sleep or slumber as the foolish virgins did;
but stir and rouse up your drooping spirits, and go I will not say, ad
vendentes, to them that sell, as the wise virgins said to the foolish, but ad
vendentem, or to him that sells himself, I mean Christ himself, and beg
faith, which is like gold, for he sells it, yea, himself, for lo here he
offers himself, saying, Rev. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me gold, that
is, faith, that thou may be rich, and raiment, that is, me, Christ himself,
that thy nakedness may not appear, I add by way of exposition; but rather
that thou may be graced and clothed with the glorious robe of my
righteousness imputed, and with fine linen of habitual righteousness
infused, and derived from the fullness of grace and goodness, which is in me,
as the ocean and fountain of all grace and holiness, John 1.16.

Thirdly, comfort your souls, as roses do comfort the heart of the body. See
Ioh. 15.26. Ioh. 16.7. how himself again and again^ ^oth promise to send the
comforter ^^plying, that if any man will be be^ (...) with the sweet
consolations (...) ^e must be beholding to (...) he must go without out it:
even as whosoever would have corn in the seven years of famine, was to get it
of Joseph, or else he might starve, even in Egypt it self, where there was
corn enough in the granaries erected by Joseph for that purpose. So a man say
I, may live in the church, and want that true and solid comfort, which comes
by Christ, both in his life and in his death, though he live in a place, where
there is no want of comfort, but comfort enough taught and proffered, and to be
had by Christ, unless he will repair to Christ, who is the true and caresull
Joseph, that must impart unto us his holy spirit the comforter, A Prolepse
and cheer up our hearts, as a rose.

Some temporaries that are illuminated and forward for a time, such as are said
to have tasted of the heavenly gift, and of the good word of God, and of the
powers of the world to come, ^eb. 6.5, 6. may have certain flashes of joy and
comfort; but the true, and sound, and solid comfort, which differs as much from
their taste, as the tasting of good meat from the eating of it, none can enjoy
and feel but only by Christ himself, inhab^^ing the heart, and blessing it
with the sweetest influence of the unutterable joys and comforts of his holy
spirit, by whom he does not only enlighten them as temporaries, but also
regenerates, and new creates them in such an admirable and glorious manner, as
that the joy and comfort thence resulting, must needs be also full of glory, 1
Pet. 1.8. And therefore as they that wanted corn, went to Joseph in Egypt to
get some, so do ye repair to Christ, believing in him, that so you also may
rejoice in him with joy unspeakable and full of glory: For why will ye, and how
can ye live so uncomfortably, as ye have lived formerly, being altogether
destitute of that holy spirit of promise, whose soule-refreshing comforts none
can truly feel, till he be truly and thoroughly come home to Christ.

3. So for the life to come, In regard of lise ete^nall.
it is Christ that must procure and assure the same unto you, or else you must
never look for it, but rather for death and destruction, as it is probably
conceived, that if roses had not revived some by Gods blessing upon them, they
had dyed when they were taken with grievous pulls. See John 3.36. He that
believes not the son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon
him. Hence De Corrept and great l. c. 7.
Austin, no man is freed from the damnation which Adam has brought upon us,
but only by faith in Jesus Christ.

This one ground well digested, is like to do you most good; for as I told you
formerly, the terrors of the law, breathing out nothing but horror, and
damnation, must first make you afraid, before you will go to Christ a^ ye
ought: even as a great many men will never yield to leave the world, and the
cares of it, till they see that they must die; and as some others will never
beg, being too much ashamed to do it, till they see that they must do it, or
starve: so you will never yield to leave your dearest sins, and bosom
delights, and to beg faith in good earnest, and to go to Christ by faith,
unless you see death as it were before your eyes, and consider of it
seriously, that you must starve, and dye, and perish for ever in that
formidable and horrible lake, which burns with fire and brimstone if you do
it not.

And therefore, as 2 ^am. 2.23.
men went no farther, but stood still by the dead body of Asael: so go no
further, till ye have viewed and digested this chief and last ground,
concerning life and death, that so you may proceed no farther, neither in your
chase and eager pursuit after the profits, sports, pleasures and preferments of
this world; but rather may beg saving faith of Jesus Christ, who is the author
of it (as I noted before) and then may look up by faith on Jesus Christ, that
ye perish not. O my dearly beloved, what will not a man do that he may not
Quomodo homines omnem impe^^dunt operam ne moriantur temporaliter, quare non
item ne moriantur in aeternum. Aug de verb. Apost ser. 18.
die; Skin for skin, yea all that a man has will he give for his life, said
Satan once to God, Job 2.4. I add, especially, if a man being a prisoner, were
like to be carried every moment out of his prison the place of execution, there
to be roasted in a chair of brass by a small fire, and so to dye by little and
little, and to finish his miserable life in unspeakable torments, would not a
man give all that he has that he might not dye such a fearful death. And
therefore what is it that you should not be willing to do, and to forgo, who
being prisoners too, must expe^^ every minute to be carried away of the devil,
who keeps you in prison, 2 Timothy 2.26. into the terrible place of execution,
called hell, there to be roasted, and to be burned, and tormented, not by a
small, but a great and mighty fire, which the wrath or breath of God, like a
stream of brimstone, does kindle, Esa. 30.33* even for ever and ever, if
Christ free you not* nay, suppose a man might escape such a temporal
punishment of fi^e, and save his life, if he would but go forth out of prison
to his King, who can free him, falling down before him, and submitting
himself unto him to be disposed of by him, do ye think he would not
willingly leave his prison, and even run to the King, and do any thing rather,
that the King shall command, then burn, Well, you may escape so, I am sure,
and therefore should ye not gladly leave sin, which is but like a stinking
prison, and go to Christ the King of Kings, who requires no more but your
coming, and the leaving of your sins, and humbling of your souls, and a
ready submission to be disposed by his holy will* Le^ Satan then suggest what
he will, saying, how can ye forgo such a da^^ing delight? and how can ye spare
such a sweet gain? and how can ye live without such honor? you may now easily
put him off with his own words, saying, All that a man has will he give for
his life; are not these thine own words? can thou deny them Satan? thou
can not, thou can not; and therefore, never trouble us more with these
insinuations and whisperings of thine, we are resolved to suffer such a
temporal loss rather, and to go to Christ now, then to go on in our sins
to the utter undoing and loosing of our poor souls for ever and ever. Thus
repel Satan, and thus be induced, I pray you, to consider the day of your
visitation, and the most terrible danger you are in, that so you may come home
to Christ, and Christ may come to you, which God in mercy grant for his
goodness, and for his Christ's sake.

SECT. 12. Six Lets, which keep men from Christ, are to be removed.
The first is Blindness.
5. BUT I am afraid for all this, Dilatatio^ of this use.
lest my persuasion prove fruitless, unless some certain impediments, which
lie in the way, be first dissolved and removed, and therefore I Will now bestow
some of my pains that way, as being confident, that, as when the pillars and
posts of an old tottering house are taken away, down comes the house, so your
former and old Dispositions which I suppose are now tottering and wavering
already, upon that which has been said already, will quickly fall to the
ground, and be prostrated unto Christ, who looks for such, as are dejected and
thrown down, if those several posts, which as yet keep them up, may be
pulled away both by me, and your selves.

1. I say by me first, who must show them unto you, and persuade you to throw
them away.

2. By your selves, who must follow my advise, for else I can do you no good.

For the first, that I may discharge my duty, I say there are six maine posts,
or lets, which yet bear up many men's tottering wills, and must be taken away; I
mean, 1. Blindness. 2. Blockishnesse. 3. Baseness. 4. Brutishness. 5.
Bitterness. 6. Business.


1. Blindness is a main supporter, ^. Let, B^^ndnesse.
and Keeper up of the wills, and dispositions of men, to make them stand out
against Christ, and to go without him.

For, Corinth. 4.4. cannot see any such excellency and beauty in Christ, for
the which they should desire him, and therefore they care not for him, though
they hear us tell much of him, they may be moved a little for the time, but I
say they will not so care for him, as to go to him as they ought, away from
themselves, and away from their base lusts, away from their pride, and away
from all their bosom sins, who be as dear unto them, as their right eyes, and
right hands.

2. As a blind man, who cannot see or smell a Rose, being far from it, can
put no difference between a painted flower, and a true natural rose, so
natural men and women, can put no difference between Christ the true Rose of
Sharon, and the vain and transitory delights, pleasures, profits, which are
but like painted flowers, and hence it comes to pass, that they do far
prefer the vanity of perishing creatures, before the everliving Lord of
glory, because they are not able to see the emptiness and nothingnesse of the
one, and the fullness, fairness, and Glory of the other, Like Esops Cock, who
preferred a barley corn, before an orient pearl, and like Esau, who set a
higher prize upon a pottage of Lentiles, whereby venerable Beda (...) Loc.
Beda understands vanity, then upon his birthright, whereby was typified the
inheritance of the Kingdom of heaven, Genesis 24.34.

If you ask me how shall we remove this blindesse?

I Answer. 1. You must pray God, two Disciples that went to Emaus that they
knew him, Luke 24.31.
so he would open your eyes, that you may know him and see his glorious
beauty, with the eyes of your mind, and also the vanity of those things,
which you do so prize above him, or else I preach in vain.

2. darkened that they may see.

Now to the matter.

As for Christ first, Christ's properties.
him I Will describe out of the Canticles 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. concluding
thence-from, that 1. he is more fair. Property.
For so his fair Spouse tells those which inquired after him, saying, What is
thy beloved more then another beloved, that thou do so charge us. verse. 9.
My beloved is white and ruddy, verse. 10. Property.
of which beauty much has been said already.

2. He is most excellent strong and valiant; For he is the chiefest among ten
thousand, or as the (...)
Hebrew has it, Property.
the very foremost or standard bearer, among an infinite multitude, v. ib. see
also v. 15. the strength of his legs

3. He is most rich. For 1. his head is as the most fine gold, even Gregor. in
Loc.
God himself, who is In auro in exhaustos thesauros clementiae and
miseri^ordiae recte int^^^gunt. Tomson in Lo^.
rich in mercy, and abundant in goodness and in truth, Exodus 34.5, 6. 2. and
his hands are as gold rings, set with the beryl, that is, his Quid enim per
manus Christi designatur, nisi opera quae in mundo gessit. Greg in Loc
works are most rich, and precious, even the most rare works of his; first
Redemption; and secondly, Mortification; and thirdly, Sanctification by his
holy Spirit. 3. and his Belly, that is, his very death and Idem in Loc.
mortality, employed by his belly, as Gregory notes, is most rich, tending to
incorruption and immortality, signified by bright Ivory [which is most
durable, and is assumed among Kingly ornaments, overlaid with Saphires] which
are of an aeriall and heavenly color, Property.
and signify those rich and heavenly joys and various pleasures, which Christ
by his death has purchased for us, so that in these words here, you here of
nothing but of gold and precious Jewels, which are doubtless set down, to set
forth the inestimable riches of Christ.

4. He is most wise. For his Per capi^los, etc. Sa^ientiam admirab^^e, consilia
imper^^^s^igabili^, j^^^^cia arcena and prosunda incorpretant^ur, qu^e ita
implexa su^^, and (...), ut iadagar, (...) a^ra ul c^rni, ac dignosci liquido
^^si pe^^aro, and non a quibusvis possi^^. Tomson in Loc.
locks are bushie and black as a Raven, that is, his wisdom is most admirable,
and his counsels so mysterious and past finding out, so deep and dark, as that
none can match or reach them.

5. He most harmless, and single eyed, for his eyes are as the eyes of doves
by the ri^ers of waters, washed with milk and fitly set, Property.
that is, he is most sincere and innocent, in all his works generally, and in
his all-seeing ^ Idem ^b.
providence, especially as interpreters note, v. 12.

6. He is most pleasant. Property.
For his cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers, his lips like lillies
dropping sweet smelling myrrh, verse. 13. whereby is set forth unto us, both the
sweetness of his disposition, and the graciousnesse of his verbal
expressions, which have proceeded out of his mouth, (...)
as Matthew. 11.28. and John 6.37. See also verse. 16. his mouth is most sweet,
Property.
or all sweetnesses, as the Hebrew has it.

7. He is most sure. For his legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of
fine gold, in regard of the Greg. in Loc. 2 Pet. 1.19, 20.
surenesse of the word of prophecy, Property.
spoken both by him and his.

8. He is most sublime and high. For his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent
as the Cedars] 1. as Libanus quippe (...) est in quo sublim^s val^e and
odoriferae arbore ^ascuntur. Cedrus etiam excelsa est arbor and imputrib^lis.
Greg in Loc.
Lebanon] which is a most lofty mountain. 2. excellent as the Cedars] which
are both high and incorrup^^^le, as Christ is.

9. He is most amiable and ravishing. For she concludes. He is altogether
lovely, or he is all desirable things, as the Hebrew phrase does set him forth
more emphatically, (...)
to show that in him there is all that we can desire.

But now what are all those things which you prize so much above Christ,
Difference.
but 1. most foul, like dung, Phil. 3.8. in comparison of Christ.

2. And likewise most w^ake and unable to help you, Difference.
and to deliver you in the day of wrath, take a view.

1. Of Riches. 2. Of Pleasures. 3. Of Honors.
To begin with Riches, let a man engrosse all the wealth of the land, and fill
his house full of silver, and gold, and let then Gods wrath se^ze upon him, and
see, whether all his treasures will be able to deliver his Soul; No, No, they
cannot, they cannot, do that which properly belongs to Christ, who alone is
able to free us from that wrath, ^sa 63.3. and hence is that excellent, peech
of Solomon, riches, profit not in the day of wrath, Prove. 11.4. Remember Spira,
Spira related and confessed so much himself, that he was exceeding covetous.
(who once was exceeding covetous of money, so as that he got abundance of
wealth) what good could all his great estate, which he preserved by his
apostasy, do unto him in the sense and feeling of Gods flaming wrath, None at
all.

2. So pleasures, how weak are they to rescue a man then, when the wrath of
God is upon him, Balshazzar you know wanted nothing that might either please
his dainty palate, or delight his amorous eyes, and yet lo how, when he did
even wallow in pleasure, his countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
him; So as that the joints of his Ioynes were loosed, and his knees, smote one
against the other, because the Almighty did begin to manifest his wrath
against him, by a hand writing upon his wall, whose meaning as yet he knew not,
which notwithstanding he was so perplexed in his thoughts, as that neither wine
nor women could please him afterward, for the text says, He cried aloud to
bring in Astrologers, etc. Dan. 5.7. Dan. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
whereas before he called for the vessels of the Temple, and for drink, etc.
Now he calls for Caldeans to know the meaning of the hand writing, which he
conceived to be against him, because his own conscience accused him, thus
neither the delicatest bel^y cheer, nor the most delicious love of women, can
free a man from perplexity in the day of wrath.

3. Alexander, and Herod, and then let Gods wrath fall on him, as it d^d on the
said Herod, Act. 12.23. who was eaten up of worms, because he gave not God the
glory, when the people said of his speech, This is the voice of a God, and not
of a man, verse. 22. and then see whether all that glittering honor, and
pleasing applause, will be able to deliver him from the revenging hand of that
great and mighty God, whose wrath burns like fire; alas it cannot, but
Christ can, and none but Christ indeed; and should ye not the^ put a higher
esteem upon Christ then upon these things?

3. Whereas Christ is most rich in mercy and comfort, Difference.
those things which you prize so above Christ are most poor, and vain, and
empty. More particularly.

1. Riches are most empty and as unable to comfort you, as they be unable to
deliver you in the day of wrath; let a man accumulate and heap up wealth like
dust, and let him tumble himself upon heaps of shining Like Caligula, who was
so delighted to touch and to handle money, as that laying great heaps of gold
in a spacious place, he would tread on it barefooted and sometimes tumble
himself in it. Su^ton, in vita. Calig.
gold, and let him see whether he can extract or attract so much as one dram or
drop of comfort from all that abundance, to sustain and to refresh him in the
midst of Gods burning ire, and flaming indignation; It Is all in vain, he
cannot; for riches are nothing, as says the wisest King, who overflowing with
wealth himself, found what he writ by experience, Prove. 23.5. Will thou cast
thine eyes upon that which is nothing, for riches betaketh her self to her
wings; mark how riches with him are nothing, whereas you think that they are
something, and that there is some true comfort to be found in them, but do you
imagine what you will. I Will rather believe Gods penman, and his experience, then
your deluded and abused imaginations, and so consequently I cannot but
conclude, that seeing riches are nothing, they can comfort nothing in the day
of wrath: for how can a man fetch any thing out of an empty bag, or an empty
chest?

2. wrath, and in the hour of death, though your table should be covered with
the choicest dishes, and your beds should be all of Down, and your Cellers
should be full of sweetest wines, and your eyes should feed on the fairest
objects, and your ears should drink in the most melodious and sweetest music,
yet would not all this be able to comfort your hearts, when God is angry, and
death approaches, like a cruel and unmercifull executioner to bring you to the
place of Gods dreadfullest execution, called hell, mark but the end and period
of other dying men, and see what little comfort they can take in any such
thing. For all is vanity, Eccles. 1.2. that is, a mere (...) Id est res quae
non est quidpiam. Pagn.
emptiness, and therefore these things must needs be so too, and so
consequently unable to yield the least true and solid comfort in the evil day,
so as that we may truly say of them, as Job of his friends, that they are
miserable comforters.

3. Saul, what content could he find in all his royal pomp, and in the most
glorious title of a crowned King, when God being angry with him, would not
answer him, neither by dreams, nor by Vrim, nor by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28 6. and
when that For he was no^ S^mue^ but S^an (...), (...) of Samuel, (...) (...).
(...). p. 56. Th^od^^e^. Quest 62 in l 1 Reg ^o. 1. H^^ds that God did speak,
then by a shape ^^kened unto Samuel his words are these. Hinc e^gn verspi^u in
quod ip^^ Deus univers^^um ^ss^rma^a, ut voluit sp^ci^ Samuelis pro^^li^
suten^am (...) pot^sisse^ (...) loqua, sed Deus, ei mini^^ protulit (...) per
^d^^^sario, etc Eus Eccles hist l 8 c 28, 29.
supposed For he was no^ S^mue^ but S^an (...), (...) of Samuel, (...) (...).
(...). p. 56. Th^od^^e^. Quest 62 in l 1 Reg ^o. 1. H^^ds that God did speak,
then by a shape ^^kened unto Samuel his words are these. Hinc e^gn verspi^u in
quod ip^^ Deus univers^^um ^ss^rma^a, ut voluit sp^ci^ Samuelis pro^^li^
suten^am (...) pot^sisse^ (...) loqua, sed Deus, ei mini^^ protulit (...) per
^d^^^sario, etc Eus Eccles hist l 8 c 28, 29.
Samuel, raised up by a Witch, told him that the Lord was departed from him,
and become his enemy, verse. 16. and that to morrow he should be with him,
verse. 19? upon that the text says, He fell all along on the earth and there
was no strength in him, verse. 20. if that instant he might have had all the
applause of Israel as much as David, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8. and if one should have
showed him all the crowns of all the Kings of the earth, to make him merry it
had been in vain; for what comfort can he take in crowns, and worldly honors
and preferments, who within a day must leave the world, and loose all the glory
of it? it is Christ and only Christ that can then comfort the heart, and cheer
it. So Maximinus that great and mighty Emperor of the East, what comfort
could he take in his Imperial diadem, and in all the pomp, honor, and
slattering applause that ever filled his ears, and lifted up his ambitious
heart, when the worms, as the just executioners of the implacably provoked God
of heaven, and most glorious King of Kings did crawle upon all his body? none
at all, though he did even recant and revoke his bloody edicts against the
poor and harmless Christians, because he was no Christian himself, and so
consequently incapable of comfort, as being out of Christ, who only can and
must comfort the heart.

4. Whereas Christ is most wise, Difference.
those things, which you do so prefer before Christ, are most foolish* See 1 Timothy 6.6. how they that will be rich fall into temptation, and into many
foolish and hurtful lusts, mark, foolish lusts, the like may be said of all
things else, as of vainglory, that it is a foolish thing, and makes a man a
fool, and of the love of Prove. 7.2^.
pleasures, that it is a foolish thing, and of anger, revenge, and envy, that
it is a foolish thing: for anger is said to rest in the bosom of fools, and
every man, before he turns into wisdom, which is Christ, in Solomon's
Proverbs is judged to be but a fool, Prove. 8.5.

5. Whereas Christ is most harmless, Difference.
those things, which you value above Christ, are most hurtful, for 1. riches
like thorns do prick the very hearts of their owners, yea, pierce them through
with many sorrows, and drown men in destruction and perdition, when they be so
greedy, and covetous after them, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10.

2. Pleasures, like the Amb^. de (...), Mu^^^ cap. 6.
anglers bait, have a hook hid under their enticing sweetness wherewith
those, that are inconsiderate, are caught and killed, Luke 16.19, 23, 25.

3. honors, ambitiously desired, and pursued, that thereby men are caught as
with s^ares, which the Devil lays for them, to carry them along with him
into everlasting fire, prepared for him, and all such, as are like him for
pride, and other wicked qualities, Matthew. 25.41. Mal. 4.1.

6. Whereupon it comes to pass, Difference.
that, whereas Christ is most sweet, those other things, which you esteem
above Christ, are, or will be in the end most bitter, the best fruit, that can
grow from them, is Si^e Aristoi^ler monehat ut v^., (...) contemplem^^^, non
venien^^s sed abe^^^^^, ve^i^^^^^ enim (...) specie blandiuntur, abeuntes
do^^rem and p^^aitentiam relinq^unt.
repentance and remorse of conscience for sweet meat must have sower sauce.

7. And whereas Christ is most sure, they are most uncertain and unstable. For
instance, 1. See 1 Timothy 6.17* how riches are said to be uncertain, and riches
says Solomon, betakes her self to her wings, like an Eagle, Prove. 23.5. and
therefore the form of money agreeeth well with the condition of it. For it is
stamped round, Difference.
because it is so apt to run from him, that owneth it.

2. Honors, that as in a wheel the spoke that now is upward, is by and by
downward: so he that now lives in pomp and honor may be shortly so dethroned
from his greatness, as that he may be little the better for all former
happiness. Thus a great King once applied the unstablenesse of a wheel, when
being dejected from the top of his prosperity, and taken prisoner, he was
enforced to drive a chario^ (which indignity was added to his former disasters,
as a complement of his calamity) as those wheels turn round, said he, so do
men's conditions change likewise, they that are high on a sudden are brought low.

3. And are not Pleasures as variable? are they not said to be but for a
season? Heb. 11.25. and to pass away, 1 John 2.17. and do we not find it so,
that as a bird in the air, and as a ship in the sea under sail, and a post
upon the land hasteneth away: so pleasures of all sorts do post Fluit voluptas
and prima quaeque evolat Cic. 2. de sin
and fly away from us? No longer then the meat and drink is in our throats,
and other pleasant things are in use, do we, or can we perceive any
pleasantness at all; the consideration whereof, caused In the advancement of
learning, l. 1. Vitium solu^ nomen habet voluptatis absequere. Chrysostom. (...) 1
Cor. 6.
one to affirm, that therefore they are no pleasures, but rather deceits of
pleasures, because after they be used, their vigor presently Vra cum satietate
moritur memoria v^^^ptatis, sic 2. effi^.
expireth, and departs, and is no longer to be perceived.

Thereupon a Thriver (...) Apoph^.
wife man wisely concludes, that as Esops dog, being deluded with a vain
shadow of flesh, lost the true flesh: so they are likewise all deceived, who in
stead of the true delights of the soul, consisting in virtue, hunt after the
vanishing pleasures of the flesh; answerably whereunto, say I, may we affirm
the very same of those, who leaving Christ, that is most firmly and
unchangeably pleasant, embrace with Demas the transitory pleasures of this
present world; ^ Tim 4, 10
and I desire you who are such, to lay it to heart, and to think seriously of
it, that you may change your minds, before God change your conditions, which
for ought I know may be very shortly.

3. And are not all these things, Difference.
which you do so dote upon, most base and low, even much below your immortal
and heavenly borne spirits, whereas Christ is most high and sublime; and
therefore were much fitter for your high and immateriall souls, then those
base things here below? Take a survey of some of them:

1. What is Beauty in men or women, but a little colour^d skin, covering raw
flesh; and sometimes, much rotten stuff, Non intelligo quid tantopere
expetendumhabeat iste non solidus, nec in ipso homine, nise super^icie ^e^nus
fu^gens, decor, multaque faeda c^ategens, and ^erre^da, ^^aendissimo^^e ^utis
o^^entu. s^nsi^^^ blandi^ns and illud^^s (...) in ^pist ad (...).
and corrupt matter, that lies hid under a fair outside, as that fair
Emperor of Rome once wrote to a friend of his, so as that Gods word might well
say, that favor is deceitful and beauty vain, Prove. 31.30? and is there no
difference then between this vain, and Christ's matchless fairness, both
inward and outward? and is not that same fitter for your sublime spirits, then
that which is so low and vain?

2. What is Meat, which the base glutton preferres before Christ, but a morsel
of a dead bird, or beast, or some other livelesse creature, too low an object
for man, who being the masterpiece of earthly creatures, and Lord of them all,
should infinitely prefer the Lord Christ, who being most sublime, and the
very food of the soul, is most fit for his uns^tiable appetite, and for his
aspiring Spirit?

3. What is Wine, which the drunkard prefers before Christ, but only the
refined blood of the vine, which springs up from the earth, too low an object
also for a man inspired with an immortal soul, which he should rather
inebriate and make drunk with the blood of that high and celestial vine,
which came down from heaven, to satiate our thirsty souls on earth?

4. Clothes, but either the excrements of worms, or the hairs and coats of
beasts, borrowed of them, or rather taken from them by violence? which caused
Er^sm l. 8. Ap^pht*
once Demonax to check a vain man for being proud upon his purple clothes,
whispering these words into his ears; Heus tu, haec ante tegestabat ovis,
This a sheep did wear before you


Compare then that which comes from beasts here below with Christ, who comes
from above, and is a far more fitter object for your immortal spirits, which
he is most willing to clothe with himself, as with a Rev. 3.17
garment, more glorious then the sun, that so you may scorn to set a higher
prize upon so low and base an object, as your clothes are, then upon Jesus
Christ, the Lord of glory, and upon the garment of his salvation.

5. applause but a little vanishing breath, and a passing sound, which also is
to low an object for that immortal breath, which breaths in your humane
breasts, and should be fed with no such corrupted air, exhaling from sinful
and corrupt men; but with the incorruptible, high, and heavenly spirit of
Christ, and with his everlasting and bright shining glory?

6. Col. 2.3. in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead, which is the
fountain of all riches Scilicet ^s^^ntialite^, praesentialiter and
potentialiter. Durand Ration div offis. l. 6 f. 106 9. Differe^^e
bodily, Col. 2.9.

7. And lastly, whereas in Christ are all desirables it may be truly said of
all other earthly things, which are so preferred before Christ, that there is
none of them all so absolute or contenting and satisfactory, as that one might
say, now I have enough, I desire no more. Will you see instances? Let a man
empty all the spicy Islands of their fragrant spices, and let him evacuate all
the richest mines in America of their most precious minerals, and let him find
out the Philosophers stone, if he may possibly be gotten, and then let him
turn all that he touches with it into beaten and shining gold; and besides all
this, let him empty the Erythrean seas of their orient and brightest pearls;
nay, let him ingrosse and get into his hands the whole material, and most
spacious world, which the ancient Poets have called (...), that is, infinite,
by reason of his vastenesse, and incredible bigness, in its Quem ambitum
quidam esse ^olunt ^ucarum, ga^licurum novem millium, and amplius, al^j autem
habere Leucas decies mill and ducentas Danaeus phys. Christ. tract. 3. c. 23.
circumference.

And yet I dare say, that all this will not, yea, cannot satisfy the infinite
and immeasurable appetite of his triangled and unsatisfiable heart: For how can
such a round globe as the world is, fill a triangle? and what says the wisest
King that ever swayed scepter upon earth: He that loves silver, shall not be
satisfied with silver, Eccles. 9.5.

Hence Val. Max. l. 8. c. 15.
Alexander that great Pellean Monarch, having a world of kingdoms, yet weeps,
and takes on, and is discontented, because he heard that there was but one
world for him to conquer; whereas his enlarged heart did wish that there had
been many more.

2. Let a man drink in pleasures like a river, and let him fill his belly with
the most exquisite and delicious varieties of meat and drink, let him have the
Vnus Pel^eo juveni nonsuffi^it orbis, Aestuat -- insaelix angusto limine mundi.
Juvenal.
fairest woman in the worlds circumference, and let him please his ears with
the most ravishing and enchanting musical harmonies; and yet I dare say, he
will not be pleased, but find a vexation and weariness, and and
unsatisfiablenesse, and emptines, even in the affluence and fullness of all
these earthly Paradises, if you will Captus est quis amo^e faeminae p^l chrae
quomodo to qu^tur antequam ^a fruitur, and cum fruitur, and post oest il
lib^di^is voluptas compescitur, ubi ergo voluptus cum nec in i^itio, nec sine
posset reperiri. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 9.
not believe me, believe Solomon, who for his part enjoyed as much pleasure as
was possibly to be taken in the most dainty dishes, or sweetest wines, or
beautifullest women, or the most pleasing and melodious music, as you may
read, Eccles. 2. I said in my heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
therefore enjoy pleasures, etc. ver. 1. again, I sought in my heart to give my
self to wine, ver. 3. I gate me men-singers, and women-singers, and the
delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts,
ver. 8. and whatsoever mine eyes desired, I kept not from them, I withheld not
my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoices in all my labors, ver. 10. add
his seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines, 1 King.
1^.3. and his daily delicate provision of Hearts, Ro-bucks, and Fallow-Deare,
and fatted foul, besides fatted oxen and sheep, 1 King. 4.22, 23.

And yet at last he could draw no other conclusion from all such premises, but
the very same which I have here set down, affirming that a man shall find in
the end even an emptines and weariness, and trouble in the very fullness of
all such pleasing and fugitive follies. Hear him speak, I said of laughter
thou art mad, and of mirth what does it, ver. 2. Again, then I looked on all
the works that my hands had wrought, etc. and behold all was vanity and
vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun; and therefore I
said, that only in the sun, that is, in Christ the sun of righteousness,
and not under the sun, or in things below this sun, there are or can be all
desirables.

3. Let a man have as much honor as the fishes in the great ocean have water;
let him even swim in the praises of men, and let him fly upon the wings of
fame, and soar as high as an Eagle, let him draw in the breath of a world of
applauding flatterers, yea, let him live by such breath as the Acrem illi
aliquando pro cibo certum est. Nam and annum integrum inediam tolerat, and
excepta hiatu aura clausis q^e malis turgidum ventrem ostentat. Lonston.
Thaumat^gr. Not. class 7. cap. 13.
Chamaeleon does by the air, and yet I dare say that all that aerie and
glittering glory will not content the most eager and greedy desire of his
aspiring and unsatisfiable breath, or soul, (...) Psalm. 24. Quod affinitatem
habet cum (...) honorabilis.
which ever craves more till he do fill it, who is called the King of glory,
and God Almighty, or all-sufficient, and all-honourable, Genesis 17.1. See Est. 3.
how restless, and how discontented ambitious Haman was, even then, when
Ahasuerus had promoted him, and set his seat above all the Princes that were
with him, ver. 1. because Mordecai, a poor despised Jew, who sat in the gate,
and did not bow to him, the text says, he was full of wrath, ver. 5.

None of all his mounting greatness and towering honor could then satisfy his
vexed and discontented mind; which shows how small a matter will mar and
unglorifie all the stateliest pomp, and most refulgent and admired glory of the
world; every poor caitife, and most vilest wretch; refusing to adore it, and
to stoop thereunto, is able to eclipse it, and to create even a little hell in
the aspiring mind of a vainglorious person, who therefore, as a Nam certe
quot homines in populo sunt, tot vinculis constringitur ambitiosus, tot dominis
subijcitur. Ch^ys. in Mat. 12. hom. 42. l 2 mihi. p. 334.
father says well, may be said to have as many Lords, unto whom he is subject,
as there be men among all the people, among which he lives, though in his mind
he do despise them all, so that honor cannot possibly satisfy. If Alexander
get up into the imperial throne of Darius, and be made a Monarch of the world,
yet that will not content and suffice his ascending and lofty mind, but he must
needs be Deified too, and called a Quint. Curt l 6. p. 257.
God, and Jupiter in stead of King King Philip must be his father. Good God,
what will not the restless souls of men do and desire, when they be out of
Christ, who only can and must satiate our endless appetites, being himself
all desirables, and the only ocean of all desirables, whence they do
originally flow, and whether they do finally return: so as that Paulinus
might well say of him, as he did in the want of all things, Tu es mihi omnia,
thou Lord art to me in stead of all things. Have what you will, desire what you
will, and yet you shall want one thing or other still, till you come home to
Christ, and he be unto you all in all. The Lord open your eyes, that you may
now see all these differences clearly, and weigh them duly, and compare them
together wisely, that so you may choose at last the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom
are all desirables, unfainedly, and also may be saved everlastingly. Amen, Good
Lord, let it be even so, if it be thy will to have it so.

SECT. 13. Of Blockishnesse, the second Let.
THe second let which here must be pulled away, is Blockishnesse, The second
Let, is Blockishnesse.
whereby many men and women are so stupefied, as that they care as little for
this rose of Sharon, as a great many of your blockish country people care for
other roses, though they have great store of them in the country: For they do
not conceive that they may be sick and stand in some need of them, and
therefore they will not take the pains to gather them, and to preserve them
against a time of faintness or sickness which may happen; Nor do a great
many men among us once seriously think upon the evil day, when Christ the
rose of Sharon will do a man more good then this whole world, if it were
turned into one entire lump of gold, nay, they do even purposely put off all
such pensive thoughts as now and then do mind them of such a day: Like that
timorous King of France, who charged all his followers, that they should not
once name before him that most dreadful, fearful name of death; they do not
desire to think that ere long they must sicken, and dye, and come to
judgment; and therefore, though we Ministers tell them never so much of
Christ, and do even fill their ears with Christ, and make them even weary to
hear so much of Christ, yet can we do them no good, because they be so
blockish, as that they cannot or will not remember their latter end. So that
needs thou must remove out of the way this block, if thou be yet out of
Christ, and remember that a day is coming, even a day of darkness, and of
gloominesse, a day of clouds, and of thick darkness, Joel 2.2. when thou
shall lie down upon thy deathbed, in thy last sickness, unless God take
thee away suddenly. When the Tremell. in Eccles. 12.
keepers of the house, thine arms shall tremble, and the Idem. ^b.
strong men, thy knees shall bow themselves, and the grinders, thy teeth, I
mean, shall cease, and those that look out at the windows, even those very
eyes of thine shall be darkened, when friends will be troublesome unto thee,
thy servants or those that shall keep thee, will not be able to please thee,
when speaking will spend thee, and silence grieve thee, and thy wife and
children, those pieces of thy self, in another kind, weeping about thee will
torment thee, and when thy feet will begin to grow cold, and thy face to wax
pale, thy lips and mouth to retire, thine eyes to pitch, thy tongue to fail,
thy teeth to close, thy breath to faint, thy heart to beat and ache; and when
the memory, the magazine of the soul, as Manchest^r al mondo.
one aptly terms it, will recount all that thou have done, thought, or spoken,
and Satan, yea, many devils and malignant spirits will in this thy last assault
with combine forces surround thy bed, and lay to thy charge what thou now
slightest, even thy most abhorred underprizing and undervaluing of the Lord
Christ, and thy wilful neglect of a number of golden seasons, and precious
duties, besides an infinite multitude of other most grievous and heinous
abominations, youthful lusts, and execrable pollutions, extortions, oaths,
cursings, revilings, and the like, which will most bitterly aggravate the
unexpressable N^m dolor est s^lutio continui. Cur^us de se^s. l. 2. c. 4? So
that the dissolution of soul and body most nearly compacted, must needs be
exceeding great.
pain of death, who in the mean while will put thy whole dying body into a
most grievous and coldest sweat, as an infallible P. Boaysiuan in suo th^a^ro
mundi, l. 3 p. 147.
evidence that nature is now vanquish^d, yea, will be sure to batter chiefly
thy once strongest castle the heart, straightening and d^stressing it round on
every side, and bur^ing the very strings of it, to make the last fatal breath,
and to fetch out by force and maine strength thy poor and trembling soul, and
to deliver it, if thou dye out of Christ (which God forbid) unto his fellow,
(...) death, to be tormented for (...) ever: For therefore it is (...) 12 20.
thou fool, this night (...) be required of thee, (...).
or (...) require thy soul of thee. (...) who they be, think ye? (...) death,
and the second, one succeeding, as it were, and seconding the other; Seriously.
and therefore I beseech you, Freq^e^tly
think but seriously and frequently on this your last sickness, and upon your
latter end, which is approaching, and be not so blockish as formerly you have
been: For then, as the little Be, which so soon as flowers spring, goes
abroad, vieweth the gay diapery, and the variety of the sweetest flowers,
growing in the colored fields, fraights her thighs, makes a curious comb,
and so betimes hoards up honey in the pleasant summer against the cold, sad and
troublesome winter: so you cannot choose but take this golden opportunity, which
God in mercy offers you, causing the most sweetest rose of Sharon, even Jesus
Christ himself, blessed for ever, to spring, as it were, and to appear. Here
before you, I say you cannot but go forth now forthwith, and use the means
formerly showed, that you may suck, provide, and get, I will not say a little
corruptible honey out of this my text, which is Christ's own speech; but Christ
himself, who is sweeter then honey, though it be made never so pleasant with
the most fragrant roses, against that most heavy, most grievous, and sorrowful
winter of your latter end, which is to come.

The Lord make you think upon it, that you may not neglect or for-slow this
most pleasant summer day of your most gracious visitation, in the which the
Lord Christ does so blessedly appear unto you in his blessed word, and
proffers himself unto you so lovingly and pleasantly, like a rose full fresh
and fair in the field.

SECT. 14. Of Baseness, the third Let.
3. AS some base people will not gather roses to bestrow their clothes and
rooms with the same, Let. Baseness.
though they smell most odiously and abominably, because they can endure any
sent, and make no reckoning of it, being used to it: so carnal men and women
are so base and sordid, as that they will not get Christ, because they are so
accustomed to the filthy smell of sin, as that they do scarce perceive it
themselves, though a stranger to them, who is not used to such an abominable
sent, do smell it quickly; and therefore, I pray you be sensible of this
baseness, and remain it by laboring to be sensible of those odious smells,
which your filthy hearts do continually exhale and send forth, as it is
written, that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart (by nature) is
only evil continually, Genesis 6.6. and that out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies, which defile a man, Mat. 15.19, 20.

Do ye not smell these abominations brethren (I speak but to the guilty) nay
should ye not perceive them? how can you choose? every body that knows you,
cannot but take notice of you how basely you carry your selves, and how
strangely you be overswayed with fierceness and anger, and with monstrous
pride, which does even stink before God and man, and sometimes with filthy
avarice, and other times with that detestable sin of drunkenness; and
therefore seeing others note you, can you not, and should you not observe it in
your selves, being privy to your very hearts and most secret and reserved
imaginations, which others know not so well as you? Well you know that ^f one
do stir in a dunghill, and put it abroad, it will stink so much more then it
did before, so as that one must needs smell it, and I doubt not but if you
shall stir but a little in this matter, 1. ^ansacking your hearts; and 2.
ripping up your lives, and sitting them exactly, you shall smell more of your
odious sins then ever you did; and therefore, search your selves, and so
labor to come to the sight and sense of all your abominations, that you may
get Christ to sweeten you, as roses do sweeten our houses.

And here look back a little I pray you to the second branch of the second
general use tending to conviction: For I confess that there is such a near
affinity between this let and that use, as that one may be said to embrace and
to re-imbrace the other, and that both agree in one, I mean in one end
principally. For as there I did labor to make men see that they are out of
Christ by the ill savor of their abominable thoughts, words and works to fit
them for Christ, and for the means to be used for the getting of Christ, that
they may see what need they have of Christ: so here I strive again to make men
sensible, if I can, of that same odious savor, upbraiding them with their
execrable baseness, that I may take away that which lets, after men have
heard much of Christ, and know what they must do to obtain Christ, pressing
them before and behind, as fighting soldiers are wont to do in the wars, to
make some yield, who yet will stand it out and maintain the field against
Christ, supposing that they are for Christ, and Christ's already, and need not
go to Christ, when indeed they are against Christ, as may appear by the
odious sent of their corrupt hearts and lives, both to others, and to
themselves, but to themselves especially.

Brethren, this is my aim I tell you, and therefore I have purposely
superadded this lot of Baseness, not forgetting my self what I had said in
the former use of conviction, but intending to second that by this, because I
know that else all my preaching and my labor will be in vain, if men be not
made sensible of the most odious sent of their abominable deeds; and on the
contrary, that if men do once smell the intolerable stinch of their very
dearest and most delicious sins, they will then labor as much as they can for
that sweet rose of Sharon, Jesus Christ, to perfume and to sweeten their most
corrupt and filthy hearts: For do we not see how men will fetch roses, and
other flowers and perfumes to perfume their rooms, if by reason of one that
dyed of a filthy disease, and stinks most abominably, they cannot otherwise
stay in their houses, as not being able to endure the odious and pestilent sent
wherewith the dead corpse does fill the same? and therefore I do proportionably
conclude, that if men were but or could be sensible of that infinitely more
abominable and execrable smell, which that body of death, even sin within
their hearts evaporates, and sends forth continually out of their hearts, they
would not go so as they do without Christ that heart-sweetning rose of
Sharon; but rather cry out as those, Acts 2.37. What shall we do to get
Christ, that he may take away this most odious sent, which we are no longer
able to endure; and with the Apostle, Romans 7.24. O wretched men that we are,
who will deliver us from that stinking body of death? Oh that Christ would do
it! and oh that we were but able to get Christ to do it.

SECT. 15. Of Brutishness, the fourth Let.
4. THere is much brutishness likewise in the hearts of a great many men and
women, Let. Brutishnes.
which keeps them from Christ: For as the bruit beasts are all for grass, and
care not for roses, so are they altogether for their victuals and belly cheer,
and sensual delights, as that they do not at all regard Christ. See Luke
14.20. how one of the guests there invited to the great supper, does upon this
very ground refuse to come, I have married a wife, says he, and therefore, I
cannot come. Mark, I cannot come peremptorily, whereas the former desired to
be excused only, which plainly shows, how hard it is for a Luxuriosi enim per
tertium intelliguntur. Durand. Ration. l. 6. fol. 157.
luxurious person to come to Christ, who is the good cheer of that great
supper; wherefore be divorced, I pray you from luxury, which is the wife there
meant, and withdraw your selves but a little from your pleasures, sports, meat,
drink, and carnal company; and then consider of this business which does so
much concern the eternal welfare of your never dying souls, for then and not
till then there is hope that you will care more for Christ then ever you did
yet. Take one Considerations of eternity. p. 244.
Theodorus for an example, when as a great festival day was kept through all
Egypt, a great feast was at his fathers house, and many were invited to it,
some of whom did dance, and others laugh, and were merry, he retired himself
into his closet, and expostulated with himself thus: unhappy Theodore, is it
according to Christian religion to pass from delights to delights! either I am
much deceived, or else Christ has showed us another way into the kingdom of
heaven; whereupon, as he prayed, that God would not suffer him to die
eternally, and wept, in comes his mother and tells him, that he is looked
for; but he excusing himself send her away again, saying that he was not well
in his fromacke. Thus being alone, he conferred with God and himself a^out
eternity, and of his former course what am I? or what have I been? or how will
it be with me hereafter? there are diverse helps to heaven: I Will go that way
which is most convenient for me, but my friends will grieve at it? what then?
but must I do it now in my youth? that is hard; so it is indeed to flesh and
blood; but experience has taught that late services are seldom good.
Therefore, Now, but I have been tenderly brought up, shall I be able to live so
strictly? I hope I shall, but it is a hard matter to strive against custom: I
have hitherto lived like a nobleman, and shall I now live like a poor man?
Theodore, what think thou? can thou do so? I Will strive what I may, Christ
is gone but a little before me, shall not I follow him? Therefore farewell all
the world, and the things that are in it, I care not for you, farewell, I say
all, but welcome eternity, thou art the only thing I seek after, my soul
longs after thee, there is nothing that I desire in comparison of thee. With
that bent of cogitations he resolved to become one of Pachomius his scholars,
and did so, says my author, and as he did thus leave a feast, and all, and
mused on eternity, and reasoned the matter with his own soul, when he was
alone, and so welcomed eternity, and resolved to be a follower of Pachomius: so
say I, do you in like manner, first retire your selves, setting apart one
whole day of fasting at least, and then, secondly, reason the matter with your
selves concerning Christ, that so you may yet embrace and welcome Christ, and
become his followers and disciples, which the Lord in mercy grant that it may
be so.

SECT. 16. Of Bitterness, the fifth Let.
THe fifth impediment is bitterness. Let is Bitterness.
For as a rose of its quality is Galen. l 7. simpl. Medicam.
bitter: so Christ is somewhat bitter too, Gal. 3.24. before he can taste how
sweet the Lord Christ is, Psalm. 34.8. 2. in regard of those bitter troubles and
persecutions, Tim. 3.12. and retard and hinder many from coming to Christ; but
that must not discourage you, my dearly beloved: For as the bitterness is
great first, and the troubles many, that such must taste of, who come to
Christ: so the comforts and the sweetnesses to be found in Christ both here and
hereafter are great, and many, yea, infinitely greater, and more then all your
greatest and manifold discomforts can possibly be; for so says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 1.5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our consolation also
abounds by Christ. See also, Esa. 7.22. also, 1 Pet. 1.8. and 2 Cor. 4.17. Oh
that you did but know what it is to be in Christ, and with Christ; and oh that
you could but taste once and feel what some have felt and tasted, even that
joy unspeakable and full of glory! For then you would never complain of any
bitterness, that is in Christ, even as he that tastes and takes roses
conserved with sugar, never complains of any bitterness, that he finds in
the same roses, because their bitterness is taken away by the abundance of
sugar which swee^^eth them: Nay, you would rather cry out (with Peter in
Christ's transfiguration) Lord, it is good for us to be here, Matthew. 17.4. and
therefore I pray you consider what I say, and tell me no more of that
bitterness which Christ himself will take away with the abundance of sugared
comforts, whererewith he will oversweeten all your discomforts.

SECT. 17. Of Business, the sixth Let.
6. Impediment. Business.
THe last impediment is Busines^ For as some worldly people are so busy and
greedy still, as that they will afford themselves no time to provide or to
gather r^ses to preserve them against a time of need: so there are not a few,
who plunge themselves so deeply in a sea of businesses, as that they can never
be at le^sure to think seriously either on Christ himself or on the gracious
means whereby they should labor to g^t Christ; and hence it comes to pass,
that they also go still without Christ. See Luke 14.18, 19. how some that were
invited to the foresaid great and blessed supper, put it off; one says, I have
bought a piece of ground, and I must needs go, mark, needs go, and see it, I
pray thee have me excused, Vnde V^rsus V^^a, bove^, uxor c^enam clausere
veca^^s, Mundus, cura, caro cael^m clausere ren^tis. Durand Ration (...) vi.
(...) l 6. to. 157.
and another said, I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove them, I
pray thee have me excused, both are wholly for this world, and wholly taken up
with the cares of this life; and therefore they cannot come to taste how sweet
the Lord Christ is, who is the cheer provided for those that come to that most
happy supper of the great God of heaven Wherefore that the same may not befall
you, do not you pretend business, (...). P^utarch.
saying, as once Antipater, King of Macedon, said to one who proffered him a
treatise tending to happiness, I am not at leisure: so we are not nor can be
at leisure to think on this matter. For lo I tender unto you such a subject
and theme, as tends to everlasting happiness, and therefore you ought to be
at leisure, and put off all business rather then Christ, who is that one most
needful rose of Sharon, which you must prefer before a thousand worlds, were
they all composed of the finest gold, and brimfull with the richest orient
pearls. I pray you think on it, that you may put your selves indeed upon the
use of those gracious means, which in great mercy the God of mercy has by his
unworthiest messenger made known unto you, for the getting of the Lord Jesus
Christ, blessed for ever, putting aside all other employments whatsoever: For
then, and not till then there is hope that so many words (spoken now, and
heretofore) will not be as water spilt upon the ground, and as a sound
vanishing in the air; but rather that you will labor for Christ with all the
might and strength you can.

To it then, to it, my dear friends, Branch.
whom now it concerns in the second place to follow all these my persuasions:
As I said at first, that as I must labor to remove the Lets now discovered by
speaking, and persuading: so you must pull them away by obeying. You have heard
how blindness, blockishnesse, baseness, brutishness, business, bitterness,
are the posts whereupon your tottering wills do stand; and you know how
earnestly I have exhorted you all this while to pull them down, and that is
all I can do; but now you must not think that all is done when I have done,
No, No, but you must then begin to be most busy, when you neither hear nor
see me at home in your closets, as I told you: you must think on this matter
seriously, ponder all things understandingly, and labor to yield obedience in
all things conscio^ably, that so consequently you may carry away Christ for
your labor most joyfully, having devolved and overcome all those unhappy Lets
most blessedly; and therefore when you come home do not, as you were wont,
ca^^ for meat, drink, work, company, sports, delights; but rather call upon
your poor souls, to whom this word of exhortation is sent, and le^ them
recount all that you have heard and are able to recall, and so fall to the
work which I provided for you at this time, that is, fall a pulling, and
shaking; and see if by any means you may pull away these six posts or Lets,
laboring as for life to see a difference between Christ * and all earthly
things whatsoever, A (...), o^ Recapitu^ation annexed to this ^inall
exhortation.
by comparing one with the other, and to be seriously mindful of your latter
end, and to be truly sensible of the odiousness of your most filthy sins,
and to weane your selves from your former brutishness, which you have too too
much discovered by your most eager pursuit after sensual and brutish
delights, who have hitherto kept you from Christ, and to cast of all business
whatsoever for Christ his sake; and if you find this to be a task too heavy
for you, then, as Sampson being minded to throw down the house in the which
the Lords of the Philistines were, besides three thousand men and women, and
finding himself too weak and unable for so great a work, prayed unto the Lord
his God, and said, o Lord God, remember me, Jud. 16.27, 28, 29, 30.
I pray thee, only this once, o God, that I may be at once avenged of the
Philistines for my two eyes, and so took hold of the two middle pillars upon
which the house stood, and on which it was borne up the one with his right
hand, and the other with his left, and bowed himself with all his might, and
threw down the house, which fell upon the Lords, and upon all the people that
were therein, and slew them? so pray ye unto the same God, saying, O Lord God,
remember us this time, O God, that we may be able to pull down these six
pillars or posts whereon our tottering wills do stand, that they may come
down, and thereupon we may be fitted, as being dejected for the Lord Jesus
Christ blessed for ever, and so lay hold on all the six posts or Lets, and
pull them with all your might, and then see whether, if you be both earnest and
constant in your endeavors, your wills and all these Lets will not come down?
and whether all your lordly sins will not thereupon be even crushed, Like the
Philistines by the mighty power of Christ, of whom Sampson was a type, there
being no block in the way, to keep him from you, or you from him. The Lord
strengthen you, that you may be able to go through this great and mighty
work, which must bring you along to Christ, for Jesus Christ his sake, our
alone most dear and glorious Redeemer, to whom be glory for ever. Amen. Romans
11.36.

SECT. 18. An exhortation to Gods people to be more for Christ then ever they
were.
2. THis point may serve to incline the wills of Gods people: This serves to
incline the wills of Gods people yet more to Christward.


1. To be more for Christ then ever they were.

2. To make more use of Christ then ever they did.

For the first,

I. By a happy undervaluing of all earthly vanities in comparison of Christ.

II. By a holy willingness to be with Christ.

III. By a mighty care to keep Christ still.

1. To begin with the first of these particulars, how willing should all Gods
people be to prefer the Lord Christ before all things else here below, even
as they would prefer roses before nettles, and thistles, and things of no
value; for,

1. Christ, (...).
being like a rose, will comfort us, John 14.18. where as worldly riches, and
honors, and pleasures will but vex and sting us, as you have formerly heard.

2. Being like a rose, he is most 1 (...) ^^.2. G^^^^^d.
precious: For (...) Rom^^^s fuit (...).
roses were ever highly esteemed; among the * Romans especially.

3. Gro^^^. John. (...) (...) Egor^^a Sharon.
Christ is a rose still: For he says not I have been, but I the * rose of
Sharon, indefinitely, and remarkably, not nominating any ^^me past, present, or
to come, to show that he is not a rose for a time only, as other fading roses
are, though in many other respects he be like a rose, No, but that he is a rose
still, fair still, precious still, fresh still, even the immortal and
everliving God, Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, Rev. 1.

True it is, that this sweet rose once withered a little, when Christ died, but
it was only for a little while, and according to his humane nature, that he
died; for his divine nature could not postibly suffer, or die, being immortal,
1 Timothy 1.17. and his humane nature rose again likewise the third day, 1 Cor.
15.4. Like a true Phoenix, which burns himself to ashes, and so dies, and
revives again wholly the third day, and then return to his own place, as
Epiph. physol, c. 11. de ph^eni^^. (...) ionem faciunt hu^^^ avis Tortullianus
quoque, Ambrosius, ^^illus, Arte^^ido^s, and alij.
Epiphanius records it.

Thus Christ for his part is a rose still durable and permanent, seeing he ever
lives, Heb. 7.25. but all earthly things else are fading, vanishing, mutable.
I Will instance in a man that swims in honor, wealth, and pleasures, and
flourishes, like a rose for a time.

There is one who writes of a famous Physician of Cracaw, that he did so
Sili^et magni nominis apud Cracovienses Medicus erat, qui adeo eleganter
apparabat cinerem ex omnibus plantae partibus, u^ omnes earum site conservaret
spiritus Cinis, admota vasculo candela aliquanto iaca les^ens apertae rosae
emittebat spe^iem, quam sensim cres^ere, ve^^tari, ac formam penitus caulis
foliorum, ac geminae denique storide re^e umbram exprimere tandem
explicatissimam rosam produccre intueri licebat, red bat in pulver^^^ igne
remoto. Rosenberg. Rhodoing. cap ult.
artificially apt and fit ashes of all the parts of a rose plant, as that he
did preserve the spirits thereof; insomuch as that, when he did bring near it
a candle and heat it, one might see the form of a perfect rose, which
afterward returned again to dust, when the fire and heat was removed. Thus
he: whether his relation be true or false I know not; but this I am sure of,
that however man, being raised of the dust, and warmed with a living soul, may
make a fair show, and seem to be like a rose in his flourishing estate, if
God do but blow out his candle, and take away that heat which must preserve
his natural life, he return to dust, from the which he is taken, and then all
his thoughts perish, his pleasures perish, his fair lineaments perish, his
honor likewise and glory does perish, and all his goods vanish; for he
carries nothing with him but a winding sheet of all his abundance. See Esa.
40.6. All flesh is grass, and all the goodlinesse thereof as the flowers of
the field. The grass withers, the flower fades, because the spirit of the
Lord flows upon it.

Wherefore let us look upon all earthly Paradises with a most disdainful eye,
and scornful countenance, and trample under with the feet of a holy contempt
all sublunary fading, and flowery prosperity, Like that mystical woman, Rev.
12.1. and let the Lord Jesus Christ be alone exalted, and mounted in our truly
believing hearts. Let him reign there, and sit upon his Throne as King, and
have the pre-eminence as our dread and sovereign Lord, whose glorious
excellency, ravishing beauty, and inexplicable delightfulness does more then
infinitely transcend the utmost and height of all earthly felicities, raised
above the highest possibility by the most inventive and strongest imagination
of any mere humane brain, and extended to the very last end of the world, or
that length of time you can imagine.

2. Be more willing then ever you were to be with Christ.

1. Here.

2. Hereafter.

1 Here, seeing he is thus like a rose, and therefore Rosa quippe p^ae caeteris
^^^ribus cohere ^^^^^ctat, odore re^^cal, and sapore comf^rt^t d^^^ctat in
vis^^, reercat in olfact^, and comfortat in gustu. Durand. Ration div offi^d.
6. p. 121.
most fair, most sweet, most pleasant; for the rose delights us more then any
flower * says Durand, by its color, and recreates us more by its odor, and
comfort us more by its taste. I am sure you will grant, that if a woman were
joined by matrimonial copulation to a husband, as fair as Absalom, and as
pleasant as Jonathan, she should not desire to go abroad among other men for
content; but rather keep home and satiate her self with that passing delight,
which she may take in so sweet a companion, nay should even infinitely long to
be where he is, rather then any where else.

Well, Christ Jesus to whom all you, who are Gods people, are most blessedly
united, and married in a mystical and ineffable manner, is fairer then
Absalom, pleasanter then Jonathan: For he is like a rose, yea, he passes any
rose, as I noted formerly. For fairness and pleasantness, being the author
of that fairness and sweetness, which is in all roses created, and therefore
I said but now that he is most fair. And should ye not then desire to be with
Christ rather then any where and with any creature else? nay, should ye not
even be restless as long as you be out of his blessed light, and sweetest
company? and should ye not even be in pain, and regardlesse of all things
else, if therein you cannot meet with your dear love Christ? Remember Asaph,
who could say for his part, whom have I in heaven but thee? Psalm. 7.25.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee? or * with thee, that
is, like thee, or as much as thee, as if thou alone were not my all-sufficient
husband, to content me, but that I must needs associate my self with others,
that they may satisfy me, No, No. Thou Lord art unto me all in all, sweeter
then a thousand other friends, and ten thousand companions; If I may but enjoy
thee, I have enough; and if I should miss thee, there is no friend, no
company, no conference, no place that would or could please me; so sweet (...).
^ 25.
S. Bernard could say the like, all the meat of the very soul is but unsavory,
if Christ be not in it: if thou write unto me, thy writing delights me not, if
I cannot read Jesus i^ it; if thou dispute or talk and confer with me, thy
discourse cannot please me, unless Jesus do sound in mine ears; Thus he, even
in those dark and nusty days of ignorance and blindness, in the which he
lived (near 400 year, (...)
before the Reformation) and should not you living and flourishing under the
brightest Sunshine of Christ's glorious Gospel be as much for Christ?

You will say unto me, where would you have us then to desire and to seek to be
with Christ, seeing you do so charge us? Christ you know is in heaven, and you
would have us to be willing to be with him here.

For answer whereunto I say first, (...)
that Christ is not like unto that rose of gold, which the Pope of Rome shows
upon a Lords day in the Lent only in Rome, which his Durand. Ratio^^ d^^.
(...). 6. (...). 111.
fl^^terers hold to typifie the new Jerusalem, No, he is not only in one place
even in heaven, which is his proper place, though his humane nature be there
bodily, but he is also to be seen and to be met with here below, as he is God,
showing himself graciously present in his own ordinances, and in the hearts and
meetings of his people. See Matthew. 18.20. When two or three be gathered
together in my name, there I am in the midst of them, and Ioh. 17.20. At that
day you shall know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you.

Thus generally.

More particularly I answer;

Be willing therefore to meet him and to be with him.

1. In the word preached in the house of God, which is like the pleasant field
of Shar^n, where the Sun shines most warm and fair, so as that there you
cannot ^^sse the Lo^d Jesus Christ, that sweetest Rose, who has obliged
himself by pro^ise to be there even as in Sharon field properly so called, with
lies most pleasantly under the warm^st Sun shine one might not want a goodly
Rose springing out of that prosperous earth in S^lom^ns days, and when the
time of the year did serve. Wherefore as the little Be loves to fly about
those gardens and places which are full of Roses, as being a Pl^n. Na^tur hist
l 21 c. 12.
lover of Roses, so do ye love and like the house of God, whereas in a Rose
garden you may be sure to find Christ that sweet Rose of Sharon.

2. Be willing to be with him, at and in the mysterious administration and
participation of the blessed Sacrament of his sacred Supper. For there also you
cannot but meet him, yea, see him with the eyes of faith, as bleeding for your
sins, and being all red, as it were, like a Rose, with bleeding, in regard of
that precious blood which once he shed for your immort all souls, when he died
for your transgressions, and which then you do savingly and seasonably remember
to have been so powered forth, as the wine is powered out, when you feast and
feed your souls with that celestial and mystical food, which is there
provided for you; nay you may even there embrace the Lord Jesus Christ in your
arms, the arms I mean of faith, as that good old Simeon, held him in the
arms of his body, being ready even to sing with him, for joy the same Cyge^^^n
caution, or song, which he sa^^, saying; Lord now let thou thy servant
depart (home) in peace according to thy word; for mine eyes have seen thy
s^lvation, Luke 2.29, 30. Thus he, and you may add; for our eyes of says have
now seen that sweetest Rose of Sharon, our eyes have seen his precious blood,
as it were, as red as a Rose, and our souls have tasted how sweet the Lord is,
even sweeter then sugared roses, and the sweetest honey; oh how good, how good,
and gracious is he? and how infinite are his tender mercies, and his sweetest
comforts past finding the like?

3. prayer, talking and conferring with him, as freely and frequently and
familiarly as a Bride with her Bridegroom, and as Zosimas, relicto Arcesilao,
s^lus ad cubiculum prop^re a^cu^^t in q^o D^^m samilia^^^^^ (...) pe^lat etc.
Ev^^^. hist. Eccles. l. 4 c. 7.
Zosimas, and Latimer that blessed martyr, and worthy Bishop did, who prayed
(as M. Fox reports it, of him) as if he had seen God face to face in a most
sweet and familiar manner, so let your believing hearts also even mount up and
ascend into heaven it self, where Christ is at the right hand of God, that
Christ may again descend in and with your hearts in a most sweet and
inexplicable manner, returning most comfortable and heart-reviving answers, to
your most gracious and heartbreaking desires, as you may see, Cant. 5.1. I am
come into my garden (meaning the Church and every Cant. 4.12. In ho^tum
dil^ct^s v^nit, quando Christus mentes visitat. Gregor. in loc.
believing soul which is his most delicious paradise) my Sister, my Spouse, as
if he should say, it was thy hearty desire, o my dear Spouse, that I should
come into this pleasant garden; for thou said let my beloved come into his
garden, Cant. 4.16. and now lo here I am to answer the longing expectation of
thy blessed soul, which does even pant and thirst after me, who am the health
of thy countenance and thy God, Psalm. 42.1.2.11. My company thou do affect,
I see, and it is most sweet unto thee, and therefore my company thou shall
have, here I am to be with thee, as thou did desire me: for as thou take
delight in me, so do I take delight in thee, and as my voice is sweet to thee,
so thine is sweet to me, Cant. 2.14. and as I am like a rose in thy sight, most
amiable and most fair, so art thou like a garden of flowers most pleasant and
most fragrant in my sight, Cant. 4.12. and as the unexpressable and sweetest
comforts of my spirit which are my fruit, that I bring with me, do marvelously
please thee, so do thy most Cant. 4.16.
pleasant fruits, which are the Vel bona opera Psellus in Cant. ^.16.
graces of my spirit, whom I find in thee, when I come unto thee, please me,
and therefore behold, here I am to enjoy thee, who do so earnestly and
ardently long to be with me.

4. Be willing to be with Christ by reading much and often in the book of God,
which is like a most pleasant (...) l. 5.
paradise (as Irenaeus aptly resembles it) in the which the Lord Jesus Christ
does flourish, as a Rose in Sharon field, showing himself through the very
thorns of the most pricking and piercing Law of God, but especially through the
green and reviving leaves of the soul-solacing Gospel, and so consequently
throughout the whole book of God, whereof that Princely preacher, the Philip.
Camerar in vitacom. Anbalt.
Prince of Anhalt was wont to say; what else is the whole Scripture, but
swaddling clothes of the child Jesus, he being to be found almost in every
page, in every verse, and line, so as that the Col. 3.16.
Apostle might well term the whole word of God, the word of Christ, because he
is the matter of the whole, and the contents of all the Bible, Ideo enim Moses
posuit aeneum serpentem non inco^gru^ ^stendens, quod lex Christum.
prophetavit. Be^a in Number. ^1.
shadowed in the Law, showed in the Gospel, which caused August. in Psalm. 49.5.
St. Austine to say most aptly, Vnam vocem habent duo testamenta, The word of
the Lord contains nothing but the word, which is the Lord.

5. Be willing to be with Christ in the reading of such good books as were
written by good men of Christ. For we must not think that the Pope of Rome
only is authorized to show Christ by a rose of gold unto the people, as his
Romanus ver^ po^tifix successor utique P^tri^t vica^ius ^esu Christ^ hu^^
fl^rem fide^thus populis demons^rat. Dur^^d. Rat^. 6. fo. 11^.
flatterers do make him believe. No, but every faithful Minister of Christ
may show him forth in the best manner he can, though he be not able to do it
in golden lines and phrases, and therefore diverse able men have done their best
to show Christ both by speaking and by writing unto the people of God, whose
most excellent treatises are to be found extant as so many delightful rosaries
or rose-gardens, wherein Jesus Christ is most sweetly set forth, and flourishes
like a rose, fair and pleasant: so as that ye may do well to fetch a walk in
them now and then, to recreate your wearied minds with the sight and smell of
so fragrant and fair a flower, and to manifest that ardent and longing desire
to be with Christ, which ought to be in every one of you.

6. Be willing to be with Christ in the people of God, who also are as a most
delicious garden, Cant. 4.12. In the which this fair rose does show himself
most graciously by their sweet and savory speeches, and fairest carriage,
emblematizing and representing in a most fit and proportionable degree that
most admirable and ravishing pleasantness, amiablenesse, and fairness which
is in Christ himself the rose of Sharon. See Gal. 2, 20. Psalm. 16.3.

2. Be willing to be with Christ in heaven hereafter, and not so unwilling to
depart this frail life, as many are: For so you shall mount up with Elias,
though not in a chariot of fire, yet upon the wings or arms of Angels into the
very bosom. as it were of Christ, that fairest rose of Sharon, as soon as your
earthly tabernacles are dissolved, and unsouled by death, you go then to
behold and to see his glorious beauty and to enjoy his sweetest society through
all eternity.

Socrates prosit^tur se ^bent.^ m^^iturum ut poss^^ videre (...) caetus veterum
h^^oum, inter (...) s^ Or^^^eus, Hes^^dus, H^^^^cus etc quid n^s si^^les? No^
^tique illos: (...) catus prophetarum (...) ip^^m in sua g^oria. A^et. probl.
de Morte p 410.
Socrates did profess once, that he for his part was most willing to die, that
he might see those companies and assemblies of those ancient heroical
personages, Orpheus namely, Hesiodus, Homer* etc. and should not you Christians
that are espoused to Christ, be infinitely more desi^ous to go hence upon the
summons of death, that you might enjoy the beatificall and most glorious vision
of Jesus Christ, your celestial bridegroom, that sweetest and fairest rose
of Sharon, blessed for ever? should ye not even echo forth as it were the same
words which once issued from the blessed soul of that holy Apostle, Phil.
1.23. answering him and saying; we also have a desire to depart, and to be with
Christ, which is far better.

3. Be persuaded likewise to manifest it, that you make more of Christ then
ever you did, seeing he is so fair and so useful, and so desirable a rose; by
a mighty care to keep him still, as we keep and conserve roses over year, in
glasses and vessels of earth: so be careful I say, to conserve Christ, that
sweetest rose of Sharon, not only over year but every year, and every day of
your whole race, till your very last gasp.

If you ask me how and where would you have us to keep him?

I answer: Val Max.
Artemisia did ever carry in her mind her dear deceased husband Ma^seolus,
mingling her very drink with his ashes: so do you bear Christ in mind, who
is your best beloved, and mingle or bestraw all your meat and drink, and words
and works with his sweetest remembrance, even as the ancient Romany fol a
rosarum serculis epularum inspergere mo^^rat Jonston Thaumato^r Not. p. 215.
Romans did bestraw their meat with roses, nay, come you must promise him so
much, before ye depart in the words of his spouse Cant. 1.4.
: We will remember thy love more then wine.

2. enjoy the comfortable sense and feeling of his gracious presence in your
blessed souls, imitating his fair spouse in the Canticles, who when he had
him, would not let him go, chap. 3.4.

You will say unto me,

I answer:

1. Sugared and sweet thoughts of God, and him, and his word, and saints, etc.
abandoning other vain and worldly cogitations: For then we make, as it were,
our minds his Salomoni ergo (vel Christo) lectulum facimus, cum amundi
solicitudi^i^bus omni^^^-cessamus, dum in solo desiderio Christi ^^benter
pausamus, eique, ut nobiscum pausit cor ab omni ter^^na cup^ditate mundamus,
Greg. (...) Cant. 3.7.
bed, whereon he is then pleased to rest, Cant. 3.7.

2. With sweet and gracious speeches and communications, if you have a care to
bridle your tongues, and to refrain your lips from bitter words, and
unprofitable discourses; and contrarily, to sugar the conceptions of your minds
with sweet and savory expressions, tending to the glory of God, and to the
edification of others; For with such communcication God is well pleased. See
Luke 24.15.

3. With sweet and gracious works, which are even able to attract him, and to
draw him toward you after he has been (in regard of his sense and feeling)
absent from you; for so he says to his fair Spouse, I am come into my garden,
etc. meaning the believing soul, Cant. 5.1. after she had desired him to give
her a gracious visit, saying, Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat of
his pleasant fruits, that is, let him please and delight himself with these
precious graces, and glorious works, which himself has wrought by his holy
spirit, as I noted formerly, that this is the meaning of that excellent place,
Gregor. in loc. Psellus (...):.
as both Gregory and Psellus in their annotations affirm.

SECT. 19. Christ should be used much.
2. BE willing also to make more use of Christ then ever you did yet, seeing
that now you understand how that he is most like unto a rose, whose usefulness
and medicinallnesse Petrus Andre. Matthiolus a Physician so extolleth and
sets forth in his Commentaries on the 1. Book of Dioscorides the 112.
Chapter, as that I for my part must not think that I shall be able to magnify
them more then he did, and therefore I Will here set down his own words (which
formerly I have cited in the margin) Certainly, says he, roses are much to be
magnified, and to be had in high esteem, because they serve not only for an
ornament to beautify our gardens, and are most delightful to the eye, but
also because they be used in the most excellent medicines, whereby the life of
man is succored. Thus he, and therefore how may we extol and magnify, say I,
the Lord Jesus Christ, that most admirable Rose of Sharon, which must needs be
more then infinitely more medicinal, being the Creator, then all roses
created. Make use of him therefore, as men make use of roses in such cases as
these.

SECT. 20. Christ is to be made use of in 25. Cases.
1. 1 Case.
When you be overcome with choler and anger, or else find your selves prone
to it at any time: for as Rosa succus sanq^i nem biliosum expur^at. Petr. Audr.
Matthiol. l. 1. Dios. c. 11^.
roses do purge choler, so Nihil ita irae impelum c^hibet sicut Jesus. Bern.
super. Cant Sermon. 15.
Christ is able to purge out your anger, and better too, for himself is most
meek, Matthew. 11.29. and therefore as it is the nature of contraries to expel
one another, so Christ, being most meek, must needs be able to expel your
wrath, even then when you are apt to be most angry, if you make use of him
aptly, that is, in such a sort and manner, as is to be showed hereafter.

2. When you be apt and prone to hate any man, Case.
which is more then to be angry only with another. For as Flos rosae sanguinem
sistit, Plin. Not. Histor. l. 21. c. 19.
Roses, being physically and rightly used, do stop a bloody flux, so Christ is
able to stop this bloody sin, which runs parallel with the bloody crime of
murder, in the sight and Judgment of God, as it is written, 1 John 3.15.
Whosoever hates his brother is a murderer. This sin I say Christ is able to
stay, Case.
and to subdue, being rightly made use of: for he is all love, being God, as it
is written, 1 John 4.16. God is love, and therefore by the same rule of
contraries, he must needs be able to cast out hatred also, which is contrary to
love.

3. When you be pestered with that Invidenti^ diabolicum vitium est. Aug. de
disc. Christ. tom. 9 mihi, p. 914 Est diaboli inventum Basil. de Invidia, mihi,
p. 173.
diabolical sin of Envy: for as William Langham in his garden of health, p.
538.
Roses preserve from rottenness, so Christ is able to keep you from that
rotten sin also, as we may call it, because it Prove. 14 30.
causes rottenness that it may not Nihil ita livoris ^ulnus sanat si(...)
nomen Jesus. (...) Sermon. 1^ super Cant.
reign; for who ever did show himself more opposite to that soul-wasting sin,
then he, in that he prayed, that his very servants might be one with him, and
gave them the same glory which his heavenly father gave him. John 17.22, 23.
and therefore there is no doubt, but if you make use of him, as you ought, he
will free you more and more from that sin, which is so opposite to his own
nature.

4. When you are troubled with the most detestable sin of Pride, Case.
being strongly tempted to be proud of your wealth, or gifts, and spiritual
graces; for as Roses are good against Si membram per inflammationemintumucrie
infundenda erit rosa tepida. Celsut l. 8. c. 4.
swellings, so Nihil ita superbie tumorem sedat sicut Jesus. Bernard.
Christ the Rose of Sharon is useful against that swelling sin, being himself
most humble, Matthew. 11.29. and therefore, as contrary to pride, is also able to
expel it in any of his faithful members, that is, or shall be infected with
it.

5. Case.
When you feel the scorching heat of concupiscence, and know not how to free
yourselves of it, then also go to Christ for help, and make use of him. For as
Roses do cool and take away Petr. Andr. Matthiol. in Diosco. l. 1. c. 112.
inflammations, so Nihil i ta extinguit libidinis flam mam sicut Jesus. Bernard.
Christ can quickly allay that flaming heat of original concupiscence, which
does so molest his own believing members, as they be partly flesh, now and then
as that it makes them cry out with Paul, who, as Apud Dionys. Carthus. in Loc.
differing somewhat from others, who take it to have been pride, as Erasm. in
Mil. Christ.
some hold, means this same concupiscence by the prick in his flesh, 2 Cor.
12.7. I say, Christ can quickly take away such heat, that it may not break out
into a flaming fire of notorious and scandalous uncleanness, but rather shall
die in the heart, without being allowed, or desired. For he is most pure, and
therefore most opposite to such burning lusts, which are most impure, so as
that they cannot consist or subsist together with him, if he be made use of and
taken as the only Sovereign antidote against the same.

6. 6 Case.
When the eyes of your minds grow somewhat dim, and you cannot, or do not see
so well as you were wont the foulness of sin, and fairness of Christ and
grace, then also make use of Christ in that case. For as William Langh. p. 539.
Roses are good for the clearing and curing of the eyes of the body, so Christ
is able to clear the eyes of the soul, so as that you shall see far cleerer
and better then ever did Lynscus tam certa acje luminu^ usus est, ut a Lelybaeo
portu Carthaginensium classes egredientes intuaeretur. Vnde Lyncei oculi Val
Max^. (...) de Mirac.
Lynceus, who with his Eagle-like eyes could see from the Lelybean Port the
Carthaginian Fleet, going forth out of their haven, for living and being on
earth, you may behold with the illightened eyes of your minds Christ himself
in heaven, which is more then For Mathematicians by their computations find
74703180 miles distance between the (...), orb only and the earth, as for the
highest heaven, that is transcendently higher again, even so high, as that it
may be called the height it self, or heights. (...), Job 11.8.
infinitely farther, even as Abraham saw him and his day by faith, before ever
he was born, Ioh. 8.56. and with the same eyes of an illuminated mind, you may
see even the least sins, and such as by others are scarce perceivable; see
Revel. 3.18. I counsel thee to buy of me, etc. and anoint thine eyes with eye
salve] Collyrium est propriae fragilitatis agnitio, s^ique abjectio and
humiliatio. Gagneus in Loc.
that is, with the knowledge of thine own frailty and sinfulness that thou
may see] that is, may see how poor, how wretched, how naked, how odious,
how sinful a creatnre thou art; therefore Subandi eme ex me. Idem ib.
buy of me this eye salve: for so much is to be understood, as interpreters
here have well noted it. Evagrius Eccles. hist. l. 4. c. 7.
Evagrius writes of Zosimas and Chuzubites, that they did at a time restore
unto the wife of Arcesilaus the sight of her eyes even miraculously, which
narration of his, whether it may be undoubtedly believed, or not, this I am
certain of: that Christ can make you see as well as ever you did; if you make
use of him, because St. John in this Canonical Book of the sacred Scriptures,
(which is infinitely to be preferred before Evagrius his Ecclesiastical Story)
sets down these words, which but now I cited, as Christ's own, and therefore you
may boldly go to him, whenever you cannot see well, that you may be enabled
by him, to see both him and your own sinfulness more clearly then you do.

7. Case.
When you can hardly keep in boasting, and detracting, or any other rotten
stuff, that it may not break out in your conferences and communications with
others, then also make use of Christ, the Rose of Sharon. For as Roses are by
their nature Galenus, l. 7. simpl. Medicament.
astringent and binding, so Christ by his nature is binding also, being clean
contrary to such boasting and reviling, as you may guess by his humility,
Matt. 11.29. and by his silence mentioned, 1 Pet. 1.23. in these very words,
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, etc. So as that you may be sure,
that he can easily bridle your tongues, and bind your vainglorious and
malicious humors, unto which you may be subject by nature, so as that they
shall neither break forth by the tongue, nor be predominant in the heart, if
you do but make use of him, as you ought, and are to be showed hereafter.

8. Case.
When you can hardly retain any thing that is good, being oblivious and
forgetful, go to Christ. For as Roses are able to Folia Rosae retentricem
facultatem corroborant. Matchiolus in Diosc^. l. 1. c. 112.
corroborate the retentive faculty for the good of the body, so Christ can as
easily strengthen the magazine of your souls, your memories, yea infinitely
more easily, for he can write his Law in your very hearts, as he has promised,
Ierem. 31.33. Wherefore make use of him.

9. Case.
When you begin to nauseate and to loath his word, as the Children of Israel
did loath even Manna, which came down from heaven, John 6.32. for as Roses do
stop and cure the loathing of meat, if we may believe Plin Natural. hest. l.
21. c. 19.
Plinte, so Christ can quickly cure the nauseating of his word, which is the
epidemicall disease of our age, yea, thousand times better. For he is Manna
himself, and the word it self; and therefore if you can but take and taste him
how sweet he is, you will find such a sweet relish in him, as that you cannot
loath his word, which is also most sweet, by reason of him, as meat and drink
is sweet, if sugar be in it, by reason of the sugar, which is in it, Psalm.
19.10. Therefore take him.

10. Case.
When you are so obstructed and troubled with stoppages, as that you cannot
fetch your breath, as you were wont, that is, do not, cannot breath and pant so
after God, as the Heart breathes after the water brooks, Psalm. 42.1, 2. by
reason of some obstruction within, proceeding from any cause whatsoever, then
also make use of Christ, who also can undo such stoppings in the soul, as Roses
can remove Succus rosae obstructionibus, etc. mirificeopem praestat. Matthiolus
in Diosco. l. 1. c. 112.
obstructions in the body: for else his dear Spouse would not have prayed him
so, as she did, to draw her, that she might run after him (Can. 1.4.) if he
were not able to take away all shortness of breath, and to enlarge the heart,
that one may Cui aliquando stetit ante faciem salutaris nominis ignaviae
t^rpor. Bernard.
run, which he cannot do, whose breath is but short.

11. Case.
If you be pestered with hardness of heart, so as that ye cannot mourn for
sin, or be sensible of sin, etc. go to Christ for help, for as the Rose can
mollify those parts that are hard, as Co^serves of Roses mollify those parts,
which are hard, yea help break the stone. Will. Langham in his garden of
health, p. 534. Cui sons forte siccatus lachrymarum invocato Jesu non fluxit
uberior. Bernard.
one writes of it, so Christ can take away the very heart of stone, as he has
promised being God, Eze. 36.26. hence Bernard what hardness of heart was ever
able to stand before Jesus.

12. Case.
When you are troubled with Melancholy, and distrustful thoughts, go to Christ
in that case also. For as Roses have a faculty, as Thomas Hill in his Art of
Guard. p. 88.
they write to expel melancholy, so has Cui in adversis diffidenti, jam
jamque deficienti si nomen adju^orii sonuit defuit fortitudo. Bernard.
Christ a most singular faculty to cast out and dispell all those pensive and
perplexed conceits, which do so torture many of his believing members. For he
has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13. Josh. 1.5. which
words of his, being spoken home to the heart of a distrustful person, by his
own spirit within, in case you make use of him in such a time of need, must
needs be of such force and power, as that light must even come out of
darkness, as when he said, let there be light, Genesis 1.3.

13. Case.
When your hearts are not very stable, go to Christ for stabilitie. For as Roses
if Pliny Plin. Not. hist lib. 25.
may be credited, confirm the tottering teeth in ones mouth, so he is able to
confirm and to make stable your hearts, as the Apostle writes, 2 Corinthians.
1.21. Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, etc. is God, mark in
Christ, who therefore is aptly resembled to a rock, which firmly bears that
edifice, which is built on it, Aug retract l.c. 21.
Matthew. 16.10.

14. Case.
In a word, when any sinful motion or evil humor does arise in your hearts,
then make haste to make use of Christ, who is able to purge it out, as Roses
have a faculty to purge the heart, so as that they suffer not any corruption
to remain in it, if we may give credit to that, which The Syrup of Roses
suffers no corruption to remain in the heart Will. Langh. p. 537.
one writes of the same, nay Siquidem cum nomin^ Ies^m hominen^ mihi propono
mitem, and humilem cord, benignum, sobrium, castum, misericordem, etc.
eundemque ipsum Deum omnip tentem, qui me and exemplo sance and roboret
adjutorio. Vnde concludit, quod nome^ I su totius indecoris fugat pruriginem.
Bernard. Sermon. 15 super Cant.
much more. For so says the Apostle, whom we may certainly believe, Hebr.
9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God?

15. Case.
If you say, what if one do yield or have given way to sin, what shall he do
then, shall he go to Christ too?

I answer, yes, For whether will ye go else but to him, who is able and ready
to take away your sins, and to cure your wounds after you have been bitten of
sin, and Satan, even as the Plin. Not. hist. l. 25. c. 2.
root of a field rose is able to take away the venom out of the wound of a
man, that has been bitten of a mad dog, as Pliny writes; for therefore he
compares himself both to a Rose in the field here, and to the brazen Serpent in
Isreal's camp, which being looked on by those that were stung of fiery
Serpents, did heal and cure the same, Ioh. 3.14, 15, 16. As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the Son of man be lifted up, (who,
as b one notes by the way, by reason of his everlasting Dietie, I add, and by
reason of the long-lasting virtue of his death, to deliver us from death,
notwithstanding sin, which ever cleaves unto us, is most aptly set forth by a
serpent of brass, which is the more durable metal) that whosoever believes
in him, should not perish but have everlasting life; unto this most excellent
passage (of which more is to be said hereafter) we may annexe that in 1 John
1.1, 2. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not.
And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the father, lesus Christ the
righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but
also for the sins of the whole world, where note by the way, how Christ in such
a case is compared to an Advocate, so as that poor sinners, who cannot plead
for themselves, may plead by him to escape the Judgment of God denounced
against sinners, that they must die, Ezech. 18.4. even as by the Litigaturo
liberum est, ut vel ipse in persona propria compareat, etc. si ipse in judicio
standi personam habeat. Natura autem quidam imped^untur, ut infantes, quida^
loge, ut soemi^ae, quae per procuratores agere poss^nt. Doctor Vulteius, Iuris
Prud. l. 2. c. 30.
civil law, women and children that cannot defend themselves, are to plead
their case by a Procurator or Advocate, whereas others may plead themselves.

So that one may as much encourage you to go to Christ, notwithstanding those
sins into which through infirmity you fall, as Cava^za in su^ma council. mihi.
p. 281.
those 227. fathers, which met in Trullo, under the Emperor Justinian (to add
Canons unto the sixth general Counsel of Constantinople, which made none) do
Licea^ omni Christiano monasterium ingred^, etc. in quocunque crimine
deprehensus fuerit: Salua^ tor enim noster Deus inquit. Eum qui ad me venit non
ejiciam for as Caxon 43. Con^. 6. Constable. sic dicti.
animate and allow even criminal persons and notorious malefactors to enter
into a Monastery: yea more, then they, seeing the word of God it self, as I
showed but now, makes for such an encouragement, whereas they can bring no
proof sufficient. They say indeed that Christ has said; him that comes to me,
I Will in no wise cast out, but they prove not that, he who enters into a
Cloister, having been a malefactor, such as by the Law of God ought to die,
goes to Christ, nay they cannot prove it. For so any murderer, or Sodomite, to
save his life, may go into a Monastery, and yet be far enough from Christ,
wherefore I say one may more safely animate poor sinners, that sin out of
weakness, to go to Christ himself rather then into a Cloister, which cannot
save them, as Christ can.

16. If you say, Case.
what if our own hearts do even tremble and shake, and condemn us as
hypocrites, shall we go to Christ and make use of him for all this?

I answer, yes. For therefore he assimilates and likeneth himself to a Rose,
to show, that as Rosa cordis palpitationi salutare est remedium. Matthiolus in
Diosco. l. 1. c. 112.
Roses do take away the trembling of the heart, so it is he, that must remedy
and cure the Palpitation and trembling of your hearts, as being greater then
your hearts, as it is written, 1 John 3.20. and near at hand to justify you,
Esa. 50.8. forasmuch as he also died for you, so as that you may boldly echo
forth these very words, after the Apostle to answer your self-accusing and
condemning consciences; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, etc.
Romans 8.34. but hereof more is to be said hereafter, in the manner of taking
Christ. This by the way.

17. If you ask me, what if we can find no rest for all, Case.
shall we go to Christ?

I answer, yes. For therefore also he is compared to a Rose, because he brings
rest and quietness, and calmnesse at last, as the Pl.not.hist. l 21. c. 19.
Rose conciliates ease, and brings men Quiescere. Cujus (scilicet Christi)
figura erat Noah, quem ubi pater ejus g^nitum vidisset juxta prophetia^
imponebat ei nomen Noe, dicens; hic quietos nos faciet ex pecoatis nostris,
etc. Noe vero a peccato quietos non fecit, sed in Christum prophetavit Lam^ch,
qui per Noe significatur in veritate. Epiph. l. 1 ^o. 2. mihi p. 132.
a sleep, being Physically taken. See for proof hereof, Matthew. 11.28. where
Christ himself, like a true (...)
Noah, so called from rest, does most lovingly promise you rest, saying, Come
unto me all you that travel, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,
Mark but these words, and see, how Christ himself answers you in this case;
you say, what if we can find no rest for all this, shall we go to Christ? and
Christ says, yes, come. you shall be welcome. For I look for such, as you be,
restless, easelesse, and dejected souls, and such I promise rest, which they
want, and F^^isti nas Domin^ pro te, and inquietum est cor nostrum, donec
veniat ad te Aug.
will want, till they come and cleave to me, and me alone.

18. When you perceive your selves to be entering into a spiritual consumption,
Case.
so as that you do not as in times past abound in good works, but rather pray
less, read less, meditate less, and give less then you did, then also go
with all speed to Christ, who can and must cure this consumption of the soul,
as For the Consumption make a confection with the flowers of Borage and Roses
with aromaticall spices, and use it. (...) Will La^^^. p. 5^^
Roses are said to help the curing of the consumption of the body in the
beginning. See John 15.5. He that abides in me and I in him, the same brings
forth much fruit, note, much fruit, so as that he cannot enter far into any
consumption, or continue long in it; for as much, as having a care to abide in
Christ, he has Christ reciprocally abiding in him, who will not suffer him to
decay and to consume away, Nisi enim palms in vite manserit and de radice
vixerit quantum-libet fructum a semetipso non potest far. Aug. in Loc.
if therefore you would not fall back, as some do, then be careful to suck
what efficacy and virtue you can from Christ, as the branch from the Vine, and
so making use of that true Vine, and most medicinal Rose of Sharon, prevent a
dangerous consumption.

19. When you find your selves dead and livelesse, Case.
to think or do any good thing go to Christ, who like a Matthiolus in Diosco l.
1. c. 111.
Rose is able to revive you; and therefore is called our very life, Col. 3 4.
and in the Judgment of Ambros. in loc Durand Rat. Divin offic. l. 6. fol. 159.
Judicious Writers is held to be that good Samaritan, which, as himself speaks,
Puts wine and oil, that is, the Dr. Boys in his Works, p. 477.
Law and Gospel in the wounds of a poor traveling soul, that is fallen among
such thieves, as the devil, the world, and the flesh are, to revive the same,
Ambr. ib.
when it is half dead, Luke 10.30.33, 34.

20. Again, Case.
when you be so a thirst after more righteousness, as that nothing can satisfy
you, then run to Christ likewise, who being like a Rose is also able to quench
your spiritual thirst, even as other William Langh. p. 539.
Roses are able to quench your corporal, For so he says himself, Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, meaning both
himself, as our righteousness: 1 Cor. 1.30. and that which is Scilicet opera
justitiae Hieron. in Loc.
inherent. For they shall be filled: using the means, namely, which are
ordained for them, to quench their thirst, as a man who being a thirst, goes
and seeks for drink. The like may be said of an unsatiable thirsting after
riches and pleasures, that as Roses do quench the natural thirst, Nihil it^
temperat sitim avari. tiae, sicut nomen Jesus. Bern ibid.
so Christ is able to quench this sinful thirsting after these things, for so
he says, Ioh. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of the water, shall never thirst,
meaning the Cyril l. 2. in Ioh. c 85.
grace of his Spirit, which will so satiate the soul of such a one, as that he
shall not thirst so, or long after the transitory riches, and fugitive
pleasures of this world, as formerly he did, and as he would do again, if he
should neglect me the fountain of living water, and drink rather of the Etenim
aqua in puteo voluptas saeculi est, in profunditate ^^nebrosa Hinc eam hauriunt
homines hydria cupiditatum. August. in Loc.
well of pleasure, and of the golden streams of earthly riches, to quench his
thirst. For thus a most judicious ancient Etenim aqua in puteo voluptas saeculi
est, in profunditate ^^nebrosa Hinc eam hauriunt homines hydria cupiditatum.
August. in Loc.
Doctor writes of that Well, which Christ speaks of, that the water in it is
pleasure, and that men draw it with the water Pot of concupiscence, and that
therefore whosoever drinks of it, shall thirst again, whereas, if a man make
use of Christ, and drink in those streams of grace, which flow from his
blessed Spirit, he shall thirst no more.

21. Case.
Is God angry with you, and do all his waves and billows go over you, and are
ye almost overwhelmed with the fierceness of his wrath, and does his fury even
burn within you, like fire? then, o then, make haste to go to Christ, who must
free you from that wrath, and take away that heat, as Roses do take away the
heat of a hot disease. For none else but he, was ever able to pacify the
provoked wrath and fury of God; It was the foolish pride of that Roman
Emperor Caligula; Caligulaes folly.
having made a bridge of grappled ships over a narrow arm of the Sea, in
imitation of Xerxes, and triumphing at midnight with innumerables torches, to
boast that he had wrought two great miracles, having made the sea dry land, and
the night day: but our Emperor of heaven and earth, even the Lord Jesus Christ
did so indeed, when he dried up the red Sea of his fathers wrath, and changed
our present night of ignorance and sadness, and future of torment into the
eternal daylight of his grace and glory, and there was none with him, when he
did it, because none but he was able to do it: nor will be ever. See Esa. 63.3.
I have trodden the winepresse alone, and of the people there was none with me,
that is, none did Nemo mihi patienti adsuit. Cyryl. in Loc.
suffer with me, when I suffered my fathers wrath: wherefore as God said once
to his people, so say I unto you, Enter into the rock, Alti^ri intellectu
praecipitur omnibus ut ingrediantur in p^tram, i^ est, confugium faciant ad
Christum, veraciter credendo in eum. Haymo in Loc.
that is, in Christ who is the rock, for fear of the Lord, and for the glory
of his Majesty; when he is angry, and there hide your selves, making what use
you can of Christ, and laboring to be found in Christ, and to have Christ ever
in your mind, till the indignation be over past, Esa. 2.10. and Chap. 26. verse.
20.

22. Case.
Moreover, are you deprived of your dearest friends, goodly children, or loving
parents? or has any of you been bereaved of a kind yokefellow, and do ye
thereupon conclude; that God is displeased with you? then go to Christ in this
your heavy and sad condition, who is ready to be unto you in stead of a son,
a father, or mother, or brother, or friend, Matthew. 12.50. and so consequently
to exhilarate and to cheer you up as a Rose, whose Roses do rejoice the blood,
Tho. Hill, in his Art of gardening. p. 88.
property it is to be exhilarative.

23. Case.
Again, though you do not feel the wrath of God in your souls, yet if you be
but comfortless and destitute of the sense and feeling of his love toward
you, rest not so, but go with all speed to Christ, who is both able and ready
to comfort your sorrowful souls, as Roses are able to William Langh. p. 533.
comfort the head and heart of a man, when he is weak. For so he says, Ioh.
14.18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you. Mark, I Will come to
you, says he, Where as other Roses cannot come to us, but we must go after
them, to show how ready he is to come and to comfort us, whenever we are sad
and comfortless; wherefore I conclude with sweet St. Tristatur aliquis
nostrum, veniat in cor Jesus. Bern. S^rm. 15. super Cant.
Bernard, is any man sad? Let Christ's sweetest name Jesus, I add, and this
precious promise come into his heart; and mind, and so let him procure that
peace and comfort, which the world cannot give, in and by Jesus Christ, that
sweet and most comfortable Rose of Sharon, but this comfortablenesse of Christ,
I have likewise already enforced upon your affections, as now I do reinforce it
upon your wills, and therefore I am here the more brief in my persuasion.

24. Case.
Are you sick and weak in body, and like to die? then, o then, make use of
Christ chiefly. For then usually, men make most use of their corruptible Roses,
or Rose Water, Rose-vinegar, Roses conserved, and For few cordials can want the
help of Roses, or Rose Water. Will. Langh. p. 535.
cordials made of Roses, and other ingredients, when they be very ill, and
should ye not then, above all other times, make as much account of Christ, that
incorruptible Rose of Sharon; yea, infinitely more: Forasmuch, as he is then
able to do good both to your souls, and bodies, whereas other Roses (as I noted
formerly) are but good for the one, and nothing for the other.

It is Christ and none but Christ, Psalm. 103.3.

It is Christ and none but Christ, Esa. 40.29. He gives power to the faint,
and to them that have no might, he increases strength, which all the cordials
upon earth cannot do.

It is Christ and none but Christ, Psalm. 23.4, 5. Yea, Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death I will fear none ill: for thou, namely Aug. in
Loc.
Christ, art with me, thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a
table, or feast, for my poor soul before me, in the presence of mine enemies,
where by enemies, we may understand death, and Satan, also among the rest, who
then are before us, when we are dying.

Lastly, Ioh. 6.49.50. Your fathers did eat Manna in the wilderness and are
dead (that could not keep them alive,) This is the bread which comes down from
heaven, that a man may eat thereof and not die, namely, for ever. And therefore
as in ancient time, sick and weak and dying Christians, were Anselm. apud
Rosium in conf. Petriconiensi cap. 73. Georg. Cassander in append. ad opusc.
Johan. Roffens. de siducia and misericordia Dei.
directed to make use of Christ at that time especially, interposing the death
of Christ betwixt them and Gods Judgment, so do I advise and persuade you now
to do the like, saying, as they were taught to say, if the Lord will Judge you;
Lord we interpose the death of of our Lord Jesus Christ betwixt us and thy
Judgment, no otherwise we contend with thee, etc. I must not proceed farther,
lest I should prevent my self in that which I must say by and by touching the
form and manner of making use of Christ, and therefore let that suffice, which
I have already spoken.

25. Case.
Finally, my brethren, if your faith be weak, either then when you be weak and
sick, or at any other time then, o then, be sure to go to Christ, who, being
like a Rose, is as able to corroborate your faith in the heart, as Roses are
able to Rosarum succus cor corroborat. Matthiol. in Diosco l. 1. c. 112.
strenthen the heart it self, yea, much more. For he is the author of the Roses
themselves, and of the heart it self, and of faith also: Hebr. 12.2. and
therefore must needs be infinitely more able to strengthen, then a Rose, which
himself has made, so as that it can have no other power, or virtue, but such
as is derived only from him, who is omnipotency it self, and therefore you may
note, how his own disciples finding their faith to be but infirm and weak,
did repair themselves unto him for more strength, and for a larger measure of
it, acknowledging him to be both able to do it, and themselves altogether
impotent and unable to help themselves in it, saying, Luke 17.5. Lord increase
our faith.

SECT. 21. Eight Rules to observed in the taking of Christ.
YOu will say unto me;

I answer. appointed of God, for the good of your poor and sin-sick souls.

Take therefore and observe these following Physical Rules for your
instruction, which God bless unto you.

1. As it is requisite, that before men take bodily Physic, they should first
be 1. Rule. Vide Praxin Medicam. Gualteri Bruel. Doctoris celeberrimi.
prepared for it, so it is necessary, that you should be fitted for Christ,
before you go to take him, as a medicinal Rose for the health and good of your
souls. For do but note the promises, which he has made, and you shall find
that they are made not to all promiscuously, but only to such, as are thus and
thus qualified. See Matthew. 5.4. for an instance. Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted; Mark they shall be comforted, if they be such as
mourn, and therefore you must be fitted for Christ, I say, if you will
comfortably take him.

You will say unto me, you have us to be fitted for Christ.

I answer.

1. 2. Well resolved;
1. Well humbled, For he resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble, 1
Pet. 5.5. and he loves to dwell with the humble, Esa. 57.15. and therefore, as
he that would keep Roses, must have Qui volunt rosas conservare in rudi ella
^^ndit^rs sub (...) abruunt a^ reservant Palladius.
earthen pots for them, to keep them in, so you, if you will take and keep
Christ to do you good, you must have humble hearts, like rude pots of earth,
void of allowed pride, and arrogancy.

Now there are three several steps or degrees, ^. Steps to humiliation.
by the which men are to descend unto this here required humiliation.

1. Self-examination. 2. Self-lamentation. 3. Self-accusation.
1. For the first, Self-Examination.
as the Apostle writes, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that
bread, and drink of that cup, 1 Corinthians. 11.26. So say I, will any man take
Christ, as Physic, either sacramentally, or spiritually only, then let him
examine himself first, and that touching these six things:

1. Whether Christ belong to him or no, so as that he may truly say, Thing.
My beloved is mine and I am his, Cant. 2.16.

2. faith or no, 2 Corinthians. 13.5.

3. love with Christ, and with man, but especially with all the members of
Christ, rich and poor, yea, or no. For that is chiefly required, John 21.17. 1
Cor. 16.22. 1 Ioh. 4.11.

4. Luke 18.13. and here let a man rip up his whole life, as much as he can for
the present, that he may be humbled, Lament. 3.40.

5. Romans 7.15.20.

6. serve God in true holiness and righteousness all the days of his life,
Luke 1.74, 75.

The first is to be tried by the second, the second by the third, fifth and
sixth, as is to be seen, Gal. 5.6. Act. 15.9. Act. 26.18. But the fourth serves
only as a glass, that we may not be proud; but humble and lowly in our
selves, as seeing no cause wherefore we should exalt our selves, and so
consequently, that we may be fit and apt for Christ, who looks for such and
none but such to take him; as for others, if they will presume to apprehend
him, and to lay hold on him, in the Sacrament especially, they may justly fear
that the Lord will even cut them off, as the Invenio praeterea and concham
praevisa manu apprehensurae se utpote suas operituram divitias, sese
comprimere, inimicam quoque manum, si forte comprehenderit, amputare, etc.
Francisc. Ruens de Gemmis l. 2. c. 13. A Case of Conscience.
Oister or shell wherein the orient pearl is hid; is said to cut off the hand
of her enemy that comes to take it. See 1 Cor. 11.29, 30. This by the way.

If you ask me, how you may know that you have examined your selves
sufficiently?

I answer. Tantam diligentiam debet facere in Examinatione conscientiae recogit
antis praeterita peceata, qua^tam faceret in magno and arduo negotio pro magna
and ardua re tractanda aut incommod^ gravi vitando. Gerson in Tripart. Quest.
or a Case of Conscience.
(With Gerson) that a man is to adhibit so much diligence herein as he would in
another matter of moment, whereby he may either gain, or loose much: let me
add a reason. For it is supposed that, that then a man will do his utmost,
which is as much as is required, Deuteronomy. 6.5.

But how shall one know you will say, that he has had so much care to examine
himself, as he would have had in another of great importance, and so has done
his best endeavor?

I answer (With Gabriel Biel that most learned and profound Doctor in the
Schools) if you omit and pass by nothing voluntarily, and if oblivion and
forgetfulness please you not, but it be your hearty desire rather, Si non
placet oblivio, sed magis desideret ad omnium peccatorum suorum illuminari
memoriam. Si nihil voluntary omittit, etc. Gabriel Biel in Can. Missae Lect.
8. mihi. fol. 11.
that your memories may be so illuminated, as that you may be able to recount
and to remember your sins; I add, and to come to the true knowledge of your
selves and of your estates. For so in like manner, you would be loath to forget
or to neglect any thing in a weighty and important earthly business, and you
would be glad to be fully informed of everything that may concern you, and we
know by the word of God, that a deceitful negligence is that which God
condemns, because it is voluntary, Ier. 48.10. Cursed is he that does the
work of the Lord negligently, and deceitfully. For the (...)
Hebrew signifies both.

Let me superadde but a necessary Corollary, A Corollary.
and then I have done with this important matter of examination; That it may
appear that you do not willingly omit any thing necessary, but rather use all
means to come to the knowledge of your sins, see that you search yourselves so
diligently, as that ye neglect not seriously to pass in your search through
all the ten Commandments, being assisted by one good Writer or other (as Mr.
Dod, Dr. Mayor, Mr. Scudder, or some other on the Commandments. For this kind
of examination is held also by Perkins in his Cases of Conscience. l. 1. c. 5.
sect. 2.
judicious Casuists to be sufficient. And the reason hereof is, because the Law
of God is so perfect as that next unto Gods own immediate discovery, there can
be no more required, to bring a man to the knowledge of his own sinful estate.
See Psalm. 19.7. The Law of the Lord is perfect.

2. Having searched as much as you were able, Self-lamentation.
then lament and bemoane your selves as much as you can, for having so highly
and hainously offended so good a God, and high a Majesty; Thus Peter
remembering himself what he had done, went out of the High Priests Hall, and
wept bitterly, Luke 22.61, 62. And Epiphanius writes of the proud (...).
Epiphan. physiol. c. 12.
Peacock, that when having beheld himself as he goes, and admired his
beautiful glorious feathers, he reflects at last upon his blackish and ugly
feet, he cries out as loud as he can in the midst of all his bravery, because
they are not proportionally correspondent and answerable to the other parts of
his fair body, and therefore well may we cry out, rather then brave it out,
when upon an exact survey and search made, we see the monstrous deformity of
our souls, by reason of sin, which is that abominable thing, and the cause why
our lives are not answerable to that transcendent beauty, which is in Christ,
and to that proportionable comeliness, which should be in every one of us, so
as that we should not stand so much upon any good parts, that are in us, seeing
that our souls have such black feet, that is, such ugly motions and
inclinations, whereupon they go, and break out even into words and actions,
which are to be lamented even with tears of blood, Self-accusation.
if it were possible.

3. Having lamented your selves fall to self-Accusation, and confess your
sins, I Will not say to Quid mihi ergo est cum bominibus^u^ audiant consessiones
meas quasi^psi sanaturi s^^t amnes languores meos. Aug. confess. l. 10. c. 3. A
Case of Co^^cience.
man, who is a sinner himself, and cannot forgive, or justify you, but to God,
who is able and faithful also, and just to forgive you, and to cleanse you
from all unrighteousness, 1 Ioh. 1.9.

You will say unto me, how would you have us confess our sins, must we
confess them all to God in particular, or will a general confession serve?

I answer. In some cases it will serve, Sol.
and in some it will not.

If you ask me in what cases it will suffice?

I answer. Luke 23.40, 41, 42, 43.

2. Perkins in his Cases of Conscience, l. 1. c. 5. sect. 2.
When upon a diligent search we cannot find out some, yea many sins, then we
may warrantably confess, and say with David in general, Who knows the
errors of his life; cleanse me Lord from my secret sins, Psalm. 19.19.12.

But when will a general confession not suffice? A Case of Conscience.


I answer. When we have time and may know, and do know our maine sins. For so
says Saint John: If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive
them; Mark, here is both a promise, and a condition; the promise is remission,
the condition is confession, and a confession of our sins, note [our] now all
the sins, that we know and may know, being main ones, are ours, so as that we
may not say such are, and such are not, so as that we may choose whether we will
confess them or no. Hear also the Judgment of holy (...) etc. Chrysostom. in
Epist. ad Hebr. c. 12. hom. 31.
Chrysostom in this case. Let us not only call our selves offenders, but let
us reckon up our sins, and repeat every one of them in particular. I do not say
accuse thy self unto others, but I counsel thee to follow the Prophet, saying,
Reveal thy way unto the Lord, etc. which words of his I add, lest men should
think that he would have us confess our sins in special to a Priest, as the
Romanists do teach, and compel the people so to do. No, No: that good In
^ffusione notatur integritas, etc. Non enim confitenda sunt solum verba and
facta, commissiones and omissiones, sed etiam cogitationes immu^dae and mor^sae
affectiones, inordinatae intentiones, mixtae voluntates, perversa judicia, and
suspiciones temerariae, Albert. Mag. Epis. Ratiep. in paradyso animae. c. 40.
Father as well as diverse others was rather against, then for any such
auricular confession. I close up this Case in the words of another great Doctor
on Lam. 2.19. Power out thine heart like water before the face of the Lord, in
the pouring out of the heart, says he, Integrity and universalitie is to be
noted, that we are to power out our whole hearts by confession. For deeds are
not only to be confessed, quoth he, and words, commissions, and omissions, but
unclean thoughts also, and churlish affections, and disordered intentions,
mixed wills, perverse censures, rash suspicions. For else, as Orig^n.
one says well, such thoughts will accuse us in the last day, I add, if we do
not now accuse ourselves, confessing them that they may not leave some
impressions in our souls, as in wax.

Let me superadde one Corollary, A Corolary.
keep short reckoning therefore, and humble your selves often, by often
confessing, even (...). Chrysostom. in Psalm. 50. hom. 12.
daily or hourly, if you can, that you may be able to remember the manifold
exorbitancies of your ever-erring souls, which otherwise, for the most part
will be through your own carelessness and oscitancie buried of you in oblivion,
to the great damage and disquietnesse of your ever Romans 2.15.
accusing consciences, See Psalm. 32.3, 4. When I kept silence my bones waxed
old through my roaring all the day long. Mark all the day long, and For the
Hebrew is (...) which signifies both every day and the whole day. which word
sometimes sig^ (...) ^^heth thoughts that are evil, as Psalm. 36.1. (...) dixit
praevaruatio impii, idest, mala cogitatio.
every day in the which he did not confess, for day and night thy hand was
heavy upon me, etc.

I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid, I said, I
will confess my transgressions, (Mark transgressions in the plural number,
lest men should think that he speaks but of one notorious sin, that troubled
him and such transgressions, as by virtue of the * original do also comprize
(his very thoughts) and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin.

Which sacred passage plainly commonstrates the needfulnesse of an exact and
frequent confessing of our main and known ^^nnes, as without which no calmnesse
or true quietness of conscience is to be expected, wherefore, as I said, so I
say again, recount your sins often spreading them abroad before the Lord, as
Hezekiah the railing Letter of Rabshekeh (2 King. 19.14.) that so you may have
the less work to do in the kind, when you go to prepare your souls for
Christ, the most medicinal Rose of Sharon, to take him as the only sovereign
medicine of your sin-sick souls.

Thus descend by these three steps down to that depth of humiliation, which
possibly you can reach unto, by the help and assistance of the all powerful
God, which in the use of such holy means by earnest prayer you must crave, and
beg at his bountiful hands.

2. In the next place be well The next thing in repentance is the change of the
mind, etc. And this stands in a constant purpose of mind and resolution of
the heart not to sin, but in every thing to do the will of God. Perkins Cases
of Consci^nce. l. 1. c. 5. sect. 4.
resolved, not to live under the reigning power of any allowed or approved sin,
and not to neglect the performing of any known duty; when a man is to take
Physic for the good of his body, he resolves to part with a little money, yea,
any money rather then want Physic, without which he knows he shall be sickly
still, and that he will do any thing prescribed by the skillful Physician, who
knows far better what is good for him then himself.

And therefore well may you resolve too, being to take the Rose of Sharon as
Physic for the good of your souls, that you will by Gods help forgo any money,
I add, any sinful pleasure, honor, or whatsoever else may be offensive unto
Christ, and that you will follow all the good instructions and directions,
which he has set down in his word, that you may enjoy him and be able to take
him as you do desire. Better is it, and a thousand times better for you to
follow Christ's precepts and to be without such delights, honors, moneys, while
you live, then one hour to want Christ, who indeed will not comfortably impart
himself and his hidden virtues unto one, whose heart hankereth after such
fugitive follies, vain delights, and golden fetters; for he says, He that
loves father or mother more then me is not worthy of me, and he that loves
son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me, Matt. 10.37. from whence I
draw this inference, and therefore how much more is he, who for the present
loves either money, or pleasure, or honor more then Christ unworthy of Christ,
and unfit for Christ, to take him to his comfort.

Nay, The life of Galeacius Caraccio. lus cap. 28.
Let their money perish with them (said once Galeacius, that noble Marquess of
Vico to a Jesuit, enticing him to return from Geneva into Italy to his own
home, wife and children) who esteem the gold in the world not worth one days
society with Jesus Christ, etc.

And therefore as Barnabas did once exhort the Antiochians, that with purpose
of heart they would cleave unto God, Act. 11.23. So do I here persuade you to
the like purpose of heart, that you will part with any thing, though never so
dear, and do any thing, though never so irksome to flesh and blood, that
Christ your dear love may impart himself, and the sweetest influence of his
grace and comforts unto you, which that you may obtain, I pray God in mercy to
settle your hearts for such a gracious purpose of heart.

You will say unto me, A Case of Conscience.
you have resolved so many times, but you were never able to perform what you
purposed, and therefore you do not know whether you may resolve so again?

I answer. So^ut.


If you did rashly resolve, the fault is yours, and therefore be wiser next and
advised, as Christ himself intimates by his two parables of a builder, and a
King, Luke 14.25.29, 30, 31, 32.

Considering

1. Philadelphia, Revel. 3.8. that you may not presume beyond it.

2. it, that they may not afterward sink under the burden, for want of more
strength and help, and for want of poising the burden of sin withal, whose
weight indeed makes the burden of resolution so heavy, as usually men after
they have taken it up do find it to be.

2. Cant. 6.13. will doubtless accept also hereafter of your reiterated
resolutions accompanied with wisdom in making, and care in keeping, though as
yet you were never able to do as ye Romans 7.15 Gal. 5.17.
would. For if there be first a willing mind, it is accepted according to that
a man has, and not according to that he has not, says the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 8.12. * That is, not according to that which is beyond his power:
Hence Dionys. Carthus. in
Leo, what a man was not able to do yesterday, let him do it to day, let him
ever, Leo de conflicta vit and virt. mihi. p. 113.
as he receives grace from above, resist his depraved custom, let him say both
mornings and evenings now I have begun. This is the change of the hand of the
most High.

2. As other bodily Physic must be taken fasting, Rule.
so be empty when you take Christ, that is. 1. if need be abstain even from
meat, keeping a truly religious fast, according to our Saviors speech, Mark.
9.29. 2. Think not your selves to be able to do any thing, as of your selves.
No: but rather that all your sufficiency is of God, 2 Corinthians. 3.5. they that
will keep Roses, says Rosas nondum patesactas servabis si in ^anna viridi fixa
reducas etc. Palladius.
one, must keep them in a green cane, And ye know that Christ calls himself a
Rose in my text, and therefore upon that very ground I infer so much, that
seeing he is a Rose, if you will take and keep him, you must be as green
hollow canes, that is, evermore empty and void of self-conceitednesse, for as
much as himself has said; Without me you can do nothing, Ioh. 15.5. Ne
quisquam putaret saltem parvum aliquem fructum posse a semetipso palmitem
far, cum dixisset, bic fert fiuctum multum, non ait, quia sine me parum
potest^s facere, sednibil pot^stis facere, Aug. in Loc. 3. Rule. Quest. Solut.
Not, but little, but just nothing, I pray you confider of it, and be persuaded
then to go even quite out of your selves, and to unbottome your selves,
wholly, casting away all self-confidence, and self-relying, that so you may be
fit for the Lord Christ, who fills but the hungry with good things, who is
empty, and sends the rich, that is, the rich in conceit, empty away, Luke
1.53.

3. As Patients will see what they take, so see you and consider Christ by
faith with Abraham, who saw his day and rejoiced, Ioh. 8.56.

You will say unto me, what great virtue can there be in this sight?

I answer very much. For if they, that did but look on the Numb. 21.
brazen Serpent, being stung of the fiery Serpents, were healed, what will not
faiths look do upon Christ himself, who is God himself, Quod autem aeneus est
signifi^al quod ille secundum carnem mortuus suerit, sed divinitus aeternus
sit. Beda. in Number. 21.
typified by the brass of that erected Serpent in the wilderness, and so
consequently most able to heal us instantly, when by faith we do but look upon
him, and eye him, as the Apostle would have us, saying, Heb. 12.12. Let us lay
aside every weight, and the sin, which does so easily beset us, etc. Looking
unto Jesus; Mark, Looking, to show that there is a most singular virtue and
energie in the sight of Christ, by a true and lively faith to subdue sin, and
therefore I beseech you look up to Christ, and elevate your minds a little,
and do not always and only pore upon your sins: For that can do you no
good, but Christ can, Christ will; and will not you look upon him? O go, go:
nay run, as it is like they did that were stung of the fiery Serpents; and
behold him as lifted up; I Will not say in the wilderness, but in the Heremus
Ecclesiam significat. Idemib.
Churches of Christ signified, as venerable Bede has well noted it, by the
wilderness. Let me add, because it contained the people of God: for are not
you pitifully stung too of Satan, and a number of stinging sins, like so many
fiery Serpents, and therefore why do ye look one upon another, and why do ye
cast your eyes so much upon your soars and wounds, which your sins made in
your bleeding consciences? This is not the way to health; No: No: you must look
up to Christ, and therefore I say again run, Answ.


You will say unto me, how would you have us to look upon Christ.

1. I answer with the Apostle, Heb. 12.3. consider him that endured such
contradictions of sinners against himself, and so Consideratio enim est
inspectio. Langius.
eye him, believing it to be so indeed that you may be moved by his The like
may be said of his humility, chastity, sobriety, meekness, mercifulnes,
benignity, sanctity, that a due and and serious consideration thereof* may
and must move us to a careful imitation of the same. See Bern. Sermon. 15.
super. Ca^.
example patiently to endure the like. Again, 2. consider all his other bitter
pangs and passions, but especially the stupendous effusion of his most
precious blood, and believe verily that he shed it, and suffered so much as he
did for the good of his, to save them from their sins, and from his fathers
wrath, and to give them everlasting life, Ioh. 10.15.28. Ioh. 6.33. Matthew.
1.21. 1 Ioh. 1.7. Hebr. 9.12.14. Ephesians. 2.13.16. Coloss. 2.14.

4. But rest not here when you have seen Christ by faith assenting to the word
of truth concerning him, Rule.
you must go farther yet and apply or take him inwardly, as men take Roses
conserved or distilled into their bodies, believing verily, that Christ not
only died for his people in general, but also for every one of you in
special, to free you from his fathers wrath, and from sins tyranny, and to
entitle you to everlasting life. In a word that he will do for you in all the
25. Cases formerly propounded as much as may be safely desired and expected.

Thus 1. Ground.
the Saints of God did ever apply him in their several times and exigencies as
you may see Job 19.25. Esa. 9.6. Ier. 23.6. Christus enim est bonus ille past^r
Aug. in Loc.
Psalm. 23.1. Luke 1.47. Ioh. 20.28. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 2.24. 1 Ioh. 2.1. Revel.
1.5.6.

2. Which words also are to be understood of Christ. Idem in Loc.
Psalm. 34.8. Zach. 9.9. Romans 13.14. * Ephesians. 4.24. 1 Ioh. 2.12.

3. Yea, thus Christ himself invites us to take and apply himself; hear him
speak himself if you will not believe me.

Come eat of my bread and drink of my wine, says he, which I have mingled,
Tremell. in loc.
that is, partake of those good things which my father would have me to
communicate unto you, Prove. 9.5. Again, Est invitatio Christi. Idem in loc.
Ho every one that thirsts come ye to the That is, to the free gifts of the
Spirit. Haym o in loc.
waters, and he that has no money come ye buy and eat, yea, come buy wine and
milk? milk if ye be weak, wine if ye be sad, without money and without
price, or freely, Esa. 55.1. Again, if any man be a thirst, let him come unto
me and drink, that is, let him derive from me by a lively faith so much
spiritual grace as may Bibat potum illum salutarem qui animam reficiat, et
omnem a^st^ cupiditatum hujus mundi reflinguat Cyril. l. 5. in Ioh. c. 10.
quench his thirsting after the things of this world, Ioh. 7.37. add Matthew.
11.28. Mark. 5.36. You see by all these sacred passages, what warrant you have
to apply Christ and to persuade your selves, that Christ will do for you what
may be done. For as much, as he both invites you to come unto him, and also
tells you what you shall have and find in him, when you come unto him, and take
him into your very souls, as you take meat and drink into your bodies, namely,
whatsoever is necessary for the life of your souls shadowed forth by bread, and
wine, and milk, and water, which things, as ye know, are most necessary and
useful for the preservation of the natural life of man, and therefore in Gods
name take, yea, eat, and drink Christ, even most confidently and boldly, as
the only sovereign medicinal Rose or Rose Water, which must revive and cure
your sin-sick souls, assuring your selves, that in all the foresaid Cases, he
will do for you what is to be done for your everlasting health.

5. But withal, Rule.
I must advise you that as men, who are to take bodily Physic are to pray unto
God for a blessing, so believing you will beseech and invocate the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is both Physic as a Rose, and the Physician himself, as he is a
Savior, that he will bless your endeavors, and make himself effectual unto
your poor and sickly souls.

More particularly, that like a Rose he will purge out choler, and hatred, and
lustfulnesse, and envy, and pride, and every other corruption, that you may be
most troubled with, and that he will clear your sight, that you may see your
sinfulness more then you did, and take away your stony hearts, that you may
be able to mourn or to grieve more for your sins then you did, and that he
will dissolve all stoppages within you, and enlarge your hearts, that so you
may run after him in the way of his commandments, and that he will be pleased
to establish your hearts, and to pardon your offenses, and to give rest unto
your souls, and to take away all trembling from your hearts. Moreover, pray him
with all humbleness of mind, that he will not suffer your graces to decay,
nor to be so dead as sometimes you are, but rather will quicken your spirits,
and when you be a thirst after more grace, that he will satisfy you, and when
you begin to thirst too inordinately after the things of this life, that he
will quench your thirst, that you thirst so no more, and when his fathers wrath
is kindled against you, that he will appease it, and when you be comfortless
and have lost a dear friend, that he will comfort you, and when you are sick
in body and weak in faith, that he will strengthen you. Thus according to the
Cases formerly prosecuted beseech Christ to be good unto you, and if he seem
to be strange, and inexorable then urge him, as the good Shunamite the Prophet
Elisha, when her son was dead, saying, As the Lord lives and as thy soul
lives I will not leave thee, 2 King. 4.30. So say thou unto Christ as thou
live, I will not leave thee till thou help me, or as Si s^^e du^io ^^e^tis
accesseris and dixeris ei, niss accepero non credam, ^ross us accipies, si
^amen ^^sum postu^a^eris, qxe ^^m daredaeat, and tibi ^^tenti^^^i ^^^^cdiat.
(...).
Chrysostom would have us, unless thou give me what according to thy will I
desire of thee, I will not believe thee, assuring thy self that thou shall
impetrate, and have what thus It moves ingenu (...) natures to ses m^n take
(...) and den^alls well, which proud person^ will not do, and so it mov^th God.
Th. Goodwin in his return of prayers* ^. 212.
importunately thou do postulate and crave. See Luke 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
Matthew. 15.26, 27. how Christ himself would both have us to be importune, and
instant, and how he commends the woman of Canaan which was so constant, and
would not give him over till he did help her. And I could tell you even of many
wonders, which fervent and importunate praying has wrought from time to time,
constraining Christ to help his people, which prayed even beyond hope and
imagination, and contrary to the course of nature to encourage you, but I Will
content my self with one instance only for the present, which may suffice.
Fox act, and men, p. 689
When Solymani^ had besieged Gunza in Hungary, and eight companies were entered
in the midst of the town, there was gathered in a house a company of women,
children, and impotent folk, which made such a noise with their cry and
prayers, that went up to heaven, as that the Turks thought a new supply did
come against them, and so left the city again, and compounded with it,
whereupon that poor place was miraculously preserved, and therefore I say
again pray whenever you be in any distress, though you can have but as
little hope as they of that little city, Christ himself seeming to be against
you, as he seemed to be utterly against the good woman of Canaan, yet pray, and
say unto him as she said, Lord help, nay cry and cry even mightily as the same
Canaan petitioner, and as the said poor women and children of Gunza did cry
saying again, and again, and again, Lord help, and if that will not do it,
cry again both day and night, using the same words, or some such like, o Lord
Jesus, sweet Rose of Sharon, help: for we are grievously vexed of the Devil,
or thus, Lord help; for we are grievously tormented of thy fathers wrath, or
thus, Lord help; for we are grievously perplexed by reason of sin. Thus in all
the foresaid Cases cry out for help, and Nam cui quaeso in dubiis aestuanti and
fluctuanti non subito ad invocation^m clarinominis emicuit certitudo. Bern.
super Cant. Sermon. 15. fol. 125.
doubt you not but that as Christ said at last to the good woman of Canaan; O
woman, great is thy faith be it unto thee as thou will; So, as that her
daughter was made whole from that very hour. Matthew. 15.28. and as that good
people of Gunza was blessedly preserved upon their loudcrying prayers, so you
also shall be likewise most happily and wonderfully delivered and made whole
though not in the same hour, when you will, yet most certainly when For God
considers all times of thy life, and still chooses the best and fittest to
answer thy prayers in. Goodwin. ibid.
God will, which clause leads me to an other rule which I must add in the
next place. As for this I have urged it so much the more, because I know ye
need it most, and are like to gain by it most, the Lord giving a blessing to
your endeavors and mine, which I humbly and heartily crave at his merciful
hands.

6. Again, Rule.
as they that take bodily Physic must have patience to wait till it work, so
you, having taken or applied Christ, that most medicinal Rose of Sharon, and
prayed most patiently wait with blessed David, Psalm. 40.1. till he incline his
ear unto you, and help you. For therefore it is written. He that beleeveth]
namely in Christ, shall make no have Hieron in loc.
or must mak^ no hast] namely, Tremell. in loc. (...)
out of impatience, so as to Luther.
fly as one translates the For God shows his wisdom and love as much in
giving the thing it self. Goodwin in his return of prayers. p. 146.
original, Esa. 28.16. and hence it is that one of the ancient, who by David's
blessed man's, Psalm. 1.1. understands Christ himself observes in him well,
that he is a tree of life bringing forth his fruit in due season. verse. 3. Non
importune sed tempore suo. Hilar. in psa, to. 2. mihi p. 16.
that is, in his own time, which himself calls his e hour, saying to his
blessed mother, mine hour is not yet come, namely, to turn water into wine,
John 2.4. so that you must not be dismayed, though he do not deliver you by and
from your sins, and crosses, when you cry, concluding that he will never help
or heal you, because he answers not your expectation, when you would. No, but
as good old Simeon waited a long time for the consolation of Israel, till he
met his much desired Savior, most happily and joyfully in the Lords Temple,
where also he did embrace him with the most hearty and dearest embraces of his
tenderest affection both in the arms of his blessed body, and with the arms of
his most precious faith, having been formerly assured by a divine revelation
from the spirit of God, that he should not see death before he had seen the
Lord Christ, Luke 2.26. so you are to wait in like manner for that
consolation, ease, and help, which you do or shall desire, till Christ send it
in his own time, having been heretofore sufficiently promised in the like
manner, that sooner or later before you be unmanned by death, and dissolved,
you shall have as much help from the Lord Christ as is needful and For the
Lord does all things in weight and measure, and has likewise appointed a
certain measure of grace, and faith and comfort, inwardly to be enjoyed Romans
12.3. Ephe. 4.^. and a measure of common blessings outwardly to be received
Pro. 30.8.
convenient for you, which security or promise ought to content you. And
therefore I say again wait: For the vision. is yet for an appointed time, but
in the end it shall speak, and not lie, though it tarry, wait for it, because
it will surely come, it will not tarry, says God himself, not I, Habak. 2.3.

If you ask me what time the Lord does usually help.

I answer. 1. When you need his help most, being ready to sink, Mat. 8.24.26.

2. Esa. 57.15. So that accordingly you may expect his help sooner, or later.

7. Rule.
As they that take corporal Physic keep their chamber, so must every one of
you taking, or having taken Christ the Rose of Sharon, as spiritual Physic
for the good of his poor soul. Keep the chamber or closet of his heart with
all diligence, as it is written, Keep thy heart with all diligence, or with all
omni custodia and vigilantia.
custody and watchfulness, as the original more emphatically imports,
Prove. 4.23. Keeping fast your doors, I mean your senses, and not suffering
any cold or infectious air to come in.

If you ask me how shall we do to keep our hearts thus with all diligence?

I answer. Solut. 1. Direction.
1. Stopping every little hole or occasion that may let in the least coldness.

2. Keep fast your doors, Direction.
that is, your senses not suffering any coldness or infectious air, that is,
infecting objects or matters to come, in Job 38.1. Psalm. 39.1.

3. Pray God to assist you herein, Direction.
as David did, saying, Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, keep the door of
my lips. You may say moreover, keep mine eyes also, o Lord, and the doors of
mine ears, and watch my heart that I may neither take a cold, nor any other
infection. I humbly beseech thee.

4. If those domestikes, Direction.
that are with thee in the chamber, that is, those sinful motions, which are
Math. 15.19.
bred in the heart, do offer to open thy doors and to go out, and so to let in
the coldness and infection, which ever follows them, 1. Dina, Genesis 34.1. and
to go in and out. Nay, 5. Ier. 4.14. How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge
within thee, or be so approved, tolerated, entertained, as guests that are most
welcome, and are even entreated to stay day after day, night after night, and
so do stay, and continue with the entertainer, as the (...) Whose root is (...)
Pernoctare, hospitari, manner, commorari.
original does most significantly imply so much, and more too, then I can well
express here, or have expressed heretofore, touching the same matter in the
second general use upon another occasion.

Lastly, Rule.
Taking or having taken Christ that most medicinal and operative Rose of
Sharon, you are as patients to keep close to the fire, or rather to three
several fires; by

1. 1 Fire.
Thinking much and often on that most formidable fire of hell which shall never
go out, Esa. 66.24. Namgehennam semper timens nunquam in ge hennae ignem cadet,
semper hoc castigatus metu Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Antioc. p 48. 2 Fire.
That so you may keep down your bodies of sin, as Paul did, 1 Corinthians. 9.27.
being ever most careful to be even universally obsequious and obedient to Gods
sacred Law.

2. By musing ever on the word of truth and promise, with holy David, Psalm.
119.97. as an other fire, which also shall never go out, Ierem. 23.29. 1 Pet.
1.23. that so it may like a pillar of fire conduct you safely through the great
and terrible wilderness of this men-devouring world into the celestial
Canaan, not suffering you either to stumble against the stone of stumbling and
rock of offense, which is Christ, accidentally, 1 Pet. 2.8. or to wander
totally and finally out of the way of Gods commandments, Psalm. 119.6.9.105.
and may likewise warm your faint and sickly souls, when they begin to cool,
blazing and flaming, as it were, about your heads, and hearts, and vibrating,
or sending forth now this, then that most sweet and precious promise. Besides a
number of other holy truths and passages, like so many hot burning sparks of
fire, whereby your cooling brains and breasts may be re-heated, and
re-enlivened, and so consequently most blessedly re-enabled to hold out and and
to persevere unto the end, in the metaphysicall and supernatural taking of the
most effectual Rose of Sharon, 2 Pet. 1.19.

3. By holding forth also your very heads and hearts against that ever burning
fire, which is God himself blessed for ever, Hebrews 12.19. and bathing your
ravished and aspiring thoughts even most deliciously and frequently in the
hot burning flames, or manifestation of that most holy and everliving
essence, even as a blessed Martyr, being condemned to be burnt alive, did even
bathe his hands in the flames of fire, to evidence and to declare the
unconceivable and unexpressable delight and joy which he took and felt in the
midst of the fire, so do you in like manner manifest and show forth your
inexplicable delight and soul-ravishing content, which you take in God and
Christ, by so thinking upon God much and often, yea, ever with Genesis 39.9.
Joseph, and Psalm. 16.8.
David: that so you may be ever afraid, as Joseph was, to sin against his
Sacred Majesty, Genesis 39.9. and also may be ever warm and fire-hot, as it
were, in affection, but then especially, when you do take and apply, or have
taken that most sweet, most fragrant, most pleasant, most operative, and
salutiferous Rose of Sharon Christ Jesus, our most dear and blessed Savior,
to be adored and magnified for ever and ever.

FINIS.
The Contents.
SECTION. I. THat Christ is like a Rose in Sharon Field, is manifested by six
grounds drawn from his. 1. Operation or hidden virtues. 2. Bloodshed. 3.
Fragrancie. 4. Suffering in the field. 5. Opennesse. 6. Intention to draw his
Spouse into the field to fight. 7. Excellency in general. 8. Pleasantness in
special. 9. Fervenoy of Love.
Two Queries resolved.

SECTION. II. Informs us of Christ's, 1. Fairness. 2. Usefulness. 3.
Desireablenesse.


SECTION. III. Satisfaction for the consciences of Christ's people, who may know
that Christ is in them; 1. By the mightiness of his Rose-like purging; where
1. An objection is answered. 2. Two Questions resolved.



1. Q. In what sense Christ's people is said to be purged from sin:

2. Q. How one may know that his evil thoughts are so purged, as that they do
not reign; Cleared By six Evidences.

2. By the sweet Savior of Christ.

SECTION. IIII. Conviction for the consciences of such as want Christ, who may
know it by the ill savor of their 1. Works. 2. Words. 3. Thoughts.


SECTION. V. Matter of fear for such as reject Christ, having no cloak for
their sin, seeing Christ is so fair, where is showed 1. What Christ may say to
them on that day. 2. What they are like to say of him again.


SECTION. VI. Matter of shame for careless and loose Christians, who are so
foul, whereas Christ is so fair manifesting it both: 1. At home. 2. Abroad
bringing most foul. 1. Mouths. 2. Hands. 3. Hearts into Godsown house.



SECTION VII. Comfort for Christ's people set forth. 1. By two resemblances. 2.
By five disproportions, showing how far more comfortable Christ is then any
Rose.


4. Objections answered by several very needful distinctions and Solutions.

SECTION. VIII. An exhortation to such as want Christ to seek him: 1. In the
Law. 2. In the Gospel.


SECTION. IX. Faith must be gotten as a hand for the taking of Christ, who
himself must work it. 1. By his Word. 2. By his Spirit.


SECTION. X. Christ must be sought speedily, as Roses in the Summer, whey they
may be had before, Either you may be taken from the means, or the means from
you.


SECTION. XI. Four grounds which should draw men to Christ to take him. 1. His
Rose like sweetness. 2. Delightfulness appearing. 1. In his person. 2.
Titles, being called 1. Light. 2. A Savior. 3. Salvation. 4. A Bridegroom. 5.
A Friend.




3. Lovingnesse, manifested by the effusion of his precious blood, which makes
him as red as a Rose.

4. Needfulnesse in regard of the life.

1. Natural. 2. Spiritual for 1. Mortification. 2. Sanctification. 3.
Consolation.
3. Eternal.
SECTION. XII. Six Impediments that keep men from Christ's are to be removed:
1. Blindness. 2. Blockishnesse. 3. Baseness. 4. Brutishness. 5. Bitterness.
6. Business.


All founded and grounded upon the Rosy Metaphor or simile used in the Text.

Of Blindness in special, for the removeall whereof men are called upon.

1. To pray to Christ for illumination. 2. Christ is compared with those things
which vain men do so prefer before Christ, who is set forth by nine
properties. For, Nine properties of Christ. 1. He is most comely. Nine
properties of Christ. 2. Most valiant and strong. Nine properties of Christ. 3.
Most Rich. Nine properties of Christ. 4. Most Wise. Nine properties of Christ.
5. Most Harmless. Nine properties of Christ. 6. Most Pleasant. Nine properties
of Christ. 7. Most Sure. Nine properties of Christ. 8 Most Sublime. Nine
properties of Christ. 9. Most Concupiscible and contentative: all drawn out of
Cant. 5.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Whereas those things which are so valued above Christ are: Nine Differences.
1. Most Foul. Nine Differences. 2. Most weak. Nine Differences. 3. Most
Poor. Nine Differences. 4. Most Foolish. Nine Differences. 5. Most Hurtful.
Nine Differences. 6. Most Bitter. Nine Differences. 7 Most Uncertain. Nine
Differences. 8. Most Low and Base. Nine Differences. 9. Most Vnsatisfiable.


SECTION. XIII. Of Blockishnesse to be removed by a 1. Frequent. 2. Serious
consideration of our last sickness, when this Rose of Sharon, will stand us
more instead then all Rose waters, or Cordials whatsoever.


SECTION. XIIII. Of Baseness the third let, which is to be removed by an
exact 1. Ransacking of our hearts. 2. Ripping up of our lives, words, and
actions.


SECTION. XV. Of Brutishness the fourth let, which must be removed by 1. A
retiring of our selves from all meat and drink, and other pleasant things for a
season. 2. By reasoning.


SECTION. XVI. Of Bitterness the fifth let, which we may remove by comparing
the bitternesses, which are said to attend Christ and those that choose and take
Christ with the sweetnesses and comforts of Christ.

SECTION. XVII. Of Business the sixth let, which concerns worldly men and
women, who must 1. Leave all business for a time. 2. Think seriously of that
maine business, which does so nearly concern them, even the choosing and
taking of this most delicious and needful Rose of Sharon.


A Final exhortation to a serious removing of all these six Impediments, and
an earnest and painful laboring for, and seeking after Christ the Rose of
Sharon.

SECTION. XVIII. An exhortation to Gods people to be more for Christ (who like
a Rose is so delightful, useful, and desirable) then ever they were; 1. By a
happy under-valuing of all earthly things in comparison of Christ; for 3
Respects. 2. By a holy willingness to be with Christ.


1. Here. 1. In the Word preached. 2. At and in the mysterious administration
and participation of the blessed Sacrament of his Sacred Supper. 3. In Prayer.
4. In the reading of his own Sacred Book. 5. In the reading of such good books,
as are written of him by holy men. 6. In his best beloved people, conversing
with them as with Christ, whose Image they bear, and members they are:
2. Hereafter. 3. By a mighty care to keep him still, 1. By a holy and
perpetual recordation and mindfulnesse of him. 2. By a sweet and comfortable
feeling of his gracious presence in their blessed souls.

Quest. What if he will be gone can we keep him.

Answ. You may keep him, as you keep Roses with sugar.

1. With sugared and sweet thoughts. 2. Words. 3. Works.
SECTION. XIX. Christ's people should be willing to make more use of Christ,
(who is so useful being like a Rose) then ever they did.

SECTION. XX. Christ is to be made use of, in 25. Cases set down in order.

SECTION. XXI. Eight Physical Rules to be observed, in and about the taking of
Christ, as the only most Soverain Rose or medicine, ordained of God for
sin-sick Souls.


FINIS.
Errata.
Page 10.1.14. Cant. 1.10. read. Cant. 5.10. p. 13. l. 8. next. r. text. p. 24.
l. 14. I now not. r. I know not. r. p. 29. l. 26. rather to be farther. r.
rather to be wished farther, p. 34. l. 25. notwithstanding, is, r. which
notwithstanding it is, p. 48. l. 18. in all eternity, r. to all eternity, p.
53. l. 10. degree. r. decree. p. 58. l. 1. he speaks, r. he spoke. p. 79. l.
11. for them. r. for that, p. 83. l. 22. after Christ. r. after Christ may
speed, p. 94. l. 18. you. r. yea. p. 124. l. 24. He most r. he is most. p. 150.
l. 9. combine. r. combined. p. 151. l. 4. breath. r. breach. p. 153. l. 24.
remain, r. remove p. 156. l. 24. Lot. r. let. p. 173. l. 17. return. r.
returns, p. 175. l. 1. flows, r. blows. p. 189. l. 13. and him. r. of him.
p. 192. l. 18. for himself, r. for he himself. p. 193. l. 11. runs. r. is. p.
198. l 22. are to be. r. is to be. p. 200. l. 2. cannot. r. nor cannot ibid. l.
4. breathes. r. pants. p. 203. l. 16. r. Deity p. 218. l. 2. r. to be
observed. p. 223. l. 12. another of, r. another matter of. p. 225. l. 20.
admired, r. admireth. ibid. 22. he cries, r. and cries. p. 230. l. 25. in
the, r. in that p. 248. l. 7. man's, r. man.


