THE ROCK: OR A settled heart in unsettled times.

A short Discourse, minding and helping Gods People to make use of their Faith
for moderating their Fears in these sad times of the sorrows of SION.

Being the heads of some Sermons, Preached lately, and now published for that
purpose.

By William Jemmat, Pastor of Netlested, in the County of Kent.

Psalm. 57.1. Be merciful unto me O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul
trusts in thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until
these calamities be overpast.

London printed for Samuel Enderby, and are to be sold at the Star in
Popes-head-alley. 1644.

To the most Noble Patriot, and my most worthy Patron Sir Edward Scot of
Scots-hall, Knight of the Bath; together with the Lady Mary Scot; his most
worthy and religious Consort: Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplied in our Lord
Jesus Christ.
SAd experience tells even good Christians, how weak their own spirits are
in the sore trials of these distracting times, even where their peace and
comforts are continued, before they are put to suffer as their brethren abroad
do. Fears of evil threatened do much disquiet them, and too often suspend
their faith from doing the due and proper office of it: So that they deserve a
check for their unbelief, in the words of our Lord; Why are ye fearful O ye
of little faith? Mat. 8.26. And yet because they dislike and struggle with this
unbelief, they deserve pity, and to be helped against it; which was the
occasion of these meditations at the first and now of publishing them.

And for this Dedication of them to your worthy selves, the cause is apparent:
Partly I would help forward your comfort in God, after all your activity and
charge in the great Cause of God now in agitation. Partly I would make known
your exemplary love to the work of God, both in times of peace, maintaining a
Lecture at your own cost, and spending much upon the poor, upon Ministers and
others; and in these times of war, exhausting your estate to buy Arms,
Horses, and provisions of diverse kinds for helping the Lord against the mighty;
beside your continual cares and counsels for the public, and for the peace of
our County, which (amongst other our Worthies) owes much to your worship for
the safety of it, and repelling of the enemy. Your Martial Family has gained
much honor hereby among all godly and understanding Christians. And partly I
would hereby tell the world, that to me and mine you have bin a most free and
loving Patron, and was the like to my Predecessor and his Family: The Lord
return into your bosom seven fold, add to your days abundantly, give you
health take away or mittigate those pains you are sometimes subject unto,
strengthen you in the inner man by his Spirit, fill you and yours with all
heavenly graces and comforts, keep you unblamable to his Kingdom and glory,
and give you (with us) to see the peace of Sion again established, with the
utter disappointment of all the enemies. Which are the daily prayers of

May 26. 1644. Your worships much obliged William Jemmat.

A settled HEART in unsettled Times.
PSALM. 112.7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his heart is fixed,
trusting in the Lord.


Section I.
Whether, and how far forth* she fears of evil may be expelled from godly
hearts in times of public danger.

THis Question is occasioned upon reading the words of that Text, thus; What?
no fear? Expos. Faith and Fears, (...).
so fixed? that you fear nothing? What if there be tidings of a great Army
coming against you? What if tidings of great losses in your estate of Children
miscarrying, friend, destroyed, or the like? Has any such a faith, as that
still he will fear no evil tidings?

Whereto the Answer may be made in six things, and the Text withal expounded.

Essence of it, casts out all fear; Essence and Exist^nce of Faith.
as is said of love, the daughter of faith, 1 John 4.18. perfect love easteth
out fear. But our faith is not perfect; as there be frailties in our graces,
so in our faith: We need still to say, Mar. 9.24. 1 Cor. 13.^.
I believe, Lord help my unbelief: We know in part, and love in part, and
believe in part, and all in part, till that perfect come. This is faith in the
exist^nce of it; in this or that Subject, this or that Believer: If it were
entire, it would render a man altogether fearlesse. Adam in innocence, by faith
adhering to God perfectly, had nothing to fear: And Christ, the second Adam,
believing perfectly, (...). Mark 1.^.33.
feared no threats of the wicked, nor dangers: He feared indeed at his Passion:
but that was, partly because he stood in our room, who by sin were brought
into a condition of terrors, partly in respect of his Fathers wrath which must
now be appeased: And I suppose, in the day of judgment, before the Saints
enter into Heaven, it will be by the perfection of their faith, that they fear
none of those terrors and amazements, 1 John 4.17. Herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment: Yea, there will be
great joy, as in a day of refreshment, a day of redemption, of the restoring of
all things, of the Lambs Marriage, of the best good that ever the godly saw.

II. Faith in the full and entire of it, casts out all fear: that is, so
long, and so far forth as we trust in the Lord; for that time we shall be
unmovable and invincible, as mount Sion, Psalm. 125.1. though another while we
be fearful, and conflict with sore doubtings: Job 19.25
As Job now confident, I know my Redeemer lives, anon very much distempered;
and David, one while will fear nothing, Psalm. 24.4.
though he walk in the midst of the Valley of the shadow of death: and another
while bewrays great infidelity, (...). 77.9.
Will the Lord be no more gracious? etc.

The proper act of faith is, to cleave to the Lord without wavering or
doubting. This led the Martyrs through the prisons, and flames and extremest
sufferings. This we read of in Paul very much, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have
believed; and Romans 8.38. I am persuaded, that neither death nor life -- shall
be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord;
and so it is in others, where the full assurance of faith is obtained, Heb.
10.22. and note the phrase here; His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord; or,
in as much as he trusts in the Lord; or, so far forth as he trusts in the
Lord; just the same form of speaking, as in 1 Timothy 4.8. Godliness is
profitable to all things, having the promise: that is, in as much as it has the
promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

Now apply this to the former instances, of a great Army coming against us, or
the like: Faith acted will say as David, Psalm 3.6. I will not be afraid of ten
thousands of people that have set themselves against me round about: as Elisha
to his servant 2 Kings 6.16. Fear not, for they that be with us (two men
only) are (...) then they that be with them: As Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.11. Lord it
is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no
power: As Jehosaphat, chap. 20.12. we have no might against this great company
that comes against us, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are upon
thee: Or as Moses at the red Sea, Exodus 14.13. Fear ye not, stand still, and
see the salvation of the Lord which he will show to you to day.

Again, faith act^d will say, God is able to make their hearts melt in them,
(...).
even the stoutest of the en^mies, a^ the Canaanites: God can make them hear a
noise in t^^ (...)* 1 King 7.^
and be gone, as the Syrians; o^ a rumor, Isa. 37.7.
as the Assyrians. God can set them to sheathing their swords in the bowels one
of another, as the Moabites, 2 Chronicles. 20.23.
Ammonites and Edomites: He can send an evil spirit among them, to fall off
one from another, as Abimelech and the men of Sechem: Judge. 11.23.
Or he can bide us in the midst of all the enemies, as he did Jeremie and
Baruch. Jer. 36.26
It may be ye shall be hid in the day of wrath, Zeph. 2.3.

And if not, yet faith acted will say. We shall go to Heaven so much the
sooner; and there it will be better for us, then if we had lived here an
hundred years longer in the greatest prosperity: After darkness I shall see
light; and, while I sit in darkness, the Lo^d shall be a light unto me, Mic.
7.8.

So in any other instances; faith is the victory, wherein we overcome the
world, 1 John 5 4. And we see large and fair exemplifications of it, Heb.
11.33, 34, 35. Through faith they subdued Kingdom, wrought righteousness,
obtained promises, ^^^pp^^ the mouths of Lions, q^^^, had the violence of
fire, escaped the (...) the sword, etc. This is the luster and glory of faith,
in the vigorous acts of it: Samson was not more glorious in those miraculous
acts, of killing a Lion, or laying the Philistims heap upon heap, then a
Beleeever shall be, if faith be well brought into action.

III. Faith when it admits of What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee,
Psalm. 56.3. and a Believer chides away unbelief, as Psalm. 42.11. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? hope thou in
God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the health of my countenance, and my
God. Unbelief is a great burden to a good soul, and makes it say with tears,
Lord I believe, Mar. 9.24
help tho^^ ^^^e ^^^el^^fe* Ah that I should bewray such weakness, after so
much acqu^intance with God! after so much experience of his goodness, after so
much profession to b^leeve in God A^mighty, (...) O wretched man that I am, Rom
^.24
who shall deliver me from this body of death?

And as faith grows stronger, so these fears wear away by little and
little. At lightsome times it is as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The wicked the^
when no man pursues: but the righteous are bold as a Lion: and we are
righteous by faith.

All graces conflict with their contraries; and so does says. The comfort is,
it is sure of victory in the end: Which is something to stay and fix the heart,
during the ^^me of the combat. Time shall be, that all these fears and first
things shall pass away: We shall not so much as fear any enemies, of soul or
body, or molestation by them.

(...) in Sword^ of (...) godly.
that it is rather an holy and commendable fear, then otherwise. Some
affliction or danger there is; but yet an higher cause, which breeds the
fear.

First, sometimes the fear is for some sin unrepented and unpardoned, as the
poor heart doubts. Job in his great calamities feared, least the Lord
reckoned with him for old offenses, chap. 13.26. thou writest bitter things
against (...), and mak^st me to possess the (...) of my youth. When trouble
comes, and the peace with God not settled, it is just cause of fear. Prove.
18.11.
A w^^^^ (...) who can bear? Though sometime the Christian be comfortably
persuaded of the peace, yet my perfectly: Or some old sin comes newly to
remembrance, and brings terror with it: As to (...) brethren when taken for
spies, Gen 12.^1.
We are (...) guilty concerning (...) that we (...) the anguish of his s^^le,
and would not hear; therefore is (...) d^st^^^sse come upon us. Or howsoever,
some fear will do well, to assure the peace more thoroughly, Phil. 2.12. Work
out your salvation wi^^ fear and tr^mbling. And thus, (...) is the man that
fears alwa^, Prove. 28.14. Where fear stands in opposition to hardness of
heart, as appears by the opposition of the sentence.

Secondly, sometimes the fear ^s not so much for himself (whose estate is
good, and gives him leave to rejoice in God all the day long) as for his
ch^ldren which are young, t^nde^, not instructed, not provided for: He fears
least they should come into Popish or profane hands, and miscarry: Alas, what
shall they do, if they be fatherless, motherlesse, friendlesse, without
government, or without good instruction? The body is like to be in bad case
enough, but the soul is worse. Few friends of the soul, even where is some
love to the body.

particular, as the welfare of the Church; least Idolaters prevail, and
Idolatry be established again, least the Gospel be hindered in the free
course of it; feast the Ark^ be taken, and the glory depart from Israel, 1 Samuel
4.13. Eli sat upon a seat by the way-side, watching; for his heart trembled
for the Ark of God.

Or he fears for the glory of God; least it be eclipsed, if the good side go
to the worse, and wicked enemies have occasion to blaspheme: Where is now (...)
God, P^^^ 12.10
and Gospelling, and Fasting, and Praying, and Reformation? Thus Moses was
afraid, least if Israel were destroyed in the Wilderness, the enemy would say,
It is because God was not (...) them into the good ^and, Number. 14.13. and
Joshua. chap. 7.9. What will thou do unto thy great Name? namely, if Israel
still fall before the men of A^. Which is an holy fear: We read of some such
thing in God himself, Deuteronomy. 32.26, 27. I said, I would (...) them into (...),
I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that
I feared the wrath of the enemy, (...). The Lord is a Jealous God, and fears
least his glory go to another; and his people a zealous people, Tit 2.14.
fearing the same thing; which is a fear holy and commendable.

V. Some fear is both natu^all, useful.

Fear is a natural aff^^ction, Fea^^, a natural (...).
carried to some evil at hand, for the avoiding of it. Nature seek^ the
preservation of it self, and declines the contraries; and the preservation of
the outward estate, wherewith God has blessed him; to save as much as it can,
from rapine and violence; why not? an honest providence is not only lawful,
but necessary.

(...).
And it is useful; to act according to Gods providence, who will bless and
help his people, but not idling, careless, fearlesse, neglecting the mea^^es.
Sometimes fear acts for the avoiding of the evil feared, as Acts 27.38. in
fear of shipwreck, and to obtain the promise of saving their lives, they
l^ghtned the sh^p, and cast out the wheat into the sea. Sometimes by preparing
for the evil, if it be not to be avoided, as Amos 4.12. Therefore thus will I
do unto thee O Israel; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet
thy God O Israel. And by this latter the soul is drawn nearer unto God:
reasoning, Is there so much danger abroad? It is time then to get the closer to
God, and keep with him. When Hawks be abroad, the Bird is safest upon the nest,
Psalm. 91.4. He shall cover thee with his fe^thers, and under his wings shall
them (...). And thus it is a sin, not to fear when a judgment is coming;
as in wicked men who care for nothing: Fea^e ye not me says the Lord? Jer.
5.22. We are commanded to fear him, who, Luke 12.^
after he has killed, has power to cast into hell: And one description of God
children is, they fear the Lord, Mal. 3.16.

VI. The promise here made to immoderate fears; either not to enter into a
believing heart at all, or else to be soon thrust out again: Therefore the
fears here are opposed to establishing of the heart, ver. 8. he shall not be
afraid; his heart is established: His heart is of a preserving and fencing
nature, to uphold the heart against every assault and annoyance of enemies,
Phil. 4.7. (...), The peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds (as
soldiers in a garrison) through Christ Jesus.

But when are fears immoderate? Feare^, when immoderate. 4. Notes.
1. When they are killing; as to worldly and carnal men sometimes they are:
worldly sorrow See an instance Jer. 49.23, 24.2. When they hinder duty; so
afraid, that ye cannot pray, read, hear with rejoice with trembling, Psalm.
2.11. and, rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say, Phil. 4.4.
rejoice. 4. When they Saul in his fear of the Philistines, would needs ofter
sacrifice, which was not his office to do; or go to the Witch at Endo^,
against his own Law and conscience.

This they do not to godly men; when most afraid, they have some help to stay
them up until better times: Even in desertions, when the Lord withdrawes his
comforts, and they make moan; yet they will not adventure upon sin, which
might give some contentment; they will lift up a prayer, even when they say
they have little hope to speed; they magnify the estate of Gods children, who
enjoy comfort, and love them, will not speak ill of them, nor do ought against
them.

A sign thr^^out of the matter is in them, Job 19.28*
as Job said of himself amidst all those distempers: They have the s^^stance,
though they fail in circumstance, Isa. 6.13. 1 John 3.9.
They holy seed is the substance thereof. The seed of God abides in them.
Though the ^^^^es fall off, yet the ^ap lies at the root; faith keeps the heart
alive still: That they are willing to resist a temptation, though sometimes
foiled; and grieve, when the Tempter has been too hard for them; and amidst
all their foiles, their faith upholds them unto victory: Still they are
comprehended of Christ, even when they are not able to comprehend Christ, Phil.
3.12. And in due time they shall be delivered from all their fears, enemies,
dangers, combats, molestation.

Section II.
Grounds of fixing and settling the heart by Faith.

The chief point in this discourse.
Faith is a strong and effectual means to settle the heart in times of danger;
in times when evil tidings fly about; in times when unbeleeving hearts reele
to and fro, Hab. 2.4. Behold, his set^le which is lifted up, is not upright in
him; ^^t the just shall live by his faith. Isa. 7.9. If ye will not believe,
(...) ye shall not be established. Chap. 50.10. Who is among you that fears
the Lord, that obeys the voice of his servant, that walks in darkness and
has no light? let him trust in the Name of the Lord, and stay upon his God.
Joh. 14.1. Let not your heart be troubled; ye believe in God, believe also in
me.

Ground^.
The Grounds hereof are these.

The whole blessed Trinity.
The heart may well be fixed, because it trusts on the Lord; who is the Rock
of salvation: In a great storm it is good to fasten the anchor to a strong
rock: Psalm. 95.1
And such is God to the Church in great persecutions, so as all the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it, Mat. 16.18.

First, God the Father; Father. Relations.
the fountain of the Trinity, and of our comfort. He is our Father; as Christ's
by nature, so ours by adoption: and a child rests securely in the bosom of
his loving father. Attributes
And every Attribute is mighty to fix the heart of Believer. The power,
wisdom, holiness, truth, mercy, justice of God, and the rest. De^^e.
Also his Counsel taken for the maine, that is, the saving of his soul. God
is far beyond all imperfections of an earthly friend; who loves well, but may
prove forgetful, unable, weary of doing good, etc.

Beside, faith sees in God a sweet and blessed Providence, Providence.
in which it may rest quietly and contentedly: Saying as Abraham in that
exigent, Genesis 22.14.
God will provide; in the mount it shall be seen. Without the will of my
Father in H^aven not a hair of mine head, nor a little sporrow can fall to the
ground: Things come not to pass either by fate or fortune (which are the
contentments of fools and Athe^sts) but by the good hand of God, at least
permitting and ordering. And there be diverse acts of Providence; Acts of it.
Overruling, mittigating, limiting, disposing all to good, even the worst
events. God is the great Governor of the world, and evil shall not come but
at his pleasure; not till now, not more, not longer, no farther; as he says to
the proud wa^es, Thus far shall ye go, Job 38.11.
but no farther. And as Joseph said, Ye thought evil against (...), but God
meant it unto good, Genesis 50.20 And as Job, The Lord give^^, and the Lord takes
away; blessed be the name of the Lord, chap. 1.21.

P^^^^ses.
Finally, faith pitcheth on prom^ses, and these heard with (...) Oath, to give
us (...) Heb. 6.18. And promises are far better then all performances in this
world, whatever they be; still there is more in a promise; Isa. 65.8.
A bl^ssing in the cluster, destroy it not: For the matter, they are precious
promises; for the manner of mak^ng, f^^e; for the extent, universal; for the
effect, 2 Cor. 1.20. Isa. 55.3.
sure and certa^ne; yea and am^n; sure mercies, everlasting mercies,
everlasting Covenant, etc. Faithful is he that has promised, who will also
do it. And the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.

Good foundations for faith to settle upon.

Secondly, God the Son; The Son of God.
the C^^^lati^e of faith, and special Ob^ect, on which it rests. There is a
world of wealth in Christ, that the heart may well be fixed by believing on
him. He is the strength of a believing heart; yea everla^^^ng strength, Isa.
26.4. and new strength to be still deri^ed from him, according to occasion,
chap. 40.31. He is an Advocate with the Father, 1. Joh. 2.1.
to nonsuit our clamourous sins, and keep our persons in favor. He is our
King, now governing for us, though in Heaven, in all that glory. He is the best
friend we have, nearer then a Brother. He is an enemy to our enemies, and will
curse them that curse us, Gen: 12.3. In all respects there is great cause to
trust in Christ, and, trusting in him, to be fixed; Blessed are all they that
put their trust in him. Psalm. 2.12
He had not been Christ, but to stand us in stead, and give us sure footing in
every slippery time and occasion.

The Holy Ghost.
Thirdly, God the Holy Ghost; the Spirit of faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. enabling us to
speak, or make confession of the truth in dangerou^ times. He is also the
spirit of strength, Isa. 11.2. the Spirit of power, of love, and of a sound
mind, 2 Timothy 1.7. And thus he fixes the poor heart, by what he works in it,
and what he testifies to it, and what he comfort; Thence we read the seal
of the spirit, the earnest of the spirit, Passion ap^d Pa^lum.
the liberty of the spirit, the witness of the spirit and the first f^uits of
the spirit; all of them confirmations to an unsettled heart against its several
trials. When the Holy Ghost was come upon the Apostles, we see how fearlesse
they stood before the Counsel, and despised all threatenings. O Austit^, he is
come, he is come, said Master G^o^^ at the sight of the stake; speaking of the
comfortable presence of the Holy Ghost, who had withdrawn for a while. And for
us, he is promised to abide with us for ever. Joh. 14.11.
Which we profess to believe, saying, I believe in the Holy Ghost; and so the
heart is fixed.

This is the first and self-sufficient ground for faith to settle the heart of
Gods child. The rest are secondary, and powerful only in their own place,
and in order to that first.

II. In respect of the Word, II. The Word of Faith,
upon which faith relyeth. A near relation there is between Fa^^^ and the Word;
thence it is called the Word of Faith, Romans 10.8. And it is a quickening Word,
as to David, Psalm. 119.50. Thy (...) has quickened me; it is a comforting Word,
as ver. 24. Thy Testimonies are my delight; It is a strengthening Word, as Heb.
5. ult. strong meat: 2 Pet. 1.19. Mat. 5.18.
It is a sure Word; all to be performed in due time: Heaven and earth shall
pass away, but my Word shall not pass away. It is a storehouse of promises,
which as they were made in mercy, so they shall be made good in truth. The
Christian being brought into straights may read, and quickly meet with a stay
for his poor unstayed, troubled heart; and without the Word he should soon
miscarry, Psalm. 119.92 ^al^sse thy law had been my delights, I should have
perish^d in m^n^ affliction: But by help of the Word he is soon settled,
confident, full of praises for his good estate in Christ, and triumphant over
all his enemies; see Ps. 56.3, 4, 10, 11.

III. In respect of what faith B^^ fits rece^^^^d by Faith.
and so much, that it rests con^ent with and condition the heavenly Father
shall a lot unto it. It sees sin abolished, forgiven, nothing to be laid to
his charge; which is ^e blessedness of a man, Romans 4.6. It sees Satan
disarmed, the Law satisfied, the curse taken away, hell shut, and Heaven opened
to him: It sees Gods wrath pacified, his justice satisfied, his favor
procured; which is matter of great joy, yea glorying, in the midst of many
tribulations, Romans 5.1, 2, 3. And this is the Kingdom of God within us, 14.17.
Not ^^at and d^^nke, but righteousness and peace, and (...) the Holy Ghost.
Finally, says sees all afflictions sanctified, sweetened, mittigated,
exchanged for good; in wrath the Lord remembers mercy; we shall not drink the
d^egs of the Cup, Ps. 75.8.
as the wicked do, and as Christ did for us; but in him sing and triumph, O
death, 1 Cor. 15.55.
where is thy st^ng* O grace, where is thy victory! What Agag said foolishly,
the Believer says on good grounds, The bitterness of death is past: 1 Samuel
15.32. Phil. 1.21
and, Welcome l^fe: and, To dye is gain: an entrance into glory.

Works f^ faith fixing the (...).
Faith is no idle grace, but still sets it self on work, about such
employments, and in such manner, as the Lord will mercifully (according to
promise) succor the laboring heart in all his difficulties.

First, it works out corruption, which would hinder comfort, Acts 15.9.
Purifying their hearts by faith, Both the guiltines of sin; it is never quiet,
till it be cleansed and cleared in the blood of Christ: Witness David a
Believer, who after those great sins, heaped up many petitions for pardon,
Psalm. 51. whereas another falls into the mire, and lies wallowing in it, as in
his proper clement. And the fil^hinesse of sin; none is suffered to command:
out with it, keep thy self from in, as from defilement, Psalm. 18.23. As the
flesh lusts against the spirit, Gal. 5 1^
so the spirit in a Believer lusts against the flesh: And, O this body of
death, who shall deliver! Ps 51 10.
Create in me a clean heart O God, renew a right spirit within me.

Secondly, faith is an undivided 1 Timothy 1.19.3.9.
which is a con^inuall feast, a brazen wall; great matter of joy in many and
great afflictions, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of
our conscience.

Thirdly, it works hope; which anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast,
entering into that with^n the veil, Heb. 6.19* and says, Though it be ill for
the present, it will be better hereafter* In the world is no comfort, but in
Heaven there is enough and enough: Men are enemies, but God a friend, and will
appear in time for us, and against them all: And if our selves should
miscarry, yet our posterity shall see the fruit of all these stirs; our
children shall enter into the good land. A great stay to the heart, when almost
overwhelmed with ca^es and fea^es; Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted, unless I had
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the l^ving.

patience; to endure any thing in the way, and for the cause of God; therefore
we both labor, and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, 1.
Tim. 4.10. And by patience the Christian has power over his own spirit; and
can possess his soul, Luke 21.19.
which otherwise would be lost (as it were) by impatience and other distempers.
When patience has its perfect work, Jam. 1.4.
he shall be altogether invincible; and shall hold out unto victory, and to the
enjoying of all mercies promised, Heb. 6.12. old Believers through faith and
patience inherited the promises.

pray; the prayer of faith, Jam. 5.15, 16. Oration fidei Omnipoten^ (...)
which avails much, and after a sort is Omnipotent, as Luther said. And
specially by prayer the Believer can get hear^s-ease in every s^d quality, the
settling of unquiet affections, heavy passions of unbelief, frightfull
apprehensions of evil to come. Lord help my mi^ch^fe, Man. 9.24.
Ps. 109.4. for my love they are my adversaries; b^t I (...) my self unto
prayer: mark the force of that phrase. And it is said of Jehosaphat, in that
great danger, that he set himself to seek the Lord; which both qualified his
fear, and obtained a victory, 2 Chronicles. 20.3.

V. In respect of the enemies, world, and from hell: Enem^es d^sabled in the
^a^ne. Romans 8.33.
Faith sees them disabled in the ma^ne: Who can a^^ ^^st, or condem^e, or
separate from the love of God? Well they may kill the body, but not hurt the
soul; or rifle the estate, but not prejudice the goodness of his estate toward
God: Therefore fear them not, says our Savior, Luk 12.4, 5. Neither can they
do that, til the Lord give them leave; 2 Samuel 16.11.
as he bad Shime^ to curse David; and satan could not touch Job, nor enter into
the Swine of the Gada^^^ns, till he had commission. Enemies are a sharp rod,
but in the hand of God; to lay on, or take off, as he pleases, Isa. 10.5. Nor
yet can they vex us one moment longer then the Lord will: As we see in Isreal's
coming out of Egypt, Exodus 12.41. The self same day, wherein the 430. years
were expired: The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous:
Ps. 125.3.
In due time the rod must be cast into the fire.

and of faith, Faith ends of not but ^n salvation.
which is salvation; 1 Pet. 1.9. Faith never leaves the soul, but in endless
and unspeakable blessedness. There indeed it self ends, having done its
office; but the effect and benefit of it never ends. Now they say, all is
well that ends well; and in present, all is well, because the end shall be
good; thence the heart is fixed, and the Believer faints not, whatever he
suffers in Cor. 4.16, 17, 18.

The Ordinance of God.
VII. In respect of Gods grant and ordinance to a Believer, walking humbly with
him; as here in the Text, this stands a^ a privilege of the godly, described
(...). 1. to be on^ that f^a ^t God, and d^l^g^^ ^^^g earth (...)
Comm^^d^ments. God ^ath past over to him such in hum^nity, He sh^^ not b^ (...)
d^g^^ (...) in the Lord. Having taken his part of sorrow and fear beforehand,
Hab. 3 16.
he shall rest in the day of evil. And having come to Gods terms (of
believing, repenting, obeying, zeal, and the like) he shall now enjoy the
sweetness of it. One that has served his time faithfully, shall have the
privileges of a Townsman, or Citizen.

These are the grounds, whereon faith setleth the heart in evil (...).

All this while we say nothing ^f a Stoicall, or C^n call resolution; that a
Christian should either be void of affections, Heb. 12.5
o^ desp^se the cross by a dogged stomach; or that he needs worldly wisdom
and policy to help himself; or that he must shift and sh^rk for himself in an
indirect way; or go over to the enemies of God and Religion; or on the other
side, seek his own revenge upon them. All this is but Sau^^ Armor, not sit
for Dav^d to fight in: Therefore we leave them to Ma^^^^vel and his disciples:
Men of this world, Job 36.21.
who choose sin rather then affliction: And we go out against the enemies of
God, as David against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45.
in the name of the Lord. Grounds of faith suffice the heirs of faith; who are
ever happiest, and most at ease, when they hold them to their grounds.

Section III.
Improve Faith for settling thy heart in these evil times.

Make use of Faith at these times of need.
Every one wishes the times were settled, and if the times were settled, he would
do thus and thus to make gain, and live a merry life. But (Christians) the
settling of the times is not in your power, the settling of your hearts is, and
ye see how: Other may pass away as fruitless wishes, and lost endeavors, but
this is feisable, and will be to good purpose: The Just is an everlasting
fo^ndation, says Solomon; Prove. 10.
that is, being fixed by faith; otherwise, he is weak as another man; this is
the Samsons look, which holds all our strength together; this keeps life in the
heart, and steadiness, whereas without it the soul staggers like a drunken
man.

Now live by faith: Hab. 2.4.
While the natural man lives the life of nature, do you live the life of grace
and of faith: Make use of this privilege, as Townsmen do of theirs, to enrich
themselves, and keep out foreigners. No man has a commodity lying by him, but
he will make use of it when it shall be most for his advantage: And so should a
Christian of his faith in these times of need: Never in all our days had we
such times and occasions as these, and therefore now more then ever we should
put our faith to the proof. Godly men have no exemption from troubles,
dangers, or evil tidings, but only an Antidote, to fence their poor hearts
against the venom of them. And they have their fears as others have; and
their fears are both natural and useful: Only this may curb them and keep
them from being immoderate. Faith acted sets the heart as a rock, and the face
as a flint; Isa. 50.7. The Lord God will help me, therefore shall I not be
confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know tha^ I shall
not be ashamed.



flesh and spirit are ever combating, as in other things, so in this; like
those that go upon the sea, sometime carried up to Heaven, Psalm. 107.26.
sometime down again into the de^ps. Let no Christian discourage himself
because of these alterations: Be glad, that sometimes ye find an high tide of
affections and assurances: 77. 10.
David remembered the yeer^ of old and was comforted.

Secondly, it is indeed difficult, (...).
All excellent things are attended with their difficulties: A great estate
needs much ado in the managing. None lays siege to a Cottage; neither will
Satan trouble those that live the life of nature; but where faith is, he will
quickly show himself an enemy.

Thirdly, Religion in general, Lactant. ^^nditu. 4.28.
both to maintain it self, and oppose the enemy. Religion in latin has its
name of bind^ng: And in this case, it binds the believing soul to its Mast,
so to avoid enchanting Sirens of the World, and keep it upright against all
storms of temptation and persecution; and faith at weakest cries out for help,
Lord increase our faith, Lord belp my unbelief. The life of nature strives to
preserve it self as long as it can, and by the best means it can; and so does
the life of faith. The weakest Believer can make moan, and say all is not well
with him, and long for some relief; which struglings shall be relieved:
Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
for they shall be filled.

Why art thou cast down, O my soul? why art thou disquieted within me? What
reason for this infidelity? Fight the good fight of faith, 1 Timothy 6.12. Contend
for the Faith, Jude 3. As for the doctrine of faith, and habit of faith, so for
the act and exercise of it: In vain is that habit of power, which is not
reduced into act. No need to bid a Seaman cast forth his anchor in a storm;
so me thinks there should be no need to call upon a Christian to set his faith
on work, in these dangerous days.

Quest. What should we do to exercise our faith in soul weather, Means to
bring faith into act.
and make our use of it when need requires.

Answ. 1. Seek the Lord by Jam. 1.17.
from whom comes every good and perfect g^ft; and to live the life of faith,
is one of those gifts. As he is the Author, so the F^n^sher of faith, Heb.
12.2. As he gives the habit, so the act and operation of it: The Lord gives his
Church, both the former and la^ter rain. Faith is a Creature, and the strength
whereby we stand is uncreated, even God himself: Thou art the strength of my
heart (said David) and my portion for ever. Ps. 37.26.
Faith that must support us, must it self be supported of the Lord; as Christ
prayed for Peter, Luke 22.32. I have prayed that thy faith fail not.

Does any of you therefore want wisdom or strength? Jam. 1.5, 6.
Let him ask of God, who gives liberally. He is the only stay for a poor
Believer in streights and difficulties: Fall to casting anchor in Heaven, or
else ye are gone: (...) does neither justify, nor uphold us in great trials:
God must help us to believe, or we shall soon come to nothing: Faith with its
Correlative is all in all to us.

Relations of God to us, his Attributes, Promises, Providence, mercies
received, mercies reserved, etc. A tall man in the bottom of a celler will see
but little; and a strong Believer if his grounds be out of fight, will be weak
as another man. To the Law and to the Testimony, Isa. 8.20.
in matters to be done; to the Gospel, and to the Promises, in matters to be
believed, and receive comfort. A Tradesman to furnish his Shop, will repair
to the Warehouse: And a Christian to be furnished with comfort, must repair
to the Promises and the like supplies.

It may be observed, that the same Christian, as he has used his grounds, or
not used them, has been strangely altered, as if he were not the same man: One
while a Giant, another while a Dwarf. Oh (says David) I shall one day fall by
the hand of Saul: Another time he will not fear, Psalm. 3 6.
though ten thousand had compassed him round about. One while Job curses his
birthday, and is very impatient; another while he will trust in God, Job 13.15
though he kill him. It is aliquid Dei, some divine thing, that must uphold the
best heart that is. If his means be neglected or laid aside, there quickly
comes a fearful alteration: When the Moon receives not light from the Sun,
it is presently eclipsed.

To walk by faith, and walk by sight, 2 Cor. 5.7. We walk by faith, and not by
sight. He that will go by likelihoods and unlikelihoods shall never be settled
in believing. The servant of Elisha feared, because he looked only at them
that came against him, and saw not who were with him: The Nobleman dyed for
it: If God should make windows in Heaven, 2 Kin. 7.2
could there be such plenty? Zacharias was stricken dumb for asking, whereby
shall I know this? Luke 1.20
being old, and his Wife well stricken in years. Abraham on the other side,
Romans 4.19
considered not the deadness of his own body, or of Sarahs womb, but looked
at him who had promised, that he was able and faithful to perform. The naked
Word of God is sufficient for performing all his promises: Never ask, when, or
how, or any such matters? Has not the Lord spoken it? And if it be mervailous
in your eyes, should it be mervailous in mine eyes, says the Lord of ^osts?
Zech. 8.6. Oh (say we) our enemies are many and strong, our friends few and
weak, treasure exhausted, no likelihood of carrying our cause; Joh. 11.39
Lord, by this time it stinketh, for t^^s is the fourth day: Ah (said Christ to
Martha) said I not unto thee, that if thou would believe thou should see
the glory of God? Joh. 11.40. Man's reason is a short measure to esteem the
power and wisdom of God.

These are some means to act faith in these times of need: Now put your faith
to it; 2 Timothy 1.6.
stir up the gift of God that is in you: Wherefore should a man have riches,
and not have the use of them? Know, it is a fault, and matter of reproof in
Believers, to give way to those fears. Isa. 8.12, 13.
Fear not their fear, nor be afraid; sanctify the Lord of hosts himself,
and let him be your fear and your dread. why did ye doubt, Mat. 8.26.
O ye of little faith? He is a coward, who has a sword by his side, and will
not use it against a thief: And he is a Miser, who has store of riches, and
yet wants necessaries in his sickness. Apply it to thy self, and think, Who
would be so clogged and turmoyled with fears, when he may be rid of them?
Only if ye stand to your own Principles, and remember your grounds: None so
merry as a true Christian, if he hold his own; indeed none but he: Others
glory in the face, not in heart, 2 Cor. 5.12.

Section IV.
Benefits of acting thy Faith in these evil times.

These benefits are many and great. Seven benefits of Faith well acted.


be, to be past these torturing fears? which now lie gnawing upon your hearts,
V^tan^n vitalis. (...). Origin.
and drinking up your spir^t, that your life is scarce worthy to be called a
life. Oh these heavy and gro^ning passions of unbelief! How do they keep a man
in bondage all the days of his life! Heb. 2.15. A man shall (through these
fears) want what he has, as well as what he has not. Only because he brings
not his faith into exercise.

Secondly, the acting of faith Although the Fig Tree shall not blossom --
yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will be glad in the God of my salvation. It
is honor to any Master, to see his Servant cheerful at his business, and
stick to him in great hazards; a sign he is a good Master: So here, God is
honored while his servants wait upon him cheerfully. And, joy of hearts one
part of our Masters allowance: My servants shall rejoice, Isa. 65.13.

There is a River, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God. And
who would not enter upon so comfortable a course of life? All seem willing to
live a fine and joyful life, which is never done completely, till faith be
both gotten and exercised.

victory, whereby we overcome the world, 1 John 5.4. We should not only bear,
but contemn the contempt of ungodly men: Heb. 12.2
As our Lord, who despised the shame. Threaten these things to your Courtiers,
said the Martyrs; we have faith, and thereby are grown hardy. Or promise these
rewards, honors, great advantages to them that care for them; we have other
matters in our heart and eye, and cannot be won from the truth.

Fifthly, it our faith were duly set 2 Timothy 1.12. 2 Cor. 4.13.
I know whom I have believed. Having the spirit of faith, we would speak, and
make a good confession in time of need. We would part with our estates, yea and
lives too, disburse, fight, apologize, any thing, so that our Lord and his
Cause may be glorified.

Sixthly, still as faith is acted, we avail much for furthering the work of
God: being prayers of ^a^th, Jam. 5.15, 16. And we shall not be weary of
praying, though we seem to strive against the stream: No, says Faith, it will
be to purpose, therefore pray alway^ and f^^m not, Luke 18.1.

He that believes shall not make have, Isa. 28.16. Our faith will be a shield
to us, whereby we shall be able to quench all the fiery da^ts of the wicked,
Ephesians. 6.16. It will be a means to keep God with us, and keep us in the way of
God; which always has a sure recompense of reward.

Section V.
Motives to act Faith in these dangerous times.

Motives.
Beside those benefits of acting thy faith, there be diverse other considerations
which may move thee thereunto.

great things for his people: According to thy faith be it unto thee, Mat. 8.13
said our Lord in the Gospel; and to Martha he said, John 11.4^. Said I not
unto thee, that if thou would believe thou should see the glory of God?
Mordecai believed deliverance would come, one way or other, and it came
accordingly, Est. 4.14. The three Jews believed God would save them in the
fiery furnace: and they were saved, Dan. 3.17. The greatest Believers have been
the greatest Receivers, Heb. 11. The old Believers by faith obtained wonderful
mercies: All things are possible to him that believes: God will do for them
that give glory to his Name, which is by faith, Rom 4.20. such give him the
glory of his power, of his wisdom, mercy, faithfulness, all his Attributes;
and they cast themselves wholly upon him, as Clyents on their Counselor,
therefore shall not be disappointed; yea, Blessed is the man that trusts in
the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is; he shall be as a Tree planted by the
watters, etc. Jer. 17.7, 8.

But ah this base infidelity, which puts our faith so much in our eye and calls
it so often from our hearts too much flesh, too little faith we believe no
longer then we see signs and wonders; scarce cheerful, but while we hear of
a victory, or discovery, or other mercy; mightily cast down at a foil, or the
prevailing of enemies; Shake as the Trees of the Wood, when Rez^n and Pekah are
joined together, Isa. 7.1, 2.

And it brings little home, as is said of carking care. God being dishonored
by unbelief, withdraws his hand, does not his work, or not yet; sees no
vessel set, to receive his precious liquor, and so the oil cease. Israel
could not enter because of unbelief, Heb. 3.19. Good is coming, but we are
short-winded, and wait not; thence these delays. All the fault is not in
wicked enemies, or the sinners in Sion; but some fault resideth in Gods own
children, who believe not as they should do. Infidelity is an hateful sin
too, and reprovable; it detracteth from God, as if he were not wise, able,
vigilant to fulfill his promises; so he stays his hand, as one that will be
better waited on.

Take notice of this, as one cause why the work of Reformation, and of our
happiness, does stick so long in the birth; it is much desired, but not
attained; and yet the Lord willing it should be done, and that thoroughly: There
is cause enough for it in the unreformednesse of people, who after all the
terrors and humiliations, yet tu^n not from their evil ways, as the men of
Ninive. Jon. 3.10.
But here is something in Gods own people, whose faith is so little, and their
fear so great: If we believed more, we should see his great works done the
sooner: Therefore resolve upon that in Mark 11.22, 23, 24. Have Faith in God:
And, What things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them.

Romans who became Lords of the World; Cicero.
pro aris and focis, was a great word with them, entering into a fight: Ovid.
Horat.
And, Ingens gloria calcar habet; and, Dulce and dec^rum est, pro patria mori;
and, Imperti causa, etc. But faith has higher and stronger considerations; the
Cause of God, the maintaining of the Gospel, contending for the faith
delivered once to the Saints, the upholding and enlarging of the Kingdom of
Christ, the keeping of a good conscience, the glory of Heaven in our eye; and
who would be a slave to Antichrist? Bodily slavery is bad enough, etc.

Consider; Their Rock is not (...) unto our Rock, (...) our enem^ the^^ (...)
being Judges, Deuteronomy 12.31. And, Th^s they do for a co^^^ptible Crown, we for
an (...) ^apitole, 1 Cor. 9.25. The higher the spring, the higher the water
will ascend at the Conduit. A Believer therefore, going b^ the highest
Principles and notions should g^t highest in his resolut^ons and behaviors.

Thirdly, we have still, and a (...) of the Wood, that it (...). A tree planted
in a go^^ place, and there continuing m^n^ee^s, is well rooted and so should
the trees of righteousness be, after so long standing. The Martyr^ had but few
yeer^ in King (...). time, yet they gathered strength enough, to carry them
through the flames. A shame it will be to us, not to be proficients according
to our time; when for the time we might be Teachers, Heb. 5.11. Weaknesses of
faith and other graces should have been outgrowne long ago.

Add the going so often to the Lords Supper; which to a prepared soul is a
batling Ordinance. No feast yields so good juy^ and nourishment to the body,
bu^ this yields as good to such ^ soul. Bread strengthens man heart;
especially this bread tha^ came down from Heaven, Psa 104.15. O the sweet
communion that has been between Christ an^ thy Soul, upon due frequenting the
Ordinance! and O the frequent repast of thy soul upon prayer, and the
experience thou have had of Gods love an^ providence! and do thou ye^ fear?
Hilarion. Hieron. in eius vita.
Septuaginta annos servivi^^ Christo, and mori times.

Finally, the many good Books and Treatises, which of late yeer^ have been
published; M. Culve^well. M. Rogers.
as it were of purpose, to fence and furnis^ Christians for these sad times
wherein are choicest collection for fixing a poor believing heart in all
occasions. M. Ball M. Wilson.
God that foresaw what he was about to do, directed his Ministers, so to make
provision for his people; as when he sent a sore famine upon Canaan, he sent
Joseph beforehand to provide for his Father and Brethren.

Fourthly, in those present troubles door of hope, Hos. 2.13.
for upholding our faith unto victory: Seeing how weak wear in believing bare
promises, he has given us something in hand for encouragement: He has still
sent us some pawnes of more, which he will do for us in time; an earnest of
the whole bargain: And experience is a great help unto faith; as in the
Apostles, 2 Cor 1.10.
He has delive^ed us from great death, and does deliver, and we trust also he
will deliver. When we began to quail at any time, presently a victory was
given, a discovery made, a defeat of their Counsels or Forces, the spirits of
people raised up above all expectation, in a Count^ which was given for a lost
Count a sign the Lord means to do the work at last: If he meant to d^stroy
us, he would not show us such things as these. Thus, by what the Lord has done
already, he does even invite us to believe, and not fear.

see what now ye believe. Y^^ a little while, Heb. 10.37.
and he that shall com^ will come, and his reward is with him. In Heaven there
will be n^ acting of faith, no use of it, as now all there is in Fruition,
Union and Vision: Joh. 20.29
In this life, Blessed are they that believe, though they see not: In that
life, blessed are those that see what hitherto they believed* If we strive a
little, we shall find our waiting was to purpose: Yet two or three Closes, and
we shall be at our Fathers house. And there we shall have neither unbelief to
combat withal, nor any other enemy; no fear, no molestation, no imperfection
whatsoever.

will lose the benefit of those comforts which are your own: Ye forsake your
own me^^^s, Jonah 2.8. Ye live heavily, when your estate gives you leave to
live most cheerfully. Hag^^ saw (...) the Well and was out of heart, as if no
water were to be bad. M^^ saw not Christ (...) eye^ being held^ and was still
in perplexity: A miserly niggard wants what he h^th, as well as what he has
not: And to look upon, Paulum sepultae, distat inertiae, Celata vi^tus.
what difference between an unbeleever, and a Believer not improving his faith
when need requires? One sighs as much as the other, etc. Now this is a
disparagement to faith, and the high calling of a Christian, who alone in truth
has cause to be me^ry: A discouragement to others, to come on in such an
uncomfortable profession: An hinderanc^ of prayer; a dishonor to God, a^ if he
made no good allowance to his Servants: And does the devils own work, who when
he cannot hinder a Christian of the end of his way, will do his best to spoil
him of the comfort of his way.

Section VI.
Objections for fear, against Faith, answered.

Oh (say some) we have so many things to fear, that we know not how to make
use of our faith: But why so? Faith has a strength at all assayes, to help at
a dead lift: That if a Christian hold his own he shall wade well through all
his fears, and evils feared: All things are possible to him that believes; to
receive, to do, to suffer, to overcome.

General salves for the fears of Believers.
Know therefore in general: First, that the Order of Grace is stronger then the
Order of Nature: We have many enemies, or troubles, but mo with us then against
then devils to hurt us: Divine Ordinances, full of solid strength and comfort;
and all the Treasures of Gods love full and inexhaust. If a Believer look
upward he sees an infinite advantage above them all: The wav^s rage horribly,
but the Lo^d is mightier, Psalm. 93.3, 4. Tyrants get on high, and are mighty to
oppress; but still he is mightier, Eccles. 5.8. They are crafty; but he
catches the man their craftiness, 1 Cor. 3.19

Secondly, faith ^^n set the Christian Out of weakness be shall be made
strong, Heb. 11.34. He can do more in a certain case, then at another time.
As Martyrs, they endured the flam^s; as men, they could never have endu^^d
them. While Peter's faith l^sted, he walked upon the waters.

Thirdly, in all particular fears, burden of fears that would clog it. The
Word has a quickening virtue, first and last: First for re^^neration, afterward
for sustentation. It is a plentiful Storehouse, out of which some comfort is
still to be fetched: And David says, he had perished, unless the Word had
comforted him.

(...)
To give some instances of the fears of godly Christians in these (...) days.
1. About losing the Gospel.
Object. 1. We fear we shall lose the Gospel; the maine aim of the
Antichristian generation that are risen up amongst us.

Answ. 1. The Word says, that the Gospel is at Gods disposing, and not man's,
whoever he be. The Stars are in the right hand of Christ, Rev. 1.16. It is
God that takes away the Word of the Kingdom, and gives it to others, Mat.
21.43. And faithful Ministers say they shall continue at their work so long
as God pleases, let all the ^o^es and beasts of the world do what they can,
Luke 13.31, 32. G^^ and tell that ^ox, etc. They were in ill case, if they were
at man's discretion: Even in times of peace, wicked men would have quite put
down good Ministers their malice and wickedness has not been wanting all
this while: No thanks to them, that the Gospel has continued as it does.

2. If there should be some res^^^t, yet not wholly, especially in respect of a
good heart: The word of God is not bo^^d, 2 Timothy 2.9. The believing heart shall
be mervailously fed with the old store it gathered. There is an hidden Manna^:
And, Rev. ^.19.
the Word of G^d abides in you.

As for the Elect that are not yet gathered, the Word shall go forth and reach
the mall: It shall have a free course, and be glorified, 2 These. 3.1. When God
has a people to gather, Act. 18.10, 11.
though there be many Adversaries, yet Preachers shall both go and continue
there, 1 Cor. 16.8, 9. I have much people in this City; abide here. And
Jeremies preaching did good to some, though the most cursed him, chap. 15.11.
The Election obtain^th, th^ugh the rest be hardened: The Elect must be s^aled,
before ^^y hurt can be done, Rev. 7.3.

3. The Word says, that if it should be suppressed a while, yet it shall be
restored again. Teachers shall not be removed into corners any more, Isa.
30.20. They must fall to their work again, Rev. 10.11. Thou must prophecy
again: After three days and an half, the two Witnesses revived and stood up,
chap. 11.11.

And commonly the ruins of the Church are restored with much advantage, the
Ordinances purged from the corruptions that attended them: The glory of the
latter house greater then that of the former, Hag. 2.9. All reduced to the rule
and standard of the Word; noting (by Gods severity) wherein they offended, and
provoked him to wrath: Ashamed of their iniquities, and all errors, and so the
Lord shows them the form of the house, Ezekiel. 43.10, 11.

4. The Word says, that the enemies of it shall be utterly confounded and
brought to an end; sp^cially Antichrist, that grand friend of Traditions and
humane Constitutions; down he must go^ notwithstanding all his pillars and
supporter^: He goes into pe^dit^on, Rev 17.11. Though he get breath a while,
and some lightning before death, yet that is his end. The end of these wars
will be at the gates of Rome, all in flames and everlasting desolation.

Object. 2. About the dishonor of God. Sect. 1.
2. God will be dishonored and blasphemed if the wicked prevail.

Answ. 1. In this case your fear is most lawful, and best allowed; because (as
we have seen before) both God and godly men have ever so feared: And I may tell
you, ye have cause to rejoice, that ye have such holy fears as the fear.

2. The Word says, that God is a Jealous God, and will look to his own glory;
will not suffer the enemies, or Idols, to get it from him, Isa, 42.8. Yea, he
will get glory over them all, as over the Egyptians and all their gods, Ex.
12.12. and will turn all their fury to his own p^a^se; Ps. 76.1^.
being the more illustrious by their disappointment.

True; it was a sword to David's heart, to hear the wicked say, Where i^ thy
God? Ps. 42.10.
but if the Lord be patient, why should not we? only our duty is, to mourn
for such blasphemies, and pray to the contrary.

3. Above a foreign invasion.
Object. 3. I fear that foreigners will invade, and they will show no mercy.

Answ. The Word tells; first, that the spirits and minds of men are in Gods
hand, Exodus 34.24. they shall not think of invading, while his people are
busy in his worship: Or, he can let them see where the Right goes; that they
shall let all alone and not meddle.

Secondly, that the Lord can make the earth to help the woman, Rev. 12.16.
Earthly men shall bear the burden of one another malice, and so his people
escape it. Moa^^tes and Ammonites fell to cutting one another, and so
Je^^^^poa^ escaped. While they have work enough to do at home, they shall not
intend to trouble us.

Thirdly, that the Lord makes f^ll the ba^^es of our gates, and is a wall of
fire round about us; Zech. 2.5.
the Rereward, the Shield, all in all to us: Though we have but a watry-wall
about our Island, yet in God it may prove too high and strong to be sealed. Our
wooden houses may swim about, and keep out the enemies.

Fourthly, there may be foreign friends as well as foreigne enemies; and
stronger then they, wiser then they, more succesfull then they, as the Lord can
make them. The hearts of all are in the hand of God, who still follows his
own work, and uses what Instruments he pleases. And we see he has brought
in one friendly Nation already.

4. About the defect of friends.
Object. 4. I fear our Worthies in Parliament will be weary, discouraged, too
few, and so the work may cease.

Answ. The Word says, that the Lord has yet the residue of Spirit, Mal. 2.15.
It is but pouring out of more Spirit, and they shall renew their strength and
courage: Or if one fail, another shall stand up in his place. Certainly, he
that has so raised and upheld them hitherto, will continue them to us, and his
own work by them. Jud. 13.23
If he meant to destroy them, he would not have showed them such things as
these. And who ever heard of a people in Covenant with God, and studying
Reformation, wholly forsaken? 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you, while ye are
with him. And he shows since the Covenant last entered into (by many great and
notable victories) that he intends them good, and us by them. Believe
therefore, they shall be worthy instruments of more glory to God, and of more
good to his people; Zech. 4.9. The ^ands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation
of this house, his hands also shall finish it.

Object. 5. 5. Of the want of Treasure. Psalm. 24.1.
I fear our moneys will fail; the sinews of War.

Answ. 1. The Word says, The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof. And
he can make our Newters, Malignants and Misers, to bring forth their treasures:
Or spring a new mine, for supply some other way.

2. It says, 1 Cor. 1.27.
that he makes the weak to confound the m^ghty: And in like reason, the poor
to overthrow the rich. When men see their estates gone, they wax desperate:
Necessity has been called a terrible weapon: And it is evident, that riches
cannot get victories. The battle is not to the strong, Eccles. 9.11. The event
of a battle belongs wholly to God; Prove. 21.31. The Horse is prepared against
the day of battle; but safety is of the Lord.

Object. 6. 6. About our sins l^st they hinder.
I could trust otherwise; but fear our sins will hinder good things.

Answ. 1. The Word says, that God does his great works for Church freely:
Only because mercy pleases him. I w^o^gh^ for my Names sake, often in Ezekiel.
20. and 36.32. Not for your sakes do I this, etc.

2. If our sins could hinder, we should not have seen any of these great
deliverances and victories. We have sins enough to have laid us desolate long
ago: Not a remnant had been left before this time. Only the Lord seems to
have past by the sins of the remnant of his people, and so we are saved by a
great deliverance.

7. About trial to some particular.
Object. 7. I fear we may suffer for a while, as our Brethren have done; and
for my part, I doubt I should show much weakness when I come to the trial.

Luke 12.4 2 Cor. 12.9.
Answ. 1. Christ says, Fear not them that kill the body. Secondly, his grace
is sufficient for thee, as well as for others: Joh. 10.28.
None shall pluck his Sheep out of his ^^^^s: None shall separate from his
love. Thirdly, in the trial God stands by his people more then at other times,
to show himself st^ong in a weak Creature, 2 Cor. 12.9. In the^r weak^^^^ his
power is the more glorified and manifested: He will be with them in six
troubles, and in seven; in fire and in water: So that ye may say boldly, The
Lord is with us; we will not fear what man can do unto us. Heb. 13.6. 8.
About Martyrdom.


Object. 8. What if I should be put to suffer Martyrdom? I shrink to think of
it.

Answ. The Word says, Rom 8.37
we are more th^n (...) through him that loved us: And we may say accordingly.
First, the Martyrs were flesh and blood as we are: O^ themselves weak, and no
more able to endure those extremities then other men. They suffered nothing in
their own strength but by faith; and you have faith as well as they. Secondly,
God is the same God now, as then; and will put forth the same strength in you,
as in them. Isa. 59.1.
His hand is not shortened; neither will his promise fail. He is God
all-sufficient; Genesis 17.1
and still the same to his Church, as in the days of old, Isa. 46.3, 4.

9. About the enduring of hardship.
Object. 9. I shall not be able to endure cold, hunger, prison, reproach, etc.

Answ. The Word says, these are vanquished enemies, and disabled in the maine;
Romans 8.35. And all the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church: And
defiance may be made against them, as there, who shall separate? who shall
accuse or condemn^? And assurance had, that we shall not flinch for any of
them: (...), I am persuaded that neither death nor life -- shall be able to
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

10. About Children left to the world.
Object. 10. What shall become of my poor Children;

Answ. The Word says, the Covenant reaches the Children as well as the
Parents, Genesis 17.7. I am thy God, and the God of thy s^ed. They shall therefore
find a Father in Heaven, when none is on earth. And promises to be performed,
which will prove large portions; and friends on earth which you little think
of: Even an hundred fold, Fathers and Mothers, etc. Mark 10.29, 30. And it has
been observed, that the Children of Martyrs have received special blessings
from God, especially in their souls.

Object. 11. About the loss of Friends.
11. How shall we live if my husband be slain? or some other friend by whom I
live?

Answ. The Word says, that Man lives not by bread only, Mat. 4.4.
but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. And is not the Lord
better to thee, then ten husbands, or ten friends? And, who multiplied the
meal in the barrel, and oil in the cruse? Who gave a blessing to Daniels
course fare, that he looked better then any of the Kings Children? Who fed so
many thousand with two barley loaves and a few in all fishes. True, miracles are
ceased, but not Providence, and that sometimes in a strange way^* God can and
will do above what we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20.

12. About sin forced upon a good soul.
Object. 12. I fear my Chastity may be violated, or some other sin forced
upon me, which would be a terror to my soul, and break the band between God
and me.

Suidas.
Answ. 1. It was Origens sin, for avoiding the filthy Black more to burn
incense to the Idol. No evil may be done that good may come of it, Romans 3.8.
Secondly, He that does worng (says the Word) shall suffer according to the
wrong he does, Col. 3.25. not he that suffers wrong. No sin hurts, to which
consent is not given: It is the others sin, thy sorrow. Tarquin. and ^ucret.
Aug.
Two in the adultery, yet but one adulterer. Thirdly, the Lord (who is most
merciful) will not presently break with his Child, when hurried to sin by
temptation, or violence of persecution. No; Isa. 30 18. Psalm. 103.14.
he is a God of J^dgment, knows (...) s^ame, and that we are but dust, and
will remember his Covenant; an everlasting Covenant.

Section VII.
Make much of Faith, which is so useful; and other Corolaries of the point.

Faith being so strong and effectual a means to settle the heart in evil
times, Faith to be ^^^^^sh^d and ^nc^ea^ed. M^^^e^.
it will be good wisdom for Christians to make much of their faith; to cherish
it, strengthen it, fix it, and be adding to it daily. Soldiers will keep their
Forts well, that their ^o^ts may keep them. And alike must Believers do for
their faith, which is so much for their turn every way. It were folly to
complain of a troubled spirit about these troublous times, and not be earnest
in preserving and increasing faith, which should fasten and quiet the heart. It
were a sinful neglect of the means, which God in great wisdom and love has
set apart for the remedy. We have seen grounds enough for our confirmation;
which if they be well improved, would both preserve and increase our faith.
(...) Arist.
It is a rule, that all things are nourished of the same matter, whereof they
are bred. Therefore,

comes at first, and afterward is increased. The Word is sincere milk, Romans
10.17.
whereby newborn Babes may grow, 1 Pet. 2.2. A child thrives best by the
Mothers milk: In the Word are promises to be ever met withal, in all
particulars: And as good Evidences for house or land, well perused, do much
clear a man's title to the thing: So the Scriptures, well searched and applied,
do strongly clear the righteous man's Evidence for Heaven. The failing of
Christians is, when they wax negligent in the Word, or if they turn aside to
visions, or other fancies; no food so nourishing, as Gods Word duly regarded.
They that are planted in the house of God, are fat and flourishing, and bring
forth fruit in old age, Psalm. 92.14.

Secondly, be frequent and serious a Medicine that expels all evils; (...).
Ignat. ad Ephesians.
both unbelief and all the heavy passions that issue from it. Only get a good
appetite, prepare, examine, come fitted to receive a blessing: The Master of
the Feast would not be wanting to his own Ordinance, if his Guests were not
wanting to themselves. Spiritual sloth, foolish curiosity, turning to vain
janglings, are maine hindrances of the benefit which that blessed Ordinance is
reany otherwise to afford.

Thirdly, frequent lovingly, and improve wisely, the Communion of Saints, which
ye profess to believe; these are able to satisfy your doubts, mind you of
promises, produce experiences, comfort you, bear you up, and do much for
fixing you on your Rock: United forces do back one another: As iron sharpneth
iron, so the face of one Christian strengthens and heereth another. But woe
be to him that is alone. Eccl. 4.10
It he fall, who shall raise him up* And the devil desires no bette^
advantage, then to find Christians solitary and private-minded. When Thomas was
absent from the rest of his fellows, Joh. 22.25
he grew to a sturdy kind of unbelief; Unless I may feel, I will not believe.

acting of thy faith, Mar. 9.24 Luke 17.5
Lord help my unbelief, Lord increase our faith. Pray to be able to live the
life of faith; to trust perfectly in the grace revealed; to have the use of thy
faith when need is; to have thy heart fixed by believing. What is not the Lord
able and willing to do for them that cry unto him? Has he not promised to
return a gracious answer? Even a natural Father will regard and pity the moon which his poor child makes.

Fifthly, recount and search out Abraham was strong in faith, because he had
both eyes upon the promises. Promises will make us Partakers of the divine
nature, 2 Pet 1.4. Heirs of promise should live on promises, as their own
proper element and nourishment. A Believer, forgetting the promises, is as a
fish on dry land. Gods people of old were busy in searching out promises, when
the search was difficult, obscure, and nothing so comfortable, as now in the
light of the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.

able who promised; he is faithful who promised, Romans 4.21. 1 These. 5.24.
etc. All of them are engaged for our good; as himself, who is our God, by a
firm Covenant: And faith will subsume; I believe in God Almighty: What cannot
he do who is Almighty? I believe in the onely-wise God, who is Omniscient; and
what cannot such a one invent? I believe in him who is the searcher of reins,
and knows the hidden things of darkness, what wicked plot cannot he
discover? I believe in him who is true and faithful; what word of his shall
fall to the ground? So in the other: A Dwarf with a Giant on his side waxes
resolute and valiant. When the eye is taken often from one-selfe, and all enemies
or other encumbrances, and kept close upon God; how strong will faith he, and
the heart unmovable?

Seventhly, strengthen thy faith Mal. 3.6.
I am the Lord, I change not, therefore ye sons of Jacob are not consumed.
Therefore also collect as David, 1 Samuel 17 36. and as Paul, 2 Timothy 4.17, 18. It
is a great help to a Believer, to remember the years of the right hand of the
most high. Psalm. 77.10. and call to mind what he has done for his Church and
people formerly; to the Church in Egypt, in the Wilderness, in Hamans time,
in other exigences. Others have fared well, while they waited on God; therefore
we also will wait, and doubt not but to do well enough, Psalm. 22.4, 5. Our
Fathers trusted in thee; they trusted and thou did deliver them: They cried
unto thee, and were delivered; they rusted in thee and were not confounded.

Thus fortify your faith as much as ye can, and it will be a strong fortifying
of your spirits in all fears of evil. A strong and healthy body gets up a
high hill far better then a weakling can do. If our faith were stronger, our
hearts should be more fixed and settled then they are. If it were the fall
assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
we should not once doubt for all these terrors. Mark 11.13.
Remember the removing of mountains, and transplanting of trees into the midst
of the sea; all by the power of faith: Only believe, and all shall be possible.

Other Consequences of the point are these.
I. Be thankful for this precious grace of faith, Be thankful for the useful
grace of Faith.
which is so useful in these dangerous days; the staff of thy life, the
strength of thy soul, the fix^ng of thy poor trembling heart, the only sight
thou have when round about is nothing but darkness. A great and wonderful gift
thou receivedst when the Lord gave thee faith, to believe in his Son and rest
in promises. It is worth the having, though thou pastedst through the pikes; in
duties of humiliation. It cost some ado to get faith; but when it is once had,
it is a most blessed commodity: It stands thee in stead ever afterward,
whatever sad occasions thou have. The Jailer (though much cast down for a
while, Act. 1^.34.
yet) rejoiced that he believed and all his household. And those primitive
Believers, who were pricked at the heart in hearing of their great sin,
rejoiced and praised God for so great a mercy, Acts 2.44, 47. Go thou and do
likewise: We give thanks for lesser mercies then this: Or, what if the Lord
give thee not riches, health, peace, and the like? Yet he gives that which is
better, and countervailes all other defects, with infinite advantage on the
eternal part.

Do thy best to work faith in others.
II. If things go thus, then do all ye can to get faith into your children and
friends; as ye desire they should have found and hearty comfort in the evil
day: Ye would not see them lie distracted, melancholy, drooping under their
burden, taking indirect courses to help themselves. Now lay a good foundation,
not only in moral virtues, or religious duties, but go higher; tell them of
Christ, of the Covenant, the promises, sin and guiltiness, their need of a
Savior, and the like. It is a great matter, Ps, 112.1.
to fear God and delight greatly in his Commandments: This Text is a promise
to such persons; but note withal, it goes higher, even to that sovereigne
grace of faith; His heart is fixed trusting in the Lord. verse 7.
And it was by faith that the old Believers d^d, suffered, or received those
great matters, Heb. 11. Therefore in all thy instruction and discipline, still
insinuate something for faith. Get that notion into their heads and hearts,
None but Christ, Jo. Lambert. Advance a faithful Ministry, whereby faith is
bestowed.
None but Christ.

III. If it be so, then advance a faithful Ministry, a^ the means whereby
faith is bred, and thereby a ground laid for solid comfort in times of fear:
Plant such a Ministry where it is wanting; cherish and maintain it where it
is: Pity them that want the Ordinance; pray they may have the Word of faith
preached among them: Mat. 6.38
Pray the Lord of the Harvest, to send forth Laborers into his Harvest. If
rich, be at charges; if in authority, give countenance to a faith-breeding
Ministry. This is the only way for poor souls to be soundly comforted when
their trial comes. Comfort stands not in a smartering knowledge, or a few
good words, or saying over some good prayers, or the like; but if faith were
bestowed into the heart, which alone can quicken a soul, otherwise dying. No
grace nor virtue can knit a knot between God and the soul, but only faith.
Faith truly so called is of a lasting nature, whatever trials there be; and of
a triumphing nature, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. Believing, ye re^o^ce with joy unspeakable
and full of glory. And if so, how worthy are those pains, whereby faith is
conveyed into the heart, and afterward confirmed?

Take faiths part against a faithless generation. 2 Pet. 1.1.
IV. Ever commend, and stand in the magnifying of faith, which does so good
offi^es in the worst times. Call it a prec^ous faith, much to be esteemed and
prized: Endure not any word of disparagement to be cast upon it. There is a
carnal generation of men and wom^n, who do much slight and villifie faith, as
an ayrie Notion, a trifle, nothing in comparison of Charity and good works: Oh
here is much ado about faith, these are our Solifidians, etc. Whereto I say;

First, neither charity nor works Without faith it is impossible to please G^d.
It is in Christ only, that we and our graces are accept^d. No merit in charity,
nor the works of it; only in Christ they get acceptance: Yea, in faith it
self is nothing meritorious; all the virtue and praise of it stands in
relation to Christ the Object.

Secondly, it is faith that must I had fainted unles I had believed to see the
goodness of the Lord in the Land of the living. And the comfort of the good we
have done, comes in a secondary consideration: Heb. 10.4
In that ye did it to these, ye did it unto me. By faith Abel offered a better
sacrifice them Cain.

Fides sola iustificat: sed fides quae iustificat, non est sola.
as a good Tree good fruits. It works by love, Gal. 5.6. and love is a
laborious thing, 1 Cor. 13.4.7. No fire without light and warmth, no faith
without love and good works: Every branch in Christ brings forth good fruit.

Popish spirit, that makes such a jumbling of faith and charity; which are ever
to be distinguished, though not separated; Leave each his own work and place,
and both are glorious; and whereas other comparisons are odious these most. Or
it is an ignorant spirit, which knows not what the maine tie is between God and
a soul now fallen into sin, nor how we come to God by Christ alone, and how
we are justified freely by grace, which faith appropriateth: al our present
adherence to God is by faith, hereafter by sight and fruition. Or lastly, it is
a profane spirit, of a man in love with his sin or worldly vanities, all for
a present enjoyment; he will not stay for his happiness till hereafter as
faith directs: And to get a lively faith asks more pains then he is
willing to take; some ado there is to try, examine, evidence, maintain and
increase faith, which the lazy Christian will never endure.

FINIS.
May 22. 1644.

Imprimatur

Joseph Caryl.


