September the 8th. 1679.
I Do appoint Francis Smith, Thomas Basset, John Wright, Richard Chiswel and
Samuel Heyrick, to Print this my Narrative and further Discovery of the Plot;
And that no other Person presume to Print the same, nor any part thereof.

Robert Jenison.

THE NARRATIVE OF Robert Jenison, Of Gray's Inn, Esquire.

CONTAINING.

I. A further Discovery and Confirmation of the Late Horrid and Treasonable
Popish Plot, against His Majesty's Person, Government, and the Protestant
Religion.

II. The Names of the Four Ruffians, designed to have Murdered the King.

III. The Reasons why this Discovery has been so long deferred, by the said
Robert Jenison.

IV. An Order of His Majesty in Council touching the same. Together with other
Material Passages, Letters, and Observations thereupon.

Together with A PREFACE Introductory to the said Narrative.

LONDON, Printed for F. Smith, T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswel and S. Heyrick.
MDCLXXIX.

To the Right Honorable, The EARL of SHAFTSBVRY, Lord President of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
Right Honorable,
AS your Lordship is known to have been a Signal Instrument for the
Re-Establishing his Majesty on the Throne of his Kingdoms, so your Zeal for
the Preservation of the Protestant Religion, and of His Majesty's Person and
Government, thus restored (in great part) by the Wisdom and Activity of your
Honor's Counsel, may Justify my Election, in Entitling your Lordship (before
any other) to the Patronage of this Small Tract; Little indeed for Bulk, but,
if I mistake not, considerable in its Use, in regard it strengthens the former
Discoveries of Others, at such a Juncture of time, when some foyl and damp was
endeavored to be cast upon Them by the subtle Contrivances of the adverse
Party. I have observed all along in the Progress of this matter, That when the
Evidence for the King has seemed to be at a Bay, as discouraged by the Power
or Policy of Malevolent Persons, Then, by Divine Providence, another Witness
has started up to retreive and confirm, what before seemed to be at a Loss:
Thus after the aspersions and prejudices cast on Mr. Oats, Mr. Bedlowe, and
Mr. Dugdale came in to assert and carry on the Truth of his Testimony
(endeavored to be shaken) by the addition of their own: And when the matter
seemed not fully to bear and to be made out, as to the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfrey, then God raised up Mr. Praunce to make a plain Discovery of
that Horrrid and Bloody Fact. Moreover, when at, and since the Trial of Sir
George Wakeman and the Rest (wherein I also appeared) some Discouragements, not
yet fully enquired into, were cast upon the Witnesses for his Majesty, yet I
was so far from being deterred by that (otherwise) disheartning Circumstance,
that I am rather animated thereby to prosecute my Evidence with greater Vigor,
as conceiving it a Crisis, wherein Truth stands in need thereof; Neither do I
doubt, but Others also may succeed me, with their seasonable Reliefs of this
Kind, in case Falsehood should make any further Attempt to overbalance and
weigh down the Truth; Which hope of Mine is in part verified already, by the
additional Testimony of Mr. Smith, hereafter mentioned; And I am persuaded,
that both His and Mine, will receive future Confirmation by the Astipulations
of Others (at present not publicly known) if need shall require; That so it
may be said of our Opposers, Though they will not see, yet they shall see, and
be ashamed. I know your Lordship will allow me to use that Scriptural
Expression, because the band of God (to those who seriously consider it) is
more than ordinarily seen in these matters. That none of these Providence of
the Almighty, may be Lost upon this Nation, but be mutually Improved, both by
Prince and People, to an Humble Acknowledgment, and a Thankful Obedience, is
the Prayer of

My Lord, Your Honor's Most humble Servant, Robert Jenison.

THE Publisher to the Reader, Serving As an Introduction to the ensuing
Narrative.
THE Name of Robert Jenison, Esquire (the Author of the Narrative ensuing) has
been formerly mentioned in many Prints, especially in that Narrative of his
Depositions, and Informations annexed thereunto, Collected by Charles Chetwind,
Esquire, and published by Order of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, July 16. last past, 1679. Besides, the Gentleman is further notified
by his appearance, as a Witness for the King, in the late Trial of Sir George
Wakeman, Corker, and the rest. Nevertheless, because his Name was then used by
others, though with his own consent, it is thought convenient in this Preface
to the following Narrative, to give a more particular Account of Him, and of
his Family, to which he has already been, and further yet may be, so great an
Honor; That so the unquestionableness of his Extraction may advance him above
the common exceptions of Lowness and Plebeity, which inferior Testimonies are
subject to. Born he was of an Ancient Family, residing at Wallworth in the
County Palatine of Durham: A place so considerable, that King James was pleased
to Honor their Mansion House (then in the possession of his Ancestors) with
his Residence (and his Retinues) for a Night, Baker's Chron. in King James.
at his first coming into England. His Father, John Jenison, Esquire, yet
living in the same House, is a Gentleman of a fair Estate, and of an
unblemished Reputation, save what may be thought to reflect upon him for his
former adherence to the Romish Religion. His Elder Brother, Mr. Thomas Jenison,
now a Prisoner in Newgate on the account of the Plot, having taken Orders in
the Church of Rome, and in one of their most obnoxious Sodalities, That of the
Jesuits, has thereby rendered himself, according to the known Laws of England,
incapable to inherit: And thus, Divine Providence so Ordering it, he has
opened a Door to this Gentleman to the Inheritance of a fair paternal Estate,
of several Hundreds by the Year; Which Consideration notwithstanding has been
so far from cancelling in him the natural Obligations to Brotherly Friendship,
or to influence him in the least toward the making this Discovery; That in his
Addresses to His Majesty on this Occasion, he has, not without success,
interceded for the Indemnity of his Brother, and of others of his Relations,
as well as for his Own, as by the Order of Council inserted into this ensuing
Narrative may appear. The Education of the aforesaid Mr. Robert Jenison of late
years has been in the Honorable Society of Gray's Inn, where his Pains have
been commendably bestowed in the study of the Law, and his Repute untainted
amongst the Prime Gentlemen, and all others; of that House. But his Youthful
institution he received at Doway in Flanders, in the strict Principles of the
Papal Religion, and in the English College of Secular Priests there, where, to
give that Order of Seculars their due, I never heard him affirm, That he
imbibed any Principles either of Immorality in point of Conversation, or of
Treasonableness in point of Loyalty, from their Information; Those Lessons
being taught in the Schools of the Jesuits, who afterward did labor to infuse
some of them into him. The Seculars value themselves much on the account of
their obedience to, or patient suffering under those Princes and Rulers (of a
Contrary Religion to them) in whose Dominions they reside. Hence it is that
formerly they persuaded those here in England of their own Sect and Profession
to quiet subjection, fealty, and allegiance, in the days of Q. Elizabeth,
contrary to the Principles, and Practices of the Jesuits, betwixt whom, ever
since their first Institution, and the said Seculars, there has always
interceded an irreconcilable Pique: The former being, as an Episcopal
Protestant has lately charactered them, Fuller's Chapter Hist. Book 6. p. 279.
The most active and Pragmatical Undertakers in all Christendom. But alas, This
Censure is but a light Velitation, if compared with that black charge of guilt,
which the Body of Seculars make against That Order and Society: He that reads
the Quodlibets of William Watson, a Secular Priest, published in the Year 1602,
will easily confess, That no Protestant Pen can decipher Jesuits in more dark
and bloody Colors, than he has done: For besides, the liberal Epithites he
intersperseth in his Book, calling them, Mountebanks, Usurpers, False-hearted,
Seditious, Impudent, Erroneous, Turbulent, Malicious, etc. In his 5th
Quodlibet, Art. 8. pa. 149. he has these words, speaking of them, It is not
unknown to all the Christian World, (as I verily think) That in Rome, in Spain,
in Flanders, and every where, but especially here in England, Scotland, and
Ireland, They labor to stir up all men under color of Religion, and Zealous
Desire in them, of our Country's Conversion against our Sovereign, the present
State, etc. But more fully, in Quodlibet 3. Art. 3. p. 61, 62. he bestows his
Favors on them, in these Expressions; They run now such a desperate Course, as
if Religion were but a mere Political and Atheal Device, etc. taught by their
Arch-Rabbies, how to maintain with Equivocations, Dissimulation, Detraction,
Ambition, Sedition, Contention, Surfeiting, sorer than ever did Heliogabalus
(with his many hundred varieties of Services served in at every Banquet or
Feast-Royal at his Table) in setting Division, breeding of Jealousy, and
making of hostile Strife by opposition of King against King, State against
State, Priest against Priest, Peer against Peer, Parent against Children, etc.
raising of Rebellions, MURDERING OF PRINCES, etc. Are these Men then to be
called Religious? etc. No, no, Their Course of life does show what their Study
is; and that, howsoever they boast of their Perfections, Holiness, Meditations,
and Exercises, yet their Platform is Heathenish, Tyrannical, Satanical, and
able to set Aretine, Lucian, Machiavel, yea, and Don Lucifer in a sort to
School, as impossible for him by all the Art he has to besot men, as they do.
Thus He. And though the same Watson, notwithstanding his Zealous Professions of
Subjection to Temporal Princes, was afterward put to death for Treasonable
Practices against King James, whereby he might seem to stain the Credit of his
own Doctrine formerly delivered; yet our Historians say, That he was outwitted
therein too by the Jesuits, out of a Vindictiveness of spirit against him, for
his plain demonstration of their odious Practices mentioned in the asoresaid
Book.

Hear what John Speed says in his Chronicle, in King James, p. 1223. Watson
having at large laid open, in Print, the Treachery, and Unsufferable
Machinations of the Jesuitical Order, left this suspicion on them at his death,
that They, in revenge, had covertly and cunningly drawn him into this Action,
which brought him to this shameful End.

It Is true, The great Favorers of Ignatius and his Followers, do look upon
their Sect, as a Necessary, Bussier. Floscul. Historiar. p. 386. 387. initii.
and Seasonable Supply to the Roman Church, in regard it was instituted not
many Years after the Assaults made against it, by Luther, To balance the
Protestants, the Jesuits were set on foot, as one of our own confesses.
Fuller's Church History. Book 6. p. 279.
Melancthon, and their Partners.

Yea, Saunders in his Book De Schismate Anglicano, drives the Observation a
little further, remarking it, as a special Providence, that the Order of
Jesuits began to appear in the World, when all other Religious Orders of the
Roman Communion were suppressed in England by King Henry the Eighth, Anno Dom.
1538. Nevertheless, some Grave and Sober Persons, even of the Roman Church, do,
not without cause, suspect, that Their heady and rash Activity may in time
contribute to the overthrow of that Religion, which They would seem strenuously
to maintain; And we do reasonably hope, that the violent Humor of that sort of
men may prove like the over-officious Duty of that Servant, who pretending to
lift his Master up to Horse, threw him over on the other side.

But to return to Mr. Jenison: He, as I have said, being Educated in the
Principles of the Romish Religion, continued constant in his adhesion
thereunto; till about the Month of January last past. The chief occasion of his
Conversion, was. The Confident Asseveration of Mr. Ireland, (who was his
Kinsman) both at his Trial and Execution, concerning his being in Staffordshire
at the same time, when he knew him to be in London, and discoursed him there;
upon which, he entertained such Thoughts in himself, That a Religion allowing
such Palpable Untruths, in the very Article of Death, must needs be
ill-grounded, besides the Countenance and Encouragement it gave to the
Slaughter and Assassination of Princes; in order to which, he had been tampered
with by the Jesuitical Party. These things did first shake his Stedfastness in
that Profession, before ever he had Will or Inclination to read any Protestant
Books; though since he has been further confirmed in the truth of the Reformed
Religion, by perusing some Writers, especially the Bishop of Lincoln's Book,
Entitled, Popery, or the Principles and Positions, approved by the Church of
Rome, ( where really believed and practiced) are very dangerous to all, etc.
Wherein he does evidently prove those Doctrines to be maintained by the Church
of Rome, which Mr. Jenison supposed to have been injuriously charged upon It
before. Yet when he was in the Communion of the Roman Church, he had always a
secret Aversion to those King-Killing Maxims, which his Cousin Ireland and
other Jesuits would have instilled into him. Hence it was, that they
communicated their Principles and Purposes to him, but gradually and guttatim,
allowing him time to ruminate upon, and digest One Principle, before they
attempted to infuse another. And the Consideration of those Principles, and his
Conviction of the Evils of Them, has proved, by God's Blessing, contrary to
their expectation, a strong Inducement to the Discovery of their Vile
Machinations and Practices.

If any shall Object, That the matters contained here in this ensuing
Narrative, are but Crambe his cocta, or a repetition of what was discovered
before; Let such know, That the Disclosing the Four Ruffians, who were designed
to do so Black a Deed, is wholly due to Mr. Jenison's Informations mentioned
herein: For though other Evidences have concurred in the number of Four, and in
their Designation to that Bloody Fact; yet who they were, none has nominated,
but Himself: A Circumstance of that Moment, that much of the Credibility of the
whole Conspiracy does depend thereupon. Besides, One and the same subject may
be cultivated by several Pens, according to the diversities of Style and
Method, and their respective Knowledges of different Occurrences relating to
the same Argument; which Variety does not weary, but refresh the Reader; nor
detract from, but corroborate former Evidences, especially His Majesty having
declared his great Satisfaction which he received from this Testimony. And yet,
This Theme is not so wholly drained, but that room is left, both for this
Gentleman, and other Discoverers, to make their further Additions thereunto.
And in the mean time, I question not, but the unprejudiced Reader will find his
Expectation sufficiently answered in the Ensuing Narrative.

THE Narrative it Self.
I Cannot deny, but that all the while I was engaged in the Profession of the
Religion of the Church of Rome; I was very unwillingly drawn to make any
discovery, of what I knew, concerning the late horrid Plot and Conspiracy,
partly because the Grand Concern of the thing it self, did much amaze me, for
great expectances of extraordinary Events (as well as deep Sorrows) do rather
tie than unloose the Tongue, partly also, because a Brother, a Cousen Germane,
and several other of my intimate Friends and Acquaintance, all of the Roman
Communion, being deeply engaged therein, I was willing so far to consult their
safety, as not to be influential to their prejudice, by any act of mine: To
which I shall add the concern of my Religion it self ( then judged by me to be
the best) which I knew would undergo an undeleble blot of Scandal and Reproach
in case any discovery were made of these horrid actings by its Professors,
besides the stain and infamy it would affix on my Self, and Family (which had
hitherto lived in good repute) in case we had been found conscious thereunto.
But the main of the Plot having been discovered by others, I came to be further
Instrumental in the clearing of many Particulars relating thereunto, upon the
following occasion; Robert Bows of Gray's Inn Esquire, Son to Sir Francis
Bows, was my Countryman and Neighbor, betwixt whom and my self, there had
interceeded several Offices of strict Friendship, and not unfrequent
intercourses by Letters; he, the said Mr. Bows wrote me one Letter, (being
then retired to Reading, in obedience to his Majesty's Proclamation for
banishing all Papists, to such a distance, from London) signifying, that my
Father was coming up to London from the North, his Errand being to persuade my
Brother (then, and yet, a Prisoner, on suspicion of the Plot) to make a
discovery of what he knew thereof, and withal he acquainted me, that it would
be an acceptable Service to King and Country, if I would cast in my mite
toward the completing that discovery; for he did presume, that upon the
account of my strictness in that Religion, and my acquaintance with, and
interest in, many of the Ecclesiastics of the Roman Church, especially in my
Kinsman Mr. William-Ireland, who was a principal man amongst them, I must needs
have a more than ordinary knowledge of their Designs: and besides, by declaring
what I knew, I might provide for my own Indemnity, it being a Rule in the Law,
That there are no Accessaries in Treason, but the Conscious as well as the
Actors are all liable to the same punishment. Being thus strongly assaulted by
my Friend, I yielded to his importunity, resolving nevertheless, so to poize my
self in my discovery, as to save my own stake, and yet not much to endanger any
of my Friends. Hereupon I wrote that Letter to Mr. Bows (in answer to his)
dated from Reading, December 19. 1678. which has already been published in
print, wherein I did so labor to vail and palliate the Truth, that doubtful
expressions might be taken in the most favorable sense, and that it might be
perceived my intention was not to bring any on the Stage; for though my Cousen
Ireland's being in London, and there discoursed by me, were therein clearly and
positively asserted (according to Truth) yet upon the first resuming that
matter in discourse betwixt Sir Michael Wharton, Mr. Bows, and my self, after
Ireland's Trial, I was so startled, that I was in effect willing to recede
therefrom, rather than cast a Note, and imputation of falsehood on such a known
Father of that Church; but that my own Hand and Letter to Mr. Bows, would then
have witnessed against me, and my conscience also have flown in my face, for
denying an evident Truth; And my strong Asseverations, mentioned in that
Letter, wherein I seem peremptory and conclusive of my self, under high
Protestations, as to any further knowledge in those matters, do stand on the
same foot; for at that time, not being shaken in the Principles of the Romish
Religion, I did count it my duty to consult for the Honor of it, by concealing
the guilt of its Professors. Besides, my Conversation having been most among
the Seculars, I had not such Doctrines infused into me, as the Deposing or
Murdering of Kings; and, what contrary Principles these Jesuits, with whom I
sometimes conversed, labored to instill into me, they did it not at first
directly, and in express words, but, according to their known Art, by Ambages
and Circumlocutions, that their Pills, thus gilded, might be the better
swallowed; yet to those, who were acquainted with their Language, their meaning
was easily intelligible, though not expressed in plain words; and if at any
time they were more free and open in their intimations to me, yet I was then,
so far guilty of humane frailty, as by my silence to suffer affection to
oversway judgment, especially the Honor of my (then) Church, and the safety of
my Relations, and my self being concerned therein; moreover I was always looked
upon by the Fathers of that Church, as a Person wholly addicted to Loyalty and
Obedience to my lawful Sovereign, and altogether averse from all actions base
and immoral; and besides, having an universal love for all Mankind, I did
rather compassionate their seduction from the way of Truth (as I then thought
it) then judge it fit to endeavor their conviction by the cruel Arguments of
Sword, Fire, and Faggot: hence it was, that I often urged to my Cousen Ireland
in discourse, the Example of Christ, who brought not in armatum Evangelium, but
by true Doctrine and the Example of a holy life, did labor to convince the
World, whose pattern ought to be our Rule; for if our Savior would not have
Fire from Heaven, called down upon the Samaritans, who refused to receive him,
why should we labor to propagate our Opinions, and Religion by ways so
contrary to His, and so destructive to mankind? Indeed the dispensation of the
Law was administered with great terror and severity, but the Gospel contains
more of gentleness, lenity, and perswasiveness in its temper. These, or
Discourses of this nature, passed betwixt us, and though sometimes, by the
importunity of his arguings, he did extort from me some treasonable words, yet
my heart was still ready to give my tongue the lie; such my expressions, not
proceeding from a calm, sedate, and well principled spirit, but from a mind
heated and agitated by disputes, and which after a little pause and redemption
from such excursions, would again return to its wonted temper. This frame of
spirit, by divine goodness, thus bestowed on me, I look upon as a great
Antidote against all the subtle insinuations of Mr. Ireland, and others, and
which at length God did so far further honor, as to free my captived
understanding from the Errors and Seductions of that Church, and to enable me
to see the falsity of that Religion which allows such solemn asseverations on
weak, ticklish, and insufficient grounds. Upon this alteration of my judgment,
I am resolved, by God's permission, to be more free and open in the Declaration
(of what I know) of the late bloody and detestable conspiracy, that so I may
make amends to my King and Country, for my partiality and reservedness
heretofore. This Resolution of mine, having come to the knowledge of my Friends
and Relations, of the Roman Church, how have they labored to batter and
assault it? and what Arguments they have used to shake my constancy herein, and
to take me off from prosecuting my Testimony already begun, will appear by the
ensuing Letters. The first was directed to me by my Brother, Thomas Jennison
before mentioned, wherein his expressions are indeed earnest and pathetical,
and further, edged with most severe Scriptural Comminations; but being grounded
merely on a mistake, as applied to me, they do not affect or alter my
resolution, as to the matter in hand, For the Curse causless shall not come;
yea, I am more confirmed in my way, by the love and encouragement of a Father
(who is of one mind with me, in this thing) then terrified and retarded by the
menaces of a Brother, especially where blind zeal, passion, and self interest
guides his Pen: yet I am not out of hope, to live to see the time, that this my
Brother may retract his heavy censures cast upon me, and instead of a Judas to
Christ, account me as a Jonathan to David, i. e. one really studying his
welfare, or if it be lawful for me to make use of Instances less divine, a
Damon and a Pylades to him (in respect of natural Bonds, as well as brotherly
Friendship) my true Pythias and Orestes. I shall for the Readers satisfaction
transcribe the Letter it self verbatim, craving his leave at the close (for
every poison must have its Antidote) to add some remarks and observations
thereupon.

Mr. Thomas Jennison Jesuit, now in Newgate, his Letter to his Brother Robert
Jennison Esquire, July 7. 1679.
Brother:
I Am ashamed to acknowledge you for such. If I were to deal with a man who had
sinned out of Ignorance, I would spend time to enform and rectify his
understanding, but now my business is with you, who from your tender years have
been educated, through the infinite blessing of God, in the light of the
Catholic Church, and received other additional helps of Learning, so that it
cannot be presumed that any man has imposed upon, or Smith'd you. I shall cut
short, and follow the counsel of the Apostle, who commands me after one, or two
chidings to avoid men of equal malice with your self, hereticum hominem,
postunam aut alteram correptionem, devita. He that offers incense to Jupiter is
an Idolater, though in his heart he denies his Divinity. But what I intend to
pursue are the dismal effects of your Crime.

By thy own mouth I judge thee, naughty servant. You know as you confessed
here, that you could prove Titus Oats perjured against me, and yet you came
hither with intent to make me yield and condescend to those perjuries, by a
false confession of a feigned and incredible Story of a Plot against the King
and Government, and so engage my self in the blood and ruins of innocent men,
that I might, after your Example and our Families ( God forgive them) cast away
the eternal happiness of my soul, to secure the temporal life of a wretched
Carcass, which I have learnt to contemn, since it has been in the power of such
an Impostor as Oats, to bring me into such eminent danger. But you are a much
greater Proficient in wickedness, than you would let me know; you were not
content to wheedle me with an invented story of a visit you made, and a
discourse you had with my Cousen Ireland the 29th. of August last; At which
time to my certain knowledge, he neither was returned, nor that week expected
from the Country; but you have deposed that untruth upon Oath; and so have, as
much as is in you, justified Oats and Bedlow, and by consequence taken upon
you the blood of an Innocent man, and a near Relation, and of one to whose
kindness, you owe that which you depend so much upon, my Father's favors, when
he lent you the money, which I am afraid, you have not yet repaid; in a word,
you have made your self an Accessory to all the wickedness, that either has
been, or shall be committed by those Two Commissioners of Hell, as long as your
Oath stands unrecalled, for you have given them a strength and support: And now
hear, not my rebuke, but rather the Holy Ghost (against whom you have sinned)
in the Book of Psalms, Sitting thou did speak against thy Brother, and
against thy Mother's Son, thou have laid a stumbling block, thou thought
wicked man, that I will be like thee; I will rebuke thee and set thee against
thine own face, Psalm. 49. Don't glory in malice, thou that art powerful in
wickedness: The whole day, thy tongue has devised injustice, like a sharp rasor
thou have committed deceit: Thou have loved malice above goodness, rather to
speak iniquity than equity.: Thou have loved all the words of rashness,
deceitful tongue: Therefore God will destroy thee, unto the end, he will pluck
thee up, and cast thee out of thy Tabernacle ( Wallworth, and all that belongs
to it) and (which is infinitely dreadful) thy root from the Land of the Living,
Psalm. 51. Understand these things, you that forget God, least at length he
hurry you out of this World, being provoked to punish you, taking from you even
that pitiful transitory enjoyment, for which you have cast his fear behind your
back; for the same Holy Spirit assures us, that Men of blood shall not live
half their days, and then there will be no man that can deliver you, Psalm. 49.
But I have not yet reached the height of your Crime, nothing under that of
Judas can parallel it. And therefore read the curses pronounced by the Prophet
in the Person of Christ against him in Psalm. 108. O God (says he) suppress not
my praise, in silence, because the mouth of the sinner and the mouth of the
deceitful man has been opened upon me. They have spoken against me with a
deceitful tongue, and have encompassed me with speeches of hatred, and have
ransacked me for nothing, and appoint the sinner over him, and let the Devil
stand on his right hand, when he is judged, let him go forth condemned, and let
his prayer become a sin. Let his days become few, and let another receive his
Bishopric, etc. You may please to consider this and the rest which follows;
And now don't extenuate your sin, and say, I have not sinned with Judas against
Christ; you know you have sinned against his Church, and it is for this that
Christ, for ever blessed and glorious in Heaven, cries out to St. Paul then a
Persecutor through ignorance, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? who art
thou Lord? answers Saul. I am Jesus (says he) whom thou do persecute. O
singular comfort for all those who suffer persecution for Christ, since he
looks upon their sufferings as his own; but dreadful voice to those who have
hardened their hearts to his call, and kick against the sting of their own
consciences. Nay, you have in some sense even outdone the malice of Judas, and
those that crucified Christ, for 'twas for the Church, that Christ out of an
infinite love delivered himself, his blessed Body to be torn, and tortured and
crucified, and his Blood to be shed, and you have conspired with the Devil to
disappoint the design of Christ's Passion, not only in the Perdition of your
own Soul, but in hiding and driving the truth from the Nation.

Now, if nothing of all this does move you, I am afraid you are delivered over
to a reprobate sense, and that you will not stop here, but according to your
impenitent heart, treasure up to your self the wrath of God against the day of
revenge, which will come upon you, like a thief before you are aware; and so
you will then open your eyes as the rich Glutton did to behold Lazarus in
Abraham's bosom, when you shall find your self in the middle of the flames and
torments of Hell, but it will be then too late to do penance, for, not so much
as a Drop of water will be granted you to cool that perjured bloody tongue of
yours. But if you consent to the Grace of God, which calls you now, perhaps the
last time, to penance, you shall follow the example of St. Peter, who, when
Christ looked upon him with an Aspect full of grace and mercy (for that,
respexit Dominus Petrum, was not registered by the Holy Penman in vain) went
out first, and then wept bitterly; and you have wept, but because you have not
gone out with St. Peter, therefore it has done you little good, and you have
found the Proverb fulfilled in you, A Dog returned to what he had vomited up,
and a Sow that has been washed to the wallowing Pool of mire: nay, I add, that
it has done you some harm, for the more obstinate and rebellious you show your
self to God's mercy, the more dreadful and heavy you shall find his Justice.
God then will not be content with halves, or rather to take his share with the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, he will either have all or nothing; he will
either save the whole man, or damn him. But you must not think that this is All
to go out and weep, you are obliged to make restitution, for you know that is
the Catholic Doctrine, according as Saint Austin has it. Non dimittitur
peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum.

I have told you the mischiefs of your perjury, these you are obliged to
hinder, and repair, for as much as concerns your self, and is in your power,
which you have not done, till you present your self to those before whom, and
unto whom, you committed the sin, as having misguided their Judgments, and
confess publicly the guilt upon your Conscience. If you say, that this will
make you infamous to the World, know, that you are so already to the greatest,
wisest, and best part; know that you are so in the sight of God, his Angels and
Saints; know that you shall be laid open to eternal confusion in the last day,
and that this very Letter shall rise up in Judgment against you; so I have
discharged my Duty, as to this Point, nothing now remaining for me to do, but
to offer up my hearty prayers for your speedy conversion. If you are privy to
Oats his wicked Cabal, you are obliged to discover, what you know; for as I
told you here, non manifestans, is an Accessory.

Your Loving Brother THO. JENNISON.

Superscribed to Mr. Robert Jennison.

SO far as this Letter concerns others, I leave them to be their own
Compurgators, being assured that they are able to justify their own
Testimonies, which have already passed the scrutiny and approbation of Two
Parliaments, and besides have undergone the Tests of several Juries, consisting
of Persons of Liberal Estates, as well as known Judgment, and Integrity: But in
reference to my self, I cannot but animadvert these Particulars following.

1. The expression of being Imposed upon or Smith'd (as the Letter Phrases it)
is an allusion to Mr. Smith, once a Secular Priest (whose interest in the
strengthening this Discovery, is not inconsiderable, as will hereafter appear)
betwixt whose Sect, and the Order of Jesuits, there has been, and is, a
constant grudge, as is more fully declared in the Preface to this Narrative:
whereupon my Brother supposes the said Mr. Smith to have influenced me to do
some prejudice, to Mr. Ireland, Himself, and their whole Ignatian Fraternity; A
thing which I must clear that Gentleman from, as an unjust and false Aspersion.

2. I ascribe that Veneration to the Divine and Holy Word of God, That if I
were guilty of those sins, which the Holy Ghost in the Psalms, and places
mentioned in the Letter aforegoing does inveigh against, and denounce Judgment
upon Those, who perpetrate and commit Them, I should willingly own my guilt,
and submit to the reproofs therein mentioned, and endeavor to avert the
Judgments denounced in those Scriptures, by True Repentance; for (I thank God)
my heart is not so obdurate in sin, but I am willing to see and acknowledge any
evils, I may be convinced of, even though it be accompanied with the most
heigthning and aggravating Circumstances. But, though otherwise guilty of many
Frailties, yet being no ways sensible, that those Comminations do at all belong
to me, I look upon them, though never so vehemently, not to say Satyrically
urged against me by my Brother, as the Curses of Shimei uttered against David,
which, I hope, God will turn into a Blessing: For,

3. The Groundwork of my Brothers censures is laid in the Sand (or rather they
have no Foundation at all) viz. my supposed Testimony, that Mr. Ireland was in
London August the Twenty Ninth, as he mistakes it; whereas my Depositions spoke
of August the Nineteenth, that I saw and discoursed Him here. Where he was the
Twenty Ninth of that Month, does not affect me; but at the time by me Deposed,
I am sure my Brother, nor no Person living, could ever see Him, the said
Ireland in any other place, unless it were possible for the same man to have
Two Bodies, in Two different places, at one and the same time.

4. And whereas he alleadges in his Letter, that I told him I could prove Titus
Oats perjured; I confess the great affection I had for him, as a Brother, did
set my thoughts at work at that time, for the invalidating the Testimony of Mr.
Oats, so far at least, as my Brother was concerned therein; but it can in no
sort be concluded, that by what I said by my Brother, or asserted in a Petition
upon that occasion, presented by me to His Majesty, That I should have been
able (although I should have sworn it) to invalidate the Testimony of Mr.
Oats, much less that I was persuaded in my self, that there was no Plot, or
that I would have him to acknowledge, that which in his Letter he calls an
Incredible Story: The Matter being too apparent to be hid.

5. The charge of Perfidiousness, Apostasy (for so it amounts unto) of
imitating, yea, out-doing Judas himself, etc. is grounded on a false Basis.
viz. That the Church of Rome, to use a Scripture Expression, is the Pillar and
Ground of Truth, and therefore my interposing for the continuance of Reformed
Protestancy in these Nations (as far as my weak endeavors can contribute
thereto) not to mention my embracing thereof, and deserting the Roman Church,
is, in their sense, hiding and driving the Truth from the Nation; which censure
how well, or rather how ill, Grounded it is, let all true Protestants, yea let
all sober Christians, of whatsoever persuasion (provided they be not of their
Interested Church) judge and determine.

6. The Weeping which my Brother misconstrues in his Letter to me, was on this
occasion; I went to give him a Visit in Newgate, partly out of Brotherly
Kindness and Respect, and partly by my Father's encouragement, to move him to
make some Confession and Acknowledgment; where finding him who had had Liberal
Education abroad in the World, and was besides so nearly related to me, to be
shut up in a Close Prison, and knowing him to be under the Character of the
deepest Guilt, I was so far transported with Natural Affection (which I hope is
no Crime in the Profession of any Religion) as to break out into Tears,
proceeding from some Emotion of Spirit on so sad a Spectacle; when it was not
at all out of Reflection or Guilt in my self, which might in any sort
assimilate my case to St. Peter's, whose sin if I were guilty of, I would
willingly tread in the same foosteps of his Repentance: But my carriage at that
time was so far from being imputable to me as a Crime, that, if I mistake not,
my Brother might rather have accepted it as an Argument of my sincere and
Brotherly affection to him, as indeed it was.

7. Though I heartily wish to all those concerned in this Plot, true repentance
and amendment of life, and cannot say Amen to the Issue of their endeavors
hoped for and expected by Them, yet my Testimony has not been instrumental to
the condemnation or suffering of Mr. Ireland (as is suggested, without ground,
in the Letter;) for his Trial and Condemnation was past, before any Evidence of
mine, in relation to him, came to be published. And as to my endeavor to
prejudice my Brother, which is there also intimated, I reply, that my visit to
him, was purposely in order to his preservation, his Person (abstracting from
his Crimes) having been, and yet is, always (notwithstanding the Severity of
his Censures) dear to me, whose safety I shall study, as well as my own, as the
event, I hope will make appear: And as for all others concerned in the Plot, I
shall count it a great mercy, if their Designs may be obviated and prevented,
without shedding any more Blood.

After this Grand Charge by my own Brother (whose Letter I have thus opened and
dissected) I have been further assaulted by Female Addresses, that so if
possible, the entreaties of that Sex might take me off from prosecuting my
Discovery, and that in a Critical Juncture of time, immediately before the Trial
of Sir George Wakeman. Hear then how a Kinswoman of mine, and her Mother, my
Aunt, residing in Staffordshire, have accosted me by their Letters out of the
Country.

A Letter to Robert Jenison Esquire from his Cousin Harwell.
Dearest Cousin,
I Think my Mother is the only Aunt you have in the world: if you have either
Compassion for her, or Kindness for me, I beg of you, for the love of God, to
recall your pernicious Mistakes; for so we are sure they be, and may prove to
be of very dangerous Consequence to your Soul, disgrace to your Family, and
Ruin to your Brother. We do impute it to some Oppression of the Fancy, since
you had that great Fit of Sickness, rather then any thing of Will to do so
great an Injustice, either to the Living or Dead. My most dear Cousin, let me
beg of you to desist, and not so much as to have a Thought of any such Thing;
which Fancy in time, through God's Goodness, may pass away. My Mother says,
she could tell you of a very near Relation of yours, that came to her, and wept
extremely. She demanded the Cause: he answered, his Sister was Dead. My Mother
said, she should have heard of it, if that had been so: he notwithstanding
persisted, saying that he saw her Dead. It proved to be nothing but a weakness
of his Fancy, and that Sister, to my Mother's Knowledge, was alive twenty years
after. I believe the strange Death of our Cousin might work and create strange
Fancies in you, that had so great a Fit of Sickness, that you lay Dead for a
Time, as I was told. Dear Cousin, I do most entirely love you, which makes me
so free with you: and I assure you, my Mother can scarce either eat, or drink,
or sleep, she is so full of Sorrow. I fear, if you persist wilfully, you will
break the Heart of your only Aunt, and my Dear Mother, which will more
afflict, then you can imagine,

Your most affectionate Cousin and Servant, C. H.
July the 7th. 1679. POSTSCRIPT.
We shall have no ease till we hear from you, pray let it be speedily.

Superscribed to Mr. Robert Jenison at his Chamber in Grayes-Inne.




After this Letter from the Daughter, and my Answer thereunto, I received the
two following Epistles from her Mother, Superscribed also to me at Grayes-Inne.

Madam Harwell's Letter to her Nephew Robert Jenison, Esquire
Dear Nephew,
I Received your Letter, which gave me no satisfaction in the Contents, but
your Civility in Returning an Answer I acknowledge, and much expect the
Continuance of it, until we end this Controversy, although it put you to a
shilling charge, which I know you value not; neither do I ten times so much, to
rectify so great a Mistake. And now I must desire to know, if you did not see
then your Aunt, Cousin Anne, or the Horse that brought your Cousin Ireland up,
for you say he was but newly alighted from his Horse, that 19th. day of August
you mention. More, I entreat to know the particulars you spoke, or swore to my
Lord Shaftsbury, and why you went to do so. I hope our weekly lying Letter
tells one of you, in saying you swore. We cannot hear from any body else any
thing, therefore I desire to hear from your self, what you said, and also to
what end you wrote such a Letter to Mr. Bows, and whether it was upon the
19th. day of August, my Cousin Ireland lent you that Money, you would have
borrowed of me. These particulars fail not to give me satisfaction in, as soon
as you can, and you will oblige me to desire to continue

Your most Loving Aunt, Ja. Harwell.
July the 14th. Your Cousin remembers her Service to you.




Another Letter from Madam Harwell to her Nephew Robert Jenison, Esquire
Nephew,
I Have expected to hear from you these three or four post-days past, but could
not. I understand now by our common-News-Letter, why you went to my Lord
Shaftsbury. It says, you are sworn that you saw Mr. Ireland upon the 19th. day
of August last in London, and other things, which I no more credit then That,
which I am sure is most false; and that both I, my betters, and several others,
whose faces you (I believe) never saw, will be deposed, if we were to die the
next minute after, What! did you think to confront us all, that appeared so
lately, as we did, to give testimony to the truth? and many more will appear,
if occasion be. I stand in admiration of your actions, ( God forgive and amend
you:) you have done your Self, Soul, and Body, the greatest Injury imaginable;
and if there had been any such thing, you were an Ill Subject to Conceal it so
long. I will assure you I would not, had he been the nearest Relation I had had
in the World: I prefer my King's Safety, before any Creature's in the World. I
have been so principl'd, that (thanks be to God) I am not ignorant of my Duty
to my God, nor of what is Loyalty to my King. I am sure you have been taught
better things, then you practice. You want the Counsel of your Good Mother, and
affront her Relations, (which were (I think) most near and dear unto her,) upon
your first acquaintance with them, most strangely. I will take leave and assume
some Authority of a Mother, but not to command, but do beg and entreat you to
retire and repent. Repent, with bended Knees and weeping Eyes humbly beg for
pardon. I think, God has permitted you to fall into this great error, as a
punishment for some sin committed, very displeasing unto him. If you were my
own, and only Child, I would say the same. I have prayed for you many years
daily, before fore I ever saw you; and you have now more need of prayers then
ever. What if one of those kind of Apoplectical fits should seize upon you
(which God forbid) that by Report you had in your Great fit of Sickness, when
you lay Dead, and they forced Life into you by Torments? I believe your Head
continued ill long after, and fancifull, although you were not sensible of any
pain; and the wicked Enemy wrought upon your humor: both together brought you
to do what, is said, you have done. I speak these things to you with a
sorrowful heart, and weeping eyes. I cannot rest night nor day, I am so sad,
and

Your most afflicted Aunt, Jane Harwell.
July the 28th. 1679.

On these three last Letters I shall only make this ensuing Comment.

1. The particular respect mentioned to me in them, or any of them, I take in
good part, and shall always acknowledge, and endeavor to requite by like
offices of Civility: but the allegation of a deluded Fancy, and of a Sickness,
which it pleased God to visit me with about three years since, are so
extravagant and foreign to the thing in hand, that they need no other
confutation but the bare reading; and which I should not have thought worthy of
the Reader's View, (as thereby laying open the weakness of some of my female
Relations,) were it not to show the extraordinary Zeal and Care that has been
used, by all probable ways and means, to Stifle my Evidence, which has so far
transported some, as to engage them to make use of Chimaericall arguments,
rather then none at all: so that (were it not for grating too much on the
Imbecility of their Sex) the Imputation of Fancy might more truly and justly
be retorted upon Them.

2. It is no wonder, that these two Persons, understanding what I had deposed
touching Mr. Ireland's being in London the 19th. of August 1678. should take
offense thereat, and endeavor by all the Artifice of words used in their said
Letters, to draw a Retractation from me, since what I had deposed as aforesaid,
did plainly contradict the Evidence by them given at the Trial of the Five
Jesuits. It Is true, I have a friendship for my Relations, but a greater for
the Truth, to which all our particular concerns ought to vail. Neither could
any thing, save the Power of Truth, have obliged me, in this matter, to run
counter to so many of my Relations as I have done. But I thank God,
notwithstanding the censures of others, I have a clear Conscience in this
particular, as having witnessed nothing but the Truth: which I speak not, as a
person engaged to salve and justify my own Credit, (being as ready to retract
an Error, upon Conviction, as to commit it;) but out of a full assurance of my
Innocence, and satisfaction of my Conscience, then which, in case of Guilt,
next to God, there cannot be a Greater and Severer Judge.

3. If my Opposers did not conclude my Appearance and Testimony to be extremely
prejudicial to their unlawful Designs, I should never have undergone so many
Scandalls, nor had so much Dust raised about me, to fully (if possible) and
disparage the Truth, that I have endeavored to deliver; which yet (I hope)
will make its own way, notwithstanding all the opposition raised against it.

Lastly, As the Reader upon due consideration of the foresaid Letters will
find, that they do all agree in the Design to oblige me, against the Dictates
of my own Reason and Conscience, to Retract what I had said, and to suppress
what farther I had to say, (though the Discovery might be of great importance
to the Safety of the King's Person, and his Government) rather then any thing
should Reflect to the Scandal and dishonor of that Religion; and consequently
may learn, that it is most unsafe to hold any Communion with that Church, or
rest under the Conduct and Influences of it: So I conceive the different
Applications, and Arguments used in those Letters, to persuade me to that
purpose, may be some inducement to others, who read them, as well as to my
self, to have a different Opinion of the several Orders of that Church; and
above all, to detest the Society of Jesuits, who have attained to that Ability,
(as the Top of their Perfection) in pursuit of their own Interest, to violate
all Laws, Natural, Civil, and Divine, and to teach others so. Thus my unhappy
Brother most industriously labors to debauch my Conscience to a suppression of
the Truth, or to a profession of Ignorance of that I know, whilst he pretends
to design nothing, but that I should assert the Truth: And despairing of
gaining this from me, would now Charge me as one that has debauched his own
Conscience; and denounces against me the pains of Hellfire, as the just
Reward of my Offense. And I could heartily wish, that this were done in Charity
and kindness to my Soul; but have just reason to fear it done in Design, that
this Truth, which he would have suppressed, and is like to come forth, may not
find Credit from my Mouth, after the Disparagement his Letter has cast upon
me. But whatever Character he has given me, as I am not conscious to my self
of any Guilt thereof, so I reasonably hope, that that sort of Men, who have
given reason not to believe them when dying, will find little Credit whilst
they live, at least in matters concerning the Interest of their own Order, or
tending to the Vindication of their own Innocence. And that the Difference
forenoted between the Professors of that Religion may better appear, it is
farther observable, that the Two other Letters are written by Persons not only
of a softer Sex, but Persons educated under a more gentle and more moral
Discipline, then that of the Jesuits School: and therefore, though they all
came upon the same Errand, yet these latter speak a far different Language from
the other. These well knowing my Education, temper of Mind, and course of Life,
as did also my Brother, had not the Confidence, with him, to censure what I had
said and discovered, as the Effect of a Debauched and Depraved Conscience. Nor
did they judge that I could wittingly and willingly injure any one by a false
Report; but impute my Discovery to some Distemper of Mind and transport of
Fancy, occasioned by some Sickness three years ago. There is no Malice in this
Allegation, nor should I have taken notice of the thing, had not they gone
about to persuade the world, and my self also, that the matter was really so,
when I made this Discovery. And now I shall give it no further Answer, then by
Appealing to those that conversed with me at that time, and who could not be
ignorant of so notorious a Circumstance, if any such thing were.

But I Am really beholden to these my Relations for their Two Letters, which
coming from those that knew me well, (and at this time no good Friends to me)
will be more then sufficient to balance that single testimony of my Brother,
who, to detract from my Credit, has Uncharacterized me as a Person of no
Conscience or Integrity.

Having thus (after some Contest in my self) conquered the main Difficulties,
which hindered my Discovery, I proceed on to give a farther account of my
knowledge of this Detestable Conspiracy. To omit then my Two former
Informations, taken upon Oath before Edmund Warcupp, Esquire one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, the first given in the
twenty sixth day of June 1679. the other the second day of July following, as
being already published in print, in my Former Narrative and Depositions,
Collected by Charles Chetwind, Esquire of which mention is made before; I pass on
to Two further Informations, taken also upon Oath before the same Justice of
Peace, and by Him transmitted to the Clerk of his Majesty's Counsel, the one
dated August the 2d. the other the 6th. ditto 1679. which are here annexed
verbatim.

The further Information of Robert Jenison of Grayes-Inn, Esquire taken upon Oath,
this 2d. day of August, 1679. before me Edmond Warcupp, Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County.
THis Informant says, Midd. ss.
That it being generally reported, that the Evidence against Sr. G. Wakeman was
full, he, this Informant, was not so careful to recollect the further
discourses he had had with Mr. Will. Ireland before the said Trial, as he has
been since. And upon the most serious examination thereof, he does very well
remember, that in the month of June 1678. the said Will. Ireland did say, that
it was an easy matter to poison the King, and that Sr. G. Wakeman might easily
do it, having a great opportunity, by being the Queen's Doctor. Which
discourse, this Informant does verily believe, the said Ireland used to this
Informant to induce this Informant to his further intentions, being, as this
Informant believes, assured of this Informant's secrecy from Mr. Tho. Jenison
his Brother, and from some obligation the said Ireland had laid on this
Informant by lending him Twenty pounds, which he said was the St. Omerians
money. And this Informant farther says, That upon the 19th. day of August
following, he the said Will. Ireland, at his Chamber in Russell-street, did
earnestly press this Informant by various Arguments, to be instrumental in
bringing in Catholic Religion, urging how meritorious it would be, and how
much to the Glory of God: and thereupon offered to cause the said Twenty pounds
to be remitted to this Informant, if he would be assisting to the taking off
the King, and would be one of those that would go to Windsor about it. But
this Informant did answer, That he would not for twenty times twenty pounds
have a hand in the death of the King. Whereupon the said Ireland replied, Will
you do nothing to bring in the Catholic Religion? To which this Informant did
say, That he did not believe It would ever come in by Blood. Upon which, the
said Irel. replied, What? would you not have Religion to flourish in England
again? Whereto this Informant answered, If it were done (meaning if the King
were taken off) so, and well. But this Informant said, he would have no hand in
it: But the said William Ireland, not being satisfied with this Informants
Answers, pursued thus, Do you know any Irish Gentlemen of our Religion, that
are stout and courageous? Upon which, this Informant replied, The Irish
Gentlemen were commonly so; and did name Mr. Levallyn, Mr. Thomas Brahall, Mr.
Karney, three Irish men, and Mr. James Wilson, being all Gentlemen of
Grayes-Inn, of whose names the said Ireland took particular notice in writing,
to the best of this Informants remembrance; and this Informant did then tell
the said Ireland, that he believed, no men of estates would be concerned in
that affair; and especially Capt. Levallyn, who was heir to a good Estate,
unless the Pique which he had to the King, might induce him to it. And this
Informant further says, that being with the said Thomas Jenison and another
Gentleman, about the latter end of April, or beginning of May 1678: (whose name
he now remembers not) in the said Ireland's Chamber, there came one in, who,
after some private discourse with Mr. Ireland departed; and after he was gone,
the said Thomas Jenison told this Informant, 'twas one Mr. Oats, who had been
a Parson, but was come over to them, and that he was a brisk jolly man, and
well worth his acquaintance. And he further says, that about the time that
some Regiments were drawn together upon Hownsloe Heath, the said Thomas Jenison
told this Informant, he had a matter of great consequence to impart to him;
adding, that there was a Design on foot, so laid, as it could not be
discovered, in which most of the greatest Catholics in England were embarked;
and that it would be of great advantage to this Informant, to embarque with
them, and that he could not be in greater danger than they; and that he would
acquaint this Informant with the particulars, after he had received the
Sacrament of Secrecy, which he engaged this Informant to do upon the next
Holy Day at Sr. Philip Terwitt's House in Bloomesbury; but this Informant
neglecting so to do, he missed the opportunity of being further informed. And
this Informant then wishing he had had a Commission in the new Levies, the said
Thomas Jenison replied, that he would get him a Commission from the Duke of
York: whereunto this Informant returning answer, How can that be, since all the
Commissions are now granted and full? The said Thomas Jenison answered, I will
tell you that hereafter, therefore let me know how I shall send a Commission to
you into the Country with safety, he knowing this Informant intended suddenly
to go into the Bishopric of Durham. And this Informant very well remembers,
there happening some discourse about the said Parson lately come over to them,
the said Thomas Jenison said, that that Parson was engaged in the design:
whereto this Informant objected, That a reconciled enemy ought no more to be
trusted, than an open foe: but the said Thomas Jenison answered, they were sure
enough of him, and that once reconciled, they were the more resolute and
trusly. To which opinion this Informant submitted, instancing Dr. Godwin and
Dr. Baily, as being zealous Catholics, although they were Protestant Converts.
And this Informant further says, that he was in Shinfield Parish near Redding
in Berkshire about the time of Coleman's Trial, where he met with Mr. Cuffell a
Romish Priest and Jesuit, who then much blamed the said Coleman, saying, he
believed he was infatuated, to suffer his own papers to be taken, upon
discovery of the Plot, whenas he had given notice to Mr. Harcourt, Mr. Ireland,
and the rest of the Jesuits, to burn or secure theirs. And he very well
remembers, that amongst other discourse, this Informant spoke against the
opinion that Bellarmine, Mariana and Suarez maintained, touching the Power of
the Pope, to depose Kings: upon which, the said Mr. Cuffell mentioned a
sentence, which he said Bellarmine quoted out of the Scripture for that
opinion. And this Informant also very well remembers, that Mr. Tho. Jenison and
himself discoursing of the Popes Power about deposing of Kings, affirmed that
that Doctrine was not laid aside.

The Further INFORMATION OF Robert Jenison OF Grayes-Inn, Esquire Taken upon Oath
AUG. 6. 1679. be before me Edmund Warcupp, Esquire one of His Majesty's Justices of
the Peace for the County of Middlesex.
THIS Informant says, that after he had, upon much importunity of Mr. William
Ireland upon the 19th day of August 1678. named unto him Captain Levallyn, Mr.
Kerney, Mr. Brahall, and Mr. James Wilson to be stout and courageous Gentlemen,
as in this Informants former Deposition is contained, the said William Ireland
did ask or require this Informant to go down with the said Gentlemen to
Windsor, to be assistant to them in the taking off the King, which this
Informant refused, saying, he would not have any hand in the Death of the King,
saying, No men of Estates would engage therein, as this Informant believed. And
the said William Ireland did approve of the said four persons named as
aforesaid by this Informant, as fit for the design: and declared, that he knew
Mr. Levallyn, and Mr. Kerney, before this Informant had named them. By which,
this Informant did apprehend, that he might have communicated with them of the
said design for Windsor, before the nomination aforesaid. And this Informant
further says, that upon the day that this Informant received the 20 l. lent
unto him, this Informant, as in his former information is mentioned, went with
his Brother to Mr. William Harcourt's Chamber in Duke-street, to return thanks
for the obligation in consenting to lend the money. And Mr. Thomas Jenison did
let fall some expressions to the Purpose following, viz. If C. R. (meaning the
King) would not be R. C. (meaning Roman Catholic) he should not be long C. R.
meaning Carolus Rex: and further added upon discourse, that the King being
deposed, he was no longer King, and it were no sin to take him off. And if it
should be discovered who did it, perhaps two or three might dye for it; but
denying the fact, the matter would soon blow over. And he further says, that
much about the same time, discoursing of the design, wherein the greatest
Catholics in England were embarked, the said Mr. Thomas Jenison did name my
Lord Arundel of Warder, my Lord Bellasis, my Lord Powis, and two or three
others, whose names this Informant does not now remember, that were to be great
Instruments in promoting the Catholic Cause: and they had often attempted the
Lord Ireasurer, and had at last made him theirs. And he further says, that
upon the 19th day of August 1678* aforesaid, Mr. William Ireland did ask this
Informant for the 20. l. lent unto this Informant upon Bond, as aforesaid,
although the same was not then due: and further said, he wanted 80. l. having
then occasion for that sum; but this Informant answered, that his allowance
from his Father was but 80: l. per annum, and he could not spare much out of
it. And he further says, that the Commission which the said Tho. Jenison
promised to obtain for him from the Duke of York, was delayed, and not to be
sent unto him, until such time as the taking off the King was accomplished, as
this Informant did understand from the said Thomas Jenison. And this Informant
knows, that Mr. Kerney and Mr. Coleman were well acquainted: and this Informant
does humbly beg pardon of His Majesty and the Kingdom, for concealing thus long
the treasonable practices against his Sacred Life and Government and the
Protestant Religion, which this Informant does say, was occasioned, by reason,
he, this Informant was unwilling to impeach his own Brother Mr. Tho. Jenison;
and as unwilling to accuse himself, being descended of a Loyal family: but
remorse of Conscience has now prevailed upon him, to give the Accounts,
contained in this and his former Informations, which with what shall further
occurr to his memory upon Discourse with some, to whom this Informant
communicated formerly the same, this Informant will be ready upon all occasions
to prove, for His Majesty's service. And further at present this Informant
says not.

THough the matters contained in the two Informations aforegoing, are so clear
and evident, that they need no Paraphrase to explain them; yet I think fit, for
my own, and the Readers satisfaction, to take notice of these Particulars
following:

1. That my Informations, as well in this, as my former Narrative, are cantoned
out into diminutive parcells, and not continued in an entire Webb, partly for
relief of my memory, and partly, because my consent to these matters, being not
voluntary, but in a sort constrained, I was the less solicitous to keep a
methodical Register of them in my own mind: whereas, if I had been a Contriver,
or at least, an active Consenter thereunto, I should have framed such an Idea
of them within me, that the whole contexture, exhibited to public view, would
have appeared a continued series of affairs, without any Chasme or interruption
at all. My frequent breaks do sufficiently argue, I was so far from being a
Grand Engineer in this matter, that I was, as unwillingly-willing drawn to the
knowledge thereof: And when it was discovered to me, my concealment, rather
than my activity, was a great part of my guilt.

2. Besides the grounds formerly mentioned, quickening me to this discovery, I
will not deny, but self-preservation had some influence upon me, to expedite
the Discovery of the Four Ruffians, who were designed to have murdered the
King; for a Gentleman of my acquaintance, having informed me the day after Sr.
George Wakeman's Trial, that one of those Four persons was come in to the
Committee of the Council, had confessed his guilt, and upon hopes of Pardon,
had proffered to discover his Accomplices: This wrought so far upon me, as
knowing my self to have nominated those Persons to Mr. Ireland, (though with
some reluctance, and being pressed thereunto by his frequent importunities) and
being otherwise concerned in this affair, as far as I have herein mentioned;
presuming also that His Discovery, if made, would reflect upon me, I was so far
willing to provide for my own safety, (other motives also concurring) as to
anticipate his feared Discovery, by making one of my own: which passage, though
it savours of humane frailty and timidity in me, and therefore may seem to take
off from the Honor of my Undertaking, yet I choose rather by this ingenuous
confession to expose my self, than to conceal any minute or particle of the
Truth.

3. The particular discourse I had with Mr. Ireland, and our mutual Replies and
Rejoinders mentioned therein, does again occasion me to resume that pretty
Fancy, which my Aunt and Niece above mentioned dandled in their own minds, and
at last tossed it to me; as if all were but an apparition or an illusive thing.
What! was there ever any such man, as Mr. William Ireland? Were his Trial,
Condemnation and Suffering real things? Did ever any man see, or converse with
him? If so, certainly I may put in for a share, and that at the time by me
deposed. Must all things be resolved into mere Fancy? Is the whole World but an
imaginary and enchanted thing? Do we live in the Region of K. Oberon, and his
Fairies? Do we converse only with Ghosts, and combat Shadows? If such
Doctrines as these may take place, it is to be feared, That Heaven and Hell
will at length be judged but mere Phantasms of the same mould, until the latter
come to be realized unto us, by our enduring of its torments justly undergone
for our Skeptical and Atheistical incredulity. I speak this to the Generality
of others, not in reference to my Aunt and Niece, whose superlative Zeal for
the Credit of their own Religion, has (I know) occasioned this Transport in
them.

4. The particularity of that discourse, which alternately passed betwixt Mr.
Ireland and my self upon the said 19th day of August 1678. mentioned in my
Depositions aforesaid, will, I doubt not, raise up amazing considerations in
the Readers, when they shall recollect and compare Mr. Ireland's confident
asseverations of his innocence at his death, and my discovery of his guilt,
yea, he was the man, who then dealt most earnestly with me, (nay, he seemed
more importunate than my own Brother at other times) to induce me to their
purposes; we managed arguments pro and con; we gave Answers, and adapted
replies, and yet all this must be naught, but a scenical thing, and a mere
delusion of the Fancy. Let us wholly resign our belief to blind impliciteness,
if our own eyes and ears may not be trusted about their proper objects. For my
part, I will not judge of any man's future estate, as to the eternity of another
world; but certainly, it must be a great mistake, to go out of this, with an
Untruth in ones mouth. I love to tread softly on the Graves of the deceased,
and therefore shall no further aggravate: only my desire is, that the
consideration hereof may engage all private Christians (of what Persuasion
soever) to look to the choice and sincerity of their Spiritual Guides. It was a
remarkable saying of Sr. Thomas More, That he would not pin his Faith on
another man's sleeve, because he did not know whither he would carry it: which,
though urged by him against the Protestants, and worded, according to the
facetiousness of his Wit, yet contains in it self an excellent Moral; To
believe as the Church believes, and vice versa, is a Circular arguing, bad in
Logic, but worse in Divinity; for every man must be saved by his own Faith,
and none can go to Heaven by a Proxy.

5. The Zeal of the Romanists for the propagation of their Opinions, (which is
the womb both of all their former, and present designs) ought, in my judgment,
to be rather rectified than condemned; provided they elected just and lawful
methods, subservient to that end, for evil is not to be done, that good may
come thereof. If Xavieres travels to the remotest Indies, were only to promote
the interest of Religion, (by him judged to be the best) without a mixture of
Jecular concerns, his Memory may come under a mild, (perhaps I might add, a
laudable) censure. I know, it is very difficult to extirpate a deep rooted
Custom, and habituated opinions stick close by us, men are so hardly reclaimed
from inbred superstitions, that they labor what they can, to propagate and
promote them. Hinc illae lacrymae. We have a strange story in our Chronicles,
which, as not altogether impertinent to the matter in hand, for the Readers
divertisement, I shall here insert. King John, being vexed and oppressed by his
Barons, sent a private message (deeds of darkness hate the light) to Admiralius
Murmelius King of Morocco, Matthew. Paris.
then also enjoying a great part of Spain, (the messengers are named by the
Historian, whereof one a Clergyman. Strange! That Salt should lose its
savor,) proffering upon condition of his aid and assistance, to resign his
Kingdom to him, and to become his Tributary, (King John was well skilled in
trucking of Kingdoms, having done the same to the Pope before) and withal to
renounce the Christian, and receive the Mohammedan Religion from Him, (the
Vantage given in, was more worth than the bargain.) The Moorish Amin told the
Ambassadors, That he himself had lately been reading the Epistles of S. Paul,
wherein he found many things that liked him well, only one thing he blamed in
him, that he followed not that Religion in which he was brought up; but for his
part, he was so far from persuading him (our King John) to change his Religion,
that if he himself had been without one, he would have chosen His: only he
thought, it was every man's duty to persist in the Religion under which he was
born: And so in great dislike, dismissed his Ambassadors. I allege this story,
to denote the power and force of Custom, which is most tenaciously adhered
unto in things of the mind. I know True Christians have a better Rule; and that
no Custom can justly prescribe to Christ and his Apostles, or the True
Followers of them both, whose Doctrine ought to be the Standard, by which Ours
is to be rectified and reformed. I shall not embarque in the particular
Controversies, agitated betwixt Rome and the Reformed, as being but lately
initiated in their perusal: but thus much I have already learned, That no error
and abuse ought to plead Antiquity for its privilege: hoary hairs are no
Crown, but when they are found in the way of righteousness: but by lawful
Authority grievances of this nature may be rectified; and that in a corrupt
state of Ecclesiastical affairs, and a separation therefrom, it is not he that
takes, but that administreth the occasion, who is the true and proper
Schismatic. But to return;

6. My Brother Thomas Jenison's activity in these affairs, comes next to be
taken notice of, as far as I have been necessitated to bring him on the stage.
Here, I confess, I have great tenderness: for though he communicated many
things to me, yet I was loath to discover them till the very last; and not then
neither, till upon assurance of Indemnity for Him as well as my self. I was
here once in wavering circumstances, and somewhat divided betwixt hope and
fear, being willing to save my own Brother, yet not to endanger the Father of
my Country; but at last the best scale weighed down the other, having this
consideration cast into it, That the safety of my Brother, Self or Family, were
not worthy to be named the same day with that of His Majesty's. The particular
Method which I took to save my Brother harmless, though I knew him to be so
guilty as I have declared, I shall not scruple to subjoin. First of all, I
presented a Petition to His Majesty against the single Testimony of Mr. Oats,
then his only Accuser, (of which intimation is given before) it being indeed
indicted out of pure Zeal for my Brothers preservation. Finding little advantage
thereby, the Sunday before the Order of Council for both our Indempnities, (to
be mentioned by and by) was obtained, I went to some Lords of the Council, and
had assurance from Them, in the Name of His Majesty, that my Brother and other
Relations should not be prejudiced by my Informations; before which
encouragement, neither of my Two Informations were given in, but purposely
suspended till such assurance given: after which, a private Council was called
on purpose to receive them, to whom they were accordingly presented. The Lords
having also given a promise before, That at the sitting of the next full
Council, effectual Orders should be obtained from the Board, for the full
ascertaining of the said Indempnities; which promise the Noble Lords concerned,
were pleased punctually to perform, to my great and signal encouragement. The
Copy of the said Order follows.

AT THE COURT AT Hampton Court, This 7th Day of August 1679.
Present
The Kings Most Excellent Majesty, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Lord President, Duke of Monmouth, Duke of Lauderdale, Marquess of
Worcester, Earl of Bridgewater, Earl of Sunderland, Earl of Essex. Earl of
Bath, Earl of Hallifax, Earl of Radnor, Viscount Fauconberge, Lord Cavendish,
Mr. Secretary Coventry, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sr. William Temple,
Mr. Powle.


RObert Jenison of Grayes-Inn, Gent. this day attending His Majesty in Council,
to make very considerable Discoveries in relation to this Horrid and Damnable
Popish Plot, against His Majesty and the Government, and fearing that what he
should now, or hereafter declare, would prejudice his Father, his Brother, his
Sisters, and one Mr. John Smith; His Majesty, for his greater encouragement to
proceed in so good a work, was pleased to Declare, That whatever he should at
this, or any other time, in the course of his said Evidence reveal, which may
any way touch or relate to any of his said Relations, should not be made use of
to their prejudice upon any Account whatsoever; But that His Majesty would take
some Order ( with the Advice of His Council) for the Indempnifying of the said
Persons therein. And was further pleased to declare, That if the said Persons,
or any of them, should come in, and discover their Knowledge also of these
matters, That He would grant unto them, or any of them, as full and ample a
Pardon, as the said Robert Jenison himself should now have, or that any others
have, or ought to have had, for their Discoveries of this matter. And he would
take the said Robert Jenison into His Royal Protection. And was further pleased
to order, That a Memorial of this Declaration be entered in the Register of the
Council Causes, for the more Public and ample Manifestation thereof.

This is a true Copy of the above Declaration, remaining in the Council Office
in my Custody this 13th day of August 1679.

Thomas Dolman.

THough a Text Royal, (such I esteem an Order of his Majesty in Council to be)
is a Comment to it self; I mean does sufficiently illustrate and honor the
subject it dilates upon, yet, 1. I should be guilty of great Ingratitude, a
Crime abhorrent to my Nature, if I should not thankfully accept his Majesty's
Grace and Favor, and publish my Obligations thereupon to the whole world; for
thereby, of one obnoxious to his Laws, and in the Eye thereof, an Enemy to his
person, in concealing the Treasonable actings of others, besides the guilty
accession of my own Crime, as far as I have before acknowledged, I am restored
and rendered to be Rectus in Curia, and further encouraged by his Royal
Protection to pay him the greatest service and duty I am able to perform.

2. And the truth is, there is some necessity of more than ordinary Protection
to all concerned in these Discoveries; for the confluence of Papists to this
Town, notwithstanding his Majesty's Proclamations to the contrary, gives
opportunity to so many Cabals, that his Majesty's Witnesses are in continual
danger, which makes some persons (and those not inconsiderable) rather to
conceal what they know, at present, than to expose themselves to restless
Adversaries, who have so great a mind to vent their malice on all those who are
Instruments in crossing their Designs: It is wittily said by One of the
Jesuits, Fuller's Chapter Hist.
That they never owe ill will to any man, because they usually make present
payment thereof; yea they sometimes antidate their punishment, to prevent their
feared and fore-judged harms. I will not deny but this consideration had some
influence also on me to retard my discoveries, especially knowing that the
Jesuits have revengeful Instruments enough at their command, and no man in
himself is of so vile and abject a life, but if Satan let loose the reins to
malice, he may be Master of another man's. Hence it is, that Assassinations and
Murders are more frequent in Popish Countries, than I hope by Gods goodness and
his Majesty's Justice; they will ever happen to be in This, though our late
times have afforded too many Instances thereof. But having conquered this
difficulty in my self, my loytering and remisness before, will now cause me to
make the more haste, as he who goes backward, does it to take the greater leap.

3. The insertion of my Father's (and of my other Relations) Names into this
Order of Indemnity was desired by me ex abundantii cautela, for it having (with
probability of truth) been affirmed, that there were few considerable Papists
in England, but were acquainted with the Plot, and knowing our Family to be in
that List, I was loath to hazard his safety to any malicious Romanist, who, by
the Reason of his embracing the Protestant Religion, might enviously accuse
him, of what he is not guilty; otherwise he was not at all concerned, save in
what he heard from me, viz. part of that discourse betwixt Mr. Ireland and my
self, mentioned in my Letter to Mr. Bows, formerly printed, and that was in
dark and obscure terms, and applicable several ways, which caused him to give
less heed thereunto.

4. The Clause encouraging me to further Discovery, I cheerfully embrace,
resolving to make use of it in convenient time, for at a Council held on
Thursday, August the 28th, at White Hall, I declared that I had further Matter
to charge some of the Ruffians withal, but in regard I sought the destruction
of none, I moved rather for a Proclamation to be issued, allowing them forty
days time to come in, with promise of Indemnity, in case they would discover;
which being accordingly granted by His Majesty's Clemency, and shortly to be
published, I judged it conducing to His Majesty's service to supercede my
Evidence till that time be expired. The same Excuse I plead for some other
reservations, which a little time may make more seasonable.

5. Next to the great Obligation that lies upon me, by his Majesty's most
Gracious Disposition, expressed in the aforesaid Order, to proceed in this
service; I find no little satisfaction and comfort, that my Father is not only
pleased to approve of what I have done pursuant thereto, but also to oblige me
to Constancy and Diligence for the future in performing my Duty therein by his
express Command.

I think it may be satisfactory to the Reader in the next place to insert two
Letters directed to me by Mr. Smith, formerly Confessor to my Father, and
Resident in his Family, which will serve in some measure to satisfy the World,
that what I have given in Evidence concerning this matter, does not proceed
from any new or late Suggestions or Inventions of my own, but are delivered
according to the truth of Fact, as it has formerly come to my knowledge.

Mr. John Smith, Late a Romish Priest, his Letter to his Cousin Robert Jenison,
Esquire.
Walworth, Aug. 15. 1679. Co. Jenison.
I Have received your last Depositions, whereby I was truly satisfied, and
likewise your Father, who gives you his Blessing, and twice his Blessing, for
discovering more if you can. What you have said in your Informations, you have
obscurely heretofore intimated to me, in which I am willing to justify your
just Proceedings against those Popish Emissaries.

I remain Your Affectionate Cousin and Servant, John Smith.

POSTSCRIPT.
ACcording to your next Letter I shall inform you of all you have said to me, I
have it all in Writing, and efficacious to the proving of a Damnable Plot
(though you told it me in very obscure terms) but, blessed be God, you prove,
as I believed, a Loyal Subject: And for what you have done, I will venture my
life against any Papist in your justification.

Pray discover what Papist Gentry you can, and learn what you can of your
Brother.

All the Papists in the Country will do you and I all the prejudice they can:
Act you the part of a Royalist, and I will the part of a Defender.

Vera Copia.

Tho. Dolman.


Mr. John Smith, Late a Romish Priest, his other Letter to his Cousin Robert
Jenison, Esquire.
August. 19. 1679. Dear Cousin.
I Have had and heard from you, in Obscure Terms, that which made me believe
you had some knowledge of the Plot; and that Ireland and your Brother were not
only tampering with you, but also endeavoring to entice and induce you
thereunto, as now I find by your Depositions upon Oath; your often Discourses
and Disputations about the Wolvish Jesuits (as I often termed them to you) and
their Actions, pro and con, and sometimes passionately, argued in my Opinion
you to be one of their Votaries, yet with a remorse of Conscience, as I often
perceived by your now and then change of color, caused me to make a short
Contraction of our Sayings and Discourses as soon as we left off, all which I
have by me ready to produce; they are material, and will undoubtedly fortify
and strengthen not only your Evidence against those Traitors and Jesuitical and
Pharisaical Blood-suckers, but also satisfy the whole world how legally and
deservedly they have suffered, how inhumanely and beastially (though Jesuitical
like) they dyed, how your now proceedings and Depositions are not groundless or
malicious, as many would have them, but true, just, and legal, how your
understanding and quick apprehension of my often saying to you, that the
Obedience of a Subject to his King, is inviolable and cannot be dissolved, and
how well and religiously you pondered this general Duty, enjoined upon all men
by God himself, that is to eschew evil and do good, especially in the
Allegiance of a Subject unto his Sovereign, (a duty so often commanded by
Scripture) so that by the well observing or villifying of it, not only a
Kingdom, but a King, a sacred person, is soon preserved or destroyed; the Evil
then which a Subject is to eschew in respect of his Sovereign, is not only in
Action, but also in Words and Cogitations; the good he is to do out of
Obedience and in true Allegiance, is not only to pay Tribute unto his Sovereign
for his Regal support, but also fighting his Battles with Joab, adventuring his
life with David, and revealing with religious Mordecai, all treasonable Designs
and Attempts, to pour out Prayers and Supplications for his welfare and safety,
to esteem and honor him from the Heart and out of Conscience, as the Anointed
of the Lord. Thus are all Subjects commanded by the old and new Law, to honor,
serve, preserve, and obey their King, and not to lay violent hands on his
Sacred Person, but to succor and defend him with the hazard of their lives,
notwithstanding the Pope's arrogant presumptive Power (and Antichristian
Doctrine) in discharging all Subjects from their Allegiance, absolving them
from their Oaths of Obedience, and giving them License to bear Arms, and offer
violence to their King (a most Licentious, Impious, Irreligious and Diabolical
Principle) contrary not only to the Laws of the Kingdom, as you may find in
Bracton's Customs of England (he was Lord Chief Justice under King Henry the
Third) Freemen and Servants are subject unto his Power, as also whatsoever is
under him, and ipse sub nullo, nisi sub deo, no man then ought to presume to
examine his doings, much less to oppose them by force or violence; it is
contrary to the Law of God also, where it is said, Where the Word of a King is,
there is Power, and who may say unto him, What do thou? This Power is given
by God who counsels, To keep the King's Commandments, and that in regard of
the Oath of God, for he does whatsoever pleases him. An evident Testimony,
that no mortal man, whether Pope or Priest, have, or ought to have, either
Power or Superiority over a King; as you may see further how St. Paul commanded
every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers, Romans 18. he acknowledged himself
subject unto Caesar; and no wonder when Christ himself paid unto him Tribute,
and confessed one of Caesar's subordinate Magistrates, Pilate, to have Power
over him, and that given from above, John 19. St. Peter likewise writing to his
Fellow Presbyters, whom he exhoreth to feed the Flock of God, that they would
submit themselves unto the King as unto the Superior, 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Pet. 2.5.
Chrysostom says, The Office of a Priest is only to reprove, and freely to
admonish, and not to move Arms, Sedition, or Rebellion, nor to use Bucklers,
nor to shake a Lance, but only to argue, and freely admonish. Tertullian,
speaking of Kings, says, Inde illis est potestas, unde spiritus; thence have
they their Power, whence their Spirits. Irenaeus says, cujus jussu nascunter
homines, ejus jussu constituuntur principes; by whose appointment they are born
Men, by his appointment are they made Princes, and not by the Pope's, who were
in former times both elected and deposed by Emperors and Kings, and no wonder,
when the High Priests themselves were subject unto Kings, and punished by Kings
for their Offenses, 1 Samuel 22. 1 King. 5. 1. King. 2. Optatus says, There is
not any man above the Emperor. Chrisostom says, No man is equal to him upon
Earth. St. Cyril and Agapetus affirm the same. Pelagius, the first Roman Bishop
of that name, wrote these words unto Childebert, King of France, With how great
study and labor are we to strive, that for the removing the scandal of
suspicion, we may minister the obsequiousness of our Confession unto Kings,
unto whom the holy Scripture commands us to be subject (this not five hundred
years after Christ.) Gregory the Great, Bishop of Rome, confessed, That Power
was given from above unto the Emperor above all men; and further says, I
being subject unto your Command, not out of feigned Humility, but out of
Conscience and Duty, etc. Otho, the Emperor, deposed John the 22th for his
impure and vicious life. Therefore, Dear Cousin, let this and your own
experience not only satisfy you of the Papal Infallibility and Usurped Power,
but also move you to recollect your Memory, as to the enlargement of your
Evidence; not only against those Jesuitical Wolves and Pope's Emissaries, but
likewise against all other Traitors and Malefactors in this Hellish Plot
concerned to your knowledge; and assure your self that I will assist you with
all that you have (as I may well say under a Jesuitical Veil) related to me,
whereby I hope you may remember more than I have seen in your last Deposition,
by this means, and no other, you may recover your lost Credit, serve your King
and Country, and hope for the Blessing of God and your Father, who obliges you,
upon the duty of a Son, to inform all you can, and against all you can: My
affectionate good wishes and Prayers shall be for ever for your welfare and
safety. I am, dear Cousin,

Your Affectionate Cousin, and ready Servant, John Smith.
Let me hear from you as soon as you can.




Note, That His Majesty, upon the perusal of the first of the said Letters,
thought fit that the Original should be left in the Custody of one of the
Clerks of the Council, with Directions, That an Authentic Copy thereof should
be delivered to me: But the Original of the second is yet in my Custody.

Robert Jenison.



If, in the second Letter, too much Gall seem mingled with the Ink, and some
bitter Expressions contained therein, it may be alleged in Excuse, That long
before Mr. Smith was born, Censures more severe have passed on the Jesuits, and
that by Members of the Roman Communion. Watson's Quodlibet 9. Art. 10. calls
their Government Antichristian, Tartarian, Turcical, and Tyranical, and their
Doctrine about it, Paradoxal, Pragmatical, and Stratagemical. Besides, I know
Mr. Smith to be of such Excellent Morals, and of so poized and just a temper,
that it is hard to transport him to extremes: So that those Expressions seem to
be extorted from him out of a just detestation of their late cruel Designs; and
if the Jesuits did often hear such Reproofs, and submit themselves to be
regulated thereby, it might be hoped that their Parts and Abilities would
contribute to the settling and establishment of Kingdoms, and not to the
destruction and ruin of them.

ADVERTISMENT.
THE Reader is desired to take notice, That there are many material things more
that are not convenient at present to publish, with such confirming proofs of
what is herein before set forth, as will satisfy all the World, how deep this
horrid Conspiracy has been laid, and carried on, for destruction of his
Majesty's Person (whom God preserve) and the Government.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. line 38. for had not read had he not, p. 34. l. 3. for granted and
full read granted out and full, p. 38. Paragraph 3. l. 4. for Aunt and Niece
read Aunt and Cousin, p. 39. l. 9. for Aunt and Niece read Aunt and Cousin, p.
45. l. ult. for abundantii read abundanti.


