THE LAWFULNES OF TITHES, Demonstrated to the Convincing of such of the QVAKERS
as pretend Conscience against the Payment of them: OR, A Demonstration for
LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE to the QVAKERS in the Payment of their TITHES.

By W. J.

It is a Snare to the Man that devoureth that which is Holy, and after Vows to
make Enquiry, Prove. 20.25. LONDON, Printed for John Williams, in
Cross-Key-Court in Little Britain, 1675

THE PREFACE TO THE COURTEOUS READER.
Reader,
LEt me find thee such as I bespeak thee, Courteous. Be not offended with this
little Treatise at the first sight of it, being so small upon such a Subject of
concern; and of the which some Learned Men have writ already. It is small,
because it is designed for the use of those that are wont to read but small
Books, (viz.) the meaner sort of Quakers. It treats upon this Subject, not that
I think to do any great feats by it, but that it may mind those that are
Learned indeed to undertake this, and such other things (wherein the Quakers do
disturb the Church) proving not only the Lawfulness of Tithes, viz. that they
may be paid, (which I do) but also the necessity of them, that they ought to be
paid, or at leastwise the Expediency of them, that they are best to be paid.
The aim of such Learned Men as have writ of this Subject already, was not the
Satisfaction of these Quakers (of whom they did not so much as dream) but the
Confirmation of Princes and Rulers, to continue in the Land, and Nation such
Gospel-Maintenance, as was of so long standing, and had been so well begun: Now
these Quakers being to be satisfied (if any thing will do it) require this
Subject to be managed another way, if not for matter, yet for manner, method,
and style, which I leave to the Discretion of such of the Learned, as shall
have the Charity to travail with these poor Men (with the will of God) to
reduce, and bring them back to the Establishment, and Peace of the Church.

As St. Paul did acknowledge himself to be Debtor to the Greeks, and to the
Barbarians, to the Wise, and to the Unwise: So I think (under Correction) that
the Learned in the Universities and elsewhere, are Debtors in these days unto
all the Sects that are among us, viz. to endeavor to reclaim them: Among the
which Sects, these of the Quakers (if it may rightly be called a Sect) and not
rather a Rage, and a Tumult fomeing out their own shame: I say, this such as it
is, is not to be let go in malam rem, as desperate as it seems to be*

Again, as St. Paul professed that he was ready to preach the Gospel to them
which were at Rome also; so I hope our Learned men will not disdain to take
pains with these Quakers, though they be gone from us as far as Rome.

The Gainsaying of Tith, and crying out Hireling, is the main thing they cant
withal; therein applying themselves to the humor of such as are prophainly
Covetous amongst us.

The more unlearned this Sect of Quaking is, the greater learning it requires
for the Confuting of it; they being not to be wrought upon otherwise than by
Demonstrations; which I presume, Learning, Leisure, and Libraries may be able
to make out unto them, by showing them, as a Perpetuity of a Ministry, and a
Maintenance to it: So also a propriety both of the one, and of the other; and
this to be deduced through the whole Series of times, and ages; the
universalities of People and Nations; and the variety of Empires, and
Governments.

This little Tract was devised by me for the satisfaction of a private Man, my
Neighbor: Why I have made it public, I have given an account already;
namely, to mind such as are Learned, and have leisure from Weekly Sermons to
travail, as they do with the other Sects that are among us; so also with those
poor Men called Quakers: I say, to mind them; for it is possible they hear not
the clamours and outcries of these Men, as poor Incumbents do. How good a Work
the turning men from the Error of their ways may be, appears by the great Good
St. James pronounces to come of it. Reader, recommend this good Work to whom
thou think it proper. Be Friendly, and Farewell.

COUNTRYMEN and FRIENDS CALLED QUAKERS
. 1. TO your Question demanding by what Right Tithes become due in the Church
of England? As a sick man is cured of his disease by virtue of a Medicine; so
is an evil man healed of his malice by virtue of the Law. Pythagoras. Break not
the Laws made for the wealth of the Country. Justinian Endeavor thy self to
keep the Law, that God may be pleased with thee. Aristot.
I answer, that it is by the Law of the Land; which being not contrary to the
Law of God, ought to be obeyed by every Subject. Now this Law of our Land is
not only according to the Law of God, but also fitted to it, and devised by it.

That there was a Law for Tithes under the Old Testament, there is no Man
doubts. Lex vetus de Sabbato, etc. The Law concerning the Sabbath, and the
other concerning Tithes (in the Old Testament) do show that Christians are
obliged to set apart no less than the seventh day for God's Worship and
Service; nor less than the tenth part of their fruits or increase, for the
maintenance of those that are Christ's Ministers. Grot. de Jure Bell. and Pac.
lib. 1. cap. 1.
That that Law is still abiding, viz. for the Substance and Equity of it, under
the Gospel, That is it which some Men would willingly be ignorant of. But I
prove it thus:

What was in being both for Right and Practice before the Law was given by
Moses, and in that Law was expressed, and set forth, and has not been forbidden
since, nor any way abrogated; that is abiding still: But such is the Law for
Tithes, therefore it is still abiding.

That it was in being before the Law was given by Moses, appears by Abraham
paying Tithes to Melchisedek, Irenaeus (l. 4. c. xxxiv.) and Chrysostom. on 1
Cor. cap. xvi. use this Law, in proving the Equity of Tyth under the Gospel,
(...), He Tythed Abraham, (i e.) he took Tyth upon him, viz. of his Goods;
which implies, that the one was in Duty bound to pay it, and the other had a
Right to demand and take it. The Text says, Melchisedek met Abraham:
Wherefore? to beg an Alms of him? No, but to receive his Due from him. O how
fain would profane Misers have the Clergy brought unto their Alms! on purpose,
that they might deal by them, as Judas would have done by our Savior Christ.
See Calvin's complaint in this case. Abraham did not this by any politic
Constitution, nor by any Right of Ceremony: Therefore it was by the Law of
Nature that he did it.
Genesis 14.20. Heb. 7.11. (...). The Text has not [(...)] but [(...)] It says
not that Abraham brought to Melchisedek somewhat in Gift, but that he gave him
that part and portion which was due unto him. If he had been free either to
give, or not to give, then in giving, he would have given what he had pleased,
and not have been bound to divide. A Division is of one whole thing into parts,
which needs not, but when some part is due out of it.

Moreover, if Melchisedek had no other Right to what he received from Abraham,
but only of Abraham's Bounty, and good will; then how does St. Paul prefer his
Priesthood before that of the Sons of Levi? For they had a Right, and a Law to
receive what they did from the People, (...), etc.

Again, If he had no Right or Authority to receive any thing from Abraham, then
was not he greater than Abraham: For I may humble my self to give what I
please, to whom I please; but I am inferior only where I am subject, and bound
to pay.

But you will say, by what Right did Melchisedek receive Tith, or for what? For
Sacrificing? No, (we do not Read that he did any such thing) but for Blessing:
Melchisedek blessed Abraham, and Abraham paid the Tenth, etc.

Hereupon I assume thus: Tyths were due unto Melchisedek, not for Sacrificing,
but for Blessing only: Therefore Tyths do remain due under the Gospel upon the
same account. The consequence I prove, Heb. 7.12. The Law concerning Priesthood
is not changed, except the Priesthood be changed also: But the Priesthood of
Christ, and that of Melchisedek is the same, therefore the same Law remains
under both.

You Will object again; What was Abraham but a single Person? What he did, he did
for himself, and what is that to Us?

Not so: Abraham was the Father of the Faithful, and thereupon, says
Chrysostom, he paying Tyth to Melchisedek, did shadow or represent all the
Faithful under the Gospel, paying Tith to Christ.

From Abraham I might go to Jacob, and take him vowing a Vow, the subject
whereof was, that if the Lord would be with him, Genesis 28.20.
etc. then should the Lord be his God: The stone which he set for a Pillar
should be God's House; and of all that God should give him, he would give the
Tenth unto God. If Jacob had not very well known this Vow of his to be grounded
upon good Right on God's part, and Duty on his own; he would never have made it.

Is not the same Right on God's part still, and the same Duty on ours? Is it
not God that gives us all that we have, Est enim hoc conscientiae nostrae
vulgar and commune Testimonium, etc. It is a common Testimony of our
Conscience known even to the Heathens, that the Necessaries of thi^ life are to
be begged of God: From whence it is, that even a among the Gentiles Tyths of
all things were vowed unto Hercules. Lambert Danaeus de Oratione Dominica* pa.
154.
and ought not we to acknowledge him as Jacob did.

To acknowledge God in this case, is not a Will Worship of ours, but a Doctrine
taught by the Holy Ghost, Prove. 3.9. Honor God with thy substance, and with
the first Fruits of all thine Increase. Though Solomon was not in being when
Jacob was, yet the Holy Ghost was; and if he had not been Jacob's Teacher in
the making of this Vow, this Vow should not have been Recorded in the
Scriptures to the Commendation of him as it is: Yea, what hinders me to say,
that it is written not only for his Commendation, but also for our Imitation,
there being all the Says St. Aug. Quid enim si diceret Deus, etc. What if God
should say, Thou art mine, O man, the ground which thou tillest is mine; the
Seeds which thou sowest, the Beasts which thou weariest are mine; the Rain is
mine, and so is the Heat of the Sun: Seeing all these things are mine, thou
which only lendest thy Hand to the Work, deservest hardly the Tenth: But I keep
Nine parts for thee, give me the Tenth, etc.
Equity that may be, that we should do as he has done?

Nay, This Lesson is still taught by the Holy Ghost, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is
taught in the word, communicate unto him that teaches in all good things. Here
is an express command of paying things in Kind under the Gospel. Indeed the
word [Tith] or [Tenth] is not here set down; perhaps because that part or
portion is supposed to be notoriously known. As it is not for Christians to
strive about words, 1 Timothy 6.4. so I think it is not for them to strive for
want of Words, where the things themselves that are in Question are to be found
in the Scriptures. To strive for want of Words, what is it but to dote about
Questions? Those that oppose Tyths for want of having them named in the New
Testament, seem in this to be like those that opposed the Consubstantiality of
the Persons in the Deity, because the Word [(...)] is not to be found in the
Scripture: And yet the Word [Tything] is to be found in the New Testament, viz.
spoken by our Savior Christ himself, and that asserting the Right of Tithes,
saying, that they ought to be paid. If you say they ought to be paid then,
but not now, I ask where it is that our Savior has told you so, or what cause
is there that it should be so?

Our Savior declared unto the Jews that he was Lord even of the Sabbath, i. e.
that he had Power given him, to set his People free from the Necessity of
observing the Sabbath; or at leastwise to moderate them in the Observation of
it: But of Tyth he said no such thing. It was prophesi'd, that the Jewish
Sabbath should cease to be; but of Tithes there is no such Prophecy. The
continuance of that Sabbath might not consist with Christ exhibited, but Tithes
may, being no way contrary to the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made us free.
If you pay not the tenth, you will pay some other part, viz. either more or
less: More we do not challenge, The Heathens judged it reasonable, that those
which served at their Idol-Altars, should live thereof: The proportion of Tyth
or Tenth they might borrow from the Patriarchs the Sons of Noah, spreading it
among the Nations.
Less you cannot pay, except you will not only alter God's Proportion, but also
have less regard to the just Maintenance of your Ministers under the New
Testament, than the People of God had of theirs under the Old. As if these were
not as worthy to live of the Gospel, as those others were to live of the Altar.

Thus I have done with the first Member of my Argument, in the fifting whereof
I desire such Candor of you, The Melchisedek spoken of in Genesis, and in the
Epistle to the Hebrews is most probably thought to be Sem, the eldest Son of
Noah, who lived in the Days of Abraham, and by his Primogeniture had Right to
take Tyths even of him.
as may bespeak you not only Civil, but also Christians.

Now of the second Member, viz. That it was expressed, and set forth in the Law
given by Moses: And this I prove from Lev. 27.30. Number. 18.8. and 31.2. Chron.
31.4. Hoc jure Abraham, etc. By this Law ( viz. of Nature) Abraham gave the
tenth to God of those spoils which he took from the five Kings mentioned in
Genesis 14. etc. Quo more Graeci quoque, etc. And by the same Law also, the
Graecians, Cartbaginians, and Romans, dedicated the Tenth of their spoils to
Apollo, Hercules, Jupiter Feretrius, etc. Grot. de jur. Belli and Pacis lib. 3.
cap. 6.
My Inference herehence is this: Moses, Number. 18.8. makes the Faculty of
receiving Tyth to belong unto the Priesthood or Ministry by reason of the
Anointing, i. e. their Calling. In the 31. verse, he makes it to belong unto
them, because of their Work or Service: But both the Calling and Work of the
Ministry do still abide: Therefore also the Faculty of receiving Tyths, which
is the Maintenance of the one, and the Reward of the other. The Minor I prove,
Ephesians. 4.11, 13. Heb. 13.17. 1 Timothy 4.17.

Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 31.4. Commanded the People that dwelt at Jerusalem, to give
their Portions to the Priests, As Hezekiah was singularly commended among the
Kings of Judah: So did the singularity of his Commendation consist in this,
viz. that he was most zealous for Religion and Piety, 2 Chronicles. 29.
and to the Levites, that they might be Encouraged in the Law of the Lord. From
whence I Argue thus:

What was well done of Hezekiah by the Ministers of the Law, that is well done
still of godly Princes by the Ministers of the Gospel; Upon this account it is,
that he is said to do according to all that his Father David did: Upon which
account also, viz. of Religion and Piety most of all it is, that David himself
was said to be a Man after God's own heart.
But it was well done of Hezekiah to encourage the Ministers of the Law, by
commanding the People to give them their Portions; therefore it is well done
still of godly Princes, to encourage the Ministers of the Gospel, by commanding
the People to pay them their Dues.

Neither Hezekiah, Nehemiah, nor any other godly Prince or Ruler, has thought
fit at any time, Nehemiah was zealous in this matter, even unto Contention,
Nehem. 13.10, 11, 12.
to require the Priests to attend their Service, without commanding unto them
their just Maintenance. Yea, God looks not with any Man to serve any Office in
his House for Naught, Mal. 1.10. Neither will God accept of any Man to pretend
to the doing of his Work, that shall disdain to receive his Wages. I am a great
King, says the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 1.13. As he disdains to be meanly dealt
with by his People, that pretend unto him, so is it not his manner to deal
meanly by his Priests that serve him; as you may see throughout that whole
Chapter.

Yea, our blessed Savior in his Gospel, says, at the sending of the seventy
Disciples, That the Labourer is worthy of his Hire: St. Paul thinks fit to cite
this Text of our Savior, together with such another from Moses, to prove both
Honor and Maintenance to be due to the Gospel-Ministery. 1 Timothy 5. verse. 17,
18.
And will any man that is a Christian, call him that lalaboureth, an Hireling
for receiving his Hire? If any man do, is not that man's Eye evil, because our
blessed Savior is good? St. Paul 1 Cor. 9. affirms, that for people to expect
that their Ministers should attend, and serve them for nothing, An
unreasonableness hardly to be imagined, much less to be practiced among the
Gentiles, except it were by such as were accounted Tyrannous, and so accounted
most of all for this, viz. That they were both envious, and penurious to the
Gods.
is a thing so unjust, and unreasonable, that it is hardly to be imagined. It
were such another thing as it would be, to make the Ox tread out the Corn, and
yet to muzzle his Mouth the while.

Nevertheless, I do not deny, but that a man may, and ought upon occasions,
serve in the Ministry between God and the People, without challenging any
Portion or set Maintenance at all: But then at the same time, and
notwithstanding those occasions, he ought to be so far from either disdaining
that Maintenance to himself, or hindering of it unto others, that he ought to
maintain and justify the Right and Power of it, not only unto others that do
receive it, but also to himself, though he receive it not. This was St. Paul's
practice, 1 Cor. 9.4, 5. Though he wrought with his Hands, rather than he would
be chargeable to the Corinthians, because of false Apostles, that perverted
them to his prejudice, yet did he justify unto them, that he had power to
forbear working as well as others the Apostles and Ministers of Christ were
wont to do.

What St. Paul did in this matter, he did out of Zeal to further the Gospel,
and not out of Envy to hinder any man's just Right or Title, (...); Have we not
power, viz. that power which is of Right?
and least of all that of the Ministers of Christ unto their own: Yea, lest any
one should construe him in such a sense, he shows himself earnest in their
Defense.

There are diverse poor Incumbents in these days, that endeavor to imitate St.
Paul in this, as far as their occasions may permit, receiving less, and paying
more than the Due, Less than the Due from some of the people, and more than the
Due to some Officers.
nevertheless are quiet and silent in favor of the Gospel. And yet they are
not Apostles as St. Paul was, at liberty to go far and near; but confined to
certain Parishes and Places, and therefore not in a capacity, like St. Paul, to
take of one Church wherewithal to serve another, 2 Cor. 11.8, 9. They must
either receive in some measure their Dues from their own Parishes, or else they
can challenge none at all; to say nothing of the many Duties they pay out of
what they do receive, to one, and to another.

I have insisted the longer upon this Instance drawn out of the Words of Moses
and Hezekiah, on purpose to take you off from thinking the worse of
Tyth-paying, for its being expressed, and set forth in the Law of Moses. Every
thing that is written there, is not Ceremonial, in such manner as to vanish
quite at our Savior's coming in the Flesh, and to abide no longer. The Law
given by Moses was threefold, Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial. One and the same
thing may in diverse respects, partake of these three Laws. I will take the
Subject in hand for instance, viz. Tyth-paying. As it is a Maintenance to the
Priesthood, No Sabbath without an Assembly; no Assembly without a Ministry, no
settled Ministry without a Maintenance, Lev. 23.3. Mal. 1.10. 1 Cor. 9.
or Ministry, so it is Moral, in as much force now as ever: As it was
appropriated unto the Tribe of Levi, so it was Ceremonial, and in that respect
it is abolish't: The Tribe of Levi have no more to do with it now than other
men may have.

In the third of Malachy, the Observation of this Commandment of Tyth-paying,
is established with a solemn Blessing, and the Violation of it threatened with a
severe Curse. If it had been a mere Ceremony (such as some men would have it to
be) the Prophet would not have busied himself much about it. Where do you find
the Prophets so greatly to concern themselves in Ceremonies, as either to
bless, or curse in their behalf?

And that you make not light of this Argument; the Fathers in the Council of
Tibur (says Bishop Andrews) used for Tyth-paying no other Argument, Patres in
Concilio Tiburiensi, cap. 13.
or Reason but this. Tithes (say they) are to be paid, that God being
appeased, may the more plenteously bestow things necessary upon us. The Fathers
also at the Council of Mentz, did use the same Reason. Tithes, say they, Patres
in Concilio Moguntino, cap. 11.
are to be paid, lest God withdraw things necessary from us. In saying thus,
they did not then determine the Right of Tithes, which was determined long
before, but they persuaded men in paying of Tithes to deal justly and truly,
devoutly also, Aug. libro Hom. 48. Majores nostri, etc.
and conscionably. Says St. Aug. Our Ancestors abounded with great Plenty,
because they paid Tyth devoutly and truly. Our [Ancestors] says he; which
implies, that Tyth-paying was of common use long before St. Augustin's Days.

Thus I have done with the second Member of my Argument, viz. that Tyth-paying
was expressly commanded in the Law of Moses.

Now of the third Member, viz. that it has not been forbidden since, nor any
way abrogated, or done away. Which I prove thus:

Whatsoever is made void at the coming of Christ in the Flesh, either falls
void of it self, or else was declared void either by Christ, or his Apostles:
But Tyth-paying neither fell void of it self, nor was declared void either by
Christ or his Apostles; therefore it was not made void at all. The Minor
Proposition, or that Tyth-paying fell not away upon either of the
forementioned accounts, I prove by Parts; and first, that it fell not away of
it self.

What may consist with Christ already given and exhibited, that falls not away
of it self; but Tyth-paying may consist with Christ already given and
exhibited; therefore it falls not away of it self. The Minor I prove:

What is neither Sacrament nor Sacrifice of the Law, that may consist with
Christ already given and exhibited: But Tyth-paying is neither Sacrament nor
Sacrifice of the Law; therefore it may consist with Christ already given and
exhibited. Or thus: Only such things may not consist with Christ given and
exhibited, as made up the Partition Wall, that was between God and Man first,
and then between Men and Men, i. e. between the Jews and Gentiles: But
Tyth-paying was no part of that Partition Wall: It parted not between God and
Man, for it was God himself that did appoint it; it parted not between the Jews
and Gentiles, because both did pay Tyth to their Priests.

Tyth was paid generally in the world, before any Partition between Jew and
Gentile was in being; Plin. lib. 12. cap. 14.19. Not. Hist. Theophrast. lib. 9.
cap. 4. de Plantis. Isocrates in commending the Wisdom and Piety of Bufiris,
the first King of Egypt, does instance in this as a main evidence thereof, viz.
that he fixed a sure and large Revenue upon the Priests, exempting them from
Wars, and other Encumbrances; thinking he could not do too much for those that
served in Holy things. (...), etc. Isocratis de Busiride Orat.
as you may see, if you consult Pliny in his natural History, Isocrates,
Theophrastus, and others. Says Alstedius of things abrogated by the Death of
Christ; That common saying must be of credit, viz. That the blood of Christ
once shed, forbids any more blood to be shed in Sacrifice: Now in Tyth-paying
there is no blood, except it be the Heart-bloud of the profanely covetous,
which makes them even Mad to the Robbing of God.

Neither is Tyth-paying a Sacrifice in any other sense, saving that it is
Eucharistical, (i.e.) it is a Sacrifice of Praise, and Thanksgiving. What is
spent upon Divine worship, is by a wise Man thought Gain. Plaut. de Milite.
He that will not acknowledge God in all his ways, to the intent that he may
direct his Paths; nor honor God with his substance, with a Dependence upon
him, let him pay no Tithes, Prove. 3. verse. 5, 6.9, 10.

How Witty are some profane Ones now a days (some Poor, and others Rich) to
upbraid the most Laborious of Christ's Ministers, As the Heathens did fancy
to themselves a variety of Gods, and every God an Author of some earthly
benefit unto them; so did they honor every such God with a special part of
that benefit whereof they supposed him to be the Author: As Lyaeus with the
Fruit of the Vine; Ceres with the Fruits of the Earth; Minerva with Oil, etc.
Metamor. lib. 8. Fab. 5.
the one with their Labor, and the other with their Estates! (A Reproach most
grievous unto ingenuous Men, such as the Ministers of Christ ought to be.) Holy
Jacob was far from this; what he gave unto God, he called not his Labor, much
less his Estate; but God's Gift. He says not unto God, of all that I shall
labor for, or of all that I shall get; but of all that thou shall give me, I
will give the Tenth unto thee.

Thus, I think, I have proved, that Tyth-paying falls not of it self, at the
Death of Christ, because it may consist with it; yea, it is a real Thanksgiving
unto God, for the grace and benefit of it.

Now it is my part to prove, that Christ did not declare it void in his Life
time, i. e. while he was upon Earth. He Is so far from that, that he enjoined
the Practice of it, Mat. 23.23. and Luke 11. from the 37. verse to the 43. He
omitteth the washing of his Hands before Dinner, though it were to the Offense
of the Pharisee that invited him to his House. He Is so far from saying, that
that ought not to be left undone, that he defends the Omission of it; as he did
also in another place, the rubbing of the Ears of Corn by his Disciples on the
Sabbathday: So little regard had he for either humane Traditions, or needless
Ceremonies. But of Tyth-paying even to the smallest things, he says, these
things ye ought not to leave undone.

It is much to be considered, that when our blessed Savior had speech of the
greatest and weightiest things of all, Faith, Judgment, and Mercy, that at the
same time, and as it were in the same Paragraph, where he says, that the one
ought to be done, he says also, that the other ought not to be left undone.

How you may understand this speech of our Savior, I know not, but Bishop
Andrews says, that the Primitive Church did generally understand it to be
spoken in Confirmation of Tythpaying: To the Proof of which, he quotes St.
Chrysostom speaking for the Greek Church, and St. Augustine for the Latin. The
speech indeed was designed first, and principally for Faith, Judgment, and
Mercy; but then it was accessorily and additionally for justness and exactness
in paying of Tyths. If he had not meant that Tithes should be paid, he would
either have opposed them, as he did many Traditions and Ceremonies; or else at
the least he would have said nothing of them, thereby to suffer them to fall of
themselves.

Now remains only the third part of the Proposition to be proved, viz. That
Tyth-paying was not declared void by the Apostles.

If the Apostles declared Tyth-paying null and void, then that Declaration of
their's is to be found either in their Acts written of them, or in their
Epistles written by them. But it is to be found neither in the one, nor in the
other: Therefore not at all.

The Minor proposition I leave to be disproved by you, viz. By showing where
such Declaration of the Apostles is to be found. They do declare against
Circumcision, Sacrificing, the Priesthood of Levi, making a Difference in Meats
and Drinks, and Days, etc. These were shadows of things to come; whereas Tyth
was nothing else but a Political Maintenance assigned of God, to the use of
those that did serve at the Altar.

If you say that as the Altar is now down, so must the Maintenance go down with
it. I answer, that as the Gospel is up in the room of the Altar, so must the
Maintenance stand up with it, though not in such things as were but Occasional,
and did belong unto Sacrificing; yet in such things as are Fundamental, and do
relate unto Blessing. Though Levi's Sacrificing be past and gone, yet
Melchisedek's Blessing is still in being.

If you allow that those which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, In
Tyth men pay not according to what they have not, but according to what they
have, which is the greatest Equity that can be: there the Rich is not spared,
nor the Poor oppressed.

The benefit, viz. without a blessing, which might be made of the ceasing of
Tyth-paying, whose should it be? the Landlords or the Tenants! I will not
determine, because I think the thing it self in this Nation is hardly to be
supposed, and that upon many and several accounts, though the Clergy only are
upbraided by the Envious and Profane; and among the Clergy, those that labor
most in the Word and Doctrine.


and yet deny Tyth-paying; can you show any other way that may be more just,
and equal than this, and no less certain and steadfast? A Fixt-Ministry, such as
that of the Gospel is, must have also a Fixt-Maintenance. As Princes and Rulers
are God's Ministers in things of Justice, so are Gospel-Preachers God's
Ministers in the things of Religion and Worship. Now, as Tribute is due to
Princes for their continual Attendance on the things of Justice: So is a just
Maintenance due to Gospel-Preachers for their continual Attendance on the
things of the Gospel. Render to all their Dues; Tribute to whom Tribute, custom
to whom, etc. Romans 13.

As Incumbent Ministers are confined to a certain Place, so are they also
confined to their Calling. It is not free for them to shift themselves out of
it, as others may do out of theirs. They are barred from having Trades, as St.
Paul had, yea, from using of Merchandise, or any other means of Livelihood,
being confined to this one thing. And would you pretending to be Tender
Christians (for a man cannot be a great Christian, but that he must be tender
too) would you, I say, that Princes and Rulers that are Christians, should be
so unreasonable as to confine men, free born, freely educated, and brought up
with much cost and expense to a certain Calling (which is for the good of all
men) and not provide that they may live thereof, as may become that calling?

But you will not have Princes and Magistrates to appoint unto you in this
matter; There are many things lawful not only to be done by Christians, but
also to be commanded them by their Superiors, that have less Authority from the
Scriptures than Tithes may have. From some men's impertinent requiring of
scripture for every humane Ordinance, Doctor Sanderson observes that the
misunderstanding of the Doctrine of the perfection of the Scriptures,
occasions much of Error relating unto things indifferent, specially in things
of Prudence and Policy. As if Magistrates might not ordain in these things, but
what they can show Scripture for: whereas it is enough that they ordain nothing
against the Scripture.
you will be free in the things of God, viz. to Rob him if you please: As if it
were not the chiefest concern of Princes, to provide and see, that God be not
robbed either of the truth of his Service, or of the just Maintenance that
belongs thereunto. Shall some few private men persuade them, that a blessing
can rest long upon this Nation without a Ministry; or that to Oppress and
Beggar the Ministry, be the way to continue the Blessing which this Land has so
long enjoyed? I think, they will not incur that Sentence against themselves,
viz. That those which despise him shall be lightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2.30. Shall
God himself appoint unto you in his own things? Or has he not done it already?
If that which we contend for be not of his appointment, show any thing else
that he has appointed in the place of it. Tyth to be once his appointment you
acknowledge; show where, and how he has quitted that Right of his, and what he
has taken in exchange of it, (i. e.) what he has ordained to succeed Tyth in
the Maintenance of the Ministry?

Either Tithes are God's Right of propriety still, or else he has taken
something else in exchange of them, Says Doctor Williams, God has commanded
the Tenth of all the increase of Goods to be paid out, thereby to show that he
reserves a Chiefery of every thing unto himself.

Of the sufferings of the Saints, p. 29.


or else he has no propriety at all, and consequently, he has nothing now
wherein he may be robbed; And if there be nothing wherein God may be robbed, then
is there no such sin as Sacrilege. Oh how fain would profane Misers that
Sacrilege should be no sin! Whereas St. Paul makes it to be as great a sin, if
not greater, than Idolatry, Romans 2.22. There is no sin that blasphemes the Name
of God more than this.

If God had now under the Gospel no propriety wherein he might be robbed; why
does St. Paul, Gal. 6. (where he bids those that are taught in the word,
communicate unto those that teach them in all good things) give warning in the
next Verse, that they should not deceive themselves, as if God might be mocked?
Now if in point of Right and Propriety, God were not concerned in what
Christian people do communicate unto their Ministers, how might he be mocked
therein? For God to be mocked, and to be robbed, I think is one and the same
thing.

If you acknowledge that God has a Right of Propriety in any part or portion
of his Blessings unto you; Quod debebat Abraham Deo, etc. What Abraham owed to
Ged, that he paid into the Hands of Melchisedek. Calvin on the Epist. to the
Hebr. cap. 7. verse. 4.
you must needs also grant, that his Ministers have a Right to use that part,
or portion of his, (viz.) of his Gift, and Assignment. I have proved this
already, Number. 18. at the eight and thirtieth Verse.

. 2d. I have proved that Tyth falls not of it self, as being inconsistent with
the Death of Christ: Heb. 7.18.
It is not in that respect either weak or unprofitable that it should be
abrogated. I have proved also, that our blessed Savior has not declared
against it, but for it. The like I have proved by the Apostles; saving that
they have not used the Word [Tyth] or [Tenth] in this matter. To this you will
add, that they received not Tithes themselves. And in this you triumph against
us, as if we were contrary to the Apostles.

That none of the Apostles at any time, or in any place, received any manner of
Tyth, I think is more than you can prove. Certain it is, that they did receive,
and that both in a plentiful measure, and in an Honorable manner too. Of their
Receipts, they were not only able to maintain themselves, but also to succor
others. They commanded Collections to be made over whole Regions, 1 Cor. 16.1,
2, 3. 2 Cor. 9.1, 2, 3.
and Countries, and directed them to be sent to all places, where the Exigency
of the Brethren did require Relief. In short, they did as the occasion of their
Apostleship did require; And the People did by them as the difficulties of
those times did permit. The People did then pay their Tithes unto others, the
Jews to the Levites, and the Gentiles to the Idol Priests.

What should the Apostles do in those days with Tithes, whenas they were not
fixed to any certain Place, nor tied to any certain Congregation of People? What
should twelve men do with the Tith of the whole World? Gal. 4.15.
From Jerusalem unto Rome, St. Paul was not out of his Parish, but all along as
he went among the Christians, he might command what he pleased. Acts 4.37.
What could the Apostles then have more, than to have the People at their
Service, and what they had at their dispose? The People sold their possessions,
and laid the price of them at the Apostles Feet.

The Apostles were so far from being Poor, that they were in a capacity to
provide for the Poor. Yea, they were beyond the serving of Tables; they must
have Officers under them for that, whilst they should attend a higher work,
viz. Praying, and the Ministry of the Word, Acts 6.4.

Will you have the Christian Church to be always in its Infancy? Will you have
the World generally to be either Jewish, or Heathen, and but a few converted
unto Christ? Will you have Kings and Princes to be Persecutors of the
Christians, for being such? Will you have Idol-Priests to abound in every
place, and will you have the People to be Idolaters? If so; then were there
need that your Ministers should be Apostles, and you your selves such
Christians as those were, that laid the price of their Possessions at the
Apostles feet. Or will you not rather give God thanks that the Church is spread
throughout the World, that whole Nations are become professedly Christian,
Kings and Queens are become Nursing-Fathers, and Nursing-Mothers; Idol Priests
vanished, and the People turned from Idols, to serve the living God? In this
condition, the Church among us has not need of Apostles, but ordinary
Ministers; not of Apostles, to lay the Foundation, but of Ministers, to build
thereon: Ministers orderly called, and ordinarily appointed, to succeed one the
other in all the Parts and Divisions which are made throughout the Land; which
Divisions, we call Parishes.

Now will any sober minded man deny a certain, known Maintenance to be due unto
every man from the place where he is bound to give his Attendance? 1 Cor. 9.12.
Says St. Paul to the Corinthans, If others are partakers of this power over
you, are not we much rather? So say I; If Impropriators and Farmers be
partakers of this power of receiving Tithes from Parishes, are not we much
rather? And yet we are only troubled by you, that labor among you, and are
willing to live peaceably; Why do you not rather suffer wrong? Why do you not
rather suffer your selves to be defrauded?
so willing, that we suffer our selves not only to be defrauded, but also
openly wronged and injured: and with these doings ye applaud your selves for
Perfection, cry out upon us for Persecution. 1 Cor. 9.6.
But to the matter in hand. The Apostles expected not that the Church in all
succeeding Ages should be supplied with Apostles as they were. Says St. Paul
of Christ after his Ascension, He gave some Apostles, Ephesians. 411.
and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers.

Though Pastors and Teachers do succeed the Apostles in the Ministry, As the
Apostles were extraordinarily called and enabled to their Ministry; so were
they also extraordinarily provided the necessaries of life: Which
extraordinaries are ceased to the succeeding Ministers.

The like either of the one, or of the other is not to be expected again;
except there should be a new Gospel to be Preached, and new Miracles to be
wrought.


yet in a strict sense are they not Apostles as they were: and therefore in
diverse Circumstances the same things are not to be expected from them: No new
Gospel, no Revelation, no Miracles, and therefore neither must they expect from
the People such things, as the Apostles did, (viz.) to have the People every
where at their Service, and what things they have at their dispose. But as they
are stinted in their Ministry, (viz.) to build on the Foundation which the
Apostles have laid; so are they stinted also in their Maintenance, not to
command what they please, but to receive what is appointed unto them, and that
not every where, but only from the place where they are appointed to serve.

By that time the Ministry came to be in Pastors and Teachers, the Gospel was
spread far and near, the World was generally become Christian, and the
Christian Church had Peace and quietness in many Lands and Nations, Kingdoms,
and States; then the Christians being thus spread and multiplied were glad also
to increase the number of their Teachers, dividing themselves into such parts
and parcels, Parishes and Congregations, as that they might conveniently be
served by them.

Parishes, and Decimations, or Tith-payments, were heretofore held to be
Reciprocal, (i. e.) implying one another: And still we say not, the Tith of the
Lordship or of the Manor, but the Tith of the Parish: and yet Tith was paid
long before Lands and Nations were divided into Parishes, yea, before they were
divided into Bishoprics; nay, before the Church had perfect Peace or
Quietness. And not only so, but Churches also were endowed by devout persons,
Eusebius. Eccl. Hist. lib. 9. cap. 8. Origin affirms, that the Commandment for
Tyth paying ought still to stand according to the Letter of it. In his 11. Hom.
upon Number. 18. And Clem Alexandrinus who lived very near the first Century,
affirms the Tenth of the Fruits, and other Increase to be due to the Priests.
(...).
Men and Women, even in the midst of Martyrdoms. This is storied to be done in
the Emperor Trajan's days; yea, before his days no man can tell how soon they
began; they were always in doing, notwithstanding the greatest persecutions.

But before I can go on with my Argument, I must return to the Apostles again;
between whom, and the succeeding Pastors and Teachers, I have showed to be a
great difference; of which difference, those that are profanely greedy, as
envious to the calling of the Ministry, as they are Miserable to detain their
Dues, will take notice: And yet they will have them to agree in this one thing,
viz. That the present Pastors and Teachers have no more House and Home than
some of the Apostles had. That we should have the like Liberty, Command, and
Authority as they had, they would not wish by any means. That we have not these
things as they had is, I think, a convincing Argument, that though it might be
proved that they received not Tyths, yet it does not thence follow, that we
ought not to receive them.

If they received not Tyths in those early days of Christianity, yet others
did: As the Levites among the Jews, and the Idol-Priests among the Heathens. As
they did continue their Priesthood, so did they also continue to receive their
Tithes. Though they were void de Jure, yet de Facto, they were not, until they
were declared, and made known to be so: And then says Musculus a Protestant
Writer, the Tyths were taken from them, and conferred upon the Gospel Ministers.

Postellus, a very Learned Man, says in his Book, wherein he treats of such
things as the whole World is agreed on, that it is a Natural Principle, an
inbred Notion to every man, that sets not himself to resist even the Light that
is within him, to think it reasonable that out of the yearly Increase that God
gives him in his Goods and Substance, he should return a Portion of that as a
Holy Tribute to the Maintenance of God's public Worship and Service.

I am a great King, says the Lord of Hosts, and my Name is dreadful among the
Heathen, Mal. 1.14. When was the time, Give unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. Says Mr Leigh, It is
observable in this place, that the Article is twice repeated in the Greck Text,
when our Savior speaks of God, and but once when he speaks of Caesar; showing
our special care should be, to give God his Due. Annot. p. 50.
or where was the place, that God's Sovereignty was not acknowledged, viz. by
giving unto him the things that are his? You know that in the late Troubles,
Tyths were paid without dispute. Ministers are not the only Men now a days
that are concerned in Tyths; they have no Personal Inheritance in them; they
neither descend unto them from their Ancestors, nor yet go down from them to
their Posterity: They are to them only a Maintenance to their calling, and a
Reward to their Service; and that in many places so slender an Allowance, by
reason of Impropriations, and other Deductions, Not only Poverty, but also the
contempt, which by the ruder sort is usually cast upon it, should not be
grievous unto a good Clergyman, but that it does disable him diverse ways,
both Spiritually and Temporally rendering him the less profitable unto those,
whose concern it is to submit themselves unto him, and to receive profit by
him. Heb. 13.17.
that while they live, they do but hardly subsist, and when they dye, they
leave not wherewithal to pay a Mortuary. Nor do I see the generality of People
to love them the more for being poor, nor the readier to pay them their Dues
for being small; but so much the bolder either to detain them from them, or
else to diminish them unto them: Though indeed those that are truly Religious,
and consequently well-will'd to the calling, may have a Tenderness for them
upon that account.

What was in the World of a known Right, and constant Practice, all along
before the Law was given by Moses; What was expressly commanded in that Law, and
of which there has been no Prophecy that it should cease at any time; What did
no way typifie Christ to come in the flesh, and now that he is come, does not
derogate therefrom; What has not been declared void, either by Christ, or his
Apostles; What was no part of the Partition Wall that was between Jews and
Gentiles; What ceased not with the Jewish-Church and Commonwealth, but
continued in the Lands and Nations among whom the Jews were dispersed: What the
Primitive Christians did never disown as to the matter of Right, and for
Practice, did put in use as soon as conveniently they might, meanwhile
supplying the Church even with the Sale of their Lands and Possessions: What
the Law of the Land most Religiously commands, threatening most severe
Punishment unto those that fail; What is not only lawful in it self, but also
expedient for you (for a payment of greater Equity you cannot devise,) That
judge you, if you may not part with, with a safe conscience, viz. without fear
of displeasing God in so doing.

While you tarry for further satisfaction (if you desire any) by an impartial
Reading of other learned men's Works, I have published this little Tract, on
purpose to beg this Condescension at Learned Men's hands. And I beseech you,
show not your selves so desperate, as to render their Labor lost that shall
travel to do you good.

The gain saying of Tyth is indeed but an Out-work of your Sect: yet is it the
main thing that you trust unto; as being both an In let to the Greedy and
Profane to come in unto you; and also an Outlet of Obliquies and profane
Speeches, to the disparagement of Religion and Piety.


either set forth already, or to be set forth hereafter purposely for your use,
and to your capacity; I think you can do no less than suffer your Tyths to be
had from you in quietness, out of Tenderness, First, to the word of God, of
whose Sentence in this case you must needs be doubtful at the least: Secondly,
of opppsing the general and constant practice of the Christian world for the
space of fourteen hundred years and upwards: and thirdly, of controuling the
Law of the Land wherein you live, the resisting whereof is Self-damnation, Romans
13.2. And yet indeed to watch you leading Home your Corn, is both unseemly, and
difficult; and then to take what you do not lay out, is not proper to be done.

Be persuaded to lay out your Tyths as others do, that so among your Neighbors
you may make way for that Blessing to light upon us, Julian the Apostate, could
not devise a better Method to destroy Christianity, than by taking away the
Maintenance of the Ministry.
which God has promised unto those that Honor him with their substance, Prove.
30.10.

I think you not so stupid, as not to take notice of the justness of God's
providence in these late years, altering greatly both the Weather, You Will say,
far be it from you to seek the destruction of Christianity: I say so too; yea,
so far as not to endeavor any such thing, the just and plain consequence
whereof, may impair, or but occasion any the least detriment unto it.
Nevertheless, it is reported of your Teachers, that they make but light even of
the person of Christ himself: What then do they make of his Office, and what
wonder is it that they teach you, to cast off his Institutions, viz. his Word,
Sacraments, Ministry, etc. making use of you to cry Hirelings against us;
whilst they privily (as St. Peter says) and I presume, unawares to many of
you, do bring in damnable Heresies, denying even the Lord that bought them, 2
Pet. 2.1. O let them not under pretense of the power of Christ within you,
persuade you to make light of the Person of Christ without you, it is Christ
without you that has bought you. Honor him as ye ought, and despise his
Institutions if you can.
and the Fruits of the Earth, from what they were wont to be. This is
occasioned by our Mis-doings, among the which, I think no Man will reckon
Tyth-paying, it being not only justifiable in it self, but also Commendable,
and withal, of a longer standing, than that any such thing may be laid to its
charge. What may be thought of the contrary, viz. Gainsaying of Tyth, a
Novelty, and that a dangerous one too, I leave to you to consider. My Son, fear
thou the Lord, and the King, and meddle not with those that are given to
change, Prove. 24.21, 22. And yet, what you would have, may not properly be said
to be a change; for a change is of something into something, or of one thing
for another: But what you would have, (if you know what it is) is a bringing of
something into nothing.

If you will not be concerned in these Words of Solomon, your Design aiming
further than a change; be pleased to hearken to St. Paul, bidding you to study
to be quiet, and to do your own business; which I think not to be that either
of Church or State.

Upon condition you study to be quiet in such manner, that King and Kingdom,
Church and State, Land and Nation, may be in quiet for you, I bid you heartily
to Farewell.

FINIS.

