A Cluster of sweetest GRAPES FOR SAINTS, Brought from the Heavenly Canaan.

OR, The Saints Assurance, gotten, and to be had in this Life, by the several
means specified in this Tract upon 1 Pet. 1.9.

And fifteen Soul-solacing Conferences with Christ, touching Sins and the
World's Conquest; according to the high and noble Art of fighting the great
fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.

Fitted for all such gracious Souls as do most heartily desire to see the death
of their strong and mighty corruptions, and a through victory gotten over this
vile and troublesome World.

By Christopher Jelinger M. A.

LONDON, Printed in the year 1664.

Epigramma Authoris Auspicatorium, ad JESVM CHRISTVM, REGEM REGVM, Dominum suum
Clementissimum.
CHrist^ Decus Coeli, Coelorum Gloria, Christ,
Unica Progenies ex Deitate Patris,
Adveniat nobis Regnum, quod nomine Coeli
Scripturae dicunt, adveniatque salus:
Monstretur nobis facies tua, Maxim Regum,
Et tendat sursum quicquid ad ima ruit;
Adveniat quoque laeta Canan, quae dulcia semper
Tundit mella probis angelicisque viris,
Tempora decedant, quibus (heu) FIDUCIA nobi^
Defuit, and veniant tempora grata Tuis;
Adveniat nova Lux, veniant Saturnia Saec'la
Quae exhilarent Sanctos, Optime Christ, tuos*
Accedatque piis FIDUCIA Magna salutis,
Et gustent Justi gaudia, magna Poli,
Adveniat cunctis etiam, sperantibus in te
Fons vitae, semper dulcibus Uber aquis;
Ambrosios libent Coelesti e Nectare Rores
Qui Coelum sitiunt, justitiamque Dei;
Adveniat porro Coelestis Musica, Christ,
Et nos nunc recreent Jubila Grata Poli,
Quae nec Julaeae voces, nec tibia possit.
Musica Cyrrhaeis assimilare Modis,
Et te collaudent, spes, O fidissima Mundi,
Omnia quae existunt, Lux, Polus, arva, fretum
(...)
To the truly Virtuous Lady, the Lady Margaret Courtney, Grace and Peace from
God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ.
MADAM,
I Cannot but be mindful of you also in the publishing of my several Treatises.

Your gracious carriage and good report which you have among good and gracious
people; and your exemplary forwardness to come to our Lectures when they were
up; and the great respect which I have, and fervent love which I bear to your
Noble Family, since I came first acquainted with it, has in a manner
constrained me so to do, and by name to dedicate unto you these Soul-solacing
Conferences with Christ which I have penned, and upon the earnest request of
others published, for the good of all such gracious souls as do desire no
better talk than such as is contained in one of these Books, and doubtless is
most pleasing to Christ. Christ you know did soon draw near to those Luke 24.15.
Emauntish Pilgrims, who did but talk of him; and therefore much more will not
be far from us also, if we shall not only talk so of him, but also with him;
especially when he shall see that we do most heartily desire to see the death
of our sins, and to live above this vile and evil world, as Conqueror of it,
and not conquered by it. Oh! that does his very heart good; and therefore how?
Oh how should we confer and talk, and commune with him about it even day and
night, that we may oppose it with all our might, prospering and prevailing
against it to our souls delight?

Madam, Christ will be exceeding glad of our talk, if we shall so talk with
him, as here we are taught of the conquest of this world, that we may reign
with him in the other world.

His heavenly Highness therefore gives us hearts to speak as we ought to speak,
that after we have spoken with him here, we may be spoken unto, by him
hereafter, to triumph with him for ever.

So prays Your most humble servant in Christ Christopher Jelinger.

To the Worshipful THOMAS REYNEL, Esquire And Justice of the Peace, Grace and Mercy
be multiplied
WORSHIPFVL,
MAay it please you to give me leave to dedicate, and to present this little
Tract of The Saints Assurance unto you, as to a Person so enobled with Grace,
as that by God's Grace enabling you, I hope you will not only Patronize it; but
also promote my grand design in it, which is to stir up all that shall read it,
to the gaining of the said Assurance through Gods assistance.

Worthy Sir, you see what a Subject I am fallen upon, even a Subject which will
subject our fears, eject our doubts, and deject all adverse powers, which in
the want of this Assurance are wont illaqueate our very intellects, to
captivate our wills, and to subjugate all the powers of our souls. Souls
therefore will never do well till they be heavened with it; for my part, when I
take a full circle of my self, and a through view of my condition, do find
without it my very being to be a burden, my life a Sustaining the loss of the
light of God's countenance.
loss, my heart a hell; for Oh the hellish horrors that a man shall feel in his
heart, when this Assurance is far from his heart! But when it is in it, O what
a glad man is he! Heaven being in his heart, his heart in Heaven; Oh Sir! what
a Heaven, what a Paradise, what a beatitude did circumscribe that holy *
Father, when, St. Hierom.
as he writes of himself, he was, as it were, in medio Angelorum choro, in the
very midst of the quire of Angels, hearing them sing, as he was in Eremo, in a
Wilderness! and may not we be so too? yes verily, if we would but labor, as we
ought, for this Assurance, treading into the Vestigaes or footsteps of those
blessed Hebrews, who were so assured of their salvation, and eternal bliss,
according to that memorable expression of the Apostle, Heb. 10.34. Knowing
(mark) knowing in your selves, that you have in Heaven a better and more
enduring substance; for then as they thereby were, so we thereby shall come to
the innumerable company of Angels, etc. Heb. 12.22. Confess I must that it is
as hard a thing to acquire, and to gain this Assurance, as any thing I know in
the world, and you know, Sir, how the Church of Rome does fulminate and thunder
out her Council. Trid. sess. 6. c. 9. and 16.
Anathema's against us, for maintaining this Assurance to be had in this life;
but I am not discouraged from this treating on it by either, for against the
one, I know that I am defensated and born up by God's never-failing Truth,
against the other by his power; and therefore I say, for all this, let us, O
let us labor, and labor hard (because our work is so hard) and strive, as for
life, to be persuaded in our hearts, that without fail and doubt we shall enter
into life. Life here is sweet, but that above is sweeter, and the Assurance of
it the sweetest thing in all this world's circumference; for when a man has
it, he may truly say of it, Oh! what a life do I now live, living by the faith
of the Son of God Gal* 2.20.
who loved me and gave himself for me? Oh the unexpressible peace which I now
have within me, being persuaded in my breast that with heavenly bliss I shall
be for ever blessed! Oh what a glorying joy does now warm me! what a^ Ocean of
comfort overflow me and what a Heaven of glory becircle me! Oh this Assurance,
this heavenly Assurance is nothing else but the very gate of Heaven, (...)
Jacob said once of the place where he saw the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon a Ladder which reached to Heaven, Genesis 27.17. Oh Sir, could we
but follow those lessons which are laid down for our going up as it were by
steps to that height of hope, which in this life a man may tower up to; could
we live such a spotless, such a strict, such an holy, such a seraphical life as
here is shown us, could we get the pardon of our sins sealed to us, could we
gain that high and unquestionable testimony of Gods holy Spirit, which is to be
had by us, how soon would this be our case too? and how soon would we be able
to echo forth the same expessions being filled with unparallelable
consolations? Oh Sir, let us stir therefore, and strive to our utmost, to
express the virtue, the life, the power of the things here shown us, laboring
especially for a gust of the very joys of Heaven, which here we are pointed to;
and to lead an extraordinary, exemplary, blameless, most holy, and heavenly
life, which we are appointed to: And what I say to your worthy self, and my
unworthy self, I say to all; strive, Oh strive with all your might, for this
most glorious and Heavenly Assurance of your salvation, which you expect to an
endless duration for your souls delight.

Your Worships most humble Servant, Christopher Jelinger.

A CLUSTER OF Sweetest Grapes for Saints Newly brought from the Heavenly
Canaan. OR, The Saints Assurance, Upon 1 PET. 1.9. Even the Salvation of your
Souls.
MY Soul longs, and loves to be there where she may be happy, and so she looks
upon this Text as a Theme, whose handling and following (with God's blessing)
is able to center her so, as that she shall be blessed; for it carries
happiness in its bosom, and is ready to bring Salvation, and the Assurance of
it to it, and to every believing Saint, who carries Christ in his heart: so
that for this very end I have chosen it, that thereby I may unload my fraighted
mind, and pursue my much drawn forth, and (for the Saints Assurance of their
salvation) bound and bent intention. If we look a little higher we shall see a
very heap of Blessings cumulated and laid together by blessed Peter, as
streaming from the Fountain of all blessings, to wit, God's infinite, and not
to be fathomed mercy, v. 3.

More particularly he enumerates these following mercies:

1. Regeneration, v. 3. Then

2. Glorification, v. 4. And

3. Perseverance, by the power of God here to be enjoyed, v. 5. Then

4. Onspeakable joy already obtained, v. 6.

Which done, he superadds the procreant cause of the said great and glorious
joy, as namely, a most certain hope of eternal life in my Text, Even the
salvation of your souls. Where, let us consider, Parts of the Text.
1. What. 2. Whose.


1. What. Even the salvation, Part
which comes in thus, Receiving, which necessarily infers a great Assurance.
Receiving the end of your Faith, Gagneius in Loc. per Meton. Adj. Haebr.
or fruit, as some, by your unspeakable joy, v. 8. and then by way of
Amplification, Even the salvation, etc. Salvation is taken,

1. For an external Deliverance, Exodus 14.13.

2. For the Metonymice.
Author of any salvation, Ps. 27.1.

3. Christ especially the Author of our salvation, Luke 2.30.

4. Our spiritual deliverance in the beginning of our conversion, Luke 19.9.

5. Our eternal deliverance from Sin and Satan and everlasting happiness,
consisting of two degrees.

The first is enjoyed, when being unmanned by death, we are carried in the arms
of Angels, into the arms of Christ who is the head of Angels, as Luke 16.22.

The second will be enjoyed after judgment, when being resuscitated out of the
dust of the earth, we shall be enroabed with the refulgent beams of sparkling
glory, in the Kingdom of glory, Heb. 1.14. Tropic.


6. The sure and certain Spes est indubitatus ante thesaurum thesaurus, Joh.
Clim. gr. 30.
hope of ever during bliss, and never fading glory in the foretast of it, as
here, where I find some Expositors so to understand this famous Scripture; I
for my part, took this to be the sense of this high and lofty place, before I
saw what others say; but when I found others to be of the same mind, I was glad
and mightily corroborated in my judgment. I will cite at present, but one
passage out of Piscator in Loc.
one, who writing upon this Text, Even the salvation of your souls; says thus,
that is the certain hope of eternal life, in that they did most certainly hope
that they should obtain salvation, as the reward of Faith; thus he: but I do
most of all ground this Exposition upon Romans 8.24. For we are saved by hope,
that is, we are assured by an undoubted and a certain hope, that we shall be
saved. For otherwise we are not already saved, but shall be, a notable place
for our But if any will not receive this Exposition, yet will he be forced to
admit of this by me here understood Assurance, by the foregoing word Receiving,
for wha^ we receive we are sure of.
purpose and this Assurance. The Greek word for salvation here is (...) from
(...), which signifies, I defend, and preserve; and so it shows how when
salvation comes, defense comes; and preservation comes. For when it comes, we
come to be defended against and preserved from all the evils which now we feel,
or fear, and especially, Death and Damnation, by a great and glorious
deliverance.

2. Whose. Part.
Your souls.

1. Souls. And yet has each man but one, Videatur Suaretz Disput. Suet. to. 2.
dep. 15. Sect. 8.
not two, as some have held. For God breathed into Adam the breath of life,
(that is, a rational Soul) not breaths, Genesis 2.7.

But what is a Soul?

It is an Act, says the Philosopher, of a body Arist. l. 2. de Anim* cui
assentit Suaretz Met. Disp. to. 1. Disp. is S. W 8.
organical, which has life Religio medici, p. 79.
potentially, in it self being inorganical; mark, inorganical, for the Learned
in Anatomy tells us, that among those rare discoveries, and curious pieces they
observe in the Fabric of man, they find no Organ, or instrument for the
rational Soul of man; for in the brain, which we term the seat of Reason,
there is not any thing more of moment, than there is in the Crany of a Beast:
thus we speak according to Philosophers, as far as they are agreed, for they do
not all, nor can agree among themselves, so as to tell us exactly what it is.
But what says Divinity of it?

I Answ. That it is a spirit, Lactant. 1. de Opif. Dei, c. 17.
and breath of life, Genesis 2.7. Eccl. 12.7. Heb. 12.9. If you go farther, and
ask me, But what is that spirit and that breath of life? I Answer, It is
something in us, and in Est tota in toto corpore, and in qualibe^ part ejus,
Petr. Lomb. c. 8. l. 1. Et non in cor^ de tantum, ut scribit, Ter^^. l. 3. de
Anim. c. 15.
every part of us; but can be without us, and will be after us; though it be
hardly known how it came into us; and how seated in us, blessed Austin
ingeniously confesses it that he cannot tell, or thus, it is a truly spiritual
Essence; Number sit ex raduce, vel ^reata, ut nos ^ensemus cum Lactant. de Opif.
Dei, c. 19. and aliis. (...) Bucan. l. 8. ^. 115.
incorporeal, immaterial, and subsisting; when it is separated from the body.

2. Your Souls, ^ Contra Ter^ull. qui eam definet esse ^orproream, ^. 3. de
Ani^^a, c. 7.
meaning the Souls of Saints, v. 8. who believing and rejoicing in Christ,
receive the end of their Faith, which is the certainty of their salvation,
which comes by Christ.

Whence note.

If any would have this Doct. to run thus, That Saints in this life may gain
and have this Assurance, he may take ^it so. But I, to encourage all Men to
labor for it, shall use here the word Men, and yet chiefly aim at Saints.
men in this life may gain and have the Assurance of their Souls salvation. See
Job. 9.27. Heb. 10.22.34. 2 Timothy 4.78. and especially Heb. 3.14.

Where give me leave to show,

1. What this Assurance is.

2. Why men in this life may gain it.

1. What it is, namely, The soul of Faith, the Paradise of Saints, the Canaan
of Believers, the Ladder of Life, the Life of Heaven. Or thus, it is that
whereby we re-enter Paradise, surmount all ordinary men, triumph over hell,
transcend our selves, and ascend into Heaven it self. See Calvin. Inst. l. 3.
c. 2. Sect. 16. how he defines it.

2. Why Men in this life may gain and have it.

As Namely, 1. By reason of, Reason.
faith Fidem ipsam quisque videt in cord suo, si credit Augustinus. Cui
assentit Petr. Lomb. did. 23. l. 3. fol. 259.
sure of their faith, and see it, if they have true faith, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know,
whom I have believed; and therefore they may be sure, also that they shall be
saved; for, He that believes, and is baptized shall be saved, says Christ,
Mark 16.16. see also John 3.36. and note it well: So that the Apostle might
well call faith an evidence Heb. 11.1. and Vnde Basil de vera and pia fide, p.
345. Est approbatio sine ulla haesitatione cum summa persuasione.
Basil a mosthigh and undoubted persuasion, according to, Romans 4.21.

2. Men may be sure of their Vocation in this life, Rerson.
if they be called, For you see your calling, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.26.
mark, you see it, as a man may see himself to be out of a pesthouse, out of a
prison, out of darkness, so a man may see himself called out of the pesthouse
and prison of sin, and out of darkness brought into God's mavelous light. 1
Pet. 2.9. Whereupon it follows, that a man may also be assured that he shall
be saved; For whom he calls he glorifieth, Romans 8.30.

3. Men may be sure of their election by the use of means, Reason.
although some of the Error Augustini de cor. and great. c. 3.
Ancients deny it, it is evident from, 2 Pet. 1.5, 6. and if so, they may be
of their salvation too; for whom he did Romans 8.30.
predistinate, he also glorified; and if chosen, then children, Ephesians. 1.7.
Having predistinated us to the adoption of children; and if children, then
heirs, Romans 8.16. For who shall have what we have, but our children? so, who
shall have what God has, viz. life and Heaven, but his Children?

4. Men may be sure of their justification, if justified, Reason.
Hoc nega^ council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 9. sed temere. Quid aliud peccata nostra
tegere potuit quam Christi justitia. Justin Martyr Epist: ad Diognetum.
whereby their sins are forgiven, and covered with Christ's Righteousness,
Psalm. 32.5. Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. Ergo, For whom he
justified them he also glorified, Romans 8.30.

5. Men may be sure of their sanctification, if sanctified; Reason.
For to be sanctified, is to shine as a light in the dark, Phil. 2.15. Now, a
light in darkness must needs be seen, so as that a man may truly say, here is
light, whereupon it follows, that when a man sees that he is light in the
Lord, and shines as a light, he may also be assured, that he shall be saved by
the Lord, see a^ These. 2.13. how therefore sanctification and salvation are
enlink'd together.

6. Men may be sure here of their Reason.
Videatur Cypr. p. 141.
perseverance, and o^ God's constant love to them in Christ, if once they be in
Christ, let the Papists deny it a thousand times, after the tradition of their
Fathers; who Cyril. Alex. in John 5. p. 703. intelligit nostram charitatem; and
dicit fideles nunquam ^b ea deficere.
Anathematize us for saying so; It is clear from, John 13.1. and from Romans
8.31. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? and v. 37, 38. I am
persuaded that neither life, nor death, etc. Read that famous place. Bellarmin,
and Stapleton Rome's great Champions would have this place to yield, but only a
Stapleton Antid. p. 503.
moral, and Bellarmine l. 3. c. 2. de justificatione.
conjectural certitude, but how can Council. Trid. Sess. 6. c. 116.
^hey prove it, since the Apostle says expressly; I am persuaded of it; they
have a shift, that Paul was persuaded by a Reve^ation, which we have not, and
that he speaks of Stapl. ibid.
himself, and ^ot us; but what says Paul when he comes to his Revelations; he
tells us, they were of things not lawful for a man to ^utter, 2 Cor. 12.4. but
this he does utter. Ergo,

Besides, he does not only speak of himself, but us also; as his very words
show, who shall separate us? Mark, us, not we. See also, Jer. 32.40. Romans
11.29. John 10.28. 2 Timothy 2.19. For the Saints perseverance, and compare all
with Matthew. 24.13. He that shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved.

Now all these 7 Reasons will serve for Saints also, if you leave out if still
and that which goes with it, and put in Saints for Men.
Reason.
Men in this life may feel the joys of Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.8. whereupon my Text
infers; that then they receive the salvation of their souls; that is, the
certain hope of their salvation, being already rapt up into Heaven; heavened in
glory; embosomed in God, and elevated to the highest zenith of divine
consolation.

Now to the Application of this grand Conclusion. Use of Consut.


And first, May not this serve to confute the Doctrine of the Concel. Trid.
Sess. 6. c. 9. and 16.
Church of Rome; averring that no man can in this life be sure of his
justification (and so consequently salvation) without a Revelation.

The Champions of that Church, stand chiefly upon these two Objections, or
places of scripture which I Will therefore briefly answer.

1. That, Object.
in Eccles. 9.1. No man knows love, or hatred, by all things before him;



1. That which follows, v. 2. shows the meaning of this place; that no man
knows that by these outward things, and by the event of things.

2. The words love and hatred, are Metonymically rendered; and expounded by
Jun. or Tremel. juxta, v. 8.
Expositors; to be things loved; and hated.

3. The other place is that in Heb. 6.4, 5. For it is impossible for those that
were once enlightened, etc. Read the place. From whence they infer; that a man
may go very far; and yet fall away at last; and if so, how can any man be sure
of salvation, seeing he may fall away, though he be never so eminent now for
holiness before he dies?

To this I answer thus.

Either the Apostle speaks of real, or of seeming Saints; if of real, as some
would have it; then these words, if they fall away, must be understood, as
spoken by way of supposition. As 1 Cor. 9. ult. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2, 3. and Gal.
1.8. Though I (or if as v. 9.) we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other
Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you; let him be
accursed. If, of seeming Saints, as I take it, then these words, were once
enlightened, etc. must be understood of grace temporaliter, as Divines speak,
or for a time received; and of the common work of God's Spirit; and common
gifts which Reprobates, and Temporaries, and such as sin against the Holy Ghost
(which sin, some say, the Apostle here speaks of) may partake of, so that, no
wonder it is, if they fall away.

2. But secondly, Use of Addubitation.
may not this afford me matter of Addubitation also? as thus; What shall I
think then of those, who being Protestants do think that they cannot possibly
be assured of their salvation in this life; and therefore always doubt and
rest so contented? There was a sect of men once called Skepticks, because they
questioned every thing, and I take these men to be partly of that sect too,
(for sects do not perish with their Authors altogether, but like the River
Arethus^, though they lose their current in one place, they rise up again in
another) but oh the insufferable infidelity in men professing Christianity!

3. And may not this Doctrine afford us matter of Communication too? Yes
verily, as thus; Use of Communication. Addubitati^ est deliberati^ nobiscum
Communicatio cum aliis.
Then why do not men and women labor for this Assurance; I say this Assurance
which here I treat of, some Assurance some have, but it is that which is called
Confidence in the flesh, or Carnal, not this. This not one of a thousand has,
nor seeks after. But why? my Brethren why? shall I tell you my thoughts, some
do not, because they are not willing to go to the pains which this Assurance
costs him that will obtain it, and herein even some true Believers may be
faulty. Others do believe that they do believe, when they do not, and so do not
labor after Faith, nor Assurance, for why should they labor after it, say
they, seeing they have it already? when either they have no Faith at all, or if
any but a Dogmatical, or Temporary, which is but a deceitful Faith like Alcumi.
The Alcumists are grown to that skill, that they will make Alcumi appear to be
perfect Silver and Gold, and much of it will bear the touchstone, that one can
hardly discover it, but when fire and hammer come to it, it will bear neither
of them, for it comes not from the right place whence Gold and Silver comes,
namely from mines; so men are come up to that height of skill in deceiving that
they will deceive any, for they will make their Temporary Faith even to glisten
like Gold, and it will pass for true Faith amongst men; and for a time hold
even under some trials, but when greater tribulations indeed come and the word
like fire and a hammer comes, their Faith is discovered to be no true saving
Faith, for it cannot endure either, because it came not the right way, whence
true faith comes, namely by the Word, and by true, and sound, and deep
humiliation; and there is much of that Alcumi. Faith now going, and that is
much the cause of it why men want this Assurance, but I wonder how some of you,
who are under this want, can be so contented; if a woman have a husband that
can assure her of something, she will be assured of something, or else she will
not be contented, nor let him to be quiet; and if a man have but one child, he
will do what he can to make it assured of something after his death, and till
then he will not rest; but you methinks can rest, and sit still, and be
contented, though you be certain of nothing; that is, though you be nothing at
all assured, as ye ought to be, of any bliss or blessedness that you shall have
hereafter in Heaven, and though you have but one poor soul each of you to be
cared and provided for, and though you know that God, who is an everlasting
Husband to some of you, is able to assure you of something indeed, I mean of
Heaven and happiness for ever, O monstrous carelessness! O stupendous security!
O how can you choose but even doubt whether you have any Nam vere fiddis non est
nisi qui divina benevolentiae promissionibus fretus indubitatam salutis
expectationem praesumit, Calvin Inst. l. 3. c. 2. s. 10.
true faith at all yea or no, it being a (...), or Though wrestling with
doubtings which oppose it and by degrees are overcome by it.
full persuasion? Heb. 10.22.

4. I come next to a Use of Excitation, to stir up my self and you to labor
therefore for this Assurance; Use of Excitation.
seeing it is so to be had in this life. For the better managing of which Use I
shall tender to you.

1. Directives, or Mediums. 2. Incentives.
1. Directives, to wit, these. Directives.


1. Labor to be born again if ye are not, Direct.
for so were those blessed Saints here; who were so assured of their salvation,
as you may see v. 3. Has begotten us again. Give me leave therefore to insist
upon Regeneration a little while. And

1. Let me intrat you to imbibe, receive, and take inwardly the word of
Regeneration; whereby we are born again; as it is written, 1 Pet. 1.23. Being
born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God,
which lives and abides for ever, where note, that this Regenerating word of
God is partly Law and partly Gospel.

1. As Law, and so it does three things.

1. It discovers unregeneracie, and unregenerate men, and shows what manner
of men they are like a glass, Jam. 1.23. as for example, by that famous place,
^^m. 3.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. where it describes them, what
throats, mouths, tongues, feet, they have, I pray you read the place. It is
storied of Luther, that a certain Jew would have poisoned him, but was
discovered by his picture, sent to Luther, by a faithful friend, warning him to
beware of such a man, when he did see him, such a faithful friend is the law
which so discovers unregeneracie, which would kill us, by such a portracture
that we may escape it, and live.

2. It puts life into sin, as you may read, Romans 7.8, 9. I was alive without
the law once; but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed: this is
a notable place, I pray you, let me open it a little, sin revived, that is, it
began to stir, to tear, Nitimur in vetitum semper, cupimusque negata.
to irrit, to exite, to do what is forbidden; and to affright withal, as some
understand the place so that I felt it. Before the law comes home close; sin is
as it were dead; like a dead adder or Lion, and so quiet; but when the law
comes, it is like an adder which is alive, so it bites, and 1 Cor. 15.56
stings, and like a living Lion, so it roars, and so it terrifieth, and makes
men afraid to Deducit enim talis metus ad poenitentiam. Clem. Alex. strom: l.
2. p. 58.
bring them to repentance, and Regeneration.

3. It kills, according to the fore-alledged place, Romans 7.9. Sin revived,
and I died; that is, I felt and saw, that I was dead and damned by the law,
whereas before I was alive; that is, I thought as sure that I should be saved
as any man alive. Thus the law kills men, and makes them sensible of the
miserable sad and damnable condition wherein they are, whilst they are in the
state of unregeneracie: according to that dreadful place, John 3.3. Read it.

2. As Gospel, so the regenerating word of God holds forth one sweet and
precious promise or other, like an orient pearl, to revive the dying, drooping
spirits of men when the law has brought them as it were to deaths door; as for
example, That most refulgent and reviving promise, in Ezekiel. 36.26. And new
heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will
take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart of
flesh. Thus the Gospel opens a Hos. 2.15.
door of hope for poor creatures condemned by the law; that though they are,
and must be prisoners, and condemned prisoners, yet they may be prisoners of
hope, Zac. 9.12. that is, may not be without some hopes of mercy; and of a
gracious deliverance,

Thus the law kills, but the Gospel saves. The law comes, bringing Damnation,
but the Gospel comes bringing salvation; the law comes with a dagger to stab
those that are alive; but the Gospel comes with a plaster to cure those that
are stabbed; and lie for dead, as Christ himself came to save those that were
lost; so the Gospel comes to bring men to Christ, that they may not be lost;
for when souls come to Christ, being born again by the word of Christ; Christ
comes to them, and when he comes, salvation comes; for he comes bringing
Salvation, Zach. 9.9. (Read the place) that those which were under the sentence
of Damnation, may attain to the state of Salvation, even the Salvation of their
souls, according to my text. Now, this regenerating word of God, you must take,
and apply every one of you, and not put it off, or let it lie as dead; saying;
Am not I such an unregenerate man now? have not I such filthy hands, which have
touched the unclean thing? Such a throat, such feet, such a mouth, and such a
tongue* which has talked so filthily? etc. But yet may not I hope that the
Lord will show me mercy, and regenerate me also, as well as others, Giving me a
new heart? etc.

3. Betake your selves to your Matthew. 6.6. and I allude to Esa. 26.20
Chamber, and spend at least one day as a day of Jejuniis and orationibus
vacato. Ignatius
fasting; I have done the same upon the same account; if you think that the
time of your regeneration is near come, as I hope it is, and that the pangs of
the new birth are at the door, and shut your door, and there, and then see your
selves convert, according to Psalm. 4.4. thus rendered in your English meetre.

And in your Chamber quietly
See you, your selves convert.
4. Begin to be in pain there as a woman in travel, for the pangs of
Childbirth must go before the Child's-birth, and you must make this Dr.
Preston on Gods Alsuff.
account, that if you never yet received the spirit of bondage, you also never
received the spirit of Adoption, Romans 8.15. and many there are, who, because
they have withstood the troubles of their minds, and the terrors of the spirit
of bondage, have withstood their Salvation; wherefore let me entreat you to
take the pains, to be in pains for a little season, that you may be at ease to
an endless duration, and for a small moment to be in heaviness, through some
necessary perturbations, that for ever you may be in joy and gladness, through
unspeakable consolations. O let even all your joy be turned into sorrow now,
and your Esto sicut Rex in cord tuo; sublimis and risui jubens vade ut vadat,
and dic tu fletui, veni ut veniat. Clim. Grad. 15.
laughter into grief; that all your grief and sorrow had for sin now, may be
turned into laughter hereafter; For blessed are ye that weep now, for you shall
laugh, says Christ, Luke 6.21.

5. Then cry out, and

1. For Anguish.

2. For, and to the spirit.

1. For Anguish, as a I allude to that famous place in Esa. 26.17. Like as a
Woman with child, that draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain and
cries out in her pangs: so have we been in thy sight, O Lord.
woman when her time is near, and her pangs begin to come upon her, or as a
child cries as soon as it is born, so you before you be new born; as thus,
what will become of our poor souls? for they are yet unregenerate, and
therefore cannot in any wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, unless
extraordinary mercy be shown them by the God of Heaven; or thus, as the
Egyptians once cried out, when there was not an house in all Egypt, where there
was not one dead; saying We be all dead men, Exodus 12.30, 33. And there was a
great cry in Egypt (See the place.) So let there be a great cry among you in
every house and family, (For I believe that there is scarce an house where
there is not one or more unregenerate and dead) and in your several chambers,
(...)
unto which you have, according to my premised advice, betaken your selves, and
let your cry be the same that was in Egypt. O^ we are all dead men; we that are
unregenerate men, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, That except a man
be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3.3. Not all the art and
wit of man, Not all the ^he^orick of the eloquent'st Orator, Not all the
in^rea^ies of Saints and Angels can therefore, or will persuade God to take one
that is a drunkard, or Whoremaster, or Usurer, or Liar, or Thief, or covetous
man (and such have been some of us) into his Kingdom, (...)
even as not all the persuasions of the men of this Country are or will be able
to prevail with any one of us, to take but one toad, or snake into his bosom.
Thus cry out for anguish.

2. Cry out for, and to the spirit of Regeneration, for by the spirit also a
man must be born again, according to that famous saying of our Savior, John
3.5. where note that the Spirit does three things to regenerate souls.

1. He convinces them, John 16.8, 9.

2. He injects the feed of Regeneration into them, according to that of Saint
John, His seed remains in them, 1 John 3.9.

3. He delivers them and makes them free, 2 Cor. 3.17. helping them to come
forth out of the dark womb of nature, into his marvelous light, that by him as
by a Irenaeus adv. haeres. bal. l. 3. c. 40.
Ladder they may ascend into John 3.35.
Heaven to our Father which is in Heaven; so that unto him you must cry and
say, O blessed spirit of Regeneration, Regenerate our souls, O our poor souls
that they may live, O convince them of their unregeneracy; O inject the feed of
Regeneration into them from above; Oh help them to come forth; Oh let a new
heart be given to us, O let us have flexible, and tender hearts, like the heart
of a little child; for we also must be like little children; Oh come blessed
spirit, come and help us, Oh come quickly, come presently and deliver us (...)
come now whilst we are in this Room, waiting for thee, as thou come upon the
Apostles in that house wherein they were sitting, Acts 3.2, 3. O, let this be
the time of our regeneration, that we also may be sure of our Salvation: here
be earnest, and cry mightily; Nay, if need be, and thou can not be heard in
that day, cry in the night too; and so come to the Spirit at this time, as
Nicodemus came to Christ in old time; even by night, and so cry day and night;
and then it will not be long before thou shall be delivered, being regenerated;
for as Christ said once, Luke 18.7, 8. And shall not God hear his elect, which
cry unto him day and night; though he bear long with them? I tell you that he
will avenge them speedily. So I, shall not the spirit of God hear his elect
which cry unto him day and night? I tell you that he will hear them, and
deliver them speedily; For ask, and you shall have (says Christ) Luke 11.9. It
is no more but ask and have; ask therefore the spirit and you shall have How
much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him.
Luke 11.13.
him; ask Regeneration of the spirit (understand in the manner aforesaid) and
you shall have it, and it will not be long before you shall hear the spirit cry
Abba Father, Romans 8.15.
even most emphatically; For, therefore to the Abba from the Hebrew (...) Jun.
and Tremel. in Marc. 14.14.
Syriack word Abba, is added Father; if you shall so cry day and night for the
spirit to the Father, Beloved, there is no crying which the Father of mercies
loves better, and the Father of lies likes worse than this crying, and
therefore use it.

6. Strive to come forth; For as endeavor without God cannot, so God without
endeavors will not help us. See Phil. 2.12, 13. and therefore as Christ said
once, strive to enter; so I, strive to come out, Luke 13.24. for ye will find a
very hard bout before ye will be able to come out; therefore I say again,
strive, and strive as other children do, when they come to their birth, or
thus, strive as once Genesis 38.29.
Pharez and Zarah in Tamars womb; nay, as Pharez so strove as that he made a
breach, and was therefore called Pharez from that breach; so do you, make a
breach as it were and tear away from Natures womb, and tear away from your beds
of ease and sin, and tear away especially from your lusts, your pride of life,
your vile affections, your violent passions, your vain, and filthy
conversations, your usury, your atheism, polytheism, and abominable epicurism,
and whatsoever else is contrary to the holy Law of God, thus strive to come
out. I pray you pardon my boldness which I took by this digression, which
carried me so far in this Sea of matter concerning our Regeneration, and be
pleased to impute it unto the vehemence of my love, which made me thus to
forget and to lose my self, that you might not lose your selves, which God in
mercy grant.

2. Labor to believe, Direct. or Medium.
for so did those holy ones, who according to my Text were so assured of their
salvation, v. 8. and besides, if a man do believe, and be sure of it that he
does, he must needs be assured also that he shall be saved; For so God loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him
should not perish, but have everlasting life, John 3.16. Mark, He Nay, he that
believes on the Son has everlasting life. Joh. 3.36. which much more and
plainly demonstrates, that a believing soul must needs be assured of its
salvation, because it has it.
shall have it, says Christ, as if he should say, he may be sure of it, for
the mouth of truth has spoken it. Believe then in the Lord, you that never did
yet, and you may be sure and certain that your shall be saved: Here give me
leave again to enlarge my self a little upon this most needful Medium, whereby
you may gain the assurance of your salvation; showing how you must go to work
that you may believe.

1. Hear a powerful and faith preaching Ministry as much and as often as you
may; for Faith comes by hearing, the Word being like water which brings forth
fruit, and especially the fruit of Faith, Isa, 55.10. John 8.30. Calvin Inst.
l. 3. c. 2. s. 6.
Romans 10.17. some Divines do therefore call it the Fountain of Faith.

2. Be convinced, and labor to be convinced, 1. Of your unbelief, as he Mark
9.23. for therefore it is partly that so many believe not, because they will
not believe that they believe not; and therefore why should they labor to
believe, seeing they believe already, say they. Beloved, go from house to
house, and ask, ho, are there any Believers here? and they will be ready to
stone you, saying; What do ye make of us? do ye think that we are Devils, or
Infidels? we are Christians, we are Christians, and believe in Christ as well
as you; and as difficult a task it is for a Minister to convince men of their
unbelief, as any thing almost I know of. A Drunkard, a Fornicator, a passionate
man, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, he may soon convince of his sin, for to that
they will say, it is true, we are such, it is an infirmity we cannot leave; but
when he comes to deal with men about unbelief, telling them that they have no
Faith, Oh what a do is there! oh how do their colors rise! they are even ready
to fly in his face, none will believe him, or be convinced that he does not
believe; therefore labor to be convinced of unbelief.

2. Of Damnation, For he that believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. which
also is a thing that unbelievers will not be convinced of; for tell them of it,
and they will tell you, God forbid, for God is merciful, and we hope to be
saved as well as you; and not all the Ministers in England can make men believe
otherwise, till God give them a sight of their unbelief; Then, O then, they can
and will cry out, saying, Oh we shall be damned, and we cannot be saved;
therefore labor to be convinced of damnation also.

Quest. You will say, if it be such a hard thing to be so convinced, then what
shall we do to be convinced?

I Ans. Pray to the Spirit, that you may be convinced by the Spirit, for it is
his work, John 16.8.9. as thus, O blessed Spirit convince me of mine unbelief,
for I must confess I am one that would not hitherto believe, that I do not
believe. O open mine eyes that I may see my unbelief, I humbly pray thee. Do
the like for convictions about Damnation.

2. Take on, and begin to be troubled, as that poor man in the Gospel, Mark
9.23, 24. who so cried, and wept, and took on, and said, Lord help mine
unbelief; and those Acts 2.37. for else you build without a foundation, and
then, how will your building stand? There is a notable place for this in Gal.
3.23. Before Faith came we were kept under the Law, shut up unto the faith
which should afterward be revealed. Mark, 1. Before Faith comes we are under
the Law, that is, under the lashes and terrors of the Law, especially a little
before Faith comes, indeed, we are whipped, and troubled indeed, by that grim
Schoolmaster whose name is Law. And 2. Before the Law comes we are shut up like
Prisoners, and therefore must suffer as Prisoners. O my Brethren, if then you
mean to have Faith, you must not refuse to be under the lashes of the Law, you
must be content to be in Prison a while; and as Scholars which are grievously
whipped, grievously to weep because of your unbelief; and because of the miseries
which shall come upon you if ye believe not, For he that believes not shall be
damned, says Christ, Mar. 16.16. Mark, he shall be damned, and what is that,
you will say? Oh! it is to be sentenced to Hell; and what is that? Oh! it is a
place called Hieron. in Matthew. 10.
Gehenna, a word first of all used by Christ, and afterward by Sicque
usurpatur in lib. Pirkeaboth admodunt antiquo, cap. 1. and 5.
others also for the place of the damned, and compounded of Gee and Hinnom,
which signifies a Valley of Hinnom, which was a Valley nigh to Jerusalem, in
which the old Idolatrous Jews were wont to burn their children alive to the
honor of the Devil, at the sounding of Trumpets and Timbrels, and other loud
sounding instruments, that they might not hear the cry of their poor dying
children, and for that the place was afterward used for the receipt of all
filthiness; as dung, carrion, and the like, and probable it is that our Savior
used this word above all other to signify the miserable burning of unbelievers
in that place, the pitiful cries of the tormented, the barbarous and confused
noise of the Tormentors, together with the most loathsome filthiness of the
place it self. Go to now, ye Unbelievers, I say now as St. Jam. 5.^.
James once to rich men, and weep for the miseries that shall come upon you in
that woeful place called Gehenna; nay go and howl together, O ye Drunkards, and
Usurers, and Adulterers, and Adulteresses, and Fornicators, and Harlots, and
Swearers; and Liars, and covetous Worldlings, and riotous Livers; as ye were
wont to be merry together some of you, so now, mourn and weep bitterly together
because you have no Faith, and because you will and must, except you get Faith
in Christ, lie and fry and burn like the little children of the idolatrous
Jews, in that woeful place of torment; thus howl together, saying, Oh that
Valley of Hinnom! for so Hell is called; and, Oh that place of torment! where
there is such screeching and crying of men, women and children, that receptacle
of all filth and filthy livers; Oh it will come for us, and for our portion!
for unbelievers (such as we are) will be damned, Rev. 21.8.

I have read of one Rich. Baxter in his Everl. Rest.
Brumo a famous Preacher in his time, that when he was dead and to be buried he
cried out 3 times, 1. Accusatus sum. 2. Judicatus sum. 3. Damnatus sum. I am 1.
Accused, 2. Judged, 3. Damned. Whereas both others, and himself before that,
verily thought he would surely be saved; so let every one of you, as dead and
condemned by the John 3.18.
words of Christ, now say; Oh, I am Damned, I am Damned, I am Damned. I thought
once that I should be saved as soon as any, and would not be otherwise
persuaded, but that my Soul should be heavened as well as others; but now I see
that unless infinite mercy do save me, and help me to believe in Christ, I
shall be most certainly condemned by Christ. For he that believes not is
Enallage Temporis.
condemned already, says Christ, John 3.18.

4. Desire to believe, as he Mark 9.24. For a desire of faith, if true, is
faith; Or thus, as a worthy Downam in his Christian warfare. c. 42.
Writer says confidently. Our desire of Grace, Faith, and Repentance, if true,
are the Graces themselves; at least in God's acceptance, see Matthew. 5.6.
Blessed are they which hunger and thrist after righteousness. Mark, they are
blessed, who have such gracious desires, as are called hungring and thirsting;
and therefore they cannot be without faith; and the cause hereof is the blessed
Blessed Bolton.
Nobleness of God's Nature, which by infinite distances does transcend the
noblest spirit upon earth, now men of ingenious dispositions are wont to take
sweetest contentment in prevailing over and gaining the hearts, good wills, and
affections of those that wait upon them; how much more then must needs
spiritual longings, gracious aspires, and thirsty desires be kindly accepted
with that most kind God; whose most loving disposition passes all men's
kindness; especially since men's good turns, turn many times to our good and
benefit, but our well doing extends not unto God, Psalm. 16.2. Were all the
sons of men Abraham's or Angels, and as many in number as the stars of Heaven,
and as shining both with inward Graces, and outward acts of piety, as they are
in visible glory; yet could they make no addition to that incomparable Majesty
above, nor confer so much as one drop to that boundless and bottomless Sea of
goodness, or the least glimpse unto that Almighty Sun of glory. If thou be
righteous, what give thou unto him? or what receives he at thy hands? Thy
wickedness may hurt a man as thou art, and thy righteousness may profit the Son
of man, Job. 35.6, 7, 8. Our holiness helps him not; our sins hurt him not; it
is only for our good that God would do us good; no good nor gain accrues unto
him by our goodness; for, what good can come by our imperfect goodness, to that
which is already infinitely good? What glory can be superadded by our dimness
to him which is already incomparably glorious? Every infinite thing is
naturally, and necessarily incapable of addition. Possibility of which supposed
implies contradiction, and destroys the nature of infiniteness, wherefore (to
return to my purpose) since desires are excepted with God for deeds, let every
one of you that would be assured of his salvation, desire to believe to his
salvation. It is reported of Luther, that when a certain poor student at
Wittenberg would not be persuaded by any to believe, or that he did believe,
and so was exceedingly troubled in his mind, and left by all, he was sent for,
and when he came, did ask him (when he said he neither did nor could believe)
but do not you desire to believe? whereunto the poor student replied, yes, with
all my heart I do desire it, why then, said Luther, you do believe; whereat the
poor Scholar was exceedingly comforted, satisfied, and persuaded that he did
believe: so you be satisfied in this point, that if you truly desire to
believe, you do believe. Our most gracious God As in Abraham, Genesis 22.16, 17.
read the place.
accepting the will for the deed, and your affections for actions; and so long,
so thirst, Dyke of selfdeceiving, cap. 19.
so hunger after Faith, as a Fame-lik after meat, a Febricitant after drink, a
Mendicant after a piece of silver, and you shall be satisfied. For they that
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and so consequently after Faith, which
apprehends Christ's righteousness, shall be satisfied. Mat. 5.6. and Bern. de
Lect. Evangel. Sermon. 7.
so much as they can desire, they shall receive.

5. Labor to see an excellency in Christ surpassing all things, and fixing thy
heart upon him, resolve to seek him without resting; and seeking him, to sell
all for the gaining of him; like the Merchant in the Gospel^, who seeking after
him and met with him, and seeing him to be a For Christ is that pearl, Hilar.
in Loc.
pearl of great price; and so esteeming him above all, sold all and bought him,
Matthew. 13.45, 46.

For Rogers of Dedham in his Doctrine of Faith; e. 2. p. 128.
then is Faith begun, when namely, a man begins to be of Kilians, a Dutch
Schoolmasters and blessed Martyrs mind; who being asked if he loved not his
Wife and Children? said, Yes, if the World were gold, and were mine to dispose
of, I would give it to live with them, though it were but in prison; yet my
soul and Christ are dearer to me than all. O souls, souls, how do your hearts
now stand affected? are ye so resolved to sell all? do you so prize Christ
above all? will you seek after him upon such terms? if you will, well; for
assuredly you shall have him, and faith in him, and with him. O my God, help
this people so to prize thy Son; help thy Sons to believe in thy Son. I humbly
pray thee.

6. Labor to have your hearts overpowered with the evidence of truth and
reason: For we find by experience, that though truth and reason, and
conscience, and all make for it, so as that we may truly say Amen to what is
said; yet the heart is stubborn, and will not yield, but stands out like a
contentious Adversary, which, though he be overthrown in every trial, yet will
begin again. So the heart, though it be answered and overcome with Arguments,
and Pleas, and Reasons again and again; yet will begin again to plead against
it self: For, say some, when they are nonsuited, and have nothing to say;
Ministers are merciful, and good Christians compassionate, and will not
discourage us; but did they know our hearts, what base unclean Cages they be,
they would judge otherwise than they do. Therefore I say, give over
quarrelling, and be satisfied and persuaded, when Truth and Reason tell ye,
that ye ought to yield, and to believe; because the Lord of Life and God of
Truth has said, Him that comes to me, whatsoever his heart be, or have been,
and whatsoever his former life have been; for he says not, unless he have a
base, filthy heart. Again, him that comes to me, though he have been the
vilest wretch that ever the Earth bore, though a notorious Belialist, a beastly
liver, a filthy fornicator, an insatiable Drunkard, an unreasonable
Extortioner, I will in no wise cast him out, John 6.37. O my Brethren! what
could Christ say more? Christ you see speaks for you; and will you have us
speak against you? nay, will you speak against your selves! O be overcome by
Reason, overcome by Truth; for Reason tells you, that you ought to yield, when
your Reasons are answered; and Truth commands you to submit, when you are so
well promised by the God of Truth.

7. Beg Faith, for it is the gift of God, Phil. 1.29. say, as Rachel, Give me
children or else I die, Genesis 30.1. So, Lord, give me Faith, or else I die, and
he will not say thee nay. For every one that asks, receives, says Christ,
Luke 11.9. Ask therefore and say, Lord, thou have said, every one that asks
receives; O let me receive for one, or how else can it be every one, if I may
not for one; Prayer is the souls recourse to the fountain of life, and a
Christians address to the God of all power, to fetch power and help in a time
of need, Heb. 4. ult. Go therefore, O dear Christians, to the Christians God,
for power and help in this time of need; Go, and cry, and say with that poor
man in the Gospel, Lord help mine unbelief, Mar. 9.24. Lord help my poor soul
to believe; Beloved, no less power is here required for you to be able to
believe, being dead; than was for the raising of Christ from the dead, Ephesians.
1.19.20. see the place; and place your selves therefore before his Throne of
grace, that you may get grace and power to believe, according to the working of
his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead,
and set him at his own right hand in heavenly places. And thus beg power to
believe, and to be good, and do not think that it is in Vt Platonici and Stoici
aiunt apud Clem. Alex. l. 1. c. 61
your power to have faith in God, when all your power must come from God;
Videatur Council. Arau s. c. 24.
It is man's greatest weakness to presume upon his own strength, when his
greatest strength is but weakness; and therefore I press and persuade you to
beg, which if ye do as ye ought, I assure you in the words of Christ, that it
will not be long before you get faith in Christ, and not long neither before ye
will be blessed with that heavenly Assurance of the Saints which comes by
Christ, Christ not being able to deny you, because he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. and not deny himself, because he is Truth it self, John 14.6. and
being Truth it self, has said; Ask and you shall have; seek, and you shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you, Luke 11.9.

Thus labor by all these holy ways and means to believe, and when your carnal
friends shall go about to hinder thee, saying; what needs all this praying, and
all this weeping, and all this running to Sermons? say, would ye not have me to
live? if I do not believe I cannot live: Again, say, Would ye have me be
assured of nothing? I will be (by Gods grace) assured of something, and
especially of my salvation. Again, if Satan seek to hinder you from striving
and praying that ye may not believe, yet pray, and use all the means premised;
because God has promised that you shall be heard; and he will do his best for
you, when Satan shall do his worst against you.

The Lord give you hearts to pray, and hearts to believe, that believing you
may be assured that you shall be saved; so prays from his heart your faithful
friend, to his and your best friend, who is a hearer of prayers, and can do
abundantly above all that you or I can ask or think, or conceive; to him be
glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without end,
Medium. Now this and the rest of the ensuing Mediums are properly and chiefly
provided for Saints, who do believe, for which cause and for whose sake I call
this Tract the Saints Assurance a potiori.
Amen, Ephesians. 3.20.21.

3. Labor to live as spotless a life as you can possibly; for 1 John 3.3.
every man that has this hope in him; What hope? that he shall see God, v. 2.
namely, in Irenaeus, l. 4. c 37.
Christ, and by himself, purifieth himself even as he is pure. Observe, every
man that has this hope; and so consequently, whose soul is safe; whose faith
is sound; whose heart is sure: Again, observe, purifies himself; that is,
labors to be pure; and how is that? even as he, namely, God himself, is pure.
O height of holiness! O profunditie of purity! are there any such in the world?
say the men of the world; Yes, says the Apostle, there are such, which though
they are not without sin, yet are not 1 John 3.9. and 1 John 1.9.
under sin; that is, under a reigning sin, pressing hard toward perfection;
which is to be pure as he is pure; that is, aspiring to it, and climbing after
it, and toward it, as Johnathan's Armor-bearer after his Master. I remember
what a Anselm, de Simil.
Father says, that he had rather be in Hell, than lie in any sin against God:
and I have been much taken with his saying; God grant that by it you also may
be so taken, as that you may not be so often overtaken; But to the Law and
Testimony for all the Fathers: Who is she that looks forth as the morning;
fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun? Cant. 6.10. Observe, how Christ praises
his Church, for her transcendent pureness, and surpassing fairness. Some spots
she has, and therefore she is assimilated to the Moon as well as Sun; and yet
called fair, because she allows them not; and because of that Christ sees
them not: No, no, even Balaam could say, He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob,
neither has he seen perverseness in Israel, Numb. 23.21. Again, She is fair as
the morning; for she is Instar diluculi quando aurera incipit tenebras
dispellere. Paraeus.
partly clear, and partly dim, like that wonderful day which is only known to
the Lord, not day nor night, Zech. 14.7. for so is the Vide Chrysostom. in Romans
13.12.
Morning, and so is she; not altogether day, because of sin remaining in her,
nor altogether night, because of sin resisted by her; and so, and after this
manner fair and clear and pure: but farther, what says Christ of her? Thou art
all fair, my love, there is no spot in thee, Cant. 4.7. that is, no spot Romans
7.15.
allowed, no spot approved; for whilst she is able to stand she stands, and
Heb. 12.4.
striveth against sin: so do you, laboring to cleanse your selves from all
filthiness of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. and that by the Spirit, Romans 8.13.
For as any one blemish in the face mars beauty, and one dram of poison spoils a
whole box of precious Ointment: so if you let alone but one sin to reign in
you, and over you, that one will spoil all, even all your fair carriage, and
all your confidence; for no Si unum in locum collata sint, omnia mala cum
turpitudinis malo non erunt comparanda. Cicoro 2. Thusc.
evil like the evil of sin to spoil a man. When Phocas, the Roman Emperor had
built a most fair and stately Palace, there was a voice heard in the night,
Sin within will destroy all: So, when we have built Castles in the air, and by
our fair and specious performances have gotten some Assurance and confidence
toward God, but afterward give way to one sin or other, we shall hear one time
or other a voice from within, Sin within will destroy all, our own consciences
Romans 2.15.
accusing us, yea, condemning us for the same, and So the Prophet Jonah lost
his confidence by his disobedience. Dr. King on Jonah 1.6.
taking away our Assurance from us, for sin allowed by us. Let us fall
therefore upon sin, and destroy it, that sins punishment may not fall upon us,
and destroy us, and our confidence with us. Oh that this people were wise! Oh
that they would so strive against sin, and against every sin! Oh that they
would unreservedly cleanse their hands! Oh that they would thoroughly purify
their hearts, Jam. 4.8. and cleanse them from lust, even every lust! Oh that I
could help them! Oh that I could even pull them away from their beloved sins!
for then they should not live, or lodge in and with any of them one day, or one
night longer: well, you must do this work with God's help; therefore go every
one of you and kill every one of them; spare none, no, not the least; Oh save
none alive, to be assured that God will save you alive; else you cannot be so
persuaded as long as any one sin is by you allowed: thus labor to purify your
selves, and to destroy sin, and when you have so done, labor to keep your
selves so; and if the Tempter re-assault you, do you also re-encounter him, and
that with the Word, for that is a Christians sword: tell him as the Spouse told
Christ in another sense, I have washed my feet, how shall I defile then^? Cant.
5.3. Oh^ I cannot; Oh! I will not, by God's help. When Satan came to Christ he
found nothing in him, but when he comes to you, he finds much in you, even much
corruption; but do you resist him in the faith: I say 1 Pet. 5.9.
as Peter, that that which he finds in you, may not be found to be yours, but
his; because you do not own it, but resist it, to be assured, as then you
Damasc. Error de Perser.
may be, that you shall be saved. Nay, cry to God to keep you; for it is not
as Damascene and others teach, in the power of man to hold out; no, no, we are
kept by the power of God, through faith to salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5. and therefore
you must beg this power of God, (...)
and that very much and often, yea, continually; for then Satan will not be
able to harm you. It is storied of a malicious woman, that she gave her self to
the Devil, provided he would do a mischief to such a Neighbor, whom she deadly
hated; the Devil went once and again to do his work; but at last returns, and
tells her, that he could not hurt him, because he found him always praying, or
reading: do you likewise; pray so always, and you will also speed as he did;
especially then when Satan tempts you to make you fall; then do you fall to
your prayers and say; Lord, this is the power and hour of darkness; now
therefore keep me in this hour of temptation, that I may keep up the Assurance
of my Salvation.

4. Make your calling and election sure; Medium.
for then you also make Heaven sure, 2 Pet. 1, 5, 6. giving all diligence, add
to your faith virtue, etc. And then, v. 11. so an entrance shall be administered
unto you abundantly, into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. I pay you observe your work; you must become good Arithmeticians,
according to the perfect Rule of Addition, to be certain of your everlasting
salvation: And therefore go, and add virtue to virtue, and still say; But do I
not mis-reckon? Am I in the right? Do I not miss temperance though I have
knowledge. And do I not want patience, though I have temperance? Is not
godlinesswanting-though patience be not? Is not brotherly kindness forgotten by
me though godliness be not? Have I not left out Charity, though I do not miss
Brotherly kindness? Are all the Graces of Gods Spirit here? and if any be
wanting, go, and reckon again, and make a farther Addition; more especially if
Patience be wanting in thy reckoning; Go, and write, I should say, add
patience, the like may be said of all the rest; and so labor to be complete in
Grace, having in you every Grace, and striving still to have more Grace, even
more of every Grace; for though, if we believe in Christ we are sanctified in
every part, yet are we sanctified but in part; even as we 1 Cor. 13.1^.
know but in part, so that we shall need still to add somewhat to every part,
if in the Saints Assurance we would have our part; Nay, had need to give all
diligence, as the Apostle tells us, v. 5. by our continual additions to make our
calling, and election, and salvation sure, and to live an extraordinary holy,
strict, and Seraphical life to attain to it. I knew a most eminent holy walker
once, his name was Ignatius Jourdan a Justice of the Peace, who was after his
conversion always assured of his salvation, as he told me; but the course that
he took was this, he would every morning rise at 3 of the Clock, as I was told,
and spend his time in prayer, reading, and meditation, till 7, and then do
justice to all that came to him: Again, he would punish any for swearing, and
other offenses, if he were never so great; and I never heard a vain, or evil
word come out of his mouth, but he would be always talking of Heaven: do you
live such an holy, and heavenly life too, and give all diligence thereunto, and
you will be sure also, as he was, of Heaven.

5. Ger the pardon of your sins sealed, Medium.
for what is remission of sin but justification from sin? Now, whom he
justifies, he also glorifleth, Romans 8.30. Again, what is it but a covering of
sin? and what says David of that? Blessed is he whose sin is covered, in Ps.
32.1. so that if I can but know that my sins are forgiven me, I may know also
that Heaven will be given me; Wherefore be earnest, even importunately earnest
with God to have thy sins forgiven thee by God, Dan. 9.19. you may see how
earnest and eager he was in this thing, saying, O Lord, O Lord forgive, O Lord
hearken and do; Never was a condemned Malefactor so earnest for a pardon with
his King. Never was a poor Mendicant so importunate for a piece of bread, or
for an Alms with his rich Neighbor, as he for a pardon with his God and King,
and so must you be, and therefore even press into the presence of God, for thy
pardon to be sealed by God; Go and cry, saying, O God forgive, O God forget, O
God Psalm. 51.
blot out all my transgressions, and cleanse me thoroughly from my sins; O Dan.
9.19.
Lord hear, O Lord defer not for thy own sake; here be more than ordinarily
fervent, and instant; for the pardon of sin is the Card and caput foederis.
Paraeus.
principal thing in the covenant of Grace so much urged, and to be pressed in
prayer; he that is sure of that, may be sure also of God's being reconciled to
him in Christ; Christ making for him his peace, peace passing all his
understanding, his understanding now knowing that he shall have life
everlasting. I for my part am therefore wont to be more large and more earnest
in this, than in any other part of my more solemn supplications, and I desire,
and strive still to be so prolix, and so long in this thing, till I have my
errands end, otherwise I am loath to make an end, and I have found much success
and comfort in it, to God's glory be it spoken, I pray you, do ye pray so too;
and withal take this Corollary with you.

When you are upon your knees asking God forgiveness, A Corollary.
have in readiness a Catalogue of your many and knowable sins, either in your
memories, or in writing, and spread them all before the Lord, as once Isa.
37.14.
Hezekiah Rabsheka's letter, for then you are most like to speed, because it is
expressly written, That if we confess our sins God is faithful and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cheanse us from all unrighteousness, I John 1.9.
and you will be able then thus to plead with God, when you ask pardon of God; O
God thou have said, if they shall confess their iniquities, then will I
remember my Covenant, Lev. 26.40, 42. and lo, we O Lord confess here our
iniquities before thee, O do thou therefore remember the Covenant made by thee,
whose capital matter is the forgiveness of our sins. Again, you may then plead
that famous place in Job 37.27. He looks upon men, and if any say, Mark, if
any say, and so if any of us here shall say so, I have sinned perverted that
which was right, and it profited me not, He will deliver his Soul; as thus, we
may say, Lord it is written, and said of thee (likewise show him the book, the
chapter, the place wherein this precious Scripture lies) That thou look upon
men, and if any say, I have sinned, thou will deliver his Soul. O look upon us
therefore here prostrate before thee, or in the singular upon me, a poor sinner
here lying before thee, and crying, and saying, thus and thus I have sinned,
and deliver my poor Soul, Oh! my poor Soul from hell, and death, and damnation,
I pray thee having forgiven me all my sins, for it is said, If any shall say I
have sinned, now Lord, I say, and say it from my heart; therefore O God forgive
me, O Lord wash me, and pardon all my offenses, for they are wondrous great,
but not too great for so great a God to forgive. Thus confess, and so crave the
pardon of thy sins, and withal to have the pardon of them Ephesians. 1.13. 2 Cor.
1.22.
sealed, that is to be assured by the Spirit that they are pardoned, as David
was, when he said, Thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin, Selah, Psalm. 22. O
Sirs, here is work for you, to have sin not only pardoned, but also to be
persuaded that it is pardoned, which is a thing not so easily obtained, as is
commonly believed, No, no you must sweat about it, and labor hard to have it
done, if you desire to be assured that you shall be saved.

6. Get an undeceiving taste of the joys of Heaven, as those Believers did,
which were so sure of their salvation, v. 8. For then you also must needs be
sure of your reception, entrance and admission into Heaven; because they are
forerunners, and the earnest of it, Ephesians. 1.14. the Greek is (...), which
properly is part of a price promised to be paid ( Vulteius in sua Jurispr. l.
1. c. 30. Distinguishing it from Hypotheca, as being moveable, whereas
Hypotheca is not.
Civilians call it a pledge) as here, part of the joys of Heaven promised to
us, to be enjoyed by us hereafter; And these joys are so great for their
quantity, and so sweet for their quality, as that I hope I shall not need to
press you overmuch to the gaining of them; For are they not most sweetly
resembled to Apples, to Cant. 2.5.
Flagons, to Mannah, all which things though they are so Ibid. id est salutari
potioni Jesu Christ. Jun and Tremel.
Rev. 2.17.
exceeding sweet, yet cannot possibly come near or match those joys which
without all degree of comparison, and measure of proportion do surmount and
surpass the same; even infinitely, infinitely, For they are unspeakable and
full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

1. Unspeakable; were all the world full of Orators, and all they like Angels,
speaking with the tongues of Angels, and able to utter their minds, and to pour
out their conceptions with torrents of elocution, yet would not they be able to
express those joys.

2. Full of glory. The great, and main Ocean is not so full of water, though it
be Mare nil nisi aquae. Owen.
nothing but water, nor the spangled sky so full of Stars, nor the gay diapery
of the earth so full of flowers, as they are full of glory. Methought I was in
a Triumph, and even covered and decked all over and over, and over with most
refulgent beams of glory, when it pleased God all-gracious, to make my unworthy
self a partaker of those joys which are so full of glory. And therefore, oh!
how should your Souls be now enamoured with them, and long, and labor after
them? O Souls, Souls here are Apples, flagons, here showers of Mannah for you
to be had by you. Oh! go after them, Oh! get them, for the Assurance of
Salvation lies in, and through them to be had by them.



I Ans. Beg them, for Christ has promised them.

Q. Where?

I Ans. Rev. 2.17. Read the place; And so place your selves again before the
Lord Christ; and say; Lord, give us, or me, in the singular, this Mannah, this
sweet bread of of Heaven; Oh shower it down upon my poor Soul, and having
tasted it, may be thereby assured; that as I have been fed with Angels food on
earth; so I shall feed on the Angels bread in Heaven. But here

A Case of conscience comes to be resolved, A Case of Conscience.
for you will say happily, Sir, we have begged these joys; and yet cannot
enjoy them; and therefore tell us what we must do in such a case?

I Answer, It may be you have left undone some thing, which ye ought to have
done; and whereupon the fore mentioned promise was made, I mean overcoming; for
so says Christ, To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden
Mannah, Rev. 2.17. Now if so, then you must for the obtaining of them covercome.

1. Satan by the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 12.11.

2. The World by faith, 1 John 5.4.

3. Your selves Matt. 16.24.
denying your selves in many things, which as yet you have not denied your
selves in, as in meats, in sleep, in pleasures, in the putting on of Apparel,
etc.

4. God himself, as Jocob did the Patriarch, especially when you beg those
joys. Beloved, never did Luke 16.21.
Lazarus so beg crumbs that fell from Dives his table; nor Judge. 4.19.
Sisera beg drink of Jael which then gave him milk to drink, as that holy man
did beg those crumbs of comfort, which he wanted; and that glorious vision of
Jehovah's face, which he to see so desired, when he said, I Will not leave thee;
till thou bless me; constraining God thereby to bless his wrestling, with the
Genesis 32.
sight of refulgent beams of the light of his pleased, and pleasant
countenance, which runs parellel with the joys of Heaven, and are infinitely
sweeter then Jael's milk, which she gave Sisera to drink in a Lordly dish; yea,
than all the milk of all the land of Canaan, flowing with milk and honey; O let
your earnestness, and importunity match his; and let every one of you, now say
after him; Lord I will not leave thee till thou bless me, as thou did bless
him with a glimpse, and glance of the light of thy countenance; or thus, as the
Spouse of Christ, said to Christ in the Cant. 2.5.
Canticles; so say thou to him, in thine heart, and in thy Closet, comfort me,
oh me also! with apples, even the sweet apples of they divine Consolations,
promised from thy most Expos. 3. patrum in Loc.
sweet, and holy word; and stay me with flagons, even flagons of love, for I am
sagitia amoris istius confixa. Theodor. in Loc.
sick of love. O my love do not, O do not deny me thy love; O my joy, do not
withhold from me thy joy. Or thus, O my dear, thou have said to him that
overcomes, will I give to eat of the hidden Mannah; and will thou not give to
me that Mannah, who come to thee for it is Manducation, to be assured of my
Salvation; O my God, thou have promised it to him that overcomes; and lo, I
desire to overcome, and to overcome Satan by thy blood; my self, by thy love;
the world by my Faith; and thy self by my prayers, and for that end am now come
to overcome both my self, and thee; Oh! give me therefore, and let me have,
what here I crave, even that Mannah which thou have promised me, and that joy
unspeakable, and full of glory.

7. Nay, Medidum.
beg this great Assurance it self, and beg it much, for it is a gift worth your
asking, and all pains taking with it, they that have it are In Angeli statum
provehit. Eusebius. Euris. hom. de Epiph.
Angelized by the Spirit, extatized in the spirit, and emparadized in God; God
being their Assurer, who also by this assurance, becomes their exceeding great
reward; As for their life, it is the life of Heaven, as their joy is the joy of
Heaven, Heaven being in their hearts, their hearts in Heaven. Labor therefore,
dear hearts, for this Assurance, begging it of God, who is both able and
willing to give it to those that ask it; Ask it therefore, and when you ask it
do as Achsah Caleb's daughter, which wanting springs of water, came to her
Father, lighted off from her Ass, and said, Give me a blessing, for thou have
given me a South-land, give me also springs of water, Judge. 1.14. answerably
whereunto, do you also light off from your most eager pursuit after the gains,
profits, emoluments, and preferments of this present world, and falling down
before your heavenly father, say; Father, give me a blessing, for thou have
given me these outward things, and I want nothing but only the assurance of my
Salvation; give me therefore springs of water also; that is, the assurance of
mine eternal bliss, which is like springs of water, yea, Fountains of living
water springing from that Ocean and Sea of ineffable delights, which are in thy
blessed self. O blessed Father, give me both the upper springs, and the neither
springs as Judge. 1.14.
Caleb did his Daughter.

The upper springs hereafter in Heaven; to wit, the joys of Heaven in Heaven,
and the neither springs; I mean, the assurance of Heaven here upon earth; I
humbly pray thee, thus beg, and beg as earnestly, and ardently as a beggar begs
his alms, because he needs it; so you this assurance, because you cannot well
live without it; I told you of a very holy man, Justice Jourdan.
a Justice of the Peace; how holily he lived to gain his assurance; and now,
let me tell you, what once he said to a Visitant that came to see him. How is
it with you? Are you assured now of your Salvation, or are you not yet? And,
when the Visitant answered no. He told him, were it my case, I would go to my
Closet, and shut my door and never leave begging it of God, till I had it
bestowed on me, by God. Beloved, this was good Counsel; whether the Visitant
followed it or no, I know not, but do you follow it, and so go, O go, and
betake your selves to your Closets, again upon this account also; and shut your
doors, Matthew. 6.6. and pray to your heavenly Father which is in secret that he
will give you this assurance of your Salvation, which will reward you amply
and abundantly, for all your pains taking in such a supplication; O Souls,
when once ye are in, never come out, (...) 8
till assurance comes in. Nay, go, and tell God so, thou that hear me this
day, and want this assurance, Lord, I will not go hence, till thou give it
me, for thou have said; Ask, and it shall be given to you, Luk (...) 9. and do
not doubt, but persuade thy self for certain, that as Caleb, Achsah her Father
gave his Daughter, petitioning him, both the * upper-springs, Judge. 1.14.
and the neither springs which she wanted; See Luke 11.11, 12, 13.
so your heavenly Father, in respect of whose tender compassions and bowels of
pity, the kindest Father's greatest mercy is but harshness; in respect of whose
incomparably melting and sweetest inclination; the most loving Nature of any
man living is but moros^ty, will give you also this by you so begged and
petitioned Assurance of your souls salvation.

8. Medium.
Get the Spirits testimony of which we read Romans 8.16. The Spirit himself bears
witness to our Spirits, that we are the children of God, and if children then
heirs; that follows v. 17. and therefore this Assurance of Salvation must needs
follow. Mark, here are two witnesses to assure us of our both filiation and
salvation.

1. Our own spirit, How? our own Spirit? what more deceitful than a man's own
Jer. 17.9.
heart? but stay, it is not the carnal heart; but theregenerate heart, as the
word spirit is taken, 1 Cor. 2.11. whence Origines in Loc.
Origin. The Spirit bears witness, not to the Soul, but to the Spirit, that is,
the heart regenerated by the Spirit, which goes for sense, and feeling, and
finding it self to have Faith indeed, and truly to be regenerated by the
Spirit, is able to say truly with the Apostle, I know whom I have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12. and I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live, yet not I, but
Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. see the place. Stapleton that subtle Popish
Writer, would have this witness to be our charity, but there is not a syllable
for it in the Text; and therefore his assertion I reject for false.

The second witness is the Spirit of God; who as a (...), or Co-witness steps
in, and confirms what our own spirit affirms, saying; it is true, thou art a
child of God; But how shall I know that this testimony is not a delusion, but
the Spirits truly? Thus you may be sure of it, says a worthy Writer. Either it
is the Spirits or the fleshes persuasion; Not the fleshes, for that does not
lead us, nor adduce us to divine, and heavenly things, therefore the Spirits,
and the Spirit does not lie. (...) Bellarm. l. 3. de justif. c. 9.
Thus he. Bell armine says that this testimony of the Spirit begets but a
conjectural certitude of our salvation; but that is as false as God is true,
for can any thing be more true and certain, than that which is asserted by the
God of truth? well then, here are two Witnesses for you, and you know what the
Law says, that at the mouth of two Witnesses, matters shall be established,
Deuteronomy. 19.15. and therefore why should ye doubt? Chrysostom upon this place
triumphs as it were, saying; Chrysostom. in Romans 8.16. to be noted against
Bellarmines conjectural Assurance.
What ambiguity is there then left for us? if a Man, Angel, or Archangel
promise a thing, a man may happily doubt, but since the supreme essence of God's
Spirit, who makes us pray, promises to them that pray, and performs what he
promises, does so bear witness within us, what room is left for hesitating and
doubting to us? Labor therefore for this testimony of the Spirit.

Q. But you will say, Qnest.
How shall we come by it?

I Answ. Luke 11.15.
Crave it, as thus, O blessed Spirit, bear witness to my Spirit, that I am a
child of God: Venisancte Spiritus, Come O holy Spirit, and tell my Spirit so,
that my Spirit may rejoice in the God of my salvation, I being assured of my
salvation. Men suppine men to be witnesses for them; but do you only entreat
the Spirit to be a witness for you, and he will be willing to do it for you;
For as Christ says of the Father, The Father himself loves you, John 16.27.
so I of the Spirit; The Spirit himself, who is one with the Father, loves you.
Therefore go again, and again to the Spirit, and pray to the same effect,
saying, Holy Spirit, speak to my Spirit, and speak plain, even so plain as that
I may know that it is thy voice, and not the voice of a stranger, for thy sheep
do not love to hear the voice of Joss. 10.4, 5. Joh. 10.3.
strangers; Nay, come blessed Spirit and call me, as it were by my Rev. 22.17.
name, as Christ calls his sheep by name, saying, Christopher, John, Peter,
Mary, thou art a Child of God. O sirs, let every one that hears me this day
say so; come blessed Spirit, come, and testify so, and he that shall come will
come, and will not tarry, and when he comes, Assurance comes, for he comes
not alone, when he comes, but his reward is with him, and before him, to wit,
his testimony, and his earnest, 2 Cor. 5.22. which is the exceeding great
reward of our supplications, and the merciful compensation of a truly gracious
conversation.

9. Medium.
But I have one help more for you, and that is, you must try your selves daily
by some evid ences for Heaven; When a Traveller, being bent for a certain
place, and told by signs and tokens which is the way to it; as namely, there
are such Meadows at the one hand, which he must pass by; such miry places at
the other, which he must leave, and such Mountains before him, which he must
pass over, and he finds it so, he is sure that he is in his right way, and
shall certainly come to the place appointed; For, says he, when he is past the
places spoken of; lo, there be the meadows, the miry places, the mountains
which I was told of, I am past them; now a child of God being bound and bent
for Heaven is such a Traveller too, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm.
84.6. and * thus rendered in your English meetre. Psalm. 24.6.
This is the brood of Travelers, in seeking of his grace: As Jacob did the
Isralite, in that time of his race. And this Traveller is told in the holy
Scriptures, and by us Ministers which is the way to Heaven, and how he shall
know that he is in his way, and shall certainly arrive there; As for example,
such sins and ways, which are like miry places, and meadows must be left on
the right, and on the left hand, and that such and such duties and perfections,
which are like high and craggy Mountains he must go over, whereupon it
follows, that when he looks back into his life and courses, and finds it to
be so as he was told, he must needs be assured that for certain he shall be
saved; for says he, are not these sins which I have left, the miry places
which I was told of? and these pleasures of sin for a season which I have
passed by, the pleasant meadows which I was told of? and those difficult duties
which I have labored to perform, as believing, self denial, a spotless
walking, and a constant, and laborious serving of God, even day and night, the
high and craggy mountains which I was fore-shown? Beloved, it is Mr. Nichols
has it, in his life.
reported of that holy man Ignatius Jordan; whom I formerly mentioned, that
when he was near his end, and one did ask him, how he did, and could so keep up
and maintain his Assurance so constantly, even to the end? he answered, that
every day, he did try himself, by some undeceiving signs; and evidences for
Heaven, and that kept it up, and so died. Do you therefore likewise as he did,
and you may be assured as he was.

But I know, you will be very inquisitive now, what those evidences are,
whereby you are to try your selves so; and therefore besides that which has
bin already spoken, I shall give you a more full information about it, and show
you more directly, which they are, out of Psalm. 15. Where they lie even
evidently before you. For there the Psalmist states the Question, who shall be
saved; saying, Lord, who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy
holy Hill? meaning Heaven, which is called Mons, a Hill, or Mountain, a Bern.
in Sermon. 29. Jansen in Loc. Clarius in Loc. Engu^. in Loc. Jacob. Paniscotus in
Loc. Burgensis 1. p. scrut. 4. did. 4. c. 4. Lorin in Lo^. Dr. Boys in Loc.
Mollerus in Loc.
non movendo, because it shall never be shaken, or moved; Heb. 12.28, And then
resolves it, saying, he that walks uprightly, etc. where we have the most
glorious evidences, and blessed properties of a Athanasius in Lpist. de
Interpr. Psalm.
Citizen of Heaven set down in order before us: They are 12.

The 1. is, He that walks uprightly. The word in the Hebrew is (...) which,
though it be usually rendered perfect; yet signifies, not Melancthen in Loc.
one that is simply and absolutely so, and altogether free from sin; for that
is absolutely denied Pro. 20.9. Jam. 3.2.1. John 1.9. but one that in his
desires and purposes is without dissimulation, 1 Eviden^^.
and hypocrisy, and so walks uprightly; as it is here rendered: where give me
leave, because this is the prime and chiefest Mark of a Citizen of Heaven to
dwell a little while, and to show you how this uprightness may be discerned, by
these 3 properties.

1. By a right aim; ^ Properties. of uprightness.


2. By true desires.

3. By Uniformity. A Right Aim.


1. By a right aim, for an upright man does in all things, aim at the glory of
God; above all things, like David himself, (who has penned this Psalm, and
here set down this property of uprightness) Psalm. 115.1. whereas Hypocrites, and
such as are not upright do all that they do to be seen of men, Matthew. 23.5.

2. By true desires, True Desires.
after Christ and grace, I mean, which are equivalent with deeds, as when
Abraham had but a desire, and purpose to please God, and to obey his command;
it was taken for the deed, Genesis 22.16, 17. Read the place.

And the truth of such desires may be known again by 3 marks. 3 Marks of true
Desires.


1. True desires are flaming, and fervent, called hungring and thirsting,
Matthew. 5.6. panting, and breathing, Psalm. 42.^. for look, as the Heart, having
swallowed Serpents, and being thereby most mightily inflamed, and put into a
grievous heat, panketh, and pants after Rivers of water to quench his thirst,
so do true desires which are flaming and come from a fervent spirit, even long
and thirst after the things desired; whether it be Christ, or grace, or faith,
in a most vehement measure, and manner.

One writes of a gracious woman; Bolton.
that being asked in her agony, as she was complaining of the want of Christ,
and Grace, and Faith; but does not your heart desire, and long after Christ?
Answered and said; O yes, I have an Husband, and Children, and many other
comforts; but I would give them all, and all the good I shall ever see in this
world, or in the world to come, to have my poor, thirsty Soul refreshed with
that precious blood of his, etc.

2. True and upright desires are ever interwoven with a sincere and holy use of
all such means, as may procure the enjoyment of the things desired; as fasting,
praying, hearing, reading, selling of all, and the like. See Isa. 26.9. how
desires are followed by seeking after God.

3. They are growing from little to more, I mean more actions, from more to
much more; from much more to habit, from habit to some competent perfection and
bigness in Christ. See, 1 Pet. 2.1. how desires and growing are conjoined, and
look upon Ephesians. 2.21. 2 These. 1.3. and try your selves often by these 3 signs
of true desires; for if you have them, you have the graces which you desire to
have, and so must needs be assured of your Salvation. I speak after famous Mr.
Rogers of Dedham; who has converted so many Souls, his words are in his
Doctrine of faith. c. 2. p. 128. What graces thou desire, and constantly
usest the means to attain, thou have. Thus he.

3. Uniformity, Uniformity.
an upright and sincere walker striveth, and labors to be the same in all
places and at all times, like true Gold, which is the same in dirt, and when it
is trodden upon, that it is when it is lifted up on high; and worn in a Ring,
or Crown, it shines wheresoever it is put: so he is the same in adversity, as
well as in prosperity; among filthy livers, as well as among Saints; in bad
company, as well as in good; at home as well as abroad; and like Aristotle's
homo (...) he is, cast him this way, and that away, and try him every way, and
you shall find him right, and square, in evil times as well as in good times;
For he knows, that to be good at all times, and in all places, is but a
Christian's duty; but to be good in evil times, and among evil men, is an
upright man's glory, and to be blameless among a wicked and crooked Generation,
yea, to the very credit of Religon, and Garland of Christianity; and so lobours
to be like a Rock unmovable; as he is required to be, 1 Cor. 15.58. See also,
Psalm. 1.3. his leaf also shall not wither, understand with any weather, and
Genesis 6.9. where the (...)
Hebrew is, and Noah walked indesinently with God; though the world was bad,
yet he was good, nay, as Chrysostom. in Genesis
Chrysostom speaks of him, like a spark he was in the midst of the Sea, which
all that wickedness which did overslow the whole earth could not quench.
Whereas Hypocrites, and such as want this uprightness are like Alcumy, which
looks like Gold, but proves not so; for when it is tried; appears to be but
counterfeit Gold: so they seem to be good, because of some glistering shows
which they make by their profession, prayers, and performances, but when they
are tried, and fallen into some Company or meet with opposition; they prove
false, and appear to be but counterfeits. And like the fish Ambros in ^exaem.
l. 5. (...). 8.
Polypus which changes colors, with every kind of stone it meets with in the
Sea; so they in the Sea of this world shift and change their colors, according
to the place where they are, and the company into which they come; among the
good, they will seem to be good, and talk as if they were good; yea, pray as if
they were Saints; but among the bad, they are all as bad; so they will talk,
and so they will do, and walk; abroad they will be like Angels, so they will
behave themselves, and so pure and heavenly they will seem to be, and so they
will speak, and pray very admirably; and as it were, with the Tongues of
Angels; but follow them home, and you will see them carry themselves as if they
were Devils; so they will lie* and be proud, and envious, and spightfull, and
so some of them will roar, and tear, and rave, and stamp, and be contentious
and unclean, and when it comes to family Duties, they will scarce pray at all
some of them, or read, or have a savory speech come out of their mouths all the
day long; or if it happen that they do pray some of them, as brief, and could,
and dry as may be, and commonly but a Repetition of the same things which they
are still wont to have in their domestic Devotions; and a kind of I speak
against hypocritical forms and repetitions, as Christ, Matthew. 6.7. and not
against all sorms, and repetitions.
form, and how can it be otherwise, seeing they have but a form of godliness;
denying the power thereof? 2 Timothy 3.5. But I have done with uprightness, but I
hope you have not done with it, for it is the chief mark of all David's marks;
and it will, if you can find it, yield you as much Assurance as any. I know the
man, says Blessed Hooker, he is yet alive, that in extremity of horror of
heart, said, he had sinned against the Holy Ghost; and therefore would have
made away himself; but now that which kept him, was, his conscience told him,
that at such a time his heart was upright before God, and that restrained him;
and God after that blessed him with assurance of his love, and favor; and
therefore this uprightness; oh! this uprightness, what a mark it is? O try your
selves daily by it. But I see that I have transgressed by my prolixity; I
humbly crave pardon, and promise to be briefer hereafter,

2. Evidence.
He works Righteousness. Righteousness i^ his trade, whereby he trades for
Heaven, laboring to give to God what is Gods, and to Man what is Man's, and to
every man his due.

3. Evidence.
He speaks the truth in his heart. Another man may speak truth too, but he
speaks it not from his heart; because it is not in his heart, but commonly
such as are none of Heavens Citizens will lie for advantage. It is given to
them all inasmuch as that they are called liars. And lying Children, Isa.
30.19. because As Rabby Moses, l. 1. c. 30.
used to them, and not used to speak truth; whereas God's Children are called
Children that will not lie, Isa. 63.9. Evidence.


4. He backbiteth not with his tongue; His tongue knows how to speak well,
but it knows not how to speak ill, 1 Pet. 2.23.
especially of any man; For it has not so learned Christ, * who when he was
reviled, reviled not again; whereas some will do little else, but revile, and
slander, and backbite, and speak evil of other men, who many times are better
than themselves.

5. He does no evil to his neighbor, Evidence.
if he can do him good he will, hurt him he dares not, in his body, goods, or
goodname; whereas some will be good to no body, but themselves, and scarce
themselves as they ought, but they will wrong any one to get by it.

6. He takes up no reproach against his neighbor, Evidence.
v. 3. for his charity will not suffer him which hopes better, because it 1
Cor. 13.7.
hops all things.

7. He is one in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, Evidence.
v. 4. But how? it is not his Brother, (for so is even a vile person) but his
Brothers fashions and vile courses, which he hates, and for which by him he is
so scorned, and despised; again, he contemns him not as he is a man, but as he
is a vile man.

8. He honors them that fear the Lord. Evidence.
I have read of a certain gracious King, called Jugo, King of the Dranes, that
once he made a great feast, and placed his Nobles and Lords in his Hall; but
the poor Christians which also were some of his guests, in a stately higher
Room, and kept them company; and when his Nobles repined, and wondered at it, he
said, these poor. Christians I look upon, as those that will reign with me as
fellow Kings, and such as will be my Companions in that other world; and
therefore I place them and use them so. So highly he honored them that feared
the Lord; and so does every Citizen of Heaven, where note, that this esteem
goes accompanied with love, as you may see, 1 These. 5.13. to esteem them very
highly in love; concerning which love, you know what is said, We know that we
have passed from death to life, because we love the Brethren, 1 John 3.14.
which once so satisfied a gracious woman, that when she could find no other
mark but this, this did gain her the Assurance of her salvation, because her
heart told her that she loved the Brethren from the bottom of her heart.

9. He swears to his own hurt, and changes not, Evidence.
v. 4. He is a man of his word, what he swears or promises shall stand, because
he knows that else he cannot stand, whether he win by it or lose he cares
not; though it be to my utter undoing, says he, it matters not, if I may but
go to Heaven at last, it shall not trouble me much, though I must forgo all
that I have upon earth first.

10. He does not put his money upon Usury, Evidence.
v. 5. And what is Usury? It is not only interest of a due quantity, as Vsura
defi^iti^ interesse quantitat is de^it^.
Civilians define it; but the loan of a thing that may be De Vsur. 22.
consumed in the use thereof, upon a compact for increase; where note, that a
man may commit it, whether he lend so to the rich or to the poor, the Tho. Aqu.
2.2. q. 79. ^. ^. (...)
Hebrew calls it biting, because it always bites, either actually, or
potentially, see Deuteronomy. 23.19. Thou shall not lend upon Usury to thy Brother,
Usury of money, Usury of victuals, Usury of any thing that is lent upon Usury,
which must be understood thus, and which may be consumed in the use thereof.
Here observe how generally God speaks, not excepting at all, him that is
rich, but saying, to thy Brother. Now is not the rich thy Brother as well as
the poor. I did preach once 16 Sermons against Usury, as near as I can
remember, upon this Psalm, but now I must be very brief, because I have
promised brevity.

So that for 1500 years after Christ, not any one of all the Fathers, and other
holy Writers have stood for it. See Rob. Bolton against M. S. P. 5.
11. He takes no reward against the innocent, Evidence.
v. 5. He is an enemy to bribery, because God hates it, and because it blinds
men's eyes; and therefore whether he be a Judge or Justice, or Lawyer, or
Minister, or Commissioner, or Arbitrator, and ender of differences; he will
rather beg from door to door, and from man to man, than be a false and bribe
taking man.

12. He does, Evidence.
that is, labors to do all that is required to be done h^re, and else where,
consequentially; I say all, for we have a Rule in the School, that an
indefinite proposition in a necessary matter is equivalent to an universal, and
such a proposition is this, Ergo. And besides, by this All, the close of this
Psalm, and this last mark does sweetly symphonize with the beginning of it, and
with the first, for the first makes him in a manner perfect, because the word
for uprightness is (...) which signifies perfect, namely in the sense
foreshewn. So that a Citizen of Heaven is truly a Catholic, a man complete in
Christ, a general treader into all the vestigaes of God's Saints, like Zachary
and Elizabeth, who walked in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the Lord
blameless, Luke 1.16. and one that would not willingly omit, or neglect any one
duty ^joyned by God, any one fervice to be performed to God, any good turn to
be done for God; no, not for a world, nor live in any one known sin with
allowance, because he knows that if he should, he would never be able to hold
up his head with joy, nor have any confidence at all, that Heaven he shall have
after all. That makes him to be so for all, even all that is to be done, I add
and consequentially to do it with his All. All the powers of my Soul, and all
the members of my Body, and all the moments and minutes of my time (says he)
shall go and be for God, for Christ, for Heaven; Heaven at last, and the
Assurance of it will pay for all; and then I shall not be Psalm. 119.6.
ashamed neither, whilst I am here, when I shall have respect to all the
Lord's Commandments: For this is the confidence that I shall have, that Heaven
hereafte^ I shall have; where drinking at the cistern of life. I shall take my
fill of the waters of life and fountains of pleasures streaming from Jehovah's
face, blessed for ever. Now my Brethren, shall I entreat and exhort you after
all this, to try your selves by these neverfailing Evidences; even daily to be
assured that you shall inhabit with God, that holy hill above everlastingly. I
believe it is a thing which some of you never did. For men think it to be
enough if they try themselves then, when signs and marks are delivered in some
certain Sermons; Nay, some will not try themselves then, and therefore no
wonder that such as are assured of their salvation, are like Rara avis in
terris.
Turtles very rare; and shall I not for that cause persuade you as earnestly as
I may, to take this new course of trying your selves; so every day hereafter to
gain the Assurance of the salvation of your Souls. O Souls, in the bowels of
Christ Jesus, I beseech you that you will be persuaded, and no longer neglect
so great salvation, I should say, the gaining of the Assurance of so great
salvation.

But shall I pray to God for you too? By God's help I will, saying, the Lord
bless these my labors to you, and bless you. He grant that these very
evidences may not only lie before ye in this Book, but also to you in your
hearts. He mind you of them, because else some days you will neglect them;
that so you may come to be assured daily, that you shall mansion with his holy
self, in that holy Hill it self, which is so far beyond all other Hills, and
high Mountains in this world, most certainly, and everlastingly. So be it.

But, A Case of Conscience.
here I must resolve a great case of conscience. For some will he ready to say;
Sir* we have used such means as these, and yet cannot gain this Assurance; and
therefore what shall we do in this case?

I Answer, There is a twofold Assurance.

The Assurance of Evidence.
The Assurance of Adherence.
1. The Assurance of Evidence; when with blessed Stephen, we see Heaven as it
were open, and the Son of man in it, that is, when we see the splendour of his
countenance, when his countenance is lifted up upon us, and in us; when in us
for the present is nothing but Heaven; when Heaven is poured out upon our
souls; when our souls are enroabed with the garment of salvation; when
salvation crowns us, fills us, swallows us; when we can see nothing, taste
nothing, feel nothing but Heaven, and must say as Jacob, This is none other but
the house of God, and this the gate of Heaven, Genesis 28.17.

2. Of Adherence. As when we can see no such thing, when every thing goes
against us, when God frowns, Christ withdraws, the Spirit chides; when if we
look up, we can behold nothing but wrath, even the wrath of a sin-revenging
God; if about us, nothing but horror; if within us, nothing but despair; if
under us, nothing but Hell, and yet can say as Job, though he slay me, yet will
I trust in him, Job 13.15. Now, when the first Assurance cannot for the present
by any means be had, we must stick to the second, we have a notable place for
it, Isa. 50.10. Who is among you that fears the Lord, that obeys the voice
of his servant, (and so does, what here has been spoken as from the Lord, by
his servant) that walks in darkness? let him trust in the name of the Lord,
and stay upon his God. The Hebrew is (...)? whence is (...) a staff, to show
that a man in darkness goes by a staff, sustaining himself by it, to keep
himself up; so such a one must rest himself upon God in this his dark and
dismal estate to be kept up. See Psalm. 23.4. concerning this staff; and let me
say unto you yet farther, let such a one cloth himself with patience, and
never think himself the more For he may be more safe than he who feels the
sweetness of joy, and may be lifted up with it, says Gerson.
unsafe, let him center himself in Christ, let him wrap up himself in his
merits; let him say, here I will live, and here I will die: If I perish, I
perish, (as Esthe^. ^.16.
Esther said once) it is all one, but it shall be upon this So Vrse^. tells us.
staff which I will not let go, but keep to my grave whither I go. As for the
other of Evidence, ye will, or may, in that also before you depart, and cease
to be retainers to the Sun, sun yourselves, and have your part.

2. Incentives of a sorts.
Now Incentives; and

1. Let me deduce some from the evils that will follow, if you will not follow
these directions.

2. Others from the good that will come, if you will come to labor for this
Assurance.

1. As for the evils. You will live

1. In continual doubts.

2. In continual fears, and sorrows.

1. You will live in continual doubts, and question even every thing, as
whether. ye did not all that ever ye did in Hypocrisy; and whether your love
be true, your conversion true, your godliness true; and especially you will
doubt of your Faith, whether that be true saving Faith, Nam fidel is non est,
nis^ qui suae salutis securitati innixus Diabolo and morti confidenter insultet
quomo do doceinur, Romans 8.38. Calv. Inst. l. 3. c. 2. s. 16.
yea, or no, because so few have it, and because so much temporary and
hypocritical Faith is going; where give me leave to dwell a little while,
because I hear most doubting Christians call their Faith mostly in question.
And because those two kinds of Faith carry men so far as they do, and thereby
raise such doubts. As*

1. The Temporary carry men so far as to make them hear the word, even with
j^y, Luke 8.13. Oh! me-thought, says the Temporary, I was even ravished when I
heard such a Sermon.

2. It makes men to be not hearers only, but doers also of many things, both
in their Families and apart, even to admiration, Mark* 6.20.

St. Basil knew such a Temporary at Jerusalem, Basil Epist. mihi p. 515.
who for a time lived so strictly, as that he did even admire him; for he had
fasted so often as that he had brought himself to nothing almost, but skin and
bones, and counted the greatest wealth as dung, and watered his cheeks with
rivers of tears, and walked as he thought with God day and night; in brief,
lived so solitarily, and retiredly, as if he had cared for no earthly creature;
and yet at last fell not only off, but also in love with a strange woman,
having forsaken his own wife, and I do not read in the same Basil of his
recoverie at all; and this and the like examples cannot but make any man who
wants this Assurance, to tremble, and doubt. So the hypocritical, I mean the
sturdie Hypocrites faith, Famous Mr. Hooker.
as Divines call it, Good Lord! how far it carries?

1. It brings him to a great deal of sorrow, being Matt. 13.22.
thorny ground, and having his thorns in him, that is, pricking sorrows, and
troubles of mind; The Temporary, says he, is deceived; for he came easily by
his faith; he was never much troubled before it, or about it; he believed by
and by, but mine cost me dear; and the truth is, such a Hypocrite commonly has
sorrow enough for the quantity of it, though not enough for the quality or
uprightness, because every valley is not filled, according to Luke 3.5. though
he himself, like a high Mountain, was thrown and cast down by a soul-piercing
Sermon, there being a hollow false heart left in him.

2. It makes him even to trade with Christ, and that much too, like that Mat.
19.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
young man who also was so sorrowful, and had so much talk with Christ about
his salvation; and made as if he would do much by Christ's persuasion, though
not to the losing hand upon any terms, but only so far, and to so much as will
suit with his estate and occasions.

3. Nay, it will carry him out even unto suffering; for says he, the
Temporary cozeneth himself, for he is Mat. 13.21.
offended and yields, and De quo Socrates, l. 3. c. 1.
Ezebolius-like complies by and by, Luke 8.13.
and is gone; but I scorn to do so, I will stand it out to the last, though I
die for it. See 1 Cor. 13.3. how a man may give his body to be burnt, and yet
want Charity; and so consequently true saving faith, which works by love, Gal.
5.6. Beloved, there is a Rule in Logic. Those disjunct Propositions, both
parts whereof are true, the whole must needs be true; if either part be false,
then the Proposition must be false. Now here both parts are true, I may give my
body to be burnt, and yet want Charity; so a man may suffer, and yet want
faith, Ergo. For there be many things in man's heart that he will rather die
than yield, as Pride, Obstinacy, self-wildness, sturdiness, and the like:
This, this makes men doubt so; and doubt they will, till by the use of means
formerly prescribed, they gain that Assurance which is here required: and
therefore get it, O, by all mean^ get it, my dearly beloved; for, how long will
ye doubt so?

2. You will live in continual fear and heaviness; for you are whilst you want
this Assurance in darkness, and see no light, Isa. 50.10. the Hebrew is
brightness, which is more than light, and seems to allude to the brightness
of God's countenance, which a child of God walking in darkness, and wanting
this Assurance, cannot see. Now when a man walks in darkness, you know what a
sad fearful man he is, because he can see no light; every man that he meets he
takes to be an enemy; every voice he hears he thinks to be the voice of
Robbers; every step he makes, he fears will make him fall: so, when men are
not assured of their salvation; and of God's favor, how sad and fearful are
they? every Scripture almost they meet with they take to be against them;
every step of theirs to be a step into hell; every glimpse of comfort to be a
delusion of the Devil; and so they live the sorrowfullest, the dismallest, the
disconsolatest life that poor creatures can live, living in a continual fear of
death, of Devils, and of hell fire, which burns for ever. It has been my own
case when I wanted this assurance; I was afraid to be alone, and afraid of
Satan, because of his buffetings, and so will you be, or are already. O my
brethren, the tongue of man is hardly able to express the sorrow, the fear, the
perplexity that a poor doubting Christian is in whilst he wants this Assurance,
and cannot see the light of the Lord's countenance; when he looks upon his
Wife, (if he have any) his Children, his Goods, wherein others take a world of
comfort, he says, what comfort can I take in them who cannot be assured at
all, as others are, of the favor of God, which is better than ten wives, ten
sons, nay, 10 thousand worlds? when he looks upon his meat and drink, he says,
what good can all this good meat and sweet drink do to me, who have no
assurance at all that ever I shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and
drink of that new and sweetest wine which they drink of in the Kingdom of God?
When he looks upon his body, he says; O, how will this body of mine be able
to dwell in that flaming fire? and how, O how will it be able to endure those *
everlasting burnings? When he thinks upon his soul, he says, O my poor Isa.
33.14.
trembling soul, whether will thou go, when thou go hence? to Heaven or
Hell? I know not, God knows; or thus: As that great Emperor Animula Vagula
Blandula.
anxiviously I have lived, doubtfully shall I die, not knowing whether I shall
go; as Aristotle said, that great Philosopher; or as David, that great King of
Israel, 2 Samuel 18.15. said of Absalom his Son once; so says he of his soul,
with a little change; O my soul, would to God; I did know what would become of
thee after me; but I know it not, and therefore O sad man that I am, and O sad
soul that thou art, Oh! my soul, my soul; Oh! how should this prick ye on
therefore like a Spur, to the getting of that here required, Assurance of the
salvation of your souls.

2. Some Incentives I shall deduce from the good that will come, Sort of
Incentives.
if you will come to labor for this Assurance: as,

1. Look as they that are sure of their vocation and election, so they that are
sure of their salvation; by a necessary consequence shall not be barren in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, in 2 Pet. 1.8. knowledge a man
may have, though no assurance of his salvation he have. As good a Logician he
may be as ever was Austin, Augustinus a petitiono vocabatur dialecticus.
who for it was called the Dialectick; speak he may diverse tongues, as Hebrew,
Greek, Latin, etc. nay, as many as Genusbrey Sultan, Solyman's Interpreter, 15
Languages, or as Mithridates 22, as the French Academy has it. An Oxford of
learning, a walking Library, an ocean of wit, he may be; abilities he may have
to wade into the Abyss of the Oracles of God, and to interpret mysteries; a
dexterity he may have with the piercing key of his most excellent knowledge, to
unlock the golden cabinet of Gospel secrets; parts he may have with the far
seeing eye of his large understanding, to penetrate the occult qualities of
nature; able he may be to discover what is in the bowels of the earth, in the
bottom of the seas, in the heights of mountains; nay, he may with the wings of
his profound learning even sore up to that flaming hill above, where the stars
are, yea, beyond the Castiopeia it self, and be able to discourse of the
altitude, magnitude, natures, influences of those glorious lights which are in
that spangled sky, even to admiration; but as barren he will be for want of
godliness and goodness, if he want the the Assurance of his election, of
salvation, as the mountain of Gilboa, 2 Samuel 1.21. Contrarily, if he be sure of
that, then, oh how fruitful will he be then in all manner of holiness, and
godly conversation? and how, oh how will that even fill his sails, with life,
with motion, with action, and make him navigate even with expansed sails,
through seas of duties? For, what, oh! what will not a man do for God, when
once he is certain of the favor of God? Oh! how he will pray, fast, read,
meditate, love, when once he is persuaded of his love? and therefore who is
there among all this people that fain would grow in grace, and not be barren in
knowledge? let him labor for the assurance of his salvation, and he shall have
his hearts desire. O my God, fulfill thou the desire of that soul, I humbly
desire, and beseech thee with my very soul.

2. You shall never fall, 1 Pet. 1.10. nor look back, like Lot's wife, which
for it was turned into a Pillar of Salt; yet to be seen, says Tertullian, to
season such as fall. Now, you do nothing almost but fall, as being in darkness,
Isa. 50.10. now into the sin of pride, then of passion, then of luxury; now ye
are too jovial, then too fantastical, in your gates, clothes; now too light,
then too melancholic; now ye talk too much, then too little; now ye sell too
dear, then ye use false weight, or mix your wares bad with good, some of you:
now ye are too strange, then too familiar, too wanton, some of ye; now as high
as Lucifer for pride, then as low as Demas for worldliness; for even in our
time are Tertul. in Sodom. Carm. p. 646.
Aug. in Ps. 77. p. 830.
many Demases. The world is now as it was formerly; there was none then, but
there has been, or is some one now that parallels him, and is, as it were, his
revived self. But let a man get the Assurance of his salvation; let him sun
himself in the light of God's countenance; let him be crowned with the certain
hope of glory; let him be refreshed once with the overflowing streams of
divine consolations: Let God's Spirit once speak peace to his spirit, and he
will say; O, I would not be as I have been, nor do as I have done, no, not for
a thousand worlds; I was proud, passionate, envious, lascivious, covetous, as
others are, but I would not be so again, if one would give me all the wealth of
England. Oh! how much sweeter is the assurance of my salvation, than all the
pleasures of sin for a season; or thus, as Joseph said to his Mistress, being
enticed by her, Genesis 39.9. My Master has kept nothing from me, but thee,
because thou art his Wife, How then can I do this great wickedness and sin
against God? so says he when he is enticed by sin; My Lord Jesus Christ has
kept nothing from me but his glory, which, he says, he will give to none
other; Isa. 42.8.
He has put such joy in my heart, such light into my mind, such assurance into
my soul, as that I am even ravished with him in my soul; and therefore how can
I commit this wickedness, and sin against my God? Oh! I will not do it for the
whole world.

3. You will thereby enter Heaven: this also follows by a consequence from the
ensuring of our calling and election; for, he that is sure of the one must
needs be sure of the other also, as I showed From Romans 8.29, 30.
formerly. Now, what says Peter? Give diligence to make your calling and
election sure, 2 chapter 1.10. and then v. 11. For so an entrance shall be
ministered unto, abundantly into the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, which words may be understood, not only of an entrance to be
ministered hereafter, but also ministered now, when we are made sure of Heaven,
as Romans 8.16. when we are saved by hope, when namely Jesus Christ is pleased to
shine upon us with the light of his countenance, beaming into our hearts; Quae
est luae, quae irradiat cor meum. Aug. in Med.
when our hearts do leap for joy; when joy triumphs over sorrow; when sorrow is
turned into singing; when rivers of comfort are shed and showred down from the
Throne of Grace upon our souls; when our souls feed on Ambrosian dainties, then
are we entered into the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which then
is in us, as well as above us, and consists in Righteousness and peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.17. and therefore if now as well as hereafter you
would live as it were in Heaven, then get the Assurance of Heaven, then beg it,
then seek after it, by the means shown for it, and never be at rest, till ye be
so blessed; for then, oh the extaticall leaps of your rejoicing hearts! oh the
dancings of your gladded spirits! oh the gloryings of your rav^shed souls!
which then you will be able to tell of, saying; O what a Heaven did I feel in
me, when my Beloved spoke to me, and assured me that my poor soul should be
saved undoubtedly! Oh, how sweet was that voice, that word, that saying to my
soul! O how was my soul then even heavened in God, embosomed in Christ,
extatized in the Spirit, and elevated to the highest horizon of divine
consolation! To say no more, this entrance gotten by Assurance is the sweetest,
the deliciousest, the pleasantest thing that ever beatified and warmed the
heart of man upon earth; for a very Paradise it is, and a Heaven upon earth;
wherein I now desire to leave you upon earth, and therefore I do so press it,
to make you press for it, that you may gain it; beseeching you by the mercies
of God, that you will after all this, sadly and seriously consider all this,
and remember the sad condition wherein you formerly lived, living in doubts;
and that if you love your souls, you will now even heaven your selves upon
earth, ensouling your selves in God, sunning your selves in Christ, and
emparadising your selves in that ever, and over-glorious Assurance of
salvation, which I have so urged by believing, and those other blessed means
which have been foreshewn; showing your selves to be not hearers only, but
doers also, and such doers as are excitated by the Word, suscitated by the
Spirit, animated with heat of zeal, elevated with height of hope, and even
ready to soar up upon the wings of confidence, and joy, beyond that flaming
hill where the stars are, and to enter that holy hill above, where fullness of
joy is unutterable, tranquillity blessed, immortality immortal, felicity to be
enjoyed through all eternity.

To God alone be all praise, laud, and glory.
Fifteen Soul-solacing CONFERENCES WITH CHRIST, Touching Sins and the World's
Conquest by Faith: Making use of the joys of Heaven, and of Christ's sweetest
Promises, Love, Death, Offices, Intercession, and overcoming the World, etc.

According to the High and Noble Art of fighting the great fight of Faith, 1 Timothy 6.12.

Fitted for all such gracious Souls, as do most heartily defire to see the
death of their strong and mighty Corruptions, and a through Conquest of this
vile and troublesome World.

By Christopher Jelinger, M. A.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1664.

The first Conference: Tending to the right happy subduing of sin, by the Word
of Promise, Mich. 7.19.
Believer. Psalm. 42.11.


WHy art thou cast down O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me?

Soul. Disquieted within me, say ye? Nay, wonder that I am not even overwhelmed.

Believ. What is the matter?

Soul. Ah! sin, sin, Ps. 38.3, 4, 6.
which is as an heavy burden, even too heavy for me to bear, it makes me
grieve all the day long.

Believ. I do not blame thee, O my soul, that thou art troubled, and take on
for sin. For a Cor. 7.10.
godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, Possidon, in Vit. Aug. c. 27.
attribuit haec verba Ambr.
not to be repented of: but thou grievest too much, as if thou wer'st without
hope, whereas thou servest a good and a gracious Lord, who pittieth them that
are his, as a Psalm. 103.12, 13.
Father pittieth his children, and removes our transgressions from us, as far
as the East is from the West.

Soul. I grant that God is very pitiful, but I doubt whether he will have
mercy on me, because it is written Prove. 28.13.
who so confesses and forsakes his sins shall have mercy: but I am as full of
sin still as the ground is full of piles of grass, the seashore full of sands,
and the Ocean full of drops of water, so that I cannot say that sin is
forsaken, and therefore I can expect no mercy.

Believ. No mercy? what do thou then make of David, whose words but now were
cited? did he not commit both murder and adultery, and yet thou see he does
not forsake his own mercy, though he was not able quite to forsake his own
sinful lusts.

Soul. Will you compare your self with David, who though he did fall
grievously, commiting murder and adultery, yet was not full of adultery, for
he repented of that sin, and of murder also, and after that ye do not read
that he fell so again: but I, your poor soul am (as I said but now) full of
sin; even sometimes full of envy, then of pride, then of lusts, and therefore I
must needs be hopeless.

Believ. Hopeless! I perceive O my Soul, that thou do utterly forget and
bury in oblivion the sacred words, sweetest consolation.

Soul. What consolation?

Believ. ^ Tim. 1.15, 16.
That Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, of whom Paul was chief,
who yet obtained mercy.

Soul. It should seem you will compare your self with Paul also, who though he
was bad before his conversion, yet was not so afterward, for he tells us, that
he was even Gal. 6.14.
crucified to the world, and the world crucified to him; but you are not so
dead to the world, for you take pleasure, even too much pleasure and joy in the
things of this world, and are often times mightily transported with the world and
the fashions of it, unto which ye do too much conform your self, in your diet,
apparel, discourse; yea, and ye cannot deny, but ye are too eager in the
pursuit of the profits and deceitful riches of this world, forgetting both what
the first and best Christians did before you, and what you ought to do after
them, vilipending and despising all the worlds stately pomp, and fading glory,
and therefore I am so perplexed.

Believ. I do not equal my self with Paul, but only comfort thee, O my soul,
with his example; for though I be not equally mortified to this vile world with
him, yet can not thou deny, but I do truly endeavor to be crucified to the
world, and I would have thee know that Paul was not an Angel neither, though an
eminent Saint, but a sinner, both before and after his conversion; an
impenitent sinner, I mean first, and a repentant sinner after; for therefore he
says in the forequoted place, Christ came to save sinners, of whom I am chief:
mark, I am, and not I have been, and again Romans 7.15. that which I allow not I
do: mark, do, and not I have done, and ver. 24. 'O wretched man that I am, Note
again, I am, and not I have been, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? Mark, shall deliver me, and not has delivered me, though that be a
truth too, that he was in a great measure mortified, and partly delivered
already; and therefore be not disheartened, O my Soul, for though Paul was
transcendently more crucified to the world than I, yet was he pestred and
troubled with a world of sin, which he calls the body of death, as well as I;
and his only hope and trust was in Jesus Christ, that he would deliver him at
last, for so he says, I thank God through Jesus Christ, as if he should say,
and would you know what I mean to do in this heavy case? then I must tell you,
that I will collocate and place my sole and whole trust and affiance in the
Lord Christ, who as he has delivered me in part, so doubtless will deliver me
yet more and more, and therefore as being certain of it that he will do it, I
thank God for it through Christ who will do it, as if he had done it already,
and this same course thou also must take, O my soul, and therefore hope thou in
God, for I shall yet praise him who is the health of my countenance and my God.

Soul. But why is not that worldliness, which I objected but now, as
discovering it self so, by eagerness after and delightfulness in the things of
this world, with its fashions, at least more subdued yet (all this while) than
it is?

Believ. Do thou wonder at that, O my soul? then consider, 1. What a
multitude of enemies do continually assault me, I mean Satanical suggestions,
the worlds enchanting provocations, and the fleshes own insurrections most
mighty and most frequent, which makes me even wonder how a poor soul can
overcome such a world in any measure; for who would not rather admire a little
Ship, if fighting with many great and well manned Turkish Galleys, it should
escape though her mast and all the higher part of it should be beaten off down
to the water, and many men slain in her, than enquire why it should be so
spoiled, debilitated and weakened? which is just thy case, O my soul; for thou
have fought with many great and pestilent enemies, like a little Ship, and yet
did so far escape, as that they could not totally nor finally prevail against
thee, though it cannot be denied, but that they have wasted and spoiled, and
hurt thee much, and killed many good motions, and therefore I say, that even
this is a thing to be wondered at.

2. Besides, God has his time for every thing, a time for trial and a time for
help, and to subdue the world in a greater measure, as he will, and therefore
Psalm. 42.11. for the Hebrew is (...) expecta.
wait thou upon God.

3. Again, it may be that the means were not so industriously used, whereby the
world may be subdued, even the vision and application of Faith, and therefore
let us amend this fault, and then I hope all will be well.

Soul. You say well, and therefore up and be doing.

Christ. What manner of communications be these, which you have, being so Luke
24.1^, 18, 19.
sad?

Believ. Concerning sin which my soul is troubled for, and would be delivered
from.

Christ. Art thou. willing indeed, O Christian Soul, to part with any sinful
pleasure, profit, honor, and with life it self for my sake?

Soul. Joh. 21.17.
Thou Lord know all things, thou know that I desire it, and would not
willingly live or lie in the practice of any Psalm. 119.
one known sin.

Christ. Luk, 24.25.
O foolish soul then, and slow to believe all that the Prophets have spoken;
did dest thou never read what is written, Mich. 7.19, 20.
he will have compassion upon us, he will subdue our iniquities, and thou will
cast all their sins in the depth of the sea? Mark, he will not only have
compassion, pardoning iniquity, and passing by the transgression of the remnant
of his heritage, but also subdue your iniquities, that is, he will For the
original is (...) subjugabit vi ac violentia capiet.
subjugate and bring under the yoke, as it were, * all your sins, so as that,
like yoked oxen you shall be able to rule them, though in themselves they be
never so unruly, and he will even offer and infer violence unto your nature, so
as that your sinful lusts, desires, and affections shall be even captivated in
such a manner, as that they shall not be able to range and to rage so freely as
they did: and therefore trust in God, O thou Christian Soul, who is the health
of thy countenance, and thy God, who can, and will help thee and deliver thee
at last most happily out of all thy misery.

Soul. Blessed be thou, sweet Jesus, dear Savior, who thus art pleased to
comfort me; and praised be thy holy name, in the which I sweetly repose my
trust, for I know thee what thou art, The Holy one of Israel, the mighty God,
the Prince of peace, the God of comfort, even Immanuel, God with us, who by
this sweet and precious promise art fast bound to perform in me, what thou have
here promised unto me, and therefore, Lord, do unto me as thou can, and then
I shall be able to forsake sin as I would, I humbly beseech thee; yea, I do
even assure my self, that as thou can, so thou will, because thou art the
Joh. 14.6.
truth it self, and therefore I say, Mich. 7.19, 20.
thou Lord wilt cast all my sins in the depth of the Sea of thy mercy, and
suffocate them in thy precious blood, as the Egyptians were drowned in the
Red Sea; and wilt subdue them, as they were subdued, that they may not rule
over me, as they did, when I lived in Egypt, the house of bondage, in the state
of my unregeneracy; I mean, O Lord, Lord, I believe that thou will perform thy
truth to me, as well as to Jacob, and thy mercy as to Abraham, which thou have
sworn from the days of old, as thou art God from everlasting.

Christ. I see thou will hold me to my word, like Jacob, and the truth is, that
being the truth, I cannot go from them, nor deny them, and therefore Mat. 15.2^.
be it to thee as thou will.

Believ. Amen, Lord Jesus.

The second Conference: Wherein Faith makes use of the Promise of Heaven, and
threatening of Hell against sin.
BEliev. See thou not, O my Soul, these snares, which Satan that cunning
fowler has laid for thee, to illaqueate and to catch thee?

Soul. What snares?

Believ. Snares of covetousness, in the goods of this world, snares of
voluptuousness in eating, drinking, marrying; snares of pride, in praying,
preaching, discoursing, Almsgiving, snares in sleeping, snares in waking, and
in every other thing.

Soul. I see them, I see them, but what must I do to escape them?

Believ. Looking beyond them with the eye of Faith upon the word of truth in
general, and applying the Word of Promise in special.

Soul. But that is very large, and therefore how can I see it all, or
appropriate it, when I am suddenly assaulted.

Believ. nor is it necessary that one do make use of all at once, and therefore
at this time choose but one threatening, and one promise; for instance, Romans
8.13. If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the spirit do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live; and then imagine 3 several
habitations, a high, a low, a middle, the high is the House of God called
Heaven, the low Hell, the middle this world; the two extremes are quite
contrary one to the other, but the middle is somewhat like to both; for in it
is light and darkness, heat and cold, sickness and health, sadness and
gladness, hatred and love, good and bad, just and unjust, Lords and servants,
rule and subjection, death and life, whereof one part does emblematize Heaven,
the other Hell; for in this world there is a mixture of good and bad, but in
Heaven are none bad, but all good, in Hell none good but all bad; and of the
men of the world some are elevated and lifted up on high into Heaven, others
are drawn and thrown down into Hell, for like and like are to be joined, good
with good, bad with bad, just men with just Angels, and transgressing men with
Angels transgressing; the servants of God with God; the servants of Satan with
Satan: Think on this O my soul, when thou see Satan's snares before thee, and
believe verily, that as living in the world thou see the image and similitude
both of Heaven and Hell before thee, even light and darkness, life and death;
so they which live after the flesh, fulfilling the lusts and doing the works of
the flesh shall never inherit the Kingdom of God, and that they which mortify
and overcome them shall certainly be emparadised, and translated into that
highest habitation and 2 Cor. 5.1.
house eternal in the Heavens; where there is light without darkness, health
without sickness, gladness without sadness, love without hatred, good and just
inhabitants only, and none bad, satiety and fullness even of joy and pleasures
without famine, and life without death, even life for evermore; Do thou
believe this, O my soul?

Soul. I do believe it.

Believ. Then consider whether thou ought not to avoid all the foresaid
snares; mortifying the flesh, with all the lusts and affections therefore, that
thou may live and not die for ever.

Soul. So I will by Gods help.

But you said that I must apply also the word of promise in special, what do ye
mean by that?

Believ. Thou must assure thy self, that thou in particular shall live forever,
and be Angelized in case thou subdue and mortify thy corrupt nature, and
resist Satan's tyranny; look up therefore, O my Soul, and possess thy self, as
it were of Heaven by faith, and thou shall easily overcome the earth.

Soul, I do now understand you; and therefore I lift up my self as well as I am
able, and beholding, as it were, the place ordained and prepared for me; I
salute it as the Patriarchs saluted Hebr. 11.13.
the promises, when by faith they saw them, saying; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
whose Revel. 21.21
streets are of gold, and gates of pearls, how pleasant and how beautiful art
thou? Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou City of God, for in thee there
is nothing but light, and joy, and bliss, and blessedness, and sweetness, and
comfort, and peace, and life, even life vital, life beatifical, life immortal,
life eternal without spot, without dolor, without Anxity, without corruption,
change or perturbation, O sweet, O quiet, O blessed life! O life of lives! O
life angelical! O^ thee also, O new and Heavenly Jerusalem, there is no
adversary to oppose; no sin, to Entice; no fear, but love* no Night but only
day; no Sun but instead of it the Son of God himself, the Son of righteousness,
blessed for ever. And therefore farewell all earthly Pleasures, Profits,
Honors. For they be but as dung and dirt, and shadows, and dreams in
comparison of that Hebr. 10.34:
enduring substance, and that 2 Corinthians. 4.17. Psalm. 16.11:
et ernal weight of glory, and those surpassing pleasures which are of the
right hand of God for evermore.

The third Conference like the former. The 3. Solil^quie.

BEliev.

I perceive that now thou art quite changed, O my Soul; For whereas in forme^
times thou have been much disquieted, now thou art very calm and quiet, or
rather secure.

Soul. So I am.

Believ. How comes this to pass?

Soul. I have felt so much comfort lately, as that upon it I did even joy too
much, and promised my self too much peace and tranquillity, which caused me to
seek out for humane Consolations, and Contentments, at last; as being too
inordinately disirous to live comfortably still, whereas I should rather have
fitted my self for new Quouiam transibit hora illa and sequetur tentati^. Tho.
a Kempis de imit. Chrifli. l. 2. c. 9.
temptations; this, as now I see, is the cause of my security.

Believ. So it is, and therefore rowze up thy self, O my Soul, and look about
thee. For neither Satan is asleep, nor the flesh quite dead; but both are
coming on with renewed strength, and therefore we must resist them by faith.

Soul. How by faith?

Believ. In this case of security, I see no fitter weapon to be used by faith,
than the sight and serious consideration of hellish torments, compared with
Heavenly joys, that so being afraid of the one, and inflamed with a desire of
the other, thou may resist Satan, and avoid sin, unto which now thou art
more prone than thou have been in times past; for security brings
Licenciousness, and much imbecility.

Soul. I like this well, and therefore make choice of one apt Subject or other
whereon I may now muse and meditate.

Believ. Me thinks that fearful place in Matthew. 24.51. against Hypocrites,
whose portion shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, will in this thy case be
very seasonable.

Soul. So it will be, for one may well suspect himself to be but an Hypocrite
when he is so secure; as I am now, being apt to yield to any temptation.

Believ. Mark then, O my Soul, the two Principal punishments of Hell here: in
extinguible heat, and intolerable cold, for of Aug. de Tripl. habit. l. c. 2.
heat comes weeping, of cold gnashing of teeth, whence result innumerous sorts
of punishments to be endured in that siery lake, even intolerable thirst, the
punishment of hunger, the punishment of horror, the punishment of fear, the
punishment of anguish; add dolor without remedies, bonds without any solution,
vengeance without end; all which grievous Punishments do accompany the two
foresaid principles, with whom compare, O my Soul, the joys of Heaven, and
whatsoever* accompanies them, Vbi nulla molestia inquietat sed perennis
laetitia regnat. Le^ de Confl. vit. and Virt. fo. 115.
Perenna^ beatitude, and of every ineffable good thing, which neither can be
uttered, nor ever entered into the heart of man, 1 Cor. 2.9. whereas Hell is
all full of whatsoever is contrary to such blessedness. Rev. 21.21, 2^.
streets of Gold, and gates of Pearls and Diadems of glory, and light
unapproachable, and of Jehovah's face it self above all, blessed for ever;
whereas in Hell the damned are and shall be cruciated with the sight of damned
men, and Spirits, and of the Devil himself the Prince of Hell. Yea, Luke 16.24.
In a word, there is nothing to be found in Heaven, but what may oblect and
please; whereas in that infernal pit, there is nothing else but whatsoever may
vex, grieve, displease, terrify, offend, sting, tear, disquiet, molest,
afflict, and that for ever and ever, for their worm dies not, and their fire
shall not be quenched, Mark 9. where the same punishment is twice mentioned by
Christ himself, v. 44. 46. because men had need be put in mind of it much and
often: and therefore think on both these contrary habitations seriously, O my
soul, and compare them exactly, and see what cause thou have to avoid sin and
Satan, that thou may not be cast into that fearful lake, but rather
transported in the arms of Angels into Abraham's bosom, where there is only
rest and no labor, ease and no trouble, tranquillity and no hostility, comfort
and no discomfort, triumphing and no fighting, rejoicing and no crying, for the
former things will be all passed away, Revel. 21.4.

Soul. O the good which you have done unto me, carrying me both into Hell and
Heaven with such seasonable considerations, that I might see, as it were, both
places; for now I do even nauseat seat and loath the worlds most delicious
pleasures, and richest treasures, and stateliest pomp, nor do I fear much the
most stingingst crosses and troubles, that may befall me in this world; I see
Hell is more grievous than any torment, yea, all torments, if they were all put
together; and that the profits and pleasures of this world, though never so
great and delectable, cannot do me so much good, and bring me so much content,
and satisfaction, as the punishments of Hell, which one shall incur, if he
yield to sin and Satan will do hurt, and produce discontent, anguish, torment,
and vexation for ever and ever to endure, I see likewise that there is more
passing joy, pleasure, delight, comfort, and glory to be found in Heaven, than
in any fools Paradise upon earth, I mean in any dainty fare love of women, fine
clothes, men's applause, abundance of wealth, flowing in with the confluence of
all earthly happiness; for there I see are pleasures without displeasure,
dignity without fear, honor without envy, riches without loss, abundance
without any defects, prosperity without adversity, and eternity without vanity;
yea, there is nothing but perfect love, perfect joy, perfect peace, Those that
have imagined the earth to turn about, and the heavens to stand still, have yet
supposed that we may stand or fit still, on that whirling globe of earth: how
much more may we be persuaded of our perfect rest above those moving spears?
Ha^^ in his 13. Occas. Med.
perfect rest: whereas here is all imperfect, in a word, there is no other
voice to be heard but of triumphers and fingers, singing the sweet songs of
Sion, and of harpers having the harps of God, Rev. 15.2. And O that I might be
so happy as to hear some of those sweet songs that are sung to the honor of
the blessed trinity by those heavenly Quiristers. Well, I hope that in Gods
good time I shall not only hear them, being taken up among them, upon the
desolution of this my tabernacle the body, but also shall sing with them the
sweet songs of Zion to the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear love, and sweet Savior,
who was slain for me, and redeemed me with his blood, Rev. 5.9. Therefore
farewell all the Quapropter recedat am^r praesentis saeculi, in qu^ nullus ita
nascitur at non moriatur, and succedat amor futurt saeculi, in quo sic omnes
vivificantur, ^t deinceps non moriantur, etc. Leo de. Cons^. Vit. and Virt.
mihi, ^o. 115.
world, farewell pleasures, I am for him who has provided for me more delicious
and lasting pleasures, even for evermore, Psalm. 16.11. farewell profits that may
be sinful, I am for him who has promifed me in Heaven a better and an enduring
substance, Heb. 10.34. farewell all vain and glittering glory of this world, for
I am for another world, where there is ordained for me a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. and where the glorious body of my dear
love Christ shines with unconceivable splendour above the brightness of the Sun
for ever and ever.

The fourth Conference. Wherein faith makes use of the Word of Promise,
touching the enjoying of God, and of the sacred words extenuation of all wordly
things.
BEliev. Why do thou trouble thy self so about the things of this life, O my
Soul? know thou not that all is Vanity? Pleasures Vanity? Riches Vanity?
Honors Vanity?

Soul. You do well, that you mind me of it. For I am apt to forget it* but what
if this consideration do not, nor can take me off from the love of those vain
things, what shall I do then?

Believ. Then elevate thy self by faith, from visibles and fly hence like an
Eagle, and cease not to mount us higher and higher still, till thou come to the
invisible God, who only can, must and will satiate thine (else) unsatisfiable
desire, and ensoul thy self, as it were, in God, who is only good, and in whom
are all goods; O my Soul, excite thy self and lift up all thy understanding,
and consider as much as thou art able, what, and how great that good is, which
is God: as for instance; all good things are delectable: consider intensively,
how pleasant that good must needs be, which comprizeth the jucundity, and
pleasantness of all things. Again, if that life, which is created, is so good,
how good is then the life creating? if Salvation wrought be sweet; how sweet
and delicious is Salvation it self, which works all Salvation? if wisdom be
amiable, when we do but think on things created, how amiable is that wisdom
which produced all things of nothing? Lastly if many and great delights be in
things delectable, and pleasant, what, and how much delectation must needs be
in him, who made all things so delightful? And therefore why do thou range
so here, and there, O my Soul, to find out what may do thee good, among things
created, which cannot satisfy thee? possess thy self of God, in whom is every
good thing, and let him fill thee, desire that which is only good, and then
thou shall have enough, and desire no more; for in that good, which is God,
thou shall find far greater joy, greater delight, greater profit, greater
glory, than all the world can possibly yield thee.

Soul. I do not only believe it, that I shall find it so; but I do partly find
it already, and therefore, O my sweet and gracious God, who art only good, turn
thou all sinful joy and carnal pleasure into gall and betterness in me, that
nothing may be so sweet, dear, pleasant, and amiable unto me, as my Lord and my
God, who art sweetness, pleasantness, and amiableness it self, and be thou my
joy, who have also promised to be my reward, I humbly pray thee.

The fifth Conference. Wherein Christ's aid is implored against Satan's
temptations, in a time of desertion.
BEliev. I perceive, O my Soul, that thou can not be long quiet; for thou
beginnest to be as turbulent as ever thou have been.

Soul. So I am, and I cannot be otherwise disposed now.

Believ. Why so?

Soul. Because, he that should comfort and sustain me is far from me, and the
tempter, whom I wish farther off, is nigh me, and raises such storms against
me, as that I know not what to do, that he may not sink me. For I am like that
little ship, Matthew. 8.24. covered with the impetuous waves of his tempestuous,
and grievious temptations beating upon me, without any cessation, or
intermission.

Believ. Let not, this dismay thee, O my Soul, for thus Christ is wont to try
his best Nunquam in veni aliquem tam religiosum and devotum, qui non habuerit
interdum gratiae subtractionem. Tho. a Kempis de imit. Chr. l. 2. c. 9.
beloved Soldiers, withdrawing himself from them, for a season, that they may
both see what need they have of him, and what they are without him, even Vnde
fit illud quod cogitationes bonae and carae Deo placentes mentem veluti
deficiant. Basil. in Reg. brev. interrog. 80.
barren, dead, and dull, unable to do any thing, and that they may likewise
seek him the more thirstingly, who seeks them even by such desertions most
lovingly; and therefore, wrestle thou with him, O my Soul, this being not a
Gregor. Moral. l. 5. c. 4.
sign of reprobation but only of probation; thy beloved has sufferd thee a
great while, suffer thou also, and sustain thy beloved, and withal seek him.

Soul. O sweet love, dear Savior, where art thou that thou absentest thy self
so long from me? when will thou return again unto me? O my Lord, and my God,
Bern. Sermon. 54.
carest, thou not that I perish? Lo, Satan that grand adversary of mine seeks
to sink me in a Mark. 8.38.
sea of misery, O save me for thy names sake. In mari turbulente versamur, etc,
Aug. Saliloq. c. 35.


Christ. Why art thou so fearful, O thou Christian Soul, having but little
faith, Mat. 8.26. Believe only that I can, and will save thee, and all will be
well with thee, for all things are possible unto him that believes, Mar. 9.23.

Soul. I believe Lord, help thou mine unbelief.

Christ. Then be safe, and let Satan cease to make a noise and raise tempests,
Ma. 54.11.
that this poor soul tossed with tempests may be calmed, and sweetly comforted.

Soul. Oh the ease! and oh the peace and joy that I feel and find in thee and
by thee, sweet Savior! o^ what a mighty Christ is this my Christ, that even
Satan that strong man himself must and does obey him!

The sixth Conference: Wherein use is made of Christ's incarnation by faith
against sin.
BEliev. how do thou now, O my Soul?

Soul. I should do well enough were it not for sin that abominable thing.

Believ. We may not expect an absolute perfection here, sin will ever Heb. 12.1.
cleave even to God's dearest children, as long as they live, and therefore let
not that dismay thee.

Soul. If one did not give way to it, it would not trouble me so, but now I
cannot but be troubled, and much perplexed, being conscious of too much
yieldingness and complying.

Believ. Though this be an heavy case, yet pray and trust in God, O my soul,
who will not therefore withdraw his mercies from thee, nor forsake thee, but
rather assist thee for after times, so that sin which is such a grievous burden
unto thee, shall be diminished and demolished in thee more and more, that it
may not reign over thee, Rom, 6.14.

Soul. I fear that I have even so wearied God with sin that he will not hear
me, though I should make never so many prayers, because I am so full of sin,
for so it is written, Isa. 1.15. When you make many prayers, yet I Will not hear
you, your hands are full of blood.

Believ. What a strange complaint is this that I hear! where is thy faith, O my
Christian soul, that thou make such a fearful conclusion? God speaks there
against irrepentant sinners, who lay nothing to heart, and revolt more and
more, v. 3.5. but thou on the contrary art not only sensible of fin, and the
danger of it, but also strivest against it more and more, and therefore that
place concerns not thee; so as that thou may est boldly come to the Throne of
grace in the time of need, Si forte ex humana infirmitate labimur non ideo
desperemus, sed iterum recurramus ad clementem medicum, etc. Bern. in Scala
parad. c. 12.
notwithstanding thi^ thy sad condition, Heb. 4.16.

Soul. Do you say so? the^ I Will adventure it again, and say with the good Mat.
15.22, 23, 24, 25, 26.
woman of Canaan, have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David, for I am
grievously vexed with the Devil.

Christ. I am not sent to be a Savior, but to those that obey me, who also may
only expect salvation, Heb. 5.9. but thou have been disobedient and rebellious
against me.

Soul. Yet Lord help me.

Christ. It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs.

Soul. Truth Lord, yet the dogs eat of the erumbs which fall from their masters
table, therefore if I may not obtain so much mercy and grace as others, who
have been more obedient and dutiful than I, who am like a dog returning to his
vomit, in that I have recommitted so many sins, which I should have omitted,
yet let me find but some crumbs of mercy, crumbs are not denied to dogs; and
that I may not be such a dog, returning to my former disobedience, help me, I
pray thee, and save me from sin, for therefore thou came into the world, that
thou may save sinners, of whom I a poor sinful soul am chief.

Christ. O dear Soul, great is thy Faith, be it unto thee even as thou will.

Soul. Oh the comfort! and oh the quietness, and tranquillity, which I find in
thee and by thee, sweet Savior! for now I am persuaded, that neither Satan nor
sin shall prevail against me, to separate me from my dear love Christ, who
saves me from evils past, fuscitates and raises me from the present, and
fortifieth me against those which are to come. O Lord Jesus, if thou did not
thus preserve me, there is no sin in the world which I might not, commit
against thee; for I know that there is no evil perpetrated and done by any man,
which may not also be acted by another man, if the Creator be wanting who made
man.

But now thou have done that for me, which has kept me that I might not do
what I would have done against thee; and that I might abstain, thou did
prohibit me; and that I might believe, thou did infuse grace into me; unto
thee therefore be all honor and glory.

The seventh Conference: Wherein the troubled believing Soul makes use of
Christ's death, to work the death of sin, and promises to be more thankful.
BEliev. How is it with thee now, O my soul?

Soul. Not very well.

Believ. Not well?

Soul. No.

Believ. Why so?

Soul. I am not so well comforted as I have been in times past, and sin begins
to gather strength, and I am not able to master it, as I do desire.

Believ. It may be thou have drawn this misery upon thy self by not being Tho.
a Kem^ pis de Imit. Chr. l. 2. c. 10.
thankful enough for mercies and comforts formerly distilled upon thee, or by
some secret pride, which if it be so, the cause must be first removed, then
Faith must be rightly used, and all will be well.

Soul. You have spoken as right as may be, I am such an unthankful creature,
and so high spirited by nature, and therefore it is just with God to bereave me
both of comforts and strength to resist the common Adversary, who goes, and
goes continually, seeking whom he may davour, 1 Pet. 5.8. and whom by no other
means I shall be able to resist, but only by Faith; and therefore I promise
both to be more grateful, for the future by God's help, and also more humble
and lowly denying my self in all things, and aforibing all honor and glory
unto him, of whom are all things, yea, Sileat sibi and ipsa anima and transeat
se mon cogit^ndo se, sed de te Deus mous, ^ etc. Aug. Man, c. 12.
passing by my self, so in my thoughts as that I may not think of my self but
of God, who is my only hope and confidence; and that I may overcome for the
future both sin and Satan, who is the Author of sin; I Will, by the grace of God,
set faith a work, and eye especially the bitter Nullum tam potens est tam
efficax contra ardorem libidinis medicamentum, quam mors redemptoris mei. Id.
cap. 23.
death and passion of my dear Savior, who loved me and gave himself for me,
that he might mundify me, and redeem me from Tit. 2.14.
all iniquity, persuading my self, that I shall be delivered in his own good
time even from these sinful lusts and passions, which now do so molest me; yea,
I Will also call upon him even now forthwith, desiring his heavenly highness,
that he will by the power of his death work the death of my sins, and free me
from Satan's power and tyranny.

Believ. Well said, this is the course thou must take, O my soul, and therefore
call thou upon the Lord in this time of need, for he has said, Call upon me in
the day of trouble, I Will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50.15.
Mark this golden sentence, O my soul, for here is both a Precept for thee, to
bind thee, and a promise to assure thee, the Precept is call upon me, yea,
(...) Clama.
cry unto me and spare not, as if thou durst not speak, being afraid, but
rather lift up thy voice and cry aloud, as being commanded to be so bold; the
Promise is, and I will deliver thee, or I Will loose thee from thy bonds, for so
much the original (...)
imports, even a solution from bonds; for troubles are as bonds, and so are
sins, and thou shall glorify me; note how the Lord does here promise not only
to free thee from troubles, but also to cause thee to glorify him, being freed
out of troubles, as which of thy self thou can not do, though but even now
thou did promise and vow to do it.

Soul. Are not these thy words, O my Lord, my God, who must help me? did not
thou dictate them into David's pen, and leave them recorded in thy book, even
for me, to excite and to secure me? Lo, I am in trouble, O Lord, being fast
bound and captivated, as it were, of sin, Romans 7.23. and I cannot unite my
self, of my self; but thou can, who art omnipotency it self, and therefore I
call even to thee, to help me. For thou have said, call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I assure my self that thou will not leave me, because thou have
promised me, that thou will deliver me, saying, I will deliver, or loose thee.
Loose me therefore, O thou, who art most free, and unbounded and yet bound to
free me, having bound thy self by a promise, to succor me, O let not sin, let
not Satan keep me bound, whom thou Lord Jesus have redeemed by thy precious
blood, but free me, O free me, by thy power, from the power of the one, and
tyranny of the other, that I may freely serve thee; being comforted in thee.
Yea, Lord, when thou have enlarged me, then enable me also and cause me to
glory fie thee. For thou have promised that also unto me, saying, and thou
shall glory fie me, taking that saying to be a promise, as well as a precept.
For else if thou should but command me that I must glory fie thee, and
should not also cause me to do what thou command, I should never be able
to do what I ought, and so consequently thou should never have the glory,
which is due to thy holy name. And therefore blessed be thy holy name, O my
God, and Savior, who in one word have both enjoined, and promised me that I
shall glorify thee. O inexhaustible Fountain of all grace and glory, cause me
therefore to glorify thee, and to be grateful unto thee, for every mercy that
I do or shall receive of thee, and suffer me not to forget either it, or my
self, and to seek my self and mine own glory in any thing I do, or shall do for
thee, I humbly and ardently beseech thee.

The eighth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul makes use of Christ's
overcoming of the world against the world.
BEliev. O Lord my God, who, being the eternal Son of the eternal God, have
given thy self for me, to deliver me, a servant, and wast made man, that I, a
man, might be made a child of God, being free from sin, which dwells in every
man, To. 7.20. (thee, God and man, exempted) who art only without sin, Heb.
4.15. Yea, did therefore overcome it in thee, who art God and man, John.
16.33. deliver me, I pray thee, from sin, even from this Luciferian pride,
feral passion, and this Soul-wasting envy, and self destroying selflove, and
from this evil covetousness, and from these unruly lusts.

Christ. Do thou not believe that I am able to do it? Mat. 9.28, 29.

Believ. Yea, Lord,

Christ. Then according to thy faith be it unto thee;

Believ. O my most sweet and blessed Savior, how great is thy mercy! For when
I silly wretch did but call, thou did hear me by and by, and when I was in
fight, thou did corrobrate me, and when I was ready to sink, thou did
support and sustain me, and when I did even despair in my self, thou did lift
me up above my self. Blessed be thy holy name for thy great and unspeakable
mercy.

The ninth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul makes use of the love of
Christ against sin.
SOul. O thou Heavenly fire, which always shinest, and O my dear love, which
always burnest, shine I pray thee from Heaven into me, and inflame me with thy
great love, so as that nothing in this world may be so dear unto me, as thou my
dear Savior, yea, let the world it self be as dead unto me, as it was to thy
servant Paul, who now lives and shines with thee in glory, Gal. 6.14. and do
thou, which art life it self, live in me as thou live in him, that I also may
live in thee with him, Gal. 2.20.

Christ. Cant. 2.14.
O my dove, thou art thus in the clefts of the Rock, even in me, who am thy
Rock, and desire nothing more than me; be of good cheer, for thou shall both
love me more than ever thou did, and I Will express my love toward thee more
than ever I did, and I will so stupifie thy senses within thee, as that the
world shall be as crucified unto thee, and I Will even live in thee, and work
mightily by thee, Col. 1.29. and thou shall live in me, and with me here and
hereafter eternally, John 6.56.

Soul. O how sweet, how ravishing, and how comfortable are these words which I
hear, sweet Jesus! more to be desired are they than Gold, yea, than much fine
gold, sweeter also than the honey and the honeycomb, Psalm. 19.10. for, by them
thy servant is now assured, that the world shall be subdued in me, and that
thou also thy self, my most glorious Redeemer, wilt be my exceeding great and
all-sufficient reward, living in me and with me now and eternally: O that this
love and good affection, which thou, O my Love, have diffused in me, might now
be like that holy fire, which in the time of the Law was to burn always, and
never to go out upon thine Altar, and that no waters of affliction might quench
it, and that no floods of Satannical temptations drown it, Cant. 8.7. O do
thou, who art Love it self, always preserve it, that it may ever burn and
never go out, I humbly obsecrate and pray thee.

The tenth Conference. Wherein the believing Soul makes use of Christ's
intercession.
BEliev. O my Soul, as thou have done in times past, so cease not now to
invocate thy dear Savior, that he will save thee more and more foom thy sins.
For he is thy Lord, and therefore worship thou him, Psalm. 45.11.

Soul. So I will by Gods help, O most fair, Psalm. 45.2. Most holy, most
gracious, most merciful Savior, intercede for me, that I may be kept from this
evil world, Romans 8.34.

Christ. I have prayed for thee, John 17.25. and I even ever live to make
intercession for thee, Hebr. 7.25. wherefore doubt not, but assure thy self for
certain, that thou shall be kept from the evil which thou fear, and overcome
the world which thou hate; for he that is my Father and my God, is also thy
Father and thy God, John 20.17. and I know that he hears me always, John
11.42. and there fore has heard me in this thing also, that I have prayed for,
when I desired him to keep thee from the evil, John 17.15.

Soul. I doubt not but God thy Father and my Father has heard thee interceding
for me, and me praying for my self for thy sake, and will hear me, for thou
have said, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, he will give it unto
you, John 16.23. O sweet name! how pleasant? how delectable? how amiable? and
how prevalent therefore must thou needs be in the mouth of him that prays,
and in the ears of him that hears such prayers, as are so sweetened with thy
sweet savor, as with ointment poured forth? Cant. 1.3. O blessed be thy sweet
and holy name, sweet Jesus, in the which thou causest me to trust by this thy
sweet and precious promise.

The eleventh Conference. Wherein the troubled believing Soul makes use of
Christ's Prophetical Office.
BEliev. It should seem that thou art not yet, nor can be altogether quiet.

Soul. Quiet? No, No, as long as I have this body of sin about me, I do not
look for it.

Believ. But yet thou must not be so much disquieted and dejected.

Soul. Dejected? how can I choose, seeing that God is still so much by me
offended?

Believ. But this is not the way to peace which thou go.

Soul. Which way then would you have me to go?

Believ. That way which is the best way.

Soul. The best way? which is the best way?

Believ. Christ who has said of himself, that he is the way it self, John 14.6.

Soul. You say true, and I had almost forgotten my self, forgetting the way it
self, and pleasing my self with grief and sorrow for my sins, which though it
be good and laudable when it is moderate and seasonable, leading the pensive
and perplexed sinner to Christ, yet is it not sufficient, or available when it
goes alone, and is separated from Christ; for he it is who must perfume and
sweeten all such tears and sorrows as shall be unto God acceptable; he must
free us also from sin, without which freedom no grief for sins past can be
profitable.

Believ. Then go to Christ, O my soul, having been estranged from him, by
reason of sin, which caused thee to absent thy self from him being so dejected,
and to count thy self unworthy of him, being so polluted.

Soul. So I will by Gods help, only advise me what I shall say unto him, when I
come before him.

Believ. Urge him upon his prophetical Office, by virtue whereof he is bound to
turn thee from iniquities, Act. 3.26.

Soul. O thou great Prophet, and heavenly Doctor, who, being come from Joh. 3.2.
God, God of God, light of light, teach what no other Rabby can teach, and
can do what no man else can do, even turn men from their iniquities; O turn
me also from mine iniquities, and save me from my sins; and let not so many
lessons thought by thy Servants, who are but men, be lost in me, that look
beyond them unto thee, who art both God and man, ordained by God to turn man
from sin, which is the greatest folly, he being the greatest and wisest Doctor,
yea, Wisdom it self.

Christ. I perceive, O Christian soul, that needs thou will be taught of God,
without whose teaching the Doctrines and instructions of men are all in vain;
Cor. 3.7.
and I see that thou groundest thy request upon a sure and everlasting Rock,
even upon the Word of truth 1 Pet. 1.23.
which abides for ever, and cannot be denied; and therefore, as I have said,
that he who comes unto me shall in no wise be cast out, John 6.37. So be sure
that I will not reject thee, neither, who so come unto me to Mat. 11.29.
learn of me, who am sent to Deuteronomy. 18.15.
turn thee from thine iniquities more and more, that they may not have dominion
over thee.

Soul. I am persuaded, that thou will do even as thou have said, Lord Jesus;
for it is impossible that God should lie. Heb. 6.18. and therefore I will even
rest on thee, and put my whole trust and affiance in thee, for my turning from
mine iniquities, casting away all self confidence, and self-relying on an arm
of flesh; for, in vain is the help of man without thee, who made man, and
causest me also at this time Ps. 119.49.
to trust in thee, and to disclaim Acts 3.26.
all power and ability in man to save, and to Jer. 31.1^
turn himself or any other man.

The Twelfth Conference. Wherein the believing soul makes use of Christ's
Kingly Office against sin.
BEliev. O King of Kings and Lord of Lords, I that am most poor, come to thee
that art most rich (...) I, being most miserable, come to thee that art most
merciful; being most weak, to thee that art most strong; and being most sinful,
to thee that art most holy and good, desiring thee, that of thine infinite
mercy thou will deliver me out of my misery, and according to thy power,
subdue the strength and potency of Satan's tyranny; and according to the virtue
of thy Kingly Office, wilt debilitate and weaken the force and power of sin,
that it may not reign.

Christ. Do thou believe that I am such a King indeed? and thy King, who not
only can, but also will subdue thy sins?

Believ. I do believe it, and therefore, O my King, and my God, Psalm. 84.4.
rule thou in my heart, even in the midst of thine and mine enemies, Psalm.
110.2. and so rule, as that my Soul may rule my Body, Reason my Soul, Grace
Reason, and I my whole self may be wholly and solely subject to thy holy will
it self, both inwardly and outwardly, and that eternally: O Lord, thou have
said, Ask and ye shall have, Luke 11.9. I ask, help, let me have it.

Christ. Thou shall have it, and must have it; for I am so tied by the Promise
which I have made, as that I cannot deny thee, what ever thou do request me,
because I have said, that every one that asks receives, and he that seeks
finds, and to him that knocks it shall be opened, Luke 11.10.

Believ. I will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy N^^^^ for
ever and ever: Psalm. 45.1, 2.
every day will I bless thee, and I will praise thy Name for ever and ever, for
thou have heard me, and art become my salvation, therefore my mouth shall speak
the praises of the Lord, and let all flesh bless his holy Name for ever and
ever, Psalm. 145.21.

The Thirteenth Conference. Wherein the believing soul returns from the vain
things of the world to Christ, and makes use of the sacred words precepts to
resist sin, craving assistance of Christ.
BEliev. O my Soul, why do thou range so, and wanderest here and there,
whereas here is not thy rest?

Soul. You do well to recall me, for I am apt to go astray, like a lost sheep,
and to forget both God and my self, and to mind the vain things of this vile
world.

Believ. So thou art, and therefore seeing thou art thus sensible of it, return
unto thy rest, O my Soul, Psalm. 116.7. and fly thou hence, like a Dove, even
like Noah's dove, which finding no rest any where for the sole of her foot,
returned into the Ark floting upon the waters, Genesis 8.6. so do thou return from
fleeing abroad unto Jesus Christ typified by that Ark, who has promised thee
rest, Mat. 11.28.

Soul. You say right, so I ought to do, and therefore I will seek no farther
abroad, nor think so much upon such vain and transitory things as I have done,
but rather come back again to him who does so lovingly invite me, saying,
Return, return, O Shulamite, return return, and I will say unto him Luke 15.18.
I have sinned against Heaven and against thee, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Spouse: but thou can cure me, as well as call me, and make me as
clean, as ever was any believing Soul, and therefore Take away all mine
iniquities and receive me graciously, Hos. 14.2.

Christ. I will do it, only sin no more, Joh. 5.14. and be not so worldly, and
so vain hereafter, as thou have been in times past.

Soul. I hope I shall never be so overtaken again, only do thou Jer. 31.
turn me, and I shall be turned, and subdue sin in me as thou have promised me,
Ezekiel. 36.26. Mic. 7.19. and keep home my thoughts and fix them upon thy self,
and then I cannot possibly be so wordly.

Christ. I see thou will needs hold me fast by my word, and I cannot go from
it, because I cannot deny my self, being the truth it self, and therefore Luke
7.50.
go in peace, thy faith has saved thee; for lo, I, whom by thy faith thou
did embrace and urge by the Word of Promise, which I have spoken (as I am God
who cannot lie, Heb. 6.18.) even I my self will do that for thee, which thou
can not do without me, that is, I will more and more subject this vile world
unto thee, and abject thy worldly lusts and affections from thee, and deject
the strong man's holds in thee, and reject his Satanical proffers by thee, and
eject even all his wicked injections and suggestions out of thee, that they not
be noxious and hurtful unto thee.

Soul. O Lord Jesus Rev. 22.20.
come and do it, yea, be thou like a Roe, or young Heart upon the mountains of
Bether, or of Cant. 2. ult. Nam (...) significat divisionem.
division, making have to fulfill thy Word in me, for lo I am even divided in
two, having a will and a will, or a will which is against a will, a will
regenerate, warring against the will unregenerate, and yet but one will; thus
divided, as it were, in two, so as that Gal. 5.17.
I cannot as I should overcome this vile world, but mine eyes are toward thee,
O Lord, who only can and must end this quarrel, and therefore I say with
David, make have to help me, O Lord my salvation, Psalm. 37.22.

Christ. Surely I come quickly, Rev. 22.20.

Soul. Even so come Lord Jesus.

The Fourteenth Conference.
Wherein the believing Soul desires Christ's presence that it may be able to
overcome the world.
BEliev. Thou must overcome thy self in many things, O my Soul, if thou will
come to enjoy a more perfect peace, and tranquillity, being freed from many
doubts, fears, discomforts, and discontents, which many times surprise thee.

Soul. Which be those many things, wherein I must yet more overcome my self?

Believ. First of all thou art too soon and too much angry, and passionate;
yea, and thou love pleasure too well yet, even fine sights and dainty fare,
and money, and men's applause, and vain talk, and idle sports, and slandrous
reports; again, thou have not laid aside yet thine envy, thy malice, and thy
revengefulness, thy high mindedness, and selfconceitedness, and thy
sloathfulness, and evil thoughts; yea, while the very steps of thy best beloved
are yet hot in thee, thou do even intromit adulterous and most ignominous
thoughts of pride and revenge, and lusts, and strife, and worldly gain, and
vain delights, and graceless talk; and those ears, which a little before did
drink in the Word spoken by the everliving God himself, are pestilently
infected, and those eyes which were even lately baptized with sacred and
precious tears, are horribly contaminated, and that heart which was recently
and newly visited of the celestial Bridegroom, is woefully soiled and polluted,
and that tongue which did decant, sing, and say the praises and songs of God,
pitifully abused.

Soul. All this is most true, I cannot deny it, and therefore woe is me, that I
have so loving and gracious a God, and Savior who may now justly say unto me
what could I have done more unto thee, that I have not done for thee? Isa. 5.9.
thou wast not and I created thee, thou have sinned and made thy self Satan's
bondslave and I redeemed thee, thou did go astray in the worlds circumference
with the ungodly, and I elected thee from among them, I gave thee grace whereby
thou might overcome this vile world; Jer. 3.1.
but thou have played the harlot with the world, and neglected that grace and
faith which I Jude v. 3.
delivered unto thee. Again, I would fain have made mine Joh. 14.23.
abode with thee continually, and therefore I have often knocked at the door of
thy heart, saying, open to me, my Sister, my Love, my Dove, my undefiled, for
Cant. 5.2.
my head is filled with the dew, and my locks with the drops of the night, by
reason of my long waiting for thee, but thou have not opened unto me, and
therefore what an unhappy creature am I, that have so horribly and detestably
abused and offended the Lord my Creator, which made me!

Christ. Thy case indeed is grievous, O perplexed Soul, but yet despair not;
for Joel. 2.1^.
the Lord thy God is gracious, and merciful, and slow to anger, and of great
kindness and repents him of the evil, and therefore he says. Thou have
played the harlot with many lovers, yet return again unto me, Jer. 3.1.

Soul. Are not these they words, O my Lord, and my God? did not they issue out
of thy sacred mouth? And are they not written for my learning, that I, even I,
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope? To. 15.4.

Chr. Yes verily: for the whole word of God is my word, and I am Gods word,
Rev. 19.13. Yea, God himself, John 1.1. who spoke these words, for thine
everlasting comfort.

S. I believe it, I believe it, sweet Jesus, dear Savior, who art Joh. 20.28.
my Lord, and my God, and therefore though my sins be great, yet will I not
despair, nor be out of hope, having so great and loving a Savior, who casts
away none, but those that will cast away themselves. O my dear Love, Christ,
which ever burnest with love, and art Gregor. Nazianz.
more merciful, than I can possibly be sinful, have mercy upon me therefore,
and pardon all my grivous offenses, and heinous transgressions, where with I
have transgressed and sinned against thee. Inflame me also with the
inextinguible flame of thy love, so as that I may love nothing in this world
more than thee, O my sweetest Love and most merciful Redeemer, Christ Jesus.

Jesus. I see thou will needs have a pardon and me too, whom thou desire to
love more than all things, and so consequently to enjoy above all things, and
therefore as both the one and the other thou do desire, so both thou shall
have; a pardon first, which may put away thy guiltiness; and me too, as by whom
thou may and must overcome thy worldiness, being wounded with arrows of my
love, and endued with sufficient strength and power from above, by me, in me,
and for me; that the world may not, as it has in times past, overcome thee.

Soul. And will thou give thy self unto me indeed, sweet Lamb, dear Savior,
who also have Gal. 2.20.
given thy self for me?

Christ. Yes verily; for I cannot deny my self, 2 Timothy 2.13. being Hos. 11.9.
God, as well as man; a mere man may deny himself, when a woman will marry him,
and have him, but I cannot do it; if the poorest creature that is will have me,
believing on me, I cannot keep my self from such a poor Soul, but I must and
will give my self unto it, because I have bound my self to do it by the word of
promise, Jo. 6.51. Jo. 14.23. Rev. 2.17.

Soul. O the joy, and O the comfort, which these sweet words of thine distill
into me, sweet Savior! For now I am fully persuaded, that thou my beloved, art
mine, and that I am thine, Cant. 2.16. and that this vile world shall have no
such power over me, as it had formerly, and that nothing in this world shall be
dearer unto me, than thou, my dear Savior; and therefore I am even bold upon
that assurance, which I ground upon thy word of promise, to bespeak thee in the
Language and praise of thy dear Spouse, saying, Let him kiss me with the kisses
of his mouth; thy love (O my love) is better than wine, Can. 1.2. Yea, my
beloved shall even lie all night betwixt my breasts, Cant. 1.13. And my beloved
is white and ruddy the chiefest among ten thousand, Can. 5.10. O my beloved, be
not far from me, ( Psalm. 37.21.) at any time, but let thy mercy, truth, and
love always preserve, guide, and accompany me, and whenever thou give any
good thing unto me, give thy self also, as well as other things, and above all
other things; Quoniam si cuncta qua fecisti mihi dederis nam sufficit servo tuo
nisi teipsum dederis. Aug. Man. c. 3.
for without thee they are all worth nothing, and therefore if thou should
give me all that thou have made, it would not, yea, could not content me, if
thou should not give thy self withal, who made all.

Believ. I must needs interrupt thee, O my Soul, (because I see that thou art
not so thankful as thou should be, for this great mercy, which the Lord has
even now showed toward thee) saying, bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget not
all his benefits, who forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy
diseases, who redeems thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies, Ps. 103.1, 2, 3, 4. I add who has given himself
in part already, and has promised thee that he will impart himself yet more
unto thee.

Soul. Well said, for Qui gratiam Dei retinere desiderat sit gratus pro gratia
data. Tho. a Kempis, de imit. Christi l. 2. c. 10.
whosoever will retain grace, must be thankful for grace received, and
therefore while I live will I praise the Lord, I will sing praises unto my God
while I have any being, Ps. 146.2.

Believ. Yea, Let every thing that has breath praise the Lord. Alleluia, Psalm.
150.6.

The fifteenth Conference. Wherein the troubled believing Soul craves the
promised hidden Manna, that it may be the more courageous to fight the fight of
Faith.
BEeliev. Why art thou sad, O my Soul?

Soul. How can I be merry, being destitute of that true comfort which I was
wont to find.

Believ. Thou must look to the hand of God in it, who 1. does so castigate and
correct thee, for having been too jovial and vain in a carnal manner, 2. does
see that thou now art not fit for such joy and comfort, not being soundly
dejected; for though thou grievest now and then even beyond measure, yet at
other times thou art as foolish and outward, and careless and fearless, as if
thou had never known the practice of Godly sorrow, which is ever to be
renewed even day by day, Ps. 51.3.

Soul. All this is true, and therefore I do resolve, that, by Gods help, I Will
never be so vain, and outward, and foolishly merry, as I have been, but rather
sober, grave, moderate, awful, careful, and constant in the daily renewing of
godly sorrow.

Believ. So do, and then look for joy, and comfort in the Lord; who is said to
comfort such as are so cast down, 2 Cor. 7.6. and then forget not to use faith
whereby thou may feed on the word of promise, as for instance, that in Rev.
2.17. To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the hidden manna, even joy
unspeakable to be found in me, who am that bread of life, that manna which came
down from Heaven.

Soul. So I purpose, and therefore, O thou ever-living bread of life, who
feedest others, and yet never failest thy self, nor art either diminished, or
consumed; feed me also, and refresh me, and comfort me, as thou do others,
and have comforted me in time past, sweet Jesus, let me taste but of the crumbs
that fall from thee, and let me feel but some of those ravishing joys, which I
was wont to feel in thee, O Lord, my God, thy very name is as sweet as honey,
and thou thy self art sweetness it self, and therefore as Samson found Jesus
^melinore ^in aure ^melos, in ^corde ju^bilus, sed ^est and Medicina, etc.
Bern. Sermon. 15. super Cant.
honey in the dead Lion, which he flew, so let me find some sweetness also in
thee, who art that Judge. 14.8.
Lion of the tribe of Juda, whom the Jews flew, yea, who is Rev. 5.5.
risen again, having overcome death, and is ascended up into Heaven, from
whence also I look for comfort and joy, to drop, and to descend upon me even as
manna (whose taste was like Romans 8.34.
waffers made with honey, Exo. 16.13. did come Scilicet miraculose. Non enim
fuit cadem cum Manna illa naturali, quae nascitur in Arabia. Danaeus Phys.
Christ. tract. 2. cap. 26.
out of Heaven, John 6.31. to fill and to feed the people of God upon earth. O
Lord, dear Savior, who art the very bread of God, which comes down from
Heaven, and give life unto the world, John 6.33. give me, I pray thee, this
hidden manna, that I believing on thee may rejoice in thee with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1.8.

Christ. Thou art too greedy and too eager after comfort, which for its
continued fruition thou should rather expect in Heaven than from Heaven; for
now is the time of fighting, and hereafter will come the time of tryumphing
when the fight is ended; and therefore why do thou desire that in this world,
which is reserved for another world? Do thou think to have a Heaven here, and
a Heaven hereafter too, that is too much.

Soul. Truth Lord, it is too much for me, who deserve not the least of thy
mercies, yet seeing thou have promised both Heavens, even a Heaven in Heaven
and a Heaven upon earth, joy here and joy hereafter, therefore I look for both,
even for a taste now, and for full fruition hereafter, and I Will not leave thee
till thou bless me with such joy, crown me with such comforts, as may refresh,
and strengthen, and encourage me so, as that like Jonathan I may with new
supplied fortitude and valor reassault my spiritual enemies, having tasted how
sweet thou art, O Lord my God, even sweeter than that most sweet and pleasant
honey which Jonathan had tasted, when his 1 Samuel 14.27.31
eyes were enlightened, and himself so corroborated, and enlivened, as that he
was able to discomfit a host of men. Nor am I the first that crave this Heaven;
for thy servant David, who was a man after thine own heart, did request thee
for the very same thing before me, saying, restore unto me the joy of thy
Salvation, Psalm. 81.12. and therefore let not my Lord be displeased with me,
who follow such an approved pattern, saying after him, who said so first, O
Lord, restore unto me also the joy of thy Salvation, which I have found wanting
a long time, and after the spouse in Cant. 2.5. Stay me with flagons, comfort
me with apples. For I am sick of love.

Christ. I see thou will not be denied, and I cannot deny my words, and
therefore as one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort thee, and thou
shall be comforted, Isa. 66.13.

Believ. As the Apple Tree among the trees of the wood, so is my Beloved among
the Sons. For lo, Now I sit down under his shadow with great delight, and his
fruit is sweet unto my taste, Cant. 2.3. and therefore return unto thy rest, O
my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; and now what shall I
render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me: I will take the Cup of
salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord, because he has inclined his
ears unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long as I live, Psalm. 116.2, 3,
12, 13.

Alleluia.
FINIS.

