CERTAIN FRIVOLOVS OBJECTIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF THE CHVRCH OF
ENGLAND; ANSWERED

By John Jewel, sometimes Bishop of Sarisbury.

LONDON, Printed by T. Cotes. 1641.

TO THE READER
Reader,
IF thy heart has not made a Covenant with Ignorance, or not grown obstinate,
through peevish wilfulness, read, peruse, and digest these ensueing lines,
dropped from the learned and judicious quill of this most pious and renowned
Author; whose well known worth and singular wisdom may challenge (if not,
command) your fair acceptance: He appears not, here, like David, ruining the
Philistime; but like our Savior, reproving the Pharisees; reserving his
downeright blows for stronger Enemies, and more discovering the folly of his
Foe, then the smartnesse of his scourge; whose sudden pen (not guilty of any
thing that is not precious) carries with it the Aspect, rather, of an ingenious
haste, than a studied Confutation: Which, nevertheless, upon mature
deliberation, if it convince not the erroneous fancy, and rectifies not the
weak Judgment of unwilling ignorance, his Pearls are lost, till found by
such as have the knowledge how to prize them.

Farewell.
Certain frivolous Objections against the Government of the Church of England,
answered by John Jewel, Bishop of Sarisbury.
The First Reason of the Novellists.
God so loved the Church, that He left a perfect pattern orderly, Novitiorum
prima ratio.
Ephesians. 4.

But here is named neither Pope, nor Archbishop, nor Archdeacon.

Bishop Jewels answer.
HOW know you that the fourth Chapter ad Ephesians. is a perfect pattern of
Ecclesiastical Government? We have, now, neither Apostles, nor Evangelists,
nor Prophets, yet are they the chief in that pattern: Neither have we there,
either Bishop, or Presbyter, or Diaconus, or Catechista, or Lecto^; and yet are
these necessary parts in Ecclesiastical Government; Therefore this Pattern is
not perfect, to hold for ever; Neither, were there, then, any public
Churches, or Pulpits, or Schools, or Universities, etc.

Saint Paul names neither Pope, nor Archbishop, I grant: and the Church is
not governed by names, but by Offices. Every, Bishop, then was called Papa: And
Anacletus, that was next after Peter, (if there be any weight in his words)
names Archbishops.

The Second Reason.
Secunda ratio
The Synagogue of the Jews, was a figure of the Church of Christ, and God to
the perfection of that Church omitted nothing.

Bishop Jewels Answer.
I See not what you would conclude: Perhaps you will say, they had not the
names of Pope, or Archbishop: So had they not this name Episcopus in all Moses
Law: yet were not all Priests of like aunciency in government. They had other
names that were equivalent with Archbishops; as Principes Synagogae, Principes
Sanctuarii, Principes familiarum Leviticarum, Principes familiarum
Sacerdotalium, Principes Sacerdotum, Principes domus Dei, Pontifex, Summus
Pontifex, Summus Sacerdos. Therefore the negative reason is but weak.

Again, whereas it is said, that to the perfection of the Synagogue, there
wanted nothing: it may be answered, that to the perfection thereof, there
wanted many things, as it is known and confessed. And as the Synagogue had not
the names of Pope and Arch Bishop; so had it not the name of Apostle, or
Evangelist.

The Third Reason.
Tertia ratio.
Where the substance of any thing is most perfect, there the accidents be most
perfect: But the substance of true Religion was most perfect in the Primative
Church, and yet there was then no Arch Bishop. Ergo.

Bishop Jewels Answer.
FIrst, this Maxim is not proved, for it may well be doubted whether the most
perfect substance has evermore most perfect accidents, And again, the substance
of Religion is the same now, that it was then: The difference, (if any be)
stands in the accidents, and not in substance.

In the Primitive Church, God raised up Apostles and Prophets, and gave them
power extraordinary, as the gift of tongues, the gift of healing, the gift of
government, etc. In place whereof, he has now given Universities, Schools,
Bishops, Archbishops, etc.

But you may say, There was then no Archbishop; So may you say, that before
King Saul, there was no King in Israel: So may you say, that before of late
times, there was neither Duke, nor Earl in England: so may you say, that in
the Primitive Church, there was neither Deane, nor Person, nor Prebendary; And
yet now, both in Ecclesiastical and civil government, all these are thought
necessary.

Last of all, where you say, there was no Archbishop in the Primative Church,
it is written by many, that Saint Paul made Titus Archbishop of Creta; Erasm.
in argument, epist ad Titum
Erasmus faith, Paulus Titum Archicpiscopum Cretae consecravit: And Lyra
likewise says, Paulus instituit Titum Archiepiscopum Cretensium. If these
Authorities like you not, Chrysostom says, Chrisost. in 1. cap. Tit.
Paulus Tito multorum Episcoporum judicium commisit: Now having the Government
of many Bishops, what may we call him but an Archbishop?

The Fourth Reason.
The Ecclesiastical and Civil government may not be confounded, or be
together in one person: But to be a Chief, or a Ruler, is a civil power,
Ergo, it cannot be exercised by any Ecclesiastical person.

Bishop Jewels Answer.
BOth these governements were confounded in Moses: Therefore, they may be
confounded. And the Priests of Israel had the Judgment and government of the
people. And Saint Augustine was troubled with hearing, and determining of
Causes: as appears by Possidonius.

And where you say, to be a Chief, or a Ruler, is a Civil government: nay in
Ecclesiastical causes, it is Ecclesiastical government, and not civil: And
these differences of government may not so unadvisedly be confounded: This is
the key of Ecclesiastical correction, and belongs only to the
Ecclesiastical Officer, and to none other. Hereof Saint Paul says Seniorem ne
corripueris nisi sub, etc. Tradidi illum satanae, etc. This jurisdiction is not
civil, but ecclesiastical and therefore may be exercised by any
ecclesiastical person.

I beseech you take these sudden answers in good part. As for these reasons; in
my Judgment, they are not made to build up, Pro. 22.
and they are too weak to pull down. Stultitia nata est in cord pueri and
virgadisciplinae fugabit illam. It is but wantonness; correction will help it.

FJNJS.

