THE Devil of a Wife, OR A Comical Transformation.

As it is Acted by Their MAJESTY'S Servants at the Queens Theater in Dorset
Garden.

Veni, Vidi, Vici.

Licensed March 30th. 1686. R. L. S.

LONDON, Printed, by I. Heptinstall, for I. Eaglesfield at the Marigold over
against the Globe-Tavern in Fleet Street. MDCLXXXVI.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To my Worthy Friends and Patrons at Lockets Ordinary.
YOU are not to be told, that Poets are saucy, very saucy, mighty saucy, but
your (would be) Poet, or Farce Snipper Snapper, such a Promiscuous Riddle me
Re, as my self always super-abounding; Therefore do I heartily hope, but more
humbly entreat, that with the Piercing Eye of Understanding, and through the
Orbicuous Glass of Reason, you will perfectly discern, and then wholly
attribute the bold Presumption of this sharp Epistle (as I may justly term it)
to my Seeming self as Audacious Ievon the Poet, and not to my Real self as
Modest Mr. Ievon the Player. But now I intend to give my self an unwilling
Loose to Eloquent Words and Rhetorical Notions (which to Me have always Prompt
and Ready bin.) Et ad Vnguem, and ad Pennam, and forthwith cast my self upon
the Naked Confines of Mediocrity, and in plain terms come pat and closely to
you thus.

You may please to call to mind and well remember that presently after our
Catcall Dissolution, which for some time, from our Natural Home, and Provident
Stage, dispersed abroad Us Under-Acting Jews without a Moses to provide our
Manna: And after the Prayers (as you may guess) of the many Murmuring
Hirelings, for those whose Whistling Breath blew 'em to a more remote and far
worse Climate, 'twas then the Needful I (by dint of Hunger forced) wrote (you
know full well) such Powerful Lines to your unmindfull Senate, that had ye not
All had Hearts of Stone you would have melted into Retaliating Favors. Your
speedy Promises were Great, but your slow Performances (witness ye Unassisting
Gods) alas, were Small. Let this my All-Commanding Style, and most Ingenious
Piece then now revive and whet your almost blunted Purpose, to a more lively,
quick and solid Answer: Let me endear ye all (my Yet but seeming Friends, and
promising Patrons only) to a more Ponderous Resolution. and Candid Answer to
him that, Gad Judge me, ye know to be

Your humble and obedient Servant, THO. JEVON.
THE PREFACE.
TO THE Grave, Learned, Judicious, and Deliberate.
THE Modern Age, and present Representations, unknown to the Antiquated Limits,
which in all bounds of Prevalent Atonements, supersede the Equinoctials of
Illuminary Spirits, are not in the least captivated with the Decorum of Dress,
fortunate and succeeding Action, exhausted Master of Volatory arrided
Flashness, that now is not in self, De Re Imaginaria neque supposita de futura,
Neither can their profound Precepts, who were known and adored as Patriarchs in
Natures primitive Sanguinity with collatoral Adherents, with the noise of what
was heretofore delivered, inculcate Predominancy to the Right Line of
Monarchical and Episcopal Adherences. Therefore if in greater and more evident
Points the Lawyer can no more be without his Fee, than the Lord Chancellor his
Mace, or a Poet without Errors, (my self alone exempted) why should the
Judgment of a Man that is partially biased against the Banditti, rule the
Author's opinion in his own Hemisphere, and discuss at large the Virtues of
Jobson's Wife, without the Management of Hobbs his Leviathan? Why should
Shakespeare, Johnson, Beaumont, Fletcher, that are no way Adequate to the
profound Intellects of my present Atonement, be ranked above the Laborious,
though dull Statesman. -- Sed Vastum Vastior Ipse,
Sustulit Aegydes, etc.
Ov. Metam.

Those several Malignant Assertions offered, a large and a compendious
Resolution ought to be maturely responded, especially, when the Eclypse of
Matrimony is subterranially trod down. As to the main Notion of Polygamy
absconded under a Cirtoot of Imagination, We take it thus. Alexander was Great
and Victorious in his Mediterranean Engagements of Hospitality. To the contrary
Julian the Apostate recites his own Benevolencies in semi Octavo of Traditional
Usury: Which plainly denotes the first Egression and the last Denotation. So
that if we come to Modern Affairs, you will find that the Masq'd Middle
Gallery, being by Command Superior, brought barefaced to the Prae-existent
Spark's construction; more amuses the Sunshine Planet of his Scarlet Coat,
than the beat of an Irish Drum to an East Indie Interloper. For what says
Terence (Paucis te Volo,) which manifestly denotes the condescending temper of
the Male, and the diving Aspect of the Female. Now if after so long a
Concupiscential Appetite the Novelty of Weeding is to be adjudg'd Ceremonious,
I leave to my Lord Chief Justice his Tipstaff to examine, and make all even
between the Pope and my Lord Archhishop of Canterbury.

PROLOGUE, Spoke by Mr. JEVON.
HOW long is it since you saw I pray,
That strange old fashioned thing called a New Play.
Or how long indeed do you think 'twill be,
Before you taste that longed for Novelty?
You may set your hearts at rest for this Age,
Union and Catcaells have quite spoiled the Stage.
Time was the Poets could cock, look bigg, and cry,
Damn these saucy Players, let us all agree,
And starve the Rogues, the Times friends turned be,
And I am turned Poet, there is Farce do you see.
But now to my Geatheration friends,
Points to some particular People in the Pit. What quick return, or what
concise amends.
Have you my ever honored ever dear,
Renowned, whistling Patrons made appear
To him that is your servant every where?
My Name's Mr. Jevon, I Am known for and near.
But no more words in so much Company,
Satisfaction I must have and quickly;
Or Gad, I Will leave off writing directly.
Let me have a pledge of it now you are here,
Or in your Balls you may forget I fear.
Be favorable to this same piece at hand,
And do you hear friends don't, shall I, shall I stand.
If I in Pocket find you dive for Catcall,
I Will let down Curtain, He tell ye that all.
Catcalls well tuned might do well in Opera's,
They Would serve for Hoboys to fill up a Chorus.
Or in a French Love Song, observe you now,
A Cadmeus Pur Qua, Pur Qua, Meme Vou.
[Sings.] Begar Monsieur it be De pretty Whyne,
Ki La D'ance De Mineway, Oh it be very fine.
[Dances.] Dances you have and various here to Night,
But they are English all, all English quite.
Throughout, English Songs, Farce English too,
That Is French Sense,
All Nonsense without any more ado.
Kickshaws like this serve for a Lenten Dish,
If not for Flesh, pray let it serve for Fish.
And since Penance at this Time's in fashion,
Come three Days for Mortification.
The Actors Names.
MEN,
SIR Rich. Lovemore. An honest Country Gentleman beloved for good old Engl.
Housekeeping. Mr. Gryffin. Sir Richard's two Friends.
Rowland. Mr. Bowman. Longmore. Mr. Peryn.
Servants to Sir Richard.
Butler. Mr. Saunders. Cook. Mr. Percyval. Footman. Mr. Low. Coachm.
The Ladies Father. Of the old Strain: A Phanatick. [Mr. Norris. Noddy. A
Hypocritical Phanatick Parson, loves to eat and cant, Chaplain to my Lady
Lovemore. Mr. Powel. Iobson. A Psalm-singing Cobbler, Tennant and Neighbor to
Sir Richard. Mr. Ievon. Doctor. A Magitian. Mr. Freeman Two Spirits.
Nadyr. Abyshog.
Countryman. Blind-Fidler. Footboy.
WOMEN,
LAdy Lovemore. Wife to Sir Richard. A Proud Phanatick, always canting and
brawling. A Perpetual Fixen and a Shrew, (a blesed Wife.) Mrs. Cook. Lady
Lovemore's Maids.
Jane. Mrs. Price. Lettice. Mrs. Twyford.
Nell. Iobson's Wife, a simple innocent Girl. Mrs. Percyval. Tennants,
Servants, Dancers, Singers, Wassalers.
THE Devil of a Wife, OR A Comical Transformation.
ACT I.
SCENE I.
Enter Jobson the Cobbler and Nell his Wife. Nell. GOOD Husband stay with me to
Night and make an end of the Holiday at home.


Iobson. Peace, peace, and go Spin, for if I want any Thread for my stitching,
I will punish you by virtue of my Sovereign Authority.


Nell. I warrant you: But you will go to the Alehouse, spend your Money, and get
drunk, and come home like Old Nick, and use one like a Dog.


Iobson. How now Brazen-Face do you speak ill of the Government? I am King in
my own House, and this is Treason against my Majesty.


Nell. I don't understand your stuff, but prithee don't go to the Alehouse.


Iobson. Well then, I will not go to the Alehouse, I have made an appointment
with Sir Richard Lovemore's Butler, and am to be Princely drunk in Punch at the
Hall Place; we shall have a Bowl big enough to swim in.


Nell. O Lord Husband, the new Lady they say will not suffer a Stranger to come
into her House, she grudges a draught of Small Beer, and several of this Town
have come Home with broken Heads from her Ladyships own hands for but smelling
Strong Beer in her House.


Iobson. A Pox on her for a Fanatic Jade, she has almost distracted the good
Knight, but she is abroad feasting with her Relations, and will scarce come home
to night, and we are to have much Drink, a Fiddle and Gambals.


Nell. But her Fanatic Parson will disturb you.


Iobson. If he does we will toss the Hypocrite in a Blanket, or kick the
sanctified Coxcomb to a Jelly.


Nell. O dear Husband let me go with you, we will be as merry as the night's long.


Iobson. Why how now you bold Bettress, what would you be carried to a company
of Smooth-faced, Eating, Drinking, Lazy Servingmen; Rogues whose nourishment
runs all into Lechery? No, you Jade, I will be no Cuckold.


Nell. I Am sure they would make me welcome, you promised me I should see the
House: Sir Richard and the Family have not been there since you married and
brought me to Town.


Iobson. Why thou most audacious Strumpet, dare thou Dispute with me? go home
and Spin, or else my Strap will wind about thy Ribs.


Iobson Sings. He that has the best Wife,
She Is the Burden of his Life,
But for her that will Scold and will Quarrel;
Let him cut her short
Of her Meat and her Sport,
And ten times a day hoop her Barrel.

Nell. We poor Women must be Slaves and never have any joy, but you men run and
ramble and take your swing.


Iobson. Why you most Pestilent Baggage will you be hoopt? be gone.


Nell. Well I must go.


Iobson. Here now I think of it, here is six pence for you, get Ale and Apples,
stretch and puff thy self up with Lambs Wool, rejoice and revel by thy self, be
drunk and wallow in thy own Stye like a Sow as thou art.


Iobson Sings. He that has a Wife, etc.

[Exit Nell and Jobson. Enter Sir Richard Lovemore's Butler, Cook, Servingmen,
Chambermaid, and other Women Servants. Butler. I would our blind Minstrel and
our dancing Neighbors were here that we may rejoice a little while, our
Termagant Lady is abroad, I have made a most Sovereign Bowl of Punch, and I
have a good hoard of Wine and March Beer.


Jane. We had need rejoice sometimes, but our devilish new Lady will never
suffer it when she knows it.


Butler. I will maintain it there is more mirth in a Gally than in our Family,
our Master Sir Richard is the worthiest Gentleman, nothing but Goodness,
Sweetness and Liberality.


Serve. Man. But here is a House turned topsie turvy, from Heaven to Hell since
her coming hither.


Maid. We are all alike, none of us can escape her rage and fury.


Jane. His former Lady is a Saint in Heaven, and lived so on Earth, all
Mildness and Gentleness.


Butler. Ay, Rest her Soul, she was, but this is inspired with a Legion of
Devils, and one plaguey Non-Con Parson worse than all, that makes her lay about
her like a Fury.


Jane. I Am sure I always feel her in my Bones, she has an Instrument of
Correction made of Whale-bone, and for fear I should forget her good usage, she
refreshes my Memory every quarter of an hour: if her Complexion don't please
her, or she look yellow in a morning, I Am sure to be laid on and look black and
blue for it.


Cook. Pox on her, when I carry up her Breakfast I dare not come within reach
of her: I have some six broken Heads already. A Lady quoth a! a Shee-Bear is a
civiller Animal: she has robbed me of my Cunny-Skins, my Kitchin-Stuff, and all
my Vails; and brought a damned eating godly Fellow with her, that scarce will
be content with five Meals a day.


Butler. None of you have been used as I have.


Jane. That Is because none of us had a Spade-Beard of a Foot long.


Butler. I that have lived five and forty year in the House, and had for twenty
years preserved a reverent Beard, which made me noted for Wisdom and
Discretion through all the Country, and she to demolish this poor Beard in an
instant.


Cook. I beseech you, by what means did she depopulate and waste your Fruitful
Chin?


Butler. Why it was ruined by Fire, with her own cursed hands she singed it
off; she said it always smelt of Brewis, and was a Sponge that soaked up more
March Beer in a month than any six the ablest Drunkards in the Hundred could in
a year: I saved nothing but this same one Sprig that grew upon a Wart, and that
by my Nail.


Jane. What pity 'twas to lose such an emblem of Gravity and Wisdom.


Butler. Ay, I am become a shame to my Neighbors and dare not show my Chin
before 'em: Oh that Beard, that poor Beard, what Authority it had amongst 'em!
I had e'ne as live she had gelt me.


Serve. Man. I believe thou had, thy Beard was of as much use as any
Implement about thee.


Jane. Methoughts he looked like one of the old Patriarchs, in the Arras I have
seen an old Eastern King, in a Mortlack hanging very much resembling his
Phisnomy.


Butler. Oh Mrs. Jane you do my poor Beard too much honor, but farewell dear
Beard, I shall never see the like of Thee.


Cook. No, a man may as well hope to have two crops of Oak Timber from the same
place, as two such Beards from one Chin in an Age.


Maid. Pish, what hurt does the loss of a Beard do? I was making a Shift for
her, and she did not like my Lacing it down; she turns the wrong end of her
Fan, strikes me on the Mouth so hard, that she beat out 2 of my Butter Teeth: A
shame on her light Fingers.


Jane. She makes the Coachman chain the Footmen to Posts, whip 'em with
Dog-whips, and stands by to see the Execution.


Butler. Heaven have mercy upon my poor Master, this devilish Termagant
Scolding Religious Woman will be the death of him, I never saw a man so altered
all the days of my Life.


Cook. There Is a Perpetual motion in that Tongue of hers, and a damned shrill
Pipe enough to break the Drum of a man's Ear, I wonder my Master does not kick
her and her Parson out of doors.


Butler. Her Parson, her Weaver; I believe he never had any Orders, but an
inward motion from his Stomach, which inclines him to eat more than a Wolf, and
this motion is an inward Call.


Noddy, (within.) Why, Cook John, Cook, where art thou?


Cook. I Am here, this is his outward Call; now is he almost famisht for his
second Afternoons Luncheon.


Noddy. Why, John, why do thou neglect me? my Spirits are exhaled, evaporated
in Study and Labor; I feel as it were a strange kind of emptifulness, I have
not eat this two hours,


Butler. A Pox on him, set him fast by the Teeth or else he will disturb us.


Cook. I have a couple of cold Chickens, some Westphalia Bacon, and Christmas
Pyes.


Nod. For your Christmas Pyes I defy them, they are abominable Scandalous, and
Idolatrous, they savor of Rome, they are so many Fortifications wherein the
Whore of Babylon intrenches her self, I will down with them, I will beat them
down, my zeal will not suffer such Popery in this House; ye are my Flock, I
will see that that Wolf the Whore does not prey upon you and devour you: down,
down I say with all her Outworks and High Places, her Superstitious and
Idolatrous Structures and Buildings, whether in Minced Pyes or otherwise: Your
Christmas is an Idol, a very Idol truly, have I not seen him in a Profane Mask,
in the Habit of an old Man with a long Spade-beard, and the deluded Rout have
worshipped and fallen down before him? your Bagpipes are as Pagan Organs, and
your Wassalers lewd and filthy Choristers unto Satan, I may not bear these Rags
of the Smock of that Scarlet Whore, my Spirit rises, my Zeal boileth and
bubbleth up as it were within me, I am transported with a holy Fury: But do you
hear John Cook send up those Chickens.


Cook. What both?


Noddy. Yea both with some Westphalia Bacon, and do you hear, John? a Tart; and
you Mr. Chipp let me have a Bottle of Sack, a Bottle of Ale and a Bottle of
March Beer, by help of this refreshment I shall be able to hold out till
Supper. Fare ye well till that time.

[ Ex. with Cook and Butler.
Jane. What shall we do with this base sniveling Hypocrite? he will spoil our
merry meeting.


Serve. Man. 'Ill warrant you it is but putting out the Candles and we'll make
him weary of his Canting, when e're he comes among us.


Re-Enter Butler and Cook. Butler. So his Provision's gone up.


Cook. He Is fast by the teeth for one hour.


Enter the Blind Fiddler, Jobson and others, Men and Women, and Neighbors.
Butler. O welcome, welcome, here is to our wish, the Minstrel and our Neighbor!
Oh old Acquaintance, Goodman Iobson, how do thou?


Iobson. By my troth I am sharp set toward the Punch, and am now come with a
firm Resolution though a Poor Cobbler to be as drunk as a Lord, I am a true
English heart, and look upon Drunkenness as the best part of the Liberty of the
Subject.


Jane. Why did you not bring your Wife with you?


Iobson. Because here are Waggs, young Rogues, and a Man may be a Cuckold
before the King's Health can go round.


Butler. Iobson we'll have a Catch, strike up Blind Will: Ah Iobson I have
heard thee outsing the Lark or Nightingal, thou art heard above all the Church,
let there be never so many Voices, thine will still be predominant.


Cook. Ay and he holds out the Note of one Verse till the Clark begins to sing
the next, he has a pure Wind.


Iobson. Ay I Am pretty good at a Psalm, I have some reason for it, I have
stich'd Soles this thirty years to those Psalms you spoke of.


Butler. Come, let us fetch out our Bowl of Punch in solemn Procession. Now let
us have a Catch in honor of Punch.


They bring out the Bowl of Punch singing a Catch, and dancing about it, after
which they sit down and drink. I.
While you Court a damned Vintner for such nasty Liquor,
As worse was never swallowed by dull Country Vicar,
And the insolent Rascal will draw what he pleases,
While Boys you may kick 'em when Masters y'intreat 'em,
And from Drawers you up into Aldermen beat 'em;
But they get your Money and you get Diseases.
II.
Stumme Brimstone, Lime, Arsnick, fond Drunkards bewitch,
While the villainous Host not content to be rich,
By Brewing and Poison sells that by false measure,
No Liquor like Punch gives delight to the Soul,
When we drown all our Cares in the bottom' oth' Bowl,
Sincere are our Ioys and immortal our pleasure.
III.
We brew for our selves and we know each ingredient,
As well for our health as our mirth is expedient,
And who ever drinks Punch shall live merry and long,
It spurs up Jade nature and quickens the blood,
Which if it finds bad it never fails to leave good;
And while we drink Punch we shall ever be young.
Cook. And after that I Will bring up the Rear with a swinging Turkey-pye, and a
mighty Gammon, besides much Pyes and other Appurtenances belonging to our
Office.


Butler. Here Is our Master's Health in a Bumper. Huzzah.


Cook. Our Ladies Confusion in another. Huzzah.

Enter Noddy, knawing the Leg of a Chicken.
Noddy. What means this Lewd, Profane, and Babylonish noise, ye Popish
Locusts, ye Idolatrous Vipers, this sanctified Place is become a Denn of Wicked
ones. Thou Blind misleader of the blind, with thy Lewd Antichristian Squeaks,
avaunt, avaunt, I say Beelzebub, avaunt.


He kicks and beats the blind Fiddler. They put out the Candles and toss Noddy
one from another and beat him. Hold, hold, what do ye mean?
Ye Sons of Darkness I defy you,
I can suffer for the truth, I am a witness.
Butler. Blind him and gagg him.


Cook. Bind him hand and foot.


Noddy. I will flee away from farther Persecution, Vipers my Lady will come,
she will to your Confusion.


Serve. Man. And as you like this do you come again.


Butler. A Pox on him; to our Business now he is gone. The King and all the
Royal Family in a Bumper. Huzzah.


[ Noddy steals out, they light the Candles. Cook. Are you ready for your
Collation?


Jane. No, no, we'll have a bout at Blindmans-buff and a Dance first.


Iobson. Ay, ay, come I Am old Dog at that, blind me, perhaps I Am as great a
Master at Blindmans-Buff as any one in Europe, no dispraise to any man.


[They blind him and dance a dance. Enter Sir Richard Lovemore and my Lady.
Lady. O Heaven and Earth! what is here within my House! is Hell broke loose!
what Troops of Friends is here, sirrah you impudent Rascal?


Sir Richard. My dear be patient it is Christmas, a time of Mirth, of Jollity,
it has always been the Custom of my House to give my Servants Liberty in this
Season, and all my Country Neighbors used to meet, and with their innocent
Sports divert themselves.


Lady. Prithee hold thy prating, meddle with your own matters, cannot I tell how
to govern my own house without your putting in an Oar? shall I ask you leave to
correct my own Servants?


Sir Richard. Good Lady, I thought this had been my House, and those my
Servants, and those my Tennants.


Lady. Did I bring a Fortune to be thus abused, and snub'd before my Servants,
do you call my Authority in Question you inhumane Monster? Look you to your
Dogs, your Kites and filthy Cattle, your Faulconers, Huntsmen, and your nasty
Grooms abroad, I Will make you know it is my Province to govern here, nor will I
be controlled by e're a Hunting, Hauking, unthinking Knight in Christendom.


Sir Richard. A Pox upon all Fools that shall marry for money, I am married to
a continual Tempest, Strife and Noise, Canting and Hypocrysie are the daily
Portion I have with her; but I Will not bear this long, if I by force oppose her,
she falls into fits, and raves worse than any one Bedlam.


Lady. You stinking Scoundrels, and you filthy Jades, I Will teach you to Junkit
thus and steal my Provision, I shall be devoured by you.


Butler. I thought Madam we might be merry once upon a Holyday.


Lady. Holyday, you Popish Curr, is one Day more Holy than another? and if it
be you will be drunk upon it, you Rogue, that by your late Demolished Beard,
thought your self an Example to the Family, is this your Example?


[She beats him over the Head. Come you Minx, you impudent Flurt are you
gigging after an abominable Fiddle? all Dancing is whorish, Huswife.

[ Jane is sneeking to get away, she catches her and lugs her. Jane. O Murder,
murder, she has pulled off both my Ears.


Sir Richard. Madam, for shame, remember your Sex and Quality.


Lady. Remember your own fools head, shall you instruct me?


Enter Noddy. Noddy. Madam, I rejoice that your Ladyship is returned.


Lady. Oh good and holy man, how came my Family in my absence thus Debauched,
Drunken, Profane and Superstitious?


Noddy. When my Ears were first offended with these Lewd Noises, I came down
grieved in Spirit, and rebuked them, commanding them to surcease from these
Superstitious and Idolatrous Rites, which they Sacrifice to that Idol, that
beastly Idol, old Father Christmas, and while my Spirit was full of Godly
Chastisement, they did extinguish the Lights, surrounded and hemmed me in, and
these Instruments of Satan did buffet me even unto great anguish, and I am sore
bruised in Body.


Lady. Alack good man! Oh ye Spawn of Belial the Fry of the bottomless Pit,
how now sirrah, who, are you in the Bumble you Buzzard?

[To Jobson. She takes the Parson's Cane and beats all the Company, Jobson is
stealing by.
Iobson. I am an honest Psalm-singing Cobbler, Madam; if your Ladyship would go
to Church, you would hear me above 'em all there.


Lady. I Will try thy Voice now.

[She strikes him over the Pate.
Iobson. Nounz what a Pox, what a Devil ails you?


Lady. O Prosane Wretch, wicked Varlet.


Noddy. Thou Son of the old Serpent, avaunt thou Frog of the Lake of Darkness.


Iobson. Avaunt thou Coxcombly Son of a Whore of the new Light.


Noddy. Be gone, Avaunt, Be gone from within these Walls.


[They justle one another. Iobson. What will you wrestle a Fall with me? Come
on. Take that Lusty Lug you Rogue of a Saint, with a pound of Ear of each side.


Jobson gives Noddy a Fall, and lugs him by the Ears. Lady. Impudent Villain,
has he not hurt the Good man?


Noddy. He has very much disordered my two Ears, and bruised me exceedingly.


Sir Richard. You deserve it for a meddling Coxcomb, go to your Book you
ignorant Fop and road, and rely more upon good Sense, and less upon your new
Light.


Lady. Oh wicked vile wretch, was ever poor Lady so miserable so horridly
miserable in a Brute to her Husband as I am, I that am so Pious, so Good and
Religious a Woman?


Noddy. She is an holy, a sanctified Vessel truly.


[ Jobson peeps in and sings. Iobson Sings. He that has the best Wife,
She Is the Burden of, etc.

And some ten times a day hoop her Barrel. Lady. O Rogue, Scoundrel, Villain.


Sir Richard. Remember Modesty.


Lady. Are you gone, Sirrah? I Will rout the rest of you: I Will spoil your
squeaking Trebble.


She lays about her, they all run, she breaks the blind Fidler's Fiddle about
his Head. Fiddler. O Murder, murder, I am a dark man, which way shall I get
hence? Oh Heaven! She has broken my Fiddle, and undone me, my Wife and Children.


Sir Richard. Here Poor Fellow come this way, take your Staff, there, there is
money to buy two such Fiddles; go, there is your way.


Fiddler. Heaven preserve your Worship, bless you sweet Master, here is a Change
indeed, little did I think to live to find such Doings at this Hall-Place.


[Exit Fiddler. Two Wassalers come to the Door singing a Wassal Song. Lady. You
are very Liberal, must my Estate maintain you in your Profuseness?


Sir Richard. Go up to your Closet, Pray and compose your mind.


Lady. Oh wicked Fellow to bid me pray.


Sir Richard. A Man cannot be completely cursed without a Wedding, but there is
such a thing as separate maintenance and a Joynter-House, which she to morrow
shall try, by the help of Heaven, I will no longer bear this nuisance in my
House. Here, where are my Servants, what must they be frighted from me? within
there, Chipp, come here and see who knocks there.

[A knocking at the Door.
Lady. Within there, where are my Sluts, ye Drabs, ye Queans: Lights there.


[Enter Boy with Candle.] [Two Maids come sneeking in with Candles. Enter
Butler again. Butler. Sir it is a Doctor that lives ten mile off with his man,
he practices Physic, and is an Astronomer and a Cunning-man, your Worship
knows him, he can make Almanacks, and help men to their Goods again.


Enter Doctor and his Man. Doctor. Sir I am benighted, it is so dark I cannot
see my hand, I cannot possibly reach home, and therefore knowing the Bounty of
your Worships Hospitality, I desire the favor to be harbored under your Roof
this night.


Lady. Out of my house you lewd Conjurer, you Witch, you Magician.


Noddy. Avaunt thou Instrument of Satan, I defy thee and all thy Works, thou
wicked Sorcerer avaunt.


Lady. If you stay in my house, you shall be worse used here, than your
Predecessor Dr. Lamb was in the City.


Doctor. Here Is a turn, here is a change, which if I have any Art she shall
smart for.


Sir Richard. You see Friend the Case is altered with me, I am not Master of my
House, but e're to morrow this time I Will be Monarch here: go down the Lane
friend, and about half a Quarter of a mile off, you will see a Cobblers house, stay
there some little time, and I Will send my Man that shall conduct you to a
Tennants house, who shall take care of you.


Doctor. Thanks good Sir, I Am your humble Servant, but you Noncon with your
surious She Disciple there, shall have some proofs of my Magic Art this Night.


[Ex. Dr. and his Man. Sir Richard. Come Lady you and I must have some
Conference.


Lady. Yes I will have Conference and Reformation too in this house, or else
I Will turn thee inside outward.


[Ex. Sir Richard and Lady. Noddy. My mind misgiveth me, these Varlets have
left some good thing in the Bowl there, but hold, is it not a Wassaling
Superstitious Spice-Bowl, let me see, hah! it is very comfortable and edifieth,
there is a huge Island of Tossed, Nutmeg and Sugar, I will attack it, it is
Chearing, I have a Paper with some Parmazan in my Pocket, which will eat very
well with it, this is also a pleasing Liquor, I will drink plentifully of it
and eat Tossed exceedingly: ah my Spirits are cheared as it were, and are excited
unto Joy and Gladness.


Enter Butler and Cook. Cook. Oh that sweet toothed Lickerish Hypocrite who is
always eating, and looks as if he had never eaten.


Butler. His meat does himself no more good than his Doctrine does others,
stand close, you will see him devour that Punch-Tost, he will never be contented
without all in the Bowl.


Cook. It will disguise him most wickedly, and make him as drunk as one of the
Profane.


Noddy. It does begin to invade my upper Region, my Pericranium does seem to be
somewhat inclined unto Giddiness, hah the Room appears to turn round.


[He hekops, belches and sneezes, and is drunk. Butler. He is overtaken.


Cook. It Is a very seasonable time, I Am just going to knock to Supper, and my
Lady will not eat without his Grace.


Butler. Go quickly, he is in a sweet Pickle for a Grace of a quarter of an hour
long as he used to make 'em.


[The Cook knocks to supper within, it goes up. Noddy. Where am I? am I in the
Buttery or my own Closet, a most excellent Spice I Will promise you.


Enter Jane. Jane. Where are you Mr. Noddy? Supper is on the Table, and my Lady
stays for your Grace.


Noddy. Is it Supper time say you, now I think of it I begin to be hungry.


Butler. Pray Sir make have my Lady stays for you?


Noddy. What is the matter with me? I think my Feet are asleep, I cannot use
them, my Eyes are somewhat dim too, which is the way?


Butler. Ay the Rogue hears my Master intends to turn over a new Leaf, and he
has a mind to wind about, but this shall not serve his turn, he is a Fanatic Rogue
still.


[ Noddy staggers, they lead him out. [Ex. omnes. Scene the Cobler's House.
Nell, the Dr. and his Man. Nell. Pray Sir mend your Draught if you please, you
are very welcome Sir.


Doct. Thank you heartily good Woman, come I Will give you some requital, I Will
tell you your fortune?


Nell. Oh! Pray do Sir, I never had my Fortune told me in my Life.


Doct. Let me behold the Lines of your Face?


Nell. I Am afraid it is none of the cleanest Sir, I have been about dirty work
Sir all this day.


Doct. Come, it is a good Face be not ashamed of it, you shall show it in
greater Places suddenly.


Nell. Oh dear, I Sir? I shall be ashamed mightily, I want Dacity when I come
before great Folks.


Doct. You must be confident I charge you, and fear nothing, there is much
happiness attends you.


Nell. Oh me, this is a rare man Heaven be thanked.


Doct. To morrow before Sun Rise you shall be the happiest Woman in this County.


Nell. How, by to morrow? Alack a day, how can this be?


Doct. No more shall you be troubled with a Surly Husband, that shall Rail,
call you names and strap you.


Nell. Lord how came he to know that? he has a Familiar: indeed my Husband is
somewhat rugged, and in his Cupps will beat me but it is not much, He Is an
honest painful Man and I let him have his way, pray Sir take the the other Cup of
Ale.


Doctor. Thank you, to morrow you shall be the richest Woman in the Hundred,
and ride in your own Coach.


Nell. O Father now you jeer me.


Doctor. By Heaven I do not, but mark my words, be confident and bear all out,
or worse will follow.


Enter Jobson. Iobson. Where is this Queen, here Nell, what a Pox are you
drunk with your Lambs-wool?


Nell. Oh Husband! here is the rarest man, he has told me my Fortune.


Iobson. Pox on you, and has planted my Fortune too, a Lusty pair of horns upon
my head, has he?


Doctor. Thy Wife's a virtuous Woman, and thou wilt be happy.


Iobson. Come out ye hang Dogs, ye Juglers, ye cheating Villayns, must I be
Cuckolded by such Rogues as you are, Mackmaticians and Almnack-makers?


Nell. Prithee peace Husband, we shall be rich, and have a Coach of our own.


Iobson. A Coach! a Cart, a Wheele-Barrow you Jade, by 'th mackin She Is drunk,
bloody drunk, get you to bed you Strumpet.


[He beats her. Nell. Oh mercy on us, is this a taste of my good Fortune?


Doctor. You had better not have touched her you surly Rogue.


Iobson. Out of my House you Rogues, or I Will run my Nall up to the handle in
your Buttocks?


Doctor. Farewell you Paltry Slave?


Iobson. Get you out you Rogues?


[Scene changes to the open Country. [She shuts the door and goes in. Doctor.
What? Hoh my Spirits, Nadir and Abishog, hoh!


Enter Nadir and Abishog flying down. Nadir. Abishog. Here, we are here.


Doctor. Praesto, all my Charms attend:
'Ere this Night shall have an End,
You shall this Cobler's Wife transform,
And to the Knights the like perform;
This bed the Cobler's Wife I ll charm,
The Knight's into the Cobler's Arm;
Let the Delusion be so strong,
That none shall know the Right from wrong.
The Non-con Parson so affright,
That he may ever Rue this Night;
Scare him from his Little Wits,
And his Hypocritick Fits.

Nadir. Abishog. All this, this Night we will perform,
In a Whirlwind, in a Storm.
In Lightning and in Thunder fly,

Doctor. And muster all the Clouds in the Sky;
Attend me till the Dawn of Day,
And then you may go sport and play.
Hold, here comes Sir Richard's Man: he will guide us to our Lodging, let us meet
him to Horse.

[Ex. omnes. Scene Sir Richard's House, the Dining Room, Sir Richard, Mr.
Rowland, Mr. Longmore.
Sir Richard. Well my dear Friends, though you have found my House in some
disorder, I cannot but rejoice to see you, the sight of Friends will lighten
great afflictions.


Roll. Some years have past, since we have been merry together.


Long. We have not met these five years: Marriage, Travel, Business, and your
Retirement, Sir Richard, have thus separated us.


Sir Richard. Us that for several years, of pleasant Frolique Youth were never
asunder.


Roll. I call methinks a pleasant Season back, here is a brimmer to our old
Acquaintance.


Sir Richard. About with it.


Long. But now it is late, we keep you out of Bed from your new Wife.


Sir Richard. A Wife! Oh Friends take warning, marry not, I say, do not marry.


Roll. Why? you have a handsome Lady and a rich one.


Sir Richard. Oh Gentlemen, I would be glad to have the Witch of Endor, were
she alive instead of her; I am linked to an Amozonian Devil, such a Thalestris,
such a perpetual Fixen, and a Shrew, such a Tongue, that 'twould be a Blessing
to be lodged in London, with a Silver-Smith under me, a Brazier over head, a
Trunk-maker and a Peuterer on either side of me, and all of 'em Industrious
Rogues to boot; a Blessing I say in Comparison of her continual Clamor, all
those Noises in consort are soft and gentle Harmony to her one single Voice.


Long. Methought she looked somewhat proudly, her Countenance between Scorn and
Anger.


Sir Richard. She wished crooked Pins in every bit of meat you eat, and Poison
in every Glass of Wine you swallowed.


Roll. Say you so, it is time for us to leave you then.


Sir Richard. No, fear not, this Night is the last of her short Reign, I have
sent for her Father to dine with me to morrow, and after dinner I will pack her
away with her separate maintenance, and then we'll spend the Christmas in
Freedom, Mirth and Jollity, and I am overjoyed you are here to be Witnesses of
my Proceedings.


Enter Jane. Jane. Sir, my Lady commanded me to tell you, She Will rout you and
your Lewd Companions, if you come not away presently, I hope you will pardon me.


[ Ex. Jane. Sir Richard. Tell her I come, I am sent for. But here is the other
Brimmer to my Deliverance.


Long. Away with it.


Sir Richard. I lay my whole misfortune now before you, I have not only
married an Indefatigable Scold, but a Phanatick into bargain; nay, I have
married her Chaplain too, who was, I take a Weaver, and ordained himself by
virtue of outward Grace and inward Knavery, have a care I warn you of a Bigot
or Zealous Woman, for be she never so wicked, she will be always so full of
spiritual Pride, She Will think you a Limb of Satan.


Roll. It Is a just observation.


Long. And for a Chaplain, I would as soon have a Russian in my House, for he
must Govern or the Wife will Rage.


Sir Richard. Right, Then, my Friends, I conjure ye have a care of separate
maintenance, a damned invention to make Whores and cursed Wives as bad, I would
not marry the Queen of Sheba were she alive, upon those Conditions.


Roll. All this daily Experience tells us.


Sir Richard. A Curse of an Owl that must try and would not trust Experience;
but at his own cost another Point is, for I am bound in Charity to warn you,
have a care of an ill born or ill bred Woman, there is as much in the Strain,
as in Horses or Dogs, we all take after our kind.


Long. You are in the Right of it, I have not heard a better Preaching.


Sir Richard. And for breeding, though almost all Women are Fools, yet those
that are well bred, by the help of that will behave themselves with some
Discretion and Good manners at least, and now in what a Case am I, that am
under all these Curses which I warn you from? how irksome must it be to me, who
with my first dear Wife, that St. in Heaven, had all the happiness that man on
Earth was capable of?


Roll. It Is hard, but like to be as short.


Sir Richard. One more to the memory of my former Wife, a Brimmer to help to
dround my sorrow for this.


Long. Let it go round: we knew her.


Roll. She deserved all honor.


Enter Lady. Lady. Now shame upon you and your filthy Companions, I Will make
your Glasses and your Bottles fly, and that Lewd Minister of your Debauchery,
your Butler I Will rout him, for not bringing me the Key of the Cellar a Rascal.


Sir Richard Whistles. Enter Servants. Roll. Your Pardon, we are going.


Lady. Going? yes, to make one another drunk and sott all Night about it, ye
may be ashamed ye Beasts, why do I call you Beasts, Beasts, I scorn to be drunk
like you.


Sir Richard. This Gentlemen is my sweet Lady.


Lady. Gentlemen! your fellow Scotts, your guzling Drunkards, get you to bed ye
Spunges?


Sir Richard. Light the Gentlemen, your Fires are ready, you see I am under
Correction sweet Princess.


If you in one, would sum up every Curse,
Take such a Spowse for better and for worse.
The End of the first Act.
ACT the SECOND.
Butler, Cook, Servingman. Disguised. Butler. WE have had a hard Tug to give
these Gentlemen's men their Belly's full.


Cook. But at last we have left 'em quickly up tosome Tune.


Serve. Man. I am Bouzy and right for mischief; let us execute our design upon
Non-con.


Butler. Have at him, are your Jack-chanes and humming Tops ready?


Serve. Man. They are, I have 'em here, he must be drunk with a Pox to him, and
could not say Grace.


Butler. A Curse on him, he staggered against my Side-Table, and brake twenty
shillings worth of flint Glasses. And though we all deposed against his
Drunkenness, our Pious Lady called us perjured Rogues, and said he had eaten
some thing that did not agree with him.


Serve. Man. And when we could not get him to himself, my Lady said it was an
Apoplexy.


Cook. Ay, and made me heat a Drying Pan red hot, to hold over his Pate; from
which she had made the hair be shaved off.


Serve. Man. Nay She has employed all her skill in Physic upon him, She has
laid a huge Caustick-Plaister between his Neck and Shoulders to raise blisters,
which will make him roar before morning.


Cook. His Head's all raw with the singeing, if he had not begun to roar, I
belive She would have Carbonado'd him, for his Apoplectick Drunkenness.


Butler. What Sport it will be when he wakes! he will wonder what the Devil they
have done to him, he will be plauguy sore.


Cook. Now he has almost slept out his first sleep, he will wake half sober,
devilish sick, and in pain, and 'twill be a fit time to begin our Persecution
upon him.


Butler. I am afraid we shall make him distracted with the Fright.


Cook. If we make him mad he may get some wit by the bargain, he is now so dull
a Rogue that any alteration would be for the best.


Butler. Come put on the shapes.


Serve. Man. Here, the Dogs will fit me, John Cook shall be the Bear, and you
shall represent great Beelzebub himself.


Butler. Agreed, hang on your Chains, list how the Rogue sports like a Sackbut,
let us withdraw into our Tyring-Room, and then Enter.


The Scene opens and discovers Noddy in Bed, and they Enter. Noddy. Mr. Chip,
why Butler Chip, I say some small Beer, give me an Ocean of small Beer, I will
swim in small Beer.


Butler. He Is between sleeping and waking, now to our Work.


Noddy. Mercy on me where have I been? I am all on Fire, and my head all burnt,
is the Bed or the Room on Fire? fire, fire, fire, hah Heaven what Noise is
that! hah it is Satan verily, what Friends are those in Chains? Oh Faith,
Faith! where art thou? I am frail, frail, even as one of the They set the
humming Tops a going, then rattle their Chains. wicked. Oh! mercy, mercy, how,
I dissolve, who are ye, in the Name of Heaven? speak, what will they do? will
they fetch me from hence? Oh Satan! sweet Satan, dear Satan, spare me, thou
mistakest me, tempt me not, I am not Righteous, I am wicked, yea even as one of
the Profane. I am an Hypocrite truly, a zealous Hypocrite verily: Oh spare me,
oh! oh! sweet Satan, dear Satan spare me.

They pull all the Clothes off the Bed. [He holds 'em with all his strength and
roars. [They cease a while.]
Butler. This is enough in the dark, now let him behold ye?


Noddy. Oh, oh, I conceive there is a Light now in the Room, let me see if I
dare open my Eyes: He brings in a Light. Oh Heaven what Friend is this comes to
me? it is like a Dog, oh! oh! I conjure thee, Friend! say The Serving Man in
his Dogs shape creeps to the Bed. what thou art; in the Name of Heaven, if thou
be a Dog speak, oh, oh, what is here a Bear? avaunt, avaunt, O Good Satan
forbear, oh what is here the Chief Devil! I dare not see any more, oh sweet
Beelzebub, spare me, mercy good Satan.


The Cook lies down on the Bed like a Bear, Noddy roares yet louder, and
shrinks under the Clothes and speaks. Butler. Art thou a true seared Hypocrite?


Noddy. Yea I am, I am.


Butler. Falsely zealous, and truly seditious?


Noddy. Oh, oh, I, I am Sir.


Butler. Most immoderately given to thy Gut?


Noddy. Yes, yes, my great delight is in Creature comforts.


Butler. The chief motive to thy Zeal, those Creature comforts, thou get'st by
thy Hypocroisie.


Noddy. Oh, oh! yes verily.


Butler. By this thou have committed Carnality with Elders Wives and Daughters;
and have been much given to Concupiscence.


Noddy. It Is true, most exceedingly.


Butler. You use not Copulation with the wicked, for fear of Scandal?


Noddy. No, I engender only with the Righteous: Good Sir, have done, I am half
dissolved.


Butler. By this thou get'st thy self made Executor and Trustee.


Noddy. Oh yes, it is the chief end of my Profession to prey on Orphans.


Butler. Oh Rogue! ha what a dreadful Thunderclap was that.


[It Thunders and Lightens. Serve. Man. What a storm is this arising?


[Serv, and Cook come from the Bed. Cook. Gods body what a Clap was there, it
shook the House.


Serve. Man. Come let us be gone, we have tormented him enough.


Cook. No, no, this storm will help us better to affright him.


Butler. The Rogue shall no longer rail at auricular Confession, who, has
confessed as he thinks to the Devil.


Nadir rises with a great Thunderclap and Appears to them. Noddy. Oh! I am
almost dead, sure the Fiends are gone, and have carried this end of the
Building with them at that last Clap.


[He is preparing some Toads on a plate. Butler. Come, come 'tother bout.


Nadir. Ay, come, come.

[Nadir Rises.
Cook. Hah Tom! what is this? we are four now.


Serve. Man. Why Ned? we were but three, ha! one, two, three, four?


Butler. Ha John! what is the meaning of this? who is this?


Cook. Nay, what a Pox know I? I am sure we were but three, we are increased
one in Number.


Ser. Foh, what a stink of Brimstone's here.

The Spirit is placing a Toad upon a plate, the Spirit goes to Noddy, he eats a
Toad, and on his Fork presents Noddy with another.
Butler. Let me see, what is he a doing?


Noddy. There is silence, now let me peep out. Oh Heaven!


Nadir. Here Parson eat this Toad, here will you eat this Toad?


Butler. Oh Heaven what is this! my Hair begins to stand on End.


Nadir. Eat this Toad I say.


Noddy. Oh, no good Satan, I hate a Toad, it is too like Fish, and I could
never endure Fish, because the Papists eat so much.


Nadir. Who will eat a Toad?

Nadir turns him to the Company, and Fire flashes about him
Butler. Cook. Serve. Man. Oh the Devil, the Devil, oh! oh!


They run roaring out, and Noddy roars, the Scene shuts upon the Bed. Cook,
Butler, Serve. Man Re-enter. Butler. Help, help.


Cook. The Devil, the Devil.


Serve. Man. If ever I fright any Body again, may I suffer the Strappado.


Enter Sir Richard with a Candle and his Sword drawn. Sir Richard. What noises
are these? here are Thieves in my House; what, ho where are my Servants?


Butler. Here Sir, we are got up, there have been most horrible Disturbances in
the Parson's Chamber, he roars like a furious Bull with the Dog about him,
listen.


Noddy. The Devil, the Devil: Murder, help, help.


Sir Richard. Hang him the Rogue's drunk still, is it he that has disturbed the
House?


Noddy comes running in roaring with a Blanket about him. Noddy. Oh the Devil,
the Devil, avoid thou Tempter.


Enter hastily Rowland and Longmore, with their Swords drawn with a light.
Roll. What is the matter here?


Long. Oh Sir Richard, we have been so disturbed with Noises, we thought some
Rogues had got into your House, and were committing a Robbery.


Sir Richard. It Is nothing but a Drunken Zealot, that has been troublesome in
his Cupps, and he has disturbed the House.


Noddy. Drunk! I defy thee and all thy works.


Long. Ha, what Apparition is that?


Butler. Apparition, whose, where?


Sir Richard. I shall soon make your Apparition vanish.


Noddy. I have seen a Vision this Night.


Sir Richard. What of Malt and Hops, Punch and Stratsbury Brandy, or a
Fools-head in a Looking-glass? take him and lock him into his Chambers.


Noddy. Oh for Heaven's sake! it is haunted with Devils, I have been tormented
all Night: They have laid a Plaster of melted Btimstone upon my Shoulders, and
singed my Head with sulphurous Flames, oh the Devil, the Devil!


[They hurry him off, and lock him up. Sir Richard. You shall disturb the House
no more to Night: Gentlemen, I am sorry that this Phanatick Preacher should
disturb you, he was drunk last Night and fancies he is haunted with Devils, he is
nothing but frighted with the Thunder and Lightning, at this time of the Winter.


Roll. Which has been the strangest I ever heard, I thought the House had
fallen down, or at least part of it.


Long. Such Thunder in this Winter Season is prodigious, methinks it should
fright the Women out of their Wits.


Sir Richard. I could not wake my sweet Lady, She lay as if She were dead, I
believe it is her property to be silent in a storm, and ever tempestuous in a
Calm.


Sir Richard. See what is a Clock by the Pendulum.


[Ex. Serve. and reenters. Serve. It Is within less than half an hour of five.


Roll. It Is almost time to think of hunting: you told us we should see your
Harriers run.


Sir Richard. Let Us to our Chambers and rest an hour or two; we have Game just
by.


Long. With all our Hearts.


Sir Richard. Bid the Grooms be ready, Butler, Do you call us; and Cook be
ready with a Breakfast, come Gentlemen our way is the same.


[Ex. Omnes. Enter Nadir and Abishog. Nadir. Well met, it is time we now be gone,
Already all our Work is done;
The Transformation's wrought so sure,
The Doctour's time it shall endure.
The Lady's in the Cobler's Hutt,
The Cobler's Wife to the Knight is put;
And we defy the sharpest Sight,
E're to distinguish which is Right.

[They sink down. Scene the Cobler's House, Jobson in his Stall, his Bed in
sight of it. Iobson. What has the Devil been abroad to Night? I never heard
such Thunderclaps and such a Storm, I thought my little House would have flown
away. But now all is clear, and it is a fine Starlight Morning. Come I Will to
work: Winters Thunder is Summers wonder.


In Bath a wanton Wife did dwell,
As Chaucer be did write;
Who wantonly did spend her Days
In many a fond Delight.
Upon a time sore Sick she was,
And at the length did Dye:
Her Soul at last at Heavens Gate
Did knock most mightily.
Then down came Adam to the Gate,
Who knocks there quoth he?
I am the Wife of Bath she said,
Who fain would come to thee.
Thou art a Sinner Adam said,
And here no place can have:
Alack for you good Sir she said,
Go Gipp you doting Knave.
Lady. How now? what impudent Ballad-singing Rogue's that, that dare wake me
out of my sleep? I Will have thee flead thou Rascal.


Iobson. Why? what a Pox, does this Jade talk in her sleep, or is she drunk
still.


[He sings on. I will come In in spite, she said,
Of all such Churls as thee:
Thou art the cause of all our Pain,
Our Woe and Misery.
Thou first brokest the Commandments,
In pleasure of thy Wife.
When Adam heard her tell this Tale,
He ran away for Life.
Lady. Why Villain, Rascal, Screech-Owle; a worse Noise than a Dog hung in the
Pales, or a Hog in a great Wind. Here where are my Servants? come and hamstring
the Rogue.

[She knocks.
Iobson. Why, how now you saucy Jade, you confounded Queen, you must be drunk
with Conjurers, you shall have money for Lambs-wool, you whoreson Drab.


Lady. Death! what Dog is this? where is my Bell? I cannot find it to ring,
where is my Servants? I Will toss the Dog in a Blanket.


Iobson. She is asleep sure, and all this is a Dream; the Conjurer told her she
should keep a Coach, and she is dreaming of her Equipage, ha! ha!

[He sings on.
Lady. Why Husband, Sir Richard do you hear this Insolence?


Iobson. Husband! Sir Richard! what a Pox has she Knighted me? my Name is Zekel
too, here is a jest indeed!


Lady. Hah he is gone, he is not in the Bed, Oh Heaven! where am I? foh, what
favor is this in my Nostrils! here are stinking Lether Breeches, and a Lether
Apron, here are Canvas Sheets and filthy ragged Curtins, a Beastly Rug and
Flock-Bed: am I awake? or is all this Dream? what Rogue is that? Sirrah! where
am I? who brought me hither? Rogue! what Rascal are you?


Iobson. This is most amazing, I never heard such words from her, so God save
me, if I take my strap, I Will make you know your Husband, and teach you a little
better manners, you saucy Drab.


Lady. Oh astonishing impudence! you my Husband! I Will have you hanged you
Rogue, I Am a Lady sirrah, let me know who gave me a sleeping Potion, and
conveyed me hither.


Iobson. A Sleeping Potion, a Pox on you, you drunken Jade, you had a sleeping
Potion, has not your Lambs-wool done working yet?


Lady. Where am I? where has my damned villainous Husband put me? why, Jane,
Lettis, where are my Queans?


Iobson. Ha, ha, ha, what does she call her Maids? the Conjurers have not only
made her drunk, but mad too.


Lady. He talks of Conjurers, sure I am bewitched, ha! what Clothes are here?
here is a Linsey-woolsey Gown, a Callicoe Hood, and a Red-Bays Petticoat, and
Shoes with Hobnails, I Am removed out of my own House by Witchcraft, what shall
I do, or what will become of me?


Iobson. Hark the Hunters and the merry Horns abroad, why Nell you lazy Jade!
it is Break of Day, come to work, come, come and spin you Drab, or I Will swinge
your lazy Hide for you; Pox on you must I be working two hours before you in a
Morning?


Lady. Why Sirrah, you impudent Villain, do you know me?


Iohson. Know you, yes, and will make you know me before I have done with you.


Lady. I am Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, how came I here?


Iobson. Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, no not so bad yet, She Is a damned stingy
Phanatick Whore, and plagues every one that comes near her, the whole Country
curses her.

[She flings Bed-staffs and Lumber at his Head.
Lady. Nay then I Will hold no longer, you Rogue, you insolent Villain have at
you.


Iobson. This is more than e're I saw by her, She Is mad sure, I never had an
ill word from her before, come Strap I Will try your mettle; I Will fetch you out
of your Drunken Fitts you maukin, come, come on Huswife.

[He straps her, she flys at his throat, they fight.
Lady. Oh murder, murder! I Will pull you throat out, I Will tear your Eyes out,
I Am a Lady sirrah, Sir Richard Lovemore will hang you for this.

[They fight and she cries out.
Enter a Countryman. Countryman. Why Neighbor Iobson, what is the matter? I
was going to fodder my Cattle, and hear murder cried here.


Lady. Oh Fellow, do you know Sir Richard Lovemore?


Countrym. Ay marry do I well enough, he is my Landlord, he is as honest a
Gentleman as any is in forty mile o'his head.


Iobson. Prithee Neighbor don't mind her, She was drunk yesterday with
Conjurers, She Is mad still, and I cannot get her up to her Spinning-work.


Lady. Oh help me, I Am Sir Richard Lovemore's Lady, conveyed hither I know not
how, to be tormented and lamed by this outrageous Villain.


Iobson. Did not I tell you she was mad, come out you Jade, I Will fetch you to
your Spindle.


Countrym. Hold you Neighbor, this is a pretty Whirlegig? I know my Lady right
well and Goody Iobson too, ah Goody Iobson I Am sorry to see this, you are mad
indeed, my Lady Quo she.


[He takes the Candle and looks on her. Iobson. What a Pox, do you think I
don't know my own Wife? that mole under her left Eye?


Countrym. A Lady? no Neighbor Iobson, you are ten times a better Woman no
Dispraise to her, She Is the hearteats Jade that e're came in the Parish, the
whole Country curses her.


Lady. Oh he has bruised me, and larned me, and I am almost dead with the
stench of this filthy place, either I am removed by Enchantment, or they have
given me Opium, and in a dead sleep they have brought me hither, are you in
earnest? look on me, do you not know my Lady Lovemore? I Will give you a hundred
pound and carry me home.


[They both laugh. Iobson. Why you mad Beast, you my Lady Lovemore? A Pox on
her, I know her well enough, she gave me three or four damned Blows of the Pate
last Night, in her own House.


Lady. I did so, I remember you now, I did give you those Blows on the pate, in
my House last Night.


[Jobson steps out. Countrym. Why Goody Iobson, why do you think I Am blind? I
do not know my Lady? a plaguey Queen, why all the Country rings of her.


She falls upon the Country Fellow, and beats him out of Doors, he runs out
crying help, help. Lady. This is a Conspiracy of Rogues.


Countrym. Help, help, if She be not my Lady, she has learnt of my Lady.


[Ex. Countryman. Lady. Is this the Rogue my Husbands revenge upon me? here is
Clothes, here is filthy Rags; ob foh! oh miserable Woman! I shall be delivered
and make 'em rue for it.


Enter Jobson with a Rock and Spindle. Iobson. Come, come you Queen, I Will make
you leave your fooling, come to your Spindle, or else I Will lamb your Hide, you
were never lamb'd so since you were an Inch long. Take it up you Jade.


[She flings it down, he straps her. Lady. Hold, hold, what shall I do? I cannot
spin.


Iobson. Oh! I thought I should bring you to your self to work, I Will into my
Stall, it is broad day now, why, when you awkard Jade? I think her Brains are
turned, She has forgot to spin.


[He sings and stitches. Lady. I know this place, I Will try my Feet, I Will run
into the Town, some body will succor me there sure.


[She runs out, be follows her. Iobson. What does the Jade run for it? I Will
after her.


The Scene changes to Sir Richard Lovemore's House, the Bedchamber, Nell,
Jobson in Bed. Nell. What Heavenly dreams I have had this Night? methought I
was in Paradise, upon a Bed of Roses, and of Violets, and the sweetest Husband
by my side; sure it was a Dream, Ha! where am I now? bless us! what sweets are
these about me? no Garden in the Spring can equal them, not Buds of Roses with
the Dew upon them, am I upon a Bed? the Sheets are Sarcenet sure; no Linen
ever was so fine, what a gay silken Robe have I gotten? Oh Heaven I dream! I
dream nothing but Point and Lace, and Gold, and Fringe. Oh let me never wake!
nothing but Gold, fine Works and Carving: oh Father what a Glass is there!
there is a sumptuous Carpet upon the Table and silver Plate, sure I died to
night in my sleep, and am gone to Heaven and this is it!


Enter Jane. Jane. Now must I go to be called Whore or Jade, and fifty other
Names, I must wake an alarm that will not lie still till Midnight at the
soonest, Madam. Madam.

[She goes sneeking toward the Bed.
Nell. Lord who this, what say thou sweet Heart?


Jane. Sweet heart, O Lord Sweet heart! the best Names I have had these twelve
Months from her, have been Whore or Jade: Madam, what Gown and what Ruffles,
will your Ladyship please to wear to Day?


Nell. Oh Lord what does she mean? Ladyship, Gown and Ruffles, sure I am awake
now, I remember the Cunningman!


Jane. Say you Madam?


Nell. The same I did yesterday Child.


Jane. Mercy upon me! Child! here is a Miracle!

Enter Maid sneeking.
Maid. Is my Lady awake, and have you had e'rea slipper or a shoe flung at your
Head yet?


Jane. Oh no, I am overjoyed, she is in the kindest humor, nothing but Love and
Sweetness, go to the Bed and speak to her now, now is your time.


Maid. You laugh at me, now is your time says she, what to have an Eye beaten
out or another Tooth? Madam.

[Softly.
Nell. What say thou Girl? Father, what would she have?


Maid. What work will your Ladyship have me do to day? shall I work Plain-work,
or go on my Parchment?


Nell. Work say thou, why? it is holiday Child, no work to Day.


Maid. Oh mercy, am I or she awake! or do we both dream?


Jane. Did not I tell you?


Maid. Here Is a blessed Change!


Jane. If it continues we are all made, we shall be a happy Family.


Nell. Who Is that?


Enter Footboy with Billets. Footboy. Now shall I be condemned to the Dog-whip,
instead of a Breakfast.


Jane. Some Billets for your Ladyships fire?


Nell. That Is a good Boy.


Footboy. O Lord! O Lord, is that my Lady?

[He runs out jumping.
Jane. Go Sir, she is in rare humor.


Nell. Prithee Sweetheart give me my things, I Will rise, I cannot abide to lie in
Bed.


Jane. Have I my senses or not, Good Lack?


Nell. This Cunning-man is a rare Man: he said I must bear it out, I Am amazed?
I know not what to do.


[ Jane gives her a Rich Morning Gown. Jane. Here Is your Ladyships Morning Gown.


Nell. Where are my Eyes? they are Dazzled, this is a Robe fit for an Angel to
wear. Bless me, I shall not know my self.

(Aside.)
[She rises from her Bed. Maid. Your Ladyships Chocolate's ready.


Nell. Mercy on me what is that? it is some Garment sure! well put it on then
Sweetheart.


Maid. Put it on Madam, I have taken it off, it is ready to Drink.


Nell. Drink says she, I mean, put it by, I don't care for Drinking.


Enter Footboy and Cook. Cook. Now go I like a Bear to the stake, to know what
her Scurvy Ladyship will have for Breakfast, how many Rascally names shall I be
called!


Footboy. You are mistaken, there never was such a change, she is nothing but
Goodness, you will be overjoyed to hear her.


Cook. You arch Dog! I Will lug you by the Ears Sirrah, if you play the Rogue
with me.


[Ex. Footboy. Maid. Oh! John Cook you will be out of your wits to see this
change, oh! she is the sweetest Lady.


Cook. What the Devil are they all mad!


Jane. Madam, here is the Cook come to know what your Ladyship will please to
have for Breakfast.


Nell. Oh Lord there is a fine Cook: He looks like one of your Gentlefolks.
(Aside.) I am very hungry indeed, honest Man, pray get me a Rashar upon the
Coals and a piece of one Milk Cheese, and some White-bread.


Jane. Here Is Humility! what a Conversion's here?


Cook. Hey what is to do here! what the Devil's the matter! my Head turns
round: where am I? honest Man! I looked for Rogue or Rascal at the best.


Jane. Oh Madam that will lie heavy upon your Ladiship's Stomach: he will get you
some rare dainty Dish immediately.


Nell. Do then e'ne what twoo't good Mr. Cook.


Cook. Good Lord! good Mr. Cook! Ohcis a sweet Lady. [Aside. And by my troth I
will Madam presently. I Am overjoyed! methinks I could leap out of my Skin.

[Enter the Butler. Chip, kiss me, prithee kiss me I say: I Am out of my Wits.
We have the rarest Lady, the sweetest Lady that ever Men served: go and be
astonished as I am.


Butler. You shamming Rogue, I think you are out of your Wits indeed; what the
Devil does he mean? the Maid looks merrily too.


Jane. Chip the Butler is come Madam to know what your Ladyship will please to
drink: Come near Mr. Chip. You Will be amazed.

[Aside.
Nell. Good Mr. Chip, let me have some good Small Beer when my Breakfast comes
up.


Butler. Mr. Chip! Mr. Chip! I shall be turned into a Stone with amazement.
Madam, would not your Ladyship please to have a Glass of Frontinuque or
Lachrimoe?


Nell. Oh me, what hard Names are these! I must not betray my self. [Aside.]
Yes if you will Mr. Butler.


Butler. Heaven and Earth, I Am amazed! here will be Joy! go get you in and be
happy as I am. Joy, Joy.

[Ex. Butler.
Enter Coachman. Coachm. The Cook has been bantring I do know not how long Do
the Butler banter too?


Jane. Madam the Coachman is at the Door.


Enter Coachman. Nell. Come in good Coachman.


Coachm. Will your Ladyship please to take the Air to day? if so, which will
you have the Coach or the Chariot?


Nell. Thank you, which you think convenient.


Coachm. O Heaven! the Sky will fall, what is this?

[He goes out smiling.
Nell. Sure I cannot be awake, how overjoyed they all seem to wait on me, Oh
notable Cunning man, I Am the happiest Woman, I grow giddy with my happiness,
I Will retire and give Heaven thanks for this, (aside.) where is the
Common Prayer Book?


Jane. Common Prayer Book! here is a turn, what will Non-con say? your Ladyship
has none, but here is my Master's.


[She takes it. Exeunt. Nell. Thank you Sweet heart.


Enter Sir Richard and his two Friends from hunting. Sir Richard. How do you
like this Gentlemen? we have had a smart turn or two.


[All the Servants flock about him. Roll. I never followed fleeter Dogs that
had any Noses.


Long. I hate your mere fleet Hounds, that kill presently in view, it is as bad
as coursing.


Sir Richard. Methinks there is Pleasure to see 'em hit it off at a fault, as
well as there is in a hard riding.


Long. And to see the Doubles, and Shifts an old Hare will make for her Life,
faith beyond a Fox.


Sir Richard. I spare my Horses to day which made me come home so soon, but to
morrow you shall try my Fox-hounds, and then Gentlemen I will lead you a dance.


Butler. Sir, here is the rarest News.


Jane. There never was the like, Sir you will be overjoyed and amazed.


Sir Richard. What are ye mad? what is the matter with you?


Enter the Coachman, and three or four Servants more jumping in. Coachm. How
now? what is the matter? here is a new Face in my Family, what all joy and mirth,
what does it mean, or is it a Christmas Gambal?


Butler. Oh Sir the Family is turned topsie turvy, we are almost distracted, we
are the happiest People.


Jane. I cannot contain my self, my self, my Lady, Sir my Lady.


Sir Richard. what is she dead?


Butler. Dead! no Heaven forfend, she is the best Lady, the swetest Lady.


Jane. Oh the dearest, kindest Lady, you are the happiest man Sir living.


Butler. Never was such a change, such a miracle, why, all the House will lay
down their Lives for her.


Jane. She has obliged us all the kindliest and the sweetliest, we'll live and
dye with her.


All the Servants Speak together. Ay, all, all of us, long live her Ladyship,
God bless her Ladyship.


Maid. Oh She Is the best Lady in the World, I could kiss the Ground she goes on.


Butler. I could lick the Dirt of her Shoes, she is the sweetest, gentliest
natured Lady breathing.


Sir Richard. Why? give me Breath a little, what do you mean?


Butler. It Is true, it is true Sir, go into her your self, and be witness of her
strange change, none but Heaven could work such a miracle.


Sir Richard. This is most astonishing, Gentlemen you see how I am surprised,
if you please to dress, I Will in and see the meaning of this Wonder, I Am
impatient till I go in.


Jane. Sir you may put off your Boots and dress first, She Is at Prayers with
the Common Prayer Book in her Closet, and will be private for half an hour.


Sir Richard. How, Common Prayer Book? new Prodygies! what miraculous Power has
been here at work? my Friends, if this be true I shall rejoice indeed.


Butler. True, ay it is true enough, long live Sir Richard and his Lady, Heaven
bless 'em both, Huzah, Huzah.


[Ex. omnes. The End of the second Act.
ACT the THIRD.
Nell and Jane. NELL I well remember the Cunning-man warned me to bear all out
with Confidence, or worse he said would follow, I am ashamed and know not what
to do with all this Ceremony; I am amazed, and out of my Senses, I looked in the
Glass, and saw a gay fine thing I knew not, methought my Face was not at all
like that I have seen at Home, in a piece of a Looking Glass fastened upon the
Cupboard. But great Ladies they say have flattering Glasses, that show them far
unlike themselves, whilst Poor-folks Glasses show them as they are.


Enter Sir Richard. Jane. Oh Madam, Here Is my Master now returned from Hunting.


Nell. Oh Heaven! this goodly Gentleman my Husband?


Sir. Richard. My Dear; I am extremely pleased to see my Family thus
transformed to all the joy imaginable, which as they tell me, you have created
in them.


Nell. Sir I shall be always overjoyed, at what gives you delight, and shall be
ever glad, if I can please your Family.


Sir. Richard. Oh Divine Softness! this Gentleness of thine transports me.


Nell. Alas Sir what am I? I am ashamed of my own meanness, I shall be glad to
be a Fellow Servant here, you are Lord of all Sir.


Sir Richard. Dear Creature, if thou continuest thus, I had rather be Lord of
thee than of the Indies.


Nell. You make me Blush Sir; I hope I shall have Grace never to be otherwise.


Sir. Richard. I am astonished, can this be Real?


[She kneels. Nell. All that is good above can witness for me: I am in earnest.


Sir Richard. Rise sweetest Creature, what has wrought this admirable change?


Nell. Alas! I never did offend you nor any of them.


Sir Richard. [Aside.] What does she mean? I have not known a Calm within my
House these six Weeks: but Yesternight you triumphed over me, and all my
Family, was not that offense?


Nell. It was not I; I sure was not my self then, indeed, I find my self so
much changed, I scarce know who I am?


Sir Richard. It is a blessed change.


Nell. It is so, I have that pleasure in my mind; that every thing I see
ravishes me with joy, such a sweet House, such brave Furniture, such ready
loving Servants, and so noble, so sweet a Lord and Master: Oh Father! I know
not where I am methinks!


Sir Richard. Heaven be thanked for this: I would not lose this Dear, this
Blessed Creature, for all the Wealth and Power that King's can boast off.


Nell. It Is sure Heaven's doing: and I can never have another mind, it is
wondrous that I ever had methinks.


Sir Richard. And I am confirmed: Joy! Joy! Oh heart make room for Joy! it will
overwhelm you else, upon my knees I kiss this dear, dear hand: Thou art so rare
a Creature, I shall worship thee.


Nell. Nay hold Sir! pray Sir! what do you do? Indeed you make me cry, I am
so ashamed, oh Father! so brave a Gentleman to kneel to me? it is My duty to do
that.


Sir Richard. Hold heart, I say contain thy self, where are my Friends, my
Servants, call them all, and let them be witnesses of my happiness.


Nell. O Lord! how shall I behave my self before these Gentlefolks.


Sir Richard. And will thou never child, nor quarrel with me more, and show
thy fury amongst my Servants?


Nell. I Will cut my Tongue out first, oh Lord I chidel.


Sir Richard. I have one thing more, will thou go to Church with me, and leave
the sniveling Conventicle?


Nell. Yes surely Sir, I Will do what e're you please, I Will have nothing to do
with Fanatics, they are a Melancholy ill conditioned People.


Sir Richard. Sure it was an Angel spoke in thee, thou art the best of all thy
Sex, I hope thou art convinced that the Phanatick Chaplain was drunk last
night; would thou let me discard him, there wants nothing then to complete my
happiness.


Nell. Yes, Heaven forbid else: what shall I disobey my Lord and Master?


Sir Richard. Let me embrace my Dear, my Love, and prithee seal this promise
with a kiss.


Nell. Oh rare sweet man! he smells all over like a Nosegay, Heaven preserve my
wits.

(Aside.)
Enter Rowland, Longmore, and all the Servants. Sir Richard. Gentlemen, behold
this day, here stands the hapstiest man that the sun shines on, I am
transported beyond my senses: I hear proclaim a Jubilee to all my Family these
three months: Summon in all the Country, I Will keep open house, send for my
Fiddlers, Hoboys, Trumpets, and all Instruments of joy: let all the Bells in the
Hundred Ring, let the Seeples Rock, and let the Ringers Drink enough: here
stands the best of Women and of Wives, the kindest and the gentlest Mistress to
her Servants: and she that has given me all this happiness.


Nell. Lord Sir, you put me out of countenance, I blush, I Am sorry that I ever
angered any of you, indeed i will do you all the good I can, I should be to blame
else.


All the Servants cry. God bless my Lady, long live her Ladyship, we'll live
and dye with her.


Sir Richard. My Dear you did affront these Gentlemen last night, speak to them.


Nell. Indeed, I was not my self, i am sorry that I was uncivil, I hope in time
to mend.


Roll. We are your Ladyships humble Servants, and largely must partake of the
great joy, which now possesses all the Family.


Longm. Joy, Joy, to both the Bridegroom and the Bride; it is a new Wedding.


Sir. Richard. It Is true; some three months since, I did espouse her Body, this
day I Am married to her mind, this is a perfect Wedding: go send for all my
Tenants, there shall be naught but Feasts and Revels here.


Nell. This will be a brave time, how I shall joy to see it.


[A flourish of Music. Without enter Servingman. Serve. Man. Your Fiddlers were
going by, having heard that my Lady would not allow of Music, but I called them
in.


Sir Richard. You did well; my Dear, do you not love Music?


Nell. Oh! I love nothing better.


Sir Richard. That Is my joy, my life; call in my Music: Gentlemen, i will make
them sing a very unfashionable song to you, in the praise of marriage, a piece
of my own Poetry in my last Wives time.

[They come in and sing the Song. Let the vain Spark consume his store,
In keeping an expensive Whore,
For others to employ.
For all those snares, and baits he pays,
Which she for other Gallants lays,
And he must least enjoy.
Keep Whores then as perfumes you wear;
Of which your selves have the least share:
Of other's claps partake.
Your Bodies bring to the Surgeons hands,
And to the Scriveners all your Lands:
And give her your last Stake.
While with reason we bless the Fate,
That brings us to the Marriage State,
The only happy Life.
The chief enjoyment in a King,
No Wealth, no Power, such joy can bring;
As does a Wife, a tender Wife.
There can be no true Friend beside,
So often does interest divide;
But they are so conjoined.
By this most Sacred Rite are grown,
That they are not one flesh alone,
But they are both one Mind.

Butler. Sir, here are some Country Neighbors hearing of the happy
conversion, desire to dance before you.


Sir Richard. Let them come in.

[They Dance.
Enter Noddy wrapped up in his Night Cap. Noddy. What means this lewd noise;
this most profane abominable Jigging? Lady I must rebuke thee, in pure zeal, I
must rebuke thee, I cannot bear it.


Sir Richard. Thou insolent fool be silent, I will have no Phanaticks, no
Law-Breakers within my Walls, especially no Hypocrites, you were drunk last
night you Swine.


Noddy. I defy thy words, it was a fit, I was taken with a fit, a grievous
fit: Lady, what say you, are you become like one of the wicked ones?


Nell. I will obey my Lord and Master, his will is mine.


Sir Richard. Retire to your Chamber, you shall not be seen this day, to morrow
I will tell you more of my mind.


Noddy. What Is this, she is not as she was; Iampridem mulieri ne credas ne
mortuoe quidem; I may not go, I will not retire, my Zeal tells me, I must
rebuke thee, and I will thunder in thine Ears.


Sir Richard. Turn him out.


Noddy. I may not go, I say I will not retire, my Zeal transporteth me, I am
become furious.


[They thrust him out. Enter my Ladies Father. Sir Richard. Father you are
welcome, doubly welcome; I sent for you upon another occasion than I now find:
Heaven has ordered things another way, we are all transported with excess of
joy, my Dear salute your Father.


Nell. Good Heaven! my Father; what means this sure? I shall be distracted, but
I must bear it out.

(Aside.)
She kneels to ask Blessing. Father. What means this, it is superstitious, and
favors of Idolatry?


Sir Richard. It Is nothing but her great Humility.


Father. I like it not.


[The Cook knocks to Dinner. Nell. I shall endeavor then to please you Sir.


Father. It Is well, I am glad to see you and my Son-in-Law well; but what is the
cause of this unwonted joy of this transport?


Sir Richard. The Cook has knocked to Dinner: let us in, you there shall have a
full account, and be a joyful witness of our Happiness.


[Ex. omnes. Scene changes to Jobson's House. Lady. Was ever Woman yet so
miserable? I cannot make one in the Village yet acknowledge me, they sure are
all of the Conspiracy, this wicked Husband of mine has laid a Develish Plot
against me, I for the present must submit that I may get an opportunity into my
hands for my Design, here comes a Rogue I will have strangled, but now I yield.


Enter Jobson. Iobson. Come on Nell, art come to thy self yet?


Lady. Ay I thank you, I wonder what I ailed, this Cunningman put Powder in my
Drink most certainly.


Iobson. Powder! the Brewer put good store of powder of malt in it that is all,
Powder Quo' she, ha, ha, ha!


Lady. I never was so days of my Life.


Iobson. Was so, no, nor I hope never will be so again, to put me to the
trouble of strapping you so Devilishly.


Lady. I Will have that Right hand cut off, for that you were unmercifull to
bruise me so.

(aside.)
Iobson. Why? Faith I Am sorry for it, but it did you a great deal of good tho,
why? you would have been mad and called your self my Lady Lovemore till this
time else, why come, why don't you Spin?


Lady. I cannot you have bruised my Arms so, when they are well I Will work hard.


Iobson. That Is my good Girl, I Will buy some Plums to make thee a minced Pie,
come let us be friends, faith kiss and friends.


Lady. Oh cursed impudent Rascal, what does he say?

[She turns from him.
Iobson. Nay, prithee now, faith I will not strap thee so no more.


Lady. I must stay till this be well, before I forget it.


Iobson. Ounz if you go to that, I will kiss you.


[He kisses her and smacks. Lady. Oh soh, how the Beast stinks of Cheese,
Leather-apron, Pitch, Grease, foul Linen and old Shoes.

(aside.)
Enter the Country Fellow with two or three more with him. C. Fellow. Why
Neighbor Iobson? Why don't you put on your Bond, and go to the Hall-place?


Iobson. Why, what is the matter?


C. Fellow. Matter! why? there is such a change, they are all out of their Wits,
there is open House to be kept there till Candlemas, all the Tennants are sent
for, why you will loose your Dinner.


Lady. What do I hear? here is fine work indeed.

(Aside.)
Iobson. What the Devil is to do there? is that Damned Jade my Lady dead?


C. Fellow. Nay I know not, we shall hear when I go, the Bells ring, do you not
hear 'em? and there is order given for all the Parishes hereabouts to ring,
Barrels of Beer, Flaggons of Brandy and Money for the Ringers, and Alms to all
the Poor are ordered.


Lady. Death what is this? Here Is a rout when I am gone, did they pack me away
for this, I shall have all my Estate run out.


C. Fellow Come, come, make have.


Lady. Husband, shall not I go with you?


Iobson. Why, what all'st thou? Did not I tell thee I would strap thee
yesterday for desiring to go, art thou at it again?


Lady. What does this Villain mean by strapping, and yesterday?


Iobson. What a Pox, I have been married but six weeks, and you long to make me
a Cuckold already, stay at home there is good cold Pie in the Cupboard. But I Will
trust you no more with strong Beer Huzwife.


Lady. Well, you will have your way, I must do what you bid me.


Iobson. That Is a good Wench, God be with you, come on Neighbors.

[Ex. Jobson and Neighbor.
Lady. And I Will be there not long after you, sure I shall meet some there that
are not of the Conspiracy.

[Ex. Lady.
Scene Sir Richard's House, Sir Richard and all the Company at Dinner. [Serv.
Men whispers Sir Richard. Father. Son-in-Law Sir Richard I long to see Mr.
Noddy, methinks I did not eat the meat with Appetite since he did not bless the
Creature.


Sir Richard. Sir to tell you the truth he is very sick, he was drunk last
night, I am sorry to say it to you.


Father. Son-in-Law, I know you are a Lukewarm Formalist of the Episcopal way,
and you are glad to say it, but I believe it not.


Sir Richard. Pardon me Sir, I do not use to lie, the whole Family are
witnesses of it.


Father. I fear me they are all too much of the same Batch, will my Daughter
affirm this?


Nell. I must needs say what Sir Richard says.


Father. Come Gentlemen, perhaps he might e're he was aware be overtaken with
the Creature, he might be transported perhaps with Zeal and so the sooner
overtaken, and so it is not a sin, but a frailty in him that is Righteous: I
must see him.


Sir Richard. But it is a sin in us: very good Doctrine.

Though Zeal stand Sentry at the Gate of Sin,
Yet all that have the Word pass freely In.

[Ex. Footboy and brings in Noddy. Father. I am sorry to see you ill Mr. Noddy.


Noddy. Bless your Worship.


Father. Now we have dined let him give Thanks.


[ Noddy is humming and haughing in order to his Grace. Enter Lady. Lady.
Here Is a Riot and a Rout, you sirrah, Butler, Rogue.


Butler. Why how now? what a Pox is to do with you? who are you?


Lady. Impudent Varlet! don't you know your Lady?


Butler. Why how now you Queen? here, turn this Madwoman out of Doors.


[She strikes him. Lady. S' Life you Rascal take that sirrah, why sirrah? don't
you know your Lady? my Lady Lovemore, hands off, I am she you Rogue.


She flings the Glass in his Face which he had in his hands, and Servingman
lays hold on her. Serve. Why you faucy Jade? Huzwife have a care here is a good
pump, we'll cool your Courage for you.


Lady. Why Jane? Huzwife, sure you do not forget me?


Jane. Forget thee Woman! why? I never remembeed thee, I never saw thee in my
Life.


Lady. Oh wicked Slut! I Will give thee cause to remember me.


[She pulls her by the Head-Clothes. Jane. Oh murder! murder! help, help!


Sir Richard. How now, what Uproar's there?


Lady. You Jade, Lettice! what will not you know me neither? I Will make you know
your Lady.


[Lady strikes her, she breaks from her. Maid. Help, help!


Sir Richard. What Is to do there?


Butler. Why? here is a Madwoman falls a beating and lugging us, and calls her
self my Lady.


Sir Richard. Some Christmas frolic, some Neighbor has a mind to be merry.


Nell I warrant it is a Bess of Bedlam.


Lady. Oh here is my Chaplain, sure he is not of the Conspiracy against me! Mr.
Noddy! Thou art an holy man.


Noddy. I am so Woman, what would thou have with me?


Lady. What are you blind? do you not know me because I have these filthy
Clothes on? look on my Face, I am the most injured, the most abused Lady that
ever yet drew Breath.


Noddy. Lady! Woman, art thou not mad in truth?


Lady. Why sirrah, are not you my Chaplain? You base Villain, did not I lay on
the Plaster to your shoulders, and a red hot Pan to your Head last Night, and
saved your Life?


Noddy. Oh Heaven! this is the Sorceress that bewitched me this Night, lay hold
on her she is a Witch.


Father. Why Master Noddy? art not thou troubled in Spirit? it is surely a
Trick, a Gambal.


Lady. My Father here! I am so distracted with my grieff and sufferings I did
not see you, but now I must embrace you, and never leave you till you succor
and revenge me, for the most Barbarous usage that ever Lady suffered: speak,
will you not speak to me, Honored Father?


Father. I know thee not, I fear thou art some lewd woman; be gone, hands off.


Lady. Nay, then I am desperately miserable.


Noddy. She a is Witch and did confess it to me, I will have her burnt.


Sir Richard. Stand by, there must be something more than ordinary in this
Business.


[Ex. Noddy and Father. Longm. What the Devil can this mean?


Roll. What should it mean? some poor Madwoman is got loose.


Sir Richard. Why? I never saw thee, thou my Wife? poor Creature I pity thee.


Lady. Nay it is in vain to hope for Redress from thee, thou wicked Contriver of
all my Misery.


Nell. How I am amazed! is that I there in my Clothes, that have made this
disturbance? oh Father! I am here in these fine Clothes, how can this be? and
yet to my thinking I am there, I am so confounded and affrighted, that I shall
begin to wish I were with Zekell Iobson again.


Lady. To whom shall I apply my self? or whither shall I fly? oh Heaven what
do I see! Is not that I there in my Gown and Petticoat I wore yesterday? how
can it be when I am here? I can not be in two places at once.


Noddy. Surely no, unless thou were a Bird, but come Sir let us be deaf to
these vile Gambals and retire.


Sir Richard. Poor Creature she is stark mad.


Lady. What in the Devil's Name, was I here before I came hither? that I should
come hither, and find that I was here before I came is the strangest thing to
me, let me look in this Glass, Oh Heaven I am confounded, I know not my self,
if that be I that is represented in the Glass, I never saw my self before.


Sir Richard. What incoherent madness is this?


Enter Jobson. Lady pointing to Nell. There, there is the Devil in my likeness,
that has robbed me of my Countenance, S' Life is he here.


Iobson. Ay that must be the Devil that is in your Likeness, remember my strap
you Queen.


Lady. How inevitably wretched am I?


Nell. O Lord, I am afraid my Husband will beat me that am on yonder side?


Iobson. Gallants pray pardon her, she was drinking with a Conjurer last Night,
and she has been mad ever since, and says she is my Lady Lovemore.


Sir Richard. Poor Woman take care of her, and do not hurt her, she may be
cured of this.


Iobson. Cured, yes and please your Worship, you shall see me cure her with
this strap immediately, Huzwife do you see this?


Nell. Hold, hold, pray do not beat me Zekel.


Sir Richard. What says my Dear? Does she insect thee with madness too?


Nell. I am not well, my head turns round.


[The Maids go in with Nell. Enter Butler. Sir Richard. Wait on your Lady in.


Iobson. I beseech your Worship don't take it ill of me, she shall never
trouble you more.


Sir Richard. Take her home and use her kindly, I Will send my Physician to her
shall cure her I warrant you.


Iobson. Thank your Worship most kindly, come Nell.


[ Ex. Jobson and Nell. Lady. What will become of me?


Sir Richard. How now, where is my Father-in-Law?


Butler. He has taken Coach, he bid me tell you he loves no Christmas-Gambals,
and he took this for one.


Longm. It is a very odd one take it all together, as e're I saw?


Roll. Methought there was a Method in her madness, she did not know her self
in the Glass.


Longm. And if you observed, your Lady uttered some strange words.


Sir Richard. She did so, which did very much amaze me.


Roll. But that I have not much Belief in Magic, I should have odd thoughts of
this.


Sir Richard. Now you have put me in mind of it, there was something in the
latter part of this story, very strange and very surprising.


Enter Servingman. Serve. M. Sir, the Doctor who called here last Night, desires
a word in private with you on earnest Business.


Sir Richard. What can this mean? bring him to me.


Enter Doctor. [Ex. Rowland, Longmore and Servants. Roll. We'll take a turn and
wait on you suddenly.


Sir Richard. Your servant Gentlemen, be gone Servants.


Doctor. Low on my knees I fall, and beg your pardon, and put my Life into your
hands, I have exercised my art of Magic on your Lady, I know you are an
honorable Man, and will not take my Life, who might have still concealed it
from you, if I had pleased.


Sir Richard. Methinks you have brought me to a glimpse of misery, too great
for me to bear, is all my happiness come only to a short Live'd Vision and a
Dream?


Doctor. Sir I beseech you fear not, if there be any harm toward you, I freely
give you leave to hang me.


Sir Richard. Can Magic bring me any thing but ill?


Doctor. I never yet did mischief by my Art, there are Aerial Spirits I command
which do no hurt, they are Sylphs.


Sir Richard. What have you done? inform me.


Doctor. I have so transformed your Lady's face, she seems to be the Cobler's
Wife, and charmed the face of Iobson's Wife into the Likeness of your Ladies,
and when the storm arose, my Spirits removed each to the others Bed.


Sir Richard. Oh miserable wretch thou have undone me, I am fallen from the top
of all my hopes, and still must have a most tempestuous Wife, that fury whom I
never yet knew quiet, since the first minute I had her.


Doctor. If that were all, I could continue the Charm for both their Lives.


Sir Richard. I Will have no happiness from Hell, all my Blessings must come from
Heaven, and I will hang you if you will not undo your Charm, let the event be
what it will.


Doctor. I Will do it in a moment, and perhaps you will find it is the luckiest
moment of your Life, I can well assure you your Lady will prove the best of
Wives, give me your pardon Sir.


Sir Richard. Upon condition you undo the Charm I will.


Doctor. It shall be done, and you shall find all my Praediction true.


Sir Richard. Hold there is yet a material thing, which I must know.


Doctor. I will resolve you Sir.


Sir Richard. May be to Crown this mischief I have suffered, the Cobbler may
perhaps have made me Cuckold.


Doct. Then cut this Throat, for e're she was transported to that Bed; the
Cobbler was got up, besides he has done naught but beat her ever since, and you
are like to reap the benefit of his Labor.


Sir Richard. Go about the business, i will send for him and her.

[Exeunt.
Enter Butler, and Noddy. Butler. I can assure you, there is no staying for you
in this Family; my Lady has yielded all up to my Mistress's power.


Noddy. Why look thee Edward Chip; thou art mistaken in me, I can conform in
many things, rather than leave so good a House and so good People.


Butler. Where there is so much eating.

(aside.)
Noddy. At least though I cannot conform inwardly, I will conform outwardly;
and that will do your business as well, give us some Wine, they shall see what
I can do.


Enter Servingman, Cook, and all the Servants. Butler. With all my heart,
Gentlemen you are come in good time to be merry with Mr. Noddy.


Noddy. Ay God I Am in a merry humor.


Cook. Here Is a pretty turn.


Noddy. Give me a Beer-glass, here is the King and all the Royal Family, Huzzah:
to 'ther, here is Sir Richard Lovemore's, huzzah: the to'ther, nay Gad take me
give me a third, here is my Ladies, huzzah: pledge me all of you, and let every
Bumper be a facer thus.


[They drink off their Glasses, and Huzzah. Servm. Is that a facer, faith it is
very pretty.


Noddy. Nounz I Will have you to know, I can be as good Company as e're a he that
wears a head.

He that wears a brave Soul, and dares honestly do,
He Is a Herald to himself and a Godfather too.

Butler. Here Is a Transformation.


Noddy. Come faith, let us sing a Catch.

A Boat, a Boat, haste to the Ferry,
For we come over to be merry;
To laugh and Quaff, and drink old Sherry.

Enter Sir Richard by the Door. Sir Richard. Here Is a turn; here is a
Hypocritical Rogue, I think we shall have Ovid's Metamorphosis in this House,
but I am too much concerned to mind this Diversion: but where are my Friends I
wonder.

[Ex. Sir Richard.
Enter the Wassalers, and sing their Wassel Song. [ Noddy joins with them in the
Song. Butler. Come on Friends, and fall heartily to our Christmas Gambals after
a Rouse or two.

[They fall a drinking.
Roll. What you tell us Sir has much of wonder in it.


Long. It is prodigious if it prove true.


Noddy. Come now, lets have a dance.


[ Noddy kisses and ruffles the Wassalers. Butler. Now Parson let us have one
Christmass-Gambal, we'll play the Blacksmith.


Noddy. Ay come with all my heart, how is that?


Butler. Come we'll show you, you shall down first, here, lie down upon this
form.


Noddy. Ay come, come, Gad I Am almost drunk.


Butler. Come I Will play the Smith and blow the Bellows, ye are my two
Journey-men.


They beat upon him like two Smiths with Boots, he roars out Murder, Murder,
all the Company laugh, and they leave off when Sir Richard speaks. Cook. Serve.
m. We are ready.


Butler. Be sure you lay him on.


Enter the Cobbler. Sir Richard. How now Iobson, have you brought your Wife with
you?


Iobson. Yes and please your Worship, she is here at the Door, a little from the
House she fell into a Swoon'd, I thought I never should have recovered her. But
at last a tweak or two by the Nose, and half a Dozen straps has done the
Business, here where are you Huswife, come in?


[ Butler holds the Candle. Sir Richard. Light there it is very dark.


[He lets fall the Candle and Servingman takes it up. Enter Lady. Butler. O
Heaven and Earth, what is this my Lady?


Iobson. What does he say, is my Wife changed to my Lady?


[The Servants run away and sneek. Cook. I thought the other was too good to be
my Lady.


Lady, to Sir Richard. You are the Person I have most offended to whom I must
confess I have been the worst of Women, bating I have kept my Body undefiled,
it has pleased Heaven to punish me most sharply for my Crimes, Heaven left me
to suffer under the power of Enchantment, I am fully sensible of all my faults,
and since I abhor 'em and detest my self for them, I hope that Heaven and you
will pardon me, here will I kneel and fix till I have procured yours at least,
and Heaven be witness to my Resolutions. The Remnant of my Life shall be
employed in duty and observance of you, if you will vouchsafe to take me to your
Bosom.


Sir Richard. Rise Madam I forgive you, and if you be sincere, you will make me
happier than all the Enjoyments of the world could do.


Iobson. What a pox must I lose my Wife thus? where the Devil is my to'ther
wife? here is conjuring indeed.


Enter Jane and Maid. Jane. Oh Sir the strangest accident has happened, it has
amazed us, and almost bereft us of our senses, my Lady was in so great a swound
we thought she had been dead.


Maid. And when she came to her self, she proved another woman.


Sir Richard. Ha, ha, that is a Bull indeed.


Jane. She is so changed I know her not, I never saw her face before, O Lord is
this my Lady!


Maid. I shall be beaten again.


Jane. I thought our happiness was too great to last.


Lady. Fear not my Servants, Sir let 'em all be called in, I will give ease and
quiet to your Family, I am a hearty Penitent, good Servants I acknowledge I
have All the Servants and Teunants come in. been too harsh and rigorous to ye
all, but Heaven has given me another mind, it shall be my endeavor to make ye
all happy. I Am sure no Mistress shall outdoe me in Kindness and in Gentleness.


Sir Richard. Hold in this mind, thou will be the best of women, and I the
happiest of men, the other was false and short lived Joy, but this I hope will
long continue.


Lady. May Heaven wreak all its vengeance on me if once I alter from this
Resolution, or e're I contradict your will again.


Sir Richard. This is a day of wonders.


Enter Nell. Nell. My head turns round I must go home, why Zekel what are you
there?


Iobson. Look you, look you now, hey day, what a Devil, what is that Queen my
wife? here is a rare business, Gad I dare not come near her.


Sir Richard. It Is rare indeed, we have all this day been under the Power of
Enchantment, to which Heaven knows there was not my least Consent. Heaven often
turns even the malice of Devils to produce a good end, this is no doubt a happy
change, I Will celebrate it with all the joy I did proclaim, for my late short
lived Vision.


Lady. To me it is happier than my Birthday was.


Sir Richard. Now Madam since you have resigned your will to me, where is the
Chaplain?


Butler. Here Mr. Noddy where are you? he is in the Buttery, here come in.


Noddy Enters Drunk. Sir Richard. Behold your saint here.


Lady. I do confess my self in the wrong.


Sir Richard. Go Hypocrite, I discard thee.


Noddy. Discard me for what, Nounz I Will conform, what a Pox do you mean?


Sir Richard. Thou wicked Wretch, thou scandal to thy own Profession, would
thou maliciously thus bring one on ours, by thinking to conform by being
vicious? detested Beast be gone, carry him to his Chamber, our Church condemns
all such Debauchery, though such vile wretches would bring a scandal on it.
Give him ten Pound, and in the Morning send him packing: here Iobson take they
fine wife.


[They carry him out. Iobson. But hold Sir, did not your Worship Sir make me a
Cuckold under the Rose?


Sir Richard. No upon my honor nor ever kissed her till I came from hunting, she
was my Bedfellow for a little while, and for this happy change, I Will give thee
with her five hundred Pound, buy store of Lether, and be my Shoemaker, I Will
help thee to all the Custom in the Country.


Iobson. He boys I am a Prince, a Prince, come hither Nell, come to thine own
dear Zekel, I Will never strap thee more.


Nell. Indeed I have been in such a dream, I Am quite weary of it.


Iobson kneels. Can your good Ladyship forgive my strapping your good Ladyship
so very much.


[To the Lady. Lady. With all my heart, the joy of this blessed change makes all
things good again.


Nell. Forsooth Madam will you please to take your Clothes, and let me have
mine again.


Lady. No thou shall keep 'em, and I Will preserve thine as Relics.


Sir Richard. Gentlemen let me present you to my Wife.


Roll. We wish your Ladyship all the joy your heart can hope for.


Long. May all your Life be ever happy Madam.


Lady. Gentlemen pray pardon me, and I think I was a Madwoman last night,
Heaven now has brought me to my self.


Sir Richard. No more of this Subject.

Proclaim my joys in every place aloud,
Bonfires surround my house, let the Bells ring,
Let Us dance and revel, feast, carouze and sing.

All the Servants cry. Long live my Lady and Sir Richard.


Jobson. Now let me speak if I may be so bold,
Naught but the Devil sure can tame a Scold.

THE EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. Jevon, and Mrs. Percyval. Mr. Ievon. COme Nell, prithee while I
dress for the Dance speak something in my behalf to these Friends of mine here,
for I Am sure they are all Friends.


Mrs. Percyval. Who I Zekel? Oh Lord you know, I wand dacity when I come before
great Folks.


Mr. Ievon. How now Huzwife dare you dispute it? remember my strap you Queen.


Mrs. Percyval. Hold, hold good Husband, I Will try what I can do?


To the People. Oh most curious fine Gentlefolks, I hope you will pardon me for
being so bold, but never stir, I Will never let you alone till I find you kind to
poor Zekel, for he is as pretty a Fellow as e're strapp'd Wife.


Mr. Ievon. Why how now, what a Pox is all this for? what speak an Epilogue in
Prose? (the Devil) I could have done that my self you foolish Jade. For example
now,

Addresses himself to the Audience, and makes a long Banter, and goes off,
after that he speaks. Look you Huzwife, there is as good Prose as any is in
England, but I must have it in Verse, all beaten Verse, away with it.


Mrs. Percyval. YOU cannot sure ungenerously refuse,
The first address of a young tender muse;
So modest that she never attempts to fly,
Up to the lofty pitch of Comedy:
Farce is her aim, the persons low and mean,
Humble the language homely it the seen.
Let this poor shrub secure from censure grow,
For all the Critiques stormy rage too low:
If you will your thundering indignation vent,
Let it on lofty bumbast all be spent.
Applauded nonsense where sad lovers pine,
And Hero's rant and fight and cry and whine;
And the old buskins empty swelling strains,
That cracks the Player's lungs and Poet's brains.
These, these are triumphs for your forces fit,
But who upon a Droll e're spent his wit;
Or crititiz'd on Merry Andrew yet?
Whilst all the lofty Frigots you attacque,
Pray let in safety pass this little smack.
Your shot against us will wast 'ith empty sky,
The whistling bullets over our heads will fly;
We lie so low your Canon mount too high.

FINIS.

