THE BOOK OF CONSCIENCE opened and read.

In a Sermon preached at the Spittle on Easter-Tuesday, being April 12. 1642.

By JOHN JACKSON*

LONDON, Printed by F. K. for R. M. and are to be sold by Daniel Milbourne at
the New Exchange, and at the holy Lamb in little Britain. 1642.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Sr RICHARD GURNY Knight and Baronet, Lord Major of the
City of London, together with the Right Worshipful the Sheriffs and Aldermen
of the same City, The continual feast of a good Conscience be ever multiplied.
SIRS,
MAy it please you, The Scottish King being imprisoned in Mortimers hole,
comforted himself and deceived the sorrows of his bondage, by scraping the
Story of Christ crucified upon the walls, with his nails: Even so God writes
the laws, and dictates of Conscience upon a wall, the wall of Conscience,
Murus aheneus; so as all the rules of Divinity, of nature, of nations, and of
positive laws, as they relate to Conscience, are like the handwriting, Dan. 5.
herbae Parietariae, wall-flowers. And they are written and sculptured with a
nail too; but a more stiff and potent nail then that of the Scottish King.
Judge not ex ungue, etc. but by a retrograde crisis, judge the nail by the
finger, which is expressly called digitus Dei, Exodus 31. 18. and what can the
nail of such a finger be, but unguis adamantinus, as it is adjuncted, Jer. 17.
1? and need it has to be no less, unless the pen be more soft then the
paper: for if our hearts be hearts of adamant, Zech. 7. 12. then the style that
writes characters upon them had need be a pen of iron, and the nail of an
Adamant.

I present here your Worthinesses with a book; a book, as St Bernard
ingeniously, for the rectifying whereof, all other books are written; I except
not the very Book of books it self. For there are four Books written by
God, for the sons of men, which are thus to be classed and ordered. They are
either the Books of Grace, or of Nature. The Books of Grace are either
outwar^ or inward. The outward Book of Grace is the holy Bible. The inward
Book of Grace is the holy Spirit, the great Doctor of the Church. The outward
book of nature is the world, or book of the Creatures, which is God unfolded.
The inward Book of nature is this very book, whose seals I have, in the
ensuing Tra^^a^e, broke open, the Book of Conscience, so called Apoc. 20. 12.

That which one likes another will dislike; some have been such gross
flatterers as to commend Nero, and some again such detractors as to dispraise
Trajan; one man's pottage will be another coloquintida; the same son was
Rachels Ben-oni and Jacob's Benjamin. The same in scription on the plaster
which made Belshazzar quiver for fear, made Darius, his successor quav^r for
joy. The very same faculty of Conscience which entertaines and feasts one,
starves or choakes another.

And the Commentary must not look for a better lot then the Text, nor the
Sermon then the Theme. I know too well the ways of this town, to expect
other: but for the publishing hereof, I have this excuse, which must prevail
with an ingenuous nature, that I have been mastered by entreaties thereunto,
so as if there be any error, in that regard, their burden must be my case.

Now I pray God keep your Honor, and Worships, in grace, unto glory, and that
as the best means* conducing to that end, you here exercise your selves to
keep a good Conscience in all things, both toward God, and toward man.

Your Hon. and Worcester. humble, and faithful Servant, in the things of God, and
Christ, JOHN JACKSON.

The readings of the Text of Prove. 15. ver. 15.
Hebr.
(...) Graec.
(...). Sept. (...) Symmac^. Lat.
Secura men's quasi juge convivium. Vulg. Cujus bilaris est animus convivium est
continuum. Transl. Chald. Paraphr. Cor bonum quasi juge covivium. Munst. Secura
men's, hoc est, bona conscientia, etc. Stephanus. Jucundus cord, convivio jugi.
Vata^^. Joci^dus cord, etc. Pagniu. Laeta men's perpetuum (...), C^stalio.etc.
Angl.
A good Conscience is a continual feast. He that is of a merry heart has a
continual feast. THE BOOK OF CONSCIENCE opened and read.
Tho Text, PROVE. 15. 15. A good Conscience is a continual feast.
THe reading of this Text must first be set straight, ere any progress can be
made, lest we seem to make a Sermon upon a text, which will not bear the
burden of the discourse.

It was read long in our English Bibles thus, A good conscience is a continual
feast; till King James of blessed memory, as another Ptolomy Philadelphus,
assembled together above 40. rare Linguists and Divines, to perfect us a new
translation, where it is read thus, He that is of a merry heart, has a
continual feast. Which reading is subordinate to the former: for there can be
no sincere or lasting mirth of heart, but such as proceeds from, and is
superstructed upon the foundation of a good conscience. Besides, if we will
drink water out of the fount, it is in the Hebrew neither a merry heart, nor a
good conscience, (...)
but a good heart is a continual feast: nor can it otherwise be, because there
is no peculiar word, in the Hebrew tongue, to denote this particular faculty
of soul, which we call Conscience, but the general word (...)
HEART. And even in the now Testament where there are proper words for it, yet
the general word HEART is used, 1 John Epist. chap. 3. and 20. (...).
If our heart condemn us, etc. there HEART stands for CONSCIENCE; for we know
it to be the proper effect of conscience to condemn or absolve: which of it
self seems to determine, that Conscience is not a peculiar and distinct
faculty of the soul, as understanding, will, and memory, etc. are, but the soul
reflecting and recoyling upon it self. Which being prefaced, we may safely read
it, as you have heard, A good Conscience is a continual feast.

Wherein every word does fitly constitute a part: for first here is the
subject, Conscience. Secondly, and adjunct of excellency joined unto it, Good.
Thirdly the praedicate, A Feast. Lastly an adjunct of perpetuity joined to
that, Continual.

And in the orderly pursuance of these four parts there will fall out to be
handled four points of very high and necessary concernment, in the life and
conversation of every Christian: namely,

First this:

That every man has a certain Genius associated to his soul, to wit,
Conscience*

Secondly this:

That by the grace of conversion, there is a divine quality stamped and
imprinted upon the natural Conscience, which is, Goodness.

Thirdly this:

That Conscience thus qualified with goodness is a Feast.

Lastly this:

That this feast of a good Conscience is not only for a time, but for
eternity, not only a long, but a continual feast.

These ought to be handled plainly, but Theologically, And this will we do, if
God permit, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 3.

The first Point.
There is a certain inmate placed by God, and associated to the soul, called
Conscience.

We say indeed in vulgar speech, that such a man has no conscience, or is a
man of no conscience, but that is but a Catechrestical form of language, like
that of the Italians, who when they speak of some notable deperdite wretch,
say, He Is a man without a soul; and like that of holy Scripture, which says of
some men, that (...)
they have no heart. But to speak properly, and as the thing is, there is no
man, be he never so lost, and reprobate minded, but has a natural^ Conscience.
A natural body may as easily walk^ in the Sun without a shadow, as the soul can
in the light of natural reason, or of the word of God, without the
reverberations and ecchoings of Conscience. Hear Conscientiam a diis
immortalibus accepimus (...) divelli a nobis non ^otest. Cic. p^o Cluent.
Tullies divinity in this point: We have each of us received from the immortal
God a conscience, which can by no means be separated from us. Many for the more
wholesome air, or better soil, have changed their place of abode; and others
to converse with God and themselves, have abandoned the society of men, and
dwelt in wildernesses and solitary retireme^ts, where Satyrs have danced, and
Ostriches dwelt; yea and many have been so hacknied and tired out with the
miseries of this life, which like an heavy pack, and an ill saddle have wrung
their backs, that they have leaped out of the pan into the fire, and shifted
their souls from their bodies; but there was never any yet could shift
Conscience from the soul. Nero shifted from chamber to chamber, but still his
mother Agrippina's ghost seemed to pursue him. Bessus in Plutarch was chased by
himself too, but still the swallows seemed to charter his crime. There Is
scarce any thing in nature so small, and contemptible, but can make a
separation betwixt the soul and the body; a hair in a draught of milk, did it
to Luc^^; a ^^ie, to Adrian; a kick of Nero's heel, to Poppea; lice to Herod;
worms to Antiochus; mice, and rats to Hatto, Bishop of Mentz; a mere conceit,
a thought, a fancy, to thousands: but there is no gulf so deep, no precipice
so steep, no sword so sharp, no not that sword which can divide between the
marrow and the bone, which can make the conscience sever it self from the
soul, but still

Juve^. Sat. 13.
Nocte dieque suum gestant in pectore testem.

That is,

Wake men, or rest,
Within their breast
Conscience will be a guest.
To proceed then; What is this thing we call Conscience, and wherein does the
power and efficacy of it consist?

Answ. It has been long said, Conscience is a thousand witnesses; and its as
truly said, Conscience has a thousand definitions and descriptions. A man
would think there were much Conscience in the world, to consider all the
books, that are written of the nature and cases of Conscience. It may be said
of them, as S. John closes up his Gospel, The world would scarce contain the
books that should be written, if all were printed, that has been said, talked,
disputed, preached, written of Conscience. And yet as little may be spread and
dilated into much, so may much also be contracted into little. As a great
mountain may produce only a little mouse, so a little nut-shell may hold great
Iliads.

Whosoever then understands these three Greek words, (...), and (...) or these
three Latin words, Lex, Index and Judex, or these three English words, a Law,
a Witness, a Judge, is in a good way of proficiencie, to understand the nature
and essence of Conscience: for in the execution of these three acts Conscience
officiateth, and dispatches its whole duty.

For first, Conscience is a Law, or a fair tablet, when in is engraven, by a
divine hand, those truths an^ principles which move i^ and set it a working.
Which principles are either natural, or acquired; and hereupon comes in the
distinction of Conscience natural and illuminated. And these principles being
preserved and kept in the Conscience, they are as Landmarks to her to sail
by, and as a law to her to live by; in which regard this first act of
Conscience is by the Greeks called (...), that is, the records or conservation
of right. (...) ^om. ^. ver. ^5. the Apostle calls it Lex scripta in cordibus,
The law written in our hearts.

For the second, Conscience is a Witness or Evidence, declaring and proving
the truth, whether the party standing at the bar^e has done contrary or
according to that law: for if the fact agree and hold measure with that law
which Conscience tendered, then it is Excusing witness, or a witness pro; if
otherwise, then it is an Accusing witness, or a witness con; in which regard,
this second act of Conscience is by the Greeks called (...), that is, a
Science with or together; and Saint Paul in the same text Romans 2. 15.
expresses both these testimonies, Their Conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts ACCUSING or EXCUSING; and thus Conscience is Index, a sign or
token.

For the third, Conscience is also Judex, an upright and impartial Judge,
comparing together the law, and the fact in the pursuance of a right sentence,
and out of that collation causing to result either a sentence of absolution
(the white stone, Revel. 2. 17.) if the fact agree with the law, or a sentence
of condemnation ( Mos erar antiquis, niveis, atrisq^ lapillis, bis damnare
r^os, illis absolvere culpa. Ovid. Met.
the black stone) if the law and fact jar and disagree. This act the Greeks
call (...), and to this judiciary act of Conscience belongs that text of Saint
John, 1. epist. 3. chap. 20. ver. If our hearts condemn us, etc. and Saint
Chrysostom glossing upon Psalm. 4. 4. Commune with your own hearts, etc. bids
us, (...)
. Erect the tribunal of Conscience. The sum thus far is thus much:
Conscience is a Law propounding the rule to walk by, a Witness to give in
evidence for matter of fact, and a Judge to give sentence according to the
evidence.

Another way to find out the very quidditative nature and being of Conscience
may take the rise and hint from that Text, 1 Pet. 3. 21. (...).
The answer of a good Conscience, as there the Apostle phraseth it; so as
Conscience is a response or return to three several queries.

The first question is de jure, touching the Law or right; as, What is the rule
or principle by which I am to be directed in this or that case, what to do and
what not to do? Unto which question, Conscience is an answer by reading the
letter of the Law, and opening the code or book, Apoc. 20. 12. and declaring
the law written in the heart.

The second question is de facto, touching the fact, thus, The law indeed
appears, but how have thou complied in practice with this Law, by doing
according to it? Unto which question, Conscience is an answer in the language
of Achan, Josh. 7. 20. Thus and thus have I done.

The third question is de applicatione juris and facti, touching the
commensuration of the fact with the law, and the application of the one to the
other, thus, what reward now remains, or what retribution is to be expected?
and unto this question, Conscience is an Answer, in the words of God to Cain,
Genesis 4. 7. If thou have done well, shall thou not be accepted? and if ill, sin
lies at the door.

The last way to find out the nature of Conscience is by defining it to a
practical reasoning or argumentation, in which are all the three parts of a
formal Syllogism; in the major proposition is the law of Conscience, in the
minor or assumption lies the evidence or witness, in the conclusion lies the
sentence or judgment.

Examples.

What rule or precept teaches in general, that instances and examples
illustrate in special; to which end let us here subnect two examples, the
former of an evil, and accusing Conscience, the latter of a good, and accusing
one.

Let Adam the first of men be substituted for the former.

1. In the day thou eatest of the tree of knowledge, thou shall surely die,
Genesis 2. 17. There Is the law, or proposition of this practical Syllogism,
there Conscience is an answer to question touching right.

2. But I did eat thereof: so runs his confession, Genesis 3* ver. 12. there
Conscience is a witness, a thousand witnesses. That Is the assumption of the
Syllogism, or an answer to the question touching the fact.

3. Therefore, I am become mortal, I must dye, Genesis 5. 5. there his Conscience
was a Judge giving sentence of condemnation. That Is the Conclusion of the
Syllogism, or an answer to the question touching the application of the law,
and fact together.

The Application of this first Point.
It were very incongruous not to use Application, while we are treating of
Conscience, whose vigor and force consists in Application, and the best
improvement and use of it is to provoke every man to take out the lesson of
that wise Greek, (...). Solo^
Know thy self; which short saying do but Christianize, and there can be no
better divinity: O Christian man know and consider thy self, learn not to
undervalue even man in thee; know thine own dignity and excellency; know that
within the narrow room of thy breast there is seated a faculty which is both a
law, a witness, and a judge; which can make unanswerable Syllogismes, and can
out of strong premises bring undeniable conclusions. (...)
Pythagoras his rule was truly divine, to bid a man in the first place revere
himself, and be mostly ashamed of himself: and (...);
another of the same rank and classis, He that is not ashamed of himself, how
shall he blush before him who knows nothing? And reason enforces thus much:
for every man is most wronged by his own offense, and every man must be
arraigned both by and before his own Conscience, and therefore surely no
tribunal next the judgment seat of God himself, ought to be so dreadful to
a man, as the Areopagita of his own heart, which can at once allege and plead
Law, produce witness and give judgment.

A learned Gentleman in a project of his conjoyneth and subordinateth these two
propositions; Sr. Francis Bacon in his new Atlantis.
the former is this, that Chastity makes a man reverence himself; the latter
is this, that self awe or reverence, next true Religion and the fear of God,
is the chiefest bridle to hold us in from villainy and sin. Which certainly
is most true: for if we did not shamefully underprize our selves, how could we
by lust, covetousness, intemperance, and the like, so degrade man in our
selves, and defile that humane nature which God vouchsafed to take into union
with his own divinity? how could we give a birthright for a mess of Lentils,
transgress for a morsel of bread, stake gold to a counter, put down an
eternal, and immortal soul to a blast of fame, an husk of pleasure, a
glow-worme of knowledge? But now though this be very true of chastity, yet
change the subject of the first proposition, and enunciate it of Conscience and
see how it appears; first then, Conscience, that lawyer, and witness, and
judge of conscience, that Triumvir, and Trismegist of Conscience makes a man
reverence and fear himself. Secondly, this selfe-reverence, which proceeds from
conscience, and the trinity of offices in it, is a threefold cord to whip us
from sin, and a threefold bond to tie us to virtue*

That which Solomon speaks Eccles. 10. ver. 20. may be hither fitly applied,
Curse not the King, etc. for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that
which has wings shall tell the matter; What bird may this be, but the little
brest-bird and chest-bird of Conscience? There is this story in Diogenes
Laertius, Xenocrates was one day walking in his garden, when a sparrow pursued
by some hawke or bird of the prey, for shelter flew into the bosom of the
Philosopher, and being bid to put out his little foster-bird, he answered, no:
for it is a most unworthy thing to betray a guest. Turpissimum est prodere
hospitem.
Moralize it thus, this Falcon or hawke represents every sinner, and wicked
person which hunts and pursues poor Conscience; this sparrow thus pursued,
represents Conscience, which whilst the foxes have holes, and the birds
nests, has not where to roust it self, till it take shelter in the breast of
Xenocrates, of some pious and conscientious person, which holds it an unworthy
thing to chase thence such a guest. And hitherto of this.

The second Point.
By Grace and regeneration, there is a divine quality and character imprinted
upon the natural Conscience, which is Goodness.
AS a noble and virtuous woman, giving laws to her own sex, enacted that a
woman, when she came to the age of thirty years, should then lay down the title
of fair, and take up the title of good: so when any man or woman is actually
called and sanctified, their Conscience then ought to be divested of the title
of a natural Conscience, and assume the title of a good Conscience. Therefore
ye shall scarcely observe the name and word of Conscience stand alone in
Scripture, but commonly there is some title and Epithet of excellency joined
with it, as (...).
either a pure Conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. or a (...).
fair and beautiful Conscience, Heb. 13. 18. or a (...).
Conscience without offense, Acts 24. 16. or a (...).
good Conscience, as here and else where, 1 Pet. 3. 21.

Now a good Conscience is either Honest bona, and pacate bona.
honestly good, or peaceably good; for Goodness imprints its character upon
the Conscience in these two qualities, purity and peace; or integrity and
tranquillity; or which still is the same, in uprightness and quietness. What
S. James affirms of supernall wisdom, chap. 3. verse. 17. That it is first
pure, then peaceable; The very same two properties are the essential adjuncts
of a good conscience. A Conscience quietly good may be viciously evil, and a
Conscience troubledly evil, may be honestly good; and therefore to constitute
a conscience perfectly and fully good, both purity and peace are required; the
violation of the purity and integrity of conscience, is to be referred to the
evil of sin, and the violation of the calm and tranquillity of conscience
is to be referred to the evil of punishment; yea the greater the light of
conscience, the greater is the sin, and the greater trouble of conscience,
the greater is the misery. The point you see is a clear truth, we will
therefore be brief in the explication of it, that we may be large in the
application.

The application of the Doctrine.
Follow therefore either S. Paul's rule, or S. Paul's example; his rule shows
what should be done, and his example what may be done. His rule we have 1 Timothy
1. 19. Have faith, and a good conscience. And again, Chap. 3. ver. 9. Having
the mystery of faith in a pure conscience. His practice we have frequently
inculcated both in the Acts and his Epistles, hear a harmony, or little
concordance, I have in all good conscience served God until this day, Acts 23.
1. Again, And herein do I exercise my self, to have a conscience without
offense toward God and toward man, Acts 24. 16. And again, I speak the truth
in Christ, I lie not, my conscience bearing me witness, Romans 9. 1. And again,
For our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. And
again, I thank God, whom I serve from mine Elders, with a pure conscience, 2 Timothy 1. 3. And yet again, Pray for us, for we are assured we have a good
conscience in all things, Hebr. 13. 18. A good conscience you see is S. Paul's
recognizance it is his boasting: for tw^ things he is observed mo^^ to glory
in, his Suffering^ and his Conscience; to ra^tle his chains, and displa^ his
conscience; it is h^^ flag he hangs out, (...).
his sige in every Epistle, so (...) writes, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 17.

Now this exercise keeping a good conscien^ stands in two things, according to
the premise^ distinction of a good conscience into pure and peac^able, which
distinction (...) as a key-stone to this arcra The former is how to ractifie
the vicious conscience, and the latter how to pacify the troubled conscience;
or how to cleanse the impure, and how to salve the wounded conscience: two
points of most necessary and daily use in practical divinity.

And in rectifying of conscience, due regard must be had to two things; first,
Jus, the right or law of conscience. Secondly, Vis, the force or strength of
conscience (two several words made up, and elemented of the same three letters
by an easy metathesis, or transposition of letters.)

First then, I. Jus Conscientia.
let a man acquaint himself thoroughly with that which must be the rule and law
of conscience; for it is no matter how strong and active conscience be, if it
be not first right informed, and then the stronger the better, otherwise the
stronger the worse; a lame man who keeps his way, shall outg^. a swift runner
that wanders out of his way; he who once has strayed, the more he hastens the
more he wanders and errs. Every science and art proceeds by a rule; the noble
and liberal sciences of Arithmetic, Geometry, Astron^my, Music, have their
numbers, figures, balances, squires, compasses, lines; even the poor sweaty
mechanics cannot be without their rules, yards, squares, etc. much less can
conscience, dainty, precise, exact conscience, which ought to be as
levell-handed in her cases as the men of Gibeah in the book of Judges, who
could throw stones at an haire-breadth, can she I say, want her rule and
measure to proceed by, when in the circumstancing and individuation of every
action, she must lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to the
plumb-line? Isai. 28. 17.

This law or line of conscience is fourfold.

1. Divine law, 1. Jus Divinum.
which is the will of God revealed in Scripture, is the proper and adequate
rule of conscience; it has of it self an adnate privilege to bind conscience,
and wheresoever it holds out to man a light to show him his duty, it does
withal tie such a bond of obedience upon the conscience, as no creature is
able to release.

2. The law of Nature is also a good rule of conscience: 2. Jus (...).
for that natural light and engraffed instinct written in our hearts, shows us
also what is to be done, and what to be avoided. That there is a God; that this
God is to be worshipped; that we ought to live honestly, hurt no body, give
every one his own, do as we would be done to; these and such like are the
dictates and statutes of the law of nature, and do bind conscience.

3. The law of Nations also, 3. Jus Gentium.
which is brought in by the common consent of all people: for that was never
false or wrong which all the whole world calls truth and right. Humane nature
was yet never so much at a loss, as that a right opinion of what is just, and
equal should quite perish from the earth. The division of things, and
appropriation of them to their owner, the fair usage of Ambassadors, etc. are
draughts of the law of all nations, and do likewise bind conscience.

Lastly, 4. Jus positivum.
Positive laws, whether they be Ecclesiastical, or Civil, do lie strong
bands and ties upon Conscience, as well as either the laws of God, or of
nature, or of nations. A thing is said to be of positive law, when it is thus,
or so, not of any intrinsecall necessity, arising out of the particular essence
of the thing, but may either be, or not be, and when it is, may either continue
or cease, by humane imposition. And even such laws as these, while they are
not contrary, but subordinate unto, and commensurate with the divine law, have
an obligatory power over Conscience; not that any law of man has of and from
it self any connate power to overawe Conscience, nor can the Conscience
subject her self to the jurisdiction of any creature, without Idolatry, but it
has an adnate power rather, to wit, as it receives influence, and virtue from
Gods law, which commands us to obey every lawful ordinance of man for
Conscience sake.

Next regard thus had to the Law of Conscience, II. Vis Con^entiae.
the second respect must be to the force of Conscience: for though Conscience
be never so well principled and illuminated, yet if it be dull and slegmatick,
without vigor and force to put things in execution, it is but as a fire of
straw which has light without heat, or as a wel-shap'd horse without metal.

Now the force of Conscience consists in Obligation, both in tying a man from
that which Conscience judges sinful, and tying him to that which Conscience
judges right. In which respect, take notice what high language the Scripture
adapteth to express this thing; as calling a man in relation to this work of
Conscience, a debtor, Romans 1. 14. a servant, Romans 6. 16. bound, Acts 20. 22.
constrained, ^ Cor. 5. 14. necessitated, 1 Cor. 9. 17. so as a man cannot
otherwise do^, Acts 4. 20.

Such is the strength and virtue of Conscience, that an action by its own
nature indifferent, it can make bad or good, and an Action in it self good, it
can corrupt and make naught. Only an action which is ill and naught in it self,
it cannot make good.

Yea such is the validity of Conscience that it binds in some cases even when
it erres: for Conscience judging that to be unlawful which is lawful, binds
to abstain from that lawful, Romans 14. 14. and Conscience judging that to be
debt and necessary, which is only allowable and arbitrary, binds to do that
arbitrary thing, Romans 14. 5.

So as both these requisites taken in together, and a due proportionable
contemperation made thereof, to wit, of both j^s and vis, the light and heat,
the good eyes and lustly limbs of Conscience, do constitute a rectified
conscience, fit to go about that work and labor, for which God created such a
faculty, and seated it in the soul of man. A law without sufficient force to
execute it, is but a dead letter, and lets a man lie like the lame creeple at
the pooles side, seeing the bath, but wanting strength to step into it. And
force without law is but a riot, serving for no better use, then Sampsons
brawny wrists, without his eyes, to pull an old house over our head, to crush
us. Only a Conscience informedly strong is she.

When then, O Christian man, or woman, thou perceivest thy Conscience to be in
this frame, and plight, that it is legal^y valiant, silence not her voice,
muzzle not her mouth. Say rather as Cant. 2. 1^. Let me see thy countenance,
let me hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and thy counten^nce is comely.
Shake off that dull and lethargick sloth, and stupidity which is upon it,
either in stimulation to good, or repression from evil. Cry aloud, and say,
Hoe, Conscience, conscience, up and be doing, and the Lord shall be with thee.
To day is a Chancery-day: to thine office: Tell me first what is the law in such
and such a point. Secondly, tell me what correspondence for matter of fact have
I held with that law. Be a true witness either to excuse me, if I have done
well, or accuse me, if evil.

Lastly, give right sentence, and play the part of a just Judge in either
condemning or absolving me, that thus judging my self, I may not be judged of
the Lord.

And having thus showed the method of rectifying the erring conscience, let us
now also declare the right order of pacifying the troubled conscience. Upon
which point before we fall directly, we must needs put a difference (for a
difference there is) betwixt sickness of fancy, when the thoughts are
distracted, and drawn aside from off pleasing and contenting objects, and do
wholly fasten and sit abrood on sad and dreadful things, and true formal
trouble of mind, which always gathers to an head, either by reason of
solicitation to sin, or remorse for sin: distemper of fancy is commonly a wild
and unreasonable thing, and swerves from that we call judgment, or recta
ratio; Or if it fasten upon sin, which sometimes it does, its troubled either
with scruples, which is no sin, or with some general notions and idea's of
transgression, without due shame and sorrow for particular lapses; or with
motes and gnats more then with beams and camels. Now rational and congruous
trouble of Conscience, when God wounds and will heal, is charactered by this,
that it is neither so superficial for sin in general, as not to have an
aspect upon particular miscarriages and misdemeanors, nor so superstitious of
particulars, as not to regard the general taint, and depravednesse of nature
also. The best report or book-case hereof is in Psalm. 51. which is (...)
the chief of the seven penitentials. There DAVID rightly pressed in his
spirit and panged in his Conscience in deed, lays the ponitentiall axe first
to the root of the tree, confessi^^ that which was the spawne and brood-mother
of all his actual wickedness, Behold I was shapen in iniquite, and in sin did
my mother conceive me, ver. 5. and then that very sin in particular which had
been as a thief in the candle, or an obstruction in the liver, to gangrene,
and waste all the quiet and peace of his mind: Deliver me from
bloud-guiltiness, O God, etc verse. 14.

This being premised by way of a praecognitum, the Method it self now
follows, which consists in a certain Scale or Ladder: The several grades or
steps whereof are these.

1. There can be no sound peace of Conscience till we be atoned and reconciled
to God: for Conscience is as Gods setting-dog, or as his Sergeant which will
not take off the arrest till its Master be satisfied.

2. Neither can there be any agreement or atonement with God, without pardon of
sin. God will not be reconciled to any man lite pendente, till the fault which
caused the variance be forgiven.

3. Nor can there be any remission without satisfaction: for if the Salvation
or damnation of all mankind laid thereupon, God will not, cannot be unjust to
himself, to be kind to us.

4. No satisfaction neither will serve the turn, but such as is porportionable
to the sault: for it is the very Motto of Justice, Noxae poena par esto.
Let the punishment be equal to the damage, the payment to the debt.

5. No satisfaction can be proportionable, which is not infinite, because our
sins are committed against a Majesty absolutely infinite, and they also are as
near infinite as number, or heinousness can make them: and if there could be
another infinite besides. God, I would say it were the sins of the world.

6. No infinite satisfaction can be made but by a person of infinite
excellency and worth, whose personal dignity must give such a tincture of
price, and value to his sufferings, as what he suffered in a short time, was
equivalent to what all the world should have suffered for ever and ever.

7. We never knew, nor heard of; never did any Historian tell, or Prophet
foretell of any such worthy person, but JESUS CHRIST, who was Godman; man to
suffer, God to overcome in suffering; man to dye, God to rise again.

8. That price, though most sufficient in it self, yet not effectual to us,
if not applied and made our own. The best cordial comforts not, if not taken.
The most magisterial plaster heales not, if not applied to the fore.

9. As that Application is made on Gods part, by imputation, so on our part by
faith. God must impute the righteousness of Christ unto us, and we must receive
it from God, by the hand of faith.

10. And that faith is but equivocall faith, and no true, justifying,
salvificall faith, which does not work by love; love to God in holiness, love
to man in righteousness, and love to our selves in sobriety.

These are the several ingredients into this balm of Gilead, according to the
dispensatory of Divinity. These are the several degrees of this Ladder, whose
foot, like Jacob's, stands upon earth, and the top reaches heaven. Let us
recollect them by an analyticall method, and so conclude this point. I.
Practice charity, and that is a sign of true faith. 2. Have faith, and you
shall be able to apply on your part, what God imputes on his. 3. Apply, and
what is sufficient in it self, shall be effectual to you. 4. Nothing is
sufficient but Jesus Christ. 5. The reason of his sufficiency is from the
dignity, and excellency of his person. 6. Nor yet were his person of
sufficient dignity, if it were not in him an infinite dignity. 7. And being
infinite, the ransom and satisfaction is proportion to the fault. 8. And upon
this satisfaction, must needs follow remission. 9. And having remission, there
follows also reconciliation with God. 10. And being reconciled with God, we
shall have tranquillity of mind, and peace of Conscience, passing all
understanding.

The third Point.
Conscience thus qualified with the goodness both of Integrity and
tranquillity is a Feast.

NOt any fantastical feast, as if a man should dream of a furnished table,
and be hungry when he wakens; nor any Tropologicall, Metaphorical feast, a
feast by way of similitude and proportion only, as Christ is called the Joh.
6. 48.
bread of Life, and the holy Ghost the Joh. 7. 38.
water of Life: but a true real feast, a feast properly so called, junketting
both the mind and the body, and presenting them both with cheer becoming a
feast.



as Conscience of evil done causes fear and expectation of some evil to be
suffered, and that fear again causes many a thought-sick hour, indigestive
meal, lancke cheeks, trembling joints, marrowless bones, restless nights,
etc. so Conscience of good done makes a (...)
cheerful and a merry heart, and a cheerful heart causes good health, Prove.
17. 22. and makes a cheerful countenance, Pro. 15. 13. and not only this,
but when night comes, which is the one (...). ^iut.
half of our life, that we are to lay us down and take our rest, then also
consciousnesse of a day well spent rocks us, and drops a sleepy silence upon
our eyes: and sleep, you know, is the stay and the prop of the Microcosme, it
is thoughts charm, it is digestions careful nurse, etc.

It is a rule in Art, and we see it true in hourly Experience; Contraries
placed together do mutually illustrate each other: Venus her mole was a foil
to her beauty; The tender eyes of Leah did the more commend the beauty of
Rachel unto Jacob; The seven lean kine in Pharaoh's dream did eat up the
seven fat kine: So the ill-favored, raw-bon'd leanenesse, the biting and
gnawing of an ill Conscience, will let us better see the festivity of a good
Conscience.

An evil Conscience is a Mar. 9. 46.
WORM, a brest-worm, gnawing upon the soul, with the teeth of bloodless fear,
of wrinckled sorrow, of self-consuming care, and of sad despair: and this
worm is not like that which St Paul shook off into the fire; it is a
Salamander, and will live, and gnaw in the fire of hell; its a worm that never
dies, a continual worm, and that is the gall of bitterness, wormewooding
even hell it self. Well were it with wicked men, if (as Herod, Acts 12. 23. and
Antiochus, a Macc. 9. 9^ were devoured and eaten up with worms) this worm
would dispatch them. But it is that Prove. 30.
sanguisuga, ever sucking, and never full, ever gnawing, but never killing,
ever eating, but never devouring; and that with a deadly tooth too, every bit
worse then ten thousand deaths, and yet (...) Lyps. Polit. lib. 1. cap. 5.
(...) gravius, quia (...) morte.
not unto death.

Compare now these two texts together, A good Conscience is a FEAST, An ill
one, is a WORM: a good one a plentiful feast, an ill one, an hungry gnawing
worm: a good one a continual feast, an ill one, a continual, a never dying
worm: and do they not answer one another, as in water face answers face^?

And these two points, 1. That an ill Conscience is a worm, and 2. a good
Conscience a feast, being thus entorted and wreathed together; Let us stretch
out the further illustration of them, by enquiring into the learning and
Confessions of the Heathen, who had no inky Divinity, no other books of
Theology, but the books of Conscience, no other law, but the Law written in
their hearts. For be it granted that the word is best when it is pure, and not
dilute or mingled; or if mingled, then with nothing but Heb. 4. 2.
faith; and that humane learning being brought to illustrate divine, is for the
most part but as painture in Church-windowes, making the glass less clear
and transparent: yet some points there are (and this is one of those some)
wherein it persuades much to show that Divinity is the same with the law of
nature (...) will only gleane an handful out of an whole field.

Surdo (...)
it does whip and lash her with secret but more smarting strokes; the whip of
cords that Christ made is not to be compared to it; all the discipline on a
good Friday in the Church of Rome, comes short of it: before sin, it is (...)
fraenum, a bridle; after sin, it is flagrum, a whip.

Prometheus may have the next place: Prometheus stole fire from heaven; his
punishment was, that he was tied to the mountain Caucasus, where a rapacious
Eagle did day and night feed upon his heart. The moral is: Prometheus
represents every sinner that is injurious against heaven; his affixing to the
mountain Caucasus, shows that it is as possible to carry away the mountain,
as to escape the vengeance of God, when he will punish; the Eagle feeding upon
his heart, is the angor of conscience which does (...)*
eat and devour the very heart of man as a Gangrene in the flesh.

(...) his (...).
snake-tressed sisters, Alecto, Megera, and Tisiphone, three dismal Elves,
which the Poets make the daughters of Nox and Acheron, and call them Furies,
which indeed are nothing else, but the (...) Poet.
torments of a wicked mind, when the pains and throws of conscience are upon it.

Orestes in the Tragedy, (...)
O wretched Orestes, says an interlocutor in the Tragedy, what disease
afflicts thee? Orestes makes answer upon the stage, (...)
Conscience (quoth he:) O the grievous disease of Conscience is upon me! Now
contrarily for a good conscience.

Bias the Philosopher, and one of the wise men of Greece, being asked the way
to a (...).
life without fear and trouble, gave this answer, A (...).
right conscience.

Periander (who was one of them) being asked, what was the (...)
greatest freedom and liberty? answered thus, A (...)
good conscience.

Socrates (the wisest man of them all, all three mentioned by Stobaeus) being
asked how men might most live without (...)
disquiet and trouble? answered, If they were conscious of no evil within
themselves. Now these all were Grecians. Let us enquire into the Latins, and
see what they say. Even the very same.

Eighthly then, Horace: Epist. ad Meco^a^.
-- Hic ^urus aheneus este Nil conscire sibi. --

A wall of brass it is
To be conscious of n^ught amiss.
Ninthly, let Tully speak for all the rest, Conscien^a rect^e ^o^^ta^^, maxi^^^
con^o^atio est (...)
An upright Conscience is the greatest consolation in adversity; to his friend
Torquatus in his familiar Epistles.

Again, Vacare culpa, maximum est solatium. Epist. 7. ad Maurium.
To be innocent and without fault, is the greatest solace.

And again, Conscientia been actae vit^ and multorum benefactorum recordatio
est jucuadissima. Cato major.
Conscience of a well-spent life, and of many good deeds, is the sweetest thing
in the world.

Let us hear him speak once more, Magnae est vis co^scientiae (...) utramque
partem, (...) neque timeant qui nihil commiserint, and poe^^m semper an^e
oculos vers^ri putent, qui peccarint.
Great is the force of Conscience both ways, so as neither can they fear who
have done nothing amiss, nor those that have sinned, want punishment ever
before their eyes.

Thus have I gathered you some few instances out of many, from the mouths of
the very heathen, (who also must be heard when they speak truth) to declare
that the dictates of the law of Nature and Divinity are all one, in averring
that, An ill conscience and facinorous is an Grave pondus. Cic. 3. de (...).
deor.
heavy burden, a Flagru^^. ^ypsius.
lash, an (...) Plut. de anim^ ^^anquil.
ulcer in the flesh, Magn^^ ^^eatrum. Cic. 2. Tuscul.
a worm. And that a good conscience is a Mark 9.
great Theater, a Hor. ad Mec^n. (...)
wall of brass, a continual feast.

^ Application.
Let us 1 Cor. 5. 8. (...)
keep the feast, as the Apostle exhorts us. You know how ill it was taken in
the Gospel, that those that were bid to the feast did make (...)
excuses, and did not come. And how ill alos it was taken, that Vasthi refused
to Esther 1.
come to Ahasueru^ his feast. It is no better then rude unmannerliness to sit
sullen at a feast, and not to feed liberally. A man may have great riches, and
yet not use them, but only live poorly, that he may die rich; so may a man
questionless have a good and upright Conscience, and yet not feed and feast so
on it as he might do, if the fault was not wholly his own.

Why, Quest.
what is this feasting? and how is it performed?

It is when a man by thinking, Answ.
and meditating, and praying, and such like, does ^ Tim. 1. (...)
stir up those heart^ cheering joys of a good conscience, which lie consopite,
and buried under the ashes either of natural, or religious melancholy, and
which do as duly belong, and of right appertain to a good Conscience, as an
inheritance to the owner. And therefore on the other side, if God measure out
earthly contents unto us with a more thrifty and sparing hand, and deny us our
desires in some (and perhaps many) things; yet if he have given unto us upright
and peaceful consciences, we have reason^ acknowledge that Go^ has dealt
bountifully and graciously with his servants: for that is a thing worthy of all
acceptance, although it should come alone; it is a feast, and what repining
nature is that, which will not be satisfied with a feast?

A good conscience has all the chief requisites to a feast in it: for,

(...) Joh^s ^ 8.
Master and Governor of this feast, and so deserves to be; for by his blood is
the Conscience both Heb. 9. 14.
purified and pacified.

Prove. 9.
Maidens in Wisdoms feast, and Mat. 22.
Servants in the Mariage-feast.

that God should so regard us, fixed hopes and longings for further both
purity, and peace of conscience, trust in God joined with watchfulness in our
selves, that the conscience so established be not again either defiled or
disquieted with sin, flaming affections of love and thankfulness to God, who
has given us sense of a present, and hope of a future good Conscience, Lastly,
singular delight which it takes in Saint Paul's Act. ^. 4. 16.
exercise, to keep a good conscience in all things, etc.

Fourthly, the music o^ minstrelsie of this feast, is not upon the Non
^^^^dula sed cor.
harp-strings, but upon the heart strings. This is our 2 Cor. ^. ^2.
rejoicing, even the testimony of a good Conscience. So that in all things it
holds the condition of a feast.

Which being so, what art thou, O more then desperate man, who can or dare
account either the least sin, small; or one sin, few; seeing that as one leak
sinks a ship, one fly spoils a box of ointment, one gourd a whole pot of
pottage, one Achan trouble all Israel, one lick of honey endanger the life of
Jonathan, one would kill Goliath, as well as three and twenty did Caesar, one
Dalilah do Sampson as much despite as all the Philistines; so one sin,
wittingly and willingly committed, may exceedingly both defile and disquiet the
Conscience: And of such an one (though it be but one) may truly be said that of
the Bartas in the Columns.
Poet:

No number, but more then a number, yet
Potentially in all, and all in it,
Root of all number, and of infinite.
Cases of Conscience.

It remains now that I satisfy two cases, that may here be put; the one by a
wicked, the other by a godly man.

The former says, My conscience I am sure is wicked, and yet for all that it
is not troubled; I use not to stick at those sins which are called Peccata
vastantia conscientiam.
sins wasting Conscience; and yet I feel not this worm.

The latter says, I labor (with Saint Paul) to have a conscience void of
offense both toward God and toward men, and yet I taste not of this feast.
The former boasts of the calmness of a vicious conscience, and the other
complains of the trouble of an honest Conscience. I will satisfy both.

First then to the Hardy-Cnute, whose heart ( Leviathan-like, Job 41. 22.) is
as hard as stone, and as firm as the nether millstone, esteeming iron as straw,
and brass as rotten wood, that is, either feels not, or acknowledges not the
worm of Conscience; To him, I say;

great punishment by Exodus cap. 7. 8. 9.
Moses in the Old Testament: and a Cauterized Conscience by Saint Paul in the
New Testament. 1 Timothy 4. 2.


The sick man is then in a deplorable condition, when he feels no pain; and so
is the Conscience of a sinner when it feels not the worm.

Do not Non glorietur accinctus aeque a^ discinctus.
boast till the putting off thine armor: No man Nescimus qui^ serus ferat
^esper.
knows what the evening of his life may bring forth, I have seen the wicked
flourish like a green bay tree, both in outward prosperity, and inward peace;
and I have seen him also ere he have gone off the stage, not able to put to
silence the voice of despair.

mirth can deaf and out-voy Conscience; tell me truly, Is not sometimes even
in laughter thy heart sorrowful? does not the flea of Conscience sometime
awaken thee? yes I warrant thee: If Democritus had but the anatomizing of thee,
he would find melancholy in thee too, that is We shall feel sometime a terror
coming upon us, the Physicians say it is melancholy, but I say it is the power
of God. M^ Gree^^.
Conscience. Now these more light and seldom gnawings, are but as a Prologue
before a Tragedy, or the first fruits before the whole, or as some drops
before a shower.

laughest at me for thinking otherwise) as to let thee have thine heaven here,
that thou may have thine hell hereafter; know that as women, which
(commonly) breed the best, bear the worst; so conscience, etc.

It is then in its own sphere of activity, of that place it is properly
spoken, the worm that never dies, and the fire that never goes out.

Mordeat hic, ut moriatur illic, muzzle not the mouth of the ox, silence not
the voice of Conscience, either by the pleasures or employments of the world;
which (as the fall of Nilus does the adjacent inhabitants) deafe^^^ conscience:
but let it admonish here, that it condemn not hereafter; let it bite here,
that it devour not hereafter; let it live here, that it may dye hereafter.

Thus have I, according to Salomons counsel, (...)
answered a fool according to his folly, lest he were wise in his one conceit.

The second Case.

Secondly, now to satisfy the godly man's complaint, whose objection pincheth
upon himself, thus.

I endeavor my self constantly both to refuse the evil, and choose the good,
I set before mine eyes ever the word of God, the law of conscience. There is no
sin so small, but I account it to defile; and none of Gods commandments so
little, but I hold necessary to be done. I both desire and endeavor to sly the
very appearances of evil; and yet I find not these sugared joys and divine
consolations whereon conscience feasteth: but go on in a kind of dryness of
spirit, and fear I shall do so ever, not knowing well what to think of mine
own estate?

To him I say,

First, Mr Greenhams report.
that (as before) a conscience may be troubledly evil, and yet honestly good.
A certain man some years afflicted in conscience, said, his continual agony
were as great, as a man's ready to dye, and then he felt such small comfort in
Gods countenance, that he would willingly have suffered his body to have lived
in burning fire till the appearance of Christ, so he might then be assured of
Gods favor toward him, yea his greatest comfort was, that though God should
condemn him, yet he hoped therein of Gods favor, to have his torments
mitigated with those that suffered least: in all which troubles
(notwithstanding) no world of reward, nor terror of tyranny could cause him
willingly do the least thing displeasing God; so there is a conscience most
troubledly evil, and yet virtuously good.

is often without any fault of ours, or at least may be so, as no other cause
may be assigned but divine dispensation, which being an infinite virtue,
works not always after the same manner, but that his providence might the
more appear, after very many sundry ways. I opened to my Beloved, but my
Beloved was gone, I sought him but I could not find him, I called him, but he
answered me not, Cant. 5. 6. signifying (as S. Gregory on that place) that she
did both what she could and what she ought, and yet she found him not, because
God so often disposes it, and that for good and holy ends.



allurements of this world.

For such is our weakness that we could never be brought to renounce one love,
unless we found another more sweet; for which cause we see often that the
comforts of young beginners and probationers in Religion, are often greater and
more sensible, then greater proficients are: but afterward God leaves us, or
rather promotes us from an estate more sweet, to an esta^e more strong; from
one more fervent, to one more steadfast; from one greater after the flesh, to
another greater after the spirit.

bitter then death, these tedious absences of the Comforter. And though
Sanctity and Godliness consist not in them, yet are both of them great
encouragements to a reformed life, and great helps therein.

And therefore we are to walk between two extremes, viz. when they are
absent, not to discourage our selves, nor distrust God; nor on the other hand
to be too secure and careless. This is to be known.

Now what is to be done or practiced in the absence of spiritual consolations
^ Thus,

Saul to the witch, and Cain to building of Cities.

It is easy to follow CHRIST for the Loaves, it is easy to love a good
Conscience for its good cheer, but when it feasts nor, then to exercise the
keeping of it is truly praiseworthy.





for want of stirring up divine consolations by meditation and prayer: and
therefore 2 Timothy 1. 6. Stir up the grace of God that is in thee.

Lord, nor setting down a day, when he should deliver thee, as the holy widow
Judith, Chap. 8.

If otherwise, that thou have been a cause thereof, by provoking the Lord to
anger, then art thou to the former rules to add the practice of true
repentance: 1. Seeking out as diligently as Joshua did for Achan, that sin
which did occasion thy woe, and then washing that stain out of thy soul, with
the Fullers Soap of Contrition, remembering ever to follow the stream up to the
fountains head, that is, to bewail the general corruption of thy nature, as
well as that particular sin.

Thus have I labored to minister a word in due season to him that is ready to
perish. If I have been long in this point of the festivals of a good
Conscience, let this excuse me, that men use not to eat feasts, as the
Israelites the Passover, with a staff in their hand, and shoes on their feet,
but to stay at them. And so much concerning the third point. viz. That a
Conscience thus qualified with the goodness both of Integrity and
tranquillity is a Feast.

The fourth Point.
This feast of Conscience is a continual feast.
AS Goodness was the Adjunct of Conscience, so Continuance is the Adjunct of
the FEAST. Wherein this Feast excels all the sumptuous and prodigal feasts of
Nero, Heliogabalus, Caesar Bargia, Mark Anthony, Cleopatra, or whosoever else
either divine, or humane pens have storyed on, for their most prodigious and
luxurious riots, when they made both sea and land contribute their utmost to
furnish their tables. The longest feast that I find recorded any were, is that
of Ahasucrus which he made in the third year of his reign, (...) 1.
to all his Princes and Servants, a feast of an hundred and fourscore days;
but what is that to a continual feast? how much short is that to him, who (like
the rich glutton in the Gospel) fares deliciously every day?

Let us state the point. The Theme to be spoken on is this, that The testimony
of a good Conscience comfort and refreshes a man at all times, and in all
conditions of life.

A good Conscience is a Pillow, if a man lie down; a Cushion, if a man sit; a
Staff, if a man walk; an Arbor or Gourd, if a man would shade himself. If a
man be sick, it is a Physician; if in suit, it is a Lawyer; if wrongfully
accused, it is a true witness; if unjustly condemned, it is a righteous Judge.
If a man be thirsty, it is a refreshing river; if hungry, it is a plentiful
feast. In a word, it is a man's Sun by day* and his Moon by night. There is no
state or condition of life can befall a man, either so prosperous or so
adverse, but in it a man shall find the joys and delights of a good Conscience.

Consult the Oracle, and you shall find instances in the several stations and
conditions of life, as

First, in inward tentation, by the Examples of Moses, Exodus 14. 15. and of
Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 17.

Secondly, in outward trouble, by the Example of Job, Chap. 27. ver. 5. and of
Abimelech, Genesis 20. 5.

Thirdly, in life, by the Example of Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 12.

Fourthly, in death, by the Example of Hezekiah, 2 Kings 20. 3.

Fifthly, at judgment, when Conscience shall be triumphant upon the word of
admission, Come good and faithful Servant, receive the prepared Kingdom;
Enter into thy Masters joy.

Lastly, after judgment, in heaven: for then and there all imperfections of
the Peace of Conscience shall be taken away, all perfection thereof shall be
added. There shall be no more interruptions, intermissions, or intercisions of
tranquillity of mind; but as in hell, to the wicked, their ill Conscience shall
be a most perfect, and continual worm; so to the godly, their good Conscience
shall be a most perfect, and continual feast.

It was a good Conscience made the three Children rejoice in their fiery
furnace, Daniel in the Lions den, Paul and Silas in the stocks, the Martyrs at
the stake, and those Primitive Worthies catalogued Heb. 11. 35. which would not
be delivered, That they might obtain a better resurrection.

In sum, if Conscience be truly good, that is, first honestly good, and then
peaceably good, accordingly as was before distinguished, it feasteth and
banquetteth the heart, at all places, and at all times; Contiguously and
Continually.

Yet are there certain special seasons of God's comfortable Visitation,
wherein he does more fully and largely dispense Divine Consolation, then he
does at other times: namely,

1. At a Christians first Conversion unto God, as we may see in both those
famous Converts, Lydia and the Jailer, Act. 16. And this God does to set and
knit the weak joints of a Christian, and to give him a taste, and antepast,
that he shall not lose, but only exchange joys, such as are dilute, and
gross, for such as are sincere, and pure.

2. After some good performed, especially if it, have come off well, in regard
of matter, manner, and end. After a good work so done, God uses
extraordinarily to cheer the Conscience, which is both part of the Performers
Merces, and Reward, and withal an earnest and pledge, that the whole shall
follow, and be all paid in.

3. Upon evil suffered also no less then upon good done: for under the cross
God has often after a very eminent manner shed his consolations into the
heart; Paul and Silas sung in the Jayle, Philip Landgrave of Hess long a
prisoner under Charles the fifth, for the cause of Religion, being asked, what
had supported him during his whole trouble, answered he had felt the divine
consolations even of the Martyrs themselves, all that while. And a cloud of
witnesses have said the like, that under the cross suffered for a good
Conscience, they have felt those sensible comforts, which they were never
partakers of all their life besides, either before or after.

4. After the brunt of some sore tentation is over, Satan out-wrestled, a
spiritual conflict ended, a desertion over-blowne, then God also uses to
refocillate the mind, and supple the nerves and weary joints of the Christian
Combatant, upon consideration, that his Grace was sufficient for him, that he
had taught his hands to war, and his fingers to fight, and that the soul had
marched valiantly.

5. Lastly, at the hour of death, after a good and well-spent life, then the
Conscience begins to lift up his Crests, and to boast in the putting off of his
armor. Then will Adolphus Clarebachius say, I believe there is not a merrier
heart in the world then mine, this day. Then will Fannius answer to one
objecting CHRIST'S sadness against his mirth, I, Christ was sad, that I might
be merry. Then will St Cyprian say Amen, when the sentence of death is
pronounced against him. Then will St Paul say, I am now ready to be offered,
and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith. Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown
of glory, etc.

Application of the Point.
Labor not therefore for the meat that perishes, but for that which endures
for ever, for a continual feast. If a poor mendicant Lazarus, who had been
accustomed all his life to cleanness of teeth, were taken from the rich man's
gate, and carried to as great a feast, as ever plenty, and curiosity devised,
served up in Dishes of Achate, studded with gold and precious stones, what
better were he to morrow, save that the remembrance of it would aggravate his
present hunger, and be as sauce to his appetite, which now stands in need of
meat? I had rather have everlasting brass then fading gold. If I were to go a
journey of a thousand miles, I had rather have only necessaries till my
journeys end, then be carried in coaches, and have all abundance and
superfluities nine hundred miles, and be put to beg my viaticum the last
hundred. If I were as sure to live an hundred years, as Hez^kiah was of his
fifteen, I would choose rather for the whole term to have no more then a
lowly cottage to sleep in, be clad with course and homespun cloth, feed upon
Lentils, and green herbs, then to have for fourscore of those years, Manna
from heaven for my food, apparel as rich as Aarons Ephod, a house as stately
as Nebuchadnezzars Palace, and then, like him, for the last twenty, be driven
out of all, naked, and poor, and hungry, and harbourlesse. I had rather live
for ever here on earth, in this vale of tears, where even those we call happy
live under an equinoctial of sorrow, and joy, then now presently be rapt up
into heaven as Elias was, and after a thousand years fall from thence with the
lapsed Angels. Oh! it is these words, Eternal, Everlasting, Perpetual,
Continual, For ever, etc. which in evils make light things heavy, and heavy
things insupportable; and in good things, make small things great, and great
things incomprehensible. Hell were not h^ll, if the torments of it were not as
endless, as they are easlesse; And Heaven were not Heaven, if the joys
thereof were not lasting as they are incomprehensible. I whet my style on
purpose, both to bring you out of taste with carnal and mundane pleasures
which are but transitory, and to raise up the appetite to this feast of a good
Conscience, which is Continual. It were then likely to be well with us indeed,
if we did not prize things temporal as if they were eternal, nor undervalue
things eternal, as if they were temporal.

I am just now in Demosthenes his strait, Plut. in vita Demosth.
who was troubled with a short breath, and yet used long Periods. So in the
last gasp of time, allotted for this Sermon, I am fallen to discourse of
Duration and Eternity. I will close up this short speech of Eternity, with a
very patheticall expressio^ of this thing, which I will translate hither both
out of Vide Drexel. Nicetas li. 2. c. 11. Cogita mill cubos millionum annorum,
hoc est, millies, millies, millies, millies, millies, millies, millina millia
annorum* cogita ergotot annos in igne transigendos: simul etiam cogita, hoc
omne temporis spatium, ^tsi duplicatum, tri^licatum, cen^^pl^ catum, nec
principium quidem esse aeternitatis: post tot anno^um rev^lutum ^empus nec dum
incepisse dici poterit aeternitas. Nisi (...) cogitatio sanctiores nos reddat,
pecudes, ^axa, merus chalybs sumus. Nihil eum mover, quem non moverit
aeternitas, immnsa illa, interminata, sine fine, perpetua, semper duratura,
nullis nec innumeris desitura seculis: quamdiu vivet deus, ta^ diu (...) entur
damnati. Sed ^ mortem immortalem! ^ vitam mortiseram! Nes^io quo te nomine
appellem, vitae an mortis? si vita es, cur crudelius mo^te afficis? si mors,
cur crudelitate^ tuam non finis? neutro te dignabo^ nomine; and vita and mors,
boni quippiam hab^t.

another book, and another language: And this it is. Think with thy self a
thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand, thousand thousands
of millions of years; Think so many years were to be transacted in fire; but
withal think, that though this whole space of time were doubled, tribled,
etc. yea centuplicated, that it is not so much as the very beginning of
Eternity: neither after the revolution of so many years, can Eternity be said
to have a beginning. Except these thoughts make us more holy, we are no better
then beasts and stones, yea even then steel it self. Nothing will move him,
which is not moved by Eternity: Eternity, I say, that immensurate,
interminate, everlasting, perpetual, infinite, enduring from age to age; as
long as God shall live, so long the damned shall dye. But oh immortal death!
oh mortiferous life! I know not whether I shall call thee by the name of death
or of life. If thou be life, why art thou more cruel then death? if thou
be death, why do thou not end thy cruelty? I will not honor thee with
either the Name of life or death, for even they both have some goodness in
them: There Is rest in life, in vita requies, in morte terminus est; solatio
sunt haec duo in omnibus malis. Tu vero nec requiem habes, nec habes, finem;
quid igitur es? and vitae malum, and malum es mortis: a morte cruciatus habes
sine fine, a vita immortalitatem sumis sine requie.
and in death an end; these two affords comfort in all evils. But, thou
eternity, neither have rest, nor end. What art thou therefore? thou art both
the evil of life, and the evil of death: from death thou have torments
without end, and from life thou have immortality without rest.

The particular Application to the City of LONDON.
I have done serving up the several courses of this feast of Conscience, and
would now take away, if it were not the solemn custom of these (...) EASTER-
Spittle-Sermons, That the Preacher should, in special manner, address himself
to this great City-Audience.

It Is said, John chap. 7. ver. 37. that Jesus stood up in the great, and last
day of the feast, and cried, saying, If any man thirst, let him come unto me,
and drink. This is the last day of this (...). Lo, I stand up in the room of
my Lord and Master, and cry, Ho, if any here be an hungry, let them come to
this feast of a good conscience, and feed freely.

My Lord Major, and all you the rest of the Citizens of this famous City, from
the Scarlet to the Blue, give me leave, I pray you, to use that liberty and
freedom of speech which becomes a faithful Preacher of the Gospel. It Is true,
we are called Ministers, that is, Servants, and so we are; but it is because we
are Servants of God, not of men; or if of men, it is to serve your Salvation,
not your humors.

Here is no danger in these Sermons of the Silver-Squinancie, or bos in lingua.
The Preacher may here speak rashly and unadvisedly, but not corruptly: for it
is well known these Spittle-Sermons differ from those at the Cross, and others
about this City, that these are without any fee or reward, other then that of
Honor, and good Acceptance. They are the far better to be liked for that.
They are the more hopeful for you the Auditors, because all danger of our
merchandising the Word is hereby taken away. And they are nor the less
hopeful to us the Preachers: for if we be faithful in this our dispensation,
we shall have a greater reward, then any you can give us.

And here I do pause a little, and not rashly, but upon due deliberation, do
wish with all my heart, both for my self, and all my brethren of the
Ministry, that the portion of the Clergy were so set out, and their
maintenance so provided for, that it might prove Balaams wages for any one
either to accept or expect any recompense, Shekell or talent, Homer or Epha,
great or small, from the hand of any person, whether high or low; for any part
of the work of the Ministry, whether public or private.

Then should you see sinners otherwise reproved, the wounds of Conscience,
which are but now skinned over with sweet words, otherwise searched into, and
healed up, great persons otherwise overawed, the Ladies spots, and the Lords
blots otherwise pointed at, deathbeds and sick couches otherwise visited, then
to give the decumbent such a peace as he may carry along to hell with him;
funeral Sermons otherwise preached, then to be mere Panegyricks, and
commendatory orations of them, whom the whole Congregation knows were no such
persons as the Mercenary tongue of the Preacher pourtrayes forth.

Then certainly, this City would not have been so much wronged as of late
especially it has, with so many of such Sermons as Saint Paul calls (...). 4.
14.
wind of doctrine, whereby Christians are blown and carried about from the
stedfastness of the truth. The Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap.
13. and 9. censures them to be new and strange doctrines, and implies that the
hearts of them who preach, and abet them, are not established with grace.
Doctrines of devils they are (1 Timothy 4. 1.) in regard of him who inspires them*
doctrines of men they are, in respect of the instruments, by which he breaths
them.

That Noble and Learned Gentleman before mentioned, Sr Fran. Bacon in his
Advancement of Learning ad sinem.
one of the standing Honors of the Law in general, and of Grayes-Inne in
particular, observes that if the choice and best of those observations, that
have been made dispersedly in Sermons within this Kingdom by the space of
forty years and more, had been set down in a continuance, it had been the
best work in Divinity, which had been written since the Apostles time. I am
about to say another thing, That if men of undoubted judgment and integrity
were but to bring in all those absurdities which they have heard vented in
Pulpits within and about this City for these 18. months last past, they would
make such Miscellanies of Divinity, as your Pulpits had need of all their rich
Velvet, and Embroydered cloths, which they have, to cover their shame. And I
wish that Ignorance were the worst root from which these things have sprung;
but I doubt much, that when some of these men's Consciences are awakened they
shall be as a thousand witnesses to tell them, that out of design, and out of
wry, and by-ends, they 2 Timothy 3. 6. 7.
have led captive simple women laden with sins, and led away with diverse lusts,
women ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And
therefore I cannot but much commend the ingenuity of Mr Alexander Hendersam,
who whilst he was here a Commissioner, did with great liberty of speech tax,
and reprove, what in this kind he both saw, and heard of in this City.

But to divert no further, I will in speaking unto you labor to keep an even
path, betwixt detraction and flattery, and first briefly, but faithfully,
reprove what I think at this time most reproveable; and then as heartily
commend what is in you commendable; that so those faults amended, and these
virtues being retained, you may partake of this feast of a good Conscience.

And for the first of these twain, I will search none of your old sores at
this time, but only note unto you two faults which have of late rendered this
City blameworthy both to God and man.

The first is the great schisms and dis-unions which have lately burst forth
amongst you, one of you being very Ishmaels to another, whereas a City should
be at unity in it self, and is the very Prototype and Copy of Concord and
Unity. That Unity is omnipotent is one of Scaligers subtleties; to be
undevided and indivisible is the chief and first Excellency of the blessed
Trinity. Therefore the Pythagoreans call the number of two an infamous number,
because it first discedeth from Unity. Nothing more divine then Unity,
nothing more ^atanicall then division.

The second is your City-tumults, tumults in the City, and tumults from the
City, just like that Ephesian-tumult, Acts 19. Confused, and the more part not
knowing wherefore they were come together. Concerning which I will only ask
you this one question, What fruit have you now of those things? Have you
thereby, trow ye, pleased God? No sure, but rather highly offended him: for God
is the God of Order, not of confusion. Have you pleased the King? you know how
high his complaints run. Have you pleased the Parliament? they do by no
means own your disorders. Have you helped trade? I trow not: and pity it were
it should be helped by these ways, lest prosperous folly should be accounted
wisdom, and prosperous wickedness be accounted virtue. Let me but ask one
question more, Have you hereby got the feast of a good Conscience? I think
there is a great deal more cause, why in this case, Conscience should be a
WORM then a FEAST.

I have done my reprehension, and coming to you with a rod. I will now come to
you with the spirit of meekness, and praise you, where you are truly
praiseworthy, for your Charity toward orphans, the poor, the blind, the
lame, the self-lame sluggard, etc. or rather praise the Grace of God, who has
made you both valentes and volentes, able and willing hereunto. And here I will
limit your attention to these three heads, viz. 1. To show you a good Rule of
Alms and Charity. 2. A good Emblem thereof. And lastly a good Example.

For the first, all the best Rules of Alms are united and concentred in that
one Text of the Preacher, Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters: for
thou shall find it after many days. Let us such the Text.

1. In the first word CAST lie closely three distinct Eleemosynarie Rules, that
is, 1. We ought to give Alms bountifully, and liberally, to sow plentifully.
2. Cheerfully also, and with a ready al^ critie of mind. 3. Speedily and
seasonably, whilst now the necessity presses the receiver, and summoneth the
Almoner: for without all these we do but drop, or sprinkle, or lay down; we do
not sow, or cast our Alms.

2. In the word THY two other Rules are employed: 1. That works of mercy must be
founded on justice. 2. They must also be founded on industry and diligence in
our particular callings: for OUR bread, and MY bread, and THY bread in
Scripture Phrase are opposed to a twofold bread, which are the bread of
others, not our own, to wit, 1. The bread of deceit, the cheat-loaves of
fraud. 2. The bread of Idleness.

3. In the word BREAD is expressed the matter of right Alms; we must give unto
the indigent not a serpent, but fish; not a stone, but bread; that is to say,
such things as will help truly to support and relieve their poor and low
condition: for by the word Bread both in the Lords Prayer, and other Texts of
Scripture, all things necessary are to be understood. Merciful Christians must
both fill the bellies, and clothe the backs, and cover the heads of the hungry,
and naked, and harbourless, else they give but crummes or crusts, not bread.

4. In the words UPON THE WATERS, there are two notable Rules more: for if
Waters be referred to the Giver or Almoner, then this Rule will thence arise,
That we must afford pity as well as piety, sympathy and condolencie of
affection as well as relief. We must weep with those that weep, as well as
wipe away tears from their eyes. And if you mean the waters of the receiver,
or poor man, then it sets out the proper object of Alms, namely he whose head
is a fountain, and his eyes conduits of tears to bewail his low, and
miserable condition. And the Rule is this, that Misery is the proper object of
Mercy.

5. In the last words, the Promise of FINDING again, this Rule lies hid, That,
Alms must be given in faith. That God will both accept them, and reward them,
though not for the works sake, yet for his mercies sake, and for his Christ's
sake. Therefore it is notable, that our Savior in the Gospel having exhorted
to Alms, in the very next words bids, Get bags: The inference seems but
weak, first to pour out, and give away, and then get bags; rather, let a man
scrape, and corrade, and then get bags: but the sense is, That the more
bountiful we are in discreet and charitable Alms, the more abundant shall
Gods blessings be, both spiritual, and temporal. Therefore Whilgift
Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had finished hi Hospital at Croyden, said,
he could not perceive, That thereby he was in his estate a penny the poorer.
These are the Rules of Almsdeeds.

The Emblem of Alms I promised you is this: A naked Boy with a cheerful
Countenance, feeding with honey a Be without wings.

Play the Pierius upon this Hieroglyphick. 1. This Boy is naked, because
Charity seeks not her own. 2. With a cheerful Countenance, because God
loves a cheerful giver. 3. Giving honey; honey, not gall; bread, not stones. We
must give good things to those that ask. 4. To a Be, not a droane; to a
labourer, not a loyterer. 5. Without wings, that is all one, as to the
trembling hand, in MOSES his Law, to such an one as God has disabled by
sickness, lamenesse, great incumbencies, old age, or the like. For it is a good
distinction (I find, in the Book of Martyrs, in a Sermon of B. Ridly, before K.
Edward 6.) of poor of Gods making, and poor of their own making, by Idleness,
thriftlesnesse, riot, etc. for the latter a Bride-well, or house of correction
is the best Alms: for the former, Cast thy Bread upon the waters, etc.

Now lastly, for Examples and Presidents of Almsdeeds, we see daily fair
ones: How God enlarges, and expanseth the hearts of his Saints to show their
faith by their works. I refer you to a Treatise written by Dr Willet,
wherein he undertaketh by instance to show how far the charitable deeds of
Protestants, since the Reformation of Religion, have both in number, and
greatness, even in these places, exceeded those of the Papists, in a far
longer tract of time. It is a thing worth the considering both to silence their
obloquie of us in calling us Solifidians, and their arrogancy of themselves as
if they only were full of good works. It is now diverse years since Dr Willet
wrote that, I wish some knowing hand would perfect it, and add unto it, what
has been done since, not to the pomp or pride of any either persons, or
places, but to The honor of God, who gives grace unto men.

And here is a fit place to commemorate those public Acts of Charity, which
have been ordered in this City, for this last year, viz.

CHildren kept and maintained at this present, at the charge of Christ's
Hospital, in the aid House, in diverse places of this City and Suburbs, and
with sundry Nurses in the Country. 975 The na^^es of all which are registered in
the Books kept in Christ's Hospital there to be seen, from what Parishes, and
by what means they have been from time to time admitted. Children put forth
Apprentices, discharged, and dead this year last past 112
THere has been cured this year last past, at the charge of Saint
Bartholomews Hospital of Soldiers and other diseased people to the number of
847 All which were relieved with money and other necessaries at their
departure. Buried this year after much charge in their sickness 161 Remaining
under cure at this present, at the charge of the said Hospital 345
THere has been cured this year last past, at the charge of Saint Thomas
Hospital, of Soldiers and other diseased people. 1013 All which were relieved
with money and other necessaries at their departure. Buried out of the said
Hospital this year 184 Remaining under cure at this present 319
THere has been brought to the Hospital of Bridewell within the sp^ce of one
^ere, of wandering Soldiers and other Vagrants, to the number of 684 Whereof
some have been clothed and sent beyond the Seas. And of which number many have
been chargeable for the time of their being there, which cannot be avoided, by
reason of their necessities, nor passed away without charge. There is
maintained and kept in the said Hospital, in Arts, Occupations, and other
works and labors, Apprentices, taken up ^ut of diverse Parishes and streets of
this City, to the number of 170
For all which, Glory be to God on high, due praise to the Founders, and
Benefactors, and Governors, Comfort to the relieved, and Imitation according
to our abilities from us. Amen.

FINIS.

