LONDONS BLAME, If not its SHAME:

Manifested by the great neglect of the Fishery, which affords to our
Neighbor Nation yearly, the Revenue of many Millions, which they take up at our
Doors, whilst with the sluggard, we fold our hands in our bosoms and will not
stretch them forth to our mouths.

Or the inestimable riches of the British Seas, which do yield a monthly
Harvest of several Fish in their season, which being brought into the Land,
would make Flesh at a low rate, increase Shipping, Mariners, Trade, and
public Revenue, whereof this Book does give a plentiful account, the which we
may in some measure thus accomplish:

Let every Ward in London build a Buss, and Money to do it may be thus raised.

If every Ward would pay a three months Assessment which they pay to the L.
Generals Army, at the rate of 90000. l. per mensem, ready down, or if the
poorer sort think it too much for them, if the richer will raise it, they may
have the benefit of their Stock returned every half year, and one Merchant may
be found in a Ward which may be the husband of that Buss for that year, and
those 25. Merchants may be a Committee for the 25. Ships, for all Intents and
purposes.

Which Ship would employ all the Poor in their Ward, for to beat Hemp, to spin
it, to make Twine, and Nets, and Cordage for the setting of Her forth, and may
be called by the Name of the Ward.

Dedicated by Thomas Ienner to the Corporation of the Poor, in the City of
London, being a member thereof, and desires that this Treatise may put them
upon a more vigorous acting for time to come, that the whole City and Nation
seeing this good Work, may be provoked to propagate it in the whole Land.

Eccles. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with all thy might;
for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave where
thou go.

Printed for T. I. at the South Entrance of the Royal Exchange, 1651.

The inestimable Riches and Commodities of the British Seas.
THe Coasts of Great Britain do yield such a continual Sea-harvest of grain to
all those that with diligence do labor in the same, that no time or season in
the year passes away without some apparent means of profitable employments,
especially to such as apply themselves to Fishing, which from the beginning of
the year unto the latter end, continues upon some one Port or other upon our
Coasts, and therein such infinite shoals and multitudes of Fishes are offered
to the takers, as may justly move admiration (not only to strangers, but) to
those that are daily employed amongst them.

The Summer Fishing for Herrings begins about Midsummer, and lasts some part
of August; The Winter Fishing for Herrings lasts from September to the midst
of November, both which extend from Boughoness in Scotland, to the Thames mouth.

The Fishing for Cod at Alamby Wirkington and Whitehaven near the Coast of
Lancashire, from Easter until Whitsontide.

The Fishing of Hake at Haberdeny Abarswith, and other places between Wales and
Ireland, from Whitsontide to S. James tide.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling about Padstow within the Lands, and of Severne
from Christ-tide to Mid-lent.

The Fishing for Cod on the West part of Ireland, and frequented by those of
Biscay Galicia and Portugal, from the beginning of April until the latter end
of June.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling on the North and Northwest of Ireland, from
Christ-tide until September.

The Fishing for Cod and Ling upon the North Coast of Ireland, from Easter
until Midsummer.

The Fishing for Pilchard on the West Coast of England, from S. James tide unto
September.

The Fishing for great Scapling, and many other sorts of Fish being about the
Islands of Scotland, and in the several parts of the British Seas all the year
long.

In September not many years since, upon the Coasts of Devonshire near Minigal,
five hundred Tun of Fish were taken in one day, and about the same time three
thousand pounds worth of Fish in one day were taken at S. Ives in Cornwall by
small Boats and other poor Provisions; five of our men with Boats and Cables
adventuring in a calm to launch out among the Holland Busses not far from Robin
Hoods Bay, returned to Whitby full fraught with Herrings, and reported that
they saw some of those Busses take ten twenty, and four and twenty lasts of
Herrings at a draught, and returned into their Country wi^h forty, fifty, and
an hundred lasts of Herrings in one Buss.

Our Fleet of Colliers not many years since returning from Newcastle laden with
Coals, about the Well near. Flamborough head and Scarborough, met with such
multitude of Cod, Ling, and Herrings, that one amongst the rest with certain
Ship-hooks and other Instruments, drew up as many Cods and Ling in a little
space of time, as were sold well near for as much as her whole lading of Coals;
and many hundred of Ships might have been there laden in two days and two
nights. Out of which wonderful affluence and abundance of Fish swarming in our
Seas, that we may the better perceive the infinite gain which Foreign Nations
make, I will especially insist upon the Fishing of the Hollanders in our
Coasts, and thereby show how they by this means principally have increased.

First, In Shipping. Secondly, In Mariners. Thirdly, In Trade, Fourthly, In
Towns and Fortifications. Fifthly, In Power abroad. Sixthly, In Public Revenue.
Seventhly, In Private Wealth. Eighthly and lastly, In all manner of Provisions
and store of things necessary.
First, Increase in Shipping.
BEsides seven hundred Strand boats four hundred Evars, and four hundred
Gallits, Drivers, and Tod-boats, wherewith the Hollanders fish upon their own
Coasts every one of these employing another Ship to fetch Salt and carry the
Fish into their Countries, being in all 3000. sail, maintaining and setting at
work at least forty thousand persons, Fishers, Tradesmen, Women, and Children,
they have an hundred Dager-boats one hundred and fifty Tuns a piece, or
thereabouts, seven hundred Pinks and Well-boats from sixty to an hundred Tuns a
piece, which altogether fish upon the Sea of England and Scotland for Cod and
Ling only; and some each of those employeth another Vessel for providing of
Salt and transporting their Fish making in all sixteen hundred Ships, which
maintain and employ at least four thousand persons of all sorts. For the
Herring season they have at least sixteen hundred Busses, all of them fishing
only upon our Coasts, from Boughonouss in Scotland, to the mouth of Thames; and
every one of those makes work for three other Ships that attend her; the one
to bring in salt from Foreign parts, the other to carry the said salt and cask
to the Busses, and to bring back the Herrings, and the third to transport the
said Fish into Foreign Countries; So that the total number of Ships and Busses
plying the Herring-Fare, is six thousand four hundred; whereby every Buss one
with another employeth forty Mariners and Fishers within her own Bulk, and the
rest ten a piece, which amounts to one hundred and twelve thousand Fishers
and Mariners; all which maintain double, if not treble so many Tradesmen,
Women, and Children on land. Moreover they have four hundred Vessels at least
that take Herring at Yarmouth, and there sell them for ready money: So that the
Hollanders (besides three hundred Ships before mentioned fishing upon their own
Shores) have at least eight thousand and four hundred Ships, only maintained by
the Seas of Great Britain^; by the which means principally Holland being not so
big as one of our Shires of England, containing not above twenty eight miles in
length, and twenty three in breadth, have increased the number of their Shipping
to at least ten thousand Sail, being more then are in England, France, Spain,
Portugal, Italy, Denmark, Poland, Sweden, and Russia, and to this number they
add every day, although their Country it self affords them neither materials,
nor victuals, nor merchandise, to be accounted of, toward their setting forth.

Besides those of Holland, Lubeck has seven hundred great Ships, Hamborough
six hundred, Embden fourteen hundred, whereunto add the Ships of Bremer,
Biscay, Portugal, Spain, and France, which for the most part fish in our Seas,
and it will appear that ten thousand sail of Foreign Vessels, and above, are
maintained and employed by fishing upon our Coast; so that in Holland there are
built a thousand sail at the least to supply Ship-wracks, and augment their
store, which as the prime and common Nursery is the chiefest means only to
increase their number.

Secondly, Increase of Mariners.
THe number of Ships fishing on our Coasts being (as aforesaid) eight thousand
four hundred, if we allow but twenty persons to every Ship one with another,
the total of Mariners and Fishers, amounts to an hundred s^x^y eight
thousand, out of which number they daily furnish their longer voyages to all
parts of the World; for by this they are not only enabled to brook the Seas,
and to know the use of the Tackles and Compass, but are likewise instructed in
Trade, in the principles of Navigation and Pilotage; insomuch as from home
their greatest Navigators have had their education and breeding.

Thirdly, Increase of Trade.
BY reason of those multitude of Ships and Mariners, they have extended their
Trade to all parts of the World, (exporting for the most part) in all their
voyages of Herring and other Fish, for the maintenance of the same; in exchange
whereof they return the several Commodities of other Countries.

From the Southern parts, as France, Spain, and Portugal, for our Herrings,
they return, Oils, Wines, Prunes, Honey, Wools, Grain, with store of Coyns; From
the Straights, Velvets, Sa^tins, and all sorts of Silks, Alloms, Currants,
Oils, and all Grocery ware, with much money.

From the East Country, for our Herrings and other French and Italian
Commodities before returned, they bring home Corn, Wax, Flax, Hemp, Pitch, Tar,
Soap ashes, Iron, Copper, Steel, Clapboard, Wainscot, Masts, Timber,
Deal-boards, Polish Dollars, and Hungary Gilders; From Germany, for Herrings
and other salt Fish: Iron, Steel, Glass, Milstones, Rhynish Wines, Battery
plate for Armor, with other munitions, Silk, Velvets, Rashes, Fustians,
Poratoes, and such like Francfort Commodities, with store of Ri^x-dollars.

From Brabant they return for the most part ready Coin, with some Tapestries,
Says, and Hull-shops; yea, some of our Herrings are carried as far as Brasile,
and that which is more strange, and greatly to our shame, that four hundred
Ships, which fish with our men at Yarmouth, within ken almost of Land, do vent
our Herrings amongst us here in England, and make us pay for the Fish taken
upon our Coasts ready money, wherewith they store their own Country.

Fourthly, Increase of Towns and Forts.
By their large extent of Trade, they are become as it were Citizens of the
whole World, whereby they have so enlarged their Towns, that most of them
within these four hundred years, are full as great again as they were before;
Amsterdam, Leyden, and Middleburgh having been lately twice enlarged, and their
streets and buildings ^o fairly and orderly set forth, that for beauty and
strength they may compare with any other in the World, upon which they bestow
infinite sums of money, all originally flowing from the bounty of the Seas;
from whence by their labor and industry, they derive the beginnings of all
their Wealth and Greatness; and particularly for the Havens of the foresaid
Towns, whereof some of them cost forty, fifty, or an hundred thousand pounds.
Their Fortifications also both for number and strength, upon which they have
bestowed infinite sums of money, may compare with any other whatsoever.

Fifthly, Increase of Power abroad.
SUch being then the number of their Ships and Mariners, and so great their
Trade, occasioned principally by their Fishing, they have not only strengthened
and fortified themselves at home, to repel all foreign Invasions, as lately in
the War between them and Spain, but have likewise stretched their Power into
the East and West Indies; in many places whereof they are Lords of the
Seacoasts, and have likewise fortified upon the Main, where the King and
people are at their devotion; and more then this^ all neighbors, Princes, in
their difference, by reason of their Power at Sea, are glad to have them of
their part; so that next to the English they are become the most redoubted
Nation of any other whatsoever.

Sixthly, Increase of public Revenue
MOreover how mightily the public Revenue and Customs of that State are
increased by their Fishing may appear, in that about thirty years since, over
and above the Customs of the merchandise, Excises, Licenses, Waftage, and
Lastage, there was paid to the State for Custom of Herrings, and other salt
Fish, above thirty thousand pounds in one year, besides the tenth Fish, and
cask paid for waftage, which comes at least to as much more, among the
Hollanders only, whereunto the tenth of other Commodities being added, it
amounts to a far greater sum; we are likewise to know that a great part of
their Fish is sold in other Countries for ready money, for which they commonly
export of the finest gold and Silver, and coming home recoyn it of a baser
Allay under their own stamp, which is no small means to augment their public
Treasure.

Seventhly, Increase of private Wealth.
AS touching their private Wealth, if we consider the abundant store of
Herrings and other Fish by them taken, and the usual prices that they are sold
for, as also the multitude of Tradesmen and Artificers that by reason of this
their fishing are daily set on work, we must needs conclude, that the gain
thereof made by private men, must of necessity be exceeding great, as by
observing the particulars following, it will plainly appear.

During the wars between the King of Spain and the Hollanders, before the last
Truce, the Dunkirks by taking, spoiling, and burning the Busses of Holland, and
setting great ransom upon the Fishermen, enforced them to compound for great
sums of money, that they might fish quietly one year; whereunto the next year
after, the Fishermen among themselves were to pay a Doller upon every last of
Herrings toward the maintenance of certain Ships of War, to waft and secure
them in their Fishing; by reason whereof, there was a Record kept of the
several lasts of Herrings taken that year, and it appears thereby that in one
half year there were taken three hundred thousand lasts of Herrings, which at
twelve pound per last, amounts to three millions and six hundred thousand
pounds; and at sixteen twenty, and thirty pounds a last they are ordinarily
sold, being transported into other Countries, it comes at least to five
millions of pounds.

Whereunto if we add the Herrings taken by other Nations, together with the
Cod, Ling, Hake, and other fish taken by the Hollanders and other Neighbors
upon the British Coasts all the year long, the total will evidently arise to
above ten millions of pounds.

This great Trade of Fishing employing so many men and Ships at sea, must
necessarily maintain as great a number of Tradesmen and Artizans on land; as
Spinsters and Hemp-winders, for Cables, Cordage, Yarn, Twine for Nets and
Lines, Weavers to make Sail-clothes, Receivers, Packers, Tacklers, Dressers,
and Couchers, to sort and make the Herrings lawful Merchandise, Tanners to tan
their sails and nets, Coopers to make casks, Blocks and Bowl makers, for Ships,
Keelmen, and Laborers, for carrying and removing of fish, Sawyers for plancks,
Carpenters, Ship-wrights, Smiths, Car-men, Boatmen, Brewers, Bakers, and a
number of others, whereof a number are maimed persons, and unfit to be
otherwise employed, besides the maintenance of all their several wives,
children, and families; and further, every man or maidservant, or orphan,
having any poor stock may venture the same in their fishing voyages, which
affords them ordinarily great increase, and is duly paid according to the
proportion of their gain.

Eighthly, Increase of Provision.
ANd to conclude, it is manifest, that Holland only affording in it self some
few Hops, Madder, Butter, and Chees, abounds notwithstanding by reason of
this Art of fishing, in plentiful manner with all kind of provisions (as well
for life) as in Corn, Beef, Mutton, Hides, and Cloth (as for luxury) in Wines,
Silks, and Spices (and for defense) as Pitch, Tar, Cordage, Timber; All which
they have, not only in competent proportion for their own use, but are likewise
able, from their several Magazines, to supply to Neighbor Countries. The
premises considered, it makes much to the ignominy and shame of our English
Nation that God and Nature offering us so rich a Treasure even to our own
doors, we do notwithstanding neglect the benefit thereof, and by paying money
to strangers for the fish of our own Seas, impoverishing our selves to make
them rich; insomuch that for want of Industry and care in this particular, two
hundred and twenty five Fisher Towns are decayed, and reduced to extreme
poverty; whereas on the contrary, by diligent endeavoring to make use of so
great a blessing, we might in short time repair those decayed Towns of the
Commonwealth, and add both Honor, and Strength, and Riches to this Nation;
which how easily it may be done, will in some measure appear by some
observations following.

By erecting two hundred and fifty Busses of reasonable strength and Bigness,
there will be employment made for a thousand Ships, and for at least twenty
thousand Fishermen and Mariners at Sea, and consequently for as many Tradesmen
and Laborers at Land; The Herrings taken by those Busses, will afford the
State twenty thousand pounds yearly Custom outward, and for Commodities
returned inward, three hundred thousand pounds, and above.

We have Timber sufficient, and at reasonable Rates, growing in our Land for
the building of Busses. Every shire affords men of hardy and able bodies fit
for such employment, who now live poorly and idely at home.

We have victual in great plenty, sold at easy rates, without p^ yment of
Excise or Impost; our shores and harbors: are near the places where our fish
do haunt; for drying our Nets, Sal^ing, and Packing our Fishing, and for
succor in stress of weather; We may bring our fish to land, Salt, and Pack it,
And from parts of this States Dominions, be at our Markets in France, Spain, or
Italy, before the Hollanders can arive in Holland. We have means to transport
our fish into some Southern Countries, where the Hollanders seldom or never
come; and though we had as many Busses as the Hollanders, yet is there want for
all, and more; for in the East and Northern Countries, and in many other
places, Herrings are every days meat, Winter and Summer, as well to draw on
drink, as to satisfy hunger; And in most places the greatest part of the year
they are scarce to be had; for presently after Michaelmas, the Sound and Rivers
are frozen up, so that no Herrings can be Transported into several Kingdoms,
Dukedomes and free Estates, until July which is for 30 weeks space together,
so that when Lent comes, there are few to be bought for money.

Lastly, since by care and industry gained from the Fleming, doubtless by the
means we may grow as expert in the Art of fishing, and in time make it a Staple
Comodity of our own.

But this we shall the better and sooner do, if we consider and endeavor to
reform certain wants and abuses, which heretofore has hindered us from
effecting this good and great work, whereof these that follow are none of the
least.

General liberty of eating of flesh contrary to the old custom, and the Statute
Laws provided for observing fish days, from whence scarcity and dearth of flesh
proceeds; for where flesh is ordinarily spent, fish will not be bought, and
want of sale decays all Trade; Gain being the Nurse of Industry: Want of
Order and Direction in our Fishing, every man being left to himself, and
permitted to fish as best likes him: whereas among the Hollanders, two of the
best experienced fishermen are appointed to guide the rest of the Fleet, and
the others are bound to follow them, and to cast their lines according to their
discretion. The Hollanders and other Nations set forth with their Busses in
June, to find the shoal of fish, and having found it, dwell amongst it till
November; whereas we stay till the Herrings come home to the Road-steds, and
sometimes suffer them to pass by, ere we look out, our Herring fishing
continuing only seven weeks at the most, and theirs twenty.

The Hollanders Busses are great and strong, and able to brook foul weather,
whereas our Cobbles, Crayers, and Boats being small and thin-sided, are easily
swallowed by a rough sea, not daring to adventure far in fair weather, by
reason of their weakness, for fear of storms.

The Hollanders are industrious, and no sooner are discharged of their lading,
but presently put forth for more, and seek for markets abroad as well as at
home; whereas our English after they have been once at Sea, do commonly never
return again, until all the money taken for their fish be spent, and they in
debt, seeking only to serve the next Market.

The Hollanders do retain the Merchants, who during the Herring season, do duly
come to the places where the Busses arrive, and joining together in several
Companies, do presently agree for the lading of thirty or forty Busses at once,
and so being discharged, they may speedily return to their former fishing:
Whereas our Fishermen are uncertain of their Chap-men, and forced to spend much
time in putting off their Fish by parcels.

These, and other defects would carefully be taken into consideration, and
certain Orders made to make our Fishing prosperous and successful, especially
considering the mischiefs the neglect hereof has brought to the Nation in
general, and to many good Towns and Corporations in particular, as by Authority
even of Parliament it self in the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. is plainly testified;
which I have briefly set down, to avoid the prolixity of the Original. Because
the English Fishermen dwelling on the Seacoast, do leave off their Trade of
Fishing in our Seas, and went but the half Seas over,, and thereupon the
English did buy fish of Pickards, Flemmings, Normans, and Zelanders; by reason
whereof, many incomodities did grow unto the Realm ( Viz) The Decay of the
Wealth and Prosperity as well of the Cinque Ports and members of the same, as of
other Coast Towns by the Sea side, which were built and inhabited by a great
Multitude of people by reason of our using and exercising the Craft and feat of
fishing. Secondly, The Decay of a great Number of Boats and ships. And Thirdly,
of many good Mariners, both able men in body by their diligent labors and
Continual exercise of fishing, and expert by reason thereof in the knowledge of
the Sea Coasts, as well within this land as in other parts beyond the Seas; It
was therefore enacted, that no manner of persons, English Denizon, or Strangers,
at that time, or at any time after, dwelling in England, should buy any Fresh
Fish of any Strangers in the said Ports of Flaunders, Zeland, Picardie, France,
as upon the Sea between shore and shore, etc.

This Act by mean Continuances, was continued from Parliament: to Parliament.
until the first of Queen Mary, and from thence to the end of the next
Parliament, and then expired.

For Conclusion, saving by that which has formerly been declared; it evidently
appears, that the States of the Commonwealth of England, by immemorable
perscription, continual usage, and possession the acknowledgement of all
Neighbors, States, and the Municipal Laws of this Nation, have ever held the
sovereign Lordship of the Seas, of England; and that unto them (by reason
their sovereignty) the supreme Command and Jurisdiction over the Passage and
fishing in the same rightfully appertains; considering also the natural Scire
of these our Seas, that interpose themselves between the great Northern Commerce
of the North part of the world, and of that of the East, West, and Southern
Climats; and withal, the infinite commodities that the fishing in the same is
daily made, It cannot be doubted, but that the States by means of their Wisdom
and Virtue, and by the Justice, and faithfulness and obedient disposition of
the Natives and people of this our Commonwealth, may easily (without injustice
to any State or person whatsoever) be made the greatest State for Command and
Wealth, and the people thereof, be the most oppulent and flourishing Nation of
any other in the world; And this the rather, for that this State is now almost
absolute Commander of all the British Isles, and has also enlarged their
Dominions over a great part of the Western Indies; by means of which extent of
Empire, crossing in a manner the whole Ocean, the trade and persons of all
Nations moving from one part of the world to the other, must of necessity come
within the Compass of their Power and Jurisdiction; And therefore the
Sovereignty of our Seas being the most Precious Jewel of the State, and next
under God the principal means of our Wealth and Safety, All true English
hearts and hands are bound by all possible means and diligence to perserve and
maintain the same, even with the utmost hazard of their lives, their goods, and
fortunes.

By all that which has bin said, it does appear how great a Nation England is,
by reason of the inestimable Riches and Commodities which (besides our selves)
other Nations our Neighbors do yearly reap, especially by Fishing in our Seas;
insomuch that no Christian Prince in the World is Lord of any Territory that
(considering all circumstances) yeildeth the like constant and general benefit.

FINIS.

