Certain Conscientious QUERIES FROM MR. WILL. JENKIN, Being the Grounds of his
late Petition and Submission to the present POWER. Whereunto is Annexed his
Petition still very much desired.

With the Copy of a Letter formerly sent to him and Mr. Love with other
Ministers therein nominated, supplicating their non-ingaging or withstanding
Gods stupendous and amazing Acts of late and present providence, which if
harken'd to in time might have prevented their late Sufferings, and better kept
up their esteem.

ALSO The Parliaments Most Gracious and indulgent Pardon to them all,
notwithstanding their Acts of Treason against the peace of the Commonwealth.

Sold by R. Harford at the Bible and States-Armes in Little-Britain, 1651.

To the Reader.
BEloved Christian Friends and Brethren, seeing God has so mercifully
appointed us to live in these precious, Gospel-divulging times, for which we
have unspeakable cause to magnify and reverence his Holy Name; This being the
last age of the World wherein more especially, the Veil is to be rent, and the
greatest glory to be revealed. In order whereunto, this Generation have seen,
the many multiplied wonders of the Lord, such as our Fathers, (nay, such as no
Generations) ever saw, which although some will not see, yet (says the Lord)
they shall see; even his mighty outstretched arm, in bringing now his people
out of Egypt, even through the Sea and Wilderness, to enjoy the promised Land,
wherein his Name alone shall be exalted, to the utter staining the glory of all
flesh, and all that is of flesh; For, the glory of the Lord approaches near,
and happy are the Virgins that are made ready to enter with the Bridegroom: and
blessed are those Servants, that watch for their Masters coming and keep their
garments about them, that they be not found naked and their shame appear; for,
to all such, he will come upon them suddenly in an hour when they think not,
and will cut them in pieces, and give them their portion with Hypocrites; For,
without question, the day of the Lord is at hand, and comes as a Thief: How
often is this reiterated, and expressed even because, men are so apt to slumber
and sleep, The consideration hereof, has constrained us, even by all helps and
means to stir up and awake one another, before this glorious day of the Lord
comes; that we may be aware of his coming and our eyes may be open to see the
glory of his appearing; for, if then we be found sleeping, we must sleep for
ever; we know there are many now sleeping, who cannot see these things, (and
indeed, who watches as he ought,) yea, the Prophets (as they account
themselves) lying down to sleep, and delighting to slumber, they tire, and are
not able to follow the Lord so fast; according as it is written, Romans 11.8. God
has given them the Spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and
ears, etc. which prophecy, let even the Gentile Prophets consider as well as
the Jews, etc. and let them read and ponder well those whole Chapters, Ezekiel.
34. and Jer. 23. Let them at no hand despise this advice, but view themselves
therein, as in a glass; for they more concern their practices then they are
willing to see. For as I live (says the Lord) I will call the Shepherds to an
account, those who have fed themselves and driven away the flock, therefore
they shall feed the flock no more etc. but the blessed promises there,
upholdeth our hearts; that the Lord himself will be our Shepherd; I even I,
will both search out my Sheep, and seek them out, and bring them to their own
Land, and feed them by the Rivers and in fat and good pasture, even upon the
high mountains of Israel shall their fold be.

This Petitionary letter was, not long since, sent to Mr. Will. Jenkins and
others therein named; sent in time but hearkened to, almost too Late; they
encouraging Mr. Love to lead the way and he them, to follow him: but they are
better advised: This letter, at first, was intended, only as a private
supplication to him, but seeing so many others, were carried away; in the same
paths, subscribing with him and laboring mightily to inflame this nation again,
in a third War, upon a desperate hazard to obtain their own ends: but, had
they fully prevailed, what had become of all their dissenting brethren, though
never so godly? we fear, they should have had, but hard measure for all the
kindness and patience showed to them: nor should they, have enjoyed, such
pardons, privileges, and quiet habitations among them, as they enjoy among us.

But the Lord himself, of his unspeakable mercy, having stopped that current of
blood intended and begun: Hereupon, some have begun, (better late then never)
to see and confess their errors and sinful miscarriages: Particularly, Mr.
Will. Jenkins, being convinced thereof (as is expressed) upon his seeking GOD
and not adventuring a Wounded conscience for a whole skin; and promises also,
to hold forth his grounds to any: we therefore thought it, of great use to
annex to this letter, The Petition of Mr. Will. Jenkins, as also certain
Queries of his grounds, upon which his Petition was framed and himself
satisfied. Expecting and assuring our selves (if truly convinced) we shall see
him and them, now act, as ardently this way, as before the other way, taking as
much, or more pains now to convince others, as well as themselves, many of
whom, were and are still misled and hardened by them, being exceedingly tainted
with the spirit of bitterness and discontent. No less can be expected from
them, were it but only, to make some part of amends to those who have so
readily and graciously pardoned such great offenders; But moreover, When thou
art converted strengthen thy brethren; else we cannot but suspect, etc. (If we
shall say no more) to save their Carkases, they have dissembled with God and
men, having taken his name in vain and abused his people: herein to clear
themselves is of very great concernment.

Three Conscientious QUERIES.
FIrst, whether the removal of Kings, and the possession of their Governments
by others, are not alterations ordered by, and founded upon Gods Providence,
and so proceeding from God himself, Dan. 2.21.4.17.25.32.
notwithstanding the miscarriages of the Persons who are Instruments therein.
Whether this be not proved plainly from those places in Daniel, where the Lord
is said to remove Kings, Dan 5.21.
and set up Kings, to rule in the Kingdoms of men, and to give them to
whomsoever he will: It being also said of Baasha, who obtained the Kingdom by
Conspiracy and Murders, 1 Kings 15.27. for which he was punished, 1 Kings
16.7. That he was raised up by the Lord over Israel, and by him exalted out of
the Dust, and made Prince over Israel, 1 Kings 14.14. 1 Kings 16. v. 2.

Secondly, Whether by the Stupendous and amazing Providence of God,
manifested among us, 1. In the Destruction of the late King, of all his
Adherents, Enemies to this present Power in so many pitched Battles. 2. In this
Nations Universal forsaking of the firstborn of the Royal Line, when he came
into the Land, to claim the Crown: and when it was in the power of many
Thousands in the Land to have Assisted him; and its accepting this present
Government manifested by a general contribution of Men, Money, and Arms in
Defense thereof, and this followed with the total overthrow of Charles Stuart,
and all his Armies: whether (I say) by these providence, God has not, plainly
removed the Government of this Nation, from Charles Stuart, and bestowed it
upon others, as ever he removed and bestowed any Government by any Providence
in any Age. And if we cannot say that these Providence shows God approving of
all the means and ways used in and for the alteration of the Government: Yet
who can deny that they manifest his pleasure to have this alteration of the
Government to be, if at least any Providence can discover such a pleasure.

Thirdly, Therefore, whether a refusal to yield Obedience and Subjection to
this Present Government under pretense of upholding a more righteous title, be
not, as contrary to the Law of England, (by which, the party in possession of
the Crown, is to be adhered unto, against the best pretender who is out of the
possession) for a refusal to acquiesce in the wise and righteous pleasure of
God; an opposition of a Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of the whole
world, a flat breach of the fifth Commandment and of that Injunction, Romans
13.8. To conclude, such a resisting, even of God himself, as none can have
Peace in continuing in, much less in acting for, least of all, in suffering for.

These Queries are propounded by one who has no design but to avoid sin, and
to know his duty.

Ezekiel. 21. 25. And thou Prince of Israel, poluted and wicked, whose day is
come, when iniquity shall have an end.

26. Thus says the Lord God, I will take away the Diadem, and take off the
Crown, this shall be no more the same, I will exalt the humble: and will abase
him that is high.

27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it shall be no more, until
Jesus Christ.
He come whose right it is.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth OF ENGLAND: The
Humble Petition of William Jenkin, Prisoner:
Most humbly shows,
THat your Petitioner, is unfainedly sorrowful for all his late miscarriages,
whether testified against him or acknowledged by him, and for the great and
sinful unsuitableness of them to his calling and condition. That upon earnest
seeking of God, and diligent inquiring into his will, your Petitioner is
convinced, that the alteration of civil Governments, are ordered by, and
founded upon the wise and righteous providence of God, who removes Kings, and
sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever
he will. That the providence of this God, have in the judgment of your
Petitioner, as evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and the
investing your honors with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared
in the taking away, or bestowing of any Government in any History of any age of
the world.

That he apprehends that a refusal to be subject to this present Authority,
under the pretense of upholding the title of any one upon the Earth, is a
refusal to acquiess in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing
of the Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and Earth, as none can
have peace, either in acting or suffering for; and that your Petitioner looks
upon it as his duty, to yield to this Authority, all active and cheerful
obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake, to promise (he being required)
truth and fidelity to it, and to hold forth the grounds of his so doing to any,
as God shall call him thereunto.

That though an Imprisonment, accompanied with the loss of his estate, and to
be followed (without your gracious prevention) on with a speedy Arraignment,
before an high and eminent Judicatory, are far from being pleasing to Flesh and
Blood; and though the enjoyment of your grace and favor be a blessing most
deserving to be reckoned among the best of temporals, yet that neither the
feeling and fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could
have induced your petitioner against the light of his own judgment, and the
prepondering part of his own Conscience to have made, or presented this
acknowledgment; he sadly forecasting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible
recompense for a wounded conscience.

That nevertheless (he trusts) he shall be excusable in tendering thus far,
even his outward condition, as to represent to your honors, that he is in most
apparent danger of his irreparable loss of his health (the sweetest of outward
blessings) unless by your gracious grant, he may speedily enjoy a more free and
open air, then this his close confinement will allow him:

And this Christian favor (which even for Christ's sake your poor Petitioner
most humbly beggs) Your Honors are as able to enlarge, even to a pardoning of
his offenses, and a perfect releasing of him, from his imprisonment, as he is
submissively forward in desiring them, though confessedly far from deserving
them.

He nevertheless promising, that your compassionate affording hereof, shall be
a strong and standing engagement upon him, daily beseeching the heart-making,
and heart-changing God, that all those who either through former
accustomedness, or present inadvertancy, do not clearly discern the minds of
God concerning the Alteration of this Government, may be observing your prime
and pious industry, to advance throughout this Commonwealth, the power of
godliness, a Scripture Reformation, and the Truth as it is in Jesus, be won to
a yielding to your Honors, conscionable obedience, and not only in word, but in
heart and life, may be true and faithful to the present Government.

WILL. JENKIN.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament;

That Master William Jenkin be pardoned, both for Life and estate, for and in
respect of the treasons, and crimes whereof he is accused; and that Master
Attorney general be authorized and required to prepare a Pardon in common form
for that purpose to be passed under the great seal of England, and that the
Lords commissioners for the great seal be authorized and required to pass the
same under the Great seal accordingly.

Resolved upon the question by the Parliament;

That Master William Jenkin be forthwith discharged of his imprisonment, and
Bail, and his estate be discharged of and from sequestration; and the
commissioners for compounding, and other officers are to take notice hereof,
and observe the same accordingly.

Upon several humble petitions of Master Thomas Case, Mr. Ralph Robinson, and
Mr. Thomas Watson Ministers; the Parliament did grant unto each of them the
like pardon for life and estate, and discharged them from imprisonment, and the
sequestration of their estates.

Upon the humble petition of Mr. Arthur Jackson Minister, the Parliament
granted him a pardon for his life and estate.

Upon M. Attur. Generals report of the humble and penitent demeanor of Dr.
Roger Drake, at his Trial at the High Court of Justice, confessing the Treasons
laid to his charge, and his humble petition the Parliament did pardon him for
life and estate, and ordered his release out of prison and his estate
discharged from sequestration.

The Parliament upon report by Mr. Atturn. General of the like deportment of
Lieut. Col. Jackson, Lieu. Col. Joseph Vaughan, and Cap. Hugh Massey.

The Parliament likewise ordered for each of them a Pardon for life and estate,
and discharged them from imprisonment, and their estates from Sequestration.

FINIS.
Mr. Jenkins Sermon Preached before the Parliament at St. Margarets Westminster,
on Wednesday the 24th. of September 1656. being the day of the public Fast.

Printed by A. M. for John Dallam and are to be sold at his Shop in
Shoe-makers-Row in Black-Fryars near Carter-lane. 1656.

In which Sermon page the 33d you have these words.

Worthy Patriots, you that are Rulers in this Parliament, its often said we
live in times, wherein we may be as good as we please, wherein we enjoy in
purity and plenty the ordinances of Jesus Christ, praised be God for this, even
that God that has delivered us from the imposition of prelatical Innovation.
Altar genuflections and cringings, with crossings and all that popish trash and
trumpery, and truly I speak no more than what I have often thought and said,
the removal of those insupportable burdens countervails for the blood and
treasure shed and spent in those late distractions.

Page. 3.

Excusing their unsubmissiveness by aspersing the Government.

Nor did I yet ever hear of any godly men, that desired, were it possible to
purchase their friends and Money again, at so dear a rate, as with the return
of theirs to have those soul-burdning-antichristian yokes reimposed upon us,
and if any such there be, I am sure, that design is no part of their godliness,
and I profess my self, in that, to be none of the number.


