THE BURNING, Yet Un-consumed BUSH: OR The Holiness of Places discussed.

Held forth in Two Farevvel-Sermons at Christ-Church London, August 17th. 1662.

By Mr. WILLIAM JENKINS.

2 Samuel 23.1. Now these are the last words of David, the sweet singer of
Israel. LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXII.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THe words of a dying man usually are very serious, weighty, and much regarded:
The ensuing Notes being this Preachers last Legacy to his Congregation, a
little before his civil, though voluntary death, by reason of the great
concourse of People that were then assembled to leave their dying Pastor preach
his own Funeral Sermon whilst he was yet alive, many being too distant from
him, or too much disturbed by the crowd, fell short of their share and portion
in them: For the benefit of such as well as other, who lost much by committing
to memory, are these Notes exposed to public view; I conceive I need not add
any one Letter to take off the clamor that has bin cast upon him, as if out of
Humor and Faction, or which is worse, disobedience to Authority, he refused to
conform; enough you will find here to give an account why he chose to take up
his Cross, and follow Christ in a way of Conscience and Fidelity.

Farewell.
Mr. JENKINS's Forenoon SERMON Aug. 17. 1662.
TEXT:
HEBR. 11.38. The former Part of the Verse, Of whom the World was not worthy.
THe Apostle in this excellent Chapter (that by some is deservedly called, a
little Book of Martyrs) discovers the triumph of Faith, or victory against all
difficulty we meet with:

First, Faith it assents to Truths be they never so improbable.

Secondly, It puts men upon Duties, be they never so irrational, or against
carnal Interest.

Thirdly, It inables to sufferings, be they never so afflictive. These Wo^thies
went through all by the victory that overcame the world, the bitterness as well
as the sweetness thereof.

In these Verses the Apostle does two things: First, He sets down the greatness
and smartness of their sufferings, which are by some Learned men reduced to
three Heads:

First, Those sufferings that were to tempt them, and draw them from God, by
those pains and tortures they were to undergo.

Secondly, Those sufferings they underwent in dying.

Thirdly, Their sufferings in regard of wandering and leaving their comforts,
rather then they would loose God.

There were all kind of persecutions laid upon these Saints, through all which
they waded, and never would be brought to forsake God and his truth, for any of
them. 2. We have here the excellency of the sufferer, and that is in that
expression, These men, or these persons, when they were under all these
distresses from the world, yet they were such of whom the world was not worthy.

Brethren, The excellency of these Saints and servants of God is considerable
two ways, that we may proceed distinctly and clearly.

First, in reference to the wicked, their excellency was so great that the
wicked world was not worthy of them.

Secondly, Their excellency is discovered from the estimate or judgment that
the Apostle passes upon them, who tells us, that he accounted them to be such,
though they were under such distresses and troubles, yet they were a people of
whom the world was not worthy.

I shall fall upon the due estimation the blessed Apostle raises upon these
persecuted Saints, who was enlightened by the Spirit of God, and so was able to
pass a right sentence upon these persecuted Saints; from this I raise this
ensuing Observation.

Observe. That a godly man does see a very great worth and excellency in the
people of God in the midst of all their troubles and distresses; Or, That a
godly man, a gracious heart, one that has spiritual Spectacles, does see an
excellency and worth in the people of God, in the midst of all trouble and
persecution that can befall them.

Here I shall handle it first doctrinally according to my constant method, then
come to improve it by way of Application. For the Doctrinal handling of it,
there are two things must be discovered;

First, Wherein the high estimation of a gracious heart does appear, wherein it
does discover it self, wherein they show they have such an high estimation.

Secondly, Whence it is, and how it comes to pass, that godly men have this
high and honorable esteem of the Saints and people of God in their troubles
and distresses which befall them.

For the first, Wherein the high estimation of a gracious heart does appear, I
shall show it in five or six following particulars.

First, It appears in this, In that they are not ashamed of owning their
persons and faith, that they profess in their troubles and distress^s; the
society of the people of God, and the fellowship of the Faith and profession,
is highly respected by a gracious heart, let the Saints lie under never so
great distresses. This is manifest in Moses in the 25. and 26. Verses of this
Chapter, He chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy all the pleasure and preferment of Pharaohs Court. The Israelites
Religion the profession of the true God, and owning the faith and those Truths
the Israelites stood up for, this was that which Moses would not desert: and
thence it was he did not desert their company and society, but went and visited
them when they lay under those burdens under which they lay.

Secondly, The second thing wherein is discovered so high an estimation of the
Saints and people of God in sufferings, is their sympathizing, and
follow-feeling with them in their sufferings, if it goes ill with the Church
and people of God, all the rest sympathizes with them; if one member suffers
all the rest suffer. Instance, Nehemiah (who had the greatest favor of the
greatest Prince then on earth) he looked with a sad countenance because of the
sufferings of the Saints and people of God; Nehem. 2.2. Wherefore the King said
unto me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing
else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid, and answered the King,
Because of the distresses the people of God lie under: The pleasure of Music
should never be with him, says David in Psalm 137.6. If I do not remember th^e,
let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above
my chief joy. As it is with two strings in an instrument rightly tuned, if one
be touched, the other trembles; if one servant of Christ be in a suffering
condition the rest suffers with him; this is the damp of all worldly delight,
if it be ill with any of the people of God the rest suffer in the way of
compassion.

Thirdly, In that they can plead for them, and take their parts, when they are
never so much out of favor, when they are never so much despised and abused:
This was in the case of Jonathan, how he pleaded for poor David before his
cruel father Saul, though Saul called him a cursed son, and fell foul on his
mother because of him. See this in the case of Esther, though it was death to
go in to the King to plead for the Jews, yet for all this she says, If I
perish, I perish; resolved I am, come what will come of it, in I will go, I can
die, but I cannot be silent.

Fourthly, In that they will relieve them, and help and supply them with all
needful good things they can, if they cannot do what they would, they will do
for them what they can: See this in the case of Jeremiah, chap. 38. verse. 8,
11, 12, 13. Ebedmelech went forth out of the Kings house, and spoke to the King
--: So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king
under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts, and old rotten rags, and
let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. And Ebedmel on the
Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these old cast clouts, and rotten rags
under thine arm-holes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so^ So they drew up
Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the dungeon, and Jeremiah remained
in the court of the prison. He would never be quiet, till he had got the
Prophet out of the dungeon, and though the cords were lined with rags, yet more
with love, and this savor of Ebedmelech God remembered, 1 Kings 18.4. Obadiahs
master was not only an oppressor of the Saints and Prophets of God, but a very
great persecutor: This good man Obadiah took and hid 400 Prophets of the Lord
and fed them with bread and water: (I will not undertake to prophecy to you
this day, yet time may come when bread and water may be good food for a
faithful Prophet.) Here note the gracious disposition of good Obadiah; as well
as the providence of God in this act. 2 Timothy 1.16, 17, 18. The Lord give mercy
unto the house of Onesiphorus, for he often refreshed me, and was not ashamed of
my chain. But when he was in Rome, he sought me out very diligently and found
me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find mercy of the Lord in that day:
and in how many thing's he ministered unto me at Ephesus, thou know very
well. A most admirable Scripture to this purpose; Blessed Paul being thrown
into prison, being in bonds, Onesiphorus often refresht him, and was not
ashamed of his chains? How did he show this? When he was in Rome, he sought him
out diligently; By the way note, That Rome was the place where the cruel Nero
was Emperor, it was the place where much blood of the Martyrs was spilt, yet
there this good man sought out Paul diligently: Mark what follows, which is the
prayer of Paul, The Lord grant to him that he may find mercy of the Lord in
that day. I profess Sirs, I had rather have the prayers of Paul, then the
preferments of the greatest Court on earth: Christians, it is the greatest
treasure in your house, to have the prayers of good men to God for you: You
that have shown your great and abundant love to the Saints and Servants of God
in distress: I do from my soul beg the like mercy for you, that whatever you
have done for his, may be ten thousand times made up by him, that you may find
mercy in that day, and truly Sirs, in that day mercy will be worth receiving.

Fifthly, They supplicate to God for them, they do not go to the Throne of
Grace for themselves, but Sion is in their thoughts. I am confident it is so
with some, and am persuaded it is so with all; they never beg daily bread for
themselves, but they remember Sion: In the 51 Psalm, David was under trouble of
Conscience, soultrouble, which is the soul of trouble, yet at the latter end of
the 51 Psalm he breaks out into this earnest supplication to God. Do good in
thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou up the walls of Jerusalem: So long as
it is ill with the people of God, so long they are earnest with God; and though
they cannot overcome men with their prayers (which by the way they are to
endeavor) yet they will never leave supplicating the Almighty, till they have
overcome. As the sufferings of Gods people are precious in the sight of God, so
they are in the sight of the people of God.

I come now to show whence it is, That there is such an high esteem in the
people of God, of the people of God, when under trouble and distress; for this
take two Heads of Reasons.

First, In regard of those of the people of God that do behold their sufferings.

Secondly, In regard of those people of God that are in sufferings.

First, In regard those of the people of God, that do behold their sufferings,
troubles and distresses, in three regards.

First, Those of the people of God that look upon others in trouble, though
they are such as may differ from them, in regard of outward estate; one may be
in honor, the other in dishonor, yet they have an interest in the same head,
and do belong to the same body that they do; they are not wooden legs, nor
glass eyes; therefore Christ is called the ommon aviour, and the Savior of
the body, the whole Church: Faith it is called, the like precious faith, 2 Pet.
1 chapter in the beginning. The says of one believer does as trnely lay hold on
Christ, as the says of another. This salvation is called common salvation: my
meaning is, this outward disproportion, as to birth and education, puts no
difference at all in a spiritual respect, between believer and believer: a King
and a Beggar all one in Christ; a Jew or a Greek, a great Scholar, or a poor
ignorant man, as to the spiritual state, all one, made happy the same way.

Secondly, Because they look at Spiritual excellency, and are able to discern
spiritual excellency; they have a renewed Judgment, as they look upon their
old courses and sins with a new eye, so they look upon their company with a
new e^e: those that before they highly esteemed they now disesteem: those
persons that before hey esteemed a damp to their mirth, they now look upon them
as the excellent ones of the earth Prove. 12. v. 26. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor. In the 16 Psalm, says David My goodness
extends not to thee, but to the Saints; the excellent ones in wh^m is all my
delight. Here was a renewed estimation, David saw excellency in these which
worldlings despised. A carnal eye sees no glory but in carnal objects; Worlding
bless the Covetous, whom the Lord abhorrs. A gracious heart sees a spiritual
worth in a man divested of worldly enjoyments, as a curious eye may, and does
see a great deal of Art and Curiosity in a picture, though in a broken frame. A
Beast can see the shining of a Diamond, but knows not the worth of it; a beast
will rather lick up a lock of Hay, then a Diamond, though of never so great
value. A wicked man wants a spirit of discerning. The people of God are the
Workmanship of God, which a godly man is very much taken withal; not with the
greatness, but with the goodness that is in them. The four Monarchs of the
earth is expressed by four beasts, which shows their cruelty, not their
curiosity, in observing that of God which may be observed. A child is taken
with the Gay, but a Learned man is taken with the Learning, and Art of a lesson.

Thirdly, A child of God, is one that highly esteems the people of God,
judging of them as God judges. The child esteems as the father esteems: if the
father cannot love any one, the ingenious child cannot endure that he should
come into the house. The Courtier follows the favorite of the King; whom the
King honors, they cringe to. But to be sure it is true as to spirituals: God
judges not by the gold ring, or silken shute; a sinner is a vile person in Gods
account, and so he is in a godly man's account; God is more taken with a
brokenhearted sigh, than with all the gaudery in Solomon's Temple. He did not
choose the Eagle, or the Lion for sacrifice, but the Lamb and the Dove: not many
noble, not many rich, but the poor has God chosen: He that has the life of
God, he has the love of God.

2d. Reason, Is from the people of God that are beheld. This will appear in
five or six particulars.

First, The people of God, those that are truly such let their present
condition be what it will, their end shall be happy. Men are not regarded in
reference to what they have in possession, but what they shall have in
reversion: the poor her care rich in faith, and shall be rich in glory. 1
Peter, 3 chapter The people of God are Heirs of glory, coheires with Christ; when
he shall appear, they shall appear with him in Glory: they are not possessors
here but they are Heirs, and are to be looked upon as what they shall be
hereafter: Here they are Princes going to their Crown, hereafter they shall be
possessed of it: Here they may be oppressed banished, disgraced, libeli'd,
hereafter they shall shine as the Sun in Glory.

2dly. They are not only such as shall be happy, but they are very useful and
beneficial in the world, they are those for whose sake the world was made,
they are the great common blessings of the world, like fire and water, they are
those for whose sake God spares the world. If God would have spared the City
for ten righteous persons sake, surely for many tens God spares the world;
those that are pulled down by the world, are those for whose sake God does not
pull down the world, they are the soul of the world, as I may so say; If God
had gathered in all his Elect, the world would not continue one hour longer.

3dly. The excellency of their performances is highly esteemed, there is a
worth in every Holy work that Worldlings are not able to discern; Every
Heavenly Prayer, and sincerely bestowed Alms, has a worth that a carnal eye
does not see: Luther says, I had rather do the least truly good work, then
obtain all the Conquests of Caesar and Alexander; if their good works shall be
so rewarded, do you think a holy man can see them and not be taken with them?
Many a wicked man when he hears a holy man make an excellent Oration, wishes
that he could do so too, it is not from the goodness he observes in it, or the
principle from whence it comes, but from something of natural accomplishments
that he is taken with it; so a Godly man when he hears another Pray
excellently, and live holily, he wishes from his heart that he could do so too,
his aim is to grow in Holiness.

4thly. The present privileges of the people of God, not only what they shall
have hereafter, but what they have here, they are freed from a world of Evils
that Worldlings lie under, whatever befalls them turns to their benefit, they
may be afflicted, but not hurt by affliction; the greatest hurt the world does
to them, tends to their greatest good; Worldlings may take away their Heads,
they cannot their Crown: There is a real communication of a blessed interest
in all that is good, for they have an interest in all that God has or i^; the
power of God is theirs to protect them, the love of God is set upon them, the
righteousness of God imputed to them, so as to acquit them from sin; so that a
child of God may not only appeal to the bowels of Gods mercy, but to the bar
of Justice, all the providence of God shall tend to their good; in the 25.
Psalm, about the 10th. verse, the Holy Ghost says, All the ways of God are
Mercy and Truth, to them that are in Covenant with him; they are Mercy because
they are appointed to do them good, and Truth because they shall certainly do
them good; Christ, and God, and all is laid out for the good of a Godly man. In
this world they may go to God and tell him wherein they are troubled, pained,
or afflicted, and they are never more welcome to him, then when they ask most
from him; if thou asks great things from God, God is well taken with such
requests, but if thou asks Riches and Honors, these are the low things of the
Footstool: God is exceedingly taken with thee when thou ask Peace and
Pardon, Peace of Conscience, Pardon of Sin, Strength against Sin, Power to
overcome thy Lusts, to withstand Temptations; The people of God may have from
God all that they want, and all they can regularly wish.

5thly. These are such as have an incomparable dear and near relation to God,
they are his delight, they are set apart by God as his own, his peculiar
people; though God have a propriety in all, yet he has a peculiar propriety
in, and relation to these, therefore they are called his Children, his House,
his Jewels, his Garden; Gods whole Treasure and Portion is his people; as God
is his peoples portion, so his people are his portion, they are those that he
has been at a great deal of cost to purchase.

6thly. They are such as have the Image of God imprinted upon them, take notice
of this word Image, for the Image of God appears in Holiness; Now an Image
does not represent any thing of imperfection or deformity, but of Excellency.
If a man takes the Picture of a man, he will not take it of his backside, Leg,
or Hand, or the like, but of his Face, his beautifullest part is chiefly aimed
at in the Picture; Wicked men discover Gods bounty in having wit and wealth,
this is not the Image of God, the Image of God is that which is most excellent
in a man, which is Holiness: The power of God is the Hand of God, the Wisdom
of God is the Eye of God, the Holiness of God is the Face, the Beauty of God,
the people of God resemble God in Purity, Be ye Holy as your Heavenly Father is
Holy, there is the Pattern, they have the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Whereby are
given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by these you might be
partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the corruption that is in the
world through lust. Ephesians. 4.18. Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their heart. Romans 3 23 For all have sinned, and come short
of the glory of God. There is more of God in Grace, then in all the works that
ever God did in the World besides; there is much of God seen in making the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, but in giving a man a new Nature, a renewed understanding in
changing of a man from being a Vessel of wrath, and Vessel of Satan, in making
of him become a new man, a Vessel of Glory; God shows more of himself then in
making ten thousand worlds

Use. Here I shall raise these following Inferences: If it be so that there is
such an excellency in the people of God here, then first, what excellency shall
there be seen on the people of God in Heaven? If they are so beautiful in
their rags, what will they be when they appear in their Robes? The Glory of
Christ shall be admired in them that believe. Oh what a Head is he that has
such members? What a Lord is he that has such Attendance? The people of God
are in a state of Nonappearance now, hereafter it shall appear what they are,
the very wicked themselves shall admire them.

2. Inference. What are we to think of those that have no regard either for
Religion, or for Religions ones, any farther forth then it is decked and adorned
with advantageous Beauty and outward Glory? If Religion be not looked upon with
a favorable Eye from Authority, farewell Religion and Religiousnesse. These
love the Child for the Nurses sake, what is the thing in fashion these are for,
what Authority commands they will creep and cringe too; When the Dear is shot,
the Heard flies from her, when Religion is shot at, then farewell Religion;
what is this but to have the Faith of God in respect of Persons? If I love
Religion for the countenance of Authority, then it is certain I love Religion
for the Authorities sake; This is a sign thou shall not have communion with
those hereafter that thou contemnest here: If the people of God are too bad for
thee when they are in trouble and affliction, they will be too good for thee in
Glory.

3. Inference. Note here the excellency of Holiness above Wordly Glory; Here a
man is dignified by what is conferred upon him, when outward Honor cease,
the man is contemned, but Holiness it dignifies a man, and shall remain here
and hereafter; Set a Giant in a valley he is a Giant still, a Pearl is a Pearl
though on a dunghill, a Holy man is a Holy man though never so much disgrast
and contemned by men: John Baptist had a Leathern Girdle, and had Locust for
his food, yet there was not a greater then John Baptist born of women; He was
the forerunner of Christ, the Friend of the Bridegroom; on the other side
Herod, that was like the Voice of God, and not of man, what was he in Gods
account? The Angel smote him and he became Worms meat. There is a silent
dignity in reproached piety, and a silent ignominy in advanced iniquity: As it
was with Christ, so it is with the Servants of Christ, when he was on Earth no
man had more ignominy poured upon him, yet there was a secret Glory attended
him in all that befell him, though Born in a Manger, yet Worshipped there,
sometimes he was driven to be hungry, the Fish brought him money, sometimes a
weary, at that very time converts a Woman, sometimes laid hold on by his
Enemies, at that very time his Enemies fell down before him; Look through the
whole course of his life, there was a secret glory under all ignominy: Just
thus it is with the Servants of Christ, they are in trouble and disgrace, but
there is a secret Glory and dignity shines in them, the Spirit of God and of
Glory rests upon them, if ye suffer for righteousness sake blessed are ye, to
be in high place and yet to be a Drunkard, or a Swearer, or a Whoremaster, or
Profane, this spoils all thy glory, be thou never so high.

4. Inference. This is the way for a man to have a good name; would thou gain
a good report living and dying? Take heed of sin, take heed of dishonoring God,
then God will have thee in everlasting remembrance.

5. Inference. Note here the certain happiness of these beholders, that do see
certain excellency in Holiness, though disgrast and undervalued; if there be
any thing in the world that is a sign of sincerity it is this, to love
Holiness when disgrast, abused, and spit upon; to cross the stream, and
thwart the multitude, is a sign of the truth of Grace, and strength of Grace:
This is a sign of a true sight, and strong sight. To see beauty in a Godly man
in sufferings, the Lord will certainly have an eye upon thee in times of
troubles; Here is comfort in thine infirmities. Do thou love Holiness when
compassed about with sufferings and persecution? God will take notice of thy
Grace, though compassed about with abundance of infirmities; the Lord will take
notice of a little of his, in a great deal of ours: Here Is comfort in
sufferings, if you regard his in their sufferings, the Lord will remember you
in your sufferings, the Lord will remember what thou did for such and such a
Servant of his in trouble or distress; God does not cast away any in their
lowness, that have kept close to him in their highness; and this will be
comfort in inward trouble, when thou can find nothing from which to fetch
comfort. And this will be comfort in the last day, though we can say nothing in
that day by way of merit, yet it will be comfort to be able sincerely to say,
that thou have owned God and his people in the midst of sufferings: Do ye think
that Judge would not save that Malefactor that had saved the life of his Wife?
If thou have owned Christ when he was in his rags, do not fear but he will own
thee when he comes in hi^ Robes.

6. Inference, and last, The People of God should learn not to be discouraged
under any misery or affliction that can befall them in this world, at this very
time God has a high esteem of you; At this time you are his delight, his
Garden, his Spouse. The Saints of God are the wisemen of the world, they have
chosen that which cannot be taken from them: I profess Sirs, the love of one
Saint makes amends for all the hatred you undergo from sinners, the very wicked
themselves have a good opinion of you, when you do not basely comply, their
Consciences cannot but have an high esteem of you, when peradventure their
tongues might speak against you. If all this will not do, remember your own
Consciences are more then a thousand witnesses, for you will then comfort you;
No man is a miserable man for any thing in the world that is done to him, or
said of him; No, it is a good Conscience that will give the best acquittance;
for thee to have the whole number of Gods people to look upon thee as an
unworthy wretch, and as a vile person, I look upon it as a greater ignominy and
disgrace, then to have all the disgraces of wicked men cast upon thee: That man
that has a Godly man to be afraid of him, had need to be very much afraid of
himself. I shall conclude all with this one word, There is great reason to look
narrowly to your hearts and ways, when they stand at a distance from you, and
are afraid to come near you.

The Afternoon Sermon, August 17. 1662
Text 3d. of Exodus, 2d. verse. And the Angel of the Lord appeared unto him in
a flame of Fire out of the midst of a Bush, and he looked, and behold the Bush
burned with Fire, and the Bush was not consumed.


He read 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. Verses.

THat this may be the more profitable and useful, I judge it necessary at your
leisure to cast an eye on the sore-going Chapter, wherein we shall see Moses
his preservation: In this Chapter is described his preparation and fitness for
that employment God had appointed him to, by a suitable apparition, in which
God discovers to Moses his care of his People, of whom Moses was to be a speedy
deliverer.

In the words read, we have the preparation confirmed to Moses, for the great
work of being called to be Isreells deliverer. In the preparation we may take
notice of three principal parts.

1st. The Apparition here presented to Moses, A burning, and yet an unconsumed
Bush.

2d. We have Moses care to observe it in these words, I will turn aside and see
this great sight, why the Bush burns and is not consumed.

3d. We have here Gods monitory precept that he afforded to Moses, when he was
drawing near to see the wonder.

In the precept or admonition we have principally considerable two parts.

1st. This precept or admonition is propounded, and that is, That Moses should
not draw near, that he should put off bis Shoes from off his Feet.

2d. The reason or argument, whereby God backs this precept or admonition,
Because the place whereon he, stood was Holy ground. Time would fail me should
I go over all these parts, therefore I shall only touch upon the two first,
namely the apparition that Moses defired to observe.

The apparition was a suitable discovery of the state of the Church. In the
burning, yet unconsuming of the Bush, observe three things.

1st. Observe the lowness and weakness of the Church, represented by a Bush.

2d. The cruelty of her Enemies, represented by Fire.

3d. The eminency of its preservation: Though it was in the Fire, yet it was
not consumed; Not one of these but would take me up more time then I have to
spend upon the whole.

The Church is compared to a Bush for two reasons.

1st. In regard of its deformity and uncomlinesse.

2d. In regard of its weakness.

The Church uncomly in regard of those sufferings. God sees it good it should
be thus to humble his Church, to show his goodness in preserving of her, to
make her long for that perfect beauty that she shall have: Hereby God makes
them the more conformable to their Head: Hereby God makes them look after
inward Beauty and Glory: Hereby he puts them upon living a Life of Faith, and
not of Sense: Hereby God shows how little he regards the Beauties of this Life:
Hereby he shows there is a state of rest and of glory above, that they should
look after.

1st. Therefore the people of God are not to be censured in regard of their
deformity, in regard of those sufferings they undergo in this Life. This Life
is the obscurity of the Churches adoption; we see what she is, but not what she
shall be.

2d. We should take heed of expecting that Glory that God has not promised, it
is too much to have two Heavens.

3d. Hereby we may see the reason why wicked men stumble so much at the Church
of God, it is because there is nothing of outside Beauty and Glory to take
them, or to allure them.

2dly. The Church of God is compared to a Bush, in regard of its weakness, not
to a strong Oak, but to a Bush, in other places to a Vine, both of them weak;
to a Dove, a Lamb, a Sheep, weak creatures, sometimes said to be destitute; As
our Lord Jesus the Head of the Church, suffered through weakness, so God
hereby makes them rest upon him, and when they are weak in themselves, then are
they strong. The weakness of our State, shows the strength of the Grace of God
afforded to them in upholding of them, the weakness of the Church wonderfully
confounds her Enemies, to be delivered not only against the strength of men,
but by the oppositions of men. Hereby the People of God are made more
thankful, both for their Preservation, and likewise for their deliverance from
their so powerful Adversaries; I am too long on this which I thought only to
have touched upon. Here Is a larg Field, which whether most suitable to the Text
or the Times, I shall leave others to judge.

2dly. The Enemies of the Church are compared to fire, the fire of affliction
does not only discover to us their rage and cruelty, but likewise discovers the
benefit that comes to the Church by afflictions, afflictions are not consuming
fire, but trying fire, God teaches his Servants excellent Lessons by the light
of this fire.

3dly. The Emminency of their Preservation; they are not consumed, though the
fire be never so spreading, as it looses in one place, so it gains in another,
God will have his number, the Enemies of the Church may as well attempt to beat
the Sun with Snow-balls, or blow it out of the Heavens with Bellows, as to
drive the Church of God out of the world, their Graves are not consumed, this
fire does not burn them up, though it burn upon them, God will not suffer this
fire to exceed their strength, it shall burn up nothing but their dross, that
that would destroy them, if not destroyed out of them.

I shall pass by the 2d. general part, viz. Moses his care to observe it.
Moses was an excellent Naturalist, yet he could see no reason in nature, that a
flaming fire should be in a Bush, and the Bush not burnt; I do not think that
Moses turned aside in curiosity, so much as to see what God did intend by this
great miracle: When Gods works are great, our observations should not be small,
when the hand of God is eminently discovered we should not shut our eyes. I am
far from being a Fanatic, or led by unscripturall grounds, yet I cannot but
observe the Hand of God, in these days wherein we now live, we have seen and
heard of strange sights, wonderful wonders, and I question whether there has
not been something as strange as this, the hand of God is not to be neglected,
though it cannot be perfectly understood; It is a sign of a wicked man, to have
the works of God out of his fight. Sirs, you may trust this God that has
wrought such wonders as in our, days he has done, he has all the creatures
at his command, we should dread and stand in awe of offending this God.

3dly. We have here consider able the Monitory admonition of God; In that he
does forbid Moses to draw nigh, and then he does bid him to pull off his Shoes,
the reason of the former will be understood by the opening of the latter, I
shall briefly take notice of two things.

1. An injunction, Put of thy Shoes.

2dly. The argument, because the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.

I shall not give you the several glosses of some Critics upon the words, the
plain meaning is this, Gods scope and drift is to require of Moses reverence,
when he was to draw nigh to him; His design herein was to prepare him for
obedience, and therefore God required that of him, which some Servants were
wont to do, when they came before their Lords, or Masters, to testify their
reverence to those before whom they came, it was an ancient custom, I might
spend the hour in giving you instances or examples to this purpose; This
Galeatius observes; the bareing the feet or putting off the Shoes, is in
Scripture held forth as a token of reverence: Hence we read of S. John Baptist,
speaking of Christ, as having his Shoes on, and of himself as unworthy to unty
his Shoo-lachets. Isaiah 20.2. And the same time spoke the Lord by Isaiah the
son of Amoz, saying, Go, and loose the sackloth from off thy loins, and put off
thy Shoe from thy foot: and he did so, walking naked and barefoot. Ezekiel
24.17. Forbear to cry, make no mourning for the dead, bind the tire of thine
head upon thee, and put on thy Shoes upon thy feet, and cover not thy lips,
and eat not the bread of men. Mourners are there said to go unshod, to note
submission or subjection: On the other side, when God would show the
deliverance of his people, he is said to put on Shoes on their feet: So the
reception of the Prodigal into his Fathers house, is according to the
judgment of some learned men, intended by that expression, the putting on
Shoes on his feet, Luke 15.22. But the Father said to his Servants, bring
forth the best Robe, and put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and Shoes
on his feet. As much as if God had said show thy reverence, due submissivenesse
and subjection of Spirit, together with thy servile readiness, to do whatever
I shall command and enjoin: Calvin has an excellent note upon this place. If
so excellent a Servant of God as Moses was, had need to be quickened by such a
Ceremony as this was, doubtless we who are more backward to obedience, we
should both signify the reverence of our souls by outward expressions, and of
our bodies by bodily gesture, by kneeling, lifting up the hand, and the like,
the presence of God is great; We that are by the law of Creation much below
him, and by the illegal Law of Sin much against him, should certainly show our
Humility, when he calls to us or we address to him The reason, because the
place whereon Moses stood was holy ground: It was holy in regard of this
miraculous Vision, not as if the place were of its own Nature holy, but God
does hereby import, that that place by the special Testimony of his presence,
in relation to the miracle, because he was miraculously there present, that
made the place holy: Thus it was then, I do not understand how I can so
profitably discourse of this unto you, unless I take notice of the holiness
of places now in the times of the Gosple, and consider,

I was not willingly put upon this employment, if it had not been extorted from
me by something that I have seen formerly and lately written, and by some, and
those not of the Leanest or Ignorant, but most Learned and accounted most
Knowing. Bellarmine tells us these words The Temples consecration is deservedly
holy and venerable, and endued with a divine efficacy and virtue: so Great is
the Holiness of Churches, that those things may be forbidden perpetually to be
done in them, which may be lawfully done elsewhere. Here I shall Endeavor to
explain the Question, then Try, and faithfully resolve it.

First, For the opening of it: 1. I shall show you what it is for a place to be
holy.

2. What that is that is the foundation or cause of the Holiness of places.

Quest. For the first, What it is for a place to be holy, wherein the Nature of
a place's holiness does Confist?

Answ. To this I answer, First Generally, Secondly more Particularly. First
Generally, The Holiness of a place consists in the Separation thereof, the
setting of it apart, exalting of it above and before other places, thus the
Notion of Holiness is taken in Scripture in 30 Exodus ver. 31. And thou shall
speak unto the children of Israel, saying, This shall be an holy anointing oil
to me thorowout your generations. You shall there read concerning the Holy
Ointment that He prescribes to be compounded for his service, it was set apart
only for that purpose: The Holiness there of consisted in the separating of it
from other uses and other oils, in the 37, and 38 verses of the same Chapter,
And as for the persume which thou shall make, you shall not make to your selves
according to the composition thereof, it shall be unto thee, holy for the Lord;
Whosoever shall make like unto to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his
people. The like we have in the zoth of Leviticus 24 and 25 verses. But I have
said unto you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it unto you to
possess it, a land that flows with milk and beney: I am the Lord your God
which have separated you from other people. Ye shall therefore put difference
between clean beasts and unclean, and between unclean fowls and clean: and ye
shall not make your souls abominable by beasts or by fowl, or by any manner of
living thing, that creeps on the ground, which I have separated from you as
unclean. 26 Deuteronomy 18, and 19, verses. And the Lord has avouched thee
this day to be his peculiar people, as he has promised thee, and that thou
should keep all his commandments; And to make thee high above all Nations
which he has made, in praise, and in name, and in honor, and that thou may
be an holy people unto the Lord thy God, as he has spoken. God is said there
to avouch his people to be his, and his. because he is said to have Separated
them: For this take two Scriptures more, 19 Deuteronomy. 2. and 7. verses. Thou shall
separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land which the Lord thy God
gives thee to possess it; Wherefore I command thee saying, Thou shall
separate three Cities for thee. And in the 20th of Joshua and the 2d. verse,
and so on. That which in one place is called Separation, in the other place is
called Sanctification. And hence it is, that a thing is said to be unholy, when
it is Common, and not set apart to holy Uses, Acts 10.14. But Peter said, Not
so, Lord; for I have never eaten any thing that is common or unclean. Hebr.
10.29. Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and has counted the blood of the
Covenant wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy thing, and has done despite
unto the Spirit of grace?

Secondly. This setting apart of places for holy uses, must have two properties:

1. It must be alienated from other uses to holy uses, the employing of them to
civil uses, must be looked upon as sinful and unlawful, when Times or Things
or Persons are reputed holy when they are to be exempted from Common
Employment. The Sabbath day, an Holy day, Common employment must not be done on
that day. The vessels of the Tabernacle they were holy, not to be employed in
ordinary uses. Some accounted this to be the sin of Belshazzer, because he
used the vessels of the Temple. Thus the oil and the ointment forementioned.

2dly. More particularly concerning this Holiness. This must be such a
separation, as a service done to God in those places must be accounted and
looked upon as a Better service, and more acceptable, thon if it had been don
elsewhere: As places are said to be holy, because they only are to be for Holy
services, and Holy services are only to be done in those Holy places. My
Brethren, I defire you to take Notice, Places were said to be Holy which did
sanctify the Worship that was done in them, and sanctified the Worshipper. The
very places were part of Worship. These places were not only those in which God
was worshipped, but by which God was worshipped. Thus the Sabbath was
sanctified, and so the Altar, when that was Holy and Sanctified, it made the
Gift to be so, Mat. 23.19. Ye fools and blind; for w^ether is greater, the
gift, or the Altar that sanctifies the Gift. The Altar you see sanctified the
gift, and the incense the Services done in such Garments more acceptable,
because done in such Garments.

More generally in respect of separation, the cause and foundation of a place
or any other things holiness, is its belonging to God, Gods propriety and
peculiar relation to it, therefore to be holy, and to be Gods, are in Scripture
equivolent, its being Gods, and God having relation and propriety to it, makes
it become holy. Exodus. 13.2. Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, whatsoever
opens the worth among the Children of Israel, both of man and of beast, it is
mine. God commands that they should sanctify to him all the first born, they
shall be holy to me whatsoever opens the womb, it is mine; The cause and reason
of its being holy, it because it is Gods. Luke 2.23. (As it is written in the
Law of the Lord, every male that opens the womb, shall be called holy to the
Lord.) This command is there again repeated, but in other words, as it is
written, every male that opens the womb, shall be holy unto the Lord; That
which in one place is said to be separated, is here said to be holy, and
therefore holy because separated by God: Yet more particularly, the declared
propriety that God has in any place, or its belonging to God, is declared two
ways.

1st. From his presence.

2d. From his precepts.

1st From his presence, extraordinary or ordinary.

1st. Extraordinary, the extraordinary presence of God is seen by his
miraculous discovering of himself, by some sign, as here in the Bush. Joshua
5.15. And the Captain of the Lords bost said unto Joshua, loose thy She from
off thy foot, for the place whereon thou stand is holy, and Joshua did so.
Hence it is that in 2 Pet. 1.18. And this voice which came from Heaven, we
heard, when we were with him in the holy Mount. The Mountain of Christ's
transfiguration is called the holy Mountain; There was an extraordinary
manifestation of Gods presence, so long as that continued, that was called an
holy Mountain, this ceasing, the holiness of the place ceased likewise; Peter
did not call it holy, because it was so when he writ, but because it had been
so, otherwise it would have been unlawful, to have employed it to any other
use.

2d. His ordinary presence makes a place holy, the presence of the standing
Residency by some external Symboll. 2d. His special presence in the religious
Services of his people, concerning the first of these; this was confirmed in
the Time of the Ceremonial Law, as instance the Altar, the Temple, the Ark, the
Mercy-Seat, They were all Symbolis and signs of Gods presence amongst his
people, That God was truly present in a more then ordinary way to do them good,
He recorded his name there, Psalm 68.1. where its said, Let God arise, and his
Enemies be scattered. Hence it was they mourned so much for the taking of the
Ark, because the visible sign of Gods presence was taken away: so long as these
continued, He was looked upon as there, and thither the people went to worship.

2. Gods ordinary presence is considerable in the religions services of his
people. This I call the Spiritual presence of God in his Ordinances, 18 Matthew.
verse 20. Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the midst of them: Not in the Midst of the place, but of the people, Praying,
Preaching, Sacraments, in the due dispensation thereof he is present to accept
them, His Spiritual presence to bless them, His presence there to Assist in
the due performance of them: Neither can his presence be ordinarily expected,
but in his own ways.

2dly. As the presence of God is the cause of a place its holiness, so Gods
propriety and relation to a place is declared by his precept: He may choose
whom he will, and what place he will. He unto whom all things belong, may more
peculiarly have something belong to him than others. Thus the Temple and the
Tabernacle of old, they were consecrated and set apart for God, by virtue of
his divine command. 1st. He must have them Just according to the pattern. 2. He
commanded them to be done in such a place, and in no other. Here in this place
is Typified Christ, and therefore God commanded the people to come to this
place to worship Three times a Year, as in Exodus 23 verse 17. Three times a
year all thy males shall appear before the Lord God. 3dly. He commanded that
people should reverence these places, and forbid all Civil Employment to be
done there. 4thly. He made a promise to that place that he would accept the
duties done there, because done there. That was the reason why the people
prayed in the Temple, rather then in their own Houses, and when they could not
be present there, if they but looked toward the Temple, God accepted, 1 Kings
chap. 8. verse. 44, 45. If thy people go out to battle against their enemy,
whithersoever thou shall send them, and shall pray unto the Lord toward the
City which thou have chosen, and toward the House that I have built for thy
name; Then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and
maintain their cause, etc. This shows the reason and foundation of any place
its Holiness, The Presence of God, and the Precept of God.

Now I come to the resolution of this Question: viz. How one place can be said
to be more Holy then another in the Times of the Gospel: and I shall resolve
it, First, by granting what must not be denied. 2dly. By denying what must not
be granted.

First, By Granting that which must not be denied, and herein, I shall Grant
these 4. things.

First, That in the Time of the Gospel it is not only Lawful, but very
commendable to design and dedicate places to Holy Services: When I say it is
Lawful and commendable to design and dedicate places, I do not say to
Consecrate and Sanctify them. There Is a vast difference between the designing
or appointing, or dedicating, and the Cons^crating that place. First,
Concerning the designing or appointing of a place for any holy Employment,
differs much from Consecrating it. A day may be appointed for the doing of any
work in, but it is not consecrated. We may design to meet in such a place, and
if prevented may meet in another. Secondly, The place we dedicate must be our
own, in our own right to give, so to give it, as not to recall it. It is
Lawful for a Rich man to dedicate such a place to such an use, or such a sum
of money to Build a School or an Almeshouse, so that it shall not be in his
power to recall it. By the way, this Dedication in Times of the Gospel differs
from the Dedication of any thing or place unto God in Times of the Law, for
they were immediately dedicated to God as part of Worship, whereas now it is not
so. Those things were holy, not because of their Dedication, but because of
Gods promise of Acceptance: Consecration is a great deal more; That makes it
so Holy, that there must nothing be done in it, but what it is appointed to.
The Services performed in those places must be more acceptable to God, and
efficacious to the performers that do perform them.

2dly. I grant some places are to have their Religious Services performed in
them, rather then others: I mean places of greater convenience, places
appointed for public meeting, rather then private, where we have the example
of good to join together, and go along with us, thus those of old overcame the
Omnipotent. I desire you to bear me witness this day, that I plead for public
Ordinances, where Ordinances are pure, without humane mixture; I do here
profess, and do avowedly declare its my judgment, if they may be enjoyed
purely, I am for public Ordinances.

3dly. During the time of performing Religious Services, we are not to use
secular or civil employments, as eating, drinking, etc. all which is lawful at
other times, but unlawful then, being contrary to an express command: Let
every thing be done decently, and in order. We are to abstain from these
things, when the Minister is preaching, you are not then to clap your self upon
your knees, as is the custom of too many, that plead for Uniformity, in that
and in many other practices they cross the thing they most plead for.

4thly. I grant that after the performance of holy duties in these places
wherein we meet, its our duty to abstein from, not only filthy and undecent
actions, but from those civil lawful actions, that may reflect any dishonor
on the work that has been done there, all that is to be done that may render
the place unmeet, for Religious Services afterward. This is reverence not due,
because the place is more holy, but for decency and order things subservient to
Religion call for reverence, and are not to be used, so that Religious Services
are to be made despicable; The Bread of the Sacrament is not to be cast to
unreasonable Creatures, because it reflects a dishonor upon the Service,
neither should dirty puddle be put into the Communion Cup, because it reflects
dishonor to the use its appointed to, this is civil reference due to any
place, where there is a Senate met in a Parliament house, in a Kings
bedchamber, etc.

I come now to deny what is not to be granted, and likewise I deny four things.

1st. That its not now in the times of the Gospel, in any man's power, to set a
part a place for Religious duties, so but it may be lawful upon a due
occasion, to use it for a civil employment, or its not unlawful to alienate
such places to other uses, then it was designed; The Bread and Wine in the
Sacrament, after public using them, is not unlawful to be eaten in a civil
way, so that we do not dishonor God thereby, neither is there any more
holiness in them then before. The Synagogues were as holy as our Churches are,
they were appointed for prayer, and preaching, and reading, and were dedicated
to holy Uses, yet there were Civil employments in those places. Here among us
we Consecrate places; I do affirm only God can make a thing or place so holy,
that it shall be a sin to employ it to any other use. And if the Governors of
the Church shall substitute other things or other places for divine employment,
fitter then those formerly used, then those former places and things returns to
their accustomed use again, for the Pulpit, or Communion table, or the
Surpliss, or any other Vestment, when done using, are not to be burnt, or
buried under the Altar, but may be used to Common and Ordinary Employments; the
Communion Cup is no more holyer then the Wine, they may be used as Common
things without fear of Sin; to Consecrate moveable things, or unmovable things
so, as others may not use them, is abominable Superstition. God has not
appointed these things to be used so, as none may ever use them otherwise.
These things are not holy in themselves.

2ly. No place in the times of the Gospel has such holiness either from
Institution or use, as to sanctify or make acceptable or effectual the
service therein performed, this is not in the times of the Gospel. God is
present at the places of Religious performances, not in respect of the place,
but to the performers. Therefore God does not say I will be present in that
place, for the places sake, but for the duties sake. Prayers in the time of the
Ceremonial Law were regarded for the places sake; but we must abhor this piece
of Judaisme, and utterly deny Consecration in this day of the Gospel, when the
Altar sanctified the Gift, this is done by Gods institution; But to say places
or things can now do so, it makes the appointments of men, equal with the
Institutions of God. The Temple sanctified the duties, or performances, not
they the Temple; its quite contrary now: Our Churches and Meetings are not
holy, without relation to the duties performed; Our duties are holy, without
relation to the Church, but the Church not holy without relation to the duties
therein performed: None but God can consecrate a place to be an effectual
means of Worship. The Jews worshipped in the Temple, Now God is worshipped
elsewhere, the places have no influence at all into our duties, at the most but
helpful to the bodies Convenience.

The third thing I deny is this; There is now no place so holy, as to exclude
another place from being as holy; we have not now the precept of God to prefer
one place above another; We have not now the miraculous presence of God, God
has not given us those Symbolls of his standing residency amongst us, as in
former days he did his People, as the Arke', the Mercy Seat, etc. As for his
Ordinances and the performance of them; if we make a Place holy, in regard of
Gods special and spiritual presence, I say the Closet, or Dining Room, or
Chamber, the Field, or the River side is holy, humane consecration make no
place truly holy: I say it again, its the special presence of Christ in his
Ordinance makes one place more holy then another, then any Utensils in the
Church are more holy then the Church, the Font and the Communion Table, then
the body of the Church, and so you make a difference between holiness, in holy
places, in holy things, and so bring in plain Judaisme; A new Table where the
Sacrament was never administered, cannot be so holy as the old, by this the very
Mouths of the Communicants would be so holy, that they must not eat nor drink
any more, but they would defile it: I conclude this with this assertion, that
Religious difference of places is removed, the Gospel takes it quite away, the
Gospel is so far from giving or making such a difference. 1. Tim. 2.8. I will
therefore that men pray every where, lifting up holy hands without wrath and
doubting. John 4.21, 22, 23. Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me the hour
comes, when ye shall neither in this Mountain, not yet at Jerusalem worship
the Father. Ye worship ye know not what: we know what we worship: for Salvation
is of the Jews. But the hour comes, and now is, when the true worshippers
shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him. 1 Cor. 1.2. Unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, to them
that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all that in
every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both theirs and ours.
Therefore where two or three are met together, there am I in the midst of
them, Mat. 18.^0.

This is the sum of all, That Gods institution is to be regarded, humane
institution to be rejected.

4. Lastly, No place is so sanctified by the miraculous special presence of
God, but that presence ceases, when the tokens of Gods residence cease; the
Ark, the Mercy-seat, the places became as before.

For us to go a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, and to the Temple, is an abominable
thing; how many bloody battles have since been sought there? these places where
the presence of God was, when abused to the dishonor of God, they become worse
and worse: whatever we use in holy uses, looses their holiness when abused.
It Is boldness for us to tie the presence of God to any place, for God has not
tied himself to any place. I cannot but wonder, how it is possible for men to
hold, that the Lords day, which God has been pleased to set apart for himself,
that its holiness can cease; for that they say, the Lords day is not holier
longer than the service is in doing; yet that the Church, that God never
appointed, should retain its holiness, that you must not tread there, but with
your hat off, nor come there without bowing the knee.

Give me leave to wind up all with profitable inferences that flows from
hence.

Use 1. The first inference: See the great difference betwixt the sanctity and
holiness of places under the Old, and under the New Testament. Those under the
Old, had the miraculous presence of God: so long the places were holy. They had
their Temple, their Altar, their Mercy-seat, the Ark, etc. these places were
holy; you cannot say the like now: we have the presence of God, but we have not
the precept of God, as they had: places now differ from places then.

Use 2. I note the great goodness of God, to give to us such a sweet
dispensation, that now he does not tie us to places, as heretofore he did the
Jenes: no land now is holier, nor place now holier then another: every coast is
a Judea, every Congregation is now a Zion, a Temple: you may pray as well now
in your closets, as then in the Temple.

Use 3. There are several persons to be reproved; those that take pilgrimages
to particular places, because of that holiness they suppose in them. I might
tell you of their lying Relics: I will not trouble you with them: suppose
them true, what is this to Institution and command of God? where have you a
command for such a thing? I might take notice of those that put holiness in
places of Burial; in the Church; think it holier than the Churchyard; and one
part of the Church holier than another; private prayer, rather than join in
public: for any to bow toward the place of the Communion Table, rather than
to any other place of the Church.

Use 4. I shall desire you to take notice of four things, you that are
Christians.

First, Let this encourage you to serve God in your Families, and places that
God has set you in, with humility and reverence, as becomes that God with whom
you have to do. Though I am against Superstition, and Popish Innovations, yet I
am for positive reverence wherever. Abraham came, he built God an Altar. Let no
morning or evening pass, without Prayer in your Families; Pray, pray often:
let every one of your houses be a Church: this will bring a blessing on the
place where you live. Be much in Prayer, for the Lords sake.

Secondly, Labor to promote personal Holiness, as well as Family duty. Since
you have heard something of holiness of places, let us labor to become holy.
Do you think those wretches are not the more to be lamented, that swear, and
drink, and lie, and whore, and think that the very dust of the Temple touching
their garments, will make them Holy? oh, put away uncleanness, pride,
drunkenness, and covetousness, else though you bow and cringe, God will not
hear your Prayers.

Thirdly, Love the holiness of the living Temples of God; wherever thou see
any thing of holiness, be in love with that soul: if there be a heaven upon
earth, it is to enjoy the company of Saints: this will blow up the coals of
spiritual love to God and goodness. A famous man had this expression, When I
was in the company of Saints, I thought I was as if I had been among living
coals; but when I was separated from them, and came among Swearers and
Drunkards, I found a spiritual frozennesse all over me. Though the people of
God are best company in Heaven, yet they are good company on earth. Whatever
thou have received, impart it: Grace may be imparted, it cannot be impaired.

Fourthly, Labor to preserve the holiness of Gods true Institutions; those
things that are of divine consecration. For humane consecration, alas what is
it? But for the Sabbath, the Lords day, labor to keep it holy. We talk much of
Holy days, this is so indeed. The Lords Supper, that is of Divine Institution,
labor for a holy participation thereof. If any thing in the world would drive
me to a Passion, this would, to hear men plead for the holiness of places,
and live unholy Lives; to stand up for humane, and not regard Divine
institutions. Oh that our King and Parliament might do something more than is
done for keeping the Sabbath holy! oh that we could mourn for that we cannot
mend! The Sacraments are Holy: it is the duty of Ministers to labor to keep
them holy. The Lords Word that is Holy. Ministry, and the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ, labor to keep in High esteem. We ought to hear with the same
reverence, as if Jesus Christ himself was here to preach. Live like walking
Temples. Many of these truths might be further enlarged, but I have not time
nor strength. I could discharge my duty, without speaking something to these.
What you have received with the right hand, do not east off with the left: I
have better hopes of you, my dearly beloved: I hope God will bring home these,
and all other those truths to your souls, which in much weakness I have
delivered to you: and be more to you, than his poor Minister, though he should
have remained with you.

FINIS.

