A Copy of the English Merchants Petition to King James
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
The Humble Petition of several English Merchants of the City of London,
Shows,
(N.5.)
THAT in January, 1685. Sir Peter Vandeput and a few others, having Petitioned
Your Majesty for the Remission of the Aliens Duty Outward, upon hearing the
Commissioners of the Customs, Your Majesty was pleased to declare Your Pleasure
in favor of the Petitioners, and to remit the Aliens Duty for all Goods
Exported of the Native Production and Manufacture of this Kingdom, until Your
Majesty should find Cause to alter Your Royal Pleasure therein.

And Your Petitioners being informed, That some Persons are attempting to get
the Aliens Duty Inwards remitted also, in all Humility, do represent to Your
Majesty, That the Remission thereof, either Inwards or Outward, is a Public
Damage to the Interest of Your Majesty's Kingdoms, and Diminutions of Your
Revenue, and the Trade of Your English Merchants, and a means to transplant
that, and the Mysteries of our Artifices into the Hands of Foreigners, to the
Ruin, not only of the Trading and Working People at Home, but also of the
several English Factories Abroad.

Your Petitioners therefore most humbly beseech Your Majesty's Leave, that they
may be heard, to demonsrate to Your Majesty the Consequence of such Remission.

And Your Petitioners (as in Duty Bound) shall ever humbly Pray, Subscribed by
Sir Matthew Andrews Sir Benjamin Newland Sir Thomas Griffith Sir John Chapman
Sir Henry Tulse Sir Robert Jeffery Sir Samuel Dashwood Sir Benjamin Ayloffe
John Hyde Sir John Moor Jacob Lucy Ralph Hardwick Robert Master Thomas D^^e
Adam Bellamy James Rudge Francis Kemp Thomas Duche William Wrayford Sir John
Eyles Bartholomew Gracediew Benjamin Dennis Charles Thorold William Cowper
Richard Hayte James Wait Samuel Nash Roger Williams Bedingfield Higham Gregory
Westcombe William Barnes John Cross Daniel Allen Rainsford Waterhouse John
Harvy Samuel Lock John Jackson James Wallis John Kent Humphry Morris Francis
Rainsford Henry Hunter Hugh Strode Francis Eyles Francis Baynton Richard Ryves
Nathaniel Maxy Joseph Martin Matthew Vincent Matthew Grantham John Flavell
Thomas Bawds Thomas Braylesford Thomas Morgan Abraham Anselme John Blackwell
Mark Proudfoot Anthony Wallinger Abraham Beak Walter Watkin Samuel Allen Isaac
Crabb Thomas Hunt William Gore Phillip Wheat

The Hamburgh Company, the Eastland Company, a great many Merchants of the West
of England, and of the North of England, presented the like Petitions apart,
which shows the generality of the English Merchants Opinion.



A Copy of an Order of King William in Council, for Collecting the Alien Duty
Outward, notwithstanding King James's Order to the Contrary.
At the Court at Hampton Court 14th. of October 1689. Present, The King's Most
Excellent Majesty in Council
THE Right Honorable the Lords Commissioners of their Majesty's Treasury,
having this Day laid before His Majesty in Council, a Presentment of the
Commissioners of the Customs; setting forth, That by an Act of Parliament made
in the 25th. Year of the Reign of His Majesty King Charles II. the Aliens Duty
was taken off upon the Exportation of all the Native Commodities of this
Kingdom, except Coals: And by an Act of Parliament made in the First Year of
his late Majesty King James II. by which the Revenue was granted to his said
Majesty King James, in the same Condition that it had been granted to King
Charles II. in the 12th. Year of his Reign; the said former Act for taking off
the Alien Duty was, in the Opinion of Council learned in the Laws, rescinded;
or repealed, and the Alien Duty became again payable upon the Native
Commodities of this Kingdom, Exported by Strangers, until by an Order in
Council of his late Majesty King James, bearing Date the 22d. of January 1685
upon the Petition of diverse Merchants of the City of London: And hearing the
then Commissioners of the Customs, his Majesty was pleased to declare, That he
would take or receive no other Custom of Merchant Strangers, for Goods Exported
of the Native Product or Manufacture of this Kingdom, than what were payable to
his said Majesty King Charles, at the Time of his Demise, by Virtue of the said
first mentioned Statute, made in the 25th. Year of his Reign And by an Act made
this present Session of Parliament, the Revenue is made payable to their
Majesty's, as the same had Continuance upon the 5th. Day of November last, by
which, the said Alien Duty seems again to be revived. And therefore humbly
praying the Directions of this Board therein. -- It was, upon due Consideration
thereof, this Day Ordered in Council by his Majesty, That the said Lords
Commissioners of the Treasury do forthwith give Directions to the Commissioners
and other the Officers of their Majesty's Customs whom it may Concern, for
Levying and Collecting all such Duties, as by Law are payable, for the Goods of
the Native Product or Manufacture of this Kingdom, that shall be Exported by
Strangers, notwithstanding the said Order of the 22d. of January 1685, or by
any other Direction to the contrary.

A true Copy.
A Copy of the Merchants Address of Thanks to King William, for his Order in
Council, for Payment of Alien Duty Outward. To the King's Most Excellent
Majesty.
The Humble Address of diverse English Merchants in and about the City of London.
AS God Almighty by his Providence, has preserved Your Royal Majesty in a
Glorious Undertaking, of rescuing our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Properties,
which were on the brink of Destruction, and seated your Sacred Majesty's on the
Royal Throne; so we in particular manner, cannot but with all Gratitude
acknowledge your Majesty's Great Wisdom and Goodness, in Restoring to (...)


