THE LORDS LOUD CALL TO ENGLAND:
Being a True Relation of some Late, Various, and Wonderful Judgments, or
Handy-works of God, by Earthquake, Lightening, Whirlewind, great multitudes of
Toads and Flies; and also the striking of diverse persons with Sudden Death, in
several places; for what Causes let the man of wisdom judge, upon his serious
perusal of the Book it self.

Also of the Strange Changes, and Late Alterations made in these Three Nations.

As also of the Odious Sin of DRINKING HEALTHS, With a Brief of Mr. PRYNS solid
Arguments against it, and his Epistle to the Late King CHARLES, to redress it.

Published by H. I. a Servant of JESUS the Christ, and Lover of Peace and
Holiness.

Micah 6. 9. The LORDS voice cries to the City, and the man of Wisdom shall
see thy Name: Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it. Isa. 26. 11. LORD,
when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see; but they shall see and be
ashamed for their envy at the people; yea the fire of thine enemies shall
devour them. LONDON, Printed for Is. Chapman in Pope's Head Alley, and for Fr.
Smith, at the Elephant and Castle near Tomple-Bar. 1660.

To all, or any of such as love Jesus Christ in Sincerity.
BEloved in our Lord Jesus, (...) through the Grace of our God and Father, for
near (...) Forty (...) been (...), to (...) him, and to lay to heart his
Marvelous (...): And having (...) received a Letter from an Honored precious
friend, in these words;

Having heard lately of several Notable Witnesses of the LORD in a way of
Rebuke to some of his, (...) his poor peoples Enemies, in several places of
this Nation, I had it in my mind, to write this word to you, to desire you to
publish what is come to your knowledge of that kind, with a Word of Counsel to
Christians in all parts, to be upon their watch, The LORDS Works being
Honorable and Glorious, sought out of all them that take pleasure therein,
(...). (...) 2, (...).

This Letter, and the Invitation of others to this (...), did the more
encourage me therein.

I (...) the longer, desiring to get the (...) that I could, of the things
related (...), forbearing many things that are spoken of, for want of clearer
Evidence. And this being so, it may occasion forbearance of (...) (...) of all,
if my Relators have missed in some (...) of things. Homo sum, Humani nihil a me
alienum puto.

The (...) Authors, Josephus, (...), Socrates, Fox, etc. have missed in more
than (...), (...) diverse Learned men record, which yet is not (...) all (...)
Relations. The Names of (...) persons alive, that have (...) hardly or (...),
are here forborne (though named to me) as not desiring their Shaming, (...)
their (...), (...), and desiring to learn that Lesson, To speak evil of none,
remembering (...) our selves were sometimes foolish, serving diverse lusts, Tit.
3. 3. And yet to love God above all, and therefore to exalt him in all his
(...) Works, that Sat at the Flood, and will sit King for ever, Psalm. 29. 10.
Who is Judge, putting down one, and setting up another, Psalm. 75. 7. oh that
(...) fear and dread before him, and (...) humbled under his mighty hand, all
that new suffer, and he will exalt (...) time, 1 Pet. 5. 6. And that all the
Lords people may be upon their Watch, lest the Lord at his coming, find them,
or any of (...) sleeping, or abusing their fellowservants. And that ZIONS
Watchmen may never hold their peace day nor night, and give the LORD no rest,
until he establish, and till he make JERUSALEM a praise, in the Earth, (...).
62. 6. O pray mightily for (...) peace, they shall prosper that love thee,
(...). 122. 6. And let us (...) the (...) hopes, that (...) Christ's (...)
solemn Prayer on Earth, shall be Answered, That they all may be one, that they
may be one in us, that the World may (...), that (...) sent me, John 17. 21.

Sixth Month. Aug. 13. 1660. H. Iessey.

A RELATION OF THE Lords wonderful works of late by an Earthquake, Lightning
and (...), by Toads; and by smiting of diverse with sudden death, upon
Health-drinking, Stage Play, etc.
Of the Lords (...) hand at Oxford, by sudden death of several persons, Actors
in (...) Play against Puritans; and others.
I Shall now acquaint you with (...) things fallen out here with us. As first,
The first man that read prayers in this University since this change, the Lord
has cut him off, and also he was the last that read prayers in the University,
in the time of war. The (...) man also that (...) Prayers at Wadham College is
also cut off, a very notorious man.

Also there was a Play acted by Scholars, wherein one acted the (...) Puritan,
he that acted that part, came in with a narrow band, short hair, and a broad
hat; a (...) comes after him, and trips up his heels, calling him (...) Rogue;
at which (...), the Old Puritan shook off the dirt of his feet against him. Two
of these Actors are also cut off; and he that acted the Old Puritan broke a
vein, and vomited so much blood in the place, that they thought he would have
died in the room, but he now lies desperately sick. This is all very true.

Also a Woman that joined with them in their Play is also dead.

Also a Scholar of Pembrook College who said he came purposely to Town to see
Dr. Langly outed, and then he would give a plate to the College. He was invited
to dinner by a Scholar, and never went out of the room more, but died there.

Here is also a great rout in Oxford of the godly people; 19 Heads of Houses
and Canons of Christ's Church are put out, and this day we think will be outing
many godly Fellows.

Truly I think, there was scarce such a place in the world, where such a
multitude held forth the power of godliness, and purity of Gods worship; even
an Eden it was, but now a barren wilderness.

Also from another in Oxford, it was thus written, July, 30. We had a Play
acted in the University, against the Puritans, the chief Actors therein were,
Mr. Ball of Wadham, who died yesternight; and one Glendal of Brazen. Nose, who
also is not like to live.

Also (...) Relation was from another Oxford Scholar; Two of Mertons College
in Oxford that were turned out upon the former Reformation, and now having
hopes of coming in again upon this late change, came down and with much
confidence demanded their places. And one of them in a more especial manner was
very high in his demands and (...). And he was the (...) man (as we hear) that
(...) forward the reading the Common (...) in the (...) College; who
notwithstanding before his Admission, as also the other before his admission,
were both dismissed hence by the Lords hand, and by his Messenger, DEATH,
though their restoring into their places was near effected.

The (...) of the abovesaid, being a Scholar of Oxford is certified by the
Oxford Carrier, That Mr. Glendal also, one of the chief Actors in the Play is
since dead.

Of the sudden dreadful Death of the Clerks Daughter at (...) in Gloucester-
shire, (...) the third, just a neek before Whitsunday, 1660.
AT a meeting there on that day, were many met; B. Collet, and B. Collings,
gifted brethren, from Burton on the water, and diverse others thence, and from
Stow, and other places: It was (...) about, that some of the County Troop would
then come and seize upon them, and Imprison some, and rout them all.

The Clerks Daughter came, with her Mother, who had opposed and reviled them,
uttering hard (...) against them and their meetings, and ways, and these two
stood by in a corner.

When they came, B. Collet was in exercise, speaking upon Jude 14, and 15.
verses, with much affection, (being a (...), humble, tender hearted man:) upon
these words.

Behold the Lord cammeth with ten thousand of his Saints, to execute judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly amongst them, of all their
ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

Whilst he was preaching upon these words, the hand of the LORD of HOSTS went
out against that Daughter as it appeared, for she gave a sudden great Schrich.
and fell down dead before them all. Those that were about her, rubbed and
chafed her for her restoring, but there was no appearance of Life at all.

B. Collet was much affected with this hand of the Lord, and looked pale, being
of a very tender spirit.

B. Collins seeing it, was about to seek the Lord, for raising her up again,
but her Mother being much out of (...), hindered their prayers for her, and she
never (...).

As some were carrying her corpse out, in the passage out, Mr. H. met them, who
led that party of the Troop; and (...) came in, and would have them away
Prisoners. And he charged (...) with the death of the Maid, that they had
killed her.

(...). (...) answered to this effect. Nay, we have not killed her, but the
Most High has done it, in whose hand is both your (...), and ours.

After he had pulled the speakers toward the door, and spoke more to them: He,
and the (...) left them.

Since this time the Clerk has spoke well of that people; saying, these are
the people of God.

And since this so remarkable hand of the Lord, there has been much peace and
freedom from molestation in their Meetings in those parts, to hear John (...)
in (...) Market place, and other places.

The Maids sudden death having been but two days before his going down to
preach in those parts.

Of the great number of (...) in Glocestershire, (...) Midsummerday, 1660.
A Company of Christians going to a meeting, and at their private meeting at
Fairford in Glocestershire, which is about four miles on this side Cirencester,
(called Ciceter) on the 24. of June 1660. Being the first day of the week, they
were much abused by some of that Town, in a rude manner.

The Lord of the Manor there stood looking on, and did not in the least
suppress the rude multitude, but appeared rather to countenance them.

In the Evening of that same 24 day, there was seen coming up from the
Mill-lane great multitudes of small Toads, they that saw them said, that there
might have been taken up many Cowls full of them. And as they were going they
divided themselves into two bodies. First, one Body, or Division of them, went
to the Lord of the Manors house, (which was about one Acers Length, from the
place where they were first seen) They come up through his Orchard, and went
under (...) Gate into the inward court, and some did endeavor to prevent their
coming into his house, but could not, though they killed many of them. They
(...) into his Kithin, and Cellar: and the next morning there went an honest
man to the house, about business, and did see the servants looking on them, and
took notice of them, that they lay thick on the ground, and being small, judged
they were many thousands of them.

And Secondly, The other Body or Division of the Toads, went to a Justice of
the peace his house, a little way off; and went into his Barn, to his
amazement, there being by providence also an honest man the next morning, who
saw the Toads in great abundance, and heard the Justice say, that it was a
judgment upon them for suffering the boys to abuse those honest men in the
Town, and no man can tell whence these Toads came.

About a Fortnight after in the same Town, these Christians were again sorely
abused, and the next Friday fortnight after, there appeared in the Lord of the
Manors Orchard, a great swarm of Flies, about the bigness of Caddus Flies,
with long wings; they that saw them said they might have taken up baskets of
them, and the same day also, an honest Christian man saw the Lord of the
Manors Garden covered with these Flies, in heaps like unto swarms of Bees

After there had been, in many about (...), Reading, and (...), great noise of
these Toads or Frogs, some went from London purposely, to inquire at Fairford,
the truth hereof. And some that came to Fairford found some that knew thereof,
very backward to speak of it, it seemed, lest these great men there should be
offended, some saying they saw then not, but some being urged that they ought
to prefer the glory of God above all, and being asked and urged, about it,
there was at last (...) as much in effect as is above recited.

Some went to see the place where they had met that were so disturbed by the
rude boys and other people, and they found how all the windows were battered
down.

Also some of those that went to inquire at Fairford, were credibly informed,
that a Minister of a place within about a mile or two of that place, that by
his inveiyng against these people that met at Fairford, stird (...) some of the
people against them, that so abused them, dyed suddenly after (...).

The truth of the substance of the relation about the (...), and those Flies,
is credibly certified by (...) persons. Though some would obscure the works
(...) the Lord.

Of the Earthquake in France, on Monday June (...) 1660. Part of a Letter to a
Merchant in London, dated at Bourdeaux in France, at his house there, June 14/4
1660. Translated from French into English, for H. I.
SIR.
ON Monday the (...) of this present month, June, at three a clock in the
Morning, God brought it so about that the Earth quaked some twelve or thirteen
Leagues round about this City. And this very City was attached therewith, by
two shakings, as if it would Elevate it into the Sky.

The Bells of St. Sirrir, by it sounded, did dering with full voice. The Castle
of Cadillacque (where was the Duke of (...) their Governor) shaked in a strange
fashion, and Baxat's City also, where the King was.

The Steeple of St. Michaels yield's tokens of it, by the Rupture of its Top,
and the fall of some of the highest stones: Also the fall of some parts of the
walls, and of half a Tower, will continue the memory hereof.

That which is most astonishing, is, that some houses, and some persons being
not far from each other, some of them were free from this shaking, and the
hearing of the noise therewith; when others heard and felt it: Even in your
very house, Madam your Wife and Pitter heard it; but the Maid and I heard
nothing of it, although then I was awake. Thus much for that Letter.

Others write, that at Toulouse, and some other places in France, was the same
Earthquake.
ITs also testified, that a great part of the Forest of Bleau, (where is one
of the Kings stately houses) was (...) by fire from heaven. Its about sixteen
Leagues from Paris.

Also, that in some parts of France, it has rained blood, and great
Hailstones, of a pound and a half weight, and great store of Frogs, in some
places, half a foot deep; and strange vermin, that eat up the Corn.

Of the strange Whirlwind on June 2. 1660. in Leicestershire, (...) be effects
thereof.
MR. A. Palmer, Esquire late High Sheriff of that shire, spoke with some of those
parts where the Whirlewind was so dreadful, and that suffered by it. About
three or four of the clock afternoon it began to be very dark with clouds, as
if some very great storm were ready to come; which occasioned many People about
Worthington, to repair from the fields into their houses, and suddenly there
arose a mighty Whirlwind, which untiled and unthatched many of the houses in
Whorthington: and thence it went to Worthington-hall, where the effects were as
great or greater.

It took away, or cast down several Bays of a Building there bringing down the
great Barn.

Also it took up a great Logg of wood from a Mill-pond, whirling it out.

And so it passed on to a Wood called Springwood, where the place that it
passed through, may yet be discerned, by the great trees blown down, and arms
of trees, and unbarking of many trees, etc.

Also thence it passed along to Tongue, which is a village near it, where also
it blew down many trees, tearing some up by the roots. Amongst other things
there, Major Beniskin told Mr. A. Palmer beforesaid that it took away a Hive of
Bees of his, of which he could never hear since.

And though there was harm to dogs, by the fall of tiles, etc. The Lord
wonderfully preserved men, women and children.

This Relation may occasion all to fear the Lord, that causes the Earth and
the great wood Lebanon to tremble at his presence, Psalm. 114. at end. And can
send destruction on the wicked as a whirlwind, when he spares his children
that (...) him, Prove. 1. 27. Mal. 3. 17, 18. And can make the wicked like a
rolling thing before the whirlwind, Isa. 17. 13. And can make his whirlwind
scattor them, Isa 41. 16. See (...). 9. (...).

One writes of Capt. Andersons hard words that he spoke against people of
tender consciences, to the grief of many, yea even some of his near Relations.

He said, He would have them live no otherwise, then that they among whom they
live, might set their feet upon them, that so they may be kept under. (...) a
little while after the Lords hand was on him, and he was under the power of
death.

It is written and also certified that at (or about) Barwick. Mr. O. a (...) in
his Sermon using many hard speeches against those peaceable people there that
he called Anabaptists, there being many such there at that time; that even
whilst he was preaching in th t manner, he fell into a swound, and was
speechless, as one dead for about two hours, and it was feared he would never
have recovered out of it.

About the beginning of May 1660. when some in VVapping (near London) had kept
a day of Fasting and Prayer together: The same day a Vintner their Neighbor
came where some of them were; and he said to this effect; Do you see what you
have gained by your fasting and Praying? even give (...) for the King is coming
now, to hang you all up.

The same Vintner, the next day after the King came into London, took a halter,
and put about the neck of one of his Consorts, and as it were hauled him along.
and said to this effect, So must the Fanatics be hanged up. But since the
Kings Proclamation he is much daunted.

A woman of that town when she heard what havoc was made of that Assembling
house, where Mr (...) Friends used to meet, she said, It did her more good,
then if two hundred pounds had been flung in her lap.: Within a few days after
she heard of the casting away of a ship, returning, being near England, wherein
her Husband had a great share; it is said the value of six hundred pounds.

A RELATION Of the Imprisonings, Plunderings, and Barbarous Inhumanity and
Cruelty, that has lately been practiced toward several Ministers of the
Gospel, and other peaceable people, in WALES, Lincolnshire, Glocestershire, and
other places: Especially since the Late Remnant of the Long Parliament, by
their Outing of many, prepared a COFFIN for themselves and others.
With the USES to be made thereof by the Sufferers, and by others.
I In WALES,

Mr. VAVASOR POWEL (who is accounted by many Ministers and others, that know
him well, to be a Man of GOD, Mighty in the Scriptures, an able and painful
Preacher of the Gospel in a great part of North and SouthWALES, usually
preaching, (as that learned, eminent, holy man of GOD (...). CALVIN did; As his
Sermons on JOB show) six or seven times, or oftener every week, to the saving of
many souls from their sins, and from hell and swift destruction thereby:) He
was seized upon, and imprisoned in Shrewsbury; And many of his friends in
several Northern Counties of Wales; and not for any crime committed by him or
them. Yea and diverse of their houses plundered by soldiers, showing no warrant
for their (...) therein. This was about the end of the 12th. Month Febr.
1659/60.

Also in SOUTH WALES, some of the Congregation, with that Precious Man of God,
Mr. Ienkin JONES (one that is judged in his faithfulness and pains in going
about preaching the Gospel in several Counties, like to Mr. VAVASOR POWEL.) Of
their sufferings, and blessed issue, take as follows.

Part of a Letter from Mr. Tho. Guyn, with Mr. Ienkin Jones, the 29 th. of the
fourth Month, June 1660.
SOme of our Brethren were for a months space imprisoned in Carmarthen, merely
because they would not forgo their Meetings, and join with them again in their
Traditional Worship, from whom the Lord had separated them.

They bore their Testimony so full, and their sufferings so patiently and
cheerfully, that we have much cause to bless the Lord for his gracious and
tender dealings toward them.

Their conversation was such; that made those that threw stones at them, and
shouted when they were brought thither, part with them with tears, confessing,
they suffered for well doing, and judged them happy therein.

I suppose the Lord was more glorified by them (in those sufferings) than by
any one thing which happened since I came to understand any thing of his
particular dealings with his People.

They had his promises in an ample measure fulfilled unto them, and his
presence very frequent, glorious and powerful.

This tended much to the strengthening of others to endure the like Trials, if
called unto it by the wise disposer of all things.

[The writer of that Letter before, was by Thomas (...), a Gentleman Cavalier
in Wales, till about three years ago, that the Lord wrought on him by the
Ministry of Mr. Ienkin Jones (who was lately in Prison) and now he is a
Member of that Church.]

The Gross Abuses to many Good (...) People in Lincolnshire, here follow, (...)
they were (...) in their NARRATIVE or Complaint thereof to the KING near the
end of July 1660. Testified under many of their (...). Part of a NARRATIVE and
Complaint, that by the help of an Honnourable Parliament man was presented to
the King. the 26th. of the fifth Month, July 1660. With the Kings Answer
thereunto.
May it please you, etc.

BEing commanded thereto by the LORD, we have met often together, to acquaint
each other what God has done, does daily, and will do for our souls; and what
therefore we ought to do toward him, each other, and all men.

From which Assemblings (O King) we have been discharged by some in
Magistratical capacity in these parts (although therein we bless God, none
has ever found us with Multitude, or with Tumult) but being taught of God to
obey him in the things by him commanded, rather than man (though in the place
of Magistracy) when commanding things contrary, we therefore durst not receive
that discharge: wherefore some of us have been silenced, from making mention of
the Name of the Lord, as formerly, by being (...) in bonds pretendedly imposed
upon us for this good behavior; to which in our innocence we readily yielded,
being bound to the good behavior in conscience, we feared not to be bound
thereto by Law.

But such is the sad estate of this Generation, that they call good evil, and
evil good (with sorrow we speak it) taking their advantage against us in our
serving the Lord.

Upon the account of the Condition of these Obligations, accounting us (O King)
peace-breakers, when (in the sincerity of our hearts, and innocence of our
(...)) we peaceably meet to worship our God in his Fear; we affirm it.

Since thus entangled (O King) we have been much abused, as we pass in the
streets, and as we sit in our houses, being threatened to be hanged, if but
heard praying to the Lord in our own Families, and disturbed in our so waiting
upon God, by uncivil beating at our doors, and sounding of horns; yea we have
been stoned, when going to our meetings, the windows of the place where we
have been met, struck down with stones; yea taken as evil doers, and
imprisoned, when peaceably met together to worship the Most High in the use of
his most precious Ordinances.

We have (O King) spread these things before them in Authority in those parts,
but can have no redress from them; but the rage of our Adversaries has been
augmented by hearing us abused by some of them (in open Court) who sat on the
bench of Justice, under the odious Terms of Knavish, Iugling, Impudent, and
Phanatick Fellows, etc. And as if all this were too little, they have (to fill
up their measure) very lately indicted many of us at the Sessions, and intend
(as we are informed) to impose on us the penalty of twenty pounds per Month,
for not coming to hear such men as they provide us; of whose principles and
practices we could give a most sad, and dolesul (yet (O King) a most true)
relation, etc.

Signed by John Wats
William Burton
John Dawson
William Dawson
Thomas Harrison
Peter Betts
William Roweth
Richard Wilkinson
James Dyon
Robert Richarson
Roger Fawn
William Hunter
Joseph Britain
Robert Maultbey
Thomas Ratclyffe
George Pay
Matthias Brumby
John Gree
Luke Robinson
William Harker
Robert Fletcher
William Hill
Edward Wood
Thomas Croft
Thomas Maxworth
Thomas Clay
Robert Grantham
Charles Cock
John Rutter
James Carden
Richard Clark
Robert Pagson
Robert Shaldor
Joseph Wright
Tho. Grantham.

The substance of the Kings Answer to the Messengers that were sent with this
Narration and Petition (upon the presenting it before him, and giving him the
Contents of it, with the delivering the Confession of their Faith, into his own
hand) was this.
THat it was not his mind, that any of his good Subjects, who lived peaceably,
should suffer any trouble upon the account of their judgments or opinions in
point of Religion, and that he had declared the same in several Declarations.
He promised us also (upon our declaring our grievances) that he would have
particular care over us, that none should trouble us upon the account of our
consciences in things pertaining to Religion. And (while we were present
before him) (...) ordered an honorable Member of Parliament to go to the Lord
Chancellor, and Secretary, and get something done to that purpose; the Member
of Parliament promised that he would do as the King had ordered him.

From Glocestershire, writ April 3. 1660. Part of the First letter.
NOw I shall acquaint you with the face of things in these parts, which is
thus: The most eminent Cavaliers imbittered persecutors in the County, ride
about armed with sword and Pistols, pretending to be of a Troop. The last week
they rid madly about to disarm the Fanatics, and all the Pastors of
Congregational Churches, and officers that had formerly served the Parliament,
especially the Rump (as they call it) together with all Church Members, whether
Soldiers or not, they rudely ransacked for Arms, as Captain Crofts, Mr. (...)
of Borton, Mr. Helm of Winchcombe, and many others; It so fell out, that Mr.
Helm not being at home, on the sixth Day of the last week they came to his
house, ransacked his Trunks, study and all his Goods, for Arms, not sparing the
bed whereon his children lay, to their great affrightment, being in Bed; One of
them held up his pistolto strike Mistress Helm, having given her most uncivil
language; so that the Terror has brought upon her a very sore Distemper, and
brought her nigh unto Death; They Drink the Kings health stoutly, and rage
against any that have the face of Godliness. And not only soldiers, but the
people who had long obscured their malice to the people of God, are now
confident, and act barbarously. Take two late examples. One was of Mr. Warren a
minister in the County, who upon the ejection of a Malignant (as then that
Denomination was given men) was put into the Parsonage of Rencome: Upon this
new incouragament the said ejected Minister (one Mr. Broad) brake in with a
Company of rude companions into the Parsonage house; Penned up Mr. Of his death
see the third, and fifth, and sixth, letters following.
Warren and his wife and family into an Upper room; so distressing and
afflicting the poor man, night and Day, making a noise with Hoboyes, so that
he Died in the place; His blood will cry.

Another was one Mr. See the sixth, letter.
Fletcher a Godly man (who lately came out of New England) being put into a
vacant place by Authority; a rude Cavaleer in the Parish, came in upon him in
his house, beat him, and used him very inhumanly; threatened to cut off his head
with a Bill, which one of them carried. At last, after much vile carriage, one
took his Coat, and Carpet off his Table, and marched with them in the streets,
on the top of a Bill: so that the poor man and his Family are fled for their
lives. This is the beginning of sorrows. It would make a flinty heart melt, to
hear and see the Blasphemies and abuses acted by this revived Generation; Oh
that God would appear! for it is high time for him to appear for the Salvation
of Zion, The Enemy rageeth in the Sanctuary, and all who love Christ, are
appointed as sheep for the slaughter; What humblings, what strong Cries, what
wrestlings Isa. 19. 19.
with God, do these thing bespeak at our Psalm. 106. 25.
hands! Surely God has mingled a perverse Psalm. 44. 12.
spirit in the midst of us, and (has for our 1 Pet. 4. 17.
backslidings) caused the enemy to hate his Hosea 11. 8.
people. We are sold for naught, and they Psalm. 14. 7.
that rule over us oppress us very sore; Judgment is already begun at the
house of God; Oh that the Bowels of our God were once again moved; Oh that his
repentings were kindled together. Oh that the salvation of God were come out of
Zion!

April. 3. 1660. From a poor Mourner in Zion.

They are so rude, that they compel men violently, to drink the Kings Health.

From Brainford thus:

Some that were there lately at the choice of Parliament men, were troubled
that there many Drank the Kings health: and some drank a health to the
confusion of Zion: The like was writ from the North that some did so about
Newcastle; and the like from Kent, etc.

One in London that had some of the Original Letters that are here Printed, was
twice at the Council of State, to give them Notice of these Letters: and did
acquaint several of the Council with the Contents of them.

But the Affairs of the Council were such, as that he could not then be heard.

From Glocestershire April 19. 1660. part of a second Letter.
SInce my last letter, the Persecution in these parts breaks out more and more.
Last week there was a Godly Minister sorely injured, as he was entering the
Pulpit to preach. And the same week, one Mr. Finch.
another was violently pulled out of his house: His wife and children and goods
thrown into the streets by the rude Multitude. None of the Parish Daring to
give them entertainment. The former ejected (...) Person, getting again into
possession; Where he Triumphantly abides, without control. And Some rudely
hauling the poor Minister thus abused, to the Gaol, ( as they said they Would.-)

Gloces. April 19. 1660.
Part of a third Letter from Glocestershire 18. of the second Month. 1660.
Dear Sir.
I Have here under my hand, given you these Particulars. First, As to the (...)
of my house; and wife by the new Militia, (inserted in a paper to Master C.) it
is very true, as also every particular in the same paper, which I am ready to
justify; Mr. Palmer also being searched (...) Arms, and all with us, who have
born Arms for the Parliament.

Secondly, I shall give you the Names of some of the Ministers abused.

First, Mr. (...), Minister of Rencombe, in the County of Gloucester, was the
person who died through the rude, and inhumane usage of one Broad, an ejected
person, and a wretched crew, who broke in upon him, and did unto him as in the
said Paper is mentioned: the said Mr. Warren laid his death to their charge, as
justly he might.

Secondly, One Mr. Fletcher, Minister at Badgington, in the County of
Gloucester, who (as in that Paper) was beaten by one of his neighbors, coming
in upon him in his house, with Bills, threatening to cut off his head; and had
his Goods taken by him, violently out of his house; flourishing a Carpet of his
upon the top of a Bill, along the streets, who with his wife and family, are
fled for their lives, who yet notwithstanding, was persuaded to come to preach
at the said place on Lords day sennight, where soon (...) he came, was again
sorely abused (by one Mr. D. a Cavalier) on the place, in the face of others.

Thirdly, One Mr. Edward Finch, Minister at Lenington in the said County, was,
since that, without any order, violently halled out of the Parsonage-house,
he, his (...) and children cast out in the streets, where, for some nights
they lay, no one daring to receive them into their houses; the poor man being
sick, was taken away seven miles by some of the said crew, toward the Gaol, as
they pretended. One Mr. S. (such a person, who was ejected thence) being gotten
in again, and keeping violent (...), (...) that Mr. Finch and his Family, are
in a sad, (...) condition.

These things I do affirm on my own knowledge, having (...) personal conference
with the persons, and relations of the (...) afflicted ones. I shall acquaint
you more in my next, but what is here said, bespeaks the tender fellowfeelings,
and earnest supplications of the Saints.

Sir your unworthy Brother,
Glocestershire 18. of the 2d. Month. 1660. C. H.

Another Letter from Glocestershire, from the house of a godly strict
Presbyterian, it was (...) written.
THat they of that Family, as others fearing the Lord, were as a (...) on a
hill, and under great Reproach, accounted not (...) to live, and counted as
Elias was by Ahab, TROUBLERS OF ISRAEL, Troublers of the place they lived in;
with other such like aspersions, counting them Anabaptists and Quakers, and
were in fears of being plundered therefore.

Part of another Letter from that County, the 28 th. of the second Month. April
1660.
IN answer to yours received this morning, First, As to Mr. Warren, whether his
death was occasioned by Mr. B. rude carriage toward him, Mr. Doleswelth (as I
am informed, a Lawyer, and now a Parliament Man for Tukesbury) is to canvass
this business. Your self, or Mr. etc. may (...) more of this Gentleman.

Secondly, As to Mr. Fletcher, that several abuses were offered, its most
certain. I shall (...) him to give them (...) his own hand.

(...), As for Mr. H. I am credibly informed that his house was searched, and
ugly language given to his wife, and a pistol held up against her, and the
(...) of it has done her a great deal of hurt.

A true Declaration of the uncivil speeches and carriages of Mr. I. D. Son of
Mr. I. D. of B. in the County of Gloucester, against Edward Fletcher, Minister
of the (...) place, in the (...) of my (...) and one Mr. R. E. of the same
Parish; (...) was as follows.
FEbruary 23. 1659. I the said Edward (...), having sent for the said Mr. E. to
come to me, that (...) might pay me some money that was due to me from him,
for the time past, which was three pound; I being in my house, the said Mr. E.
came in, and I. D. with him; and having demanded my money of Mr. E. he said,
he would pay me no more, but expected all the moneys he had paid me
formerly for his Tithes. Upon which the said I. D. drew forth a Receipt he had
of me for moneys I had received for his Tithes, and said, Ye Rogue, pay (...)
my money, otherwise I will have it out of thy hide; and thereupon took hold on a
silk scarf that was about my neck, and tore it, and struck me on the face with
his fist, and kicked me on the belly with his foot, saying, Ye Rogue, ye
Dog, the times are turned, and I will have ye out; and thereupon laid hold on
my (...), and tore it, with pulling of me to have me forth of my house, and
with saving my self, my hat fell off, and he took a stick that was in his
hand, and struck me on the bare head; and took my Carpet off the Table, and my
Coat, and carried them forth, and as I followed him out of the Parlour into the
Hall, he took a hedge-bill, and held it up, and said, Ye Rogue, I could find
in my heart to cut off thy head, saying, He would have my blood, and I should
be hanged within four and (...) hours, (...) that (...) would lay all level;
and thereupon went forth, and pulled up my hedge, and other wood to the
quantity of half a load, and a great Gate that was to my yard, and carried it
away, and made a Bonefire of it, reviling me as he carried it away, and
calling on me in a blasphemous manner; Where is thy spirit (...)? ye Rogue,
ye Iesuitical Dog? and also abused my Maid in the street, at the same time,
holding up a great stick (that he pulled forth of the hedge) over her, calling
her Whore, and commanding her to kneel down, and confess where she (...) been.

Febr. 25. Being newly come from Gloucester, as I was standing at my door within
my Court, the said I. D. came in the street, and gave me the like base terms,
asking me what I did there? and said, If I did not run away I should be
hanged, and that (...) would not give a (...) for my life, bidding me to go to
Rencome, and (...) what was done there, meaning, to (...). Warren the Minister,
by Mr. B. and his company.

April 1. 1660. Being the Lords day, in the afternoon, sending my Maid to ring
the Bell for the Sermon, the said I. D. would not suffer my servant to open the
door, saying. That if she opened the door, he would have the Key from her, if
he could; upon which I sent to the Churchwarden to come and assist me, but
he refusing, the Exercise was put by at that time.

April the eighth day, Being the Lords day after, in the morning I came, with
some of another Parish, who came to hear, and going into the Belfrey, the Rope
being taken away from the Bell, I desired one that was present, to go up in the
Tower, and toll the Bell, to give the Parish notice; and when he tolled the
Bell, the said I. D. came into (...) Meeting Place, where I was, and asked who
tolled the Bell? upon which I answered, that it was one that I had appointed,
upon which he called me Rogue, and said, I had nothing to do there, and laid
hands (...) me (...), thrusting me, and punching me forth, saying, I should
not stay there, and so continued thrusting me, and punching of me, until I
was in the street; and then because one asked him, Why he abused (...) so,
that did him no wrong? he struck him on the face, and fought with him: and
after came to me, who prayed him to be quiet, and struck me three or four
blows on the neck and head with his fist. The same day I sending one to lock
the Meeting House door, this I. D. with his Father, wrested the key by force
out of his hand that was sent, threatening him; and since, have in my absence,
broke into the dwelling house, and keeps me sorth, so that I am fain to be in
Gloucester for my safety. All this is true;

given under my hand the 28th. of April, 1660. Edward Fletcher.

Part of a Letter from the North, to another Friend.
Newcastle the seventh day of May, 1660.

SIR, the Country, as well as the Town, abound with vanities; now the reins of
Liberty and Licentiousness are let loose: May-poles, and Plays, and Iuglers,
and all things else now pass current; sin now appears with a brazen face: That
wicked spirit amongst men, that formerly was curbed and restrained, does now
audaciously, and impudently show it self, with boasting and gloriation: But
that just one, I hope, will witness one day against the wickedness of the
profane, which do so much dishonor and blaspheme his Name.

So, not further at present; only my love remembered to you, and M.

I take leave and remain, Your very Loving Friend.

From Redding - Prison, July 16. 1660. Where diverse peaceable people were put,
having Oaths put upon them, which they were not satisfied to take: Of the LORDS
Instructing, and comforting them, and their Relations.
OUr Lord and King, whom we serve, has brought us under his own pavilion, and
his Banner over us has been (and still is) Love; and has been teaching of us
these Lessons following:

First, In the Loss of all outward things, having Christ, we enjoy all
things, and are satisfied, in the Lord, we shall take the spoiling of our goods
with far more Comfort than the enemy will do in the spending them, for that
Word in the twentieth chap. of Job, ver. 22, 23. is very much upon our hearts
concerning him.

Secondly, We hope we have learned in whatsoever condition (we are in) to
be therewith contented: and are perfwaded in our hearts, this is given us in,
as an answer of many prayers breathed forth unto the Lord on our behalfes.

Thirdly, That whereas formerly we could hardly part with any thing for the
Lord, we are now made willing (by him) to part with all things, for him, and
to say with good Old Ely, 1 Samuel 3. 18. Its the Lord, let him do what he
pleases; and that in Job 1. 23, 23. is set before us (for our Examples, upon
whom the ends of the World are come) the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, and
blessed be the name of the LORD; in all this Job sinned not, etc.

Fourthly, We have (since our Confinement) tasted a greater sweetness in the
promises of the Lord, than formerly; and particularly these places following
we have had sweet experience of; Deuteronomy. 33. 25. Phil. 4. 19. 1 Pet. 5. 7. And
we can truly say by experience, That faithful is he, that has thus
promised, for he has also done it; Its the Lords doing, and is marvelous in
our Eyes. We are also brought (by the power of his grace) to a more watchful
srame over our Hearts, Thoughts, and Actions, by these Trials, than formerly.

One thing, that had almost slipped our memory, the knowledge of which will (we
hope) rejoice your Hearts; that our Relations that are precious to the Lord,
and to us, bear this our suffering with incomparable patience, rather singing
for Joy, than weeping for grief: also our societies from whence we were taken,
are exceeding cheerful; and a very lively spirit of Faith and Prayer is amongst
them; and their meetings rather increases than otherwise, Sure the Lord is
near, his wondrous works declare; for the singing of birds is come; and the
Turtle is heard in our Land.

And now Brethren, for as much as the mercies expected, and prayed for by us,
are to be enjoyed in the way of Righteousness, it greatly concerns us, we cry
mightily to the Lord, as did his Servant of Old, Isa. 62. 1. Then shall we
have that New Name which God will give us, which is expressed in the Last verse
of that Chapter.

New the God of all Peace, fill you with Peace and joy in Beleiving; so pray

Your Brethren through grace, John Jones.
Robert Keate.
John Peck.
Richard Steed.
Thomas Jones.
John Combs.

A letter writ at Newport in WALES, 12 July, 1660. of Rude Proceeds there.
TO give you a sull Account of the hard dealings we now meet with from some.
Last Lords day with naked Swords and staves they attempted to set upon Mr. H.
W. Mr. Will. I.

But these by their peaceable carriage, staid their hands from blows: it being
an Assembly of Rude soldiers, and most (or many) Papists that came together
against sermon was ended in Lauvihaugel Laularnam, which they had designed
since the Night before: Especially (as we understand) to cut off Mr. W. Mr. I.
and another friend that lives in that Town: Though ((...) like) if they had but
the least just occasion, or any pretense to fall (...) them, they would have
spared none of the rest.

Since the Lord was pleased to bring us sase from under their hands, they
continued (it seems) their Carowzing all that day, till midnight; and fought,
and dangerously wounded one another. And as we understand, made use of that to
accuse us at London. Though we have neither spoken nor acted any thing,
contrary to the public peace; though for our own defense; we were
sufficiently provoked (...) to.

This is writ; that as occasion is, a True Relation hereof may be given.

OXFORD PROCEEDS, 1660. The Great Alterations lately made by (...) Kings
Commissioners there, in Discharging the Vice Chancellor, and many Heads of
Colleges, Beadles, Fellows, etc. are related in several (...) thence, here
(...).
THursday, August 2. Our Visitors being entered upon the Execution of their
office. -- Some small account of what they have already done. The (...) named
by the King, are, the L. Chancellor Hide, the Marquess of Heart ford, the Earl
of Southampton, the Bishops of (...), of Rochester, and Oxford; Sir Edward
Nicholas, and Sir William Morris the Kings Secretaries, and Dr. Hood, Dr.
(...), Dr. Zouch, Dr. Chaworth, Dr. Lluellyn, Dr. Clayton, Dr. (...), Mr. Say
of Oriel, Mr. Blanford of Wadham, Mr. (...) of (...)-Nose, Mr. Walrond the
Marquesses Secretary.

Their Citation for all the University to appear before them, was set up on
Thursday last, July 26. Their Commission was likewise opened and published in
the Convocationhouse on Tuesday morning. None of the great persons are here,
but the Bishop of (...). They sat on Tuesday and discharged the
Vice Chancellor from his Office; who made a very honest speech, and resigned
yesterday to Dr. Hood. Mr. Campian the Beadle, and all the Yeomen Beadles are
turned out.

The same Tuesday also Dr. Stanton, Mr. Thankful Owen, Mr. Howell, and Mr.
Johnson were all discharged from their Headships, Dr. Bailey is expected to
come, and take possession of St. Iohns-Colledge this ( Thursday, Aug. 2.)

The Provost of Eaton the Generals Brother, was presented Dr. of Divinity,
Wednesday, August 1.

Dr. (...) exercising the office of (...) in presenting more Doctors are to be
created this day, ( Aug. 2.)

The Visitors have yet done no more, but do proceed continually, so that you
may expect a further account next week.

On Thursday last, ( July 26.) Dr. Morley came and took possession of the
Deanery of Christ-Church, and by Order from his Majesty admitted seven New
Canons, viz. Dr. (...), Dr. Gardener, Dr. Main, Mr. (...), Mr. Fell, Mr.
Dolby, and Mr. Allestry. And there (...) remains none of the Former Prebends,
save only Dr. Wall. Dr. Reynolds is chosen by the Fellows Warden of Merton,
but is not yet come to take possession. It is reported that the KING has sent
a Letter somewhat to moderate the Visitors Proceedings.

Part of another Letter from another College in Oxford, relatos (...), in
several Fellows, and in the way of Gods Worship; That freedom that had been
used and allowed of late years, not pleasing these now.
THe Presidents Masters or Heads of several Colleges, are Outed by the
Commissioners, and others put in their steads. Dr. Conant that was (...)
Professor is discharged, and Dr. Hood of Lincoln succeeds, as Vice Chancellor,
etc.

From EATON-Colledge by WINSOR, is Relation of the like Proceeds, in Displacing
them generally that were in Offices or Places there.

Likewise several Ministers in London, and Westminster, and Many HUNDREDS
throughout England, and some in Ireland, have of late been put out, and are
putting out, or to be put out. And we cannot hear that better are put in their
places.

And whereas it is said, that in the time of their long Parliament, many
Centuries of Ministers were displaced: Its answered, that it was generally in
regard of being Scandalous Ministers, as that Century set forth by Mr. White
the Chairman, shows. Though its true, that some others were outted, only for
not taking that Engagement they would have put upon them: which was indeed a
grievous evil, and was testified against by the Publisher hereof, and by many
that are now termed Fanatics. Who testified also publicly against the (...),
etc.

An Ancient poor Woman went from Wapping to London, to buy flowers about the
sixth or seventh of May, 1660 to make (...) for the day of the Kings
Proclamation, (that is May 8) to gather the youths together, to dance for the
Garland. And when she had bought the flowers, and was going homeward, a Cart
went over part of her body and bruised her very sore. Yet she made up her
Garland, and gathered youths together, that danced for it, just before the
doors of such as she might vex thereby. But since she remains in a great deal
of misery, by the bruise she had gotten; and cried out of the Devil, saying;
The Devil had owed her a shame, and now thus he had paid her

Its judged at the writing hereof, that she will never outgrow it.

A Letter touching a Coopers acts, and end at Waltham near Theobalds.
THere was a Cooper by trade, which the day of the Kings Proclamation there, in
the Evening there was a (...) made, for to express their joy.

This Cooper swore, and tore, and struck the ground, and said; Now have at the
Anabaptists: Now as the fire burned he took a Faggot, and said, here is a
Roundhead; and cast it in the fire, which burned. And then took another Faggot,
and said, here is an Anabaptist, and that burned. He took a third Faggot, and
said, here is a Quaker, and that burned.

But the Lord struck him that night, so that he never saw the Morning, attested
by several of the same Town.

This man being dead, his body had blew spots on it.

A (...) also big with Child, that was (...) there, drinking healths, and of
such a spirit as th at Cooper, shortly after was delivered, but her child was
dead.

And her Midwife told one tha t spoke of it to Mr. (...), that the child had
blew spots also, like t hose that (...) on that Cooper, that so suddenly dyed.

Soon after the Secluded Members, by General Monck were restored to sit in
Parliament: there was one called Gamer W. near the Dock-head in Tolayes Parish
in Surrey, when some were drinking the Kings health at her house, she wished
that they were struck lame that would not drink the (...) health.

Suddenly the day or night following was she her self struck (...), and her own
mouth that so spoke, was turned awry, so ill was she taken, that for several
days, she could not dress nor uncloath her self, nor get into bed nor out, but
by help. So she continued ill a long time: and she is not recovered to talk or
walk so well as before she was wont to do, unto this day First of July 1660.
This is spoken of by her neighbors that knows her.

Quest. What improvement may be made of the RELATIONS foregoing, for the
spiritual and Eternal BENEFIT of the Readers, and hearers thereof, both
sufferers and others?

Answ. Oh that wisdom may be given from above, to understand this, and to
consider the latter end. Deu. 32. 29.

First, That we may be INSTRUCTED yet more to see, and perceive, the vanity
that is writ on all things under the Sun, (...) Vanity of vanities, (...) of
(...) all is (...), Is it not plainly so? When of all outward riches, Silver,
Gold, Houses, Lands, Liberties, Honors etc. Enjoyed to day, one may be
despoyled, (...) bereft of to morrow?

And now thou that have suffered therein; First why art thou so grieved and
troubled at thy loss? What, for the loss of (...)? And why did thou, or do
thou, set thy (...) on that: which is not? Have not (...) things wings, and
stye away as an Eagle? see, and learn, Prove. 23. 5. Psalm. 62. 9, 10.

2. Consider, if others now deal hardly with thee art not thou by nature as apt
to do so by others, if it were in thy power, and temptation?

3. Whether have not thou, or some of thy friends, by persuasion, done so to
others, as others do now to thee, or to thy friends? If so, then say with
(...), As I have done, so God has requited me. Judge. 1. 7.

4. If not, but in their affliction, thou have rather mourned and pittyed them,
as David did ( Psalm. 35. 13. 14. then count it all joy when you fall into many
troubles and temptation, which are the trials of your Faith, and for your good,
(...) am. 1. 2, 3. Romans 8. 28. Knowing that its a Cup your (...) Father gives
you, Ioh. 18. 11. Dan. 11. 35. Heb. 12 5, 6. Hab. 3. 17. Psalm. 73. 25. Heb. 13.
5, 6.

5. Learn to love your Enemies, and pray for such as revile you and abuse you,
Mat. 5. 44. Forgiving them, and defiring the Lord to forgive them, and the Lord
will seal up his forgiving you, and that you are his own (...) Children, verse
45. Mat. 6. 14.

Secondly, To such as dispoiled, or now dispoile, or (...) others or look on
with joy at it.

First, Consider that in Prove, 24. 17 (...) not (...) thine Enemy falls, or
stumbleth; lest the Lord see it, and it displease him: and he turn away his
wrath from him. To thee, see Ob. 12. 4.

Secondly, Consider have not thou judged that other party, for doing such
things, as now thou do, because now thou have power in thy hands? Mind that
in Romans 2. 1. Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man, that judge another and
(...) same things. Though thou (...) say, they did thus by us.

Thirdly, Remember what is written for good in (...). 4. 17. 18. Ier. 46. at
end.

Fourthly, To day whilst it is called to day, (...). (...) return to the Lord,
and He will return to thee; and (...) Spirit on thee, (...). 3. end, Prove. 1
23. Else dread at what follows there, and Rom, 2. 3, 4, 5. Mic. 7. 8, 9.

Of Healths drinking, and Heavens doom thereon; Part of a Letter from Mr. Ab.
Ramsbotham.
Within four or sive miles of my house the first of July (as I take it) at a
town called Geslingham; there were three or four persons in a shop keepers
house, drinking of (...) and of HEALTHS, as it is spoken.

And all of a sudden there came a flame of fire down the Chimney with a great
crack, as of thunder, or of a Canon or Granado; which for the present struck
the men as dead.

But afterward they recovered; and one of them was as it were shot in at the
knee, and so up his Breeches and Doublet to his shoulder, and there it brake
out, and split and brake in pieces the window, and set the house on fire; the
greatest part of which is burnt down to the ground.

This has filled the Country with wonder, and many speak their judgments both
on it, and of the persons.

Abr. Ramsbotham.

Against that odious, sinful and unhealthful custom of DRINKING HEALTHS,
especially the K. Health, much revived and practiced by high and low, rich and
poor of late. The Lord (...) born witness by several remarkable judgments on
diverse persons, as hereafter follows. And because there are many persons,
that are not convinced in their consciences that this custom is wicked, odious
and abominable: It was judged meet by some, that Mr. William Prynns notable
Book called HEALTHS SICKNESS, should be reprinted, few of them being to be had
for money; or rather for saving cost, and the greater toil, that a brief
collection might be taken thence, of the pith and Marrow of his many sollid
Arguments against it: And of his Epistle (...) in these words, To the most High
and (...) Prince, CHARLES, etc. In (...) year (...).

Which for the help of many, is therefore here (...) accordingly: Referring the
Reader that desires further satisfaction herein to that learned and excellent
Book it self.

HEALTHS-SICKNESS: OR, A Compendious and (...) Discourse, proving the drinking
and pledging of Healths to be sinful, and utterly unlawful unto Christians; By
Arguments, Scriptures, Fathers, Modern Divines, Christian Authors, Historians,
Councils, Imperial Laws and Constitutions; and by the voice and verdict of
profane and heathen Writers; Wherein all those Ordinary Objections, Excuses,
and Pretenses, which are made to justify, extenuate or excuse the drinking of
HEALTHS, are likewise cleared and ansvvered.
By WILLIAM PRYNNE, (...). Hospicii Lincolniensis. 1628.

Isa. 5. (...). VVo to them that follow strong drink, till wine (...) them. VVo
unto (...) that are mighty to drink wine.

Hab. 2. 15. VVo to him that (...) his neighbor drink, and (...) him (...) that
thou may look on their nakedness.

verse 16. The Cup of the Lords right hand shall be turned unto (...); and
shameful spewing shall be on thy glory.

Owen. Epigram. pars. 1. lib. 2. Epigram. 42. Quo tibi potarum plus est in
ventre SALUTUM, (...) minus e potis hisce SALUTIS habes. Una SALUS (...),
nullam potare SALUTEM: Non est in pota vera SALUTE SALUS.

To the Most High and Mighty Prince Charles, By the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, etc.
Most Gracious and Dread Sovereign,
THe reasons which swayed and imboldened me to Dedicate so small a (...) unto
so great a Patron as your Majesty were chiefly these.

First, Because your Highness in regard of these infinite and many HEALTHS,
which are daily caroused in your Royal Name throughout the Kingdom, and
elsewhere are more interested in the (...) and Subject of this compendious
DISCOURSE, then any other that I know.

In that your Sacred Health, your Name, your Crown, and Dignity, by means of
HEALTHS, are made the daily Table-complement, Grace, and first salute of every
jovial Courtier, and chief Allegiance of every (...) Corporation, Court, or
Country Officer; The phrase and valor of every deboist and roaring Soldier,
the Livery and Table, Buttery and Cellar talk of every good-fellow-Servingman.
The first ingredient of every Drunkards cup; the first pot-service of every
great (...) mean man's table. The only Reign or Pol-ax to assault, to (...) and
overcome the (...) and temperance, of all true hearted, real, practical, and
blessed Christians, who make a conscience of excess (because the Scripture does
condemn it, as that fifteenth Argument (...) proves.) The chief alective bait,
or stratagem to draw men unto (...); and the only Protection and Patronage to
(...) and bear out the (...) and riot of all such who deemed (...) and
Drunkenness, a Virtue and no sin at all (at least but Venial.) if YOUR
MAJESTY'S HEALTH OCCASION IT.

And is not this a great (...), Indignity, and Dishonor to your Majesty, that
your (...) HEALTH, your NAME and Royal CROWN should be thus (...) and banded up
and down in every Drunkards mouth? in every Cup and Can? In every Tavern,
Taphouse, Hall or Cellar? That every degenerous, infamous and stigmatical
Belialist, every deboist and brutish Pot-companion, should so far debase and
undervalue them; as to prostitute them to their swinish sins and lusts.

Secondly, As HEALTHS do thus (...), so they do likewise prejudice and wrong
your Sacred Majesty in two respects.

First, In merging and quenching the fervency of prayers, turning them into
profane, hellish Healths; the only means to draw down curses and diseases, yea
woes and fatal Judgments, on a King and Kingdom, deeming it a greater breach
of Allegiance not to pledge your Majesty's Health then not to pray for it.

Secondly, By interessing and engaging your Majesty in the excess and
Drunkenness of many others; your Name being made a party to it; Four HEALTH an
occasion, Apology or justification of it.

Thirdly, Because (...) is so able in respect of Place and Power, none more
obliged in regard of Duty, To purge these Hydropical noxious and superfluous
humors, and unhealthy Healths, out of the body of our State and Kingdom, now
so distempered and overcharged by them.

Your Majesty's loyal and humble Subject, WILLIAM PRYNNE.

After his Epistle to the Reader, of the causes of that odious sin of
Drunkenness, beginning his Book, he urges many solid Arguments against
Drinking of Healths, which are worthy to be Reprinted. The brief sum whereof
follows.
First Argument against these healths.
THat which in its very best acception is but a vain, a Carnal, Heathenish,
Foolish, and Unnecessary Custom, Tradition, invented by Riotous, Drunken
persons, to draw on Drunkenness and excess, must needs be sinful and utterly
unlawful. Ephesians. 2. 2, 3. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. Col. 2. 20, 21. 1 Pet. 4. 3, 4.
Romans 12. 2. Isa. 5. 11, 22. Hab. 2. 15, 16.

But this Drinking and Pledging of Healths, is so (as shall be proved anon)
Therefore it is (...).

Secondly, That which is an unusual, ordinary and common cause, occasion and
inticement to draw men to dunkenness, is sinful and unlawful, Hab. 2. 15. Prove.
Job. 31. 1. Mat. 6. 13. 1 These. 5. 22. Jude 23. And the common maxim, Quicquid
efficit tale est magis tale.

But this Drinking of healths is so, Therefore it must of necessity be sinful,
and unlawful.

Thirdly, That which does pervert and cross the true end, and right, and proper
use of drinking, must needs be sinful and unlawful: because it is an abuse of
Gods good creatures.

But this drinking of healths, does pervert and cross that true end. Therefore
it must needs be sinful.

4. That which is against the rules of Charity, and Justice, must needs be
sinful and utterly unlawful, because it is a violation of the Law of God, of
Man, and Nature.

But the Drinking of Healths, is so; because it tends for the most part both to
the Temporal and Eternal hurt of those who pledge it: Therefore it must needs
be sinful.

5. That which is Scandalous, Infamous, and of ill report amongst the best and
holiest Saints of God, and the better sort of Carnal Men, must needs be sinful,
Romans 12. 17. chapter 14. 3, 13, 15, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 8. 1, to 13. chapter 13. 13 32, 33.
2 Cor. 8. 21. Phil. 48.

But th s Drinking of Healths, is Scandalous, Offensive, and Infamous, among
the Saints of God, and Civil, Morral Men, Witness our own experience, and
Heathen Authors, which shall be cited hereafter.

Therefore they must needs be Sinful, and unlawful.

6. That which does often times cause men to Despise, and Reproach their Brethren
without a cause, is sinful; God informs us in this case, Romans 14. 3, 4, 13,
(...) 22. Col. 2. 16, 20, 21, 22.

But this Erinking of Healths is so, for if any man out of conscience refuse to
pledge an Health, he is presently Branded, and Sentenced for a Puritan, and
repined at by those who begin the Health, and they hate him in their hearts
This daily experience, together with the Scriptures, and Fathers (...). There,
fore this Drinking of Healths must needs be sinful and Unlawful.

7. That which takes away Christian Liberty, and Freedom, and puts a kind of
Law, and necessity upon men in the use of Gods good Creatures, must needs be
so, Romans 14. 1. to 22. 1 Cor. 8. 7. to the end, Heb. 2. 15, 16. Esther 1. 8. 1
Pet. 4. 3, 4. 1 Timothy 43. Col. 2. 16, 20, 21, 22.

But this Drinking of Healths is sin, for it confines, and restrains both the
Matters, the Measure, the Time, the End, and Manner of Men's Drinking, to the
will of such as begin the Health, as experience testify; therefore it is Sinful
and Unlawful.

8. That which neither wicked nor Godly Men can safely use without offense,
(must needs be so) because it cannot be used Lawfully,

But it is so, for wicked Men cannot (...) it, but with Drunkenness, and
excess, or some other unlawful (...), neither can Godly (...) use it, for it
beseems not our (...), and would be (...), (...), and temperate in all their
Conversation, to begin or Pledge a Health.

So that neither good nor bad Men, can safely use them without offense:
Therefore this Drinking of (...) must needs be sinful, etc.

9. That which is an ordinary cause of Devils Quarrels must (...) be evil and
(...).

But this (...) of Healths is so, for how many Quarrels, Murders, Wounds, and
Discontents do we hear of every (...) about the beginning, or refusing Healths,
of which we cannot but take notice, and occasion of Idle, (...), Songs, of many
(...), and of much (...) and loss of time. Therefore this Drinking Healths is
sinful, and (...).

10. That which was never practiced among Godly Christians in former ages, that
which serves to no good use at all, that which does much mischief, but (...) in
no glory to God, nor good to Men, must needs be evil and sinful, especially
when it is not enjoyed, nor commanded (...) any public Authority.

But this Drinking of Healths is so, it was condemned by godly Christians in
former ages, as I shall prove anon, nay it was never used in our (...) that we
can read or hear of, till of (...) It is an apparent occasion of much hurt, of
much excess and Drunkenness, but it does no good to any that do practice it, it
dishonours God, and prejudiceth the bodies and souls of many men, as experience
testifies, and it is not enjoyed by any public Authority. Therefore it must
be sinful and unlawful.

11. That which does usually tend to the honor, applause, and (...) of vain,
and (...) men, whose very memories and names should rot, and perish, and whose
persons should be vilified and despised, as far as they are wicked must needs
be sinful, because it does justify those whom God himself condemns.

But the Drinking of (...) is so few, there are whose Healths are commonly
(...), but (...) as (...) of the Prophaner sort as for all good and holy men,
they desire not to have others drink their Healths, and they are commonly so
ill beloved in the (...), that most of our Healthers (unless those that have
the r whole dependence upon them) would rather drink their (...) than their
Healths.

Therefore this Drinking of Healths must needs be sinful.

12. That which does pervert, and abuse those serious, and religious Gestures,
wherewith we are to Worship God, must needs be evil because we are not to use
any serious, and Religious Gestures, but in seriours, and religous things: and
because we give an account to God of all our (...), as well as (...), so that
we may not abuse, and take the one in vain, (especially of set purpose, as we
do in Healths) no more than the other.

But the drinking of Healths does (...), therefore it is evil.

13. That which does cause men to drink more, and to Pray and Praise God less
than else they would do: must needs be sinful, because it abuses Gods good
creatures; and perverts his Holy Ordinances.

But this pledging of Healths does so, therefore its sinful, and utterly
unlawful.

14. That which was a Common Practice, and Ceremonies of Gentiles, who knew not
God in their ordinary Meetings, and in the Solemnities of their Devil gods,
must needs be sinful to (...).

But this Drinking of Healths one to another in a certain Method is so,
therefore it must needs be sinful, and utterly unlawful unto Christians.

The Major proposition is warranted, not only by Fathers, and Counsels, (but
likewise by many (...) ( g) scriptures which do (...) enjoin us: Not to (...)
the Customs, Fashions, Ordinances, Rudiments, Traditions, or Ceremonies of the
World, or of the Heathon-Gentiles, or Worldly men: not to learn their ways nor
Customs; not to be like to them, nor (...) to conform, or Fashionour selves
unto them; especially in their Profane, Heathenish, Idolatrous, and
Superstitious Rites and Ceremonies. ( g) Lev. 18. 30. (...), 12. 29. 30. Psalm.
106. 35. Ier. 10. 2. Mat. 6. 7, 8, 01, 32, etc. Ephesians. 4. 17.

That this Custom of Healths is from Pagans that know not God, is thus proved.
Plutarch relates, ( k) Convivum, 7 Sapientum) that it was the Custom, etc.
Manner of the Ancient Gretians to drink one to another in course by a certain
measure: and that Jupiter in the Feast that he made to the Gods, did pour out
Wine into a Cup, and enjoin them to drink it off one after another in course:
so that it seems, the great Devil god Jupiter, was the first inventer, founder,
and instituter of our Hellish, and Heathenish Healths. (...) at Alexandro,
(Genesis Dier 1. 5, 10, 21, 3. and Polidor Virgit (De invent (...) lib. 3. 1, 5.)
record that the Gretians (yea and the Romans too, quod sumut (...) libunt.
Ovid. Fell. 1. 3.) did Salute their Gods, and Friends, among their Cups: and
call upon them by Name Carouzing off the whole Cup to them.

Athenaeus dipnos. (lib. 22. chapter 5.) relates that amongst them of Tire, it was
lawful for any (...), to provoke whom ever he would to pledge an Health (might
produce Plutus) in Mustel et Persa) and marsial Epigr. lib. 9. Epi. 74. 11, 11.
Epi. 21. and others to prove unto you, that it was common and usual among the
Gentiles, to drink the Healths of their Devil gods, their Friends, their Kings,
their (...), their Whores etc. sometimes 1. Cup, sometimes 3. cups, sometimes
5, 7, sometimes more. Shall we now (...) to Celebrate the nativity (...) of our
blessed Lord as the Pagans did their Bar cbanalia or the Devil feasts, in
drinking and carouzing, Healths? As if light ( a) and darkness, righteousness,
and unrighteousness, ( a) Christ and (...) the Cup, ( b) and Table of the Lord,
and the Cup and Table of Devils, the Temple of the Lord, and the Temple of
Idols, (which can have no Communion, no concord, nor agreement) were fully
reconciled and recorded. ( a) 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. ( b) 1 Cor. 10. 20. 21.

15. That which the Scriptures, Fathers, and many Modern Christians Divines and
others, together with Counsels Christian Emperors and states: (yea) and many
Pagans infidels and Profane (...), have utterly condemned and disapproved;
must needs be sinful and unlawful.

But thus have all these have utterly condemned and disapproved. Therefore it is
unlawful,

First, Its against Scriptures which prohibits all appearance of evil, 1 These.
5. 23. and all occasions of sin, Job 31. 1. Secondly, all Heathenish vain
Customs Lev. 16. 30. Ier. 10. 2. (...). 12. 1, 2. Mat. 6, 7, 8, 31, 32.
Thirdly, all rioting and drunkenenss and fleshly lusts, Romans 13. 13, 14.
Fourthly, All Scandelous and offensive things, 1 Cor. 10. 32. 33. Hos. 8. 9,
12. Fifthly, All rebelllngs excess of wine and riot, Isa. 5. 11, 22. Dan. 5.
3. 4. Sixthly, Denouncing woe to him that so gives strong drink, making drunk
that he may see his nakedness, Isa. 5. 11. 22. 28, 1.
Secondly, Ancient Fathers disapprove and condemn this Drinking Healths. Basil
writes against this saying, They Drink like beast, they give equal cups to the
guests, as out of an (...) fountain. de Ebrist, St Ambrosse in express terms
condemns this, do (...) Ieiun chap. 17. 11. 12, 13, 14. What (says he) shall
(...) speak of the obtestations of drunkards? Let us drink say they the
Emperors (...).

Saint Heirom, so speaking of the effects of Drunkenness in his days, has
this passage. ( lib. 1. content in Tit. (...) (...). 6. page 200. a) then
may (says he) behold some turning cups into (...), and dashing them in the
faces of their companions: others with torn Garments. etc. He that (...) off
most, is deemed the Valientest man, which course, and practice he utterly
dissalows, as sinful.

Saint Augustine, is very large saying ( De Tempore Sermon. 231. 232. de Sobrist
et Virge, etc.) (...) Brethern, albeit I believe that you fear drunkeness, as
much as Hell it self: exhort you neither to drink more your selves, nor to
compel others to drink more than they ought. For many, often times drink, by
measure without Measure, they provide great cups, and drink by a certain law
and rule, I entreat this of you above all the rest, that as often that as you
Feast one another, you would utterly banish from your Feasts, that Fillthy and
Unhappy Custom of Drinking of Healths. But admit it should be said unto thee,
Either drink or dye, it is better that thy Sober flesh should be slain, than
that thy (...) should dye for drunkenness.

Pope John the 13. that Monster of men (as Platina styles him) drank a Health
to the very Devil himself, Baronius An. 963. (...). 17. 23. Mr. John Whites way
to the true Church, Digres. 57. Sect. 9, etc.

Thirdly, from Modern Divines, etc. See in the Book it self which has it, and
all these Arguments more fully and Substancially.

Part of the KINGS first PROCLAMATION, May 30. 1660.
C. R.

OUR diflike of those, who under pretense of affection to us, and our service
(...) to themselves aLiberty of Reviling, Threatening, and Reptoaching of
others. There are like wise another sort of men, of whom we have heard much,
and are sufficiently ashamed, who spend their time in Taverns, Tipling-houses,
and Debauches, giving no other evidence of their affection to us, bat in
Drinking our HEALTH.

Also the next PROCLAMATION, June 1.
We therefore by the advice of our Lords and Commons, do by this our
Proclamation, Command, Publish, and Declare, that no Person or Persons, (...)
or Temporal, shall presume, forcibly to enter upon, or disturb their said
possession, either (...) or Temporal, who have been settled by any lawful or
pretended Authority.

The Relation of the Death of above 20. or 30.
Dogs at Graves-end, on the Kings Proclamation day there, the 12. of the 3.
Month May, 1660. given in by one that was there present.

A May Pole had been set up there in the Market (...), which then had the Top
cut off, and a (...) put on the top of it.

Another May Pole was set up by it, that 12. day, there they had Bonefires, and
great Drinkings, and Drinking Healths, and (...).

A great (...) of strong Beer, and many Bottles of Wine, being brought and set
under the Market place, to be drunk there.

The King was Proclaimed their twice on that 12. day, first by the Deputy Mayor
his Deputy, and afterward by the May. or himself, when he returned home.

That same 12 day, dyed many Dogs there at Graves-end on a (...) one after
another, Sprawling and dying, Mastives and great Dogs especially 23. were told
by some that night, about 33. were told of them, the next morning they being
(...) out of Graves end as Carrion into the (...).

There was one Mr. P. that complained to the Mayor against one, for saying to
this effect, that this Death of the Dogs, was a Judgment of God; The Mayor
caused him to be put in the Cage, Mr. P. his Dog dyed soon after. And when the
(...) went home, (...) Dog also Sprawled before his eyes, and dyed, (...) that
man wa kept in the Cage that day, and the next, called Sunday.

Of strange Hail. stones at Deal and Dover, and Sandwich, etc. on 6. Month,
August 4. day, 1660.

Of which first take part of a Letter from Canterbury, August 6.

On Saturday at night fell out here a great Storm of Thunder and Lightning, and
Hail, for about two hours. One Mr. Price was in the Downs, who is said to be a
Purser of the Admiral, he tells that Hailstones fell aboard their Ship in the
storm, as big as Musket Bullets, and that on the Shore at Deal, it has broken
many Windows to a great damage.

Another relation sent from one Mr. R. at Dover, to his Brother in London,
showing what effects that Hail had their.

Last Saturday to wit the 4th instant. from Ten at night, till two or three in
the morning, was a great Thunder and lightening: and such showrs of Hail, as
the like was never known with us. The Hailstones were as big as Walnuts, some
were measured to be 4 inches about, it has dashed out much Corn and Fruit
where it passed. Fifty pound will not mend the Glass windows in Dover, that are
broken by the Hail. How far it reached I knew not, but I hear it was at Deal,
as well as here, also at Folketon, where two cat tell were drove over the
cliff, and destroyed: Doubless it signifies somewhat; that in the midst of
Summer such Hail should be, that some affirm was more then 4. inches about.

Likewise one Mr. Fennir of Canterbury coming to Town, relates that he spoke
with an honest man who was at Sandwich, and affirmed, that he measured some
Hailstones, after they had lain for some time on the ground, to be Three inches
about, and better. Also that the storm had done much harm to the Windows in
(...) Town. Thus for the relations of that Hail, which may yet more occasion
our fearing of that God, and him alone, that at his pleasure by Hailstones,
while-wind storms, etc. can easily destroy all his and his peoples Enemies.

Consider of these Scriptures, Exo. 9. 18, to, 28. in Egypt Psalm 78. 47. He
destroyed their Vines by Hail. Yea in Joshuas Wars more were destroyed by
Hailstones in one battle, than by the sword, Josh. 10. 11.

THE END

