(...)

THE Blind Guide, or the Doting Doctor.

Composed by way of Reply to a late tediously trifling Pamphlet, Entitled, The
Youngling Elder, etc. written by John Goodwin, and containing little or nothing
in it, but what plainly speaks the Author thereof to lie under the double
unhappiness of Seducers, To be Deceiving And Deceived.

This reply indifferently serving for the future direction of the Seducer
himself, and also of those his misled followers, who with him are turned
enemies to the Word and grace of God.

The authority of which Word, and the efficacy of which grace are in this
following Treatise, succinctly, yet satisfactorily vindicated from the
deplorably weak, and erroneous Cavills of the said John Goodwin in his late
Pamphlet.

By William Jenkyn, Minister of the Word of God at Christ-Church in LONDON.

2 Timothy 3.13. Evil men and seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and
being deceived.

Prove. 14.16. The fool rages and is confident.

Jude 13. Raging waves of the sea foming out their own shame.

Nissen. de Trinitat. p. 8. (...).

Call. Ep. 354. Contra Mennonem. Hoc sane video, nihil hoc asino posse fingi
superbius.

Printed at London by M. B. for Christopher Meridith, and are to be sold at his
Shop at the sign of the Crane in Paul's Churchyard.

To the Christian READER.
READER:
WEre not my desire to serve thy Soul, greater than my hope to recover my
Adversary, and were I not more apprehensive of the greatness of thy danger,
than the goodness of his disposition, I should not spend my precious hours in
a second engagement against his Errors; my contention is greater that thou
should not fall to be like him, than that he should rise to be unlike
himself. He who wrote his last Pamphlet only to represent me unworthy to
contend with him, will hardly write his next to confess that truth by me has
conquered him. It Is not consistent with his honor, who in his last boasted,
that he had laid the attempts of all his adversaries in the dust, Ep. to the
Reader, To. Eld. p. 3.
and that Presbytery lay bleeding at the feet of his Writings, in his next to
lay himself in the dust, and to acknowledge that his Heresies lie bleeding at
the foot of a Yongling; so that should he be convinced of the duty, (as
possibly he may) he would be afraid of the shame of a recantation. Its more his
sin than my unhappiness (though both) that by confuting his errors I occasion
him still to vent them; but never did I meet with wretched opinions so
wrathfully asserted, and so weakly maintained. His Writings have more of Tongue
than matter, (...) Nissen de Tri.
and yet more of Teeth than either; with the weapon of the Tooth (like the
Heretics of old) he conquers, even after he is overcome with Arguments.

Certainly while Master Goodwin wrote his late Book he was under a quotidian
fit of Frenzy, and all that time was an interregnum of his reason, his Pen
being only dipped in passion. His Pamphlet consists of such unmanlike scoldings,
that he has rendered himself the shame of his, Party, and the scorn of his
Opposites; the only product of his reproaches, being a confirmation of the
report of his being badly nurtured formerly, and worse natured still; Unhappy
man! who stumbleth in the dark, and stormeth against the light, and who
always endures that least which he wants most. The weakness of Flatterers
has so abused him into love of himself, and the strength of interest into the
love of Error, that he cannot abide either plaine-dealing, or sound doctrine.
The palpable weakness of his late performance in his Youngl. Eld. Ep. to
Reader, P. ult.
extorted from him this acknowledgement, that he wrote not his Book to refute
me, and had not his Lordship silenced his Conscience, it would have added, but
to revile me; Yo. Eld. p. 1.
I confess he words it more gently, telling me, that the task to which he was
confined in his Writing, was to show me more of my self (nothing of him self)
and in pursuance of this merciful design, he puts his whole Book under a
quaternion of topics, 1. My defect of Conscience. 2. Of Clerkship. 3. Of
apprehension. 4. Of ingenuity (forgetting in the mean time one little defect
which runs through the veins of all his four parts, viz. while he so rudely
handles my name, scarce to touch the matter of my Book) unto which four
defects he reduces whatsoever malice or falsehood can invent. against me;
though the prosecution of them all be a continued transgression of the Laws of
Art and honesty, nay, not only of method, but even at once of common modesty;
so that I know not in this world, the thins that are so contemptible, as Master
Goodwins scurrilities; (...). Basil. De ira.
for my part, I much more regard that excellent advice of Basil, Neither be
proud of thy praises, nor impatient at thy reproaches, when neither are due
unto thee.

I confess, I delight not to see him in those distempers, for which I pity
him; I never intended to drive him into a Frenzy, and yet neither am I willing
that he should drive me into a Palsy; idle silence is a sin as well as idle
speaking: his Contumelies can be no plea for my Cowardice; where sin is
impudent, reproof must not be bashful. If errors seek no corners, should
truth do so? How happy were we if we could leave all our stings in the sides
of Error and Profaneness! if in their blood all our hatreds might be dround! I
have ever thought, that peace with that with which we should contend, is the
grand cause of contention with them with whom we should be at peace. Its just
that they who will not knwon Error so as to hate it, should not know Truth so
as to find it, How incongruous is it to shun that man, upon whom (as thou
think) thou espyest a Wart, and to take him into thy bosom upon whom thou
know there is a Plague Sore? Errors in Discipline do but scratch the face
of Religion; these in Doctrine stab it to the heart. To. Eld. p. 20. p. 47. p.
66
When the whole written Word is at once struck off from being the ground of
faith, and whatever is in and about the Scriptures denied to be the foundation
of Religion, unless the Counsels contained in them. When it shall be asserted,
that natural men want no power of making themselves able to believe, and that
notwithstanding all the power of converting grace, there is a liberty in the
will to defeat and frustrate conversion; In a word, when Sectaries strike at
the faith, both which and with which we believe, Jude ver. 3.
its our duty (if ever) to contend for this faith once delivered to the Saints;
In my present endeavors about which work, if thou embracest what thou find
of God, I shall not only be willing that thou should reject, and desirous
that thou would remit whatever thou find of man, but shall also ever
remain thankful to God, and Reader,

From my Study at Christ-Church, London, Nov. 23. 1648. A friend to thy-Soule.
William Jenkyn.

THE Blinde-Guide GUIDED.
Chap. 1.
Directed more particularly to the reverend and learned subscribers of the late
testimony to the truth with-in the Province of London. Showing the senseless
raylings, the gross untruths, the shameless boastings; expressed by Master
Goodwin in his Pasquill called, The youngling Elder, With a recital of sundry
weak and erroneous passages contained therein.

THe reproached in Mr. Goodwins Pamphlets, have more need to be humble under
their glory, than to be patient under their disgrace; no scriblings are so
scurrilous, and no scurrilities are so honorable, as are those which drop from
his pen. It Is rare to meet with that Christian, who does not more than
conjecture that there is much worth in every thing against which he expresses
much wrath. His Antagonists never could do him good with their will^, but he
has ever done them good against his will. By writing against his errors they
could never make him better, but be has ever by railing against the truth and
them, made both to be better beloved. I suppose Master Goodwin rather notes
than likes that abundant estimation which your testimony finds with the
faithful. The stones that this Shime^ has cast against it, God has turned
into pearses, and made of them a Crown of honor for it. Your testimony opposed
error, and God has made it to vanquish infamy. He who directed you to make it
useful, has himself made it accepted.

God has caused your testimony like the sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and rather than it should not refresh them that did desire it, to diffuse
its beams on them that did not deserve it. It has shined upon the unsavory
dunghill as well as the pleasant garden, the close and noisome alley as well as
the sweet and open Country. No wonder then if its success have been as various
as its objects. When its welcome warmth visited the Countries, Warwickshire,
Essex, Norfolk, Devonshire, Yorkshire, Northamptonshire, Lancashire, Wiltshire,
Somersetshire.
how sweetly fragrant was the savor which instantly they breathed forth? Who
has not gratefully resented the pleasant odours of zeal and learning
scattered through the Kingdom by the Ministers of sundry Counties, in the many
attestations to, and approbations of your testimony? Some of us have seen the
letters of the learned Spanhemius highly approving of it, as an eminent
expression of your faithfulness to Christ and his truth. A Declaration and
exhortation, page 34. The many testimonies which the truth and cause of Christ,
the Covenant, and Presbyte^iall Government, have lately received from that
cloud of witnesses of the Ministry in leverall Counties of England, after the
example of the worthy Ministry of the City of London, against the errors of
Independency, Anabaptisme, etc. are unto us matter of great praise and hearty
thanksgiving.
And who observes not the frequent and respectfull mention that the famous and
faithful General Assembly of the Church of Scotland makes of your testimony,
in their Declarations of most public concernment. These indeed were the
breathings of the more sweet and open places, when warmed with the zeal of
your witnessing to the truth. But who can expect the like from the unsavory
dunghill, or the noysom alley, though jointly enjoying the same bounty from the
beams of your testimony with the other?

Those stinking exhalations, those muddy streams, I mean the suming and
foolish pamphlets arising against your testimony, out of that alley of errors,
where Master Goodwin lodges, (whose composition is mud and blood) are a
supersufficient testimony of the contrary. In his other impure pamphlets he
outgoeth all his accomplices in wickedness. But in his two last, wherein God did
leave him to oppose Christ in your testimony, he has even outgone himself. I
know not one in the world left him to contend with for mastery in the black
arts of lying and reviling, unless it be his stygian teather. In which respect
as his terms of youngling and novice are notes of no disgrace to me, so
neither is his hoary and heretical head found in those ways of
unrighteousness an ensign of over-abundant honor to him. It Is true, his
expertnesse in lying speaks him Captain of the Cretian Band, and his
skilfulnesse in reviling a Doctor fit for the ducking-stoole, though not for
the chair, hut these preferments rather deserve pity than provoke envy. As
ambitious to give the world a view of his maturity in the forecited sins, he
addresseth himself against the reverend subscribers of the late testimony in
multitudes of passages, after such an odiously false and reproachful manner,
as thousands of moralliz'd heathens in the world would blush if but desired to
do the like. A handful, in stead of a vast heap which might be given, are
these which follow. To this effect he breathes out reproaches.

Master Jenkin his reverend and beloved brethren, Epistle to the Reader, p. 4,
5.
are these fals-fingered men, these opprobria and propudia generis humani, The
shames and blots of mankind, the vilest of men: Their cage is defiled, clean
birds forsake them, and it stands all of this nation in hand whom either the
interest of honor or conscience touches, speedily to quit communion with them.

In his former pamphlet Syon College was visited, in this latter, it is
excommunicated, in neither it is prejudiced. In casting upon you the names of
blots and spots of mankind, he is but your scullion to make your integrity
shine the brighter by all these reproachful smutchings; and as he willingly
detracts from your reputation, so he unwillingly adds to your reward. What he
relates of the foul and forsaken cage, clearly shows that he accounts
meetings for prayer, preaching, purity of reformation, alms to the poor,
relief to the aged, and for increase of brotherly love, to be the foul
defilements of a place, of which the Ministers having been guilty in their
meetings at Sion College, he knows that in stead of shunning communion with
you, the faithful with a holy scorn neglect his excommunioating of you. The
truth is, most of those whom he accounts to be of his own party, forsake and
abhominate him if they have any thing of God in them; only they being (I fear)
under the tentation of carnal policy, have not (as yet) fully declared against
him, for which the Lord pardon them. Master Bridge, lately of Holland, whose
judgment in this particular I shall not mention without respect, said but a
little while since among sundry Ministers of my intimate acquaintance, That
some brethren of them were resolved to repair to Master Goodwin by way of
advising him to desist from maintaining his erroneous opinions touching the
Scriptures; and if he refused so to do, they resolved (he said) to quit
communion with him; with these or with words to this very purpose did he
express himself. And I have heard sundry of the Independent judgment speak
of this and his other opinions, propagated in the alley against grace, with the
height of abhorrence, and with much professed detestation And the truth is,
Master Goodwin in his pretended joining with the conscientious Independent, is
looked upon by the piously prudent but as a scabthat cleaves to the body. He
speaks of clean birds that forsake you. A double mistake; I know but of one
that has forsaken you, and I wish he were not, Master Goodwin, in stead of a
clean bird an unclean heast.

He thus goes on raving, page 5.
There Is an old saw which cuts well:

Non audet stygius Pluto tentare quod audet
Effranis flamen --
Which he thus englisheth:

The Prince himself of the black stygian lake
Dares not attempt what Priests will undertake.
In cutting with this saw he turned the teeth of it the wrong way, I mean from
himself toward you, otherwise it wouldhave cut better and quicker thus:

The sins which stygian Pluto dreads
The Priest of Errour-alley spreads.
But let him turn the teeth of the saw his own way, it is no disgrace for you
to be taxed with deeds which Satan dares not attempt; and such are those which
I mentioned even now to be the deeds of Sion College; nor is it any honor for
him to be in harmony with hell, and to conspire in the same performances with
Satan.

He says, his saw cuts well, but whom may he thank? he knows who it was that
did both file the teeth of it, and helped him to handle it; viz. the prince of
styx, in Satan's saw pit schooled he was.

In another place, drunk with rage, he thus goes on, Youngl. Elder, page 16.
Impiety and opposition to the truth hang upon Sion College, and if Sion
College were removed, impiety and opposition to the truth would soon fall to
the ground.]

What? Si. Col. a prop of all impieties! could more be said for the removal of
any stews or stie of fin? It Is true, there is much impiety and opposition to
the truth in the Kingdom but, Mr Goodwin, suppose impiety and opposition to the
truth be Independent, how can they then hang on Sion College? And were that
poor College so loaded with impiety, etc. a removal of it might be spared,
for it would of it self certainly and suddenly fall to the ground. For his
intimation of a removal of Sion College, it is but a cast of his Episcopal
office. Not long since he visi^ed Sion College, even now he excommunicated it,
and now he sues out his Writ de excommunicato capiendo, absolving those from
finne that shall remove it; nay he makes it a most meritorious employment, even
the taking away of all impiety and opposition to the truth. Mean while let him
take heed lest he be translated from his Bishopric, and removed to his own
place, Ar. 1.25.
before Sion College be removed out of its place: And truly could all his
impious errors that so much oppose the truth be removed with him, his
miserably misled flock wouldhave a happy change, if his endeavors that they
may have his spirit among them when he is gone have not been too effectual,
and his head be not their directory then, as it is their rubric now.

He now foams for madness. For all the success, Youngl. Elder, page 25.
either in converting of souls, unless it be from God unto Satan; and so for
building up of souls, unless it has been in wrath against the Parliament,
Army, and faithful servants of God, which the Ministers have had for these
three or four years last past, I am full of rational confidence, that it may
be cast up with a cipher, and measured with a reed that never grew.

In one thing you may observe Master Goodwins modesty, he only says, That for
these three or four years you have converted none; but I have spoken with
some very gracious Christians, who have been exact observers of Master Goodwins
Ministry, and they told me, That they never heard or perceived that ever God
blessed it with the turning of any one sinner toward God. How many he has
turned from God, its not so easy to determine as it is to sear.

But the total insuccessefulnesse of your Ministry in the conversion of none,
is such a putid calumny, that even the sectaries read it with blushing, and
when they are told of it, they turn their heads another way, and pretend it is
for convenience of spitting; It may be your grief you are successful in
converting no more; your comfort you are successful in converting some; your
confidence that he is a soul perverter, or at least that the way to convert
men, is not to teach that men can convert themselves. His trouble it is, that
any are converted by you from his errors. But if he thinks that there is no
conversion of souls in our Churches, what will he and his Colleagues do for new
recruits? their trade of Sheep-stealing will quite decay, for I have heard that
sundry of themselves do not so much as pretend to preach for conversion of
souls.

As for my self, I see no other import or tendency (as he cants it) in this
his foolish pamphlet, but only by reviling to vilify me (though I can,
blessed be God, say with Joseph, God has meant it unto good for me, yea, unto
a good contrary to the evil of reproaching,) and therefore more than one
hundred times does he in this his railing pasquill express himself against me
in such terms as these: Youngling, novice, boy, child, youth, young
springlius, young glorioso, young ignaro, young Phaeton, vain young man,
unworthy young man, young Jenkins, young simplicius, childling, young
Pragmatico, shameless young man, young Dictator, young Metropolitan, young
Thraso, green-head, young piece of presumption, Prelaticall piece of
Presbytery, unhallowed piece of Presbytery, swelling piece of vanity, san of
shame and folly, illiterate soul, poor man, silly brain, mancipium of
illiteratenesse, friend William, Batte mi fili, (as if with his religion and
reason, he had also abjured good manners.) And he plainly tells his Reader, that
his aim in writing his book was thus: To make me know my self; though a
gracious heart would have put him upon writing to have made the people know the
truth.

Touching his reproaches for my want of years, I could say: That I was ordained
Presbyter about ten years before Mr. Goodwin commenced Independent; That I
learned those rudiments of Logic above 20. years ago in the University of
Cambridge, which Master Goodwin is now defective in, either by never learning
them, or forgetting them, as is clear by sundry passages in his Book which I
have mentioned in this. That if I be so young, I am in part excused for my
illiteratenesse, my times (it seems) having been short as well as my
seize. That I grant, Mr. Goodwins book speaks him old, particularly, that
passage of his, p. 2. To. Eld. where he speaks his own seniority thus: The
worse spirits of malignity, hypocrisy, searednesse of conscience,
dissimulation of the truth. etc. do not often find men out till they be
stricken in years. As for the residue of his Pamphlet it speaks him old even
to dotage, which is to be a child twice and always. That were I so young as
he pretends, yet he cannot prove the falsenesse of my assertions by the
fewness of my years, though this be the strongest argument in all his book
against what I write, his only endeavor being to make my book a sufferer by
my years, because he cannot make my years to suffer by my book. That were
there so great a disparity of years between us, yet truth is senior to us
both, and he and his errors are more younglings to truth than I am to him,
though I grant his Errors to^^ing grace, as old as Pelagius.

Touching that other imputation of illiteratenesse; I say I am so far from
disliking this his charge, that I should have bin very well satisfied if sundry
who exceed Master Goodwin in standing, and very much in understanding, had
passed the same censure upon me that he has done, and never another. That as
he has not so much learning as to allow him to boast, so I have not so little
as to suffer me to be unthankful. That he has dishonored himself in the
undertaking, nay in the overcomming (were he victor) much more inbeing overcome
by one so illiterate; having mustered such a vast body, such a huge book to
pursue a flea, wherein every line is at least either a pike or a musket; should
he vanquish it would be no honor to him, should he be vanquished the disgrace
would be indelible. That sundry, not contemptible, have had but low estimations
of Mr. Goodwins literature. Famous Doctor Stoughton observing how Master
Goodwin was wont to torture Scripture for the defending of his errors which in
those days he vented in his Sermons, used this comparison in the hearing of an
eminent Minister now in London, As an hungry dog that teareth and gnaweth upon
a dry bone, and can suck nothing out of it for the relief of his appetite, by
long gnawing upon it, wets it all over with the unclean moisture of his own
mouth, and at length for hunger sucks in that moisture again as if he had been
beholding to the bone for it; so, said he, did Mr. Goodwin tear the holy
Scriptures to draw out a sense that might countenance his unlearned and corrupt
opinions, which he not able to obtain, (the Scriptures being dry to such
intents) the spurious expositions that flowed out of his own month upon the
Scriptures in his tedious tozing of them, he confidently sucks in again, as if
they had been the contributions of the Scriptures themselves. Mr. C. a Minister
of good worth, now in London, and Minister of Ma. near the be. whether upon
observing the darkness of Mr. Goodwins way in expounding, or rather his
darkning in stead of expounding Scripture, or otherwise, sometimes said, Mr.
Goodwin was like a horse that went into a very clear stream, but coming forth
again, he left it by pawing with his feet, very thick and muddy. And indeed he
is no better at the pen than in the pulpit; for in making all his pamphlets, he
seems to dip his pe^, or rather his pia matter, in puddle-dock. A reverend
Commissioner, and a learned Minister of the Church of Scotland, having one of
those wretched pamphlets called Sion College visited sent him, in his letter
shortly after returned, he used only this short but sharp expression concerning
it, Goodwin is a beast, The passage I read.

Touching that imputation of Prelaticall piece of Presbytery, I say, my
principles, preaching, and other practices, are and ever shall be, by Gods
grace, opposite to Prelacy, because my conscience tells me that Prelacy so much
opposes the Word; under Prelacy I was an early sufferer. At Cambr. long since
I was forced to forsake my otherwise dear College, because I durst not full mit
to popish and prelaticall innovations, and to betake my self to another
College in the same University, where I enjoyed liberty for study sundry
years with out those Prelaticall impositions; and sundry are able to testify
how fierce the rage of the Prelaticall faction was against me a long time in
the university, and afterward; though I say not that Master Goodwin was
connived at, and secretly encouraged to vent his opinions in Colemanstreet,
when the faithful Min^sters of the City were silenced and persecuted.

You have had a taste of his reproaches; behold him now making lies his refuge.
He relates two stories concerning you, which together with his descants upon
them, are the subject matter of most part of his Epistle; but there is scarce a
word in either of them, in the writing whereof, his fingers were not woefully
troubled with the Cretian cramp.

In his first story he tells the Reader, Page 2, 3. of his Epist.
That although n a Provincial meeting, it was resolved upon the question, That
no answer should be given to his book called Sion College visited, and (he
hops out of sense of his innocence) that the graver judicatory had determined
his immunity as Pilate did Christ's, yet Master Jenkins like the Jews, who
would needs have Christ crucified, has made log furrows upon his back, etc.

A story that has not fewer than fore of five of the foresaid Cretian
commodities in it. For first, The Provincial meeting never propounded, much
lose made any resolution upon, any question concerning the answering or not
answering his book. 2. Never was it resolved in any of your meetings, that his
book should not be answered; indeed it was generally conceived that so empty a
pamphlet deserved not to be answered by any. So that 3. the forbearance to put
any upon the employment of answering his book, was not out of sense of his
innocence, but out of apprehension of his impotenoy; you looking upon him as
seven fold more the son of shame ant folly after the publishing of his Sion
College visited than he showed himself before. 4. Never did Mr. Jenkin make
furrows upon his back, he only showed the deep furrows that Mr. Goodwin had
made upon the back of truth with the plow of his pen, Satan guiding and driving
it most commonly for him. And I know nothing that was laid upon his back but a
rod, (according to Salomons advice) and that too of his own making. Sorry I am,
that instead of making him to mend, it has occasioned him to be mad.

In his second story he tells his Reader, that the Archytects of the design (he
means of testi^ying against his errors) obtained the subscriptions of Master
John Downame to a paper, wherein was not the least mention of any of his
Errors, and after, Mr. Downames band was obtained, they foysted into the
Catalogue of Errors what sayings they pleased.

Captain Cretensis is upon his march, but I shall stop him. The relation
consists of two as odious untruths as ever dropped from a Cretians quill. For.

First, I affirm, that the Errors of Master Goodwin were mentioned and set
down in the Catalogue in that fullness and order wherein they are now
expressed, nay distinctly read in the bearing of Master John Downame, before be
subscribed his band to the paper for the witnessing against them.

2. No sayings of Mr. Goodwin, or of any other of the Sectaries mentioned in
the Catalogue, were put into the Catalogue of Errors after Master Downames
hand was obtained.

The former Master Downame has acknowledged to two or three Reverend Ministers
that went to him on purpose for enquiry, at the same time expressing to them
his abhorring of Mr. Goodwins opinions mentioned in the Catalogue; which I
rather relate, because he terms Mr. Downame learned, and one of the best
spirited men. I like the expressions, with this note, that such men most detest
Mr Goodwins Errors.

Two detestable lied are contained in that relation of his, page 78. To. Eld.
where he says, That not long since some of his followers came to me to
propound their scrup^es about the Dectrine that I had taught, concerning the
nature of a true Church, and that contrary to my (...) promise, I denied
conference with them, and that I refused to dispute with them unless by
writing. The truth is this, many Sectaries (observing how sundry Christians (I
desire to mention it with humble thankfulness) were strengthened against the
Schism of Independency, by the Sermons which I preached near three years
since, concerning a true visible Church) were filled and cut to the heart with
madness. At which time some of Mr. Goodwins followers, upon a Lords day toward
evening came to my house, sundry of my Christian friends in my own parish
coming with them, to observe (as I conceive) their deportment. Where one or two
of Mr. Goodwins followers that had a mind to speak more than the rest,
discovered that shameful ignorance in cavelling, that diverse of those that
flood by, and some of their own party, as afterward they confessed, blushed to
hear them; my self also wondering at their empty impudence; they being so far
from bringing any objection against what I had delivered, that they were not
able without my prompting them to tell me what particular passage in my Sermon
it was against which they took exception. Only they knew, that what I had
delivered made against them, and they were resolved that they would not like
it. But so far was I from refusing conference with them, that I entertained
near two hours discourse with them at that time, though I had preached twice
that Sabbath, my body being thereby very faint and weary; expressing also the
greatest forwardness and willingness to inform and satisfy them whenever
they pleased, and desiring them to that end to come to my house, for indeed I
much pitied them. To be short, it wat at length propounded by one of my
friends, that my self and two Ministers might dispute with three of theirs who
were of a contrary judgment concerning the points in controversy, for the
satisfaction of the unsettled Gentlemen. This motion I embraced most willingly,
and desired them to certify so much to their Ministers, which they promised to
do; and upon advice taken with some reverend brethren concerning the fittest
and profitablest manner of managing the said disputation, I made this offer
under my hand in writing, and sent it by some of the unsettled Gentlemen, viz.
That I would send their Ministers the heads of all my Sermons, with all those
positions contained in them, that opposed the way of separation; and if they
would engage to answer them in print, I promised also to publish a reply in
print to that their answer, that so all the world might see on which fide the
truth lay. But this offer, savouring too much of plain dealing, and love of
the light, their Minihers accepted not, pretending their mighty employments.
The Ministers refusing the discussion of the controversy by way of writing,
though solicited thereto by my Letter, what followed: why now my Gentlemen (to
make up in sobriety what they wanted in setlednesse) having it seems leisure
enough, earnestly desire that I would engage with them in writing. This I
refused, holding my self close to my former offers, that if any of them were
unsatisfied, I would endeavor most willingly in a private way of conference to
inform them, conceiving that this might content them who aimed at information
and not at ostentation. In this relation therefore of Mr. Goodwins, I charge
him with these two broad faced falsities: 1. His saying, That I refused
conference with his followers, whereas I earnestly invited them to come to me
for that end. 2. His saying, That I was advised by my brethren to dispute with
his followers only by writing, whereas I never was advised or offered at all to
dispute with them by writing; my offer to dispute by writing or printing, being
only made to their Ministers, or those so called.

In a cool requital for these three rotten and false stories, in two of which
he basely slanders so many of his betters, I shall only succinctly show how
much more he has abused himself in his Youngl. Elder, than he has all or any
of you, by his foul and false representations.

For the wronging of his own reputation, (if at least it could be made worse
than it was before) by his late pamphlet called, The Youngling Elder, to say
nothing here, how cheap and worthles he has made his scriblings by the scores
of pages spent in such raylings, as the common observations and light of every
reader does confute (scum and scurrility making up his whole book.) I shall
only observe how shameless and ridiculous he is in magnifying and extolling
himself, pretending himself to be the most dreadful adversary that ever put on
gown or ^antlet, bragging, and swaggering, and boasting, and ranting, and
rufling, in the beginning of his book, as if he would bury ten such younglings
as my self in one furrow of his brow; and as if he would affright the whole
world into a forbearance of quetching against him, by the terror of my example;
when as, alas, in the sequel of his book he is so wretchedly weak, and
ridiculously empty, that instead of making me to bleed with his force, he only
makes me to blush at his folly.

Speaking concerning my hazardous adventures in dealing with him, page 3.
he thus insults: Little does this poor man know what be has done. Presbytery
lies bleeding at the soot of my writings, and is as good as broken in pieces by
them; it is shaken, shattered, and dismantled by them. When I write I feel the
strength of God near me. page 17.
I have had to do with the keenest sons of high Presbytery, page 5, Ep.
whose little finger had more weight than Master Jenkins loins, and yet I have
laid all their attempts and writing in the dust, as well they did deserve, and
therefore this young man was of no deep reach, because he feared not the same
issue. Exempla gratia, p. 26. Y. El.
You laid Master Walker and Master Robroughs writings in the dust; with the
former of which you encountered as an ass with a lion; and with the latter of
which you never durst enter the Lists, though provoked by an elaborate Treatise
in confutation of your errors about justification. So you laid Master Edwards
his Antapologia in the dust; a book that so fully and clearly detected your
frauds, that instead of answering the matter of it by Scripture or reason, you
were feign to betake your self to your Grammar, and only here and there snarle
at the seeming impropernesse of a word. He threatens, That before he and his
friend William part, he will make him as heretical as himself, etc. And
rather than he will not prove himself a boaster, he makes himself a
ballad-maker; he says. or rather saweth thus, in the height of menacing:

The time will come that youthful Turnus shall
Wish dearly Pallas ne^'r had been encountered.
But why rather makes he not use of the skill of a far better Poet, who brings
in Master Goodwins younger brother, expressing himself thus to David:

-- Art thou weary of thy life so s^one,
O foolish bay, fantastical baboon.
-- I will not file
My feared hands with blood so faintly vile,
Go seek thy match, thou shale not dye by me,
Thine honor shall not my dishonor be,
No (silly lad) no, were thou of the Gods,
I would not fight at so unknightly odds.
This, among the rest of the characters of those ungodly men, spoken of by Paul
and Peter, 2 Timothy 2.3, 4. 2 Pet. 2.18. (...).
agrees with him, to be fierce and high minded, to speak great swelling words
of vanity. He expressing himself more like a Russian than a Minister; he
shining not like a sweetly influentiall star, but flashing like an angry bloody
Comet, he speaking after the rate of the eldest son of Godmagog; more like a
Polyphemus than like a Paul; more like a swash-buckler than a Bishop; a Lamech
than a Moses; and expressing more the presumption of Behemoth, Job 40.23.
who trusts that be can draw up Jordan into his mouth, than the lamb-like
spirit of a Saint. In a word, he has so much of the Goodwin, that be has
nothing at all of the John in him, for

-- From his eyes
All drunk with rage and blood, the lightning flies
Out of his beaver like a boar be foams,
A bellish fury in his bosom roams.
But alas this Ivye-bush of boasting does but show the badnesse of his wine to
all prudent passengers; his book is a mere thundering trifle, a mountain of
chafe, a terriculament, only for the ignorant of the alley; like the logg in
the fable, it makes a great noise in its falling, but then it lies still for
every frog to skip upon it.

The truth is, he might well have spared the pains of setting his name unto
it, for so poor a weakling, and so misshapen a monster it is, that as none will
challenge it for theirs, so none will doubt it for his; although in two regards
it be very unlike the father, it having a rich and a full bead, (a stuffed
title) and a thin empty body; the residue of the book.

He does not so much as pretend to answer the greatest part by far of what I
bring in opposition to his errors. There Is not so much as any mention in his
Youngling Elder of the most material passages contained in mine; but he
prudently passes them by in learned silence, and only here and there touches
superficially upon a few by-passages, (not but that he was able I trow, with
the least puff to send them all on an errand to the worms, had not his own
goodness and noble nature more prevailed with him than any merit in such a
naughty youth as I) so that as to the business of answering me, his book is a
mere by-work, and indeed among all judicious men a mere byword; which he
prudently foreseeing, confesses by way of anticipation, that his book is not
a formal confutation of mine, but that his end in fetting of it forth, Epistle
to the Reader,
was to make me know my self; but of his childish and impotent omissions I
shall (God willing) give a more particular account in the following Chapter.
But if at any time he does vonchsafe a mentioning of any of my passages against
him; instead of an answer he either brings scoffs and reproaches, or else he
labors to do the work of an opponent, bringing in stead of a solution of my
arguments, a bumble of musty reasons, taken out of his other books to fill up
paper in this; or else his poor sew answers are so miserably unsatisfactory,
impertinent, and heretical, that this his last work appears plainly to be
the issue of his very dotage to all impartial observers.

I shall only in this first Chapter barely recite some of his answers to some
places of Scripture and passages contained in my book; reserving the
refutation of them to the third and fourth Chapters, though indeed the
recitation of such cheap and poor stuff, be a sufficient refutation of them
among intelligent Readers.

The places of Scripture which I bring against his Errors, he either wholly
passes by, as if they had never been alleged by me, (and thus he deals with
all those many places which I allege against his Errors about the Scripture)
or else if he pretends to answer them, he puts such false and unsound glosses
upon them, that he speaks himself most erroneous, even when he goes about to
clear himself from error; like the swearer, that being reproved for his
oaths, swear with a greater oath that he did not swear.

To that place Acts 26.18. where Paul declares, That he was sent to the
Gentiles to open their eyes, etc. I having said, That conversion is the
restoring of sight, not of light only, T. El. p. 54.
he asserts most profanely and erronously, that men's eyes are only opened in
conversion as the light of the morning or the sun may be said to open a man's
eyes which were shut by the darkness of the night; so that natural men have
good eyes, only they are in the dark, there is nothing perished in the faculty
of seeing.

To that place, Yo. Eld. p 55.
Epist. 2. dead in trespasses and sins. he answers, by saying the meaning only
is, That they of whom the Apostle speaks, were guilty of death, and liable to
condemnation.

The meaning of that place, Yo. Eld. p. 87.
1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God,
neither can be know them, etc. he gives us thus, by the natural man, he says,
is not meant the man that is simply or merely natural or unregener are, but
such a kind of men as are babes in Christ; and whereas its said, be cannot
know the things of the spirit of God; Yo. Eld. p. 89.
this profound expositer of Scripture gives us this to be the meaning: The
natural man whilst he continues thus, bath not a power actually and for the
present, to know simply the things of the spirit, but he has such principles
which by a due and regular improvement may advance and rise into such a
capacity or power as is contended for.

That place of 1 Cor. 4.7. Yo. Eld. p. 59.
Who makes thee to differ; he tells us, is not to be understood of any
difference between man and man which is made by any saving work, but of such
a difference only which stands in more or fewer, or in greater or lesser
gifts; which difference in the primitive times was frequent.

He having said, That no writings, originals, or translations, are the Word of
God, the matter and substance of things (as that Christ is God, is Man; that be
dyed, that be rose from the dead, etc.) contained in the books of the Old and
New Testament, being by him acknowledged only for the word of God. I demand of
him thus. Bu. p. 22. how can any believe that the matter and substance of the
Scripture, as that Christ is God and Man, etc is the Word of God, when as be
must be uncertain whether the written word wherein that matter is contained is
the Word of God or no; This heretical and rediculous soul fetches off himself
thus, by asking me again, Cannot a man believe these matters contained in the
Scripture, The Sun is the greater light, and the Moon the lesser light, unless
he be certain that the written word is the Word of God?

To my charge, of his joining hands with the Arminians in heir errors,
concerning power to good supernatural, he answers ^ot a syllable by way of
denying the charge, but tells me, That in holding Jesus Christ to be they holy
one of God, Yo. Eld. p. 43. Y. El. p. 44.
I join hands with the Devil. Yea, he says the Arminians attribute all the
praise of conversion to God.

Nay, he slights and neglects as much the accusation of agreement with Pelagius
in his Errors, impudently affirming, Youngl. Elder, page 52.
that between Augustine and Pelagius there was little or no difference.

To my allegations out of the Fathers and Bucer, for vindicating either of the
Scriptures or the grace of God, he answers not a word. And instead of doing
so, when I bring multitudes of evident places out of them, to show how those
places which he wresteth ought to be understood, he very modestly rather than
they shall not be though to speak for him in some few places, tells us that they
contradict themselves in all the rest.

To cite (says he) other words of a contrary import to those qu^ted by me out
of the same Author, is no manifestation of the impertinency of my quotations;
Yo. Eld. p. 5.
but it is indeed a discovering of the nakedness of an Auth^r, to present him
contradictious to himself, and to expose the unstablenesse of his judgment to
the eyes of men; So that ^ucer, Ball, Augustine, Hierome, are
self-contradictors, unstable, naked, unable, rather than this petty-toes of a
Pope can err an hairs breadth.

He scoffs at the absolute decree, and says, Yo. Eld. p 10.
That I and my mates tremble not to inform the creature against the Creator, as
if from eternity be had shut up his grace, etc. with the iron bars of an
irreversible indispensable decree.

He tells us page 62. that there is nothin but moral persuasion to act the will
into a saving consent, Yo. Eld. p. 62. page 63.
for thus he wanders. It passes my understanding to conceive how the will
should be wrought or acted into a consent in any kind otherwise than by
argument, motive and persuasion, unless it be by force, violence, and
compulsion. The essential constitution and fal^ick of the will exempt it from
being drawnely an other means.

And page 65. he thus debaseth the working of Gods grace, There is no man
converted actually, but might possibly have acted or demeaned himself so as
never to have been thus converted.

And page 52. The adjutory of grace does not imply a necessity of effecting
that which is effected by it.

He clearly takes part with that infamous Pelagius against those holy men, Vid.
p. 5. Y. El.
in charging them with Manicheism, I having told him, That the charge of
Manicheism was an old calumny cast upon the Fathers by Pelagius, he tells me
again, We are not to enquire by whom or upon whom it was cast, but by whom it
bath been taken off from any of your judgment; Youngl. Elder, page 45.
till this feat be done, he concludes the charge must be continued.

But of his omissions, and slender and erroneous performances, you may please
more fully to take this following account in these three following Chapters.

CHAP. II.
Showing Master Goodwin his omissions in his Youngling Elder, and total
passing by of most of the material passages contained in my book called, The
busy Bishop, against his pamphlet called, Sion Coll. visited, by way of
parallel.

Asserted in Sion College visited.
IT was never well with Christian Religion, since the Ministers of the Gospel
(so called by themselves, and so reputed by the generality of men for want of
knowing better) cunningly vested that privilege of theChurch of being the
ground and pillar of truth in themselves. There came lately out of the press a
few papers, stiling themselves, A testimony to the truth, etc. and pretending
to a subscription by the Minist. of Christ, etc. Sion Coll. visited, page 1.

It is a precious truth of Jesus Christ, That no act of man what soever is any
foundation of Christian Religion, the Apostle affi^ming that other foundation
can no man lay but Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. and yet the denial of the act of
man to be a foundation of Christian Religion(as viz. The believing that the
Scriptures are the Word of God) is by the said Book called, A Testimony to the
truth, ranked among infamous and pernicious errors. Sion College ^sited, page
3.

You cite some of my words barely, suppressing craftily my sense. You cite
these words: Questionless no writing whatsoever, whether translations or
originals, are the Word ^f God, Divine Author, page 18. without citing those
other words of mine, Divine Author, page 13. wherein I assert them to be of
Divine Authority, Si. Coll. visited, p. 11, 12.

Let the thirteenth and fifteenth pages of Divine Author be looked upon, page
12. Sion Coll. visited.

I beseech you brethren, where lies the error of these words? (...) God should
not endue men with such principles, abilities, etc. by the diligent improvement
whereof they might come to be convin^ed of a readiness, and willingness in
him to receive them into grace and favor upon their repentance, and turning to
him(upon which conviction that repentance and turning to God always follows)
they which are condemned would have their mouths opened against God, and
surmshed with and excuse, etc.

The sum of his passage cited for an error in our testimony is this: If God
should deprive men of all power to believe, and yet persuade to believe, etc.
God would be like a King that causes a man's legs to be cut off, and yet urges
him to run a Race with those that have limbs. Div. Au. p. 168.

Natural men may do such things as whereunto God has by way of promise
annexed grace and acceptance.

All the world, even those that have not the letter of the Gospel, have yet
sufficient means granted them of believing these two, viz. That God is, and
that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him; which is all the faith
that the Apostle makes necessary to bring a man into grace or favor with god.
They who have only the heavens, the sun, m one, and stars to preach the
Gospel to them, have also reason sufficient, to judge the same judgment with
them who have the letter of the Gospel, for they have the Gospel, the
substance and effect of it, the willingness of God to be reconciled to the
world, preached unto them by the Apostles aforesaid, the sun, moon, and stars.
Div. Auth. p. 183. p. 186

Nor were it a matter of much more difficulty to bring antiquity it self, and
particularly those very Authors who were the greatest opposers of Pelagius, as
Hierom, August. Prosper, etc. with mouths wide open, in approbation of the
same things for which I am arraigned at the tribunal of Sion Col. Sion Col.
Vis. p. 24.

These men have exchanged the Fathers adjutorium, into their own compulsorium.
Sion Col. Vis. p. 28.

The question between Pelagius and the Fathers, was not whether man had
freedom of will in respect of good or evil, but whether men notwithhstanding
their freedom of will, did not still stand in need of the adjutory of grace,
both for the performance of, and perseverance in what was good.

Answered in busy Bishop.
1. It Is you sorrow to see that they are so much as reputed Ministers; your
sin to say they are only reputed Ministers for want of men's knowing better.
Tell me of one man, either Minister or private Christian, differing from the
Subscribers only in the point of Independency, who dares say thus with you. If
you do account your self a Minister, which way had you your ordination? Whether
by that way that the Ministers of London had theirs, who you say are no
Ministers, etc.

2. You say, The Ministers have vested themselves with the privilege of the
Church, of being the ground and pillar of truth. -- The Church (as a pillar)
holds forth the truth, either in a common way to all Christians mutual
exhortations, profession, practice, etc. or in a ministerial way, preaching,
administration of Sacraments, etc. If you say the Ministers have vested
themselves with the privilege of being the pillars of truth the first way,
it is ridiculously false, profession of the truth being common to every one in
the Church: If you mean (as you must needs) that the Ministers have vested
themselves with the privilege of pillars in the second respect, it is odiously
false, for the Lord Jesus himself and not themselves vested them with the
privilege of holding forth truth by way of Office, Ephesians. 4.11. Christ gave some
Pastors and Teachers, 1 Cor. 12.38. God has set some in his Church, etc. Busy
Bishop, page 3, 4.

Though no act unto which man is enabled by God (such as believing) be a
foundation in that sense in which Christ is, upon whom we build the hope of out
salvation, to be obtained by his mediation, yet believing of the Scripture, as
it is an assenting to a maine and prime credendum, viz That the Scriptures are
by divine inspiration, is a necessary foundation for other subsequent graces
that are required in the Christian Religion, and without which foundation all
godliness and Religion would in a short time fall to the ground; no
theological grace can be without faith; and no faith, if the authority of the
Scriptures fall.

If believing be no foundation, why does the Apostle give to faith the name of
foundation, Heb. 6.1. Not laying again the foundation of repentance and of
faith, etc. Bu. Bish. p. 9.

These words, therefore questionless no writings, etc. are the conclusion and
the result of your premises in several long winded pages. If your conclusion
be crasie and heretical, your premises must needs be so too; and therefore
the setting them down could not have helped you; and if the conclusion be not
heretical, why do you not defend it against the accusation of the Subscribers,
which you dare not do; but only send the Subscribers to your premises in the
thirteenth page, leaving the poor 18. (the conclusion) to mercy.

Suppose you had in the thirteenth page written the truth, therefore ought you
not to be blamed for writing errors in the 18. page 21. Bu. Bush.

At your command I shall consult the pages, wherein you would be thought to
say, The Scriptures are the word of God. In these pages, and pa. 17, you say,
That you grant the matter and substance of the Scriptures, the gracious
counsels of the Scriptures, to be the Word of God. As that Christ is God and
man, that he dyed, that he rose again, etc. These you say are only the word
of God, and not the writings or written word; when you say the matters, etc.
are the Word of God, you suppose they should be believed for such. But upon
what ground ought I to believe them? I hope you will not say, because a province
of London Ministers says they are to be believed, nor barely because the
spirit tells me they are to be believed for the Word of God, for the spirit
sends me to the written Word, bids me by that to try the spirits, and tells me I
must be leeve nothing to be from God, but what I find written. I therefore
desire to go to the written Word, as revealed by God, for the building my
confidence upon the matters of the Scriptures (as pardon through Christ, etc.)
but then J. Goodwin tells me, this written Word is not Gods Word. So it must be
the word of vain man, and so I have no more to show for this precious truth,
Christ dyed for lost man, than man's word. In your alleged pages you make no
distinction between res credenda and ratio cudendi, the matter to be believed,
and the ground of believing that matter. The matters to be believed are the
precious truths you speak of. The ground of believing them is the revelation
of God in his written Word. The Revelation of God has always been the
foundation of faith; and now this Revelation is by writing, the ground of faith
is, it is written. What course took Christ and his Apostles to prove the
matters and doctrinall assertions which they taught but by the written Word,
and when they would render them (...), fit for belief, they ever more tell how
it is written. Consult with the places in the Margin and you will find that
the matter, substance, precious counsel, etc. contained in the Scripture, are
proved to be things to be believed because they are written; yield your self
to that evident Scripture, Joh. 20.21. These things are written that ye might
believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, etc. The rativ or ground of
believing this precious truth, That Christ is the Son of God, is its revelation
by writing. So Act. 14.24. Romans 15.4. Job. 5.47. If therefore you deny (as you
do in terminis) the written Word to be the word of God, what formal object
has faith? i.e. to whom or what will you send me for the building my
confidence upon the matters and counsels of the Scripture, etc. Touching this I
added in Busy Bishop the testimonies of Tertullian, Ireneus, Aug. Chrisost.
etc. Bu. Bish. p. 24.

Is not every man, as a man, a debtor to God, and a creature tied to obedience?
and does his making himself insufficient to discharge the debt discharge him
from payment? it would follow, that if such impotency excused from duty, and
from the obligation of the the command, that those men were most excusable that
were most sinful, and had by long accustoming themselves to sin, made
themselves most unable to leave and forsake sin; nay, if by reason hereof God
did not command obedience from them, it would follow, that such did not sin
at all; (for where there is no precept, there is no transgression) and so
according to you, by a man's progress in sin he should make himself cease to
be sinful. Bus. Bish. p. 29.

In your next, prove 1. That they who perish have power to believe. The
Scripture denies it, when it says, The world cannot receive the Spirit, etc.
Joh. 14.17.

2. Prove if a man has not power, that this impotency is merely poenall, as
inflicted by God, so involuntarily endured by man (for that is the nature of a
punishment properly so called) the Scripture says, Man has found out many
inventions, Eccl. 7. etc. Genesis 6.12. All flesh has corrupted its way, etc.
Bus. Bish. p. 31.

I suppose by your natural man, who you say does things to which God has
annexed acceptance, you mean the same man the Apostle speaks of, Romans 8.8.
The man in the flesh. now, that man cannot please God, though your natural man
does things acceptable to God. Invert not gods and Natures order. First, let
the tree be good, and then the fruit. Bus. Bish. p. 34.

What stuff is here! have all the world sufficient means of believing these
two, 1. That God is. 2. That he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek
him? Paraeus informs you, that those two heads of says, that God is, and that
God is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, are not to be understood
Philosophically, but Theologically; that the eternal God is Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, and that be is a rewarder of them that seek him Evangelically by
faith in Christ, with the benefits of the Gospel, pardon, adoption,
sanctification, glory. And can heathens by the sim, moon, and s^arres do this?
Can they by the light of nature believe a trinity of persons in unity of
essence. None (says Gerrard) can be led to the knowledge of God by the
creatures, but only so far forth as God is their cause. Now, God is their
cause by a divine power common to the three persons, therefore by the creatures
we can only attain to knowledge of these things which are common to the three
Persons, and not to the knowledge of the distinction of Persons, Ger. de Trin.
and can the heathens by the works of creation have the discovery of a
Mediator, and have Christ made known to them, and believe in him? I am sure
you nsver learned this of the Apostles, who says; that faith comes by
hearing, Romans 10. or are you of Smalcius the Socinian his judgment, who says,
that faith in Christ is not always required to justification, but faith
simply; and he proves it out of this very Sctipture that you have alleged,
Heb. 11.6. for the faith of heathens, etc. Bus. Bish. p. 36.

The Fathers assert the being and nature of free will only, and not its power
to supernatural good in all the passages which you allege out of them.
Though Austin and Jerome against the Manichees maintained the nature of
free will, yet it is as true that against the Pelagians they denied the
abilities of free will to good supernatural. Of this latter you wisely take no
notice at all, as making directly against you, though there are hundreds of
instances to that purpose to be found in them. And thus the learned, and
orthodox Divines of the reformed Churches abroad, understand Austin and Hierom,
when alleged by Papists and Arminians, as writing for free will. Rivetus and
Walleus, two famously learned writers among the Protestants shall suffice for
instances. Baily the Jesuit, objected out of Austin to prove free will, that
very place against the Protestants, which you allege against the Ministers.
The words of Austine which both Baily and your self allege are these. Si non
estliberum arbitrium quomodo Deus judicat mundum? If there be no free will how
does God judge the world? This place Rivet understands only of the natural
being of free will, For says he, if man were turned into a stone, or a block,
or a bruit creature, be should be exempted from Gods Judgment, but since when
he acts out of deliberation be chooses and wills what pleases him, he
deservedly gives account of his actions, Riv. to. 2. p. 183. The place you
allege out of Jerome is this. Frustra Blasphemas and ingeris, etc. Thou
blasphemest in vain, buzzing in the ears of the ignorant that we condemn
freewill; And Waleus, T. 2. p. 95. answers Corvinus in these words of Hierom.
Frustra, etc. but then he gives the reason why, and how both be and Hierom did
allow of free will, not in regard of its abilities to good supernatural, But
because (says Waleus) He denies man to be created according to the Image of
God, who denies him to be adorned with the natural faculty of freewill. Bus.
Bish. p. 46.

In Bus. Bish. I set down the agreement between the Fathers and the
Subscribers, concerning the doctrine of the adjutory of grace at large, and
concluded thus. I should gladly be informed by you in your next what the
Ministers adjutorium differs from that held forth by the Fathers, and what they
hold tending more toward a compulsory then these Fathers here, and in hundreds
of other places have written, but he answers nothing.

Your mistake here is pitiful, for the great question between Hierom,
Augustine, and Pelagius, was not whither the will did stand in need of the
adjutory of grace for the performance of good, but what kind of adjutory it
was, of which the will did stand in need, and wherein grace was an adjutory;
and I allege sundry places to prove that Pelagius himself granted the
necessity of the adjutory, but that Austine was not satisfied with that his
grant, saying, that Pelagius is to be asked what grace he means.

Replied in Yo. El.
Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

Nothing.

These are some of the heads of those many passages which Mr. G. touches not,
whether because they were too considerable, or too contemptible himself best
knows.

Sundry other material omissions I could mention; and how unscholler-like a
deportment is it for him to boast, that Buce and the Fathers are of his
opinion, and yet when the contrary is proved, by showing that the scope and
streyne of their writings oppose his dotage, and how they explain themselves,
to have nothing to say, but that these Authors contradict themselves, and never
to answer those multitudes of places which out of the said Authors are brought
against him?

CHAP. III.
Showing the weakness and erroneousnesse of his pretended answers to what I
bring against his Errors about the holy Scripture.

IN your title page you say there are two great questions which in your book
are satisfactorily discussed:

The one concerning the foundation of Christian Religion.

The other concerning the power of the natural man to good supernatural.

The former whereof, you discuss after a fashion, from page the 26. to page
the 38 of your Youngling Elder, concerning which your position was this:
Questionless no writing whatsoever, whether translations or originali, is the
foundation of Christian Religion.

I have proved in Busy Bishop that this position does raze and destroy the
very foundation of Christian Religion, Busy Bishop; p, 23, 24. etc.
and the groundwork of faith; I still abide by what I there proved and
maintained; I fear not at all to tell you, that this your assertion being
embraced, faith must needs be over thrown: That the matters and precious
truths laid down in the Scriptures; as that Christ is God and man, That he
dyed for sinners, etc. can never be believed with a Divine faith, unless the
ratio credendi or ground of such believing be the revelation of God in writing,
or the written Word. I again inculcate, that your blasphemous position, No
writing, etc. is contrary to Scripture, which tells us, the Church is built upon
the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Chamier to 1. L. 6. c. 8.
Ephesians. 2.20. that is, their writings, see Chamier who vindicateth this place
against the exceptions of the Popish writers.

Your position directly opposes that place, Joh. 20.31. These things are
written that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and
that believing ye might have life through his Name, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. Esa. 8.20.
Ioh. 5.39. 2 Pet. 1.19. Luke 24.25, 27, 46. Act. 13.33. Act. 17.11. Romans 14.11.
etc.
and that other, 1 John 5.13. These things have I written unto you, etc. that ye
might believe on the Name of the Son of God; with multitudes of other places
which have been, and might again be mentioned, in all which the ground and
foundation of our believing the truths of salvation, and consequently of
religion, is said to be the written Word.

Nor did I ever meet with any one Orthodox Writer, but he oppugned this your
abominable assertion, when he discourses concerning the Scriptures in this
point. I quoted sundry places out of the Fathers in my last, fully to that
purpose, out of Tertullian, Ireneus, Augustine, Hierome. I might add, that all
our modern Protestant Writers oppose you herein.

To name all would require a volume. Zanchy. Tom. 8. in Confess. calls the
Scriptures, The foundation of all Christian Religion. Synops. pur. theol. dis.
p. 2.
The Leyden-professors assert the Scriptures to be prineipium and fundamentum
omnium Christianorum dogmatum, etc. Gomarus also, These. de scriptura, may be
seen to this purpose. Ames^medul. c. scrip. Tilen syntag. disp. de scrip.
Rivetus Disp. 1. de scrip.
And I desire the Reader to consider, That in this whole discourse, though you
exceed your self in impudence and audacious assertions, yet you do not so much
as offer a justification of this These, as it is set down in the testimony and
in terminis taken out of your book by the London Ministers, and therefore
whatever you say might be neglected as not appertaining to this controversy
between you and me.

But to consider of what you say, though your whole discourse be nothing to the
purpose, in this satisfactory discussion (as you vainly and falsely term it)
of the foundation of Christian Religion.

You do these three things: 1. You bring some six weak and childish exceptions
against me, for opposing your error in such a manner as I have expressed in my
book. 2. You present the Reader with eight terrible things which you call
demonstrations to prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation of Christian
Religion. Not one of which eight feathers but is able to cut off the arm of an
adversary. 3. You subjoyne two or three cavils (profane trifles) by way of
answer to me.

First for your exceptions:

1. To. Eld. p. 27.
You say, This unhallowed piece of Presbytery wholly concealeth and suppresseth
my distinction, and what I deny only in such and such a sense, he represents
as absolutely simply, and in every sense denied by me. In a due and regular
sense I affirm and avouch the Scriptures to be the foundation of Christian
Religion. I appeal to these words in page 13. of my Treatise concerning the
Scriptures. If by Scriptures be meant the matter or substance of things
contained and held forth in the books of the old and new Testament, I believe
them to be of Divine Authority, etc.

1 Friend, Rev. 22.15.
remember you the Catalogue of the excluded out of the new Jerusalem? is not he
that loves and makes a lie mentioned? wretched creature, what will be your
portion if God in mercy give you not repentance? Does not he whom you call the
unhallowed piece of Presbytery set down. page 20. of Busy Bishop, this your
distinction? are not these very words spoken to and of you? You grant the
matter and substance of the Scripture, the gracious counsels to be the Word of
God, as that Christ is God and man, That he dyed, That he rose again, etc. And
page 22. Busy Bishop, read you not thus in express terms? You tell me p.
13. That you believe the precious Counsels, matter and substance of the
Scriptures to be of Divine Authority, and in the same page you say, That the
matters of the Scriptures represented in translations are the Word of God. Do
not you acknowledge, page the 39 of Youngling Elder, that I did set down this
your distinction, where you bring me in enquiring of you, How can any believe
the matter and substance of the Scripture to be the Word of God, when he must
be uncertain whether the written Word or Scriptures wherein the matter is
contained, are the Word of God, or no? Is it possible to dispute against that
which is altogether concealed, and acknowledge you not that I dispute against
it.

2 What great matter is it that you assert concerning the Scripture, in saying,
You grant the matter and substance of the Scriptures to be the Word of God? All
this you may say, and yet deny them the foundation of Christian' Religion, and
the formal object of faith. The Papists (from whom you have stolen most of
your following Arguments) acknowledge as much, and yet deny them the foundation
of faith?

3 You say you believe the matters of the Scriptures to be the Word of God, but
you tell me not why: Nay you plainly deny that which indeed is the true ground
of believing the matter of the Word of God, namely, the written Word. You are
not too old to learn from a Youngling; take this therefore for a truth. Upon
what ground soever you believe the substance and matters contained in the
Scriptures for the Word of God, if that faith be not ultimately resolved into
the written Word or the revelation of God in writing, it is no divine faith.

4. In this your penurious and scanty concession that the matters contained in
the Scriptures are only the Word of God; (...) 2 Timothy 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.19^ 20,
21. (...) called afterward (...) Whituk. de Auth. Scrip. lib. 1. cap. 10. sect.
8. Neque tantum ratione dogmatum scriptura a Deo prodiit, etsi edita scriptura
est ut certa and perpetua dogmatum ratio constaret, sed tota scripturarum
structura and compositio divina est, neque non modo dogma sed ne verbum in
Scripturis ullum niss d^vinum est, etc. Yo. Eld. p. 5.
you come far short of the Scripture which calls the Written Word of God the
Scriptures or Word of God: It telling us, That all Scripture is of divine
inspiration, and that we have (...) A more sure word of prophecy, not in regard
of the matters of it, but in regard of its manner of manifestation by writing.
And holy men spoke being moved of the holy Ghost. Did the holy men speak what
they were moved to speak, and not also as they were moved. Learned Whitaker
tells you, The Scriptures did not proceed from God tantum ratione dogmatum,
only in regard of those divine truths contained in them, but the whole
structure and composure of the Scripture is also divine, and the truths are not
only divine, but there is not a word in them which is not divine.

To that ridiculous passage of yours in this first Exception, page 27. Mr.
Jenkins charge against me, in denying the Scriptures to be the foundation of
Christian Religion, stands upon the credit or base of such an argumentation as
this, etc. A wooden horse for unruly Soldiers is no living creature; thereiore
an horse simply is no living creature; so, The Scriptures in regard of the
writing are not the foundation of Religion, therefore in no sense are they such.

The answer is obvious; my charging of you to deny the Scriptures to be the
foundation, etc. is not grounded upon any argumentation of my framing, but upon
the result of your own arguments, as your self have set it down in the place
quoted Div. Auth. p. 18. Questionless no writings whatsoever are the
foundation of Christian Religion; which base being laid, the superstructure
will be this, the Scriptures taken in your sense, are not the foundation of
Christian Religion, you being no way able to ground your faith upon any matters
in the Scripture; and your talking of a ^^oden horse shows you have of late
been either among (...) Soldiers, or the wanton Children.

6 Why use you these words in this your last exception, p. 27 the Holy Ghost
says, Genes. 6.6. It repented the Lord, etc, yea, and God himself said thus
to Samuel; It repents me, etc. surely there is some mystery in it.

Your second exception against me is, Yo. Eld. p. 28.
that in as much as I can produce but one place wherein you seem to deny the
Scriptures to be of divine authority, or the foundation of Religion, whereas in
twenty and ten places (you say) you clearly assert them for such, I ought to
regulate the sense of that one place by the constant tennor of the rest of the
treatise.

1 The whole design of your wordy work, Div. Au. of Scrip. so far as it
handles this point was to justify those passages in your Hagiomastix, which
deny the divine authority of Scripture; in it therefore certainly may be found
more than one place wherein you do more than seem to deny the same.

Div. Auth. of the Scriptures, p. 10. you say, No translation whatsoever, nor
any either written or printed Copies whatsoever are the Word of God.

Div Auth. p. 12. They who have the greatest insight into the original
Languages, yea who believe the Scripture to salvation, cannot upon any
sufficient ground believe any original Copy whatsoever under heaven, whether
Hebrew or Greek, to be the Word of God.

And Yo. Eld. p. 29. When I deny the Scriptures to be the Word of God, I mean
whatever is found in them, or appertaining to them, besides the matters,
gracious counsels contained in them, etc. And how can it be otherwise, when
the places and passages in Hagiom, which you intend to justify in Div. Auth.
and Yo. Eld. are such as these. In your Hagiom. p. 35. Sect. 27. Taking the
word Scriptures for all the books of the Old and New Testament divisim and
conjunctim, as they are now received and acknowledged among us (which is the
only sense the ordinance can bear) they can find no manifest Word of God
whereunto this (That the Scriptures are not the Word of God) is contrary.

And Hagiom. p. 37. Sect. 28. It is no foundation of Christian Religion to
believe that the English Scriptures, or that book, or that volume of books
called the Bible, translated out of the original Hebrew and Greek copies into
the English Tongue, are the Word of God, etc.

2 Instance in one place in all your writings, wherein you say as unlimitedly
and peremptorily, that the Scriptures are the Word of God as you do here deny
them; and you may have some pretense for this charge. Nay, it is impossible for
you to grant the Scriptures to be the Word of God and not to contradict your
self; you denying the written Word.

Your third exception is this; you say, Third exception Yo. Eld. p. 28.
That though you do not believe that any original, exemplar, or Copy of the
Scriptures now extant among us is so purely the Word of God, but that it may
very possibly have a mixture of the word of man in it, yet you assert them to
contain the foundation of Religion. i. e. Those gracious Counsels, etc.

1 Your granting that the holy Scriptures contain the foundation of Religion
in them,

2 In granting me that the foundation of Religion, i. e. the Gracious Counsels
of God are contained in the Scriptures, and yet in denying that the written
Word is that formal object of my faith, or that foundation for which I should
build my faith upon those counsels of God for salvation, you do both delude
your Reader, and contradict your self; you taking away what you grant. Gods
revelation of his mind in the written Word being the reason why I embrace the
Counsels, or matters as the foundation upon which I build.

3 You vainly applaud your self, for asserting the Scriptures to contain the
foundation, when as you deny the purity of the Scriptures, for let it be once
granted that errors are crept into the Scriptures, Leo Castrius Go^^onius, etc.
and that there is no original pure (which is the blasphemous calumny cast
upon the Scriptures by the Papists the authority of Scriptures falls to the
ground, and we may call the whole Scriptures into question. You assert that the
purest original exemplar is corrupted, and you know not what the particular
places are that are corrupt; when any Sentence therefore out of Scripture is
brought against your errors, why may you not shield your self with this
defense, for ought I know the place whence you take this sentence is corrupted,
Ecce fundamentum religionis Goodwiniana, behold the foundation of a goodly
religion. I confess one so erroneous as your self cannot coveniently be
without this comfortable refuge. If you be not too old to learn of the
Fathers, Aug Ep. 19 Ad. Hieron. Non te arbitror sic legi tu^s libro^ velle
tanquam Prophetarum, vel Apostolorum: de quorum Scriptis quod omni careant
errore dubitare nefar^um est. Manichaeiplurima divinum Scripturararum loca
quibus eorum, nefarius error convincitur quia in alium sensum deto^quere non
possunt falsa esse contendunt quod tamen quia nec, probare potuerunt, notissima
veratate super ati, confusique discedunt. Id. Ib.
take this from Augustine in his 19. Epist written to Hierom. I suppose thou
art not willing that men should read thy books as they would read the Writings
of the Prophets and Apostles, it being a most heinous sin to doubt of the
freeness of their writings from all error. And the same Father in the same
Epistle tells Hierom, that the Manichees contended that sundry places of
Scripture which overthrew their errors were false, which falsenesse they did
not attribute to the Apostles that wrote them, but to certain corrupters I
know not whom. quod quia, etc. which because they could not prove, being
overcome by known trub, they departed confounded.

For your fourth frivolous exception, Exception 4. Yo. Eld. p. 29
you cite a passage out of your Div. Auth. of Scrip. p. 17. where you say, The
true and proper foundation of Religion is not Ink and Paper, nor any book or
books, nor any writing or writings whatsoever, etc. Hereupon you make a double
enquiry. First, Why did not Mr. Jenkin insert the words (true and proper) into
the charge of my deuiall of the Scriptures for the foundation of Christian
Religion. Secondly, why does he not declare that I mean by the Scriptures Ink
and Paper, etc.

1 Poor shifter! (true and proper) because the Ministers took not your charge
out of the 17. page where you say the words (true and proper) are, but out of
the 18. where I say they are not. 2 Because you being taxed with this
abominable error in the Testimony of the London Ministers, your self in your
Pamphlet called (Sion Col. Vis) p 12. for vindication and explanation of your
self in this point, refer the Reader only to the 13. and 15. pages, and this
17 page, your self never mentioned in Sion Col. Visited; to which book only
mine was an answer, and not to Div. Auth. where (say you) in p. 17. you mention
true and proper; it seems the novice has now driven you to another shift,
another leaf, though a mere Figg-leafe defense; for

3 Your denial of the Scripture to be the foundation without this mitigation
or allay of (true and proper) is most suitable to your former undertakings. I
took you according to the constant streine of your writings, as you desired
even now; see Hagiom. Sect. 27, 28. as also the many places in Div. Aut. p. 10,
11, 12. and p. 39. in Yo. Eld. so that evident it is that these words (true and
proper) were inserted here, as a blind for your blasphemy. They are not found
(for ought I know) in any other place in all your Div. Aut. you mention (I am
sure) no other place; nor did you in Hagiom. printed before your Div. Auth.
once make mention of them. In what a pitiful condition then are the poor old
Hag. to lie under the charge of so many tongues and hearts, so long before Div.
Auth. was printed; to be upon duty so long before releeved with (true and
proper)

4 Do you not leave these words (true and proper) out, in the conclusion of
that discourse wherein they are contained, in which conclusion being the result
and winding up of all that which went before, you peremptorily and unlimitedly
deny any writing whatsoever to he any foundation at all of Christian Religion,
without a (true and proper) to mend the matter.

2 Your second enquiry; Why death he not declare, that I mean by the Scriptures
Ink and Paper, is too ridiculous for a novice to read, though not for a dotard
to write.

1. In your next I pray tell me who beside your self and the blasphemous
Papists, did ever by the Scripture understand ink and paper? Indeed Doctor
Humfred. Jesuitmise, p. 2. page 89. Tells us of a Nun that to the question, Qua
in re sita est religio Christiana, wherein stands Christian Religion? made
answer; In laceris panniculis, in torn rags, We need no other Oedipus to open
this riddle than Master Goodwin.

2 Had you therefore only thus trifled by this denial of ink and paper to be
the foundation of Christian Religion, you had neither been charged for
erroneous by the London Ministers nor any one else in this point; but when to
your trifling you add blasphemy, and say, That no writing whether originals or
translations are the foundation of Christian Religion, and page 29. Yo Eld.
that you deny whatever is found in the Scriptures besides the precious counsels
to be the foundation, etc. You are to be dealt withal upon a new account. You
then go beyond your denial of ink and paper.

Your fifth Exception against me is, Exception the fifth Yo Eld. page ^9.
That I want Logic, in denying the conclusion, without answering any thing to
the premises. You say, you had proved the conclusion, That the Scriptures are
not the foundation of Religion, with several arguments, and that without any
answer given to any one of these arguments, I denied only your conclusion,
which was this, No writing whatsoever, whether Originals or translations, are
the foundation of Christian Religion.

1. No writing whatsoever is the foundation of Christian Religion. It was by
the Subscribers of the late Testimony taken out of your discourse, without any
mention of your premises; your charge therefore of the want of Logic, is
drawn up against them at the feet of many of whom, you may sit to learn both
Logic and Theology also.

2. The scope of the Ministers that subscribed the Testimony was not to dispute
errors, but to recite them; and recite them they could not more properly than
by setting down the conclusion and result of your tedious discourse, nothing
speaking a man's mind so plainly and peremptorily as that.

3. My book was an answer to Sion Coll. visited, and not to that former piece
of yours, Divine Authors wherein you said you brought the arguments to prove
that the Scriptures were not the foundation of Religion. Had you recited your
arguments in Sion College visited, they should have been answered, though in
truth neither you nor they deserved it.

4. You bring one pitiful thing, which I dare say you account an argument in
Sion Coll. visited, page 2. to prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation
of Christian Religion, viz. Because Christ is the only foundation. Which weak
cavil I fully answered, page 7. and 8. Busy Bishop. I call it a cavil,
because your self seem afraid to call it an argument; for though it be clearly
confuted yet you say I bring no answer to any one argument.

In your sixth exception, Exception the sixth, Yo. Eld. p. 30.
you exceed your self in ignorance and impudence, wherein you write thus: Does
not himself (Master Jenkin) distinguish, page 7. and affirm that in a sense the
Scriptures are not the foundation of Christian Religion, else what is the
english of these his words, Christ is the only foundation in point of
mediation, and the Scriptures in point of manifestation, etc. has the man a
mushrome instead of caput humanum upon his shoulders, to quarrel with me for
denying in a sense the Scriptures to be the foundation of Religion, and yet to
deny as much himself; Did I ever, or do I any where deny them to be such a
foundation in respect of representation and discovery, etc.

Dote you, Sir? or dream you? or are you ambitious to be Bishop of Bethlehem,
at your translation from Swan-alley? First, you pretend that you approve the
distinction, and that you are of my opinion, Do you (say you) any where deny
the Scriptures to be a foundation in respect of representation? Then you scorn
and revile it, saying, That the foundation of manifestation is an absurd and a
ridiculous metaphor; again you own it, and assert the Scriptures in this
sense, The foundation, etc. and lastly you scorn it again, and desire me to
tell you of one Classical Author that uses it? Certainly if Master Jenkin
have a mushrome upon his shoulders, you have a windmill upon your pate. This
passage (I fear) will confirm Master Vicars in his opinion of the
suitableness of the emblamaticall windmill, and make him applaud himself
notwithstanding my endeavors to dissuade the honest man from expressing you by
such a picture.

1 In this Exception, you ask, Did I ever deny the Scriptures to be a
foundation in respect of manifestation?

Yes, and do so still, Div. Author, page 18. Thus you write, Certain it is
there was a time when neither Originals nor translations were the foundation of
Religion, but somewhat beside, therefore as certain it is, that neither are
they the foundation of Religion at this day. Th^^ you there, where you clearly
assert, that we must no more ground our faith upon the manifestation of the
Scripture now, than they that never had any such manifestation by way of
writing at all. And what do you assert, page 49, 50. etc. of that Treatise, but
that Religion has another foundation in point of manifestation, than the
Scriptures, viz. the sun, moon, and stars, etc.

2. In this Exception you say, That to call the Scriptures the foundation in
point of manifestation is a ridiculous and absurd metaphor: Master Jenkin
thinks that he manifests the feebleness of Sion College visited, is he
therefore the foundation of the book, or of the supposed feebleness of it
which he discovers.

Your jeering betrays your ignorance, forgetfulness of that known
distinction of fides quae creditur, and fides qua creditur. The matter which
faith believes, and the grace it self of faith, both called faith in
Scripture. Religion also comprehends the matter of Religion and the grace of
Religion. The Scriptures though they are not the foundation of the matter of
Religion, yet by their manifestation of the will of God, they are the
foundation of the grace of Religion, as my book called the Busy Bishop if it
have manifested the feebleness of Sion College visited, may be the foundation
upon which some may build the knowledge of the feebleness of Sion College
visited, though it be not the foundation of your book, or the weakness of it.

3 In this exception you produce that question which I propounded to you, p. 7.
Bus. Bish. Why does Master Goodwin allege that Scripture, Yo. Eld. p. 31.
1 Cor. 3.11. Other foundation ^an no man lay but Jesus Christ, if he does not
ground his belief hereof upon this very Scripture?

To this you give a double answer; 1. By way of quaere, Why did Christ cite the
testimony of John to prove himself to be the Messiah, if he did not ground his
belief of his being the Messiah upon John's testimony? Joh. 5.32.33. etc.


1 When will you leave off to blaspheme? Its my unhappiness that instead of
reclaiming you from heresy, blasphemy. Toungl. Elder, page 6.
Do you no more need the Scriptures than Christ did? Did Christ cite the
testimony of John as a ground for his own faith, or as a ground for the faith
of others? Does Master Goodwin never read the Scriptures that say, Christ is
the Messiah but only for the establishing the faith of others?

2 You answer by way of supposition; What if I should say that I do ground my
belief of Christ his being the only foundation upon this place which follows?

1 It follows that you cite not this testimony as Christ did the testimony of
John, who did not cite John's testimony to ground his own belief upon it that
he was the Messiah. 2. It follows that you contradict your self, for now you
say this Scripture is the foundation of your faith in Christ; and before you
said, that because Christ is the only foundation, therefore the Scriptures are
not.

Before you said, that only the matter and truths contained in the Scripture
were the foundation of faith, and not the written Word which contained those
truths; and now you grant that the written Word of God, 1 Corinthians. 3.11. is the
ground of your faith.

3 If you mean as you speak, the controversy is at an end, the written word
being acknowledged a foundation of faith; and all those Sophismes instead of
Arguments, which afterward you bring, concern you to answer, as well as my
self.

In this exception.

4 You revile me for charging you with weakness and wickedness in your
opposing Christ and his Word, since you say, Yo. Eld. p. 31, 32.
that a while since I opposed a foundation Personal to a foundation
Scripturall, and what is that (say you) but to oppose Christ and his Word as
much as you oppose them. And for the known distinction of essendi and
cognoscendi, which Master Jenkin wonders should be hid from me, he is desired
in his next to produce any Classique Author that ever used it but himself. The
complexion of it is, as if it were of the lineage of Mr. Jenkins learning.

You can find no shelter from any thing that ever dropped from my Pen, for your
opposing Christ and his Word; oppose Christ and his Word, I distinguish only
between Christ and his Word; now Accurate Logicians know the difference between
oppositio and distinctio, though old detards have forgot it. Opposition implies
a pugnarerum, distinction only a non idenditas; so Keckerm. cap. 5. Lib. 1.
Syst. Lo. Suminus vo^em distinctionis cum omnibus e^uditis Philosophis,
oppositioni contradivisive, prout nude opponitur identitati, excludendo
diversitatem. You so oppose Christ and his Word, as that because Christ is the
foundation, you deny the Scripture to be a foundation, Sion College visited,
p. 2.15. this is Pugna, but I show Bu. Bish. p. 7, 8. how they both agree,
though they be not one and the same foundation; that Christ is the foundation
upon which I build for salvation, and the Scriptures the foundation upon which
I ground the knowledge of this Savior; your saying therefore that because I
distinguish thus between a foundation Personal, and a foundation Scripturall,
I therefore oppose them as much as you, who make the word of Christ a
foundation inconsistent with Christ's being a foundation, again bewrayes your
forgetfulness of your Logic, for every opposition implies necessarily a
distinction, but a distinction does not imply an opposition.

And whereas with sufficient ignorance you desire me to tell you of any
Classique Author that uses the distinction of essendi and cognoscendi, I
refer you for information to Keckerman, Syst. Theol. p. 133. where he says,
Duplicia reperiuntur principia essendi and cognoscendi, sic etiam in Theologia,
See also Trelcatius jun. Instit. Theol. L. 1. Duo sunt principia rei and
cognitionis, illa ex quibus alia producuntur haec ex quibus aliorum pendet
cognitio. Wollebius also, Comp. Theol. p. 2. Principium Theologiae essendi
quidem Deus est. Cognoscendi vero verbum Dei. See also Altenstaig Lexicon,
Theolog. in Tit. Principium, where there is mention of sundry learned men that
use this distinction. If the complexion of this distinction shows that it is
of the lineage of my learning, certainly the ignorance of this distinction
shows the complexion of Master Goodwins learning.

To prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation of religion, arguments,
and in your entrance upon them you brag that you demonstrate, Yo. El. p. 32.
and you thunder out the shame and confusion of all those that have charged the
error upon you; (though the issue will prove to your own confusion, I say not
to your shame who I think are past it.)

Your own words are these; That the Scriptures whether written or printed are
not truly and properly the foundation of religion, I demonstrate in the s^ght
of the Sun, to the shame and confusion of all those faces, who have charged the
Tenet upon me as an error. O yes, all men, women, and children, stand forty
foot off from the blind Bear, if not, being bitten thank your selves. Bas.
Moral. reg. 26. cap. 1 (...).


1 What do you call a Theological demonstration? have you read the rule of
Basil; Whatever we say or do, ought to be confirmed by the testimony of the
holy Scriptures, for the establishing of the good, and the confusion of the
bad? Have you done thus? certainly the Scriptures have not given to you a
weapon, nor lent you a proof to destroy themselves. No Sir, your
demonstrations are either childish mistakes, or Popish cavills; not
demonstrations of your position, but of your folly and impiety. Ad bonam
solutionem non pertinet quod probet conclusionem sed quod defendat eam ab
objectione contraria.


2 To what purpose do you bring any Arguments at all? Are you not respondent?
Was it not your part to answer what was brought against your wicked Position?
but you are better (you think) at your sword than your shield (though at
neither good) otherwise why have you passed over what was brought against you,
and instead thereof vainly endeavor to bring somewhat in opposition to your
opponent?

3 Does it become an Accurate disputant to propose a question under so many
ambiguities, and explain none; what mean you by Scripture? what by
foundation? what by religion? what by true and proper? are these two words
(...) of the same importance? why leave you things so confused and indigested?
Is it to make your opponent ashamed with your folly, because you cannot with
your arguments? That we may not therefore fight blindfold, at which you are
old excellent, I shall desire the Reader to take notice, that in this whole
dispute, when you deny the Scriptures to be the foundation of religion.

By Scriptures are understood all the books of the Old and New Testament,
Scriptures.
conjunctim and divisim, as they are now received and acknowledged among us,
conjunctim, the complete foundation; divisim, the partial foundation, and your
self grant that thus your opponents take the Scriptures. You acknowledge this
to be the only sense that the ordinance against Heresies can reasonably mean,
Hag. Sect. 26, 27. and so you take the word Scriptures, p. 32. Yo. El. p. 32.
Yo. Eld. where you labor to prove them not the foundation of religion. Now
whereas you assert that by the Scriptures we are not to understand any writing,
or the wtitten Word that reveals the truths of God, but only the truths and
matters themselves named; I affirm, that the Scriptures are to be taken
concretive both for matter and words, both being inspired of the Holy Ghost.
Ames. med^^de ser,
( In iis omnibus quae per supernaturalem revelationem inno^u^runt, non solum
res ipsas inspiravit Deus, sed etiam singul^ verba quibus scriberentur,
dictavit atque suggessit. The holy Ghost suggesteth words as well as matter,
says Ames, and the form of the Scripture stands in the manifestation of the
true Doctrine in words, which came from the immediate revelation of the holy
Ghost, says Gomarus. Materia Scripturae circa quam, est tota verae religi^nis
doctrina ad salutem necessariae Ecclesiae; forma Scripturae esi t^tius doctrina
de ver^^ religione ad s^lutem necessariae ex imme^^^^^ revelatione sp^^: sancti
conceptis ipsius verbis significatio. Gomar. de scrip. s^^n Disp. 2. Id. Ibid.
ut verbum non scriptum sermonis signo and enuntiatione sic contra verbum
scriptum, literarum notis, and descriptione ^^n ^at) and both matter and words
are preserved by the providence of God so pure this day, Foundation.
that they are still the foundation of Religion; the matter the foundation
which we must believe, or the objectum materiale (this you grant) the writing
by the appointment of God, the foundation why we must believe, or the objectum
formale, into which our faith must be last resolved, and this you deny, and I
maintain against your following cavils, Religion.
it being the thing in question between us.

Whereas Religion may signify either the matter of it, viz. the things
believed, or the habit of it, i. e. the believing of these things, I assert
that the Scriptures are the foundation of Religion not as Religion is
considered in it self, or in the matter of it, but as it is in us, True and
proper.
and considered in the grace and habit of it.

Whereas you join together (True and proper) words of a vast difference, it is
affirmed that the Scriptures are the true foundation, though not the proper, as
Christ when he calls himself the vine, the door, spoke truly though
figuratively, and so not properly. So that the question is not whether the
foundation or fundamentals, the great articles of faith be contained in the
Scriptures, this Master Goodwin acknowledges, Divine Author, page 17. repeated
in your last book, sect. 37.

Nor is the question whether ink and paper be the foundation; a conceit so
senseless, that it would never have come into the head of any man but Master
Goodwin and such as are left of God to blaspheme; ink and paper being the
external matter of any writings whatsoever, as well as the holy Scriptures.

But the question is, whether Christian faith which believes the truths of
Christian Religion necessary to salvation, be built upon the divine authority
of the written Word, in which God has been pleased to reveal those truths.
This Master Goodwin denies in sundry passages in his Hagiomastix and in his
Divine Authority of the Scripture. This he disputes against in his Youngling
Elder, and in this sense he endeavors to answer what I bring in Busy Bishop,
Hagiom. sect. 28. he denies it to be any foundation of Religion to believe that
the English Scriptures, or the books called the Bible, are the Word of God.

Div. Auth. page 10 he denies the English Scriptures and the Hebrew and greek
Originals themselves to be the Word of God, etc.

Yo. Eld. page 29. he says, When I deny the Scripture to be the foundation of
Religion, I mean by the Scriptures ink and paper; And whatever else is found
in them, or appertaining to them, besides the truths, matter, and gracious
counsels concerning the salvation of the world which are contained in them, etc.

In direct opposition to which detestable passage, I assert that by Scriptures
or foundation of faith, we are not only to understand the gracious counsels,
or their materia circa quam, as Gomarus speaks, the doctrines of salvation, but
their form also, or the signification from God of these Doctrines in the
written Word, or in letters, or writing.

And page 39. Yo. Eld. he disputes (after his manner, dotingly, a weak hand
best beseeming a wicked work) against the written Word. If it he impossible
(says he) to believe that the matter of the Scriptures is the Word of God, if
I be uncertain whether the written Word be the Word of God or no; how came the
Patriarchs who lived in the first two thousand years of the world to believe
it, since it was uncertain to them, whether such a word should ever be
written. Here Is more opposed than ink and paper, viz. the written Word.

I shall now examine his arguments, having briefly premised these following
considerations, for the further explaining of the question.

1. The end of man's creation was to glorify God, and to save his own soul.

2. The right way of Gods Worship and man's salvation could not be found out by
the light of nature, but there was necessarily required a supernatural
revelation of this way.

3. God was therefore pleased to manifest his own will concerning it.

4. This he has done from the foundation of the world diversely, after diverse
manners.

5. In the infancy of the Church, and while it was contained in narrow bounds,
God manifested his will without the written Word by dreams, visions, audible
voice, etc.

6. When the Church was further extended, more increased, and to be set as a
City upon an hill, and when impiety abounded in men's lives, God commanded this
his will formerly revealed to be set down in writing.

7. God did infallibly guide holy men whom he did choose for his Amanuenses,
that they did not ^rre in the matter of his will, or manner of expressing of it.

8. He ordered that his will should be written in such Languages, as were best
known and underst^od in the Churches, unto whom his truths were committed.

9. He has given a charge to his Churches to have recourse to these writings
only, to be inforn^ed what were the truths and matters of his will, and to try
and prove all doctrines by those writings.

10. Therefore the only instrument upon which the Church now can ground their
knowledge and belief of the truths, matters, gracious counsels of God,
revealed for his own glory and their salvation, is the written Word or holy
Scriptures.

These things thus premised, I come to your arguments which you are pleased to
honor with the name of Demonstrations.

To prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation of Religion, Yo. El. page
32.
your first argument is this: If Religion was founded, built, etc. before the
Scriptures were, then cannot the Scripture be the foundation of Religion, but
Religion was built and founded beso^e, etc. therefore -- Eccius Euchiri. Tit.
1. Bailius. q. 1. Bellar^de verb. dei, l. 4. c. 4.


Should I tell you that your demonstration (if demonstration if must be called)
is stolen out of Papists in their writings against Protestants, it would by
you be accounted but a slight charge; brass cannot blush. For answer I deny
your consequence; Though Religion was built, and stood firm before the
Scriptures were, it follows not that the Scriptures now are not the foundation
of Christian Religion. Though the Scriptures were not always heretofore the
foundation of Religion, it follows not but that they must be now the
foundation thereof. God teaches his Church, and reveals his will diversely;
he has varied the ways of his administrations; and his will being
presupposed, the Scriptures are now necessary as a foundation, which in former
times were not. The learned Rivet tells us, Rivet. ^. 1. c. 1. Aliud tempus
alios mores postulat Deus pro multiformi su^ sapiemia, administrationis suae
rationem volait variare. Consequentias a lversariorum merito ridemus; fuit
aliquando Ecclesia cum non esset Scripture ergo he^ tempore Ecclesia potest
c^rere Scriptura. prae supposita Dei veluntate nobis necessariam esse
Scripturam asserimus.
Merito ridemus, We account it a ridiculous consequence, That because formerly
the Church was without the Scriptures, therefore now it can want them. The same
solution does Gerra^d also make, Exeg. p. 16. Quia non nisi per Scripturas,
etc. Because God in the business of our salvation would not deal with us but
by the Scriptures, upon this supposition they are now necessary.

The like says Whitaker: Whitak. de perfec. Scrip. cap. 7. Partibus olim D^us
se familiariter ostendit atque iis per se voluntatem suam patesecit, and tum
Scripturas non fuisse necessarias fate^r: at postea mutavit hanc docendae ^^
clesiae rationem and scribi suam voluntatem v^lait, rumnecessarta esse
scriptura ^^^pit. Alia illorum: alia horum temporuam ratio. --
God of old time familiarly made known himself to the Fathers, and by himself
manifested to them his will, and then I confess the Scriptures were not
necessary, but after God did change the way or course of teaching his Church,
and would have his will written, then the Scriptures began to become necessary.
The material object of the faith of those that lived before the Canon was put
into writing, was the same with ours; they built their faith upon Christ; they
believed the same truths for salvation; but the formal object of their faith,
or the ground of believing those truths, differed from ours in the manner of
its dispensation. Di^ine ^e^elation was the foundation and ground of their
faith and is of ours also, but divine revelation was afforded to them afone
manner, and to us after another, God has spoken in diverse manners, Heb. 1.1.
The authority of the revelation is always the same, the way of making that
revelation, has frequently been different, sometimes immediately by visions, a
lively voice, etc. at other times by writing, as now in these latter times;
upon which consideration I flatly deny, that because their Religion stood firm
before the Word was written, or before God revealed his will in writing,
therefore our religion is not built upon revelation of God in writing;
concluding my answer with that excellent passage of Tilenus, Syntag. Disp. 2.
Licet plane eadem sint quae olim voce, qu^que deinceps scripto fuerunt tradida,
(...) tamen and fidei nostrae (...) scriptis duntaxat nititur. Although the
things which were formerly delivered by voice, were altogether the same with
the things asterward delivered in writing, yet the certainty of our faith only
depends upon writings.

Your second Argument to prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation of
Religion, The foundation of Religion is imperishable, even as is the Church
(you fay) which is built upon it; now you say, any book and all books
whatsoever, and consequently the Scriptures, we perishable, therefore no books
and consequently not the Scriptures are this foundation. If Master Jenkins
Bible be the form (...) of his Religi^n, then is his Religion no such treasure
but that thi^ces may break through and steal it from him.

(...) bearing that Plat^ had given the definition of a man, that he was a
living creature with tw^ feet with^et feathers, gets a (...) off all his
feathers while he was alice, and throws him in among some of Plato's (...),
wishing them to behold their Master ^ato his man. If some such odd conceited
fellow should use means to get Master Jenkins ^ible, and having defaced, rent
and torn it, should cast it into the midst of his auditors, and say, Ecce
fundamentum Religionis Jenkinianae, I chold the foundation of your Master
Jonkin, it might prove a more offectuall conviction unto him of his folly, than
seven demonsirative reasons, etc.

You say the foundation of Religion is as the Church unperishable, This
position, simple and absolute unperishablenesse, I deny; for though both Church
and Scriptures upon which the Church is built be unperishable, exhypothest
divinae providentie, in regard of Gods providence, which he has promised shall
preserve the Scriptures and Church, yet of themselves they might perish.

It was possible in it self that Christ's legs as well as the legs of the
thieves might have been broken, but Gods pleasure presupposed it was altogether
impossible. As for your arguing from the tearing of my Bible, to the abolishing
of the Scriptures, you show your self as good as your word, for this is one of
the arguments which you bring to the shame of those that charge this error
upon you; my self among sundry others being ashamed of your child shnesse
herein; have you any such ground of assurance from God, that any one particular
Bible shall not be burnt, as you have that his written Word shall not be
utterly removed from his Church? or can the perishing of my Bible prove that
God will suffer the Scriptures to be utterly taken away? Reverend Mr. Bifield
upon the first of Peter, ver. 25. p. 506. will tell you though this or that
patticular Bible may be destroyed, yet that the Word abides for ever in the
very writings of it. If all the power on earth (says he) should make war
against the very paper of the Scriptures, they cannot destroy it, but the word
of God written will be to be had still. It is easier to destroy heaven and
earth than to destroy the Bible. So he; you say the Scriptures are as
imperishable as the Church; but can you conclude because the Church in it self
may fail, and may cease in this or that particular place, therefore that it
may be overthrown in all parts and places of the world: And therefore for that
contemptible because profane scoff of Platoe's man, or a living creature with
two feet without feathers, had you added one accident more, that he is animal
latis unguibus, it would more properly have belonged to your self than animal
rationale; your nails being much sharper than your arguments, a fit cock for
such a cockpit as you game in.

Your third argument is, if any books called the Scripture be the foundation of
Religion, then may Religion be said to have been founded by men.

It would be to no purpose happily to tell you that this is a popish cavil;
Stapleton, lib. 9. c. 4. and we see his servant also following him. In your
argument I deny the consequence, for though the written word be the foundation
of Religion, yet cannot Religion be said to be founded by man, without
borrowing blasphemies from Master Goodwin, who has enough to furnish all the
town; the written word had not men for the Authors of it, but only for the
Amanuenses or penmen of it, who indeed rather were the pens Greg. praf. in
job, cap. 1. Si magni cujusdam vi^i susceptis Epistolis, verba legeremus, eaque
quo calamo suissent Scripta quaereremus, r^dicul^m profecto esses etc. cum ergo
cegnoscimus, eju^que tei spiri^um sanctam, uctorem tenemus, cum scriptorem quae
rimus quid aliu^ eg^mus, nist legenies literas de calamo perscruta^i,
in the band of God, when he wrote unto his Church; and we may look upon men
in this consideration and capacity, and yet not upon either Scriptures or
Religion as founded by men: holy men inspired by the holy Ghost wrote and
spoke. 2 Pet 1.19, 21. The holy Ghost did both put them upon, and direct them
in the work of writing; and therefore though the word were written by them,
yet not founded by them or upon them, and by consequence not Religion.

Your fourth argument seems too weak to be owned by Mr. Goodwin, or any other
man that ever pretended to a competent share in common sense,

It Is this: If those tables of stone wherein the Law was written by the finger
of God, were not the foundation of obedience exhibited to the Law, then neither
is any Bible or book the foundation of Religion. Yo. El. p. 34.


This thing which you call a demonstration touches not the question; paper of
the Bible, and so indeed and no otherwise it holds good, for the paper of our
Bibles, and the stone wherein the Law was written, are foundations both alike,
of obedience and Religion. But its ridiculous to argue from the unfitness of
the stone and paper to be foundations, to the denial of the written word to be
a foundation, your consequence therefore is a creple.

To the proof of it which you pretend to bring in these words, Doubtless
there is as much reason to judge those two tables which are said to have been
the work of God, and the writing therein, the writing of God graven upon the
tables to have been the foundation of the Law, and of the obedience to it, as
to judge any book whatsoever either written or printed, to be the foundation of
that religion, the principles whereof are contained in it. I answer:

1. You join together things that are of a different nature, the Law and the
obedience to it; the question was not concerning the former, whether the
writing in the tables was the foundation of the Law, but of the latter, whether
it were not the foundation of obedience to it.

2. There Is not as much reason to judge the two tables which were stone a
foundation of obedience, as there is to judge the revelation of the will of God
by writing in our Bibles.

3. If you intend, that the writing of God in those two Tables which were
broken was as much the foundation of obedience to the Israelites, as the
Revelation of the will of God by Writing is now to us, I deny that also,
because God foresaw and intended that those numericall tables should be broken,
and that the writing upon them should perish and not be communicated to the
people to be a foundation of their obedience; howbeit if you deny the writing
in the second tables, and in that book that was before the Priest, out of
which the King was commanded to take a copy, that he might re^de and learn to
fear God, Deuteronomy. 17.18. to have been the foundation of obedience unto the Law,
I expect stronger arguments from you than any of these demonstrations you have
brought in your Yo, El.

Your fifth thing which you desire to have us look upon as a demonstration,
Yo. El. p. 35
is drawn from the inconsistency of the foundation of Religion with it self, if
any book or books whatsoever be the foundation of Christian Religion; in regard
of the Errors which you say may possibly be found in every copy now extant in
the world, by reason of the negligence, ignorance, etc. of the Scribes, etc.

You live upon stealing: Stapleton is still your friend, you plow with his
heifer, Prin. Doct. lib. 9. cap. 5. Arg. 4. he uses this very argument, and he
is abundantly answered by Chamier, Panstr. lib. 12. cap. 10. Salom. Glassius,
lib. 1. t. 1. tr. 1, 2. de puritate textus. Your consequence is denied, viz. If
any books whatsoever, bible or other be the foundation of Religion, then is not
the foundation of Religion in every thing consistent with it self. The reason
of your proposition (you say, you should have said of your consequence) is a
bold assertion, of which you offer not the least proof, of errors that may be
found in every copy now extant, which may render the copy contradictious to it
self.

1 A double minded man is unstable in all his ways. Remember you what you
asserted Divine Author, p 257. God has kept the Scriptures from being
corrupted or depraved, that is, from any such alteration or change in the
words, whether by transposition, pointing, or otherwise, whereby the nature or
proper sense of them should be impaired or cast out, or a sense that is
spurious and unsound brought in in the stead thereof. Why is your Hosanna to
the Scriptures turned so soon into a crucify them?

2 Whether grant you that even there was any copy in the world pure and without
errors, and so not liable to this exception of yours; if there were not, how
has God left his Church an unerring steadfast rule of faith and life, and how
is the Word called a Canon, 6 Gal. If there were whether grant you that the
written Word in that pure and unerring copy was the Word of God, and so the
foundation of Religion; if you do grant it, you contradict your self, who have
said all this while, No writing whatsoever is the Word of God; if you grant not
that purely written Word to be a foundation of Religion, (as its clear you do
not) to what purpose argue you against the Word for being corrupted, when as
you do not deny the written Word to be a foundation qua corrupted but qua
delivered in the way of writing. 3. In your next I pray bring in your instances
of those Typographicall Sphalmata, and errors found in every Copy that render
the Scriptures thus contradictious to themselves; and 4. prove that the same
power which keeps the Scriptures from perishing, does not also keep them pure.
Toll puritatem verbi dei scripti and uliro collabescet dect inae ex ve^bo
desumptae puritas. Glass. p. 174. Quod documentom ad convincendos errores exeri
potest, si hac vex admittatur scripturas esse c^rruptas. Aug. L. Cont. F^ust.
Manic. c. 2.
If God by his written Word gathers and preserves his Church to the end of the
world, then certainly he defends it from being corrupted, for there must be a
sutablenesse between the rule and the thing regulated, pure and incorrup^ed
Doctrine requires a pure and incorrupted Scripture, according whereunto it is
to be examined, and by which it is to be tried. Take away the purity of the
written Word, and the purity of Doctrine taken out of the written Word (as
Glassius says) must needs fall to the ground; and what proof can be taken out
of the Scriptures against errors, if this be admitted the Scriptures are
corrupted, as says Augustine. And 5. further, prove from the false printing in
some Copies that therefore the Canon or written Word is depraved, show that
because some words may be written wrong, therefore the written Word of God is
corrupted. Cease it not so far to be Gods Word, as any thing is printed
against the mind of the Lord the Revealer? Is this purity of the Canon at the
courtesy of a Printers boy? Man's word may be inserted, but Gods not by him
depraved; something may be represented instead of the Word, but the Word is not
corrupted by that mis-representation. He that can make Gods Word to become his
own, that is, humane and corrupt, may with the same labor make his own word to
become Gods, and of divine Authority. Nay, prove the errors of the edition ( E.
G. of our new Translation) from the errors of the Copies, learn of the more
learned Chamier, Paust. I. 12. c. 10. Ipsaratio cogit ut codices distinguamus
ab editione, haec enim prosect a abuno principio, illi quotidie sunt
authoritate privata, vel cujus libet voluntate; ergo non been concluditur a
singulis codicibus adversus primariam editionem. We cannot conclude from some
Copies against an edition.

The true and proper foundation of Religion is not any thing that is visible,
Yo. Eld. p. 35
or exposed to the outward senses, but something spiritual, and opprehensible
only by the understanding, etc. but Bibles, or the Scriptures are legible, and
may be seen.

The foundation of Religion taken materially for the truths contained in
Scripture, the things believed, or fundamentum fedei quod is invisible, and not
exposed to outward sense, but taken formally for the fundamentum propter quod,
or for which faith yields assent unto the matter believed, for as much as God
works mediately, and now reveals no truth to us but by external means,
and Divine Authority of it self is hidden and unknown, the thing into which
faith is ultimately resolved must be something externally known, which we may
read or hear, Vid. White, way to the Church, p. 378
and you must either yield an external foundation and formal object of faith,
or else lead us to secret revelations.

The material object of faith comprehends the Articles of faith, as that God
is one in essence, and three in person; that Christ dyed, and rose again the
third day, etc. but the formal object of faith, or the reason wherefore I give
assent unto these matters and Articles of faith is Authority Divine revealed in
writing.

Nor 2. is your Consequence true, viz. If any book be the foundation, then is
the foundation somewhat visible, etc. because our dispute is not about Ink and
Paper, Books or words materially considered, which are the object of sight,
but about words and books as they are signa conceptuum, and so discernable
only by the understanding, Verbis and vocibus per se and materialiter
consideratis nulla in est vis, says Keckerman.

3. How wretchedly weak is your proof, Yo. Eld. p. 35.
that nothing external is the foundation of faith; because then (say you)
there is nothing necessary to be believed by any man to make him religious but
what he sees with his eyes, etc. And (by the way) I pray answer; Is any thing
to be believed to make a man religious, but what may be seen written in the
Scriptures? what a disputer rampant have we here? And you say, every man that
did but look into ^ Bible, and see such and such sentences written or printed
there, and believed accordingly, that these words and sentences were here
written and printed, must needs hereby become truly religious, etc.

Think you (dreadful Sir) by such stuff as this to make your friend William
of your judgment? though the Word written be the foundation of Religion, does
it follow that there is nothing necessary to be believed for the making of a
man religious but this; to believe that such and such things are written; is it
not also required that a man should believe the truths of the word, because
they are written from God as well as that he sees they are written?

The Assent to the truth of the things written is faith, and not only that the
things are written; what can you say against this proposition, Whosoever
believes with his heart the things that are written in these books, because the
first believes that these books in which he sees them written are the oracles
of God, is truly religious.

Your seventh commodity which you cail a demonstration,

Your Argument is this; Yo. Eld p. 38.
The true and proper foundation of religion is intrinsecally, essentially, and
in the nature of it unchangeable and unalterable in the least, by the wills,
pleasures, or attempts of men; but there is no book or books whatsoever, Bible
or other, but in the contents of them they may be altered and changed by men.
Ergo:

It seems you are much pleased with the blasphemy of the Jesuits against the
Scriptures, your second Argument was drawn from the perishablenesse of them;
your fifth was, they are corruptible; your seventh, they are changeable. Your
major I deny not, if it only import, that the foundation of religion admits not
of the least change in the essence or nature of it by men; but if it import
that it is repugnant to the nature of the foundation to be changed in the
least, though this change be only accidental, I deny it.

The proof of your major, (viz. That if the foundation of religion were
intrinsecally and in the nature of it changeable, then can it not be any matter
of truth, because the nature of truth is like the nature of God, unchangeable)
bewrayes your ignorance, or your dotage, or something worse, though ordinary
with you; what created verity is there that is as unchangeable as God, and
which God cannot change? Is it veritas metaphysica, or the truth of being?
Cannot God annihilate all created beings, and if so what becomes of their
verity? Is it Logical truth, or truth of Propositions? Does it not cease upon
the change of the subject? Jesus Christ is to come in the flesh was once a true
proposition, and the object of the faith of those that lived before Christ his
Incarnation, but is it so still? and is not veritas ethica, or the agreement of
the judgment or mind with the proposition, changeable likewise upon the same
ground.

To your minor, whereas you allege the changeableness of all Bibles in the
contents of them, what mean you by contents? mean you ink, papers, letters,
etc. such changes either pervert the sense, and so far as the Scriptures are
thus changed they cease to be the written Word, or they pervert it not, Waleus.
T. 1. p. 129. Scriptura substanti^ non potest corrumpi.
and if any such changes be, they nothing hinder the written Word from being
the foundation of faith. Sphalmata Typographica, Typographicall faults
makeerrours in Orthography, none in Divinity.

Your last demonstration; Yo. Eld. p. 36.
If the Scripture be the true foundation of Religion, it must be understood
either of the Scriptures as in the original Languages only, or only as
translated into other Languages, or as both; but the Scriptures neither in the
original Languages, nor as translated, nor as both are the foundations. Ergo:

I deny your minor, and assert the Scriptures as in the originals, translated
so far as agreeing with the originals are the foundation.

1. How prove you that the Scriptures in the originalls are not the foundation
of religion? thus; If the Scriptures be the foundation as they are in the
original Bibles, then they (say you) that understand not these Languages, as
illiterate men, cannot build upon this foundation; for your unworthy scoff of
the danger of my Religion, you representing me as one that understands not the
originals; you may please to know that I am not ignorant of all originals, for
either concerning your scoffing, or your unmannerly jeering; Mr. T. G. said
lately, that you had it from your Father ( cheap enough it seems) but to the
point: This cavil is borrowed of your old Masters whom in this point you
follow; already answered by Anth. Wotton, Pop. Artic. Ar. 3 p. 20. and by
Baronius against Turnbul. de objecto formali fid. p. 44. but I answer:

Illiterate or unlearned men who cannot understand originals, Scriptures
contained in them, though mediatly, virtually, and not with that distinctnesse
which one learned does, the unlearned knowing not particularly in what words
the mind of God was revealed; though you call me a Novice, yet let me teach
you (if at least so plain a lesson has not hitherto been learned by you) that
unto faith there is required, Principium quod, or the foundation to be
believed; Principium propter quod, or the reason why men believe the former;
and media per quae, those necessary means by which they come to believe, and
these are external, the ministry of the Word, and internal, the witness and
effectual working of the holy Ghost, by which the heart is enabled to close
with the formal object of faith, viz. the revelation of Gods will in writing.
Now the Ministry of the Word and Spirit are limited to the written Word; these
teach no other things than God has revealed therein, and persuade not men, but
God (as the Apostle says, Gal. 1.10.) so that these lead the most illiterate
to the Scriptures, and are so administered that they draw the heart even of such
to assent to the written Word, as that into which their faith is ultimately
resolved, as the Scriptures abundantly testify; and you can no more conclude
from the strangeness of the original Languages to those that are illiterate,
that illiterate persons do not build their faith upon the written Word
contained in them, than that one who only understands the English tongue and
receives a Letter from his Father in the French tongue (for the explaining
whereof, the Father has appointed an Interpreter) builds not his obedience
ultimately upon the writing of his Father, though in a strange tongue.

2. You endeavor to prove that the Scriptures are not the foundation of
Religion, as in Translations and Originalls, thus; If they be this foundation
in both those considerations, or as well in the one or the other, then two
things or more, specifically differing one from another, may notwithstanding be
one and the same numeriall thing,

You should rather have laid your consequence thus, then (...) subject
numerically the same may be the subject of accidents specifically different;
but you tell me of two suppositions upon which your consequence stands.

1. That the foundation of Religion is but one and the same numerically.

2. That the Scriptures in several Languages differ specifically among
themselves.

About the identy of the foundation numerically, I shall not contend; but how
prove you your second supposition? viz. That the Scriptures in several
Languages differ specifically, you endeavor it thus:

Two things (you say) which differ more than numerically, differ specifically;
Now an Hebrew and a Spanish Bible, differ more than numerically, because they
differ more than two Spanish or two Hebrew Bibles differ from one another, and
yet these differ numerically the one from the other.

1. Had the Youngling Elder disputed thus, how many exclamations, of poor man!
illiterate soul! silly man! etc. would your tender heart have bestowed upon
him; but I shall not retaliate, for the Reader (if intelligent) I am confident
will spare me a labor. Things (you say) that differ plusquam numero, do differ
specie. Should a fresh-man hear you reason thus. Mas and faemina differunt
plusquam numero, ergo differunt specie, or a learned man and an idiot,
differunt plusquam numero ergo differunt specie, they would laugh at your
argument; the very boys would judge you a professor fitter for an alley than
an Academye. Do not you grant that these differ specie accidentali only; and
will you conclude that therefore they differ specifically.

2. You say, That though the difference between an Hebrew Bible and a Spanish
is but in specie accidentali, or specificall accidental, yet such a difference
as this is sufficient to prove that they differ numerically. You give in
already, and show your self but a foundered disputant, for what is this to your
undertaking, which was to prove your second supposition, viz. That they do
differ specifically and not numerically only, which was nothing to the second
supposition, page 37.

3. You contend that a Spanish Bible, a Latin, and an English, differ in
specie accidentali, or with a difference specifical accidental in regard of
the specifically different Languages wherein they were written. Ergo quid, how
by all this prove you your assertion, which was; that the scriptures in their
several Languages do differ specifically; nay how prove you by the specifical
accidental d^fference of the Bibles, that the Scripture or the foundation is
not the same numerically. The Languages I will grant differ specifically, and
the copies do differ with a difference specificall accidental, but the
Scripture the foundation of faith, the will of God revesled in writing, is
numerically and identically the same. May not the same thing numerically be the
subject of accidents specifically different? The same man may (I speak not of
Master Goodwin) speak Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. These Languages differ
specifically, yet the man who speaks them, is not multiplied, but is
numerically the same. Esth. 3.12.8, 9.
Ahashuerus sent out a decree to the people of an hundred twenty and seven
Provinces in sevecall Languages, the Decree was one numerically, for he sent
not out many but only one Decree, though the Languages differed specifically,
and the Copies numerically, and specie accidentali, in regard of the
specifically different Languages; and why may not the same be said of the
foundation of Religion. The Bibles and Copies wherein the foundation of
Religion is contained differ specifically accidentally, in regard of their
specifically different Languages, but the foundation of Religion, i. e. the
revelation of the will of God in writing is numerically one and the same; so
that your learned argument, That the Scriptures cannot be the foundation of
Religion in several Languages, because of the specificall or at least
numericall difference of the Bibles, is vain and childish.

We have seen your acumen in arguing, let us see what you can do in answering
(so far as you go) of what you are pleased to pick out of Busy Bishop, against
your opinion concerning the Scriptures.

You say but very little by way of answer; but in that little you woefully
trifle; you stay not to answer the Scriptures I bring against you at all, nor
do seriously endeavor satisfaction in any thing, only you propound two or
three slight and impertinent quaeries against what I write, and so, as if you
were lapping at Nilus, you hastily and superficially conclude.

I asked you in the Busy Bishop, Busy Bishop; p. 22.
how any could believe the matter and substance of the Scriptures to be the
Word of God, when as he must be uncertain whether the written Word wherein the
matter is contained, is the Word of God or no?

To this you answer by propounding these ignorant demands, whereof the first
has two branches. Yo. Eld. p. 39. etc.


1. Is not this a question of the same profound calculation with this, how can
a man believe the sun is a greater and the moon a lesser light if he be
uncertain whether every jot and tittle of what is read in our Bible, Genesis
1.16. be the Word of God or no? because here it is said, And God made two great
lights, the greater, etc.

2. And afterward. Do not the Scriptures affirm, That the heavens declare the
glory of God, etc. and again, That that which may be known of God, his
invisible things, his eternal power and Godhead, are clearly seen from the
creation of the world; and that the Gentiles (without the written Word) show
the works of the Law written in their hearts?

In this demand which you put under two distinct heads, you express two gross
mistakes, unworthy a scholar, your self.

1. In that you distinguish not between the matters of the Scripture to be
believed, i. e. between those things or objects which are communia, such as
may be know by the light of nature, and those which are propria, such as
cannot be known but by the Revelation of the written Word; our question was
not concerning winter and summer, the greatness of the Sun and Moon, etc. but
concerning the Mysteries of faith.

For when you explain your self Sion Coll. visited, and Divine Auth. page 17.
what you meant by the matter, substance, precious counsels of the Scripture,
did you make any mention of the sun and moon, the winter and summer; did you
not say you meant such truths as these? That Christ was God and man, That
Christ dyed, That he arose again, etc. Now can you know these without a
written Word, though you may the greatness of the sun above that of the Moon?

Your second gross mistake in propounding this demand, is, in that you
distinguish not between an intellectual habit, knowledge, and a divine grace,
faith; the ground of the one being reason, the ground of the other being divine
testimony. Or in that you distinguish not between fides divina, or theologica,
and fides naturalis and acquisita, acquired by humane reasons, or by the
authority of man; it was of the former that I disputed, and now you learnedly
(ut soles) fly to the latter. When you say, That without the written Word you
can believe the greatness of the Sun above that of the Moon, Can you believe
this with a divine faith, without a written Word? Quaevis propositio physica,
astrologica, historica fit objectum fidei, si a deo in Scripturis nobis
propanatur, Davevant, p. 12. Scriptura, and fides nostra sunt aequalis
latitudinis, fides nec plus nec minus debet amplecti quam est in Scriptura
revelatum. Geth. Exeg. p. 169.
de judice fidei, Then (says he) is any Physical, Astrologicall, Historical
proposition, the object of faith when it is propounded to us by God in the
Scriptures; and page 149. Formalis ratio credendi, est authoritas dei
revelantis. You may also say, That without a written Word you believe that the
worlds were framed by God, but can you believe this with a divine faith,
unless you had a written word for it? These things happily you may know, and by
a natural or acquired faith, but not by a divine faith, believe, unless
written, quod non lego, non credo.

Your second profound demand is: If it be impossible for me to believe that the
matter and substance of the Scripture is the Word of God, because I am
uncertain whether the written Word be the word of God or no, how came the
Patriarchs to believe it, who lived the first two thousand years of the world,
since it was uncertain to them whether the word should ever be written? The
same way to bring me to believe what they believed is open to the glorious God.

Those things that the Patriarchs believed, divine revelation, and though the
written word was not needful to them for the grounding their faith upon the
things believed, God then immediately manifesting himself to them without it,
as even now I told you, yet the like cannot be said of us who live under a
different dispensation. Vid. Riv. Cath. Orth. T. 1. Q. 1. Whitaker. Chamier, etc.

This was the substance of your first argument, Yo. Eld. p. 32. I must send you
back for answer: The same way to bring you to believe, may be open by Gods
power, but it is not his pleasure to open it.

3. You say, The nature, beauty, worth, weight, etc. of the matters and
substance of the Scripture is sufficient to bring men to believe that they are
things which came from God, though they had not the super-added advantage of
any thing in the Scripture as writing.

It was great pity that you were not consulted withal to give your judgment
concerning the most advantageous way of bringing men to believe; grounds of
faith, submit you not to the old? Its no matter what such a poor creature as
your self say, when you tell us what is the most sufficient way to bring men to
believe, when as I see that the wise God was pleased not only to have the
matters committed to writing, but also to tell us (notwithstanding the weight
of the matter) that the end of that writing was that men might believe those
matters, These things are written that ye might believe, Job. 21. and 1 Jo.
5.13. why rather did not the Evangelist say, These things are so weighty, so
worthy, so beautiful, that therefore you have reason to believe them.

2. The most weighty worthy matter that ever was believed, had it only been
believed for its own weight and worth, and not as revealed by God, and because
God manifested it, had not been believed with a divine faith. It Is not the
worth of the thing but the Authority of the Speaker that is the ground of a
man's faith: Nor do I understand how the worth and beauty of any thing can be
said to bring men to believe that thing, they may indeed bring a man to desire
it, and to long to enjoy it; there is required to faith not a worth and a beauty
in the thing revealed, but truth ln the revelatien; the object of assent is not
pulchrum; but verum, not the beauty of the thing spoken, but the veracity of
the speaker. Be the thing never so good, yet I believe not (says learned
Downame) unless I be persuaded it is true, p. 355. Treat. of justification.

3. He that assents not to the Scriptures as revealed by God, cannot assent
unto the beauty of the matters contained in the Scriptures. There Is nothing
revealed in the Scripture will seem truly beautiful and worthy to that man
that believes not the authority of the Revealer. If the written word be
entertained, and received as (says the apostle) as the word of man, the most
beautiful and worthy matters in the Scripture will be so far from being
believed, that they will be profanely neglected. When as the excellentest
matters were preached to the Jews by Christ, how were they contemned, in
regard that they were not looked upon as the mind of God, but rather on the
contrary.

To conclude my Answer to this profane conceit of yours, should this beauty,
worth, weight, etc. of the matters contained in the Scripture be admitted as
the ground of believing them, I would know by what rule we should judge of this
their beauty, worth, weight, etc. or what it is when their beauty is impugned
by heretics (as you know that the gloriously beautiful truth of the
satisfaction of Christ, so beautiful that its worthy of all acceptance, is by
Socinus accounted the most deformed and unrighteous conceit that can be. What
is it (I say) in such cases by which I should groundedly account the truth of
God beautiful? you must here denying the written Word, make any man's judgment
and reason to be the rule of the beauty and worth of the matters of the
Scriptures, every one must esteem of truth, and believe them, as reason
dictates and tells them they are beautiful, and then Mr. Goodwins Socinian
design is perfectly accomplished. And there are who stick not to say, That all
the clamourous outcries of your tongue and pen intend nothing but the advancing
the Diana of recta ratio instead of Scripture.

Yet again you querie (though to no purpose, Yo. Eld. p. 40.
yet) to this effect: Does not (say you) the Scripture affirm that the (...),
the goodness of God leads to repentance? Romans 2.4. Which repentance cannot
be without believing of the matters of the Scripture, as that upon repentance
God will be gracious and accept men into favor, and forgive their sins; now
this goodness of God, leading to this repentance, is extended to many, who are
uncertain whether the written word be the Word of God or no.

1. profane calculation with that in Divine Auth. where you said, page 182.
That the Heathens who only have the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, to
preach the Gospel unto them, have reason sufficient to judge the same
judgment with them who have the Letter of the Gospel. Which in Busy Bishop
was disproved; to which in this book you reply nothing, but new braze your
face and say the same things again.

2. From this place Romans 2.4. that Gods goodness leads to repentance, follows
it that Heathens who only were invited by the general goodness of God in the
governing of the world, believed that God would be gracious unto them, Spanhem
de great. univers. page 1291.
and forgive them their sins in Christ the Mediator? follows it that all
invitation to repentance is invitation to a Redeemer, and to believing, and
that rain from Heaven and fruitful seasons did afford such an invitation?
There Is a repentance which is not saving, and true and internal, but externa
and disciplinaris, which consists in mere abstinence from outwardly vicious
acts, and in the contrary practice of actions civilly and morally honest. And
2. there is an invitation to repentance, which is simpliciter imperativa and
exactiva officii, (as Spanhemius says) which simply commands and exacts, that
duty which man owes to God, which requiring of repentance leads not more to a
Redeemer, than the requiring of that debt did lead the servant in the Gospel
to a surety. And 3. how could the Gentiles be lead to true and saving
repentance by the outward benefits they enjoyed, who thought that they received
them from Jupiter and Juno and such Idols, and that all that repentance which
those Idol-Deities required from them, did consist in idolatrous worships, and
sacrifices and services? These of whom the Apostle speaks, could not rightly
think of God, who only could pardon them, nor of the duty of repentance they
owed to this God without a superiou^ illumination, far excelling that which is
by the common goodness of God in the government of the world; you woefully
blunder therefore in affirming that the heathens believed the matters of the
Scripture being destitute of the written Word.

Briefly thus; you say, The goodness of God bestowed upon the Gentiles who
were destitute of the written word, led them to a true and sound repentance,
and to a knowledge, that upon that repentance God would be gracious unto them
and forgive them their sins; I desire in your next, your so frequently promised
undertaking (if at least we be not put off, as ever yet we have been, with a
mouse instead of a mountain) you would tell us whether a true and sound
repentance and a knowledge that God will be gracious in the forgiveness of
sins, were ever (yet) wrought in any without the knowledge of Christ Jesus, and
whether the general goodness of God put forth in the government of the world
did ever manifest Christ Jesus to the Gentiles; sure I am the Apostle tells the
Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.12. That they were formerly without Christ, having no hope,
and without God in the world; and the times wherein the Gentiles were destitute
of the Gospel are called the times of ignorance, to which he directly opposes
the time in which now God commands all men every where to repent, Act. 17.30.
I shall only advise you to learn of reverend Nemo potest vel minimum gustum
rectae sanaeque doctrinae percipere, nisi qui scripturae fuerit discipulus.
Palam est Deum erga eos omnes quos unquam erudire cum fructu voluit, subsidium
verbi adhibuisse quod effigiem suam in mundi forma impressam parum esse
efficacem provideret-Significat propheta, Ps. 19. quum frustra Deus omnes
populos ad se invitet caeli terraeque in tuitu, legem esse peculiarem filiorum
Dei scholam Cum humana men's pro sua inbecilitate pervenire ad Deum nullo modo
queat, nisi sacro ejus verbo adjuta and sublevata omnes tunc mortales, exceptis
judaeis, quia Deum sine verbo quaerebant, necesse fuit in vanitate, atque
errore versari. Calv. Instit. c. 6. l. 1.
Calvin, Instit. l. 1. c. 6. No man, says he, can have the least taste of
sound Doctrine, but he that is taught by the Scripture. And again, God has
bestowed upon all those whom he ever taught with benefit, the help of his Word,
in regard that the effigies of himself imprinted upon the world, he foresaw
could not be effectual. And again, Quum frustra Deus, etc. Since God did
ineffectually invite to himself all people by the sight of the Heav^n and
Earth, the Law is the peculiar s^hoole of his sons. Once more hear that
excellent man, Since the mind of man, in regard of its weakness, could no
ways come unto God, unless helped and relieved by his b^ly Word, all men who
sought God without his Word, were necessarily occupied in vanity and error:
The Gentiles could not have believed this proposition (says Davenant) Christ
has reconciled us to God by his death, unless it had been revealed to them by
the preaching of the Apostles.

To conclude this first question, Gentes huic propositio^i, Christus morte sua
nos reconciliavit Deo, non potuerunt fidem adhibere nisi ea per praedicationem
Apostolorum fuisset illis revelata, p. 149 de jud. and nor. fid.
I desire the Reader to observe that this Dotard, who would be accounted the
great assertor of the Divine Authority of the Scriptures, does when he states
the question borrow of the Papists their blasphemies, calls the Written Word ink
and paper, as Ecchius, Pighius, and others; and when he disputes against the
Scriptures, he goes down to these Philistims to sharpen his axe, and is
beholding to Papists and Jesuits for most of his arguments. This the Reader
may see in this brief parallel which I have added with an intimation of some
learned Protestants who have confuted them; that he may not say in his next, It
is no matter whose the argument is, but who has answered it?

Master Goodwin.
YO. Eld. p. 32. Arg. 1. Religion was founded, built, stood firm and stable in
the world before the Scriptures were, Div. Auth. page 10. Moses is generally
acknowledged by us to be the first penman of the Scriptures, or the Word of
God, and that the world had continued more than 2000 years before he was
borne; but to affirm that there was no word of God in the world, no foundation
of Religion, for the space of 2000 years is to contradict what is plainly
written.

Youn. Eld. page 31. if the Scriptures be the only foundation in point of
manifestation, how came all the penmen of the Scriptures, by the knowledge
they had of God, and of Christ, and of Religion, did they ground their
knowledge of these upon the Scriptures, whilst as yet they were not.

Yo. Eld. p. 33. Arg. 2. All books whatsoever are perishable, may be burnt,
miscarry by many casualties, Argu. 5. It is very possible, that either through
negligence ignorance, of Scribes, and correctors of the press, some such
error may be found in every copy now extant in the world, which will render
this Copy contradictious to it self. Arg. 7. Experience teaches us that the
Books and Bibles themselves, are de facto, altered by men from time to time.

Arg. 8. If Mr. Jenkin will say, That the Scriptures are the foundation of
Religion, only as they are in the Originals, then they who understand not these
languages, cannot build (at least with understanding) upon this foundation, and
consequently can never be truly religious, Divine Auth. page 19.

I suppose it is no foundation of faith to believe that the English Scriptures
are the word of God; God spoke not to his Prophess or Apostles in English, nor
does our English Translation agree in all things with the true sense and
meaning of the Originals, Hagiom. page, 37. sect. 28.

The Papists agreeing with him.
BEllarminus de verbo Dei, l. 4. c. 4. Ab Adam usque ad Mosen, fuit Ecclesia
dei aliqua in mundo, and colebant homines deum fide, etc. at nulla fuit
scriptura ante Mofen. There was a Church in the world from Adam to Moses, and
men worshipped God, but there was no Scripture before Moses, etc.

Vid. etiam Bailium. Jesuitam in sua catech^si, Ecc. Enchirid T. 2. Trip. Cord.
p. 156 before Moses who first wrote, the Church continued 2000 years. Fuit
assensus fidei antequam esset Scriptura, Turnb. Tetrag.

1 Turnbul Jesuita Tetrag. c. 10. Ipsi scriptores canonici prius fuerunt
divinitus edocti scribenda, quam scriberent alioque proinde signo Deum fuisse
dictatorem scribendorum.

The penmen of the Scriptures, were taught by God the things that were to be
wrote before they worte them, and therefore by some other sign than the
written Word, God did dictate to them what they were to write.

Jac. Tiri. Ies. Syn. Contr. ex ser. Textum bibliorum hebraicum non paucis in
locis depravatum esse, partim injuria temporum, partim inscitia vel oseitantia
typogra, horum, etc. suis hinc inde locis ostendi. The Hebrew Text of the
Bibles are corrupted and depraved, partly by the injury of times, partly by the
ignorance and idleness of printers, etc. vid. etiam Stapleton. Relect. princ.
fid. doct. contr. 5. q. 3. act. 1.2. valent. in Thom. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. q. 1.

Turnbul. Tetrag. c 5. sect. 2. Scriptura immediate spectata, est idonea tantum
regula literatis nec usui esse potest illiteratis, etc. The Scripture
considered immediately, is only a fit rule to men learned, nor can it be of
any use to the illiterate. So Canus in Locis, l. 2. c. 13. Discourse concerning
the rule of faith, sect. 7. Scriptures cannot be a rule of faith, accomodate
to the capacities of unlearned men who cannot read them.

Discourse uhi supr. sec. 6. These Translations are not infallible as the rule
must be, for neither were the Scriptures written in this Language, neither were
the Translators assisted by the same spirit infallibly, as if it were imposble
they should err, etc.

Protest. Writers confuting them both.
Chamierius Panstr. t. 1. l. 7. c. 7. Rivet. Cath. or. Trac. 1. q. 1.

Gerrand Exeg. page 16. Whitak de Script.

Baronius Apol. pr. object. formali fidei tr. 4. p. 155.

Maresitheol. elench. T. 1. p. 24.

Sol. Glass. T. 1. de pur. Text.

Chamierius Paustr. T. 1. l. 12. c. 10.

Baron. Apol. Tr. 1. c. 2. Dr. White way to the Chapter p. 17.

Dr. Whites way to the Church, p. 13

I shall conclude with observing, that in this Mr. Goodwin is worse than either
Papists, Enthusiasts, or such other Sectaries that oppose the written Word,
because though they deny it to be the formal object of faith, or that upon
which we are to ground and build our faith in believing the matters of the
Scriptures, yet they have held forth some other foundation in stead of the
written Word, but never were we beholding to Master Goodwin for such a favor.

This Bishop of Bangor vainly threatened when he entered upon the handling of
this question about the Scriptures, Yo. Eld. p. 26.
that he would make his friend William as heretical as himself before they
parted at this turning: My Lord, we are now parting at this turning; but all
that your young friend has received at your Lordships hands is confirmation in
the same truth which he entertained before you and he first met, and which so
much opposes your Errors; and he hopes that he shall ever forsake you and
these your works.

CHAP. IIII.
Showing the weakness and erroneousnesse of Master Goodwins pretended Answers
to what I bring against his Errors about the power of man to good
supernatural.

IN my former Book called Busy Bishop, I charged you with Arminianism in the
handling this Doctrine of grace and free will; Yo. El p. 43, 44. Sect. 56.
you deny not the charge but acknowledge it true, though not penitentially, but
impudently: But what say you in your own defense?

1. You slight the charge, Yo. Eld. p. 43.
as fit to be regarded only by women and child^en, and not by m^n of worth,
parts, etc.

But is it so small a matter to be accounted, be a professed Arminian? C^nc.
Carth^g sub Aurel. Apud Bin. To. 1. p. 864. Conc. Mileu. 868, 869. Nefarius and
ab omnibus anathematizandus error. haeresis nimium periculoso, error
pernitiosissimus. Aug. ad Hilar. ep. 94. pestifeta impietas execrabile dogmald.
fidei venena Aug. Contr. Julian.
would it never have moved men of worth, parts, etc. Were they men of no worth
or parts, etc. that censured the Tenets in Pelagius, which afterward revived in
Arminius? have none but women and children held these forth as accursed,
abominable, most pernicious heresies, execrable, pestilent impieties, the
poison and bane of faith? The many holy and learned men who have been moved
against the errors of Arminius, were so far from being children for their deep
resentment of this heresy, that they show you a child for sleighting the
charge of it; Neither women nor children sit in Parliament, and yet the House
of Commons in their Remonstrance to the King, June 11. 1628. profess
themselves no less perplexed with the growth of Arminianism than of Popery;
that being a cunning way to bring in Popery; and the professors of Arminianism
they look upon as the common disturbers of Protestant Churches, and
Incendiaries of those States wherein they have gotten head, being Protestants
in show, Vid. Prin. neces. Introd p. 92.
but Jesuits in opinion and practice; Its clear what Master Goodwins esteem
was of that Parliament, for being so moved against Arminians; and I doubt not
but this present Parliament which has been so earnest in suppressing
Arminians, is yet lower in the opinion of this censor.

2. In this section you plead that truth is not the worse because bareticks
hold it, I my self (you say) hold some things that Devils, Pharisees,
Arminians believe. Yo. Eld. p. 4^.


Its confessed, but this comes not up to your case; Arminians hold, I blame you
not; L^de nup and Conc. c. 3. libe^wn in hom^ne esse arbitrium, utrique
dicimus, hinc non estis Celestiani liberum autem quenquam esse ad faciendum
bonum, hoc vos dicitis, hinc estis celesti^ni.
Its for the embracing the errors which they maintain that I charge you. Its
a speech of Augustine to the Sectaries. That there is free will in man, we say
on both sides, hence therefore it is not that you are called Celestians, but
that any one has free will to good, you say, and hence you are called
Celestians; you tell me that the devil holds Jesus Christ to be the holy one
of God; but this confession makes him not a devil, its common with the Church
of Christ; but your tenets are properly Pelagian, Arminian, condemned by the
Churches of Christ, whom you leave therefore, particularly this Church of
England, of which the learned Davenant says: No man can embrace Arminianism in
the Doctrine of predestination and grace, Prin. Comp. Tr. p. 166.
but he must first desert the Articles agreed upon by the Church of England.
And in this you close with the Jesuit, building upon that foundation which he
laid, and watering that plant which he planted in England and Holland, as a
sovereign drugg to purge the Protestants from their heresy.

3. You say, That this practice of mine to defame books, by saying that those
who are erroneous hold them, is an old device of Papists, whereby they
endeavor to render such truths of God as made not for their interests
hateful, you instance in one Prateolus. Yo. Eld p. 44.


A trivial passage that needs not a reply. Papists slander truths, errors;
where is the harmony? They load truths with imputation of error, I compare
error with error. Morton, Cath. Apo^par. 1. c. 24 Spr. de haeres. p. 1. l. 2,
3. Riv. Cath. Orth. Tr. 1.
When you shall have cleared your self and opinion from the imputation of
Arminianism, as Morton, Springlius, Rivet, have vindicated the Protestants
against Prateolus and his compeers, you may say I used a popish stratagem, but
till then you must be under the accusation of heresy, for ought I can do to
relieve you.

I having told the Reader that your charging the Subscribers of the Testimony
with Manicheism is as old as Pelagius, Yo. Eld. p. 45. sect. 57.
and by him cast upon Jerome and Austin; This, you say, is as if one charged
for a seducer of the people, should plead thus for himself, The accusation of
seducing the people was cast upon Christ by the Pharisees, etc. by whom have
any of your judgment in the point of reprobation, been vindicated from the
accusation of Manicheism.

1. charge of Manicheism is as old as Pelagius, that he may observe your
compliance with that Heretic, Non est minon qrod nevi (...), cathel is ^
quibus ex^unt, no^um nomen (...), Aug. l. 2. op. imp. n 7.
as in your opinions, so in your opprobrious calumnies against the truth; you
know who said it.

Nec lacie lacti, nec ovum ovo similius.
'Twixt milk and milk the likeness is not greater,
Nor egg to egg more parallel in feature.
2. A sedu^er (such are you) may not plead for himself, by saying the
Pharisees did cast the accusation of seducing upon Christ, but an innocent
person may bear up his spirit with the recollection to his mind, of the false
accusations that have been cast upon the saints in former ages. Cernis cum
quibu^ maledicta rua (...), cernis cum quibus mihi sit causo (...) is, (...) qu
int^^i per^^osum sit, tam horrthile ^rimen objicere talibus, and quam mihi
gloriosion sit quod libet crimen oudire and talilus. Aug. Contr. Jul. l. 1. c.
4.
So persecuted they the Prophets, says Christ, Mat. 5: 12. And (is Austine
says) though it be a dangerous thing to reproach such, yet is it a glorious
thing to suffer reproaches with such.

3. You ask by whom any of my judgment in the point of reprobation, have been
vindiceted from Manicheism.

1. How know you my judgment in the point of reprobation. 2. What need any of
my judgment in the point of reprobation, any vindication from Manicheism? does
not this further manifest, that you understand not what Manicheism is? Did the
Manichees hold any reprobation at all? You lay upon me the imputation of
Manicheism; I deny it. It Is your part to prove it, who say it; but do it
thoroughly least you prove your self not only a simple accuser, but a false
accufer. But 3 know that if those whose heresy is your inheritance, have case
the imputation of Manicheism upon any of my judgment, they have been
sufficiently cleared by Augustine of old, and by Springlius, cited Busy
Bishop, page 48. among many Modern Writers who have done the like.

In this section I find you miserably flundering in the quagmires of error,
nonsense, and absurdity; Yo. Eld. p. 45. Sect. 58.
and you would feign persuade Master Ball to sink with you, but you cannot;
your opinion is this: Men are not wholly destitute of all power to do what God
requires of them as simply necessary to salvation, particularly to repent, and
believe. Master Balls word are these: No man is hindered from believing
through the difficulty or unreasonablenesse of the command, or through his own
simple infirmity, as being willing to believe but not able, which inability
deserves pity, but he does not believe because he will not.

1. I demanded, Yo. Eld p. 46.
what is here that gives you the least countenance in your errors? You answer
by asking, Who either said or thought that here was any thing of such import? I
reply, you did not think so, you dealt very contraconscientiously to say so.
Your very words, Sion Coll. visited, page 16. are these: The self-same opinions
are countenanced by men of your own party for which you defame others, and
immediately you subjoyne this allegation out of Master Ball. And Youngling
Elder, page 46. say you not thus: I cite the words not so much by way of
countenance as concurrence. Here Is an open confession that you cite the words
by way of countenance as well as concurrence, though not by way of countenance
so much; but you would feign be looked upon as a Doctor seraphicus,
irrefragabilis, resolutus, (the encomiums of three dunces met in one,) your
opinions need no man's countenance, nay, you build your faith no more upon the
Scripture, than Christ his upon Moses. You call me childling for but asking
what is here that gives you countenance. But friend, Yo. Eld. p. 31. Yo. Eld p.
46.
though you be happily a Pythagorus to your deluded followers, you need some
countenance to bear up your port among others. And its just with God if you
who have accustomed your self so much to falsnesse should not hereafter be
believed by plain hearted Christians, without the Countenance of others,
though possibly you speak the truth; Its the portion of the liar.

2. You proceed, Yo. Eld. p. 46.
Master Ball ( says Master Jenkin) says, That unwillingnesse to believe
hinders a man from believing, but he does not say, that any man of himself can
be willing. But, Master Jenkin, when I tell you that Master Ball speaks of
apples, why do you (by way of answer) tell me that he does not speak of
oysters; where did Master Jenkin ever meet with any such assertion of mine? who
ever said that any man of himself could be willing to believe?

I perceive your mind is on your junkets, you had rather be loading the ass
than disputing. But (Master Goodwin) if you cited Master Ball by way of
concurrence with you, why do you bring him in speaking of apples, when you
speak of oysters? if the serious Reader compare your words and Master Balls,
should he find them to agree, 'twill be with the agreement of harp and harrow.

2. Yo. E^ p. 51
Did never any man say, That a man of himself could be willing to believe? why
then you have wronged Pelagius in the 51. page of Taungling Elder, charging him
to have held, That the adjutory of grace was not simply necessary for the
enabling of the will to do that which is pleasing to God, but by way of
accommodation or facilitation of the work, citing sundry places out of Austine
to prove that this was his opinion, as indeed at first it was. Why abuse you
poor Pelagius if he never said so?

3. Did I never meet with such an opinion of yours as this, That man of
himself can be willing to believe? you either forget or understand not your
self. Yo. Eld. p. 45. sect. 58.
Say you not in this very section that your opinion is, That men are not wholly
destitute of all power to do what God requires of them, as simply necessary to
salvation, particularly to repent and believe? Yo. Eld p. 47
Also express you not your self thus in this section; Natucall men want no
power, no not of being willing, or making themselves willing to believe? Say
you not, That men cannot be said to act or do, or to be able to act or do, but
only what is possible for them to will, or to make themselves willing to do?
This is your detestable Doctrine. Reader, are there not two who hold, that man
of himself can be able to believe?

In this section you endeavor with woeful weakness to draw the forecited
place of Master Ball to concur with this your opinion. Ball says, No man is
hindered from believing through the difficulty or unreasonablenesse of the
command. Hence you infer, Certainly a man has power to do that, from the d^ing
whereof he is not hindered by any difficulty relating to the performance of it.
If the command of God, wherein he commands men to believe, has no such
difficulty in it whereby they are hindered from obeying it^ have not men power
to obey it, and consequently to believe?

What dotard besides J. G. would have made such an inference; Ball removes
difficulty and unreasonablenesse from the Command, Master Goodwin simply all
difficulty relating to the performance; Master Ball says, No man is hindered
from believing through the difficulty of the Command; Therefore says Master
Goodwin, men have power to obey it. But friend, be merciful to the sepulcher
of a Saint now in heaven. How little did this blessed man think when he was on
earth, that ever Popery and Arminianisme should have found a prop in his
writings after his discease; Popery I say, for might you not as well have
argued from Master Balls words, that men want no power to keep the whole Law?
for, is it from the difficulty or unreasonablenesse of the Law that men
perform not the Law, or from the weakness and corruption of their nature?
pray, pass not sentence upon Mr. Bell before you hear what he can say for
himself, p. 245. Cout. of Gr. he says, Impossible in it self, or in respect
of the unreasonablenesse of the thing commanded is not the object of Gods
Commandment, but an impossible thing to us may be and is the object of Gods
Commandment; should I request Mr. Goodwin to construe a chapter in the Hebrew
Bible, he would not be hindered from doing it by any difficulty in the thing
which I request of him, but if he understands not the Hebrew Tongue, he would
be hindered through his own unskilfulnesse; if there be no impossibility on
the part of the command, yet if there be an impossibility on the part of the
commanded, there will be a falling short of performance.

4 You add besides, when Mr. Ball says, A man does not believe because he
will not, he does not resolve his unbeleefe into any deficiency of power in him
to will, or to make himself willing (as Mr. Jenkin would imply) but into his
will it self, into the actual and present frowardness; and indisposition of
his will; therefore what? why therefore (according to the Gloss of Master
Goodwin) Mr. Ball asserts, a man has power to believe.

Answ. If impudence in an old man be a virtue, you are virtuous; you shamefully
abuse Mr. Ball, for he resolves not man's unbelief into a present and actual
wilfulness, or frowardness of his will, as if the will had a strength and
power to believe, but being in a fit of peevishness, would not put forth that
power, or make use of that strength though it could do so if it pleased; but
he resolves man's unbelief into a frowardness, not, actual and present, but
habitual and rooted, awd settled, such a frowardness and oppositenesse to the
things of God, as that he cannot but be froward and opposite till the Lord
makes him to consent; habitual frowardnes in man's will being the root of the
wills impotency, and that this holy man resolves unbelief into this habitual
frowardness, is clear from the scope of this place, which is to prove, that
God is just in requiring faith, though he gives not sufficient grace to men to
believe if they will, and from the constant consent of other passages in this
and his other books. Tract of faith, page 11.
Hear what he says concerning the production of faith; God (says he) does
infuse or pour the habit of faith into man, whereby he gives to will to come
to Christ; this is requisite to faith, for as a dead man can do no act of life
until a living soul be breathed into him, etc. no more can man dead in
trespasses and sins move himself to receive the promises of grace, until the
free and gracious habit of faith be infused. We cannot will to believe unless
God give that will; the power to believe, and will to use that power is of God.
It is God only and altogether that inableth, stirs up, and inclines the
heart to believe. page 12.
If God have not left you to a most obstinate obduration of heart, you will in
your next acknowledge how you have abused Mr. Ball, in your saying that he does
resolve man's unbeleefe only into present, actual frowardness, or a fit of
peevishness.

You give us a fifty ninth Section thus: just such work as he makes in
interpreting Mr. Balls words, to manife st their non-concurrence with me, he
makes also in a like attempt upon the passages cited by me from Mr. Bucer, Yo.
Eld. p. 45. Sect. 59.
the fathers, Austine, Hierome.

In this Section you plainly yield me, Bucer, Austine, and Hierome,
acknowledging, that I have proved their non-concurrence with you, as I have
proved the non-concurrence of Mr. Ball with you; if you desire the Reader
should believe that Bucer and the Fathers are still on your side,
notwithstanding all that I have said to the contrary, why give you not so much
as one word by way of taking off my exceptions, to your allegations out of
them, which exceptions were largely set down in my Busy Bishop, p. 41, 42,
43, 44, 45, 46; 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 53, 54, etc. but all that I say in all
these pages in proving the impertinency of your quotations out of the
forecited Authors, you blow away with this learned answer; just such work as
he makes in manifesting the non-concurrence of Mr. Ball with me, he makes also
in a like attempt upon the passages cited by me from Mr. Bucer and the Fathers;
moll strenuously and disputant-like illustrating, if not endeavoring to prove
this your answer from the example of Josuah, (quoted in chapter and verse in
your margin) who as he had done to Hebron and Libnah, and to her King, so he
did to Debir and her King; and I promise you a good proof too, as proofs go
now a days in the alley.

But what is become of your friend Testard, your chief witness, whom also you
alleged as concurring with you, whose Doctrine you (impudently) said, was
asserted for orthodox by a province of Ministers in France, and was the
received Doctrine of the reformed Churches in France. It had been ingenuity in
this Reply to have asked pardon of that Province, which in your last you so
unworthily slandered?

In your sixtieth Section I read thus. Yon. Eld. Sect. 60.
Whereas he quotes several sentences out of Mr. Ball, Bucer, Austine, etc. of
a contrary import (as he after his weak manner imagines) to that opinion which
I affirm to be asserted by them in the passages cited by me, I would gladly
know of him what is the distinct sound that this trumpet makes; my intent and
drist in citing these Authors was not to prove, or so much as to insinuate,
that they no where else in their writings delivered themselves with any sceming
contrariety to the places cited by me.

1. Whether it be more weakness in me to quote places out of them, and also to
prove the repugnancy of those places to the errors which you hold forth, or in
you not to answer the quotations, let my very enemies judge; if I cited those
passages pertinently, why tax you me with weakness? if weakly, they had been
the sooner answered.

2. Whereas you ask why I cited them, I answer; the tondency of my
counter-quotations was, to vindicate those godly, and orth^dox Authors from
your aspersions, to manifest how much you abused the truth and them, by holding
them forth as favorers of your heresies, and how far they were from
affording you succor in your sin; and to let the Reader see what little
credit is to be given to you when you cite Authors, and this was the intention
both operis and operantis.

3. Your intent (you say) in citing these Authors was not to infinuate, that
they no where else delivered themselves in contrariety to the placece cited by
me, etc. But its evident that you laid these few passages taken out of Bucer
and the Fathers upon the stall, in open view, to make every Reader think that
the Books of those eminent writers were shops that contained such commodities
within. Was it not your desire to have the Reader believe, that the constant
^enor and strain of the writings of the cited Authors maintained your errors?
else what is the meaning of that passage of yours, Sion College visited p. 17.
where you having abused Mr. Ball in citing a passage out of him; you tell the
Reader, This passage fell not from the Authors pen at unawares, but the
contents of it were his settled and well resolved judgment; to which end you
produce another passage out of the same Author, which also you pretend to
speak for you.

I pass over your 61. and 62. Sections, wherein you pretend to nothing but
chafe and scoffs, my drift being to follow you only where you would be
thought to write about the controversy.

To, the next therefore I having told you, Yo. Eld. p. 50. Sect. 6^.
Busy Bish. p. 48. that the great question between Jerome, Austine, and
Pelagius, was not whether the will did stand in need of an adjutory of grace
for the performance of good, but what kind of adjutory it was; whether or no an
adjutory by way of working of good in the will, and that invincibly and
indeclinably, etc.

1. You tell the Reader that I said, that this was the question, but why pilfer
you from my words? why clip you -- why leave you out the word great? I said it
was the great question, had you put in that, you had found nothing to reply in
this place; the state of the question changed four times between Augustine and
Pelagius, as you may see collected by Aluar. de auxil. Lib. 1. c. 2. by
Jansenius in his Augustinus, To. 1. l. 5. by Latins, and Vossius in Hisioria
Pelagiana.

1. At the first pelagius denied omne anxilium supernaturale, all supernatural
assistance, and affirmed, that the natural power of man's free will was
sullicient to keep all the Commandments, and to obtain salvation.

2. He did acknowledge an adjutory of grace, but placed it in the outward
Doctrine of the Law, and in the example of Christ, but denied this to be simply
necessary, but only for the facilitation of the act.

3. He confessed an adjutory by inward grace, viz. the inward illumination of
the understanding, and the excitation of the stupid will, but always denied
that grace, by which God works in us to will infallibly.

4. His scholar Celestius did confess that inward grace was simply necessary,
not to begin, but to perfect that which was good.

Now my asserting that the great question between the Fathers and Pelagius was,
what kind of adjutory it was of which the will did stand in need, is so far
from denying that there was any other question, that it clearly implies there
were other.

2. You endeavor in this Section to evince, that this which I have mentioned
was not the state of the question, Yo. Eld. p. 50.
for (say you) that which caused the distance between Austin and Pelagius was,
that Pelagius denied the necessity of the adjutory of grace for the performance
of the Law, and this you pretend to prove from Austins words: dicat Pelagiut
per gratiam nos posse praestare legem Dei and pax est. Let Pelagius say that by
grace we may perform the Law of God, and it is Peace.

But 1. Why have you so learnedly passed by all the places quoted out of Austin
in Bu. Bish. to prove, i.e. that Pelagius did acknowledge the necessity of the
help of God to the doing of good; Ba. Bish. p. 49 Liberum sic confuemur
arbitrium ut dicamus nos semper indigere dei auxilio, Au. con. Pel. l. 1. c.
31. Ita homenis laudamus naturam ut dei semper gratiam addamus auxalium.
Anathema qui docet gratiam dei per singulos actus nostros non esse necessariam.
Ibid. Diligenter interrogandus est Pelagius quam dicat gratiam qua fateatur
hon^nes adj^vari, querimus quo auxilio, etc. Corur. Pel. and Call l. 1. c. 31.
fateantur imerna in effabili potestate operari in cordibus hominum, non solum
veras revelationes, sed bonas voluntates, l. 1. c. 24. de gra. Deus facit ut
velimus praebendo vires efficacissiuas voluntati, de^g. and l. c. 16^
as where he says, we so praise nature, as that we always add the help of
the grace of God; and where he pronounces anathema against every one that
thinks the grace of God is not necessary every hour to every act. 2. Why
have you passed by all the places brought to prove that Austin was not
satisfied with this Concession of Pelagius, but says, that Pelagius is to be
asked what grace he means? and Lib. 1. c. 24. de gra. Christi. Fateantur,
etc. Let them confess that there are wrought by a wonderful, internal, and
ineffable power, good wills in the heart as well as true discoveries; and Aug.
degr. et. l. a l. 16. Deus facit ut velimus, faciamus etc. God makes us will
and do by affording most efficacious strength to the will. Haecgratia a nullo,
etc. this grace is rejected by no hard heart. And de cor. et. gra. C. 12.
Infirm is servavit, etc. Hereserved for those that were weak, that they should
by his gift will what is good, most invincibly, etc. And whereas you say that
the words of Austin are expre^y contrary to this my information, he saying,
Dicat Pelagius etc. Let Pelagius say that by grace we may perfurme the law of
God, and we are friends; you show your self a va^ne man thus to boast of a
sentence you misunderstand; Aug. (it is true) desired only that Pelagius would
acknowledge that a man did stand in need of the grace of God. But what grace
means he? a grace morally suasory, a grace only exciting, that leaves the
will to its own indifferency to be saved if it will, that woos only, and does
not work, in a word, Bishop Goodwins Grace; Impudent soul once to imagine it,
and thus to fly-blow the Fathers! But to evince that Austin did not only
require from Pelagius the acknowledgement of the necessity of grace as an
adjutory, but as this kind of adjutory which I contend for, I add to the
former, these allegations out of Augustine. de Gra, Christi c. 10. He thus tells
you what grace it is that he would have Pelagius acknowledge, Nos istam gratiam
nolumus, istam cliquando gratiam fateatur, qua futurae gloriae magnitudo n^n
solum promittitur v^rum etiam creditur and speratur, nec solum revelatur
sapientia, sed and amatur nec suadetur solum om^e quod bonum est, sed and
persuadetur. Hanc debet Pelagius gratiam confiteri, si vali non solum vacari,
verum etiam esse Christianus. Hug de sacr. l. 1. p. 6. c. 17. Aug. de bo. pers.
c. 23. Deus sic in potestate s^a habet cor nostrum ut bo ^n quod non tenemus
nisi proprid voluntate, non tamen teneamus nisi ^pse in nobis operetur and
velle. Aug. de praed. sa. l. 1. c. 20. ^on Deus vult id fieri, quod non nisi
volentibus hominibu, (...) et fieri, inolinat little corda ut hoc velint. Eo
scil. inclina^te qui in nobis mi^ abili and in effabil^ modo operatur and velle.
before ever he would be friends with him, Pelagius only acknowledging the
grace that enlightened the understanding, and excited the stupid will (my Lords
grace) Augustine excellently says as follows. Nos istam gratiam nolumus, istam
aliquando gratiam fateatur, etc. We will not have such a grace as he brings.
Let Pelagius acknowledge that grace, whereby the greatne^se of future glory is
not only promised, but believed, and wisdom not only revealed but beloved, and
we not only entreated but prevaild with to accept of good, this grace must
Pelagius ackdowledge, if he will not only be called but be a Christian. It was a
grace that works the goodness of the will in us, which gives to the soul a
kind of spiritual and divine being, a grace that first, bonam voluntatem
operatur, and then per eam operatur, first works a good will, and then by a
good will. Augustine says, God so has our hearts in his power, that the good
which we lay hold upon with our will, we lay not hold upon, unless God work
the will. And elsewhere, Cum Deus vult id fieri etc. When God will have that to
be done, which is not to be done but by men that are willing to doc it, he
inclines their hearts that they may he willing, namely, he inclinet men, who
works in us after a wonderful and ineffable manner to will -- And de bon.
pers. cap. Tantum spiritu Sancto accenditur voluntas eorum, ut ideo possint
quia volunt, ideo sie velint, quia Deus operatur ut velint. Aug. de Cor. and
Gr. c. 12. Parum est permanere in bono si velit, nisi etiam efficiatur ut
velit. Aug de cor. and gr. c. 11. Est in nobis per hanc dei gratiam, in bono
recipiendo and perseverar^er tenendo, non solum posse quod volumus, verum etiam
velle quod possumus. Id. Ib.
13. nos volumus, sed Deus in nobis operatur and velle, nos operamur sed Deus in
nobis operatur and operari. We will, but God works in us to will; we work,
but its God works in us to work: It would requite a volumne to cite all the
passages that might be collected out of Austine to this purpose; namely, to
show that the grace which he only admits of is efficaciously operative, and
determining.

3. Yo. Eld p. 50.
In this Section as if you had bid farewell to all wholesome reading and to
ingenuity, you shamefully abuse the holy man Austin thus: If the question (say
you) was, whether God does not invincibly and indeclinably draw or work upon
the will, then the question could not be between Augustine and Pelagius what
kind of adjntory the will did stand in need of, but whether it stood in need
of an adjutory or a compulsory; that you may have a pretense for this
conclusion, you give your own interpretation of working invincibly and
indeclinably upon the will, that is (say you) the will must of necessity follow
the working of God, will it, ^ill it, Yo. Eld. p. 51
be it never so obstinate, or resolved to the contrary; so that God should come
in with an unresistible force upon one, and ravish the will, and force it to
consent contrary to the present bent and posture of it, now this (say you) is
not adjuvare to help, but cogere to compel. If some stout Porter should boyse
Mr. Jenkin upon his shoulder against his will, this Porter were not an adjutory.

Answ. But friend, who ever thus interpreted this invincibly efficacious
working of God upon the will before your Masters the Arminians, and the Jesuits
theirs; the Orthodox know the invincibility, certainty, and indeclinablenesse
of the work of grace upon the will no whit promotes your heretical inference,
that then the will may be wrought upon whether it will or no, and so compeld;
you saw in Busy Bishop the contrary maintained, to which you here answer
nothing. When God by his efficacious grace works in the will, to will, this
efficacious grace, puts into the will a non-resistencie, or takes away actual
resistencie, there being an impossibility that these two should co-exist and
meet together in the will, to be wrought upon with efficacious grace, and to
resist this being as impossible as for the will in the same moment to resist
and not resist, to will not to resist and to will to resist. Aug de Cor. and
ora. cap. 14. Hwna ^ voluntates non ^ ofsunt resistere q^o micus fac^at D^us
quod vult, quand q^^dem ^ttam de ipsis hominan voluntatibus quod valt, cum valt
fac^t. Piuna gratia d^ta primo Ad^n est qua sit ut habtat homo justitiam si
velit, sed gratia potentior est in secun lo Adam qua sit ut velit, tanteque
(...) diligat, ut carnis voluntatem contraria concupist^n^em voluntate spiritus
vincat. Aug. de Cor. and (...) 12 Infi^ms (...) ut ipso donante ^n victiss^ne
quod be^m est, vellent. Id. ib. Inspirata gratiae suavitate per spirium
sanct^m, f^ciente plus delectare quod precip^t, quam delectat quod impedit.
(...) c. 34. Ea quae pert^nent ad justiti^m, fic delectant animun ut quiqaid
aliud dolor impedit, delectatio superat.
Hence is that conclusion of Augustine; Humane vo^untates (...), etc. Men's
wills cannot resist Gods d^ing what he will, since God (...) with the very
wills of men as he will, and when he will; Its a (...) imputation cast upon the
grace of God, that from the inf^llibility of its working upon the will you
should conclude a possibility of its compelling the will, or (...); will
nothing prevail with you to acquit grace from compelling the will, unless
putting all the operations of grace that need be put into the balance, a (...)
free will musi turn the (...) whether a man shall be comberted (...)? If these
be the institutes of the alley, certainly its as corrit^t as its close, and as
narrow in grace as space. No friend, when you suppose that essi^tious grace
works upon the will whether it will, or (...), p. 50. you speak
contradictions, for that which grace works is this, to will; and the will is
not against the working when under the working of efficaciens grace. Its a
happy expression of Augustines, Inspirata gratiae suavitate, etc. The
sweetness of grace inspired by the Holy Ghost, makes the soul more to be
delighted with what is commanded than with what would hinder it, etc. 34. Ea
quae pertinent ad justitiam, etc. Those things that belong to righteousness so
delight the soul, that grief does not so much hinder, as delight prevails,
and de pec. mer. and rem. l. 2. c. 19. he calls it (sweetly) Victricem
delectationem, a conquering and victorious delight that God puts into the soul
when he converts it; the will is wrought upon so sweetly that it yields it
self to God with the greatest willingness, and yet so powerfully, that it
yields to him with unfayling certainty.

4. Whereas Austine said, that there is a twofold adjutory to good, the one,
without which a good work it not done, the either by and through which a thing
is done; and I having said that the Pelagians in granting the former never
satisfied Austine, deaying (as I fear you do) the latter; hereupon in this
Section you say, that I am an unhappy man, that neither fears nor faiths but
without ground; you (say you) freely acknowledge such an adjutory of grace, not
only without which a good work in not done, but by which every good work is
done.

A good confession, such an one the Arminians make, Decla^ Sent. c. 17. such an
one Pelagius, Aug. de Gra. Christi. c. 3. so that Austine himself professes,
Mihi paene persuaserat, hane illam gratiam de qua quaestio est confiteri, Ib.
c. 37. Pelagius had almost persuaded me that he granted that grace for which I
contended, but as he suffered not Austine, so neither do you the Reader long
to retain any hopes of you, for you instantly cast in your Coloquintida, (a
mite you call it,) which you bequeath to my understanding (a bountiful man to
give away all you have at once) and it is this; Yo. Eld. p. 52.
such an adjutory of grace (say you) by and through which a thing is done, does
not imply an absolute necessity of effecting that which is effected by it.

But why do you involve your self in dark terms? why make you the stream
by your pawing so muddy? Come, come; off with your Visard, speak aloud man,
and tell the world; Col. Mag. Act. 4. Quoad modum illius co-operatianis illa
non est irresistibilis. Coruin. Cout. Bogerman, p. 263. Positis ommibus
operationibus quibus ad gratiam in nobis efficiendam Dens utitur, manet tomen
ipsa conversio, ita in nostra petestate, ut poffimus non converti. Id. p. 274.
Istis omnibus operationibus non obstantibus, fieri posse statuimus, ut voluntas
non consentiat.
I say with my Masters, The adjutory of grace does not infallibly produce that
effect which is produced by it; putting all the operations of grace that God
uses to the working of grace in us, yet conversion is so in our power as that
we may not be cenverted; and no twithstanding all these operations, the will
may not consent. Wherein you fight against the Scriptures, which tell us, that
the boly Ghost works in them that believe according to his mighty power, and
that his power toward believers is exceeding great; and that he works even
this in us to will, and

This your error attributes more to man's will than to God in conversion, man
being converted not because God makes him so, but because he will be so; God
only persuading, but man of himself consenting; God only giving a posse velle,
a p^ss^^muerti, a power to be converted if one will, but man determining
himself to will or not to will as he pleases; by which opinion that which is
the greater, and which specifies the event, man performs of himself, to wit,
actually to believe, convert, and will, and by all the power of Gods grace the
will is advanced but to a middle kind of state, a posture of indifferency, or
an indifferent profension to either hand, and God works only by way of
contingency and sub h^c condition, on this condition, that the will by its
natural power will move it self. Aug. de pee. mer. and rem. l. 2. c. 18 Si
nob^s libera voluntas ex Deo est, quae adhuc potest esse vel bona, vel mala,
bo^a vero voluntas ex nobas sit, nelius est ^d quod a nobis quam quod ob allo,
quod non nisi abjurdssime dic^ possit. Aliud est adjutorium sine quo aliquid
non fit, and aliud quo aliquid fit, nam sine al^mentis non possumus vivere, nec
tamen cum affuerint alimenta, eis fit ut vivat qai mori voluerit, ergo
adjuto^iam alimentorum est sine quo non fit, non quo fit ut vivamus, ut vero
beatitudo quam non habet homo, cum dara fuerit, continu^ (...) be adjutorium
est non solum sine quo non fit, verum etiam quo fit propter quod d^tu^ quia and
sida^a suerit b^mini beatitudo, couti^uo fit beatus, and si data non fuerit,
nunquam erit; ^l^menta vero non consequenter faciunt ut homo vivat.
Thus Augustine expresses himself against Pelagius, De pec. mer. and rem. l.
2. c. 18. Si nobis libera quaedam voluntas ex Deo est, etc. If we have a free
will from God which yet either can be good or evil, and the good will be of
our selves, what we have from our selves is better than what we have from God,
which is most absurd; so that evident it is, that in saying you acknowledge
with Austine such an adjutory of grace by which every good work is done, you
both delude your self and your followers; for he by this adjutory expresses
himself to mean, not such an one by which a man is left to himself, to
susser conversion to be wrought or not to be wrought, but such an adjutory by
which it is infallibly wrought Vid. Aug. de cor. and gra^c 12. Aliud est
adjutorium sine quo aliquid n^n fit, aliud est ad u^orium, quo aliquid fit; nam
sine alimentis, etc. There Is an adjutory (says he) without which a thing is
not done, and an ad utory by which a thing is done; we cannot live without
food, and yet neither does he live by food who will dye though he has it; so
that food is an adjutory without which we cannot live, not by which it is that
we d^e live; but when blessedness is bestowed upon a man, he is f^rthwith made
blessed: this is an adjutory not only without which a thing is not done, but by
which that is done for which it is given, because if blessedness be given to a
man he forthwith bec^mes blessed; and if it be not given he shall never be
blessed; but it follows not that a man shall live by having food, only
without food he cannot live. If your adjutory be the same with Austines tell
me; I charged you from your accusing of the Ministers with Manicheism that you
understood not what it was.

1. In the next Section you give me an account therefore of your profound
knowledge what Manicheism is, Yo. Eld. p. 53.
and having cited a sentence out of Augustine, Sermon. deaemp. 191. They err who
with Manicheus affirm that a man cannot avoid snne, etc. -- from this passage
you say it clearly appears, that one notorious strain of the Manichean error
was this; that men by the eternal, unchangeable, irresistible decree of God,
are put into, or left in such a condition, wherein it is impossible but that
they should sin.

Answ. Who is the illiterate soul now? had you required from me an account of
Manicheism out of the Fathers, and had I given you such an ignorant answer as
this, I had deserved to have changed my Seraglio for the Warehouse? From whom
have it you, that the Manichees held that man was put into, or left in such a
condition of sin by any decree of God? Is this your knowledge of Manicheism?
had you held your peace happily you would have been accounted wise in this point;
but now Scholars are ashamed of you. Did the Manichees hold that a man could
not avoid sin, from the unchangeablenesse of Gods decree? Jerome would have
informed you better; Hier ad Ctes.
Manichaeorum est hominum damnare naturam, and liberum auferre arbitrium. It is
Manicheism to condemn the nature of man, and to dispoile it of freo will; and
Augustine haer. 46 Peccatorum Originem non libero arbitrio voluntatis, sed
substantiae tribuunt gentis adversae. The Manichees asserted impossibility to
avoid sinfrom the very being of nature in it self, which could not but be bad;
and their Principles were: 1. Peecatum esse substantiam, and (...) per se
viventem and subsistentem, non autem tantum, qualitatem quandam, affectionemque
vel (...) mentis a ratione aversae, quae substantiae superuenerit; that sin
was a substance, living, and subsisting of it self, and not only a quality,
or an affection of the mind averse from reason, which did supervene.

2. They held voluntatem male agendi nobis a natura infitam esse, non ex
rebellione nosira accensitam, vel inobedientia natam, Dan. de haer c. 46.
That the will of doing evil was from the very nature, not fetched from
rebeltion und disubedience; Aug. l. 4 c. 3. Contra duas ep. Pel. Asserunt malam
esse naturam, quae^im mutari nullo modo potest. A me nunquam audies malam esse
naturam.
for Austin charge them to hold, that Malum was ex (...) nesoio qua fomper
m^la, that sin was from a kind of nature always evil; And Jerome says they
held, That nature it self was evil, and could by no means be changed; he
saying in that place, That no man ever heard him say so. Evident it is that the
Manichees asserted such a necessity of sin, as that it was repugnant to the
very being of nature not to sin; and blush you not to cast such a fencelesse
imputation upon the Ministers of Christ? Did they whom you accuse of Manicheism
ever say or think that sin was from any nature unchangeably evil? or that we
sin by a necessity of nature? or in regard of the unchangeable decree of God,
that nothing can come to pass contingently, so as that it would have been
against the nature of the creature to have acted otherwise? brings not
learned Resp. Apol, p. 23.
Piscator the instance of breaking the legs of Christ? says he not that though
it were determined by the decree of God, that his legs should not be broken,
Quae necessitas illius impediat voluntatem, quae ^anta vis odio digna imperet
(acere, ut non quod vult sed quod non vult, and odit, facere compellatur?
Respondebit tu quis (...) etc.
yet by the nature and will of the Soldiers such a thing might have been? And
the last mentioned Father thus meets with your argument from the
unchangeablenesse of Gods Decrees. Ask the Apostle (says he) quae necessitas,
etc. what necessity hinders the will? what force commands it to do things
worthy of batred, that it should be compelled to do not what it would, but what
it would not and bates to do? Will not (says Jerome) the Apostle answer, O man
who art thou that disputest against God? shall the thing formed say to him that
formod it, Why have thou made me thus? Object to God a stronger calumny, for
it is said, Esau and Jacob being yet in the womb, he hated the one and loved
the other; and Austine, to whom the Pelagians objected that he brought in
Manicheism by the Doctrine of the necessity of the spirit (the making of which
objection is pure Goodwinism) in several places says, Vid. vos. hist. Pel. l.
3. p. 2.
that the Catholici go in a middle way between Manicheism and Pelagianism.
Contr. du. ep. Pel. l. 4. c. 3. A Catholic so asserts free will, that he says
the sin of Angels and men came not from I cannot tell what nature always
evil, which is none, but from the will it self, and this overthrowes the
heresy of the Manichees, nor therefore that the captive will can attain to a
saving liberty but by the grace of God, and this over throws the heresy of
the Pelagians. And Contr. du. ep. Pel. l. 2. c. 5. Sic asserit Catholicus
liberum arbitrium, ut non ex natura nescio qua quae nulla est sed ex ipso
arbitrio Coepisse dicat and angeli and hominis malum, quod eve^it
baeresinmanichaeam nec ide^ posse captivam voluntatem, nisi dei gratia,
respirare in salubrem libertatem quod evertit haeresin Pelagianam. Peccar^ Adae
arbitririum liberum de hominum na^ura periisse non dictmus, sed in horniuibus
subditis diabolo, ad been, pieque vivendum non ^lere, nisi, ipsa voluntas
hominis fu^rit liberata. Morton Apol. p. 1. c. 30. Alsted. Tuppl. de Not. Ecc.
Manichaei, naturam hominis tollebant, i. e. libertatem naturae, nos homini
nondum regenito deroganus libertatem gratiae.
Pecc^te Adae, etc. We say not (says he) that by the sin of Adam free will is
perished, but that in men that are slaves to Satan it has no strength to holy
living, unless the will of men be delivered. To conclude, The Manichees took
away the very nature of man i.e. the liberty of nature, we deny to a man not
regenerate only liberty in respect of grace. In your former pamphlet you said
that you were about to preach against Manioheism; I suppose that the treasury
of your understanding is not so full as yet, but that it will hold one mite
more, take this therefore; but if you consult with Aug. de civ. d. l. 5. c. 10,
11. and Zanc. de oper. dei l. 4. c. 4. q. 4. youmay receive of their bounty, if
at least they give you not more than your treasury can hold.

2. Yo. Eid. p. 54.
In this your section you liberally charge Triglandius and Piscator.
two famous Divines of the reformed Churches with Manicheism, but childishly
prove no more the charge against them, than you proved out of your Grammar
rules, by which you answered Master Edwards his Antapologia, that there was no
kiss of love or anointing with oil you know where -- Your only argument
whereby you endeavor to prove their opinions guilty of that imputation, being
this: If such tenets as these be not pure Manicheism, I know not what
Manicheism is. (Who ever said that you did know?) This is somewhat like your
learned confutation of the dispectation at Christ-Church concerning tithes,
where you having weakly and pitifully yielded the question, you vindicated
your self shortly after, in your preface to your Hag. with this burly but
beggarly dictate, I (infallible John) profes unfeignedly, the two arguments
brought for the payment of tithes were no more able to carry the cause, than
two lambs to draw a wagg^n; such stout confutations as these are current coin
no where but in the Alloy.

You tell the Reader that some passages in these two learned men (whose umbra
meridiana you (as yet) are not in understanding of Polemicall Divinity) savor
of Manicheisin; but you prove it not, nay you do not so much as pretend to go
about to prove it; I deny it with the same facility that you asserted it.
Asserenti incumbit probatio; only I desire the Reader to take notice, that
Manicheism cannot be imputed to the former, to Tri glandius, for what he here
says, but it must be charged upon the Apostles, Act. 4.28. and for Piscator,
he is cleared by the acknowledgement of Vorstius himself, John, Goodwins
friend and Piscators erroneous though far more learned adversary.

You go on; Sect. 65. Yo. Eld. p. 54.
you say that I understand not the will of God in the Scriptures, etc. because
from Act. 26. 18. where Paul says, that he was sent to the Gentiles to open
their eyes, etc. I proved that Conversion is the restoring of sight, not of
light only; the opening of the eyes, not the bringing of light to them who have
eyes already; upon which passage of mine you comment thus:

1 You say, I am ridiculous in making an opposition between opening of men's
eyes, and bringing light to them who have eyes already, as if men who had eyes
to be opened had not (yet) eyes already.

Answ. Most fulsome! In Scripture Phrase to open the eyes is to give sight, and
not light only. In Job. 9.10.11.21.26.30. the blind man is said to have had
his eyes opened, what is that if not that he had sight bestowed upon him? not
(according to Mr. Goodwin) that he had light only brought to him having good
eyes already. His eyes are said to be opened, though he were borne blind.

2 Thus you proceed; The Scripture by the opening of the eyes of men in
conversion, mean only such an opening as is proper for the light to effect,
for as darkness shuts men's eyes, and the light of the morning opens men's eyes.
So here,

Answ. If this be so, what is the work of grace upon the understanding? The
light irradiats or cleares the medium, but gives no strength to the organ; so
(say you) it is in conversion, a natural man has good eyes already, let the
object be but clearly proposed, and he can see it; is not this pure
Pelagianism, to place grace in the giving of the Word? But know according to
Scripture, a natural man wants sight as well as light, Deuteronomy. 29.4 the Lord
has not given you a heart toperceive, nor eyes to see; open mine eyes (says
David) Ps. 119. and Es. 42.7. Christ is said to open the blind eyes, Pro.
20.12. The hearing ear, and seeing eye are made by God. And 1 Jo. 5.20. He
has given us an understanding to know him. And the Apostle tells us, not that
we were in the dark, but that we were darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. you told us, Sion
Col. visit, p. that you have always asserted the necessity of grace by way of
adjutory; now I understand what grace you mean, none that conferres any power
upon the faculty by which it is enabled to act, but only restores it to a
capacity of present acting. But you desire to prove your error; 1. by
Scripture, Matthew. 4.16. 2 Cor. 4.4, etc.

But why ground you not an argument from any or all of these Scriptures, that
by giving of spiritual Isight is only meant the giving of light, as the Sun or
the Morning may be said to open men's eyes? Nay, why do you not so much as
recite the words of the text, but only set down the figures of Chapters and
Verses. There Is not one of them that make for your purpose, and some that make
directly against you, Mat. 4.16. The people that sat in darkness saw great
light; Ergo quid? therefore in conversion, because God gives the light by which
he does not also give the sight with which we spiritually see. Does his giving
the one to this people prove that he did not also give the other to those among
them, that were savingly enlightened; blind Bartimeus sees the light when
Christ recovers him from his blindness, therefore his recovery was only
effected by the coming of the light, and not by the work of Christ in
bestowing a power of seeing upon his eyee; so here the people saw great light,
that is (according to G. the glosmaker) they saw only by having the light of
the Gospel; for that place out of the 2 Cor. 4.4 The god of this world has
blinded the minds of them that believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ should shine unto them; it makes directly against him: 1. The
natural man of whom the Aposile speaks is here said to be blinded, Yo. Eld.
p. 54.
which Mr. Goodwin denies; for he only grants that a natural man is as a man
in the darkness of the night, not blind, but his eyes are good. 2. Its said,
lest the light of the Gospel should shine unto them; evidently importing that
their blindness hindered the light from shining unto them, and that though these
natural men had the light of the Gospel shining among them, yet they were
blind for all that, Id. Ib.
when as Mr. G. tells us, its proper for the light to effect the opening of the
eyes of men in conversion; but here was light without sight: This quotation
sure (if it be not false printed) he laid before him, not to confirm, but to
consute his errou^.

But you labor by argument to maintain your error thus; Yo. Eld. p. 55.
If men should have the eyes of their minds opened in any other sense, then
that wherein the light nay be said to open them, God must be said to work as
many miracles as conversions; and how then can that great Pillar of Presbitery,
that Miracles are ceased, stand.

Answ. I desire to know why you call the cessasion of Miracles a pillar of
Plesbitery; 1. If cessation of Miracles be a pillar of Presbitery, I pray take
heed lest in opposition to a Pillar of Presbitery, you cry up Miracles as you
cry down the Word; some of you (I hear) begin. Your engagement against
querisne or seeking, mentioned in Sion College visited, I plainly see will
come to nothing. Nos non asserimus Dei brachium sic hodie esse abbreviatum, ut
miracula mulla concedat, praesersertim iis qui Evangelium sincere conantur
inter Ethnicos praedicare, sednegamus ista inter Christianos, de ar^iculis
nonnullis dissentientes, ad mittenda esse ut veritatis gnorisi^^, aut criteria,
Pride. 10. page 99. quae invisibilia and occulta sunt, miracula non sunt. Pol.
synt. Lib. 6. Cap. 58.
Rather than Presbitery shall not sink, you will seek. 2. What do
Presbiterians as such, build upon the cessation of Miracles. 3. It seems by
your arguing, that you know not what a Miracle is; Polanus (I remember) Lib. 6.
c. 58 makes this the first condition of a Miracle, that it be visible and
external, and he proves it by many Scriptures: Miracula necesse est sensui
exposita esse, qui^ debent convincere infideles, etc. Miracles ought to be
external for conviction of unbeleevers, or confirmation of believers. You
cannot say this of the opening of the eyes of men's minds in conversion, taken
either in your sense or mine, vid. Greg. val^m. To. 1. Disp. 8. c. 3. p. 3.
It Is in courtefie that I return not upon you those undervalewing expressions
os illiterate silly-braine, etc. I can easily grant the work you speak of, to
be a greater and more admirable work than many Miracles, and yet not a Miracle
properly so called.

3. In this Section you weakly cavil against my quotation, Ephesians. 2. Dead in
trespasses and sins; you say the Apostle only means that they were guilty of
death, and liable to condemnation.

1 Before you had so peremptorily pronounced your glos upon this place (which
if you know any thing you know is cited by all writers of Controvetsies agninst
Papists and Arminians, as by me) you should have furnished your self with
stronger arguments.

1 You say this their death in sins and trespasses is explained by their being
children of wrath, ver. 3. -- but is this to understand the Scripture? had i^
bin as easy for you to have proved as to have said i, we should have had an
argument instead of a dictate, but you only give the latter, etc. The scope of
the Apostle is to illustrate the benefits we receive by Christ, this he does by
the calling to mind our former misery out of Christ, this misery was 1. our
spiritual b^ndage to sin, and 2. for sin to wrath. The former contained in
the 1. verse. Dead in trespasses and sins, every natural man being totally
void of spiritual life, and so under the power of sin that he can do nothing
holily. The latter contained in the 3. verse. children of wrath; in which 3.
verse. the Aposile expresses that practical unholinesse (held forth in the 2.
verse. as the fruit of their death in fins) by showing 1. who they were that had
lived in it, Jews as well as Gentiles, also we all, etc. 2. By showing wherein
it consisted, they had conversations in lusts of the flesh, fulsilling, etc. 3.
by showing what they deserved, or the punishment to which they were liable when
they lived so, they were children of wrath. Calvin in Lo. Non in elligat solum
fuisse in mor^s periculo, sed realem mortem significat, ac^ praesentem q^a jam
erant oppressi; omnes mortui nascimur, donec efficiamur vitae Christi
participes, unde illud Johannis. O^nis bom^ na u^ alis mortuus est in ha^nativa
sua corruptione, quia nulla pars anitrae petest in spiriualibus vitalem ^ct.
o^em exercere. Dav. in 2 Col 13. Amma mornu^, morte gratiae quatenus peccatum
sua impuritate dissoluit grat^itam animae unicnem ad Deum, in qua sita est vita
spiritualis. Id. Ib. Pise. In loc homo natura manciptum est diaboli, cui servit
pepetram^o peccata, ac prcinde est filius irae, h. e. reus damnationtis. Pisc.
in lec. Quum dicit (...) significat se conceptos and natos esse in peccato, ac
proinde reos mortis, nam singulis naturaliter n^scentitus imputatur Ad^ lapsus,
and in singulos nascendo propagatur naturae eorruptio seu pravitas.


Thus the most learned Calvin upon this place, interprets this of the Apostle
dead in sins. Non intellegit solum fuisse, etc. The Apestle understands not
only (says Calvin) that they were in danger of death (Mr. Goodwin says,
liable to death) but he signifies a real and a present death; all are borne
dead, and live dead till they are made partakers of the life of Christ; whence
is that of John, The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they
who hear shall live. So Pifeator also upon the place; Homo natura mancipium,
etc. Man by nature is a slave to Satan, whom he serves in committing sin, and
therefore is a child of wrath and guilty of damnation. So Davenant; anima
moritur, etc. the soul dies, in as much as sin by its impurity dissolves
that union of the soul to God, wherein stands spirituali life. You see that
Expositors understand by this death in sin, etc. that our native
corruptednesse whereby we become guilty, and we are made liable to wrath, not
the guilt, and liablenesse it self.

2 You say, that quickening together with Christ opposed to this death is
interpreted, Col. 2.13. to be the forgiveness of sins. You that deny the
Scripture, fear not to pervert it; the Apostle makes not forgiveness of sin
the formalis ratio of vivification; by quickening together with Christ, he
understands a spiritual reparation, and forming of the Divine Image in us, by
which the filth and pollution of sin is wiped away, and we are made his
Workmanship, created in Christ Jesus to good works. Davenant, in 2 Col 13.
Deus anim^m vivificat all^m repar^n lo, and sordes peccati detergendo ^psius
enim factara sumus, creat^ in Christo Jesu in operibus bonis. -- Per
vivificationem intelligit (...) quod ipsum, Rom 6.11. Vocat vivere Deo amhulare
in nov^tate vitae. To. 6.4. Pise in loc.
So Davenant; wherever sin is remitted, and its guilt taken away, there is this
vivification by grace. Piscator says expressly upon the place, that by
vivification the Apostle intends the renovation of nature.

3 You say the Scripture expresses the condition of guilt by the term of
death, therefore by dead in trespasses we must understand guilty of death, etc.
2 Samuel 9.8 -- 16.9 -- 19.28 Romans 8.10. 2 Cor. 5.14. 1 Timothy 5.6.

That the Scripture does often express the condition of guilt by the term of
death though I deny not, yet the Scriptures which you cite, prove nothing
less; those places, 2 Samuel 9.8. where Mephib. says to David, What is thy
servant that thou should look upon such a dead Dog, 2 Samuel 16.9. and
Abishai calls Shimei a dead Dog, etc. have no other sense than 1 Samuel 24.14.
where David expostulating with Saul, asks him, after whom is the King of
Israel come out, after whom do thou pursue, after a dead Dog, after a flea?
in which words the word dead notes not guilty as you most ignorantly suppose,
Vivens vita ndturali mortua morte spirituali, Pis. in Loc.
but vile, contemptible, base; that of 1 Timothy 5.6. where the widow is said to
be dead while she lives, is by most understood to be meant of spiritual
death, and by the happy interpreter of Scripture, learned Calvin, its
understood of her unprofitablenesse, and her being nothing worth, q. d. those
widows who love to live without all care, and pass their times idely and in
pleasure are no more useful, profitable in their places then if they were
dead; Mortuas vocat quae nulli sunt usui, he calls those dead which serve for no
use; now your interpetation is, the widow that lives in pleasures is guilty of
death, if I may have John Calvin, let who will have John Goodwin for their
Expositor, That of 2 Cor. 5.14. comprehends both liablenesse to eternal death,
and spiritual death also, as all interpreters agree.

4 Lastly, whereas you most unworthily and wretchedly assert, that dead in sins
is not represented by the Apostle as the condition of men considered as
natural, but of men who have a long time continued in sin, the context
witnesses against you; for 1. First the Apostle tells them what they were by
nature, (...) verse 3. not only by practice; 2. He makes their walking in sin
a fruit of their death in it, ver. 2. dead in sins wherein ye walked; 3. this
death in sin is represented by the Apostle as common to all, Jews and
Gentiles; and the Apostle certainly intends that the death is as extensive as
the quickening, which latter Mr. Goodwin will not limit unto those that have a
long time continued in sins, he intends that all were dead that ever were
quickened, old and young. Your Expositions are husks, food fitter for swine
than souls; the Lord grant that your poor misled followers may no longer lay
out their money for that which is not bread.

Upon your saying, Sect. 66. Yo. Eld p. 56 Bu. Bush. p. 25.
that by the improvement of nature a man may attain to such a conviction, as
upon which saving conversion always follows; I demanded what place is here
left for grace? you reply in this Section:

1 By asking me, If a man who is able, through laziness were unwilling to go
an hundred miles in four days for the saving of his life, is there not place
left for the kindness of his friends to accommodate him with an horse?

Answ. There Is no place according to this supposition left for grace, by way of
absolute necessity, but only by way of accommodation, and facilitation of the
work, he stands in no Absolute necessity of an horse to carry him, that is
able to go his journey on his ten toes, you now loudly speak your self a
Pelagian: you told me before that the ^^turall man needed not eyesight but
light only, and now you say he needs not the help of God save by way of
accommodation, he can of him self will, or make himself willing to believe,
only not so easily; detestable doctrine! and yet,

2 In this Section you tell me, Yo. Eld. p. 56.
there is place enough for all tha grace of God which the Apostle attributes
unto him, Phil. 2.13. in working both to will and to do in mon of his good
pleasure.

Answ. I flatly deny it; the Apostle in that place ascribes the work of faith
to God wholly and necessarily, you ascribe it to him but by way of partiality
and convenienty. According to your late resemblance God comes in, in a
super-added way, and makes us to believe who yet are able to make our selves do
s^. The Apostle says, God works according to his own good pleasure, but you,
That God works according to man's good pleasure, otherwise you suppose, That
God should work in man whether he would or no, and that grace would be a
compulsorium, not an ad utorium.

3. Yo. Eld. p. 56.
You say, That there is far larger place left for grace by your opinion th^n by
mine. If you can evince this, Eris mihi magnus Apollo, my opinion says with
the Apo^le, God has quickened us being dead in trespasses and sins, till which
quickening (the fruit of his rich love) we lie under a present, real,
spiritual death, and can do no act of spiritual life as ^o believe, Yo. Eld
p. 55.
etc. You say, That this death implies no impoten^y to believe, but only
consists in guilt, so that as to the being able to believe all natural men
are alive. My opinion says, This grace of God is infallibly effectual; yours,
That it may be rejected, and that there is no infallibility in its effecting any
thing. Yo. Eld. p. 52.
You say, That God only gives light; l, that God gives light and eyes to
behold it. In a Word, You hold that God gives food; I, That That he gives life,
which is more than meat. And now leaves your opinion a larger place for grace
than mine?

4. You endeavor to prove, That your opinion leaves a larger place than mine
for that grace which the Apostle attributes to God, Yo. Eld. p. 56.
Phil. 2.13. You say, Its a greater act of grace to forgive the sins of one who
knows how to d^well and yet does evil, than to forgive the sins of him that
has no four to do well; the latter is Mr. Jenkin his sinner, the sormer mine.

Ergo quid? therefore your opinion leaves a larger place for that grace which
the Apostle attributes to God, in working to will and to do, Phil. 2.13.

1. Whether now Sir? have we a wandering Jew, or a wandering John, you are quite
gone from the question; we were disputing about the grace of conversion, and
the Apostle was asserting this, and now you fly to the grace of remission. Its
not this latter that the Apostle in this place Phil. 2.13. attributes to God;
he speaks not of God pardoning the evil which we have done but of giving the
will to do that good which of our selves we cannot do. And by the way, I cannot
but observe your perfect conformity with Pelagius, one spirit acts you both.

Sic Oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora forebat, just so and so, with eyes,
Gra^iam Dei, quae neque lex est, neque natura, in hoc tantum valere, ut peccata
praeterita dimittantur, nou ut futura vitentur, etc. Quis me liberab^ a reatu
peccatorum meorum quae commisi cum vitare potuissem. Contr. Jul. l. 1. f. 85.
hands, face, he acted. Pelagius said, that the grace of God, which was neither
Law nor nature, only did serve for the remission of former sins, not for the
avoiding of future sins, etc. So Julian the Pelagian expou^ds that place, who
shall deliver me from this body of death? i. e. Who (says he) shall deliver me
from the guilt of my sins, which I have committed when as I could have avoided
them?

2. In proposing the object of this grace ( a sinner) you deal unworthily, in
concealing both what your self hold, and what I hold; for your sirner is one
that wants no ability, either in his understanding to know the things of God,
or in his will to embrace them; the grace he wants is only outward light for
the understanding, and moral persuasion for the will, which is left to its
own choice, whether it will embrace what is offered it or no, and when it has
received all from God, there is a possibility of nonconversion; Yo. Eld p. 65.
whereas my sinner is one that is in spiritual things stark blind, that
neither knows nor is able to receive the things of God, that in his will is
wholly unable to embrace them; this inability arising from his p^avity and
lusts, which have put out his eyes, and made him an Enemy to God, so that he
hates light and reformation, and the grace that I stand for, is such as renewes
the understanding, and changes the will not only by affording light and
persuasion, but by an infallibly effectual power. And now let any judge
whether of these is the more miserable sinner? whether of these the more
glorious work of grace? you will have grace for the accommodation and
facilitation of the work; I maintain it to be simply necessary. Your sinner is
but in a sleep, and may ^ossibly awake of himself, mine is dead, and cannot
live but by the power of grace.

2. You say, Yo. Eld. p. 57.
For God to give a man strength and power to believe twice over, or after a
forfeiture made by sin, of the first donation, is an act of more grace than to
confer them only once, and that without any such provocation. Master Jenkins
opinion leaves place only for the latter act of grace, whereas my opinion makes
rome for the former.

To say nothing of your nonsense in this passage, abominable falsehood.

Do I deny that God gives a man strength to believe twice over? I have ever
taught that God created man in his own image, in all the faculties of his
soul, which when man had defaced and lost, and thereby infinitely provoked
God, that God of his infinite goodness by the power of his Word and spirit of
grace, does renew in man that image, giving him not only ability to repent and
believe if he will, but working in him to will and to do according to his good
pleasure, giving repentance, and being the ^^thor and finisher of our faith.

5. I having demanded of you how this your position, upon the improvement of
nature, a man may attain to such a conviction, upon which saving conversion
always follows, agrees with that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4.7. Who makes thee
to differ from another? And I having said that Master Goodwins answer to this
question of the Apostle, is my self by my improvement of nature,

1. You say, That these words, from another, are not in the Original. There
its only found thus, (...); Who makes thee differ, subtle Sir? can there be
any difference if there be none to differ from?

2. You demand how your opinion leads you to make such an answer as I put into
your mouth? Relate your opinion and you shall find the answer at hand, You who
say, That conversion alwapes follows a conviction abtained by the improvement
of nature, D. a. p. 200. You who say, A natural man may do such things, as
whereunto God has by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance, page 26.
And hold, That after every work of grace, the will remains in equilibrio, and
may convert or refuse to be converted, page 52. 65. resolving actual
conversion not into the efficacy of the grace of God, page 52. but into the
compliance of man's will. And yet will not say with your friend Episcopius, Ego
meipsum discrevi, I have made my self to differ, upon this your forbearance you
may be looked upon as more courteous, but by no wise man as less heretical
than Episcopias; if in your next you will determine this question, whether the
same grace being afforded to two sinners of the same degree, one may be
converted, and not the other, you will happily be better known to your self in
this point.

Your sixty seventh, and sixty eighth Section follows, Yo Eld. p. 58. Sect. 67.
wherein you proclaim your sin; in the former you say, that these words, (
who made thee to differ) exclude not the creature from being the cause of its
differing in a way of inferior efficiency, and causalty, for if it be (say
you) the creature it self, and not God who believes, then is it the creature
it self and not God which makes it self to differ.

Answ. The Apostle removes all cause of glorying from man, and therefore leaves
no share in the efficiency of this work to man. 2. The Apostle denies most
vehemently, that man has any thing which he has not received; therefore a man
has not this concurrence of his will with the grace of God. It is very true
that a man believes when he believes, and it is man, and not God who believes;
but the question is, who makes him to believe? certainly that is not of
himself, it is the gift of God.

In the next Section you say, Yo. Eld. p. 59. Sect. 68
Evident it is that the Apostle speaks not of any difference between man and
man, which is made by faith, or by any saving work in either, but of such a
difference which stands in more or fewer, in greater or lesser gifts. A
difference frequent in the primitive times, and God was indeed the sole cause
of such differings.

Answ. Profound! 1. God was the sole cause (you say) of sptrituall gifts,
speaking with tongues, etc. but not of believing, for here you say, that man
himself is a subordinate cause, its man that believes when he believes, and
not God; but how prove you that God is rather the sole Author of spiritual
gifts, than of saving graces; I thought that the former, gifts, had not been
(as grace) above nature, but had been attaineable by study and industry; you
say that its man that believes, when he believes; and is it not man that speaks
with tongues, when he speaks; you say, that man believes and not God, and is it
not man that speaks with tongues and not God; take him, not Bedlam, but
Beth-lehem.

2 Does not the Apostle make use of general maxims, as that none but God
makes to differ, and that there is nothing that a man has but he received it,
according to that of the third of John, A man can receive nothing unless it be
given him from heaven; and draws not the Apostle these general maxims down
to this particular case, of which he is speaking.

3 Cannot a man make himself to differ from another in the least things, as
more or fewer gifts, and can a man make himself to d^ffer in the greater.

You conclude this Section with singing your Jo Paean; thus you chante to the
Reader, Yo. Eld. p. 60.
you have seen the young man's ankednesse in point of arguing; he neither
leavies ^easons nor Scriptures with any pertinency. There Is not the least hair
of the head of my opinion concerning the natural man's power to good
supernatural fallen to the ground; which passage I am confident every pious and
prudent Reader will interpret thus: You have seen the old man's nakedness in
point of answering, he neither answers Scriptures nor reasons, with either
piety or pertinency, and there is not only the hair of the head of his opinion
concerning the natural man's power, etc. but even that very head it selse fallen
to the ground, being struck off by the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God,
who I desire may have the only glory of it.

I propounded, Yo. Eld. p. 60. Sect. 69.
busy Bish. p 54. four quaeries to you, to know what kind of adjutory it was
which you acknowledged grace to be, that you might not under the pretended name
of grace obtrude nature, as the Pelagiams of old, and Jesuits and Arminians of
late have done, Yo. Eld. Sect. 69.
and now you come to taste my genius and strength (you say) in quaereing. You
begin with a scoff; you say Arisiotle cannot answer so much as an ass can
ask; you have prefac'd a good apology for the weakness of your following
answers for how then, say I, should an ass answer more then ever Aristotle
could ask? you are such a friend to independency, that your first qua^nell
against my quaerces is, that they have a dependence the three last upon the
first.

My first quaeree, is whether grace be an adjutory by way of insluence into the
will, or by way of concourse unto the work only.

Your answer is, you understand it not; he has opposed me with his first
question.

I see my mishap to ask a tallent of him that is not worth a mite, and your
audaciousnesle to undertake to be a Rabbi, and to pretend to a tractate of the
power of natural man's will to good supernatural, like those (...) that did
not know what they said, or whereof they did affirm.

This question is of great weight, famous in the Schools, and the first
usually handled in this controversy, but I perceive that Jesuits and
remonstrants are half as bad to you as modall Propositions in Logic, De
quibus non gustabit Asinus; what? J. Goodwin apposed? Yo. Eld. p. 53.
he? even he, not understand a question so frequently agitated? penotrus in his
Propugna. bum. lib. L. 8. C. 15. propounds it thus: An concursus Divinus sit
influxus in secundas causas, and in illarum effectus, an solus sit influxus cum
causis secundis in effectus, non autem in ipsas secundas causas? esse vero hanc
controver siam gravissimam, etc. Whether the divine concourse be an influx into
the second causes, and into their effects, or only with the second causes into
the effects, and not into the causes themselves? So Alvar. de auxil. lib. 3.
disp. 18. etc. and this question was determined in the affirmative by Augustine
de gra Chri. c. 16. viz. that the grace of God was an adjutory by way of
influence into the will. Certum est nos servare mandata si volumus, sed quia
preparatur voluntas a Domino, ab illo petendum est, ut tantum velimus, quantum
sufficit ut volendo faciamus. Certum est nos velle cum volumus sed ille facit
ut velimus bouum, de quo dictum est quod preparatur voluntas a Domino. Its
certain, says he, that when we are willing we will: but he makes us to will
good of whom its said, that the will is prepared of the Lord, But this question
is determined negatively by Arminius. Cont. Perkins: Convursus and influxus
Dei, nihil confert creaturae liberae quoad agendum, vel inclinetur vel juvetur,
vel confortetur. The influx of God conferres nothing to the free creature, to
help, incline, or strengthen it. The School of the Arminians follow their
Master, and join with Jesuits, making the grace of God and man's will the
partial causes of man's conversion, as if two men between them both should
bear a burden: thus Grevinchovius contr. Ames. p. 208. Gratia and arbitrium
concurrunt ut partiales causae ad conversionem hominis, partialitate causae non
effectus, eodem plane modo quo pater and fili^s unam, eandemque navem trabunt.
Grace and free will coucurre as partial causes to the conversion of man, with
a partiality of the cause, not of the effect, as a Father and a Son draw
between them both the same ship, the father not contributing strength to the
Son, etc. Such an answer as this will make short work, for it leaves no place
at all to the grace of Christ, but resolves all at last into nature;
acknowledging no other influence from God into the will, but that general
influence God affords unto it, as the author and preserver thereof. And what
else does Mader Goodwin grant us, when he makes all the influx that God affo^ds
us to be only by way of general conc^urse as we are creatures or men whose
natures are from God, or sustained by God, denying g^any special influx of
Gods grace into our wills in conversion. Whats^ever (says Master Goodwin, p.
11. Yo. Eld.) is afribed unto nature, except nature be giv^ away from God
there is no occasion given to look upon it as der^gating from the grace of God;
Aug de verb.
just as Pelagius, Videte tum fratres mei quomodo generalem illam gratiam
praedicant, qua creatus est homo, qua bomtnes sumas, and utique cum imoiis
homines sumus, hane gratiom qua Christiani sumus, ipsam volumus prae licent,
ipsam volumus agnoscant. Faust. Regie^s, de l a. l. 2. c. 8. Qui naturam in
bonis suis negat praedicari debere, nescit profecto spsum naturae dathorem
esse, quigratiae.
whose plea is recited and refuted by Aug. S^bminem Deus creavit, and hamini
Deus liberum donavit arbitrium, quiequid potest (...) arbitrio, eujus gratiae
debetur nisi ejas qui eum condidit cum libero arbitrio? If Go I created man,
and gave him free will, whatever man does by his free will, to whose grace is
this due but to his that made man with free will? -- Observe (Brethren) how
they proclaim the general grace of God whereby we are men, not whereby we are
Christians, etc.

2. You answer by taking away the subject of the questim; for I having
explained to you what I meant by grace its concourse unto the work, only thus,
as two men that between them both carry a barden, yield no assistanre to each
other, neither of them contributing strength unto other. You learnedly answer
that you must deny what the question supposes, viz that faith has two ends.

If you had not confessed your ignorance in this answer, yet you had here
grossly bewrayed it Who but you would have supposed that faith has two ends? or
that this had been the subject of the question? Alvar. de arx. l. 3. disp. 18.
would have informed you better, where he says, The question is, utrum
necessaria sit praevia dei motio, recepta in ipsa causa, ut de facto producat
suam operationem, an vero sufficiat concursus simultaneus pariter influens cum
ipsis causis in earum effectus. The question is, Whether the motion of Gods
spirit he necessary, as received into the cause it self, that it may produce
its operation, or whether there be required a concourse bestowing its influence
together with the cause upon its effect. Where you may see the answer in three
conclusions, the third whereof is against quos dam recentieres theologos, some
late Divines (he means Jesuits and Arminians) asserentes, quod concursus
supernaturalis non sit in causam sed cum causa in effectum; Who held that
supernatural concourse was not into the cause, but with the cause in and upon
the effect. And yet here was no supposition that grace had two ends.

And did not you say, page 99. Yo. Eld. The purging of Jerusalem was an effect
which depended partly upon God and partly upon Jerusalem, in comporting with
God. And page 100. of Yo. Eld. you say in these words, For men actually to will
and do things accompanying salvation, depends partly upon God in respect of the
necessity of the motion, and assistance of his spirit thereunto, partly upon
man in respect of a like necessity of their concurrence, and consenting unto
the motion of the spirit of God. Did you suppose when you say that the purging
of Jerusalem depended partly upon God, and partly upon Jerusalem, that this
purging had two ends? and when you say that a man's willing depends partly upon
God, in respect of motion, and partly upon man in respect of a like necessity
of their concurrence, that faith has two ends?

Can there not be a concourse of two partial causes into an effect, but this
effect must needs have two ends? Can you not distinguish with Grevinchonius
between partialitas causae and effectus? May not two causes produce one and
the same effect, which yet partially concur^e as causes to that effect? Yo.
Eld. p. 61. Sect. 70.


In your next section you come to the second quaere that I propounded to you,
which was this: If you do acknowledge that grace is an adjutory unto the will
by way of influence into it, whether mean you that this influence is moral,
suasory, by way of entreaty, that the will would in^ve, or physica, that is
properly, really, and efficaciously operative upon it.

This you say contains in it more absurdities than the former; I wish your
answer bewrayed not more ignorance and malice than your former.

1. You say, It supposes that there can be no moral influence, but that which
is suasory, or by way of entreaty. When Master Jenkin commands his Clerk to
set a Psalm, and threatens him, that be will turn him out of his place if he
will not do as he is commands, has such an address any other influence than
what is moral, but will Master Jenkin call it suasory, by way of entreaty?

I pity you! senseless exception propounded by one pretending to be an
instructor? Are you yet to learn what suasio moralis is? My acute adversary
conceives, that a threatening may be said to have a moral influence upon the
will, but it cannot be suasory or by way of entreaty. He will not have
Comminations or threatenings to be morally suasory; though you have but a mite
of your own, you might have been acquainted with those that have more; but I
see that ( spider-like) you are only beholding to your own bowels (and truly
you go far enough for your cob-webs) otherwise you might have observed in every
author who writes about suasio moralis, that even threatenings are suafory; not
to give above one or two instances in a case so trivial, see Wendelins,
Christ, Theol. p. 534. de sanctif. mandata, promissiones, comminationes saepe
non persuadent quod suadent. See also suffragium Britan. p. 135. where you
shall have these words: Non inficiamur in opere conversionis Deum adhibere
Comminationum, promissionum, aliarumque hortationum vim suasoriam. I pray ask
Price, that puppet incendiary what is the English of Comminationes suadent, in
the former, and of Comminationum vim suasoriam in the latter; (the Latin
holding him up, happily he may be kept (though hardly) from stumbling into a lie)
Learn one lesson more from a novice, Though there be difference between
threatenings and promises, yet they are both in their influence upon the will
suasory, the latter ab utili, the former ab inutili.

2. You say, That my quaere supposes, an inconsistency between a moral
influence upon the will, and that which is properly, really, and efficaciously
operative upon it.

Answ. Where do I say or suppose that these two cannot stand together? this
indeed I say, that a moral influence is of it self insufficient, but not with
an efficatious influence inconsistent, That a mere moral influence is
operative only metaphoric^s, and per modum objecti, and gives no power to the
faculty upon which it works, but serves only to excite and draw into act the
innate power, and that the soul of man destitute of power to supernaturals,
cannot be wrought upon in such an objective way of moral persuasion.

3. You say, That if by physical influence Master Jenkin understands any
either kind of work^ng upon the will by God, than by the mediation of the Word,
or than that which is proper to be wrought by such an instrument as this, etc.
I deny any other physical influence upon the will. It passes my understanding
to conceive how the will should be wrought or acted into a consent in any
kind, otherwise than by argument, motive, and persuasion, unless by force,
violence, and compulsion, etc.

Answ. Your answers here are inconsistent 1. with themselves, and 2. with
truth. First you deny any work of God upon the will, save by the mediation of
the Word, and yet instantly you say, Yo. Eld. p. 62.
You allow an outward excitation of the soul, or opening of the heart by the
spirit, a gracious and immediate supporting of the will in the act of
consenting, etc. I would feign know how these two can stand together.

2. You deny, That God works any thing upon the will which is not proper for
the Word to work; or that any thing can be wrought upon the will except by
persuasion, or by argument, etc. If you had attended the state of the question,
you would have spared much of this twatling; the question is, by what influence
of grace, the natural man's will is set right in actu primo, has a principle
of new life infused into it, and not by what it is made actually to believe, in
actu secundo, the former is done by the immediate and almighly power of the
grace of God, Homines tentum sunt habitualis conversionis, or^^sio and
amecedens condit o^quod praedicato evangedi^ resipiscent^^ and fidei, deus
spir^^u regenerante virtutem fidei and resipiscentiae ^nimis electorum indat,
ut habiles sin^ ad par^dun Evangelium, actualis vero conversionis sum causa
instrumentalis. Gom. p. 154.
the other by the same power working in the word. You must not assert that the
causa objectiva or moralis does create the faculty but suppose it. For your
further information, herein I refer you to that excellent Tractate of Gornarus
de gratia conversionis, particularly to page 154. To. 1. at whose feet you may
fit to reap the blessing of his head (as you speak,) but fit not as an
instructor any more, but as a novice, not as a teacher, but as teachable.

4. You tell me (in this section) frequently that you understand not well, it
passes your understanding, etc. to conceive how the will should be acted into
consent, etc. how men be begotten by the Word, etc. The miste ies of faith are
not to be measured by the strength of your understanding; will you believe
nothing but what you can conceive? why do you not turn a professed Socinian?

5. You tell me in this Section that God opens the heart immediately,
supporteth the will in the act of consenting, suffers nothing to intervene to
prevent consent. You would feign seem to say something, but hoc aliquid
nihilest, what mean you by supporting of the will? Does not God as immediately
support the will when it consents to evil, as in the act of consenting to
good? and though he prevents external tentations, yet leaves he not the will
it self in ^quilibria, to consent or not to consent? Is it enough to deliver
from external tentation, unless also from our own internal corruption? What
mean you by opening the beart? is it not so done by the Word that it passes
(as you say) your understanding, how the will should any other way be wrought
into a consent; mean you not as your Pelagius, who in a fit of zeal spoke for
the working of grace just as you do; Aug. de gra. Chr cap. 7. Adj^vat no; Deus
per doctrinam and revelarionem suam, dam cordis nostri oculos aperit, du^n
nobis ne praesentibus occupemur, futura demonstrat, dum diaboli pandit
infidiat, etc. Nunquam isti inimici gratiae ad eandem gratiam vehememius
oppugnan lem occultiores mol untur insidias, quam ubi legem laudant.
adjuvat nos Deus per doctrinam and revelatim^m, etc. God assisteth us by
doctrine and revelation, when he opens the eyes of our minds, when he shows
us things to come, lest we should be entangled in things present, when he
disc^vers the snares of Satan. Concerning which and the like passages Augustine
says, That the enemies of grace (the Pelagians) did never more subtly oppose
grace, than when they most p^aised the Word; in which respect, In Con. mileu.
Can. 4. was that anathem^ denounced, Conc. Mil. c. 4. Quisquis di erit gratiam
dei propter hoc tantum nos adjuvare ad non peccandion, quia per ipsam
revelaiu^, and aperitur intelligentia man lato^um, ut sciamut, etc. non autem
per illam nobis praestari ut quod saciendum cognoverimu, agere valeamus,
anathema sit.
Quisquis dixerit, etc. whosoever shall say, That the grace of God serves to
help ut against sin, only because by that we know and understand the
commandment, and not also because by that grace, power is bestawed upon us to
do what we know, let him be accursed. Yo. Eld. p. 63


Lastly you say (in this Section) That you do not well understand what I mean
by my physical insiuence of grace upon the will.

Answ. Where have you lived all your time? have you grown gray in promo^ing
Arminianism, and yet never heard of the physical influence? go to Ames,
Triglandius, Rivet, etc. and you shall be informed what it is. I acknowledge it
with these and sundry other reformed Divines, to be that gracious and real
working of the Spirit of God, by which a principle of divine life is put into
the soul of the natural man, that was dead in sins and trespasses, by which
he is quickened and raised from the death of sin and of natural is made
spiritual, and savingly to understand and will spiritual things.

You acknowledge Sect. 69. that I propounded four quaeries; Yo. Eld. p. 63
Sect. 72.
but now in this your 72 Section, you having thus ridiculously (as is seen)
gone over my two former quaerees, muddily jumble together my two last, though
not without this design of a more convenient hiding your opinion from the
Reader. My third quaere was this: Whether grace be an adjutory uncertain and
resistible, or whether grace be an invincible infallible determinating adjutory
to the will.

1. In this Section you say, That I make the invincibility and infallibility of
the working of grace, and the certain determination of the will by grace, to
be one and the same; whereas invincibility and infallibility are but
modifications of the act or working of grace, and determination of the will, is
the act it self, or the effect of such an act.

The quaere looked upon will show you a wrangler. Did I ever take it in any
other sense than what your self here set down? Bu. Bush. p. 54.
namely, That grace is in the manner of working invincible and infallible, and
therefore determinating the will? and make I not both in the quaere and
throughout my book, the certain determination of the will, to be the product
or effect of grace, working infallibly and invincibly; show your seniority by
more seriousness.

2. You charge me with supposing what is not to be supposed; For grace (you
say) may invincibly produce such an effect in the soul, which answers the
nature, measure, and degree of it, and yet not necessarily produce such a
certain determination of the will to a saving consent, or a through act of
believing.

It being presupposed, 1. That the question is concerning converting grace, and
not common. And 2. That by (necessarily) is meant infallibly. I demand:

1. What that effect is, which special converting grace works in the soul,
which answers the nature measure, and degree of it, if it be not a certain
determination of the will.

2. How this assertion of yours will stand together with that which afterward
follows, Yo Eld. p. 65.
p. 65. The grace of God acting in and toward the conversion of a man, subdues
and takes away all actual rebelltousnesse or gainsayingnesse of the will, and
all inclination toward any rebellion? Does it accomplish all this, and not
determine the will?

3. You say (in this Section) That I was ridiculous in demanding whether the
certain determination of the will by grace proceeds from the powerful
nature of grace, considering (you say) that effects do not proceed from the
natures of their causes, but from the actual engagement of their causes in a
way of efficiency, etc.

Answ. But (my acute Antagonist) was not I enquiring into the efficacy of the
grace of God as a cause of conversion in us? And does not every effect proceed
from the nature of the cause? no, say you, but from the actual engagement of
the cause in a way of efficiency; but this actual engagement of the cause in a
way of efficiency, is the nature of a cause as a cause; we are not considering
of the grace of God absolutely as it is in it self, but relatively, as it is a
cause of an effect in others. And I demand whether this effect do depend upon
this cause infallibly, that wheresoever the cause is, by virtue of it the
effect shall necessarily follow.

4. What you say concerning the obtusenesse of the distinction between an
infallibility of the working of grace, in respect of the event or what de facto
does come to pass, and in respect of the powerful uature of grace as the
cause, is not for want of ignorance, both because the distinction is most
frequently used among the acutest that write concerning this controversy, and
also in regard that it so directly tends to the declaring of that efficacious
causality which is by the Orthod^x claimed, and by Sectaries denied to the
grace of God, there being a vast difference between an antecedent adjunct, the
presence whereof an event does infallibly follow, and a cause properly
productive of an effect infallibly to ensue.

5. To the maine intent of my quaerees you would be thought to answer.

1. By saying your sense clearly is, According to the ordinary course of the
grace of God, working in and about the conversion of men, there is no man
actually converted, but might possibly have acted and demeaned himself so, as
never to have been thus converted.

Answ. You pretend to clearness, but in your performance I find nothing
less. Why use you this expression (according to the ordinary course of the
grace of God) would you have me believe that God has some other way (though
extraordinary) by which he can do that which you assert simply impossible to be
done, as you say it is to make a man simply impoccable by the infallibility of
the work of the grace of God.

2. You say, That possibly the grace of God may take away from the will all
inclination toward any rebellion, yet it remeves not away all possibility to
rebel and do wickedly.

Answ. What you say is nothing to the question; there is no enquiry whether
grace does take away all possibility in the will to rebel, but whether it does
not so infallibly take away the act of, and inclination to rebellion, as that
the work of conversion always follows this working of grace?

3. You say, Yo. Eld. p. 65.
That Master Jenkin makes a blasphemous claim to an incommunicable property
of God, he asserteth himself under the same impossibility of sinning with God;
probatur, he supposes it impossible for him to sin when he is converted?

Though I shall not hope to determine whether ignorance or malice be most
praedominant in this charge, yet to the matter of it I easily return this: A
simple and absolute impossibility to sin, is one of the incommunicable
properties of God; but what say you to an impossibility to sin ex su positione;
the efficacy of grace supposed, though there be a natural defectibility in the
creature, may there not be an impossibility to sin? Is it not true, that good
angels and Saints in heaven cannot sin? can they actually put forth their
defectibility, so as to frustrate the grace of God, and is it blasphemy to say
that they cannot sin, or in so saying do we grant they have an incommunicable
property of God?

But 2. O thou my simple and false accuser, though you be not tender of
charging me with blasphemy, yet take heed your self of Blaspheming. I claim
no share in the incommunicable properties of God, when I aver it impossible
for my self or any other to frustrase the council of God (for who has
resisted his will) or to hinder the work of special grace coming to convert;
but sadly consider whether you blaspheme not, in asserting men to be stronger
than God, that they can hinder his work, when he acts with that power which
is exceeding great, and which raised Christ from the dead?

4. You say, An man may sin after his conversion; therefore much more at my
time befoe.

Answ. Yo. Eld. p. 65.
(...)! If a man be left to himself he may sin; but can he sin being under
that measure and strength of grace which is put forth in his conversion, and so
as to overcome it?

5. You say, Yo. Eld. p. 66.
If there be a possibility for a man to sin at any time before his
conversion, then is there a possibility in him also to hinder his (...),
because it is impossible for any man to be converted in an act of sin.

Answ. From this principle, That it is impossible for a man to be converted in
an act of sin, you may rather argue for the impossibility of conversion, than
for the possibility of non-conversion; must a man leave his sin first, and be
converted afterward? why cannot God change the heart, and infuse a principle of
spiritual life into a man (as into Saul, Act. 9.) while he is actually
sinning, so that this conversion or passive reception of a new life should be
in an act of sin?

6. Yo. Eld. p. 66.
I having said, bu. Bish. page 52. That the efficatious determination of the
will by grace, takes nothing away but the pravity and rebellion of it, and
restores it to its true liberty; you tell me, If grace takes nothing away but
the rebellion of the will, then it leaves a liberty of rebellion, for there is
nothing more evident than that there may remain a liberty or power of
rebellion in the will, when the rebellion it self is taken away.

There is no question but there may remain a power of rebellion, where there
is no actual rebellion, but that this power may be brought into act when the
act it self. and inclination to it, is taken away, which you grant may be,
implies a contradiction. Reconcile these two. Gods grace subdues all rebellion,
and all inclination to rebel, and yet rebellion may hinder the work of Gods
grace.

7. Yo. Eld. p. 66.
You tell me, If the adjutory of grace restores the true liberty of the will to
it, then its that liberty which was natural to it, wherein 'twas created, etc.
and then it leaves a liberty in it to rebel and to frustrate the work of
conversion and defeat it, for the liberty wherein the will was created left the
will under a possibility of rebelling.

Answ. Your arguing discovers that you understand not the nature of the wills
true liberty which once it had, and to which it is by grace restored. The true
liberty of the will is willingly and freely to obey, to be able to sin is no
perfection, nor any part of true liberty, but a defect in the wills liberty.

I having desired but one page half filled with quotations out of Orthodox
Writers agreeing with those your opinions transcribed by the Subscribers, you
hereupon promise to give me measure heaped up. Resolving to make up in measure
your want in weight, and to supply with the abundancy of your quotations the
defect of their aptitude to the matter for which you allege them. Yo. Eld p.
67. Sect. 76.


1. You snarle at this passage in the Testimony, [thousands of souls which
Christ has ransomed with his blood, shall be endangered to be undone] here is
(say you) the Doctrine of universal redemption asserted, If the ransomed by
Christ may perish to eternity, then Christ ransomed not the elect only, of
whose perishing there is not the least possibility.

Answ. Romans 14.15. Destroy not him with thy meat, for whom Christ died. Job.
10.28.
Who but such a spider-like reader would have sucked poison out of so sweet a
flower? may not the Subscribers say to you with Hicrome (as I told you even
now) hoc non nobis sed apostolo, lay this accusation at the Ap^stles door?
Romans 14.15. 1 Cor. 8. 11. does the Apostle mean that any of the Sheep of
Christ could perish, or that any could take them out of the hand of Christ? or
that any could perish that are upheld by the power of God through faith, or
that have the intercession of Christ improved for them, etc. or that are given
to Christ by the Father? Job. 6.39. Romans 8.38.
Why (if either you could or would not your self, have answered for the
Apostle or the Ministers) went you not to those reverend and learned
Interpreters that have expounded these Texts? surely they would have taught you
to have given the Ministers better usage.

Chrysostom would have informed you, that those of whom Christ is Redeemer in
respect of the sufficiency of the price, may perish, though not those to whom
the price is applied.

Paraeus would have taught you, That in respect of themselves and left to
themselves, the best are in danger of perishing. Hominibus nihil infirmius, In
regard of Satan's formidable power they might perish; In regard of the scandals
themselves which (without the powerful sustentation of God) are insuperable
They might perish, but in respect of the counsel and decrce of God, in respect
they are the sheep of Christ, and are sustained with his interce^ion, they
cannot perish.

(...) would have told you, Reader, in Yo Elder p. 100. John Goodwin allows
this interpretation Rom 14 15. In Paul's languare says he he is said to destroy
his brother, who does that which is apt or like to destory him, whether he be
actually destroyed or no. Yo Eld. Sect. 77, 7^, 7^, 8^.
That these who are looked upon with the judgment of charity, as these for whom
Christ dyed, of whom (he says) the Apostle speaks, may perish, though not
those for whom certainly Christ dyed.

You now impudently improve many Sections (though with vain endeavor) to make
three Reverend learned Ministers guilty of concurring with you in your err
neous epinions concerning the power of natural men to good supera^turall.

These my Reverend friends Doctor Gouge, Master Scudder, Master Calamy, (though
one so weakly slanderous as your self deserved it not) have so far
condescended to you as to send me in their several vindi^ations from that
unworthy and hateful asporsion of complying with you in your fore^aid
opinions; I shall present them to the Reader distinctly, and word for word, as
they sent them to me under their ewne hands.

MAfter John G^dwin to demonstrate that the substance of his opinion of the
power of a natural man, Doctor William Gouge his Vindication.
is contained in the Writings of many of the Subscribers, produces sundry
sentences of theirs: And in particular, having gathered sundry passages out of
The whole Armor of God, he thus says in his (...) page 72. I appeal to any
man that will take the painee to comp^re my passages with these, whether the
one can be Or^hodox if the other be (...). Here therefore behold the one
compared with the other, each in their own terms, and thereby judge whether
the one be so like the other as is pretended.

The whole Armor of God.
Page 233. In something or other all those which believe not come short of that
which they might have done for attaining unto this precious gift of faith: and
that is it for which another day they shall be condemned, unbelief is in a
man's power.

Page 604. Let every one of what rank or condition soever he be, be encouraged
to apply to himself these glad tidings of pardon; and seeing God excludes
none, let not any of us exclude our selves.

Page 591. In the order of Redemption God has made man's sin pardonable; but
man by his impenitency makes it not to be pardoned.

Page 230. Did not the very lifting up of the Serpent show, that it was Gods
will they should look on it, and looking be cured? So God causing Christ to be
lifted up by preaching of the Go pell before thee, shewe^ that HE WOULD THOU
SHOULD BELIEVE, and believing, have everlasting life.

Page 231. God never failed any that continued to wait on him, at length he
satisfied their longing.

Page 289. (...) be hard to the carnal careless man, yet (as Salmon says of
knowledge Prove. 146.) faith is easy to him that will believe, not that it is
simply in man's power, but that GODS SPIRIT SO OPENS HIS UNDERSTANDING, etc.

Page 290. If we repair to the Author who gives faith, and to the spring
whence it flows; if we rightly use the right means of attaining it, and
wait at the door of wisdom till he open unto us, UNDOUBTEDLY WE SHALL FIND
FAITH, and not miss of it.

The Div. Auth. of the Scriptures.
Page 26. Natural men may do such things, as whereunto God has by way of
promise annexed grace and acceptance.

Page 169. To suppose that they to whom God makes rich and sweet applications
of himself, are wholly destitute of all power to do what he requires of them,
in this case to save them from destruction, and to confer the great things
promised upon them, as viz. to believe and repent, is to represent the glorious
God in his greatest expressions of mercy and grace, and love unto the world,
rather as laughing the world to scorn in that great misery wherein it is
plunged, then as a God any ways truly desirous, or intending to relieve it.

Page 183. They which are without (I mean without the Gospel written or
preached upon such terms as it is preached among us daily) have also
sufficient means (if not large and plentiful) for believing.

Page 186. They who are destroyed and perish by the hand of God for unbelief,
had means, and those sufficient whereby to have believed.

Page 182. Concerning those have only the Heavens, the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and the goodness of God in the government of the world, to preach the Gospel
unto them; these also have reason sufficient (if not in abundance) to think
the same though, and judge the same judgment with the other [who have the
Letter of the Gospell] in the point in hand.

In all the passages que^ed out of the whole Armor of God, there is no
sentence that implies, that natural men may do such things as whereunto God
has by way of promise annexed grace and acceptance. Men are there incited to
do what lies in them for attaining grace; but it is not said, that any promise
of grace is annexed to that which they do, while they temaine in their natural
estate.

Neither is it said in any of those passages, That none of those to whom God
makes rich and sweet applications of himself, are wholly destitute of all
power to believe and repent; for those sweet applications in the outward
dispensation of the Word, are made to all present, though there may be many
reprobates there, who have not power to believe and repent.

Nor yet is it there said, That they who are without the Gospel have
sufficient means for believing; nor, That they who perish for unbelief, had
means sufficient to have believed, if means be taken for that power and
ability which is in a natural man.

1 Object. If men's coming short of that which they might have done be the
reason of their condemnation, it undeniably follows, Yo. Eld. p. 70.
that they have power to do that whereby their condemnation might be prevented.

Answ. It does not follow; because they might more improve their natural parts
than they do, and yet not prevent condemnation thereby, they are supernatural
gifts whereby condemnation is prevented.

2 Object. In saying unbelief is in a man's power, Ibid.
does he not imply, that a man has power over it, and may dissolve, subdue,
and destroy it, if he will?

Answ. No, he implies no such thing; he only intends that it arises from a
man's self, and is ordered by a man's own free will, as other corrupt acts are.
The evils which are in the Devil, are in his power; yet can he not dissolve,
subdue, and destroy them. As for the instances of original corruption,
blindness by birth, frailty of life, mortality, corruptiblenesse of flesh,
(...), for none of these are acts under the will of man, to be ordered thereby,
as unbelief is.

3 Object. Questionless a Teacher would not encourage men, Ibid. page 71.
or persuade men to encourage themselves, to do that which he judges
impossible for them to do.

Answ. 1. That which is here taken to be unpossible, is brought upon man by his
own default.

2. It is such an impossibility as God by the work of his Spirit can, and
ordinarily does make possible. In this respect Christ says of that which is
impossible with men, that it is not so with God, Mark 10.27.

3. The Teacher does encourage men to go as far as they can, and to do as much
as in their power lies, to obtain such or such a blessing; which is not to
persuade to that which is impossible.

4. Object. If God excludes none [from bleeving] then has he not inflicted
any such punishment upon men for their sin in Adam, by which they are
disabled from believing.

Answ. That which is spoken of Gods excluding none, is meant of the manner of
dispensing the Gospel, and offering grace, which is wi^^ such general
terms, as therein no man has cause to think himself excluded. The Author
of the (...) God, thus explaineth his own mind, page 603. This Do^trine is to
be understood of Gods outward dispensation and manife^ation of his mercy by the
ministry of the Word, wherein no difference is made betwixt persons, nor
excertion of any. So as it calls not into question the secret counsel and
^ernall decree of God.

SIR,
YOu, Master Sou^^^ Vindication.
with many other Ministers of the Province of London, gave (...) against this
tenent of Master John Goodwin, viz. touching (...) asserte ^, That by
impr^vement of nature a man may attain to such (...), is upon which saving
conversion always follows: This I judge to be an error. 1 Cor. 2.14.
For the Apostle says, The natural man reiciveth not the things of the Spirit
of God, for they are (...) him: Neither can be kn^w them, because they are
spiritual^y (...). Romans 8.5, 7, 8.
And he says also, They that are after the flesh (as all natural men are)
sav^ur or mind the things of the fas^. And again, The carnal mind is enmity
against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, nor indeed can be. So
that they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Wherefore man by no natural
power can improve the gifts of nature so, as without special grace to will or
do that which is spiritual and supernatural, as to repent, believe, etc.

I fi^de that Master John Goodwin has alleged some passages in my book,
Christians daily walk, cap 15. sect. 1. page 452, 453.
as if I did concur with him, or favor his opinion. I have hereupon
considered and weighed well what I have there written, and find nothing
tending to the maintenance of his error; but something expressly against free
will to good. I declaring, That notwithstanding Christ may be said to give
himself a ransom for all, etc. yet this does not argue universal Redemption,
nor that all men may be saved if they will. I appeal to any judicious and
impartial Reader, whether in any thing I have there written, I have justified
his opinion; which I am utterly against.

Henry Scudder.


SIR,
Unde^standing of your purpose to return an answer to Master John Goodwins
book, Master Calamy his Vindication.
and finding that therein I am brought upon the stage as one that, in a Sermon
preached Jan. 12.1644. should say something to countenance that heterodox
opinion of his, That a natural man has power to believe and repent. I thought
it my duty, so far at least to vindicate my self and my Ministry, as to
entreat you to insert in your Answer thus much as from me, by way of reply.

1. That I do and always did abhor that proud, Pelagian, and Arminian
Tenent. And that 1. because it seems to me, as it is defended by him in his
book, to set up free will, (which by the fall of Adam is no longer liberum but
servum arbitrium) in the place of free grace. And to make free will to put the
difference between the Elect and the Reprobate, and not free grace, which is
coutrary to Romans 9.11, 18. Ephesians. 1.5, 11. 1 Tit. 1.9.

2. Because it makes a man able by nature to do something that will positively
and infallibly dispose and prepare him to conversion, which is contrary to Romans
11.35. John 15.5. John 6.44. And contrary to right reason also, as N^lil se
disponit ad gradum altiorem quam habet natura. Atqui gra^ia regenerans excedit
totam naturem, quicquid igitur est a viribus naturae id inferioris est ordinis
and improportionatum ad gratiam. Potest quidem homo minus peccando, mi^us
indispositus reddi ad recipiendam gratiam, quam alius sed nihil tamen facere
potest, per quod ad gratiam disponatur. Vossi historia Pelagiana. lib. 4. part.
1. and page 420. page 419. Dispositio ad gratiam est pars converfionis nostr^:
Conversio autem est opus Divinwn, Psalm. 85.5. Lam. 5.21.
Vossius excellently shows.

3. Because his opinion, as he defends it, seems to me wholly to take away the
necessity of preventing grace, and to make the grace of conversion to be
subsequent only to man's natural endeavors, or at least but concomitant.
Which is contrary to Isa. 65.5. Romans 9.16.

4. Because the Scripture sets out the (...) and inability of anaturall man to
believe, and repent in such full and express terms, as that (as I conceive)
it is impossible to be my opinion without wresting the Scriptures. Witness
Genesis 6.5. Gen 8.21. Jer. 17.9. Eccl. 36.26. Mat. 7.18. John 5.25. Rom 8.7. Romans
5.6, 10. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Cor. 3.5. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3, Col. 2.13. John 3.6. and
diverse others of the like nature. The Scripture does not only say, That a man
by nature is in the dark, (as Master G. erroneously affirms) but that he is
darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. not only that he wants light, but that he wants eyes
also, Deuteronomy. 29.4. Not only that he is de ad in sins, in regard of the guilt
of sin, (as Master G. says) but also in regard of all spiritual ability to
raise himself, as appears by the next argument.

5. Because conversion in Scripture is not only said to be a giving of light
to one that has eyes before (is Master G. says) but a giving of sight also,
Isa. 42.7. Lu. 4.18. It is not only a giving an immediate actual or present
capacity (as Mr. G. minceth it contrary to Scripture) but it is a sutting
within us a principle of spiritual life. It is not only a rais^ng us up from
the guilt of sin, but it is a bestowing upon us a new heart, and a new
Spirit, it is a spiritual resurrection and regeneration, 1 Pet. 1.23. Ja.
1.1^. John 3.3. Ezekiel. 36.26. And therefore as a natural man cannot contribute
any thing to his natural being, no more can he contribute any thing properly
to his supernatural being.

These and diverse other reasons have induced me always since I knew what
belonged to Divinity, to detest and abhor this his unsound and unjustifiable
opinion.

There is a second thing that I would have you likewise to put into your Answer.

Secondly, That I am much wronged and abused in what Master G. relates
concerning the Sermon I preached Jan. 12.1644. The truth is, looking over my
notes, I find that I made two Sermons upon the Doctrine mentioned in the
Book. In which I laid down this position quite contrary to his assertion,
That man by nature is dead in sin and trespasses, unable to do any thing that
is spiritually good, as he ought to do. That man by nature is unable to believe
and repent, and is like the cold earth, able of it self to bring forth briers
and thorns, but not able to do any thing pleasing to God, in order to eternal
life, unless he be enabled by the seed of grace sorcen in his heart by Gods
holy Spirit. Indeed I added,

That a man unconverted, remaining unconverted, might do that that was right in
the sight of the Lord, he might do bonum though not been. And by the help of
the Holy Ghost in the common work of it, he might do many things in order to
salvation. And that the reason why he is damned, is not for want of power, but
for not improving the power he has; not for cannot, but will not.

But then I subjoyned two other positions.

1. That no unconverted man did ever improve the power that God has given him,
but does give advantage to God to damn him for voluntary refusing to do what
he has power to do.

2. That though an unconverted man did improve his natural abilities to the
utmost of his power, yet notwithstanding God was not bound by any promise to
bestow the grace of conversion upon him. This I proved by five arguments too
long here to repeat.

And thus I have given you a short account of what concerns me in his Book. I
have but a word more to say; and that is to a passage in the 131 page, in which
he says, He will not so far abuse me, as to call me either learned or pious.
For my part, I thank God I am not solicitous what he or his Pulpit-Incendiary
say of me. I have learned of my great Master to requite good for evil, and to
heap coals of fire upon their heads, which I desire may be in remedium, not
in ruinam. The great God guide us all into the ways of peace, truth and
holiness. So prays

Your loving Brother in the work of the Minestry. EDM. CALAMY.


What a vast Ocean of scorns, jeers, vilifyings, childish ventosities, and
profane puffs of wit do I sail through, before I can espy the least point or
spot of land, any thing wherein he so much as pretends to theological
argumentation? sollid matter lodges in his great book of words, as a child
of two days old in the great bed of Ware. Going over many pages filled with
nothing but with scum and scurrility, he vents, among hundreds of other such
unsavory passages, this gentle expression:

Sect. 90. Yo. Eld. p. 85. Sect 90.
Confident I am, that there (...) was a g^neration of Christians (scarce of
men) so bloody in asserting their opinions, etc. as the greatest part of the
London Subscripturients.

I marvel not at your confidence, Solomon tells me who it is that rages and
is conf^dent, Prove. 14.16.

For the bloody asserting, etc. never were the veins of any writings so filled
with the blood which you speak of, as those of this last and worst of your
pamphlets; certainly when you wrote it, you were under a quatidian fury, or
sick of the miserere mei; the Reader beholds you vomiting your excrements of
scurrility and wrath in every page; what is there that you mention through your
book (if you would have it help you) but either you feign it your friend, or
else you frown upon it, that it may not dare to be your enemy, the Scriptures,
the Fathers, your mother Tongue, your opposites, against their bent and minds,
are threatened unless they stoop to your sense and service; Scriptures must
speak for you against themselves, and Vrijab-like must carry letters for their
own destruction; Bucer, Ball, the Father, under the pain of self-
contradiction, and of being accounted naked and unstable, must turn Pelagians.
Yo. Eld. p. 5. p. 76, 79.


If you will have it so, it must be sense for the garment to be clothed with
the man, and it must be as proper to say, exchange this thing into another, as
to say exchange it for another thing. Who ever will lift up a pen against you,
must expect no other guerden, but to have your pen cased in his heart, and to
lie bleeding at the feet of your writings; the pulling down of Sion Coll^dge
shall be voted the taking away of the pillar of all impiety and opposition to
the truth; all the works that ever stood it out against you must be demolisht
and dismantled: Your next wrath is expected against those daring (and yet more
knowing than daring) men, who have priz^ your works that now lie upon the hands
of your late booksellers widow, but for wast paper; which by the way I note as
a just retribution of providence, that those writings which value the
Scriptures below the Word of God, should themselves be valued below the word of
man.

You recite an argument which you brought in Sion Coll. visited, Sect. 91. p.
85.
to prove that natural men have eyes to see spiritual things. Natural men
(say you) have eyes to see because it is not needless for Satan to blind them.

I denied your consequence, and gave you the ground of that my denial, viz.
because the Scripture says, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man cannot know the
things of the Spirit of God.

After your scoffs (which I answer with neglect) you return thus?

1. You say, That by (...) the natural man is not meant the man that is simply
natural or unregenerate, but such a kind of men wh^m the Apostle calls
carnal, babes in Christ, meaning weak Christians. Confidently concluding from
my producing of this Scripture for this purpose, I understand little of it.

Answ. I had rather suspect any interpretation of Scripture, when you say it is
true and sound, than when you say it is false and misunderstood.

You have the stream of godly and learned Interpreters against you. Piscator
takes this natural man for a man that Nihil eximium in se habet prater animam
rationalem, qui non est regenitus; a man that has nothing excellent but a
rational soul, and is not borne agains, Ans. says, this natural man is one
Qui animalium more versatur, qui put at nihil esse p^st mortem, one that lives
like a brute creature, and thinks there is nothing more after death to be
expected. Ambrose thus: Animalis homo p^coribus similis, etc. Ambr. in Lee.
Sensum in terram deprimit, ideaque non ^ssequitur nisi quae v^let, (...) put^t
aliquid posse fieri quam quomodo (...), ideo quicquaid aliter audit quam norit,
st^ltum juditar. Theophilact. (...) Oecumen (...).
This natural man like the beasts, keeps down his sense to the earth, and
therefore he only reaches what be sees, nor thinks he that any thing can be,
but as he bears; therefore whatever he hears to be otherwise, he judges it
foolish. Theophilact says, This natural man is one that is given altogether
to natural reasonings thinking not that he wants s^^our from alove.

Oecumenius thus: The natural man is one that lives after the flesh, and has
not his understanding enlightened by the Spirit.

Theadoret thus: Qui Contentus propriis Cogitationibus, spiritus doctrinam non
admi^tit, One that is pleased with his own cogitations and gives no admittance
to the Doctrine of the Spirit. Calv. in Loc. Homi^em onimalem vecat queml. bet
hominem solis naturae facult tibus praelitum in puris natural^tus relictum. Ter
spiritu^lem intelli^iur is eujus m^ns illuminatione spiri^us Dei regitur.


Calvin says, By the Natural man is meant a man endowed only with the
faculties of nature, and by the spiritual, a man whose mind is governed by
the illumination of the Sprit.

I shall make bold to instruct my instructor out of Isidorus Pelusiota, Ep. l.
5. Ep. 128. (...) etc. The Scripture distinguishes (as he shows) between the
(...), the (...). The Carnal, the natural, and the spiritual. The Carnal
that fall, by reason of their weakness, into many ways that are fleshly.
Natural, that follow the reasoning of the natural mind and understanding.
The spiritual that are adorned with the gift of the holy Ghost, and are
illuminated above nature, as (he divinely expresse^h it) (...), having gotten
above natural reasonings.

I stay in Arminius, Disp. 11. These. 8.
who says, Men's hominis (non renati) in isto stain Caeca est, salutari Dei,
ejusque voluntatis cognitione destituta, non capax illorum, quae sunt spiritus
Dei, juxta Aposlolum, Animalis homo, etc. The mind of an unregenerate man
(says he) is blind and destitute of the saving knowledge of God and of his
will, not able to receive the things of the Spirit of God, according to the
Apostle, The natural man, etc. I add, the same kind of men are spoken of by
Jude,

The Aposile, verse. 19. he joining (...), and (...), Seperatists sensual or
natural, not having the Spirit, together. So James joins natural and
devilish together, the 3. cap. 15. ver. The wisdom that is not from above is
sensitall or natural (...), and devilish, so that the natural man, 1 Cor.
2.14. is unregenerate.

2. You say, That by natural man, is meant a weak believer, because by
natural here, and carnal cap. 3.1.3. are meant the same men. Now by carnal
there is meant the weak believer.

Answ. Its evident that the carnal man spoken of, cap. 3.1. and the natural
man spoken of in cap. 2.14. are not the same. That carnal man was a babe in
Christ, and therefore he was such an one as had the Spirit of Christ dwelling
in him, Rom, 8.9. This natural man was such an one as bad not received the
Spirit, ver. 12.14.

3. You endeavor to prove that by carnal man, cap. 3.1. and by natural man,
c. 2.15. are meant the same,

Because the same kind of persons whom he calls spiritual is oppused both the
natural man, c. 2.15. and to the carnal, c. 3.1.

Answ. Away with this trifling; a man may be opposed to a beast and a child,
therefore a beast and a child are the same; dicite Jo. Paean, cop 2.15. the
spiritual and natural man differ statu, as a man that has the spirit from
him that has it not; but c. 3.1. the spiritual man and the carnal differ
only gradu, in degree and measure of participation of the same spirit, as you
your self assert.

4. You say, That the Apostle does not speak simply or in general of the
things of God, nor particularly of things simply necessary to be believed to
salvation, but only of the deep things of God, which things, v. 6. he had
called wisdom.

Answ. The contrary is evident by the context that the Apostle speaks
generally of the things of the Gospel, Christ crucified, c. 1.24. made to us
of God, wisdom, etc. c. 1.30, etc. of the wisdom of God, c. 2.7. as opposed
to the wisdom of this world, v. 6. the manifold wisdom of God made known by
the Church, Ep. 3.10. All the Gospel is a great mystery, 1 Timothy 3.16. A
mystery kept secret. Romans 16.25. Into which the Angels desire to look, 1 P.
1.12. Though in this mystery there be greater and lesser deeps, yet all are
deeps, so deep as that none of the princes of this world did know them, by the
spirit we coming to know the things that are given us by God. Chrysostom. 1 Cor.
2.8. Chrysostom. in Loc. (...). Perfectos voc^t non qui asiquuti sunt plenam
sapi^ntra^, sed qui sano sunt and in corrupto jud cio Caiv. in Loc.
by the wisdom you speak of, which the Apostle preached to those that were
perfect, understands it of the preaching of life and salvation by the death of
Christ, and by the perfect ones believers, etc. And Calvin upon the place
says, That by perfect ones the Apostle understands not those that had atteyned
to high degree of knowledge, but those that were of a sound judgment.

5. You say, That man merely natural may be incapable of these, and yet be
apprehensive of such of the things of God, the knowledge whereof is of absolute
necessity to salvation, as Generally of the duties commanded in the Moral Law,
of the eternal power and Godhead manifested in the creation, etc.

Answ. The things of the Law, or of the eternal power and Godhead, are not the
things of which the Apostle is speaking, or which you and I are disputing of.
The things we are now speaking of, are the things freely given us to our glory;
for those other, which you say natural men are apprehensive of, duties of the
Moral Law which are absolutely necessary to salvation, etc. if you say they
are absolutely necessary to salvation, I yield it, as sine quibus non est
salu^, but not as Cum quibus est salus; by the way, let the Reader but consider
this arch-argumentator, who from this his exposition, That weak Christians are
not capable of the deep things of God, undertakes to prove that the natural
man may understand those things which are necessary to salvation.

In your 94. Page 88. Se. 94.
Section you say, That power which the Apostle here denies to his natural man,
of knowing the things of God, may well may of necessity must be understood
only of an immediate, actual, or present capacity of power, so that his
meaning may be carely this: The natural man, while he continues merely such,
has no principle or power actually and de praesenti to know savingly the
things of the Spirit of God; but this proves not but that a natural man may
have such principles, even for the present, which by a regular improvement, and
such, whereof by the never denied assistance of Grd at first, he is very
capable, may advance and rise through the ordinary blessing of God in such
cases, into such a capacity or power as is contended for; a youth of twelve
years of age cannot construe a Chapter in the Hebrew Bible, he has no
immediate actual power, yet such a power he has, by the improvement whereof
he will according to the ordinary course of Gods providence be able to do it,
etc.

Answ. Why do you so flagg and faulter in giving us the meaning of the Apostles
saying, This power may well be understood, etc. the meaning may only be this,
etc. Did your heart misgive you? take heed; uncertainty, I fear, is your
punishment, though you pretend confidence.

2. That the natural man has no power to know savingly the things of the
Spirit of God, I acknowledge for an undeniable truth.

3. When you say, Nevertheless this proves not but such a man may have such
principles by a regular improvement, etc. I told you before of your foggy
conceptus; you might have spoken your self a Pelagian, as plainly as now you
do, with half these words.

1. These principles you speak of, by the improvement whereof he may rise to
the power contended for, I suppose are those which you mention Divine Auth.
page 200. reason, judgment, understanding. memory, etc. if you mean not these
let me hear.

2. By the never denied affistance of God, whereby a man is capable of
improvement etc. at first. If you mean not a general concourse of God,
afforded and given to every man as a man, and as created of God, according to
that passage, Yo. Eld. p. 11. Where you told us, because nature is not given
away from God, whatever is ascribed unto nature, is no derogating from the
grace of God, clear your self.

3. By advancing into such a power as is contended for, you must understand a
power of knowing savingly, and believing the things of the Spirit of God. The
sum of all which is thus much: A natural man, by the ordinary assistance and
blessing of God, afforded to every one, may so improve his natural Principles
of Reason, Judgment, Memory, etc. as savingly to know and believe the things
of God.

This your similitude of a youth that may be pains acquire skill in the
tongues further declares to be your meaning, by which wretched opinion you
hold out, That there is nothing in grace above nature, which nature may not
reach unto; or rather, That grace it self is nothing but polisht nature. But
how stands this with the words of the Apostle, who says, That the natural man
cannot know the things of God, because they are spirituaily discerned, and
elsewhere, That the carnal mind cannot be subject to the Law of God, as being
enmity against God. Can all the pains, improvement, pollishing, make nature
any other than nature, and make a natural man to understand or believe any
thing but after a natural manner? can it give ability to know spiritually? can
all the care, and cost, and dressing, make a bad tree to be of a good kind,
and while bad, to bring forth good fruit?

I add in explication of this of the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.14. and for your
information; that excellent passage of learned Musculus upon the place,
Confert, utrinque tam hominem, etc. Musc. in Loc. Confert. utrinque tum hominem
animalem tum spiritum dei, and doces ita esse comparatum hominem animalem, ut
quae spiritus Dei sunt nequeat cognoscere, quemadmodum si dicas bestiam
cognoscere non posse quae bominum sunt plus interest inter animolem hominem,
and spiritum Dei, deinde and inter intellectam hominis, and ea quae sunt Dei,
qu^m inter hominem and bestiam.


The Apostle compares the natural man (says he) and the Spirit of God, and
he teaches, That the natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit, any
more than a beast the things of a man, etc.

In your 95. Yo. Eld. p. ^9. Sect. 95.
Section you produce a double construction of the Apostles words, 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man cannot know the things of the Spirit, etc. This unabtlity (you
say) may either be understand of the great^d d^ffi^ultie that lies in the way
of such men; to attame the knowledge of these things, or else of their present,
actual ind^sp (...) to under them capable of such knowledge.

Answ. I meet in these ^ections with a sea of words, and a (...) of matter, you
multiply expressions to no purpose.

1. If you say. The natural man is unable in the former sense, because of the
(...) that lies in his way, etc. you are a (...), and that by your own clear
confession; which is in these very words: The (...) Austin and Pelagius, was,
(...) simply and absolutely necessary, for the (...) to do that which is good,
etc. which was Austius opinion; or, Whether it was necessary (...) by way of
acconm^dation and facilitation for such a perfromance; which was the sense of
(...). Yo. Eld. p. 51. 52. Quicurq. (...) vit ideo (...) gra^am (...), ut, quod
face^, jabemur rer lihernm (...) faci^ius pessimus (...) per gratram, ta quam
and (...) vina ma data, Anathema sit De (...) sine me difficalius potestis
facere, sed art sine (...) facere. Conc. Afr. Can. Cap. 5.
And if this be your opinion with Pelagius. why bring you the Fathers
particularly Austin, as joining with you in the point of the (...) of grace, in
Sion Coll. visited? when as, by your own (...), An^in was against you and your
(...). I shall add you were condemned for holding this opinion long before you
were borne.

2. If the latter be your opinion, viz. That natural men are (...) their
present and actual indisposednesse and (...), etc. Besides that I save
confuted it before; it is eviden^ly coutrary to those Texes of Scripture
imp^dently and impert^nently cited by your self for your self. as Matt. 12.24
Hew (...) being evil speak good things, Joh. 5.44. How can ye believe, etc.
Job 6.44. No man can come to me, unless the Father (...), etc. Jo. 12.39.
Therefore they could not believe, etc. Joh. 15. Without we can d^ nothing, and
Joh. 14.17. The Spirit of truth which the world cannot receive, etc. Romans 8.8.
They that are in the flesh cannot pltase God, (to which you might as well have
added, had it not opposed you a little too palpably) Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the Law of God, neither
indeed can be. These Scriptures clearly teaching that though man have a soul
passively capeable of saving grace, faith, knowledge, repentance, etc. and his
want of them be indeed accompanied with present hatred and contempt of them,
yet that he is also absolutely unable to attain them, and that it is possible
only to God to work them in him; nor do you in alleging these Scriptures,
for me an argument out of them, to prove that this want of power is only in
regard of actual indi posednesse. Sure I a^, you might have raised several
arguments against that your cursed and rotten exposition; as, That its an
impotency consisting in the want of a spiritual principle and faculty suitable
to the duties and performances which men are said to be unable to do, with ut
me ye can do nothing, Joh. 15.5.
1 Cor. 2 14 The natural man cannot know the things of God, for they are
spiritually discerned, Mat. 7.18. a co^rupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit,
Mat. 12.34. how can ye being ^bill speak good things, Romans 8.8. They that are
in the flesh cannot please God; and as the natural man's impotency proceeds
from the defect of a spiritual principle, so for the removal of that
impotency, God bestows a new principle of spiritual life, (which were
needless if man's impotency proceeded only from actual indisposednesse) Ezekiel.
36.26. A new heart will I give you and a new spirit will I put into you, and I
will give you a heart of flesh. And that its not an impotency that proceeds
only from actual indisposednesse or unwillingnesse, is clear in that a
natural man cannot but be indisposed, Joh. 6.44.
and unwilling to every spi^tuall act; to believe and repent, etc. No man can
come to me except the Father draw him; Joh. 14.17.
No man can be willing or consent, unless the Father make him so; the world
cannot receive the spirit. The like also is evident from, Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is enmity against God, and cannot be subject to the Law of God, etc.

These are the principal passages which I find in his Book, wherein he
pretends either to Scripture or Argument; for indeed the business of
argumentation, is but the by-worke of this his big work.) The bulk of his
book, being a heap of defamations and scurrilities, fitter for a sink than a
study, concerning which, I say, 'twere easy to return him reviling for
revileng; but this were to lay aside the Minister, the Christian, nay the man;
and as ridiculous as for a man whom an ass has kicked, Yo. Eld. p. 1.
to kick the ass again. I shall couclude mine (mutatis mutandis) as M. Goodwin
began his: Though more truly. For a great part of Mr. Goodwin his pamphlet, the
constitution and complexion of it, eases me of the labor of making any answer
or reply unto it; for consisting of such reproaches, vilifications. and
disparagements (the madness whereof is sufficiently known unto and cried out
against by all men) I should but actum agere, and do that which is abundantly
done already to my bond, if I should go about to possess men of sobriety and
judgment, with the unsavourinesse thereof.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 5. Marg. read Ac. 1. 25. p. 2. l. ult, for streams read steames; p. 13.
l. 35. r. pore, than himself, p 14. l. 25. instead of for, r. only ^o amaze. p
17 l. 2. r. their, l. 3 r. not. p. 26. l. 25. r. neaver, p. 31. m. r. Cc. de
Scar. d 36. m. l. 15. r divinarum, p. 37 l. 15. r. wa^ p. 40 l. penult, r
place, what follower, p. 41. l. 32 r. sumimus, p. 43. m r. script. p. 47. l 3^.
r. tradita, p. 58. l. r. revealed, p. 77. m. r. hominis, p. 77. m. r.
efficaciffir^ p. 80. m r. concupiscentem, p. 81. l. 11. r. illum, p. 85. m. r.
qua semper mala, ib. l. arb^ um, p. 86. l. 25. l. scriptures, p. 87. l. 14. r.
makes p. 88. l. 25. r. undervalewing, ib. in m. ^. ut. p. 89. m. l.
perpetrando. p. 94. l. 34. r. and. l. penult, del you, p. 95. l. 9. r.
causality, p. 93. l. 5. dele of, p. 117. l. 30. r. (...).


