A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE Q. ELIZABETH BY THAT LEARNED AND REVEREND MAN JOHN
JEWEL BISHOP OF SARISBURY.

Upon these words,

PSALM. 69. 9. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up. WITH AN ANSWER OF THE
SAME AUTHOR To some frivolous objections against the government of the Church.

Printed in the year 1641.

TO THE READER.
IF thy heart has not made a Covenant with Ignorance, or not grown obstinate
through peevish wilfulness, read, peruse, and digest these ensuing lines,
dropped from the learned and judicious quill of this most pious and renowned
Author; whose well-knowne worth and singular wisdom may challenge (if not
command) your fair acceptance: He appears not here like David, ruining the
Philistine; but like our Savior, reproving the Pharisees; reserving his
downeright blows for stronger Enemies; and more discovering the folly of his
Foe, than the smartnesse of his scourge: whose sudden pen (not guilty of any
thing that is not precious) carries with it the Aspect, rather of an ingenious
have, then a studied Confutation: Which nevertheless upon mature deliberation,
if it convince not the erroneous fancy, and rectifies not the weak Judgment
of unwilling ignorance, his Pearls are lost, till found by such as have the
knowledge how to prize them.

Farewell.
CERTAIN FRIVOLOVS OBJEctions against the Government of the Church of England,
answered by JOHN JEWEL, Bishop of Sarisbury.
The First Reason of the Novelists.
God so loved the Church, that He left a perfect pattern Novitiorum prima
Ratio.
orderly. Ephesians. 4.

But here is named neither Pope, nor Archbishop, nor Archdeacon.

BISHOP JEWELS Answer.
HOW know you that the fourth Chapter ad Ephesians. is a perfect pattern of
Ecclesiastical Government? We have now, neither Apostles, nor Evangelists,
nor Prophets, yet are they the chief in that pattern: Neither have we there,
either Bishop, or Presbyter, or Diaconus, or Catechista, or Lector; and yet are
these necessary parts in Ecclesiastical Government; Therefore this Pattern is
not perfect, to hold for ever; Neither were there then, any public Churches,
or Pulpits, or Schools, or Universities, etc.

Saint Paul names neither Pope, nor Archbishop, I grant: and the Church is
not governed by names, but by Offices. Every Bishop then was called Papa: And
Anacletus, that was next after Peter, (if there be any weight in his words)
names Archbishops.

The Second Reason. Secunda ratio.

The Synagogue of the Jews was a figure of the Church of Christ, and God to
the perfection of that Church omitted nothing.

BISHOP JEWELS Answer.
I See not what you would conclude: Perhaps you will say, they had not the
names of Pope, or Archbishop: So had they not this name Episcopus in all Moses
Law: yet were not all Priests of like auntiency in government. They had other
names that were equivalent with Archbishops; as Principes Synagogae, Principes
Sanctuarij, Principes familiarum Leviticarum, Principes familiarum
Sacerdotalium, Principes Sacerdotum, Principes domus Dei, Pontifex, Summus
Pontifex, Summus Sacerdos. Therefore the negative reason is but weak.

Again, whereas it is said, that to the perfection of the Synagogue there
wanted nothing: it may be answered, that to the perfection thereof there wanted
many things, as it is known and confessed. And as the Synagogue had not the
names of Pope and Archbishop; so had it not the name of Apostle, or Evangelist.

The Third Reason. Tertia ratio.

Where the substance of any thing is most perfect, there the accidents be most
perfect: But the substance of true Religion was most perfect in the Primitive
Church, and yet there was then no Archbishop. Ergo.

BISHOP JEWELS Answer.
FIRst, this Maxim is not proved: for it may well be doubted whether the most
perfect substance has evermore most perfect accidents. And again, the
substance of Religion is the same now, that it was then: The difference (if any
be) stands in the accidents, and not in substance.

In the Primitive Church, God raised up Apostles and Prophets, and gave them
power extraordinary, as the gift of tongues, the gift of healing, the gift of
government, etc. In place whereof, he has now given Universities, Schools,
Bishops, Arch. Bishops, etc.

But you may say, There was then no Archbishop: So may you say, that before
King Saul there was no King in Israel: So may you say, that before of late
times there was neither Duke nor Earl in England: so may you say, that in the
Primitive Church there was neither Deane, nor Parson, nor Prebendary; And yet
now, both in Ecclesiastical and civil government, all these are thought
necessary.

Erasm. in arguments epist. ad Titum.
Last of all, where you say, there was no Archbishop in the Primitive Church,
it is written by many, that Saint Paul made Titus Arch Bishop of Creta: *
Erasmus says, Paulus Titum Archiepiscopum Cretae consecravit: And Lyra
likewise says, Paulus instituit Titum Archiepiscopu^ Cretensium. If these
Authorities like you not, Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. in 1. cap. Tit.
Paulus Tito multorum Episcoporum judicium commisit: Now having the Government
of many Bishops, what may we call him but an Archbishop?

The Fourth Reason.
The Ecclesiastical and civil government may not be confounded, Quarta Ratio.
or be together in one person: But to be a Chief, or a Ruler, is a civil
power, Ergo, it cannot be exercised by any Ecclesiastical person.

BISHOP JEWELS Answer.
BOth these governments were confounded in Moses: Therefore, they may be
confounded. And the Priests of Israel had the Judgment and government of the
people. And Saint Augustine was troubled with hearing, and determining of
Causes: as appears by Possidonius.

And where you say, to be a Chief, or a Ruler, is a Civil government: nay in
Ecclesiastical causes it is Ecclesiastical government, and not civil: And
these differences of government may not so unadvisedly be confounded: This is
the key of Ecclesiastical correction, and belongs only to the
Ecclesiastical Officer, and to none other. Hereof Saint Paul says, Sen^rem ne
corripueris nisi sub etc. Tradidi illum Satana, etc. This jurisdiction is not
civil, but Ecclesiastical; and therefore may be exercised by any
Ecclesiastical person.

I beseech you take these sudden answers in good part. As for these reasons; in
my judgment, they are not made to build up, and they are too weak to pull
down. Stultitia nata est in cord pueri, and virga disciplinae fugabit illam.
It is but wantonness; correction Prove. 22.
will help it.

FINIS.
PSALM. 69. V. 9. The zeal of thine house has eaten me.
Certain learned and wise men of old time, that had no understanding or savor
of God; when they considered with themselves, to what end and purpose mankind
was created and set in this world: after they had driven the matter as far as
they might by natural knowledge, at length they concluded; some, that man was
made to know the properties and qualities, the convenience or difference of
natural things, either in the air, or in the water, or in the earth, or under
the earth; Some other, that man was made to consider and behold the Sun and
Moon, the Stars, and course, and revolutions of the Heavens: And so they
judged, that man which either had most abundance of natural reason, or beheld
and considered the heavens best, to be most perfect of all others; and that he
came nearest to the end of his creation. Thus said they, as men without feeling
of God, only endued with the light of nature.

But (as God himself declares, who fashioned us, and made us, and knows us
best,) the very true end why man was made, was to know and to honor God:
Therefore whosoever knows him best, and honors him with most reverence, he is
most perfect, he comes nearest the end of his creation.

When Solomon had described the deceaveable vanities of the world, and said,
vanity of vanities, vanity of vanities, all is vanity. When he had concluded
by long discourse, that riches, Eccl. 1.
Empires, honor, pleasures, knowledge, and whatsoever else under the Sun, is
but vanity: he knitteth up the matter with these words, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments: Eccles. 12.
for this is the whole duty of man: that is, this is truth, and no vanity;
this is our perfection; to this end are we made: not to live in eating and
drinking, not to pass our time in pleasure and follies, not to heap up those
things which are daily taken from us, or from which we are daily taken away;
but that in our words, in our life, in our body, and in our soul we do
service unto God; that we look above the Sun and Moon, and all the heavens;
that we become the Temples of the holy Ghost; that the holy Spirit of God may
dwell in us, and make us fit instruments of the glory of God.

Therefore God gave his holy word, and has continued it from the beginning of
the world until this day: notwithstanding the Philosophers and learned men in
all ages, who scorned it out as the word of folly, (for so it seems to them
that perish;) notwithstanding the wicked Princes, and Tyrants, and high powers
of the world, who consumed and burnt it, as false and wicked and seditious
doctrine; notwithstanding the whole world and power of darkness were ever bent
against it, yet has He wonderfully continued and preserved it without loss of
one letter until this day: that we have whereby truly to know him the true and
only God, and his son Jesus Christ whom he sent.

Therefore have we Temples and Churches, places to resort unto all together; to
honor, to worship, and to acknowledge him to be our God; to join our hearts
and voices together, and to call upon his holy name. In such places God has at
all times used to open his Majesty, and to show his power; In such places God
has made us a special promise to hear our prayers, whenever we call upon
him: Therefore are they called the dwelling place and house of God; In such
places all godly men set their greatest pleasure; and thought themselves
miserable, when they were secluded or put off from the same: as the Prophet and
holy Prince David, Laetatus Psalm. 122.
sum in his quae dicta sunt mihi, in domum Domini ibimus: O (says that holy
man) my heart rejoiced within my body, when my fellows called upon me, and
said, let us go into the house of the Lord. Again, I am in love with the
beauty of thy house. And again, O how beautiful is thy Tabernacle, O Lord, O
thou the God of hosts: my heart longs and faints to come within thy Courts.
His spirits were ravished with the sight and majesty of the Tabernacle: not for
that the place it self at that time was so beautiful; for in David's time it
was almost rotten and ruinous, a homely thing to behold, nothing in comparison
to that Temple that was afterward built by Solomon: But therein stood the show
and worthiness of that holy place, that Gods truth and law was opened and
proclaimed in it; and the Sacraments and ceremonies so used, in such form and
order, as God had commanded them to be used, and the people received them
obediently, and lived thereafter.

Therefore when the Tabernacle was restored; when the Arc was fet home from
Obed-edom, and set in the mount Sion; when religion Revived, which through the
negligence and malice of Saul was forsaken; when he saw his Nobility, his
Bishops, his Priests, and all his people willing and forward, he could not
refrain himself, but brake out and sang, Haec est dies quam fecit Dominus,
exultemus and laetemur in ea: This is the day which the Lord has made, let us
be glad and rejoice in it: Let us be merry, and joy, that ever we lived to see
it. Even so Paul, when in his time he saw the Gospel take root and prosper,
and that the savor of life was powered abroad, that the kingdom of God was
enlarged, and the kingdom of Satan shaken down, his heart leaped, and sprang
within him; Ecce, nunc tempus acceptabile; behold, now is the acceptable time;
behold, God has looked down mercifully upon the world; behold, the day of
salvation is come upon us.

But the godly man, as he rejoices at the beauty of Gods house, so when
contrariwise he sees the same disordered filthily, when he sees the
Sacraments of God abused, truth trodden under foot, the people mocked, the name
of God dishonored; he cannot but lament and mourn, and find himself wounded
at heart. When the good King Josias saw the book of God, which was so long hid
in the wall, and out of remembrance; when he considered the blindness in which
they had lived, and the unkindnesse of their forefathers, he could not
forbear, but fell a weeping: he feared least God should take vengeance upon
them for so great contempt of his word. When Jeremy saw the wilfulness and
frowardness of the people, which would not submit themselves and be obedient
unto God, he cried, Oh that my head were full of water, and mine eyes Ierem. 9.
a fountain of tears: that I might weep day and night etc. Such care had they
for Gods people. Thus the zeal of Gods house had eaten them up.

Zeal (if any man know not the nature of the word) is an earnest affection,
and vehement love: as is the love of a mother toward her children, or of the
natural child toward his mother: This zeal cannot abide to see that thing
which it loves, despised or hurt. Such zeal and care carries God over his
people; he loves them as a mother loves her children; he will not suffer them
to be hurt. By the Prophet Esaias he says, can Esaias. 49.
a woman forget her child, and not have compassion on the son of her womb?
Though they should forget, yet will not I forget thee. Zachary Zach: 2.
also says, he that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. For God has
said, they shall be my people, and I will be their God. Such care likewise
bear all the godly toward their God: they love him with all their soul, with
all their heart, with all their strength; they reverence him as their father,
they are grieved with any blasphemy, and with any contempt of his holy name.

But as every man, be he never so wicked, yea even he that says in his heart,
there is no God; which is become filthy and abominable in all his doings, yet
in his talk outwardly, says, he has a God, and that he believes in him:
even so there is none so wicked, or so forsaken of God in his heart, but he
persuades himself he has the zeal of God: and what he does in self-love of
his own fantasy, he will bear in hand he does it for the love of God. The
overthrowers and wasters of the Church will seem to show a special care for
the Church: dissemblers, hypocrites, despisers, scorners, even such as sin
against the holy Ghost, which deny the truth of God after they have known it,
which witting and knowing fight against the truth, which say of Christ we will
not have him to rule over us, which work that sin which will never be
forgiven, in this world, nor in the world to come, yet notwithstanding will
pretend and seem to have the zeal of God.

Thus the Scribes and Pharisees set up their bristles against Christ; thy
Disciples keep not the common fast thou suffer them to pull and to eat the
ears of corn, thou suffer them to eat with unwashed hands, thou breakest
the tradition of the Elders, thou breakest the law of God which he gave us by
Moses, thou art a seditious teacher, thou art a Schismatic, thou art an
Heretic. They said, We fast twice in the week, we have Abraham to our Father,
we are Moses Disciples. Therefore when they heard Stephen speaking those
heavenly words; Behold, I see Act: 7.
the heavens open, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God,
through zeal they gave a shout with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and
ran upon him all at once.

When Christ had said, Ye shall see the Son of man fit at the right hand of
God, and come in Mark: 14.
the clouds of heaven: the high Priest, through zeal, rent his clothes; and
said, ye have heard the blasphemy; this naughty man speaks blasphemy
against God: he called a Council; the Scribes and Pharisees met together; not
one man amongst them, but of themselves: they looked about them as if they only
were the pillars and buttresses of the Church, and were only zealous and
careful for the house of God. But their meeting was (as David forespake, and
as Peter declares, and as We know) against the Lord, and against his anointed:
they were touched with the zeal of their own glory, and not with the zeal of
Gods truth; they sought their own praise, but not the praise which is of God:
they made cracks that they knew the Scriptures, that they were the Temple of
God, that they had the consent of all Antiquity: as others have done since that
time, and as we see many do this day: and in very deed, these men have now
even as much as they had then, as by proof and trial it will appear.

There are others, which have a feeling of God, and a great care for his
Church: but such a feeling and care as comes either of their own fantasies, or
of some opinion and credit they have in their fathers which were before them;
not of the understanding of Gods pleasure. Such are they which offend God, not
of malice or wilfulness, but only for lack of teaching and understanding:
Such were they which withstood S. Paul in all his preaching, for that they took
him for an Heretic, and thought his preaching was against God. I bear them
witness (says he) that they have the zeal of God, but not according to Rom: 10.
knowledge: Such a zeal have many who forbid that which God commands, and
command that which God forbids: such a zeal had Paul himself; I was a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and an oppressor: but I was received to 1. Tim. I.
mercy, for I did it ignorantly without belief. Such a zeal have they who
think they do God good service, when they kill and murder the righteous and
good servants of God. Such a zeal have they, who (as says Nazianzen) defend
Christ against Christ, and defend the Church against the Church. And these
things do they, not of malice, nor of wilfulness, nor against their
conscience, but because they know not God the father, nor his Christ whom he
has sent: therefore they stumble at Christ, and spurn away the Gospel of God
and think ill and speak evil of the word of life, because they know not the
Gospel of God, nor the word of life. Thus they persuade themselves, that they
defend the Church, that they honor the son of God, that they do God great
service, and that they have the zeal of God.

But this pride was ever in the heart of man and it appeared even in our
grandfire Adam: whatsoever likes us well, we think that cannot but please God.
Such is the opinion we fondly conceive in our fantasies: in trust whereof,
whatsoever we do we think our selves sure and safe. Origin writing upon Origin
in 10, Romans lib. 8.
the place of the Apostle, Zelum Dei habent, sed non secundum scientiam: they
have the zeal of God, but not according to knowledge: says, similiter potest
dicere Apostolus and de aliis, quod timorem Dei habeant, sed non secundum
scientiam; de aliis etc. in like manner the Apostle may say of others, they
have the fear of God, but not according to knowledge; of others they have the
love of God, but not according to knowledge; of another, he has the faith of
God, but not according to knowledge; and another may be said to fast, but not
according to knowledge: And so in all things, whatsoever we do, unless we
have knowledge and understanding, it may be said unto us, that we have the
zeal of a good work, but not according to knowledge. I deo danda est
praecipue opera scientiae, ne res nobis infeliciter accidat, ut in fide
pofitifrustremur a fide, zelum habentes bonorum decidamus a bonis: Therefore
all heed is chiefly to be given to the attaining of knowledge, least it go not
well with us; least w^ fail from our faith, when we think we believe; and
thinking we have a zeal of good works, we be found void of all good works. The
wise man says, this was not enough for them, that Wisd. 14
they erred in the knowledge of God: but whereas they lived in great wars of
ignorance, th^se so many and so great plagues they called peace. The zeal that
they had, and the contentation of their hearts, made them believe that all
their superstition and idolatry, and other enormities was Catholic unity.

This zeal, as on the one side it has many tokens of goodness, for that it
has a conscience, and a fear, and an obedience toward God; so on the other
side it is very dangerous, because it lacks knowledge: even as a ship, for
lack of a governor, is ever in danger of the Rocks; and as the body which has
no eye, is ever in danger of falling. Such kind of zeal the greater it is,
the worser it is; the more vehement it seems, the more vehemently it fights
against God. For our good meaning makes not our doings good: our zeal is not
a rule whereby we may measure out, either our faith, or our works: but only the
known will and pleasure of God. Therefore speaks God in this manner by the
Prophet andsay; my thoughts are Esai: 55.
not your thoughts, neither are your ways my ways. Therefore says Solomon,
Trust in the Prove: 3.
Lord with all thine heart, and lean not to thy own wisdom: in all thy ways
acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy doings. This counsel also does Moses
give, take heed that ye do as Deuteronomy: 5.
the Lord your God has commanded you: turn not aside to the right hand, nor to
the left.

But the true and godly zeal proceeds not from hypocrisy, or intention, but
is led and trained by understanding, and is molten into the heart; and the
vehemence and heat of it, no man knows, but he that feels it: It takes
away the use of reason: it eats and devoureth up the heart; even as the thing
that is eaten, is turned into the substance of him that eats it; and as iron
while it is burning hot, is turned into the nature of the fire: so great and so
just is the grief that they which have this zeal, conceive, when they see
Gods house spoiled, or his holy name dishonored. So says Elias; I have been
very jealous 1. King. 19
for the Lord God of hoasts: for the children of Israel have forsaken thy
covenant, broken down thy Altars, and slain thy Prophets with the sword, and I
only am left, and they seek my life to take it away. So when Moses found that
the people had forsaken God, and were fallen down before a molten Calfe, and
did put their trust in the work of their own hands, his wrath waxed hot, and he
cast the tables out of his hand, and brake them in pieces beneath the Exodus 32.
mountain: his heart was so inflamed with zeal, that he considered not what
he had in his hand, nor what he did Jeremy, when he saw the disorder of the
people, and How they were not mended with his preaching; and would inwardly
conceal the grief he conceaved; and purposed, not to make mention of the
Lord, nor to speak any more in his name; yet could he not: for his zeal found
way, and brake out; His word, says he, was in Ierem. 20.
mine heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I was weary with for
bearing, and I could not stay.

And, albeit there is much likeness between the rage and fury of hypocrites,
and the godly zeal of good men; for either are hot, either are vehement,
either wishes redress: yet this is an evident difference; godly zeal is
tempered and seasoned with charity; the ungodly is joined with bitterness and
revenge; the godly seeks to win, the ungodly to kill and to destroy; the
ungodly have their hands full of blood; they kill the Prophets; they say we
have a law, and by our law He must dye; they say; come let us destroy them,
that they be no more a nations Let not the name of Israel be had any more in
remembrance; they burn the holy books of the Scriptures, as did Aza and
Antiochus; they say, ransack it, pull it down, raze it to the foundation, let
not one be left alive; they dig up the bodies of the dead out of their graves,
they show their cruelty upon the bones and ashes which were long before
buried, and well nigh consumed. It grieveth them when they lack upon whom they
may whet their bloudthirstie and cruel zeal; It grieveth them, no one thing
else so much, that they did not work surely, and cut up the root. Such is the
zeal of the ungodly: even such a zeal as was in Nero, in Caligula, (of whom
it is reported, he wished that all the Romans had but one neck, that he might
cut off all their heads at one stroke;) as was in Herod, in Anna^, and Caiphas,
and the like murderers.

But the godly, when they see any disorder, they do nothing like the other:
they mourn in their hearts, to see that the truth is not received; and to see
the minds of their brethren so obstinately hardened: they make prayer to God
for them; they are deeply touched with the feeling of such calamities, which
God lays upon other. The zeal of Moses could not like the Idolatry of the
people* yet he went unto the Lord again, and said, Now if thou pardon their
sin, thy mercy shall appear: but if thou will not, I pray thee raze Exodus 32.
me out of thy book which thou last written. Christ lamented over Jerusalem o
Jerusalem, Jerusale^ which killest the Prophets, and stonest them which Mat. 23.
are sent to thee: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as
the hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not: behold, your
habitation shall be left unto you desolate. Paul suffered much at the hands of
the wicked Jews: they troubled the Church of God, they hindered the course of
the Gospel, they were enemies of the Cross of Christ, they were dogs, they
were Concilio^ yet he says, I have great heaviness, and continual sorrow in
Romans 9.
mine heart: for I would wish my self to be separated from Christ for my
brethren that are my kindsmen according to the flesh, which are the Israelites.

David says, Mine eyes gush out with rivers Psalm. 118.
of water, because they keep not thy law. And again, My zeal has even
consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words. Again, I saw the
transgressors, and was grieved, because they kept not thy word. And when he
saw the whole nation of Israel wasted by the enemies, how mournful a complaint
made he to God? O God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance: thine holy
Temple have they defiled, Psalm. 79.
and made Jerusalem heaps of stones: the dead bodies of thy servants have they
given to be meat unto the fowls of the heaven, and the flesh of thy Saints
unto the Beasts of the earth. At this time, when the Tabernacle was lost, when
Saul was unquiet, and the Priests were slain, and the Prophets despised, and
the people left without all comfort, he powers out his heart in these words;
Zelus domustuae comedit me: O Lord the zeal I bear unto thy house, has eaten
me up; it inflameth my he^rt, dries my blood, consumes my marrow: such a care
had he for the house of God; it was death unto him to see it so destroyed and
laid wast.

So Christ, when he saw the Temple of God foulely and unseemly abused; that
they made the holy place a place for their unlawful and unhonest gain by
usury; that they turned Religion into robbery, sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves, and
kept their banks for exchange in the Temple; when the Priests and Levites,
which should serve God, were become Merchants, and served themselves; when the
Temple or house of God (which David purposed, and Solomon finished, and
Ezechias and Esras and other godly Princes preserved, in which was kept the
book of the law, whither all the people assembled together to serve God) was
not used like Gods house, but like a common fair or market, and was made a
den of thieves; when these gross abuses were suffered, and things were let
run to such extremities, and all this under pretense of holiness; as if it
were not only lawful, but needs it must be so: moved with zeal, he could not
abide it; he made a scourge of small cords, and drove them all out of Ioh. 2.
the Temple, and poured out the mony-changers, and overthrew the tables, and
said, make not my fathers house a house of merchandise: And his Disciples
remembered that it was written, the zeal of thy house has eaten me up. This
was no frantic or melancholy passion, neither in Moses, nor in David, nor in
Christ: Moses was a very meek Numb. 12.
man, above all that were on the earth; David was a man that hears not, and
in whose mouth are no reproves; And Christ said, learn of me, for I am humble
and meek: when his Disciples James and John grew wrothful against the
Samaritanes that would not receive him, and said, Lord will thou that Luke 9.
we command that fire come down from heaven, and consume them, even as Elias
did? He turned about, and rebuked them, and said, ye know not of what spirit
you are: yet through zeal for Gods house, Christ whipped out the buyers and
sellers, David shed forth tears abundantly, and Moses dashed in pieces the
tables of Gods Commandments. All men ought to be patient and gentle in matters
appertaining to themselves: but in Gods cause no man must yield or be patient.

In our days, upon whom the end of the world is come, when we did lately see
those times whereof our Savior foretold so long sithence, that desolation
should be in the holy place; and such confusion, ignorance, and blindness, that
men should stumble at noondaies; that truth should be a stranger upon earth;
that men should forsake wholesome doctrine, and give ear unto fables; that the
mystery of iniquity should work; and the very elect (if it were possible) be
deceived, what trial was made of true and godly zeal? How notably did it show
it self against the rage and fury of the wicked? What should I speak hereof?
The examples are fresh: you cannot forget them, you heard of them so late, it
is so late since you did behold them. What moved so many, so learned, so
virtuous, to yield their backs to the scourge, their necks to the tormenters,
their bodies to the fire, to forsake their goods, their friends, their parents,
their wives and children, but the zeal of Gods house? Neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor things present, nor things to come, was able to separate them
from the love of God: they continued steadfast unto the end. The zeal of Gods
house did eat them up.

But now God has restored us; he has taken away the desolation from us; he
has given us his truth; he has revealed the man of sin; he has raised up a
banner of hope: we see and enjoy such things as many Kings and Prophets would
have enjoyed, and could not: what remains, but that we take the zeal of the
Lords house into our hearts, and seek by all means the glory of the same? As
our good fathers and brethren showed the vehemence of their love in disliking
the disorders which troubled the Church of God, so in this blessed peace which
God gives to his Church, let us witness our earnest zeal in seeking that it
may be made beautiful and established for ever.

Let our next care be, to continue possession: Kingdoms are preserved by the
same means, by which they were first gotten: that which is conquered by zeal,
by careful zeal must be kept. It was said of Anniball, that he knew how to
get the victory, but how to use it he knew not: Many have lost that by
negligence, which they had by diligence won. Therefore we ought, as our
hearts were careful and desirous to see these days, so by our thankfulness
to God for so great a blessing, and by christian and godly providence foresee
such means whereby we may long hereafter enjoy the same. When Phydias had made
the pourtraiture of Jupiter Pisanus, he overlaid it with oil, that it might
continue fresh and green, and never putrify: When God gave order to Noah for
making the Arc, he said, thou shall pitch it within and without with pitch,
that it might be sound and sure and abide the waves.

He which challenges to himself that proud and wanton name, to be called the
head of the universal Church, after by little and little he was gotten into
possession, was not behind hand by all means to maintain and keep the same:
In this policy he took away the reading of the Scriptures from the people; he
made Noblemen and Princes his Cardinals; he threw down, and set up, and
changed whom and what he would; The Kings and States of the world, the
Bishops, Professors, and Scholars in Universities, and Preachers, were
brought to swear allegiance and obedience unto him: I devise not this the
stories here of are abroad, and the oath which they took is known; his
authority grew greater then the authority of general Counsels; nothing might
be decreed in Councels, but what pleased him; none might be admitted to speak
in Councels, but such as were sworn to him; he had all law in his breast.
There was sometimes a proclamation made in Rome that, for considerations, no
man should erect or build up any Theater; and that if any were set up, it
should be rased and pulled down: Pompeius, a Gentleman of great wealth and
noble courage, did build a Theater; such a one as before had not been seen,
which would receive 2500 men, contrary to the Proclamation and order taken: But
doubting least the next Magistrates should destroy it, he caused a place of
religion to be set upon it, and called it the Temple of Venw: whereby he
provided, that if any would overthrow it because it was a Theater, they might
yet spare it for the Temples sake: for to pull down a Temple, was sacrilege.
Even so there have been proclamations and Canons that no man should be called
the chief or the head of all Churches, or usurp such authority over others:
but when the Pope built up his supremacy against the meaning of such Canons, he
pretended religion for his doing; he said it was. de jure divino that no man
should presume or attempt against it, and that so his power might continue
forever.

If they have been thus careful to maintain falsehood, how much more careful
should we be to maintain the truth? If they to advance their own kingdom, how
much more we to set forth the kingdom of God, and to build up the Church of
Christ? And if they sought to do that by lies, and by false means, why should
we be slack to use the right, and true, and good means, whereby that good
thing which God has wrought for us may be established? And albeit there be
many ways, by which the kingdom of God may be maintained; as the favor and
countenance of the Prince, which so comfort and cherishes the Church, as
the sun beams comfort and cherish the earth; and knowledge, and learning, and
discipline, which are as the life and the sinews, and without which the Church
must needs fall asunder: at this time, I will leave to speak of the rest, and
only stay upon Learning, which may truly be called the life or the soul of the
Church, and of Christian Religion.

How necessary a thing they have counted Learning to the setting forth of
Religion, the stories of our old Fathers, of Heathens, and Christians in all
ages do witness: They thought that neither Religion might stand without
knowledge, nor knowledge were to be esteemed without Religion. Charles the
great, that he might the better plant Religion in Saxony and Helvetia, did
erect many places for increase of Learning: he knew well that there was no
other way better to establish Religion. The Cathedral Churches, before such
times as ignorance and blindness grew over all the world and brought in an
universal corruption, maintained Schools of learning, that the doctrine which
was taught in those places, might be defended against the gainesayers by such
learned men as were there bred up. The Princes of Germany, and the free
cities, after they had received the Gospel, they dissolved their Monasteries,
which had been harbourers for such as lived in idleness: and set up Schools
and Colleges, which should be nurceries to breed up learned men that might be
able to teach the people, and to maintain Religion: whereby it came to pass,
that in short time they had great store of worthy and learned men.

This did they well see, that have been the enemies of Religion: and therefore
used all means to hinder the increase of Learning, that they might have the
better way to overthrow Religion: For if Learning decay, it is likely that
Religion cannot abide. Bear with me, if I speak that which may seem more fit
for some other place, then for this audience: the best here understands me
well. Inother Countries the receiving of the Gospel has always been cause
that Learning was more set by, and learning has ever been the furtherance of
the Gospel. In England I know not how it comes otherwise to pass: for since
the Gospel has been received, the maintenance for learning has been decayed,
and the lack of Learning will be the decay of the Gospel. Would God it were
not so, or that yet, before the fault be incurable, there may be some redress.

Loath I am to speak; yet the case so requires that it is needful to be
spoken. I trust I shall speak in the hearing of them that will consider it.
Maintenance of Learning, whereby an able and sufficient ministry may grow and
be established in all the Churches of this Realm, is to be wished for: The
good estate of this noble Kingdom, the comfort of posterity, the stay of
Religion, the continuing of the Gospel, the removing of darkness hangs upon
it. One asked sometimes, how it was that in Athens, so goodly and great a
City, there were no Physicians? To whom this answer was made, because there
are no rewards appointed for them that practice Physic. The same answer may be
made for our times: the cause why the Church of God is so forsaken, is the want
of zeal in them that should either for their cuttesie, or for their ability,
be fosterers of learning, and increase the livings where occasion is, and give
hope and comfort to learned men. What said I? increase? nay the Livings and
provision which heretofore were given to this use, are taken away.

Have patience, if any such be here, as I well know there are, whom these
things touch suffer me to speak the truth; it is Gods cause. The livings of
such as are in the Ministry, are not in their hands to whom they are due: all
other laborers and artificers have their hire increased double as much as it
was wont to be: only the poor man that labors and sweateth in the Vineyard
of the Lord of hosts, has his hire abridged and abated. I speak not of the
Curates; but of Parsonages and Vicarages, that is of the places which are the
Castles and Towers of fence for the Lords Temple: They seldom pass now adays
from the Patron, if he be no better then a Gentleman, but either for the Lease,
or for present money: Such Merchants are broken into the Church of God; a great
deal more intolerable then were they who^ Christ chased and whipped out of the
Temple. Thus they that should be careful for Gods Church; that should be
Patrons to provide for the consciences of the people, and to place among them a
learned Minister (who might be able to preach the word unto them out of season
and in season, and to fulfill his Ministry,) seek their own, and not that
which is Jesus Christ's; they serve not Jesus Christ, but their belly. And this
is done, not in one place, or in one country, but throughout England: A
Gentleman cannot keep his house, unless he have a Parsonage or two in farm
for his provision.

O merciful God, whereto will this grow at last? If the misery which this
plague works would reach but to one age, it were tolerable: but it will be a
plague to posterity; it will be the decay and desolation of Gods Church.

Young men, which are toward and learned, see this; they see, that he which
feeds the flock, has least part of the milk; he which goes to warfare
has not half his wages: Therefore they are weary and discouraged, they change
their studies, some become prentices, some turn to Physic, some to Law, all
shun and fly the Ministry. And besides the hinderance that thus grows by
wicked dealing of Patrons by reason of the Impropriations, the Vicarages in
many places, and in the properest market-townes are so simple, that no man can
live upon them: and therefore no man will take them. They were wont to say,
Beneficia fine cura; Benefices without charge: but now may be said, Cura fine
Beneficio; Charge or cure without Benefice. I speak not this of myself: many
here present know I speak the truth: and my self know the places which have
continued still these many years without a Minister resident among them, and
have provided themselves as they might with their own money.

Your Graces subjects had hope of amendment, in your Graces late Visitation:
but yet it stands still in case as miserable as it did before. I know, your
Grace hears not of these matters: And I hope, God will work in Your Gracious
heart, to provide some remedy against them. For otherwise, the Schools will be
forsaken, the Church desolate, the people wild and dismayed, the Gospel
discredited: otherwise, we shall see that wrought against the house of God,
that never any Jeroboam, or Julian, or Licinius could have brought to pass
against us. This noble Realm, which ever was famous for the name of Learning,
is like thereby to come to such Ignorance and Barbarisine, as has not bin
heard of in any memory before our time.

I know, that there are grievous complaints made, that the Bishops appoint
Priests and Ministers that are ignorant, and have no understanding in the
Latin tongue. Would God it were not true: or would God that they which be the
causers hereof, would somewhat help to amend it. But alas, are we able to make
learned men upon the sudden? Or can we make others then such as come unto us,
or will come to live in misery?

But there are many which can say, such as be Ministers in the Church, should
teach freely, without hope of recompense or hire for their labor; Our preaches
are no better then Peter and Paul, and the other Apostles; they are no better
then the holy Prophets, who lived poorly; poverty is a commendable estate. So
say some, in like devotion as did Judas, What needed this wast? this might
have, been sold for much, and given to the poor not that he cared for the
poor, but because he was a theife and had the bag, and bare that which was
given. I doubt not, there are many with teach Christ for Christ's sake; which say
in their soul, the Lord is my portion; who in that heavy time, from which God
delivered the, if they might have received their life only for a recompense,
would have been glad to take the pains; who seek you, and not yours; which
have forsaken all they had, to follow Christ: I doubt not there are such.

But for the hope of posterity, I report me to all you which are Fathers, and
have children for whom ye are careful. Although your selves have a zeal and
care for the house of God, yet will you breed them up, keep them at school
until 24 years old to your charges, that in the end they may live in glorious
poverty, that they may live poorly, and naked, like the Prophets and Apostles?
Our posterity shall rue that ever such fathers went before them: and Chronicles
shall report this contempt of Learning among the punishments and murraines and
other plagues of God. They shall leave it written in what time, and under whose
reign this was done. Or if we grow so barbarous, that we consider not this, or
be not able to draw it into chronicle, yet foreign nations will not spare to
write this, and publish it to our everlasting reproach and shame.

In the mean time, what may be guessed of their meaning, which thus ravin and
spoil the house of God? which decay the provisio^ thereof, and so basely
esteem the Ministers of his Gospel? they cannot say to God, the zeal of thy
house has eaten me up. Howsoever in other things they do well; howsoever they
seem to rejoice at the prosperity of Sion, and to seek the safety and
preservation of the Lords anointed, yet needs must it be that by these means
foreign power (of which this Realm by the mercy of God is happily delivered)
shall again be brought in upon us. Such things shall be done unto us, as we
before suffered: the truth of God shall be taken away; the holy Scriptures
burnt and consumed in fire; a mavelous darkness and calamity must needs
ensue. For if the tempest be so dark in the sea, that the load-star loose her
light, and the needle fail to give token of the North Pole, no marvel though
the ship lose her course, and be swallowed up in the sands.

The Gospel of Christ is the fountain of light and of knowledge: It cannot be
maintained by ignorance and darkness; these be the props of their kingdom,
which take away the Scriptures; which hold the people in blindness; which fly
the light; which have their Common Prayers, administer the Sacraments, marry,
bury their dead in a strange tongue, that the people may understand nothing;
which make a famine of hearing the word of God; which stop up the springs of
the water of life; which take away the keys of the kingdom of heaven, and
neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that would enter; which say,
ignorance is the mother of devotion; and the Church is then in best order, and
the people most devout, when they are hood-winkt, and blinded, and see nothing.

These are not fit instruments wherewith we may overcome the adversaries; this
is not the sword of the Spirit; these are not the spiritual weapons which cast
down holds and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God.
What man, that would keep out his enemy, will pull down his holds? What
Captain that means to give a forcible assault upon the enemy, will discourage
his fighting soldiers? but our soldiers are out of courage; our Castles are
fallen: therefore that which we fear, will fall upon us.

The Ox that treads out the corn is mussled; he that goes to warfare,
receives not his wages; the cry hereof goes up into the ears of the Lord of
hosts. He will not abide so great contempt of his word and preachers: his own
name is thereby dishonored. Our Savior says, he that despises Luke 10. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
you, despises me. And St Paul, he that despises these things, despises not
man but God. And think we, that he will suffer his holy name to be despised?
nay, his wrath is already kindled; he has already begun his judgments, and
therefore many places are left desolate. There is none that can warn them of
their sin, none that can move them to repentance, none that can preach unto
them forgiveness through Christ, none that can instruct them in the comfort of
everlasting life: because they work such things against the Lord, the hearts of
many are astonished; though they hear, they understand not; they scorn and
jest at the word of salvation; it is unto them a savor of death unto death;
they are earthly minded; whose God is their belly, and whose glory is their
shame.

For this cause you live still in your sins, in adultery, in covetousnes, and
in pride, without any feeling of conscience, without any fear of God. Your
daughters, your Heirs, to whom you shall leave your lands, are stolen away
from you. Robberies and thefts are so common, as if it were not only lawful,
but also commendable; as if sin were no sin, and hell fire but a fable.

Thus we provoke God to anger: many walk, of whom we cannot think but with
weeping: they are the enemies of the cross of Christ: the name of God is
blasphemed through them. Many are so ignorant, they know not what the
Scriptures are, they know not that there are any Scriptures, they call them
heretical and new Doctrine: many will believe neither side, whatsover they
allege; bring they truth, bring they falsehood; each they Christ, teach they
Antichrist, they will believe neither, they have so hardened their hearts: Be
the Preacher rough or gentle, learned or unlearned; let him use authority of
the Scriptures, of the Doctors, of the Councels, of Decrees or Decretals, of
Gods law, of man's law, nothing will move them, nothing will please them,
because the Ministry of God, and thereby God himself is despised.

These words happily seem sharp and over vehement: but the darkness of our hearts
against God, and the lack of zeal to his house, enforce me to them. We are
almost fallen into the lowest pit: we are left without zeal, as senseless men,
and as if we had clean forgotten our selves, as the heathen, which know not
God. Therefore, unless we repent, the kingdom of God shall be taken away from
us: he will send upon this land a famine of the word: Jerusalem shall be
overthrown, and made an heap of stones: the man of sin, and they which have
not the love of the truth, shall prevail with many, and withdraw them from
obedience to the Prince: this noble Realm shall be subject to foreign
nations. All this will the zeal of the Lord of hosts bring to pass.

I could have spent this time in opening some other matter: but nothing, in my
judgment, is more worthy your good consideration and speedy redress. I would
be loath, rashly or rudely to abuse the reverence of this place: but unless
these things be cared for; unless we show forth greater zeal then hitherto; if
the years to come eat up and take away from the Ministry, as the late years
have done, there will not be left, within a while, any to speak the word of God
out of this place, the Pulpits shall have none to use them, the people shall
grow wild and void of understanding.

When Xerxes beheld the great company of Soldiers, sudde^ly he brake into
tears and wept bitterly: one said to him, o Sir, you have cause to rejoice,
you have a goodly company, they are able to fight for you against any nation.
But what shall become of them, says Xerxes? after a 100 years not one of all
these shall be left alive. If the view of the small number of Preachers might
be taken, how few they are, and how thin they come up, we have greater cause
then Xerxes to lament, if we have any zeal to the house of God: for of the
Preachers which now are, within few years none will remain alive. And Xerxes
his soldiers left issue behind them, which might afterward serve their
country: But there is like to be small increase for the supply of learned men.
The Lord shall lack men to bring in his harvest: the little ones shall call for
bread, and there shall be none to give it them. They that shall come after us,
shall see this to be true; there is no house so spoiled, as the house of the
Lord; there is no servant so little rewarded, as the servant of Christ, and the
dispensers of the mysteries of God.

Oh that your Grace did behold the miserable disorder of Gods Church: or that
you might foresee the calamities which will follow. It is a part of your
Kingdom, and such a part, as is the principal prop and stay of the rest. I
will Cyrill: Epist: ad Theodos: and valent.
say to your Majesty, as Cyrillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors
Theodosius and Valentinian, Ab ea quae erga Deum est pietate Reipub: vestrae
status pendet; the good estate and welfare of your Commonwealth hangs upon
true godliness. You are our governor, you are the Nurce of Gods Church; we
must open this grief before you. God knows if it may be redressed, it has
grown so long, and is run so far: but if it may be redressed, there is no
other beside your Highness, that can redress it.

I hope, I speak truly, that which I speak without flattery; that God has
endued your grace with such measure of learning and knowledge, as no other
Christian Prince: he has given you peace, happiness, the love and true hearts
of your subjects. Oh turn and employ these to the glory of God; that God may
confirm in your Grace the thing which he has begun. To this end has God
placed Kings and Princes in their State, as David says, that they may serve
the Lord; that they may see, and cause others to see to the furniture of the
Church. The good Emperor Justinian cared for this, as much as for his life:
Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, and other godly Princes called themselves
Vasallos, the subjects and bond-servants of God* they remembered that God
furnished them in their houses; and were not unmindfull to furnish his house.

When Augustus had beautified Rome with setting up many fair buildings, he
said, (...) later it iam, marmore am reddidi: I found it made of brick, but I
leave it made of marble. Your Grace, when God sent you to your inheritance and
the right of this Realm, found the Church in horrible confusion: and in
respect of the true worship of God a Church of brick; or rather, as Ezechiel
says, daubed up with unseasoned mortar. Your Grace has already redressed the
doctrine now cast your eyes toward the Ministry; give courage and countenance
unto Learning, that Gods house may be served: so shall you leave to the Church
of God, a testimony that the zeal of the Lords house had eaten you up.

And you, o dearly beloved, if there be any such which are neither hot nor
cold; which do the work of the Lord negligently; which esteem the word of God
but as a matter of policy; which are ashamed to be called Professors of the
Gospel of Christ: pray unto God, that he will increase your zeal. Let us
continue rooted and built in Christ, and stablished in the faith: let us have
care for the house of God. Whosoever is not after this sort zealous, is a man
of a double heart. We may not halt between two opinions: If the Lord be God,
follow him; but if Ball be he then go after him: he that is not with Christ,
is against him. Many talk of the Gospel, and glory in their knowledge: but it
is neither talk, nor knowledge, which shall save them in that day. He that
fears the Lord, and serves him with a pure heart, and may truly say, the
zeal of thine house has consumed me, he shall be saved. If they shall not
escape which have zeal without knowledge, what shall become of us, which have
knowledge without zeal?

And you, whosoever you are that by such means have decayed the Lords house,
and abridged the provision and maintenance thereof, and see the miserable wrack
of Gods Church: if there be any zeal of God in you, if you have any fellowship
of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy, if you love God, if you desire the
continuance of the Gospel, Oh remember you have the Patrimony due unto them
that should attend in the Lords house. You take unto your selves wrongfully
that which was not lotted for you Give unto Caesar those things which belong to
Caesar, and unto God the things which appertain to him, and make for the
beauty and furniture of his house. Enrich your selves by lawful means, and
without the spoil and wast of Gods Church. Let not the Ministry by your
means be despised: you enriched them which mocked, and blinded, and devoured
you; spoil not them now that feed, and instruct, and comfort you. Let us seek
the glory of God; let us at length serve the Lord, and not our belly and
greedy wantonness.

So shall God bless you, and prosper you in all your affairs: so shall he
strike a terror of you into all foreign Princes that dwell about you: so
shall your heart be kept steadfast in the hand of God: so shall your heart be
perfect before the Lord: so shall you leave such as shall always praise the
Lord in Sion: so shall you see your childrens children, and peace upon Israel.

And thou, o most merciful Father, grant that thy words be not spoken in vain:
it is thy cause. Thou art our Father, we are as clay in thine hands. Thou have
the key of our hearts. give zeal to them that have knowledge, give knowledge
to them that have zeal; that they may be enflamed and ravished with the love
of thy house, to sorrow for the decay thereof, and to do all their endeavor
to build up and establish the same for ever.

AMEN.
FINIS.

