A Bargain for Bachelors Or: The BEST WIFE In the World for a PENNY Fairly
Offered To young men for directing their choice, and to Maids for their
Imitation.

By Mrs. Susanna Jesserson.

You that have got no Wives, do not refuse,
To learn from hence whom you may fitly choose;
And you that have 'um, here may let them see,
Better then in their Glass, what they should be.
Printed for E. A. 1675.

The Virtuous matron, OR, The Incomparable Wife, etc.

I Am confident, Gallants! you no sooner hear this Title of, A bargain for
Batchelors, cried under your windows, but you will presently conceit I am some old
decayed Procuress that by chance have got a pretty handsome bit of temptation
out of the Country, and that this is a Bill giving notice, where her
Maidenhead is to be sold by inch of Candle; and methinks I see you already
flinging the Foot-boys over the Beleonies for have to get the advertisement
before your Neighbors; but in truth, Gentlemen, you are like to be honestly
cheated, what I present you with is a wife; and to add to your surprise, one
that is honest and virtuous, with whose charms I have reason to suspect you but
little aquainted, since of late you have got a silly trick to despise and laugh
at her very name, as if you could not be wits unless you proclaimed your own
selves Sons of whores, nor testify your regards to our sex but by dishonouring
your Mothers; for your conversion from this brutish heresy, I shall venture
to set her picture before you, therefore wipe your eyes (I mean those of your
understanding if you have them about you) and view her in her native luster.

A good wise is the temperate zone, where alone love delights to inhabit, and
free both from the frosts of peevish virginity, and scorching heats of rageing
lust, injoys a perpetual spring; She is the perfection of a man, or a lost rib
restored to complete and perpetuate humane nature; a true copy of our Mother
Eve before she dialogu'd with the Serpent; a second edition of female Divinity
(with the Errata's corrected) polished with beauty, and bound up with chastity
to convince the world that piety and goodness; The virtues and the graces are
all of the feminine gender, she is an innocent iulep in an amorous fit, and a
most restorative Cordial after it is over; A young man's Mistress to advise him, a
middle aged man's companion to solace him, and an old Man's Nurse to cherish him;
a help-meet in the cares of the world, and toils of business, and the most
agreeable diversion at hours of leisure; an inseparable second self that
mitigates all a man's misfortunes by dividing and sharing them, and doubles his
joys and prosperities by an equal participation; The guardian of her husbands
honor, and the conduit through which successive nobility derives its glories,
and to whose integrity the law commits the conveyance both of Titles and
inheritances: She is the Elixir of temporal comforts, the only Amulet against
the malice of fortune, the most to be admired, and the most to be desired thing
here below, and next to Abraham's besome, every wise man would choose to lie in
hers.

^ut this is only a draught of her perfections in Landscape, a transient
confused prospect of her excellencies in the Lump, be pleased to take a more
particular survey, and each Irem will transport you with love and wonder.

She scarce thinks her self obliged to those that applaud her for being chaste,
since 'twould be a curse and a punishment for her to be otherwise, and though
self-murtherers are justly condemned, yet we never read of rewards given to
people merely because they did not make away themselves; honesty is the
greatest commendation for a bad Woman, but in a good one it is the least; She
chooses not a Husband by the strength of his back, nor at all considers the
lusty Calf, or complexion; if Rude Language assault her ear, innocence keeps it
out from infecting her mind, and saves her other virtues the labor; She
prevents the designs of the debauched at a distance, and by a strict guard on
her modesty and aweful carriage, secures her self from being tempted, holding
it for a Max me (though a Paradox.) That she alone is chaste that never was tried,
He comes too near that comes to be denied.


Thus she shuns all occasions that may commit a Rape upon her soul, or fill it
with wandering petulant Idea's, and therefore reads the practice of Piety oftener
then Cleopatra or Cassandra, and takes more pleasure in some Divine history
with her corious needle, than in the alluring scenes of the most Tickling
comedy.

She loves but one, and that is him she should, viz. her husband, and she loves
him because he is so, and if he prove cross or unkind it may exercise her
patience, but never destroy her affection.

This love she demonstrates in the whole series of her life by endearing
obligations, and the greatest respect, as remembering the duty of her place, and
that God and the law have appointed him to be her head, and therefore
endeavors to conceal his infirmities, as knowing them to be her own
dishonours, and is as much ashamed to show her self wiser than her Husband in
company, as some pragmatical Gossips are proud to be thought to have more wit
than theirs, and if ever she be forced to tell him of a fault, she does it so
sweetly, and with so much discretion, that he finds reason to be angry with
himself, but none to be offended with her, who studies his temper, to work the
better effects on his humors, takes the fittest opportunities, and has a
special care never to speak out of season, and so avoids scoldings and clamours
as the plagues of marriage, and commands by obeying, and rules the roughness of
his spirit by the soft compliances of hers; a flint that defies the anvil may
easily be broken upon a feather-bed.

Her industry and frugality are no less remarkable than her discretion, she
considers she is called a house wife, and endeavors to make good the Title,
both by refraining from gadding abroad, and abhorring sluttishness and
sletternly tricks at home; she provides liberally for her family, but has an
eye that nothing be wasted, and remember that an ill managed Kitchen has
destroyed many a noble Hall; She knows no necessity for a breakfast in her bed,
and can get up without being roused by the Treachers rattling to dinner; She
spends more time in prayer and exercises of devotion, than between the glass
and the dressing-box; She suits her clothes to her husband quality and ability,
rather then the fashion, yet loves neatness, and cannot endure any paint on her
cheeks, but the natural vermillion of modest blushes; her good man dares trust
her with his cash without an exact account, nor does she call him to task for
every odd Twopence, She is not perpetually draining his purse for Modish
vanities, and envies not her next Neighbors New Gown or richer Laces, she
never upbraids him with her portion or parentage, and is better employed at
Church, then to observe who has the finest Fan, the best suits of Knotts, or
the most glittering Pendants. She is very tender of her Children, and thinks
them her choicest treasure, yet gives them no occasion to curse her hereafter
for over-fond Indulgence, she is courteous and sociable to her Neighbors, but
scorns to go a Hunting for Gossipings, and thinks her time better spent at home
(though but in patching a Dishclout) than in idle visits, or expensive
Assignations for carrying on the grand affair of tatling; in brief, she is
religious, without Hypocrifie, discreet without pride, loving without folly,
pleasant without vanity, grave without clownishness, and h^ that enjoys her,
has no greater happiness to wish for on (...)side Heaven.

And now Sirs, I doubt not but you like the Wi^^ (...) propose well enough, and
begin to cry, Where i^ (...) Where is she; Truly I shall neither send you t^
(...) nor direct you point-blanck to her dw^l^ing* she lives very privately,
some say it is at the sign (...) Philosophers-Stone, in Phoenix Alley, in
Non-suc^ street; but if you will but observe the following D^rections, and add
thereto a competent d^s^ o^ your own discretion, it is much to be hoped you may
light upon one of her Sisters.

1. Let piety and solid virtue be the prime motive of your addresses, for be
sure where those are wanting, let the proverb say what it will, those marriages
were never made in heaven.

2. Let her be descended of honest parentage, yet not too high above your own
degree; For where there is too much difference in quality, it is rare, if they
draw equally in the marriage yoke.

3. Be not cheated with the modish conceit of a brisk and airy Girl, least her
lightness weigh down your head with a pair of stately horns; a solid breeding
and de^ortment ^s infinitely more commendable than that fantast^t^c^l Gayty;
singing, dancing, etc. are innocent a^c^^plishments, yet can scarce answer for
the ^^^rge and time lost in acquiring them, and are fat more taken in a mistress
than a Wife.

4. Never let money bribe you to a loathed bed, or make you accept of a wife in
whose person you can take no delight: yet do not on the other side cast away
your self for a pretty face, which three days Sickness can destroy.

5. After her qualities, let your next consideration be her portion; for though
Riches alone of themselves are not a sufficient ground for a Match (for then it
would be not a Marriage, but a Bargain and Sale) yet they are excellent good
and comfortable additions; The hottest love being apt to cool and decay, where
there is not the fuel of a Competent estate to feed and maintain it.

6. Though, Virtue, Riches, and good Nature are excellent things by themselves,
yet joined all together, they are not enough to Justify your choice, unless
she be fit to, I mean of a like humor, and agreeable temper to suit with
yours. For all love is both begot a continued b^ ^^^eness.

I have a great many other Documents to give you, but I fear here are more
already then you will have patience to regard: And therefore I shall conclude
with the Parson; So much shall suffice for this time.

FINIS.

