THE Ages of Sin, or Sins Birth and grows. With the Stepps, and Degrees of
Sin, from thought to final Impenitencie.


Suggestion.
Original- Concupiscence Does make
Our Nature like a foul great-Bellyed Snake:
For, were not Satan apt to tempt to Sin;
Yett, Lustful- Thoughts would breed and brood, Within:
But, happy, He, that takes These Little- Ones,
To Dash their Brains (Soon) against repentant-St^nes.


Rumination
When lust has (thus) Conceived It brings forth Sin,
And Ruminating-thoughts Its Shape begin.
Like as the Bears oft-licking of her whelps.
That foul deformed Creatures Shape much helps.
The dangers great, our Sinful thoughts to Cherish,
Stop thire growth, or thy poor Soul will perish.


DELECTATION.
If, Sinful Thoughts (once) nestle in man's heart,
The Sluice is open, Delight (then) plays its part:
Then, like the old-Ape hugging in his arms,
His Apish-young-One; Sin, the Soul becharmes
And, when our Apish impious-Thoughts delight us
Oh, then, (alas) most mortally They bite us.


CONSENT.
For, where Sin works Content, Consent will follow;
And, This, the Soul, into Sins Gulf, does swollow.
For, as two ravning Wolves (for, it is their kind)
To suck Lambs-blood, do hunt with equall-minde:
Even so, the Soul and Sin Consent, in One,
Till, Soul and Body be quite overthrown.


Act.
Sin and the Soul ^^us, ha^ing stricken Hands,
The Sinner (now) for Action ready stands;
And Tyger-like, swollowes-up, at One-bitt,
What ever impious Prey his H^^^^ does fit
Committing Sin, with eager (...)
Selling his Soul (...)


Iteration.
From eager-Acting Sin, comes Iteration,
Or, frequent Custom of Sins perpetration;
Which, like great Flesh-Flies liting on ra^^-Flesh,
Though often beat-off, (if not killed) come afresh:
Hence, Be'lzebub is termed Prince of fflesh-fflies,
'Cause Sin, still, Acts, until (by Grace) It Dies.


GLORIATION.
Custom in Sin takes Sense of Sin away,
This makes All-Sin seem but a Sport, a play:
Yea, like a rampant-Lyon, proud and Stout,
Insulting, over his Prey, staulking about,
The Saucy-Sinner boasts and braggs of Sin,
As One (oh woe) that does a City win...


Obduration.
When Sin brings Sinners to this fearful pass,
What follows, but a hard Heart-Brow of brass?
A Heart (I say) more hard then Tortess-back,
Which, nether Sword nor Axe can hew or hack;
Judgments nor Mercies, Treats nor threats can cause
To leave-off Sin, To Love or fear Gods Laws.


FINALL-IMPENITENCY.
And (now, alas) what is Sins last Extent?
A hard-Heart makes a Heart Impenitent.
For, can a Leopard change his Spotted Skin?
No Nor a Heart accustomed (thus), his Sin.
Then, Conscience, headlong, casts Impenitence.
With horrid ffrights of Hellish Recompense.

