TREASON IN IRELAND For the blowing up of the Kings English Forces, With a
hundred Barrells of Gunpowder; with the Names of the chief Agents; and the
manner of the Discovery, December the tenth. With a Relation of the cruelty
of the Irish Rebels used against the English Protestants there, killing them,
ravishing the Women, cutting them to pieces, hanging them by the hair of the
head, scalding them, cutting off their heads, and firing their Towns and
Houses. With two Battles fought betwixt the Protestants and the Rebels: the
Rebels having the worst in both. With a Plot discovered at Athigh.

Sent into England by Mr Hierome, Minister of Gods Word at Athigh in Ireland.

LONDON Printed for Solomon Johnson, 1641.

TREASON IN IRELAND for the blowing up of the Kings English Forces, with 100.
Barrels of Gunpowder, with the names of the chief Agents; and the manner of
the Discovery. December. 10. With a Relation, etc.
ABout the space of six miles from Dublin in Ireland, there is a Town inhabited
with Irish, called Rockoll, in which Town is no more English inhabited, save
only two, William Clark, is the name of the one; the other is a Widow, both
Inne-keepers in Rockoll.

About a mile from the said Rockoll, dwells one Patricke Lock, at the foot
of the hill called the hill Rockall. The said Patricke Lock is a great Papist,
and a man of great means in those parts, having a very great estate, who had
vaulted his house round about: in which Vaults he has kept four several
Smiths, and Forges, working upon provision for war, ever since the first
Treaty with the English and Scots, that is for the space of these two years.

He has also since the first intent of rising of the Rebels in Ireland, he
has entertained fourscore men, who by the Rebels have been set on work, to
vault the said hill Rockoll round about.

This Vault is so far finished, that there is entertained in a Vault wherein
they have undermined the hill great store of Rebels; to the number of about
500. as is credibly reported: whereof one hundred are Popish Priests, Friars,
and Jesuits.

The passage over this hill is a great rode through which they pass from
Dublin to the chiefest part in the Country toward Munster, and other places
where the Rebels for the most part lie, and the Country is most oppressed: so
that when the Kings Majesty's Army had been come into Ireland from England, to
relieve the Protestants against the Rebels: this Hill was the direct and ready
Rode for them to pass over in the Vault whereof, which they had dug for
that purpose. They have been preparing powder in readiness as they could plot
it; expecting thereby to blow up the Hill therewith, when the Army marched over
it.

There was one of the Rebels called William Raster, that was taken by Colonel
Carot Topey, who discovered this plot, and confessed that the said Hill was all
undermined, and that there was 100. barrels of powder in the Vault, and their
purpose was, that if they could take Athigh, and the Castle, they then knew
that when the Kings Forces came to Dublin, they would immediately move that
way, because by that place they should be much strengthened: and to come to
them the way does lie directly over the said Hill Rickoll, and with the said
powder in the Hill they had determined to blow them up as they passed by.

And he discovered moreover that M. Ochashen of Azabe in the Queens County,
about 20. miles from Athigh, and 8. miles from the Fort of Leise, together with
Sir Florence Fitch-Patricke of Castle Town should have come by night with 5000.
armed men to the Fort of Leise, and lie as Soldiers that were to ward, the
Papists within had agreed, and were appointed to let in a certain Company of
the Rebels appointed for that purpose to burn and batter down the Town.

Hereupon Captain Picket went forth to meet that Company with 500. men, who
fell upon them, and slew 3. or 400. of the Rebels; and the rest fled into the
woods.

Himself sustained the loss of 60. men, slain and dangerously hurt.

The said Rebels did rove extraordinary up and down in Ireland, on Thursday
the 3. of December, 1641. and did them much hurt in diverse places of the
Country. They came to the Town of Rockall spoken of before, on the same day.
The Rebels had a pair of Bag-pipes which played before them, as they marched
which played exceeding loud, which the Town hearing, rose to meet them, and at
the Towns end saluted them, and made them great entertainment, and joined
themselves with them by an oath.

Afterward they went to the aforesaid English Inhabitants, William Clark, and
there they slew him, his wife, children, and family, 7. persons in number, of
whom they left not one alive, but cruelly murdered them. From thence they
marched to the Nassey, that is about 5. miles, a Town of Irish Inhabitants,
also they did go to the house of an English man, called Henry Orell, where they
slew his wife an ancient woman, and ravished her daughter in the most barbarous
manner that ever was known: and when they had done, pulled her limbs asunder,
and mangled her body in pieces without pity or Christianity.

From thence they marched the next day toward Athigh, which is 10. miles from
the Nassey, toward which place having marched about a mile from the Nassey
aforesaid, they came to the Town of Puckingell, a Town inhabited of English,
where they fell upon the Inhabitants thereof, and slew them in a cruel manner,
without mercy, to the number of above 20. families, men, women, and children.
One woman above the rest, they hanged at her own door, with her children by
the hair of the head: and afterward burnt up the whole town with fire.

Having made that place desolate, they marched the next day forward, as before,
and having marched some three miles further, they came to an English man's
house, where first they slew the man at the door, and afterward they entered
the house, where they found the woman and her maid a brewing; for it was an
Alehouse, where they brewed their own drink: The Maid they took and
ravished, and when they had abused her body, at their pleasure, they threw her
into the boiling Caldron, or pan of wort, that was then over the fire: and
her Mistress they slew, and cut off her head: and afterward fired the house.

Then they went on toward the Town of Athigh, with an intent to surprise the
Town and Castle; but God prevented their intentions by one Master Carot Topey,
an English Colonel under the States there, appointed by the Lords, Justices,
and Counsel, over 500 foot, and 100 horse, who with his Regiment fell upon
them, and slew 300 of the Rebels, and put the rest to flight.

The most part of the Rebels that fled, ran over the Bogges, and took the
Woods.

This Regiment of Rebels, are about 2000 strong. Their chief Commanders are,
Patricke Onell. Teage Okell. Charles Row. William Rafter, taken prisoner.


Colonel Topey lost in this Skirmish fifty-five men, that is, fifty foot, and
five horse.

FINIS.
A Description of Athigh. Colonel Topey and his Company. The Rebels. The Fort.



