The Jews high Commondation of the Metrapolitant Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, having viewed the greatest Effiges in the world: With Paul's complaint to
his Sacred Majesty of all his sad Losses and al uses in the time of his
absence, and his Majesty's gracious promise for the Repairing of it to its
former state and condition.
To a delicate new tune, Or, The Repairing of Paul's.
coat of arms of the City of London

NOw I am canstrained to write of a thing
was builded a thousand years ago,
For all the Effugies that ever was seen
old Paul's still carries the bravest show.
Indeed I have traveled Kingdoms far,
and seen their famous Fabrics all.
Yet never a one could be compared
unto the Cathedral Church of Paul's.
The City of Room I have bin in,
and many weary step have I trod,
The Tower of Babel I have seen,
in traveling over the world abroad.
Yet never a Monument I found.
of such aspiring heigh of all.
As is that noble ever renowned
the brave Cathedral Church of Paul.
The Pilgrims asked me severally
what manner of thing this Church it was,
Whose height was raised up to the sky,
and the very walls were beaten brass.
I answered them these words to the same
that story I often times had bin told,
And great report I heard of the name,
which was not the like in all the world.
Then presently I tied up my reed,
it ravished me with so much delight,
And over the Seas I sailed with speed.
so willing was I for to see this sight.
But when I came to Paul's Church yard.
Lord quoth I what a Church is here.
I thought the English people had made
their way to heaven through the spire.
I was amazed amongst the crowds,
and staring upwards still did I.
The top of the church did seem in ye clouds
and I thought ye steeple did reach to the sky
now hear ye complaint which Paul did make
unto the King when he came home,
I have bin abused my Liege for your sake
which make me stand in my rags so torn


FOr in fifty seven and fifty nine,
with grief my ^ds began to crack,
My aged corpse did much decline,
for my cloths were pulled off from my back
My leaven covering they did take,
their guns were then so hungry grown,
A purpose Bullets for to make,
they never would let old Paul's alone.
They did not care who they abused,
for ruin was their chief intent!
Where Prayers formerly was used.
here they did make a stable in it.
Yet for all this I still held up,
though weather-beaten many a year,
But several people were in a doubt,
this last year I was in great despair.
But now bespeak our gracious King,
for all the abuse you received then,
With speed I do intend to begin
to give old Paul a new trimming again
Then presently I took heart of grace,
because our Sovereign Lord the King,
Did say he would make a sacred place,
and give old Paul a naw trimming again
The Service Book shall then be read,
the Queristers shall sing like men,
The Bishop he shall be the head,
and all things shall come in old fashion again
The Organs merrily they shall play,
and David's Music we shall hear,
The Harps and Timballs all the day,
which much delights then the ear,
All these were godly sons that were
delightful much in David's days,
Which made his Subjects God to fear,
whilst he was playing with thanks and prais
The Clergy flourish shall again,
and Heretics they must all go down,
True Christian faith we shall maintain
and Paul's shall be called Sacred ground
As famous as I ever have bin,
I now shall receive my high renown,
And all my honors returned me again,
I am old Paul of London Town.
Now God preserve our Gracious King,
Lord Mayor and the Aldermen.
which have bin pleased in this noble thing
to give old Paul a new Trimming again
printed for F. Coals, T. Vere and W. Gilbertson


