BEAVFRONS; OR, A New-DISCOVERY of TREASON, UNDER The FAIR-FACE and MASK OF
RELIGION, AND OF LIBERTY of CONSCIENCE. In an ANSWER to the Protestant
Reconciler. In which is PROVED, That the Protestant-Reconciler Encouraged the
New Discovered Plot, by his giving out unto the People, That the King and
Governors were, and are, the Betrayers of their Liberties; And therefore
Deserve Death.

By One of HIS MAJESTY'S Chaplains.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Morden, Bookseller in Cambridge, MDCLXXXIII.

REVERENDO Admodum in Christo Patri, Doctissimoque Antistiti, ac DOMINO D.
SETHO EPISCOPO SARISBVRIENSI, Nec-non NOBILISSIMI ORDINIS a Periscelide Dicti
Cancellario, Tractatum Hunc In Summae Observantiae Symbolum Humillime Dicat
Dedicatque, Ecclesiae vere Anglicanae Filius Observantissimus.

TO THE READER.
COURTEOUS SIR,
IT is humbly conceived, that this TREATISE, small in its Bulk, but great in
its Weight, will be Acceptable unto all who Love their King and Church;

Because, it so Seasonably Discovers the Plots and Designs of the Enemies to
Both.

And although the Author was fully Satisfied,

That the Dissenters Principles were Treasonable, and inconsistent with the
Safety of our English Monarchy, and of our Churches Welfare;

Yet, he little thought, They would so soon have given the World a Proof
thereof, as they have done in their NEW PLOT against the King's Most Sacred
Person, and against His Royal Highness the Duke of York, which, by Divine
Providence, is so happily discovered, and, we hope, Totally Prevented.

Stephen Colledge's, and their Treason detected, fully Answers the Reconciler,
and proves sufficiently,

That no Condescension can safely be Granted unto the Dissenting Brethren,
until they have openly Renounced their Traitorous Principles, and have given
some Better Signs of their Loyalty.

For, as this TREATISE Foretold, so now, their New Treason Discovered, has
proved it to be a Truth, that they are, and will be, as Dangerous, if not more,
than the Papists.

And, this Plot, together with the Popish Plot, does clearly evidence, farther,
this Truth also,

That our King and Governors have no true Friends to trust unto, but only the
True Episcopal-Church-Men of England.

For the Principles of all other Parties lead them into Faction and Rebellion:
from which Good Lord Deliver Us.

July 2d, 1683.
THE Contents.
CHAP. I. THE True Notion of a Protestant. p. 1. CHAP. II. The Presbyterians no
Protestants. p. 8. CHAP. III. The Independents no Protestants. p. 17. CHAP. IV.
The Anabaptists no Protestants. p. 29. CHAP. V. The Quakers no Protestants. p.
36. CHAP. VI. The Reconciler's Design, as pretended, proved to be Impossible.
p. 40. CHAP. VII. The Reconciler's Design, proved to be, as Managed, Malicious
and Treasonable toward the King and Governors, both of Church and State. p.
60. SECT. I. The Reconciler gives out to the People, That our King and
Governors are the Authors of our Present Schisms and Factions. p. 61. SECT.
II. According to the Reconciler, Our King and Governors are Proud Men, and,
The Plagues of the Earth, For Imposing things Indifferent. p. 67. SECT. III.
According to the Reconciler, Our King and Governors Deserve Death, For
Imposing on the People things Indifferent. p. 68. SECT. IV. The King and
Governors, according to the Reconciler, are Traitors to the Commonwealth,
and Betrayers of the Peoples Liberties, for Imposing upon them things
Indifferent; And, that therefore the People ought not to yield to their
Impositions, But ought to Rebel and vindicate their Christian Liberty. p. 70.
SECT. V. The Reconciler scandalously affirms, That the King and Governors want
Piety and Prudence, And that therefore it is, they Impose upon the People
Things Indifferent. p. 74. SECT. VI. According to the Reconciler, The King and
Governors are the Destroyers of the Work of God, and are the Murderers of
Myriads of Souls, for Imposing things Indifferent. p. 77. SECT. VII. According
to the Reconciler, The King Commands Men to Sin, when he Commands their
Obedience as to things Indifferent. p. 79. SECT. VIII. The Reconciler's Rule
for the King and Governors to observe, in case any Evil Consequents should
happen, through the Dissenters Disobedience, after a Condescension granted to
them, to wit, To leave the Event to God. p. 81.
CHAP. VIII. The Reconciler's Proposition, to wit, That (considering the
Circumstances our Church and State at present are in) Things Indifferent ought
not to be Imposed by the Legislators, as Conditions of Church Communion. This
Proposition, if taken absolutely and simply in it self, is proved to be false.
p. 84. Secondly, It is proved to be false, and unseasonably Propounded, if
taken Relatively, in Reference to the Circumstances our Church and State are in
at present. p. 96.

CHAP. I. The true Notion of a PROTESTANT.
NEver was the Christian World more abused with any Word, under the Pretense of
Religion, than with this of Protestant: And especially in this Our Factious and
Disloyal Age and Country; In which, this Word has been, and still is, made
odious, and a very Covert for all Religious-Male-Contents in Church and State.
For, All Parties and Sects, that would not be deemed Papists, have Christened
and Styled themselves Protestants, Although they have been, and still are, the
most erroneous, vicious and dissolute Persons in the World, both as to
Principles and Practices.

And for as much as a Late Author Entitles himself and his Book, THE
PROTESTANT RECONCILER.

But has not told his Reader, Who are the Persons he understands by
Protestants; We therefore entreat the said Reconciler, to inform the World,
What he means by, A Protestant:

For, if by Protestants the Reconciler understands, All those men who disown,
and Protest against, the Name of Papist; Then, in truth, the Turks and Jews
may, as deservedly, be called Protestants: But if he says, that by Protestants,
he means, All Christians who Renounce Popery,

Then he would do well, 1. To define what is Popery. 2. To let us know, who
are the Persons that renounce Popery so defined.


For by Popery, the Church of Rome means, the Pope's Supremacy, and whoever
denies that, is no Papist at Rome, Let his other Opinions be never so Canonical.

And by Protestantism, the Church of England understands, the Pious Doctrine of
the King's Supremacy in Opposition unto that of the Pope's; And whoever denies
the King's Supremacy, is no Protestant in England, Let his other Tenets be
never so Orthodox.

Wherefore, Once again, We request the Reconciler, not to amuse the World with
any Bugbear Words -- But in plain English to Unridle,

Who, and What, are the Persons, he discriminates, from all others, by the
Specious Title of Protestants:

For, if the Reconciler be a genuine Son of the Church of England, as now
established (which we very much doubt) He cannot but know, That our Church and
State, own and acknowledge, None to be Protestants in England, but only such,
who in their Consciences and Principles, allow of, and Protest for, The King's
Supremacy:

And, by the King's Supremacy we mean, Full. Chapter Hist. l. 9. p. 53.
A Power in the King, given to him by Almighty God, to Restore Religion when
decayed, to Reform the Church when corrupted, and to Protect the same when
Reformed.

This is the Supremacy which the German Princes (being the first Reformers)
Assumed to themselves, exercising their own Authority, in Ordering and Settling
Church Matters within their own Dominions. And because they all Protested
against the Pope's Supremacy, and Defended that of their own, Therefore were
they called Protestants.

In like manner, King Henry the Eighth was the first Protestant Prince in
England, for no other Reason, But because he was the first King of England
(since the Reformation) who strenuously vindicated his Own Regal Supremacy, And
Protested against the Pope's Usurpation and Tyranny over Kings and their
Subjects.

For which the Pope of Rome Excommunicated King Henry the Eighth, and Branded
him with the Name of Heretic and Protestant.

And notwithstanding King Henry's being a perfect and Rigid Papist, in all
points of Doctrine, according to the Church of Rome; yet, because he Assumed
his Own Supremacy, and Abjured that of the Pope's, he is Therefore styled (and
that very truly) A Protestant:

And our Statute-Laws call all them who deny the King's Supremacy, Recusants,
whether they be Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, or Quakers, The Law
Names all Recusants; and indeed such They are, and Not Protestants.

For, as in the Church of Rome, no man is counted a Papist, but only he who
declares for the Pope's Supremacy; So in the Church of England, no man is, nor
ought to be reckoned, a Protestant, but only he, who, in Thought, Word and
Deed, is for the King's Supremacy, as above stated:

These things being Premised,

We are of Opinion, That the Reconciler has Mistaken his own Title: for in
equity and honesty, he should have Entitled

Himself and his Book,

The Recusant (and not the Protestant) Reconciler.

For we know no Protestants in England that need any Reconciliation, unless it
be the Beaufronts, alias, Fair-faced Protestants, Who have God and the King in
their Mouths, but the Devil in their Hearts; Who Speak their Prince fair to his
face, but will Wound his Reputation, and cut his Throat behind his Back.

Who will take and swallow all Oaths, particularly, those of Supremacy and
Allegiance; And yet, will enter into a Scotch-Covenant, or into a
Shaftsburian-ASSOCIATION, and Plot Treason and Rebellion against their King and
his Government.

Who will cry-up the Church of England, and yet cry-down the Bishops.

Who will on a Sunday-Morning go to Divine-Service in the Parish Church, and
receive the Sacrament Kneeling, and yet in the Afternoon, Contrary to their
Oath of Allegiance, will go to a Seditious Conventicle: These are the Tares
among the Wheat, the very Pests of the Nation:

And indeed, They want a Reconciliation, that is, Of their ungodly Principles
and Practices to Piety. Of their Knavery to Honesty. Of their Perjury and
Hypocrisy to Truth. Of their Faction to Loyalty.


Except these dissembling Beaufronts, we know no Protestants that need any
Reconciliation: for in England there are no Protestants (except the Beaufronts)
but only the true-hearted and Loyal Episcopal men, who, in Heart and
Conscience, Own, and Protest for (according to our Churches Articles, 34, 36,
37.)

(1.) The King's Supremacy. (2.) The Churches Authority in Ordering Rites and
Ceremonies. (3.) The Episcopal Government, as now established, Asserting the
Distinct Orders, of Bishops, Priests and Deacons. (4.) Who give due Obedience
to the Churches Orders and Constitutions.
These are the only Protestants in England: As for all others, the Laws of the
Realm Notify them by the Name of Recusants:

So then, it is a most Certain Truth ( though a Paradox to the Vulgar) That
although there be Myriads of Men in England, who pass for Protestants, and call
themselves Protestants, yet in truth and reality, they are Recusants; They all,
Combining and Siding with the Papists against the King's Supremacy, do, by so
doing, declare themselves to be No Protestants:

And, the only way to Reconcile these Recusants unto our Church, is, in the
first place, to persuade them to become Protestants, that is to say, to
persuade them to Own, and Protest for, the King's Supremacy in Ecclesiastic
Matters, and to become Obedient to his Laws, Civil and Ecclesiastic, for till
this be done, as was said before, They are No Protestants:

And, of this Nature and Character are all the Dissenters in England, to wit,
Recusants, and not Protestants.

For, they all deny the King's Supremacy; which is the Essence and Foundation
of Protestantism in Opposition to Popery.

And whoever pleads for them to be Reconciled to the Church of England, without
an open Recantation of their Popish Principles (as does the Reconciler) is
guilty of a Praemunire, and smells more of a Papist, than of a Protestant.

This then being the proper Notion of a Protestant,

We once more petition the Reconciler, That he would be pleased to inform us,
who are the Protestants, for whom he so earnestly pleads, and unto whom he so
passionately craves a Condescension may be granted by the King, and the
Governors:

If he says, They be the Dissenting-Brethren (as he has it in his Title Page)
then he grossly mistakes himself;

For the Dissenters are No Protestants, Because, they all deny The King's
Supremacy.

Which is the only Badge and Characteristical Note of a Protestant.

Now, that All the Dissenters do so, is easily proved, by their own Avowed and
Declared Principles and Practices:

The Dissenters in England, although they be very numerous, yet, they may be
reduced unto four Ranks and Sects, which will comprehend them all, at least all
those which are of any Bulk and Note among us; Such as the Presbyterians.
Independents. Anabaptists. Quakers.



All which Sects we shall in order prove, to be No Protestants.

CHAP. II. The Presbyterians No Protestants.
THe Presbyterians are no Protestants, in as much as They Deny The King's
Supremacy:

And in Opposition thereunto, They Set up their own Ecclesiastic Consistory
above the King and his Power:

For by their Consistorian Power They pretend they may, and actually they have
censured and deposed their own Natural Prince, raised War by Oath and Covenant
against Him; when he would not yield himself a slave to their Demands and
Consistorian Tyranny.

This is too well known in Scotland and England; and needs no farther proof:

And although they do declare with the French Presbyterians, French Disci.
Eccles. c. 5. of the Consistory.


That a Magistrate may be called and employed in the charge of an Elder in the
Consistory, yet, it is with such a Restraint and Limitation, as that the
Execution of one of the Functions must not hinder the other, and bring no
prejudice to the Church; that is, to their Consistorian Power, which is to
overrule and control the Magistrate in matters Ecclesiastic.

It is to be Noted,

That the first Presbyterian Consistory, erected in Opposition to Monarchy and
Episcopacy, that ever we heard of, was first in Geneva, Settled by Calvin and
Beza.

And the First Presbyterian Confistory Settled in Scotland, was by John Knox,
who came from Geneva, and brought from thence the Platform of Presbytery.

And the First Presbyterian Consistory, Bishop Bancrost English Scotizing, l.
3. c. 1. Full. Hist. l. 9. p. 103.
that ever was in England, was held at Wandsworth in Surrey, Anno Dom. 1572.

And most of the Chief Men of this Presbyterian Consistory (which was the
Firstborn of all Presbytery in England) came from Geneva, especially Mr. Tho.
Cartwright, and Walter Travers, who both meeting with discontents in Trinity
College in Cambridge, traveled to Geneva, and there were Catechized in the
Presbyterian Doctrine and Discipline. And Mr. Travers, G. G. Chapter Hist. p. 237.
after he had left Geneva, went to Antwerp, and there having received
Ordination of the Presbyterians, upon his return, he in England bitterly
exclaimed against the Episcopal Government of our Church, as then established
in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

Thus Geneva and Antwerp gave the first Breath to Presbytery in England and
Scotland.

And that all these Presbyterian Consistories, in their very first Foundation
and Erection, were against Monarchy and Regal Supremacy, is evident, from John
Calvin the Primo-Pater of them all, who has openly in Print, Declared his
Judgment in Two Remarkable Points concerning Kingly Government: 1. That
Aristocracy or Democracy is to be preferred before Monarchy. 2. That if Kings
prove Heretical, Ungodly, or Tyrannical, Then, they may, and ought to be
Deposed by the Tribunes or Primes of the people.


As to the first Point, Calvin delivers himself in these words, scil.

Equidem si in se considerentur tres illoe quas ponunt Philosophi, Calvin.
Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 8. p. 306.
Regiminis Formoe, minime negaverim vel Aristocratiam, vel temperatum ex ipsa
and Politia Statum aliis Omnibus long excellere, etc.

That, if all the Forms of Government, which Philosophers and Ancient
Statesmen have propounded, were well weighed and considered, then in his
judgment, That of Aristocracy, or a Common wealth Modelled out of it, would
appear to be infinitely the best Form: And that because, Rarissime contingit
Reges ita sibi moderari, etc. It rarely happens that Kings Govern either
themselves, or others, well.

Wherefore, says Calvin, Vt libenter fateor nullum esse Gubernationis genus
isto beatius, sic and Beatissimos censeo quibus hac condition frui licet, etc.
As I freely confess there is no kind of Government more happy, than that of a
Free Commonwealth; So I judge them most happy who are permitted to enjoy the
same: And, Patrioe suoe Proditores, etc. They are all Traitors to their
Country who do not use their utmost endeavors to promote and maintain the same.

These expressions are sufficient to show what a bad opinion Calvin had of
either Kings or Monarchy.

As to his Second Position,

That Kings may, and ought to be deposed, if they be wicked and ungodly, and do
not Govern according to God's Word: Be pleased to read his Comment on Dan.
6.22, 25. where he assures his Reader.

That, Calvin in Dan. 6.22.
earthly Princes (abdicant se) divest themselves of all right to Power, when
they Rebel against God, and are unworthy to be accounted in the number of Men
(that is, as Dr. Nalson descants upon his words, in plain English, Nalson's
Common Inter. p. 226.
They do not deserve to live) and men ought rather to spit in their faces, than
to obey them (ubi sic proterviunt) when they become so malepertly proud or
froward, as to endeavor to despoil God of his Right, etc.

And in his Institutes, Si qui nunc sint populares Magistratus ad moderandam
Begum libidinem constituti, (quales olim erant, qui Lacedaemoniis Regibus
oppositi erant, Ephori, aut Romany Consulibus, Tribuni Plebis, aut
Atheniensium Senatui, Demarchi;) Et qua etiam forte potestate, ut nunc res
babent, funguntur in Singulis Regnis Tres Ordines quum Primarios Conventus
peragunt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum Licentiae pro Officio intercedere non
veto, ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and humili Plebeculae
insultantibus conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non carere
affirmem: quia Populi Libertatem, cujus se Dei Ordinatione Tutores positos
norunt, fraudulenter produnt. Calvin. Institu. l. 4. c. 20.. 31. p. 311.
Mr. Calvin confesses, That although it be not lawful for Private Men to rise
up against their King, yet, Si qui nunc sint Populares Magistratus ad
Moderandam Regum Libidinem constituti, etc. Where there are Magistrates elected
out of the People, or where there are Three Orders or States, such as of King,
Lords and Commons; There the People ought, by their Representatives, to
moderate their King's Ill Government, to punish his Vice and Tyranny, and to
Overruled Him, as the Ephori did the Lacedemonian Kings, and as the Peoples
Tribunes did the Roman Consuls, whom they Deposed and turned out of Office,
when they thought fit.

These Treasonable Positions of Calvin made Adrian Seravia (a Dutchman) whom
Learning and Piety preferred in England, Heyl. Hist. of Queen Eliz.
hate to be called a Calvinist.

As Calvin, so also in like manner did John Knox the other Founder of a
Presbyterian Consistory in Scotland, in Opposition to Episcopacy and Regal
Supremacy, Declare himself thus,

To wit, Knox Hist. of Refor. of Scotland, p. 392.
That Subjects may not only lawfully oppose themselves against their Kings,
whenever they do any thing that expressly oppugns God's Commandment, but also
that they may execute judgment upon them according to God's Law; So that, if
the King be a Murderer, Adulterer, or Idolater, he shall Suffer according to
God's Law, not as a King, but as an Offender.

And Knox is seconded in his Treason, by his Countryman Buchanan, whose Maxim
was this, Populo jus est imperium cui velit, deferat. That the People may alter
the Government, and bestow the Crown upon whom they please.

And the Learned Archbishop Spotswood (though a friend to Knox) when he heard
Bishop Bancroft Preach at Hampton-Court-Conference before King James, and heard
his Learned Arguments against Knox, for the King's Supremacy, did declare, That
he was wonderfully pleased and satisfied with the said Arguments, though (as he
reports in his History, l. 7. p. 497^) The Scotch Ministers then present at
Court, Heyl. in vit. Laud. p. 49.
were grieved at Heart, to hear their Scotch-Presbytery, and Popery, so often
equalled in their Opposition to Sovereign Princes.

And this caused our English Cyprian Archbishop Laud so often to say, and more
particularly in his Sermon at Oxon, 1614.

That the Presbyterians were as bad as the Papists. Because they denied The
King's Supremacy.

And he (Good Man) found them to be so, by woeful experience; for it was the
Factious Scotch and English Presbyterians, and not the Papists, that Cut off
his Head.

Which lead them the way, soon after, to Act a Blacker Tragedy, upon the Sacred
Person of their Dread Sovereign the King.

Nor is it to be forgotten, What Samuel Clarke (a Noted Presbyterian) writes of
Knox.

How that in Queen Maryes days, Clark's Martyrol. p. 293.
Mr. Knox fled into Germany, where at Frankfort, an English Congregation was
settled, who served God after the English Rubric published by King Edward the
Sixth: But Mr. Knox coming thither, disturbed the aforesaid Congregation; and
made a Schism among them -- for Knox cried down the English Service Book, And
drew up a Liturgy, which was (says Clark) the very same with that used at
Geneva, which Calvin had composed.

But Dr. Cox, a Prelatical Man, stood up stoutly in Defense of the English
Service Book. And he complained to the Magistrates, That Mr. Knox his Doctrine
and Discipline was inconsistent with the safety of Monarchical Government, And
that he had Preached and Published Seditious Doctrine against the Emperor.

All which being proved, Mr. Knox fled to Basil, And there he set up the
Genevian-Anti-Monarchical Discipline.

Afterward, upon the Death of Queen Mary, the said Mr. Knox went into
Scotland, And infected that Nation with his Presbyterian Doctrine;

Preaching, That Kings are to give an Account of their evil Government, not
only unto God, but also unto the People, who entrusted them with the
Magistratical Power. And that Ungodly Princes, such as are all Popish Princes,
are no less enemies to Christ, than was Nero, etc. And there in Scotland the
said Knox set up his Scotch-Kirk and Presbyterian Consistory, which assumed to
its self a Power over Kings, to that Degree, as that King James the Sixth of
Scotland, and First of England (who knew them too well to trust them) said, He
would never admit of the Presbyterian Government in England, G. G. Chapter Hist. of
Gr. Brit. p. 268.
lest every Jack and Tom in the Consistory should Censure Him and his Council,
as they had done in Scotland.

And, as thus, Calvin in Geneva, and Knox in Scotland, settled Presbyterian
Consistories in Opposition to Monarchy, Episcopacy, and all Regal Supremacy;

So did, Whittingham, Cartwright and Travers, who every one of them had been
New-principled at Geneva, come over from beyond Sea, and endeavored to settle
the Like here in England.

To which purpose, One of them broached his Anti-Monarchical Principles at
Cambridge, being there made a Professor, and slily poisoned That Fountain with
the putrid waters of Geneva's Lake; for which he was Deposed.

Another of them did the like in the Temple at London, being chosen Lecturer
thereof; And there he infected the other sort of Gown Men, even the Lawyers;
for which he was Silenced.

They, i. e. the Presbyterians, thus having got (as they thought) both Law and
Divinity on their side, proceeded so high, as to fix their Consistories in
several places of this our Land.

In all which Consistories, they Declared against Subscription to the English
Rubric, and against the Queens Supremacy, and the Orders of Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, and against the Ceremonies of the Church.

And thus they would have run on to an higher rate, even to the unsetling the
Established Government both in Church and State, Had not Queen Elizabeth
interposed her Authority, and by her care and prudence soon put a stop to their
carreir.

The like did King James in Scotland, soon after, by the advice of Bishop
Bancroft, who, before Queen Elizabeth's Death, kept correspondence with King
James, and discovered to him the Inconsistency of the Presbyterian Principles
and Consistories with Monarchy, in that they Denied The King's Supremacy:

And King James was so far convinced of the truth of what he Asserted, Heyl.
Life of Archbishop Laud, p. 62.63.
as that when he came to the Crown of England, he caused several eminent
Scotch-Divines to be Consecrated Bishops according to our English Rubric.

And sent them hence, back into their own Country, and placed them in several
Diocesses in Scotland.

And by their Prudence and Assistence, King James restored His own Supremacy,
and the Protestant Episcopacy again in that Kingdom, which ever since has had a
Being there, though not a Well-Being, by reason of the late Bloudy-Rebellions
made against the King by the Presbyterians, who all were, and still are under
an Oath and Covenant to maintain their Consistorian Power against the King's
Supremacy and the Churches Episcopacy; which verifies King James his Proverb,
No BISHOP, No KING.

And what the Presbyterians have been in Scotland, the very same have they
been, and still are, here in England:

For they All are still (if not by Oath, yet by Principle) against The King's
Supremacy.

And therefore we may safely conclude them to be No PROTESTANTS.

CHAP. III. The Independents no Protestants.
THis Sect and Generation of People are as Dangerous to the State and Church,
as the Presbyterians, and in some respect worse, Because they are against a
National Church, which the Presbyterians acknowledge.

They make every Individual Gathered Congregation, An absolute Church,
Independent on all other Congregational Churches:

And therefore are they called Independents.

So that, Every Individual Independent Congregation is invested with a
Supremacy of their own:

And challenge to themselves a Power to Censure, Condemn, and to Excommunicate
any man whether Magistrate, Prince, or Peasant.

And that which excells Popery it self, The Independent individual Church will
allow of no Appeal from their Sentence (whether right or wrong) unto any other
Power:

And the Reason for it is this, scil.

Because, They own no Power on Earth to be above them: They being a perfect
Church of themselves, have the Supremacy absolutely within themselves.

Hence it is, that Dr. Owen, the greatest Independent in England, says, and
that very consistently with his own Independent Principles,

That all Church Power is Originally in the People, Owen's Vindica. p. 37.
who have the casting Vote in their Congregational Church.

And this is the Professed Doctrine of the Independent Churches in New England:
Whose Supreme Magistrates are all chosen Annually, by the People of God, that
is, This is one of their Fundamental Laws. Vid. New England Statutes. And if
our King should par pari refer, in Old England, then none should be chosen,
or Choose Parliament Men, but only Protestants, i. e. Only such who are for
the King's Supremacy, and the Churches Episcopacy.
by the Members of the Independent Congregations, and by no other:

For, in New England, Let a Man be never so virtuous and sober, so rich and
wealthy, yet, if he be not a Member of some of their particular Independent
Congregations, He is not capable of giving a Vote for a Governor, nor of being
chosen a Governor among them: And as all Governors in New England are chosen
by the People, so all their Governors and Magistrates (if they err and
transgress in Government, or become wicked and vicious in manners, they are
all) subject to the censure of the People and the Church: for in New England,
none is to be a Governor or Magistrate, but he, who is endued with Grace, and
is Godly, in their Sense;

Their great State- Maxim being this, scil.

Dominium Fundatur in Gratia, That, All Dominion and Government is Founded in
Grace and Godliness.

And, among them, the Censores, Judges of the Governor's Grace and Godliness,
are the people of that Independent Congregational Church unto which the said
Governor or Magistrate belongs: For, as was hinted before, every Governor
must be a Member of some Individual Congregational Church:

And before he can be admitted a Member, he must declare, The time of his
Conversion,
The Marks and Evidences of his Conversion.


This he must do in the open Face of the Congregation, where, every Individual
Member of the Church is a Judge of his Grace and Fitness.

And if it be objected, That he has not given sufficient Evidence of his
Conversion, then he shall not be admitted a Member of their Church. Nor shall
he be chosen a Governor or Magistrate of their Commonwealth; And all,
because, he wanted Grace:

This is the constant Doctrine and Practice of the Independents in New England.

And although this kind of Doctrine and Practice may be consistent with a
Commonwealth;

Yet we are sure it is Diametrically Opposite to the very Being of Monarchy,
which Jure Divino challenges to it self a Regal Supremacy over all its
Subjects, whether Ecclesiastic or Civil.

And hence it is, that all Independents are against Kingly Government, to wit,
Because they are against Kingly Supremacy.

The Independents indeed, would allow of Kingly Government, if their King would
let them choose him, and if he would submit himself to their Congregational
Censures and Orders:

And in case, their King should by them be found unfit for Government, through
want, either of Grace or Prudence, if then, he would suffer himself quietly and
meekly to be Deposed by them; Upon These Terms, and no other, will, or can, the
Independents (according to their professed Principles) admit of a King: For
hence it came to pass, that, Because the Independents, in the Late Rebellion,
were of Opinion,

That King Charles the First was an Ungodly Man, One void of Grace, an
Idolater, and therefore Unfit for Government; Hence it was, That They (the
Independents) Deposed Him, and then Cut off His Head, and that (as They termed
it) by the Axe of High Justice.

And, Because (after they had Murdered the Father) they Feared, that The Son,
King Charles the Second, did also want Grace, and trod in his Father's Steps,
and would not love the People of God, i. e. Themselves; Therefore it was, That
they (the Independents) strove by force of Arms, with all their Might and Main,
to keep him Out of the Royal Throne:

For proof of this, Witness a most virulent Independent Writer, in his
Treatise, Entitled, PEACE and TRUTH; MOSES and AARON Kissing each Other.

The Author of the said Treatise Writes his Name, (...); i. e. John Blackbdell.

In his Preface to the Independent Army, Dissuading them from Setting up the
Present King in the Throne of his Father; He Writes thus,

God was angry with the Israelites for desiring a King, and that, Page 7.
because God was against the Form of Kingly Government, and preferred the
Government of Judges before that of Kings.

And what, Will you desire a King?

Now, Dear Friends, Page 9.
Concerning the Fruits that came by Kings, I Appeal to God, to his Sacred Word,
to the Records, to the Chronicles, to the experience both of our own and other
Nations,

Whether Kings have been to be compared with those Judges? for, Have not Kings
been addicted to Vices, and very empty of such Graces as were requisite for Men
in such eminent Places? Kings were neither the first, nor the best way of
Government:

God disliked Kings and loved Judges: And I verily believe, These are the very
times, in which God will destroy corrupt Government and Governors, and will
give and restore to us Judges as at the first.

I am not desirous (says he) to call back those things that are done and past:
and therefore, Page 14.


Touching the late King's Death,

Consider, that we cannot recall that. What then? Are you Resolved to set up
the Eldest Son upon the Throne of his Father?

Consider well of it. Can you tell, whether He will care for the Flock? Can you
tell, whether he will prove wise or foolish?

Will you expect Grapes from Throns?

Do you see any Tokens of Godliness in Him? David says, Page 15.
That he loves those that love the Lord, and hates those that are God's
enemies.


And ( Page 22.) he highly commends the Army for Defending the Rump and
Commonwealth against the King and his Party.

And ( Page 25.) he upbraids Prinn and the Presbyterian Party for showing their
Teeth, but durst not Bite; for going about to Manacle King Charles the First,
and for endeavoring to restrain and lessen his Regal Power, But durst not
strike where his strength lay, to wit, his Head.

Whereas, the Independents did better, for by Cutting off his Anointed Head,
they deprived Him of all Strength.

The Scripture (says he) is evident, Page 31, 34
That the People have Right in diverse Cases, Yo Depose and Punish wicked Kings
and Governors, when the Said People are Strong enough to Do it.

Though (says he) woeful experience tells us, How hard a matter it is for a
People to get Strength enough to Remove a King, though never so apparently
Delinquent:

And therefore, Dear Friends, Let us be warned -- Pray Mark this.
Not to admit of the Son, lest, when he is in the Throne, we shall not be able
to Remove him.


But that which is most Prodigious of all, and which speaks This Saint-like
Independent, a Worse, and more irreconcilable Enemy to the King, than any
other, except some of his own Gang and Sect, is this,

That this Author was so far from excusing The King's Murder, as that he
impudently Glories in that Bloody and Hellish Action; and dignifies the
Regicides with the Title of The Worthies of the Lord:

And whereas, it had been Objected,

That, the Jesuits and Papists had a great hand in carrying on the late War
against the King, and in Cutting off his Sacred Head;

This Author, Johannes Melaina Bdella, Page 41.
denies that it was the Jesuits or Papists Doings; But boasts, that it was
only the Independents, and their Godly Army (whom Almighty God crowned with
success, it was they) who conquered the late King and his mighty Host; who, By
God's Law Deposed him, and then, after a fair and open Trial, justly Condemned
him to Suffer Death for his Delinquency and Treason toward the people,
committed to his Government.

Oh, the height of Villainy, and impudence! not only to commit Murder and
Rebellion, but also to Vaunt and Glory in it! and without Blushing to proclaim
their own shame, and with a Brazen Forehead to stand at the Market Cross, and
cry, O, ye good People! Believe us; we, we, the Godly Independents, that walk
by Scripture-Rule; We, the People of the Lord, and no body else, are the
Saviors of the Nation: We, and not ye Cowardly faint-hearted Presbyterians;
We, and not ye wicked Jesuits, nor ye Idolatrous Papists; We, and not ye, nor
any else, are the Courageous, Gallant Spirited Men, who in Our Zeal for God and
his Glory, Killed (not to say Murdered) the late King. We were the
Justiciaries who paid unto Him the proper Wages of his sin, which was death.

And now, Surely, any pious heart would have thought, That all the Sect of
Independents, with one consent would have sharply exclaimed against this
Traitor and his Treason;

But (pudet dictu!) instead of that,

The Independents Cried up, and Applauded this their Champion:

And sent forth into the Field two others, to be his Seconds.

For, Soon after Johannes Melaina Bdella, alias, John Blackbdell, appears
Milton's (...).
John Milton, the Blind Independent Historian, and Jo. Goodwin's Defense of the
SENTENCE passed on the KING.
John Goodwin, the Independent Pastor of Colemanstreet, London: Both Wrote in
Justification of King Charles his Trial and Execution.

And we heartily wish, Dr. Owen, yet Surviving, would Recant his Treasonable
Words spoken to the Commons of the Rump Parliament, the very day after the
King's Murder, on Jan. 31. 1648. when he said,

He that is trusted with the Sword, and dares not do Justice on every one that
dares do Injustice, is afraid of the Creature; But makes very bold with the
Creator.

From these, and an hundred other Instances which might be brought, it is
evident,

That the Independents were the Professed Enemies of the late King, and of this
his present Majesty.

And although the Presbyterians began the War and the Rebellion against King
Charles the First, yet it was the Independents, who carried it on unto the
Death.

For, Who, but the Independents, debarred the Secluded Presbyterian-Members
(that began to Repent of their Rebellion) from entering the House of Commons?

Who, but the Independents, Brake up the Presbyterian-Assembly of Divines? What
was Oliver, and his New-Reform'd Army, But Independents and Anabaptists?

Who continued the War and Rebellion, after the King's Murder, But the
Independents? And when the Whole Nation Groaned under the Oliverian-Tyranny and
Oppression, And Longed for the Present King's-Restauration,

Who opposed it but the Independents? Was it not Mr. Caryll the Great
Independent, that was Sent Church-Hist. of Gr. Brit. p. 367.
in the Name of all the Independent Churches unto General Monk in Scotland,
with Arguments to divert and hinder him from Marching on into England; urging
this for one Reason, to wit,

That if he did persist,

Then Mr. Caryll's Speech in the Name of the Independent Churches.
Charles Stuart King of the Scots, and his Party, would reap Great Advantages,
and as it was feared, would soon be Restored; and the Perizzites and Canaanites
in the Land would Triumph; And the People of God (for so he called his own
Party) would be brought into great danger?

And when General Monk was Marched into England against Lambert,

Who was it, But the Independents that in their Juncto, Voted on Jan. 2. 1659.
That No man whatever should be a Councillour of State, But only he who took an
Oath of Abjuration of the King, his Family and Government?

And I pray, Who was it, But Doctor Owen (Head of the present Independents)
that since the Act of Oblivion and of Uniformity, Dr. Owen's Vindica. cult.
Evang.
Satyrically called All the Church of England (and therefore among them the
King) Limbs of Antichrist: and said, Dissenters Sayings.
That the Ministry of the Church of England, is False, Superstitious and
Idolatrous: And that Persons performing the Publick-Worship in the Church of
England, are No Officers appointed by Christ: But are an Antichristian
Ministry, and Idolaters?

Now, What is all this? But the very same Railery and Doctrine continued, which
was formerly Preached and Vented by the same Man, Dr. Owen's Thanksgiving
Sermon 1651.
on October. 24. 1651. when he Queried -- in the Pulpit --

What is this Prelacy? A mere Antichristian Encroachment upon the Inheritance
of Christ?

And it is to be noted, That this Independent Doctor Preached and Printed this
his Anti-Prelatical Sermon, soon after Worcester-Fight, when the Oppressed
Nation was in great Hopes, That Monarchy and Episcopacy would have been
restored.

And truly in all probability they both had been Restored, had not the
Independent Army prevailed and prevented.

So that, all the Calamities and Troubles which our King and our Nation met
with, after Worcester-Fight, they were all occasioned by the Independents: And
all the Blood Shed then, and since, in the Defense of the Present King and his
Government (as also the Blood of King Charles the Martyr) it all chiefly lies
at the Independents Door:

And more particularly at That Man's Door who has in Print Justified the said
Murder and Rebellion;

So that we may truly say to him, what Nathan said to David, Thou Art The Man.

We will add only two instances more, as,

First, That of the Independent Author;

His BOOK Entitled; One Blow more at BABYLON, Printed, 1650.

It is well known (says he) that the late King was not Murdered by the
Parliament, Page 57.
but fell by the stroke of Justice; and that so Legally and Righteously
administered for his bloody Crimes he became guilty of in the Face of Heaven,
that we doubt not but God was well pleased with it; and will clear the
inflicters of it (if they keep their integrity) against all their Accusers and
Condemners whatsoever.

Secondly, The Character which Dr. Bastwick and Mr. Burton gave of the
Independents, in which they say,

That the Independents are Revilers, Covenant-Breakers with God and Man:
Heretics, Causers of Divisions and Offenses, and such as all Christians ought
to take heed of, and not to bid them God Speed.

And yet, these are the Godly, the Conscientious Men, Our Reconciler would have
the King and Government to admit into the Bosom and Communion of our Church of
England, and that without any Public- Penance or Abrenunciation of their
Treasonable and Anti Protestant Positions.

But,

For as much as these Men have, and still do, peremptorily deny The King's
Supremacy;

We therefore, Conclude them (as we did the Presbyterians) to be

No Protestants.

CHAP. IV. The Anabaptists No Protestants.
THis Sect has as many Names, as Hydra had Heads; Full. Hist. l. 5. p. 229.
and therefore it may well be called, The Monster of Religion, or rather of
Impiety.

This Monster Swiming over from Amsterdam (as did the Presbyterian from Geneva)
made its first unlucky Arrival in England about 29 Hen. 8.1538.

Their Opinions are innumerable: And therefore we will only take notice of
such of them, as speak them Enemies, 1. To the King's Supremacy in the Church.
2. To his Monarchy in the State.


1. The King, by his Supremacy, is to order all matters in the Church so, as in
his Royal wisdom he shall think most consistent with the revealed will of God
in his written word, and most conducing to the advancement of God's Glory,
Religions Honor, and of the Churches welfare.

Whereas the Anabaptists deny this power to be granted by God unto Kings, or to
any Civil Magistrates.

For now, under the Gospel, nothing is to Govern the Church of God, Calvin
Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 1, 2.
but only the Spirit of God: And because the Spirit of God is invisible,
Therefore the Regimen of God's Church must also be invisible and spiritual.

Upon this account it is, That All, or most of the Anabaptists, Cry-down all
External Forms and Orders of Church Polity and Government.

And many of them decry the Religious use of any outward visible Elements, such
as Water in Baptism; Or Bread and Wine in the Eucharist. Because, now we are to
be Baptized only with the Holy Ghost.

And now, we are Only to eat and drink Christ's Body and Blood Spiritually by
Faith in our hearts, and not Carnally with our Mouths. Now, by the illumination
of God's Holy Spirit, without the Ministry of the Word and Sacraments, Men may
be saved.

Hence it was, Simpson Chapter Hist, p. 445.
that the Anabaptist, Gasper Suenkfeldius, born in Silesia, maintained, That
the Outward Ministry of the Word and Sacraments was not necessary to eternal
life.

Their General Opinion is, That the Supreme Magistrate highly sins, when he
makes Laws and Orders for the Outward Worship of God, and for the External
Celebration of the Sacraments, or for any thing else which is visibly to be
observed in Divine Worship.

They being of opinion, That every Christian is left to the particular Guidance
and Persuasion of the Holy Ghost: And that he is to do nothing, but what he is
persuaded to do by some secret and immediate Impulse of the Spirit.

2. As to matters of State;

They deny the Civil Magistrate to have any Right unto the Secular Sword:

But that All are to vail unto Christ's Scepter of Grace.

Hence it is, that They deny Princes to have power to put to Death any
Malefactors, though never so Criminal.

And if any of their Faction be executed, although it be for Murder, Treason
and Rebellion, yet they will cry out of Persecution; and will Canonize such an
one for a Martyr; Declaring to the World, that that their Brother died giving
his Testimony to the Truth (as died Scot the Regicide) and, that according to
his Duty and Conscience, he resisted unto Blood the Anti-Gospel Powers; as they
Maliciously (at least Erroneously) Nickname all Civil Magistracy.

For, Totam politioe rationem, rem esse pollutam, Calv. ut supra.
etc. They condemn the whole Polity of Civil Government, as a thing corrupt and
Anti Christian. And affirm, Nec judicia sint, nec Leges, nec Magistratus, etc.
That in these glorious times of the Gospel, there ought to be no Laws,
Statutes, or Magistracies obliging Christians to the obedience of Humane
Ordinances, nor any Tie put upon men, whereby their Christian Liberty may be
obstructed. For now, Alexand Ross View of Relig.. 12. p. 362.
Mortui sumus per Christum elementis hujus Mundi, etc. We are dead through
Christ unto the Elements and Ordinances of this World.

And therefore, upon this account, they style themselves, Liberi, Freemen,
because they being in Christ, are made Free (by Christ) from all Obedience unto
Humane Laws.

Hence it is, that They all, deny to take an Oath, and to Swear before a
Lawful Civil Magistrate.

And therefore, they are so far from taking the Oath of Supremacy, as that they
will not so much as take the Oath of Allegiance:

So that, the King has from these Men, no other Security for the preservation
of his own Life, and of his Subjects Properties, than their Bare-Word and
Promise --

Which word and promise they may, and have Broke, and again will soon break,
when ever the Spirit shall Dictate and Reveal to them, That it is for God's
Glory, so to do.

For all Anabaptists are of this Belief, scil.

That God reveals his Will, P. Sim's Chapter Hist. 443.
not only by the written word, but also, and that very frequently, by
immediate Visions and Dreams, the which, the Saints ( i. e. themselves) ought
as well to follow, as the written word.

So that, through pretended Revelations, and sudden impulses of the Spirit,
they have often times, in their Zeal, been irritated to draw the Sword against
the Civil Magistrate, and have sheathed it in the Bowels of many Innocent
Christian people, who would not be carried away with their wind of Doctrine.

And they have been so far hurried on, and actuated by a Spirit of Delusion, as
that in imitation of Jonathan and his Armor Bearer, a few of them have essayed
to chase thousands, though they have wretchedly fallen and miserably miscarried
in their bloody Attempts. A fresh and desperate instance of this, we have had
in London, since the King's Happy Restoration, when the Wine Cooper, Thomas
Venner, an Anabaptist, and a Fifth-Monarchy Man, who had before, in 1657,
styled himself the Champion of Christ's Monarchy on earth, and an Enemy to all
Monarchies besides Christ's; He did on January, 7, 8, 9, 1660, with about Sixty
of his own Opinion, Armed with Back, Breast, and Headpiece, enter
London-streets, crying, King Jesus, King Jesus: threatening present Death to all
those that would not yield, and side with him for K. Jesus. And such was their
Madness, as that they believed, That they, and the rest of their own judgment,
were called by the Spirit of God, to reform the wicked, Antichristian World,
and to make all the Earthly Powers (which they called Babylon) subservient to
the Kingdom of Jesus. And in Order hereunto, Venner and his Company Vowed never
to Sheath their Swords, till the Powers of the World were subdued.

And although their Number was but small, not exceeding Threescore, yet they
taught, and believed, that One of them should subdue a Thousand, making an
account, that when they had conquered England, they should have passed over the
Seas, and have subdued France, Spain, Italy and all Christendom, if not all the
other parts of the World; And thus have brought Satan and all the Kingdoms of
the Earth under the Scepter and Obedience of King Jesus.

Dr. Featley and other Writers have noted, that the Anabaptists have been the
Great (if not the first) Incendiaries, and Fomenters of Rebellion against their
Lawful Princes: And that it is impossible they should be otherwise, unless
they should act contrary, and inconsistently, to their own avouched Principles.

For the two fundamental Articles of their Faith, are these, scil.

1. That the Offices of Kings and Emperors, and of all Civil Magistrates, are
not approved by God under the New Testament.

There being (in their judgment) no other Monarchy, or Government, but only
that of King Jesus.

2. That no man ought to take any Corporal Oath, or to enter into any Covenant,
to preserve, or to obey the Secular Powers, Royalties and Dignities, there
being no Covenant, but that of Grace, among Christians.

And therefore, says the forementioned Historian, It was no wonder, that Men
who had laid such Grounds of Seditious Doctrine, were also found in their lives
to be Authors of Seditious Commotions and Insurrections against their Princes:
As was Thomas Muntzer, one of the first Anabaptists in Europe, who gathered a
great number of Common people together upon the account of Religion and Tender
Conscience, and Headed them in a Bloody Rebellion against the Princes of
Germany. Though it pleased God, that this Religious Traitor was overcome in
Battle, and deservedly executed for his Treason.

It would be endless to enumerate all their Treasonable Principles; for with
them, as with all others, the Proverb is true, Mores sequuntur Humores.

Men's Practices are the Natural Results and effects of their Principles.

And therefore, forasmuch as the Anabaptists Principles are Treasonable and
Anti-Protestant, Declaring against

The King's Supremacy in Church, And His Monarchy in State;

We may, and ought to, Conclude them (as we did the Presbyterians and
Independents)

To be No PROTESTANTS.

CHAP. V. The Quakers No Protestants.
THis is a Sect of Men, who also pretend to Religion, and, like bad Weeds, have
in a very short time grown high and numerous within this our pleasant Garden of
England.

And truly, they are, outwardly (whatever they be inwardly) more modest than
the three former Dissenters: in that these men, knowing their own Principles
and Practices to be directly opposite to the Protestant Religion, have not
presumed (as did the three other) to Name themselves Protestants;

But have been Content to pass under the Denomination of The PEOPLE of GOD,
Commonly Called QVAKERS.

And as for their Tenets and Principles, no man is able to give a perfect
Account of them, They being a Maniple of Confusion: Nor are they among
themselves agreed, what are their own Doctrines and Principles: Witness their
own Writers, who Contradict one another.

Only in these particulars they all agree; 1. To deny, The King's Supremacy.
2. The Churches Episcopacy. 3. The Lawfulness of taking an Oath, and of
Swearing before a Civil Magistrate.


And in one thing they are (out of a Principle of pretended Sanctity) more Rude
and Inhumane, than any of their Dissenting Brethren; In that they obstinately
refuse to pay to the King, or to any Person whatever, the Common Civility of
outward Respect and Reverence, and do deny the King and all Magistrates the
Civil Honor and Complement of the very Hat.

And this is to be noted, That although the Quakers will not Swear in their own
Persons, Because it is a sin to Swear, yet they will desire (and sometimes
hire) others to take an Oath and Swear for them, and to sin in their stead; as
frequently they do, in the case of Burying in Woollen only: nay, sometimes
they will procure Knights of the Post to Swear for them, Persons who never saw
their Dead either laid forth, wound up, or Buried, and yet have Sworn and made
Affidavit before the Justice of the Peace, only upon the Credit of their Word;
As the Writer of these Lines once discovered; and advised the said Quakers to
take up their Dead out of the Grave, and to get a true Oath to be made
according to Law, the which advice they (within the time) did follow, and saved
their forfeiture.

In truth, this Action of the Quakers, in getting others to Swear for them,
seems to us, very like David's killing the poor Man's Lamb to save his own.

But, forasmuch as the Quakers abhor a Reconciliation with the
Episcopal-Protestant Church of England --

We therefore think, it had been more proper for the Reconciler to have urged
Arguments rather for their Conviction, than for their Reconciliation.

For, until He has convinced them, and the other Dissenters, of their Errors,
and Disloyalties, it is Impertinency, not to say Teason, for him or any other
to persuade the King and Government unto a Condescension toward them, or such
as them, who are all by their Principles, obliged for ever to be Enemies to The
King's Supremacy.

And as Impertinent and Ridiculous is it, for the Reconciler to persuade his
Mother (as he calls) the Church of England, to be reconciled to such as these;
This being to persuade a Reconciliation

Between LIGHT and DARKNESS.

Between YEA and NAY.

Wherefore, seeing these things are impossible, we do from the Premises
Conclude The Quakers,

As we did their former Brethren, In DISSENSION, Not to say, In INIQVITY, To be
No PROTESTANTS.

CHAP. VI. The RECONCILER'S Design proved to be, as Pretended, IMPOSSIBLE.
HAving hitherto given the Reader a short account of all the most considerable
Sects in England; and proved them to be No Protestants.

We now presume, That the Reconciler cannot but by this time, perceive his own
Mistake, and Confess, That the TITLE of his Book is False.

And that he has gratified (by Printing it) no Party of Protestants, but the
Beaufronts (alias Whigs and Trimmers) who are of no Religion, Because they are
of every Religion, according to their company and interest.

And we hope he will acknowledge his Pretended Design (if true) to be
impossible.

Because, Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and All
Dissenters, if true and constant to their own Principles, will ever remain
such, i. e. Dissenters: for no Soap can wash the Blackamoor white.

And therefore, it is utterly impossible for the Church of England to be
Reconciled to them.

Unless the Reconciler would have the Church of England to Vn-church her self,
and become the Mother and Patroness of all Sects and Religions at one and the
same time. Now, if this should ever happen to be, as the Reconciler desires may
be, pray, What an uggly Monster, what a deformable Beast, must the Church of
England be? even worse than the Scarlet-colored Beast in the Revelations, Rev.
17.3.
which was full of Names of Blasphemy, full of Abominations and Filthiness.

But we cannot imagine, the Reconciler's Brains to be so shallow, as ever to
think Impossibilities feasible, as he must, if ever he thinks it feasible to
reconcile the Episcopal Church of England and the Dissenters, whilst they
continue such.

In our apprehension, the Reconciler may as well plead for the Church of
Englands Condescension to, and Reconciliation with, the Papists, as with the
Dissenters.

For the Dissenters are as dangerous to the King and his Monarchy, and to the
Church of England and her Episcopacy, as the Papists.

And therefore, if the Dissenters may be brought into the Body of our Church,
and be indulged, because of their tender Consciences, notwithstanding their
erroneous and treasonable Principles

Then pray, Mr. Reconciler, Why may not the Papists also, for the same reason,
be indulged?

For Thousands of the Papists have proved themselves to be men of great
Conscience, by their constant Loyalty to the King in Temporals, notwithstanding
their Obligations to the Pope in Spirituals; as also by strict and frequent
Fasts, according to their Churches Orders, and by their daily devotions and
great Charity even to their very Enemies, as well as to their Friends, and by
their sober inoffensive Lives: by these and other instances, you may see, that
the Papists do not only prosess, but also live Christianity in many degrees
above the generality of Dissenters, or of the Beaufront Protestants.

Now, if this be a truth, as verily it is, then pray, Sir, (seeing as you
pretend, that you wrote your Book, only to ease your own Conscience, and that
poor Dissenters may not be damned by being excluded our Church, why then, Sir,)
will you damn the Conscientious Papists, by excluding them? for you do in your
Book exclude all the Papists, as the Only Common Enemy to our Church and State.

As if the Dissenters were no Enemies to either; as if they, dear innocent
Souls, had no Gall or Bitterness, no Malice or Ill Will against the King and
his Government?

Sir, you are become an eloquent Tertullus, a great Apologizer for, not only
some, but even all the Dissenters.

When in Page 108, and Page 114, of your Book, you declare to the whole world
in these very words, Their Innocence and your own good opinion of them,
Protestant Reconciler, p. 113, 114.
saying, I Sincerely profess, I know not any pure Malice, Obstinacy and
Wilfulness, which can certainly be applied unto the Case of the Dissenters.

Surely, Sir, you will for once eat your words; and Confess, That you know
some, yet Surviving, who entered into a Malicious Scotch-Covenant against the
late King, and obstinately raised a Bloudy-War against Him and his present
Majesty: and you know farther, That They have not (as yet) Openly declared
their Repentance and sorrow for so doing;

Ergo, You know some, that still continue Obstinate and Malicious, as the
Learned Dr. Womack and Faulkland have informed you.

Surely, Sir, you knew (or at least have heard of) Oliver Cromwell and his
Malicious Army that Murdered King Charles the First; and you know many of that
Army do yet survive without declaring the least Abhorrency of that Horrid
Action; Ergo --

Did you never know nor hear of Tho. Venner and his Company, who in 1660, shot
and fired at the King's peaceable Subjects in London Streets, and pleaded, They
did it out of a Tender Conscience, and for King Jesus his sake: And is there
not one Fifth Monarchy Man of all your Acquaintance?

Did you never hear of a late Malicious Association, carried on by the
Beaufronts and the Dissenters against the King and the Church Government, The
which (if you will believe the King's late Declaration) would, in all
likelihood, had it took effect, have proved more fatal and destructive to the
King and the Church of England, as now established, than ever the Scotch
Covenant? And, I pray, Sir, don't you know one of these Associatours?

Did you never know Stephen College that was hanged at Oxford?

I wonder in what County you live:

For in all Counties the Associatours exceedingly abound, both Beaufronts and
Dissenters. And it is observed, that the Beaufronts are of this humor, That
they will on Sunday Morning go to their Parish Church, and in the Afternoon to
a Conventicle: in the Afternoons they will never come to Divine Service, nor to
Catechizing, nor to Exposition on the Church Catechism, though never so
profitable and large, yet if there be no Sermon in the Pulpit, they will turn
their back upon Divine Service, and either go to another Church where there is
no Catechizing but a Sermon, or to a Conventicle, or else they will stay at
home, and Scurrilously Rail at the King and Bishops, and be sure at their own
Parson, and complain that he is lazy and idle, although he be never so
laborious and painful in his Exposition on the Church Catechism, and in
instructing old and young, according to the Church- Canons, in the Desk. Yet
because he does not in the Afternoon ascend the Pulpit, and beat the Cushion,
he cannot escape the Virulency of their Tongues; And, Mr. Reconciler, in one
County a Canonical Parson being sent for, to Preach before his Diocesan, he was
thereby prevented from Reading Divine Service the next day (which fell out to
be an Holyday) at his own Parish Church;

Hereupon, it happened, that the Dissenters and Beaufronts in the said Parish
(who never came to Divine Service on Holy Days) went from House to House in the
said Town, railing on the said Parson, tauntingly, saying, Look ye, Neighbors!
ye see what care the Parson has of his Parishioners Souls: He is gone out of
Town, and has left no Body to Read Prayers to morrow, it is very true (for we
have been with the Clark to know the truth.) And if we should die before
Sunday, we may all be Damned, for all the Parson's care of us.

A Vengeance on him, and on all his Tribe! They mind only the Fleece and not
the Flock, etc.

And yet, you must know, that when the said Parson is at home, he never misses
(if he be well) the Reading of Divine Service on Holy days at his Parish
Church; no, although he has had no other Auditors but the Walls, and those few
of his own Family: And when the said Parson has (as he often has) called upon
the aforesaid Dissenters and Beaufronts to frequent the Divine Service on the
Holy Days;

They have answered him to his very face, and complained, That Holy days were
first of the Pope's Superstitious Appointment, And that they do more hurt than
good, for they make Servants idle, and bad Husbands. And farther, said they,
"What need we go to Church on the Weekdays, Sunday is enough? God required
but One Day in Seven: We can Pray at home, as well as at the Church: Come Sir,
we must tell you, that you have a Pope in your Heart, and that makes you so
Superstitious as to Observe Days of Man's Inventions

And now, pray, Mr. Reconciler, be ingenuous, and tell the truth; What think
you of this true Story, for it is no Romance? Do you not think, these men were,
and all men like them are, Malicious, Obstinate and Turbulent?

But, because you profess you know not one of them, pray, Know you not one
Associatour or Beaufront (besides your Dear Self) in all your Town and Country?
Know you none of the Men of Shaftsbury? Or, Are they, and all your
Acquaintance, since Stephen College his Execution, transformed from
Associatours into Abhorrers? from Knaves into Honest Men?

If so, it is very good News.

But if not, then pray, Sir, What makes you plead so earnestly in their behalf,
as even to Damn the King and Government, if they do not Humor you in Granting
to the aforesaid Factious Beaufronts and Dissenters, a speedy Condescension?

But to wave this Digression, and to return to our former Querie.

Pray, Sir, tell us,

What Reason is there, That the Dissenters should be indulged, and the Papists
prosecuted? Or why should the Dissenters only be saved by an Admission into
our Church Communion; But the Papists, though never so Religious, be Damned by
an Exclusion? for according to your Doctrine,

If Exclusion will damn the one, it must also damn the other:

But you will object and plead;

1. That the Papists are Idolaters, and therefore ought not to be indulged.
But, I pray, Does not Doctor Owen in totidem verbis say the like of us? How
that all the Ministers of the Episcopal Protestant Church of England, Vide, p.
33.
are Idolaters.

But, pray, Mr. Reconciler, be pleased to tell us, Wherein the Papists are
Idolaters? I presume you will answer (if any thing to the purpose) That

The Papists are Idolaters,

Either because they worship the Host:

Or, because they Bow down to, and Worship Images and Crucifixes.

Very Good: If they do Worship the Host, Crucifixes, or Images, we then are of
your Opinion, and do believe, that they are Idolaters: and our Church of
England concludes the same of them, whilst they worship the Host as God, which
indeed is no God: for otherwise, were the Host (as all Papists believe)
Transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ, God-Man, then it
would be no Idolatry to Worship the Host.

But, Sir, As to Crucifixes and Images,

If a Religious bowing down to, and praying before, an Image, or Crucifix, with
the Eye directed toward it and cast upon it, Be Idolatry;

Then we must tell you, that Mr. Richard Baxter, your admired Author, and your
Great Dissenter, is a Notorious Idolater. For, if Mr. Baxter himself, in his
Christian Directory, or if Doctor Edw. Stilling-fleet, in his Unreasonableness
of Separation, may be credited,

The said Mr. Baxter Writes, That it is Lawful to fall down, and Pray, before
a Crucifix, and that it is Lawful to Direct our Eye toward the said Image or
Crucifix, for the better Stirring up of our Devotions; and therefore Mr. Baxter
calls a Crucifix, Medium Excitans, not Medium Terminans, of our Devotion.

And no more say the Papists for themselves, when they Bow to, or Pray before,
a Crucifix, or Image.

And now (to argue a little with you.) If Mr. Baxter, a Presbyterian-Idolater,
may be indulged, and admitted into our Church Communion,

Then, pray, Why may not another Man, who is a Popish-Idolater, in like manner
be indulged, and admitted too?

Verily, you must grant the Demand, and Indulge them Both, or else discover the
partiality of your Conscience and Affections.

But, pray, Sir, What is it that weighs down the Balance of your affections
more toward the Dissenters, than toward the Papists, seeing neither of them
are Protestants?

The one party as well as the other are your Native Countrymen, and therefore
upon that account they both equally challenge your love.

And Christ died for Papists as well as for Dissenters and Beaufronts, and
therefore according to your Own Argument, you ought to be as solicitous for
their Salvation, as for the others.

2. But you will again Object,

That the Papists are Superstitious.

And so are the Dissenters, as also the Beaufronts?

It being a great Superstition for any Man to oblige himself and his Party to
serve God only in such and such a particular way, Jos. Glanvill. Essay 4. p.
13.
Displeasing to his Lawful Prince, and contrary to his Royal Commands, when at
the same time he might as well have served God in the way commanded, which was
and is, as pleasing unto God, and much more pleasing unto his Prince.

This is the great Superstition All the Dissenters and Beaufronts are Guilty of.

And farther, it is The Plain Man's Way, Sect. 19. p. 40.
as great a Breach of, and as great a Restraint put upon Christian Liberty, for
any man to oblige himself not to Do a Thing indifferent, as to be Obliged by
his Prince to do it.

For every man in that case, is more his King's and Sovereign's Man, than his
Own: And therefore, All those Persons who oblige themselves and their
Followers, Not to observe the Orders and Ceremaonies of our Church, which are
acknowledged to be things indifferent, and which are commanded by the King. All
such Persons, whether Beaufronts or Dissenters, are, not only Disloyal and
Schismatical, but also Self-willed, and highly Superstitious, as well as the
Papists.

3. But you will plead farther;

That the Papists are so wedded to their Principles, as that neither Scripture,
Reason, nor Antiquity, can divert them. And pray, Are not all the Dissenters
wedded as strongly to theirs, if they be men of any settled Principles and
Humors? indeed, as for the Beaufronts, they will not wait for either Scripture
or Reason, But like the Weathercock, will turn with every wind.

4. But say you, The Papists have Vowed Obedience to the Pope of Rome.

And I pray, Have not the Presbyterians Vowed Obedience to their Consistory?
And have not the Independents Vowed and Promised the like to their
Congregational-Church?

5. But the Papists do all Deny the King's Supremacy.

And have we not proved, That all the Dissenters Deny the Same, and that
therefore they are No Protestants?

6. But the Papists are Bloudy-minded Men, and hold with Bellarmin, Papam
habere plenitudinem potestat is super omnes Reges and Principes Christianos,
and Posse eos Regnis privare, and in temporalibus prorsus eximere plebem
Christianam ab eorum obedientia and subjectione, etc. Bellarmin. de potestate
summi Pontif. in Reb. Temporal. c. 13. p. 149. Edit. Colon. Agrip. 1511. Vid.
Stephen Colleges Trial.
and other Jesuits, such as Joan. Driedo, That Christian Kings (if Heretics)
may, and ought to, be Deposed, and put to Death.

And pray, Do not all the Dissenters hold the same Bloody Opinions?

For, (Because I know you love Repetition) pray, Who, but the Dissenters and
the Beaufronts, raised the late Bloody War and Rebellion, upon no other account
(as was pretended) but that of tender Conscience and Religion? Who, but they,
Deposed and Murdered the late King? of which you take not the least notice (as
I remember) in all your Book.

Who but they entered into a New Association against the King, to seize on his
Person at Oxford, and to Depose Old Rowland (as they most Opprobriously
Nicknamed Our and Their own Dread Sovereign the King) in case he should not
yield to their Demands?

Was it not they, who Beheaded Archbishop Laud in England, for being true to
the King and the Church?

And was it not they, the Dissenters, who the other day in Scotland
Assassinated, and most barbarously Butchered and Murdered in the King's
Highway, the most pious and eminently virtuous Protestant-Arch-Bishop of St.
Andrews, and that for no other Reason (as their own Party confessed on the
Gallows) but because the said Archbishop was a true Liege's-Man, and a true
Churchman?

And now, Sir, Will you not grant that the Dissenters and Beaufronts, are
Bloudy-minded Men, as well as the Papists? And if they be so, pray tell the
World, what is the Reason you so passionately Love them, and so bitterly hate
the Papists?

In truth, Sir, If you would not Rail, and say (as some Dissenters and
Beaufronts already have done, and said) that I am a Papist; the which, I bless
God, I am not, and hope never to be; But (if I must confess) I am, and through
God's Assistence I resolve to be, and to die (what I ever professed my self to
be) an hearty Episcopal Protestant of the Church of England; But were it not
for such a Calumny, in truth, I would tell you, that if you are a right, true
Episcopal Protestant (which I fear)

That, then in Reason, you ought to love the Papists, rather than the Obstinate
Dissenters; Not but that you ought to use your best arguments to convert both;
yet, if you will be partial in your Respect, then you ought to show it to the
Papists.

And the Reason for so doing, is this, scil.

Because, The Papists are more like the Episcopal-Protestants, than any of the
Dissenters.

And you cannot but know so much Philosophy,

That where there is the greatest Parity and Likeness, There ought to be the
greatest Love.

The Parity and Likeness between them is this,

1. The Papists are (as the Episcopal-Protestants are) for the Sacred Order of
Episcopacy, distinct from that of Presbytery and Deaconship.

But the Dissenters are all against it.

2. The Papists (as the Episcopal-Protestants) are for Monarchy rather than for
Democracy.

Whereas All the Dissenters are (as was Calvin) rather for Aristocracy and
Democracy, Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 20.
than Monarchy in the State.

3. The Papists (as the Episcopal-Protestants) are for solemnly Consecrating
and Dedicating Churches and Chapels unto the peculiar Service of Almighty God,
and his Holy Worship.

But the Dissenters are all against any such pious Dedications and
Consecrations, for fear (say they) of placing Holiness in one place more than
in another.

4. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) are for an Uniformity in Divine
Service, and for a Set-Liturgy, and for the Peoples Responsals, That so all
Persons may serve God with one voice and mind, and in one way.

But the Dissenters are against the Impositions of any such Set-Forms and
Liturgies.

5. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) are for Imposition of the Decent
Ceremonies of the Cross in Baptism, of Kneeling in the Eucharist, of the
Surplice, and of Bowing at the Name of Jesus.

But the Dissenters and Beaufronts (and the Reconciler) are all against the
imposition of them: Though it is to be Noted, that the Reconciler, to hold his
Great and manifold Preferments, uses them all, and one more, to wit, Bowing to
the Altar, as he hints to us in his Book.

6. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) do not prefer the Pulpit before
the Desk, a Sermon before the Judicious Prayers of the Church; But they
Command, and Commend both in their due places and order.

Whereas the Dissenters and Beaufronts Idolize the Rulpit, and slight the Desk:
highly admire and cry-up Sermons and Preaching, but cry-down the Prayers of the
Church, and sometimes in derision, have called the Holy Prayers of our Church,
no better than a Mess of Pottage.

7. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) are strict for Catechizing, and
for expounding upon the Catechism (according to Canon) on Sundays in the
Afternoon, in the open face of the Congregation, that thereby not only the
youth, but also the elder people, may be taught the Principles of Christianity.

Whereas the Beaufronts and Dissenters will not come to Church at all on a
Sunday in the Afternoon, if there be only Catechizing and Exposition, and no
Sermon.

8. The Papists (as also the Episcopal Protestants) will not allow of any
Irreverence, or walking up and down in any part of the Church, or sitting with
their Hats on in the Church.

But all the Beaufronts and Dissenters do permit, and allow of this
Irreverence, and will tell you, That a man is Superstitious, and Worships the
Walls, if he Religiously uncovers his head, when there is neither Singing nor
Praying in the Church.

But one thing I have observed among them, when they have come to our Churches,
That in time of Sermon (which they so much Idolize, and prefer before the
Prayers) they will sit with their Hats on, but in time of Prayer they will pull
them off; as if God was not present in the time of Preaching, as well as of
Praing.

I wondered at their doings, and once I asked of them, Their Reason for it.

Their Answer was this;

That in Prayer, they, by the Minister, spoke to God; and therefore, in
Reverence to God, they, in Prayer pull off their Hats: and, for this Reason,
the Quaker now will put off the Hat in Prayer.

But, said they, In Sermon, or Preaching, God, by the Minister, speaks to us,
and therefore we put on our Hats, lest we should be thought to adore the
Minister instead of God.

As if God was not as much to be adored when he speaks, as when he is spoken
to: Yet, this is the Superstition of all the Dissenters, I will not except any,
no not the Presbyterians, nor the Independents; for though I never was in any
of their Conventicles, as I know of, yet I have frequently observed in our
Churches this Superstition in them, that is, to put on the Hat in Sermon, and
to put it off in Prayertime.

9. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) are for Burying all Baptized
Persons Christian-like, i.e. decently and piously, with a Solemn Funeral Office.

But the Presbyterians are indifferent, Presbyterian Directory for Burying.
whether there be at the Grave any Prayers or Exhortation made to the Living or
no; They that will, may; and they that will not, may let it alone.

Just as our Reconciler says, p. 341. Reconcil. p. 341.
They that will have a May Pole, shall have one, and they that will not have a
May Pole, shall have none.

But the Independents and all the other Dissenters are against all Funeral
Offices. And their Buryals, for the most part, are no better than that of a
Dead Dog or an Ass.

10. The Papists (as the Episcopal Protestants) are for keeping God's House,
the Church, Neat and Clean; and if the Papists err in this respect, it is in
their excess.

Whereas the Dissenters are for the other extreme, to wit, for Sordidness and
Nastiness in their places of Divine Worship.

By these and other instances, the unprejudiced Reader may perceive in the
Papists a great Parity with, and resemblance unto, the Episcopal Protestants.

And therefore, if the Reconciler be an Episcopal Protestant, and if he will be
partial in his Affection (which is not at all necessary) then he ought, in
Reason, to like that Party best, which is most like himself.

But yet, I would not have the Reconciler, nor my Ingenuous Reader to mistake
me, As if I pleaded for an Indulgence and favor to be shown by the King and
Government unto the Papists, because in some things they resemble us; and none
to the Dissenters, because in no one Essential of either our Church, or our
State Government, are they like us.

For in truth, I am, as I ought to be, against both Parties, Papists and
Dissenters.

This being my Opinion (with submission to my Superiors better judgments)

That, if either Papists or Dissenters get the upper hand, our Church of
England, as now Established, and our King's Supremacy and Authority, will be
utterly destroyed.

And therefore, it is humbly conceived, That a Reconciliation with the Papists,
is as impossible, and as Pernicious and Dangerous (if possible) as a
Reconciliation with the Dissenters: For it is evident,

That unless the Papists will Renounce the Pope's Supremacy, and so cease to be
Papists;

And unless the Dissenters will acknowledge the King's Supremacy, and so cease
to be Dissenters:

Unless these two things be granted, It is impossible for the Church of
England, as now established, to be Reconciled unto either of these
Schismatics, whether Papists or Dissenters.

Nor is it safe for the Government to admit of Schismatics into our
Church Fellowship, S. Cyprian. de Unit. Eccl.. 8.298.
for Schismatici duos Episcopos, duos Greges in una Ecclesia constituunt; and
they will bring in Confusion, which is the destruction of all Order and
Government: Et dum Conventicula sibi diversa constituunt, Ibid. 299.
veritatis caput atque originem reliquerunt, etc. which words of St. Cyprian we
will leave to the Conventiclers of both Parties to translate, and seriously to
consider. We being well assured, that the Principles of both Papists and
Dissenters are inconsistent with Truth, and with the Well-being of our
Established Government in Church and State.

For, as has been already proved, Papists and Dissenters Deny the King's
Supremacy.

And therefore, notwithstanding their taking the Oath of Allegiance (which many
of them have taken) the King has no firm Security for the Preservation of his
Life and Crown, from either Papists or Dissenters.

For if the Pope should command the Papists (as he did Ravillac) or if the
Consistory bid the Presbyterians (as it did in the Deposition and Expulsion of
Mary Queen of Scotland) or if the Congregational-Church bid the Independent (as
in the Murdering of the late King) or if the Spirit move, and bid the
Anabaptist and Quaker (as it did Venner) to raise War against the King, because
he is an Heretic, and an ungodly Man, and to Depose and Kill him, not being
fit for Government,

Then they all, both Papists and Diffenters, must (according to their several
Principles) obey their several Orders, and must Fight against, Depose and
Murder the King, and destroy all that side with him.

Wherefore, that neither the King's Life and Crown, nor our own Privileges and
Immunities, may be exposed to their Cruelty and Usurpation;

We humbly conceive it necessary, That the Laws of the Realm should stand in
force equally against both, Papists and Dissenters.

Because there is no party of men in this Kingdom, that ever were, or can be,
according to their Principles, true and faithful in all respects, to the King
and the Government in Church and State, as now Established, but only the
Episcopal Protestants.

And for a farther confirmation of this great Truth, we have the Attest of our
present Dread Sovereign, in his Royal and Noble Speech unto the Dr. Gower
Vice Chancellor.
University of Cambridge, upon their humble and Loyal Address made to him at
New Market, Sept. 18. 1681. In which, His Majesty was graciously pleased to
Oblige them, and indeed the whole Nation, with the following words and
Assurances, to wit,

That He would constantly own and defend the Church of England, King Charles
the Second his Speech to the University of Cambridge, Printed in the
London-Gazette by Authority.
as Established by Law: of this He bid them be Assured, for He would be as good
as his word, Notwithstanding whatever Representation either had or should be
made of him to the contrary: Being farther pleased to add,

That there was no other Church in the World, that Taught and Practiced Loyalty
so Conscientiously, as that did.

In truth, This short, but pithy Speech of His Sacred Majesty, is a full Answer
to the Reconciler's whole Book, especially to that part of it, which so
unworthily Misrepresents His Majesty's former Declarations, to the eye and ear
of the World.

CHAP. VII. The Reconciler's Design proved to be, As Managed, Malicious, and
Treasonable, toward the King and Governors, both of Church and State.
OUr Church and State of England at present, God be Praised, are, by the Divine
Providence, and by the King's wise Conduct of Affairs, in a very prosperous,
well-ordered, and Settled State and Condition: And therefore, for any Man to
wish, and endeavor (as does the Reconciler) their disturbance by an
unnecessary Alteration of their Established Laws, is truly to wish them a
worse state and condition than at present they are in.

And so to wish and endeavor, is (according to the Stoics Philosophy) the
height of Envy and Hatred. (...), Diog. Laert. Zeno l. 7. p. 506.
etc.

Now, that the Reconciler's Design is (as he has managed it) thus Malicious and
Treasonable,

Toward the King, in Scandalizing and Blaspheming Him,

And toward the Church (as now Established) in representing her Bishops and
Governors as Anti christian, Cruel, and Tyrannizing over Godly Men's
Consciences; And in prostituting her pious Orders and Constitutions to Public
Scorn and Derision;

That it is so,

Will be the Task of the following Lines and Sections, to prove.

SECT. I. The Reconciler Scandalously makes The King and Governors, the
Authors of all our present Schisms and Factions;
And that for Two Reasons;

1. BEcause they impose things indifferent upon the People.

2. Because the King and Governors require of the Clergy subscriptions to the
things Imposed.

As to the First -- -- the Reconciler's own words are --

Why do Superiors still continue the Imposition of those Indifferent things,
Reconciler, c. 1. p. 30, 31.
which do occasion the Schism, etc?

And in Page 339. he Argues and Queries thus; Page 339.


Whether those Rules of the Church which concern things indifferent -- should
not be altered or relaxed, when it so happens that an Horrid Schism with all
its dreadful consequences, is by Imposition of them caused throughout the Body
of the Nation?

But, a little to stop the Carreir of this fierce WRITER, and to Vindicate the
Honor and Justice of our King and Governors, as to this particular, we
entreat, it may be noted --

That the Reconciler is not only Disloyal toward his Prince and Superiors,
in so Aspersing them,

But also Disingenuous toward his Ignorant Reader, in so miserably imposing
upon him:

For the truth of the matter is briefly this,

To wit,

Not the Imposers of things indifferent, But the Separatists and Disobedient,
are the Sole Causes of the Schism.

For it is Confessed by the Reconciler, and by the Separatists, that the things
Imposed are things Indifferent in themselves, and have no sinfulness in them.

And therefore the not observing them, when by Lawful Authority Commanded, is
a Sin of Rebellion and Disobedience.

And this sin of not Observing things Indifferent, when Lawfully imposed, is
the sole and Prime Cause: of the Schism. Nay, Mr. Baxter presses farther, scil.

That, although it be a sin in the Magistrate to Command, yet it is a Duty in
the People to Obey His Command, in things not sinful in themselves.

Mr. Baxter's own words are --

Many a Ruler sins in his Commands, Baxter's Cure of Church-Divisions,
Direct. 34. p. 194.
when it is no Sin, but a Duty of the Inferior to Obey them: A Ruler that has
but a bad end, or bad circumstances, may sin in commanding, And yet it will be
the Subjects Duty to Obey. Yea, as to the Matter it self, it may be unlawful
for a Ruler to command a thing that will do no good, And yet it may be the
Subjects Duty to do it.

Therefore (says Mr. Baxter) remember that ye do not prove it sinful in you to
do such things, Ibid. p. 195.
by proving it a sin in the Imposer, unless ye have some better Reason, and can
show a Law of God forbidding you.

And elsewhere he tells his Reader,

That a Form or Liturgy defective, may, and must be used, rather than a Schism
by Separation be made, and rather than the Churches Edification be hindered by
our Non-complyance with such a defective Form -- His own words are --

If I am restrained from the Public Preaching of the Gospel, or exercise of my
Ministry, Ibid. Direct. 32. p. 185, 186.
unless I will use a more disordered or defective Form, I shall take it for my
Duty then to use it -- for to use a more defective Form, with Liberty to use my
best Gifts also, and to exercise my Ministry publicly to all, is more to the
Churches Edification, than (by Separation) to use my Gifts only a few days in
a Corner, and then (for my Disobedience) to he in Prison, and use them no more.

Thus far Mr. Baxter pleads excellently for Obedience to our King and
Governors, in things indifferent; and which are not forbidden by some express
Law of God; and that not the King, nor the Imposers, but the Separatists and
Disobedient, are the Authors and Causes of the Schism and Faction throughout
the Body of the Nation.

And great pity it is,
that Mr. Baxter's own practice, by a daily Separation from the Church of
England, and by his Constant Disobedience to the King's and Governors
Impositions of things Indifferent, should so Notoriously Contradict his own
Doctrine.

But to return to our Reconciler, and to speak ad hominem.

The Sin of not observings things indifferent, when lawfully commanded, is the
sole and chief cause of the Schism.

This is no more than what the Reconciler himself has owned to be true in many
places of his Protest. Recon. c. 1. p. 22. c. 2. p. 29. c. 3. p. 58, 59. c. 5.
p. 145. and Preface, p. 59.
Book, When, he Exhorts the Dissenters to obey the King and Governors, and to
Conform to their Impositions.

And his Argument, persuading the Dissenters to Obedience and Conformity, is
this, scil.

Because the Ceremonies imposed are things Indifferent,

Ergo, The Dissenters ought to Obey and Conform,

Lest, by their Disobedience, they become Guilty of Schism --

For Separating when they ought not to Separate I verily believe all Separate
Congregations in the Nation, which are not Subject to the Government of our
Diocesans, are Schismatical; and that all they who abet and head them, and
exercise among themselves a Spiritual Jurisdiction Independent on them, do set
up Altar against Altar. Prot. Recon. Preface, p. 59.
.

Thus our Reconciler is become a very Bifrons, a Janus with Two Faces.

And with the One,

He looks upon the King and Governors as the only Authors of our Schisms and
Factions, for Imposing things Indifferent:

But with the other,

He looks on the Dissenters, as the only Authors and Causes of the Schisms
throughout the Nation, for their not Conforming to the Ceremonies imposed,
which are things Lawfully to be observed, they being things Indifferent.

As to the Reconciler's other Reason, scil.

That the King and Governors are therefore the Authors of all our Schisms,
Because they require Subscription Protestant Reconciler, c. 1. p. 7.
to things Indifferent, etc.

It is, as scandalous to the King and Governors, and as false, as the other
Argument: And can be published for no other end, But to amuse the World, and to
prejudice the People against the King and his Government.

For did not God himself require an Oath (which is much more than Subscription)
of the Priests and People of Israel, thereby strictly binding them to observe,
not only his Moral, but also his Ceremonial Law, which chiefly consisted of
things Indifferent, before they were lawfully Imposed and Commanded?

And, I pray, Are not Kings God's Vicegerents? And is it not their Prerogative
to be like God, and to Imitate him, in all things lawful and expedient? And
did not the Religious Kings and Princes of old, Nehem. 5.12. c. 10.29. 2 Chronicles.
15.14. 2 Chronicles. 34.21, 33.
particularly Nehemiah, Asa and Josias, make the People take an Oath, and to
Swear Uniformity and Conformity to God's Laws, and to some things that were
Indifferent in themselves?

And have not all Christian Kings and Princes, throughout all Ages, imitated
those Godly Kings, when they went about Reformation? Have they not required
Subscription to their Pious Orders and Constitutions? The Reconciler is not
able to mention any one Christian Council, or Christian Emperor, King, or
Prince, that ever made any Canons, Laws, or Constitutions for Government of the
Church and State, but they required either an Oath, or Subscription, for the
better observation of their said Canons and Laws; or else they subjoyned a
dreadful Punishment, such as an Anathema and Excommunication upon Obstinate
Disobedience.

And yet, those Primitive Councils, and Ancient Christian Emperors,
were never Scandalized, as is our Gracious King, and Governors; nor ever said
to be the Authors of Schisms and Factions, for requiring Subscriptions and
strict Obedience unto their Impositions of things indifferent, as our King,
Bishops and Governors are said to be by the Scurrilous Reconciler.

SECT. II. According to the Reconciler, The King and Governors are Proud Men,
and the Plagues of the Earth, for Imposing things Indifferent.
Take the Reconciler's own words --

IT seems Pride for men to institute unnecessary Rites and Ceremonies, and
say, I Command you all to Worship God according to these my Institutions and
Inventions; and he that will not thus Worship him, shall not have liberty to
Worship him at all (Note Reader, A Great Lie cast upon the Kingand Government.
that this is an Abominable Lie told of the King and our Governors, for by Act
of Parliament, Any Man with any Company, not exceeding five, may in his own
House worship God in any manner.) "If (says the Reconciler) the work of
Church Government be to make small Matters great, and make that damnable which
before was lawful, and this without any Necessity at all, Prot. Recon. c. 10.
p. 328.
it will tempt the People (as it does the Reconciler) to think such Governors
to be The Plagues of the Earth.

To confirm all this Harangue, the Reconciler quotes Mr. Baxter's Disp. 5th of
Human. Cerem. Chapter 14. Sect. 8. and Chapter 5. Sect. 4.

And in the following words, he says, Prot. Recon. ibid. p. 328, 329.
That not the Dissenters for Disobeying, But the Governors for Commanding
Obedience, in things Indifferent, are the Disturbers of the Churches Peace.

SECT. III. According tot he Reconciler, The King and Governors Deserve Death
for imposing things Indifferent.
The Reconciler's own Words are --

YOu ( Superiors, Sect. Recon. c. 10. p. 329.
King and Governors) disturb the Church much more Sinfully (than the
Dissenters) by laying such Snares as shall unavoidably procure it ( i. e. a
disturbance) and then taking occasion by it, to make a greater disturbance by
your Cruel Execution.
If the Fly offend, and deserve death, by incautelously falling into the
Spider's Web; What does the Spider (that is, the King and Governors) deserve,
that out of her own Bowels Spread this Net in the way, and kills the Fly that
is taken in it? Your own Actions most concern your selves, try therefore
whether you do well in Commanding and Punishing, as well as whether others
offend in disobeying. Thus far the Reconciler, for which he again quotes Mr.
Baxter.

Now, What Sense can there be made of this Similitude between the Fly and the
Spider, but this? to wit,

That the Venomous Spider, is the King and the Governors, who lay Snares for
the People, by Imposing on them Strict Laws for the Observation of Ceremonies
and things Indifferent: And that the Harmless innocent Fly, are the Dissenters,
who are caught in the Snares of the Laws made by the King and Governors, and
for their Rebellion and Disobedience are either put to Death, or Cruelly
Punished.

And therefore (according to the Reconciler) as the Spider Deserved Death for
making Webs, by which the Fly was Caught; So does the King and Governors
deserve Death, for making Laws, by which the People are Caught, and Restrained
their Liberty, and their Tender Consciences Imposed upon, as to things
Indifferent.

Never let this Author any more Write against the Jesuits for their Treason,
until he quits himself of the same.

SECT. IV. The King and Governors (according to the Reconciler) are Traitors
to the Commonwealth, and Betrayers of the Peoples Liberties, for Imposing upon
them, Things Indifferent: And that, therefore, the People ought not to yield to
their Impositions; But ought To Rebel, and Vindicate their Christian Liberty.
The Reconciler's own Words are --

BOth these things (that is, Prot. Recon. c. 5. p. 160, 161.
the Superiors, King and Governors Imposing things Indifferent, and requiring
Subscription to them, Both these things) do put a necessary abstention and
restraint upon us, as to the use of these things; if therefore (says the
Reconciler) by so doing ( i. e. the Superiors, our King and Governors, if
they) in effect Betray our Liberties, Dissenters ought not to yield to them in
the least: nor should good Christians by a Vow restrain themselves from the
free use of things Indifferent.

And as bad, or rather worse Treason, does the Reconciler utter, p. 338.

Where he plainly Suggests Two things; by which Suggestions he extremely
prejudices and incends the-Giddy-Vulgar against the King and his Government.

He Suggests, 1. That the King and Governors are going about to Betray the
City and Commonwealth unto the Enemy. 2. That therefore, The Subjects May, and
Ought to Rebel, and Vindicate their own Privileges.


For the Subjects may (says the Reconciler) neglect and transgress the Orders
and Commands of their King and Superiors, In hopes of a Greater Good;

The Reconciler's own Words are --

Secondly, I Answer with the Learned Camero, Prot. Recon. c. 10. p. 338.
That even Order may be not only laid aside, but even neglected and
transgressed, for a Greater Good; As when a Citizen does volantarily rise up
against a Magistrate, who is endeavoring to Betray the City to the Enemy, or a
common Soldier against a Rebellious Officer.

Never did Hugh Peter's Preach and Print greater Treason.

For, upon the pretended force of this very Treasonable Argument of the
Reconciler's, did Oliver, and the Rump, with their Rebellious Army, cut off
King Charles the First His Head,

Pretending to the People, That the said King was going about to bring in
Popery, and to Betray the City (of London) and the whole Nation to their
Enemies, and deprive them of their Liberties.

And because (as they alleged) that He Imposed such Ceremonies and Orders upon
Tender Consciences as would Damn the Souls of Myriads --

Therefore it was, that the late Rebels made War against the said King and
Murdered Him.

And lo! Here is a Second Hugh Peter's, one that styles himself, not only a
Protestant, but a Priest, nay, a Cathedral-Man, and therefore Doubly obliged to
the King and the Church; yet lo! Here is Such an One, That dares publish in
Print, That it is not only lawful, but necessary, to Neglect, and Transgress
the Magistrate's Orders, and to Rebel, if so be, The Subjects apprehend a
Greater Good will accrue to them thereby:

That is to say,

If the Subjects do fear, that Myriads of Souls will be Damned by the King's
and Magistrates Impositions: But may, and will be Saved by their Rebellion, and
Transgressing such Orders and Impositions,

Then (according to the Reconciler) the Subjects May, and Ought to Rebel.

The Reconciler's own words farther are --

Now (says he) Charity is greater than Faith, Ibid. c. 10. p. 338.
and therefore is a greater Good than Order in Extrinsecalls, and the Salvation
of Souls is the end of Order, That therefore must be better than the Means, and
consequently Order may be transgressed, when it is Necessary for that end to be
so.

That is, in plain English,

The King's and Governors Orders and Laws may Lawfully be Transgressed;
Treason and Rebellion may Lawfully be Committed, whenever the People shall
think, for their Greater Good and Ease, it should be So.

Thus the Reconciler takes the Liberty and Confidence to speak out that
Treason, which the Shamefaced Dissenter dares only conceive in heart and mind;

And which of the Two, is the most Malicious, and dangerous to the King and his
Government, we will leave to others to determine.

SECT. V. The Reconciler Scandalously affirms, That the King and Governors
want Piety and Prudence, And therefore it is, that they impose upon the People,
Things Indifferent.
FOr Proof of this, the Reconciler quotes Doctor Tillotson, though very
Falsely:

The Reconciler's own words, are --

If then this be not done (to wit, Prot. Recon. Preface, p. 19.
an Abolition of things Indifferent) it must be, in his Judgment (that is, in
Dr. Tillotson's Judgment) through defect of Piety and Prudence in some men
(that is, if he writes sense, Tillots. Sermon. on St. John, 13, 34.34. p. 28.
through defect of Piety and Prudence in the King and Governors (especially of
the Church) for of such Dr. Tillotson treats in his said Sermon) or through
Consent with what is reasonable in others, etc.

Now that the Reconciler means the King and Governors, by what he says, is
evident;

Because, he knows, and confesses, that it is in the power of none, but only
of the King and Governors, to alter the Imposition of things Indifferent. And
therefore (according to the Reconciler) The King and Governors continue the
Imposition of things Indifferent, through want and defect of Piety and Prudence.

And now, pray, Is not this Reconciler worthy of Reproof? to call his King and
Governors, Ungodly, Imprudent.

What can he call them worse?

In our thinking, it is all one, as if the Reconciler had Mounted the Stage at
New Market (where the King was, much about the Time when his Book came forth)
and there had made Proclamation in the open Market, and Harangued the
Discontented People with such Phrase as this --

O Brethren! Be wise, and look to your selves, for our King is a Fool, our
Governors are all like him, unwise and imprudent; they are, as he is, ungodly,
wicked men, and for want of Grace, and through Defect of Piety and Prudence,
Therefore it is,

That they continue the Imposition of things Indifferent upon you; for, I will
assure you, had they the Wisdom and Prudence which is from above, or were they
acted by a Spirit of Grace and Holiness, They would ease Men's Consciences, and
would soon take away these Heavy Yokes and Burdens (I mean, the Imposition of
things Indifferent) from off your Necks.

But alas! Dear Brethren, I tell you, and so does Doctor Tillotson tell you,
That the King and Governors want Piety and Prudence, And that is the very
Reason of their Impositions.

Now, What is all this? But a New Plot against the King and Government: What is
it? But to Alarm the People,

First, That the King and Governors are Ungodly, Imprudent.

Secondly, That (according to Calvin's Doctrine) Because they are Foolish and
Ungodly, they are therefore unfit for Government. And,

Thirdly, Because they are Ungodly, Imprudent, and Unfit for Government, Calv.
Instit. l. 4. c. 20.
Therefore, the People may Oppose them, and may (as Calvin and Knox Taught)
Depose them.

Thus (in our apprehension) the Reconciler again Sounds the Trumpet to a New
Rebellion, Odiously and Maliciously misrepresenting the King and Governors
unto the People, as Idiots and Fools, as Wicked and Ungodly.

SECT. VI. According to the Reconciler, The King and Governors are the
Destroyers of the Work of God, and the Murderers of Myriads of Souls, for
imposing things Indifferent.
The Reconciler's own words are --

IF I durst (says he) make the Parallel, Protest. Recon. c. 4. p. 98.
it unavoidably would be this; That since Superiors, by using of their Power,
in the Commanding of these things Indifferent, do that which, accidentally,
and through the weakness of Dissenters, does Minister unto that Schism, which
is Destructive to them, it may be feared, that they ( i. e. the King and
Superiors) destroy the work of God, and unnecessarily cause the Souls to
perish for whom Christ died.

And Page 99. He adds.

Were I worthy to advise my Governors, Ibid. p. 99.
I would say, Have thou (O King!) power in these things Indifferent? Have it to
thy self before God; and use it to that end, for which alone he gave it, for
Edification, and not for Destruction.

Here is plain English, and there is no need of an Oedipus to unriddle and find
out the Odium and Scandal cast upon the King and our Superiors.

And, in Page 195,

The Reconciler has these words, to the same purpose --

A Scandal (says he) in the Nature of it being Spiritual Murder, Prot. Recon.
c. 6. p. 195.
it is to me a wonder how Men (that is, the King and Governors) can think it
is consistent with Christian Charity to enjoin any thing unnecessary, whence,
by experience, they ( i. e. the King and Governors) know the Murder of
innumerable Souls is like to follow: Now, must it not oblige Superiors to lay
aside a thing Indifferent (as all the Ceremonies are) for the preserving of
many Myriads of Souls from Ruin?

It being then not necessary for Superiors to Command things Indifferent, Page
196.
much rather should they Quit them, than be (as they are) Accessory to these
sad Consequents of that Command, to wit, the Murder of so many Myriads of Men
-- God Grant (says he) That our Lawgivers (the King and Governors) may make
the due Inference from the Premises, etc.

Now, Good Sir, What Inference would you have us think, the King and
Governors, in Honor and Justice, should make from your Premises, But to
Reward the Traitor according to his Treason? unless he shall timely Repent,
Openly Recant, and beg Mercy: which God grant he may, and then we hope the
King's Clemency will be farther signalized in Pardoning so Notorious an
Offender.

SECT. VII. The King Commands Men to Sin, according to the Reconciler, When he
Commands their Obedience as to things Indifferent.
The Reconciler's own words are --

MOreover this may be farther Argued, Prot. Recon. c. 6. p. 200.
That, Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet.

He that, being a Superior (as is the King) does not what lawfully he may for
the prevention of his Subjects Sinning, does Command his Subjects to Sin. Now
it is confessed by our Superiors, that if they please, they may abate these
Impositions of things indifferent.

And it is also certain, that the not abating of them is the Occasion of the
Schism, and so of the Great Sin of many of their Subjects; How then will they
avoid (according to this Rule, Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet) from
commanding their Subjects to Sin, when they may, but will not, prevent their
sinning?

Most Excellent Logic!

The King and Parliament Command by Law, that whoever calls the King Fool, or
Papist, shall be hanged:

A certain Rebellious Fellow wilfully transgresses that Law, And is hanged for
it;

Ergo, Because the King and Parliament had Power, not to make that Law, and
after they had made it, they had power to Repeal that Law, But would not,
Therefore the King and Parliament Commanded that Rebel to Sin, and therefore
the King and Parliament are doubly Guilty,

First, Of the Rebel's Sin.

Secondly, Of his Death; in not preventing both, by Repealing the said Law:

For, according to the Reconciler, Qui non vetat peccare cum possit, jubet.

SECT. VIII.
The Reconciler's Rule, for the King and Governors to Observe, in case any
Evil Consequents should happen through the Dissenters Disobedience after a
Condescension Granted; to wit, To leave the Event to God.

The Reconciler's own words are --

IF (says he) it be Objected, Prot. Recon. c. 10. p. 326.
That should our Superiors Indulge Dissenters in these Matters, the Dissenters
would never be contented with the Abatement of three Ceremonies, unless (as Dr.
Womack urges) we should also yield up the Churches Government, and leave the
Bishop and every Parish Priest unto the Choice of the People.

The Answer and Rule --

To this (says the Reconciler) I Answer, if so (God's will be done) however,
let us do our Duty, and Abolish these three Ceremonies, scil. Cross in
Baptism, Kneeling at the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and Bowing at the Name
of Jesus, let us do our Duty, And leave the event to God, etc.

That is, to speak plainly,

If the Dissenters will not be satisfied, However, the King and Governors
ought to Indulge them, and Leave the Event to God.

And if by such an Indulgence, the Dissenters shall destroy all our
Church Government, and bring in Confusion among us, God's will be done;
However, the King and Governors must do their Duty, and INDVLGE them, and
then, Leave the Event to God.

And if the Pragmatical People shall usurp an unlawful power to themselves,
and shall choose their own Bishop, and every Parish Priest, Volens Nolens the
King, or any Proper Patron, God's will be done: However, the King and
Governors must do their Duty, and give the People their Liberty, and then,
Leave the Event to God.

If Dissenters should (as they did in 48) Mutiny, Rebel, and Cut off this
King's Sacred Head, as they did his Fathers, and destroy all Good Order and
Government in Church and State (as formerly) under the fair Pretense of Liberty
of Conscience, if so, God's will be done; However, The King and Governors must
do their Duty, that is, Indulge the Dissenters, and meekly resign up their
Lives and Concerns to the Mercy and Courtesy of their Rebellious Enemies, and
then Leave the Event to God.

Now, should this Rule of the Reconciler's, take place in its full Latitude,
without the due use of Means, for the Support of Government, and for the
Suppression of Vice, Rebellion and Treason, Then there would be nothing but
Anarchy and Confusion in Church and State: Which evil Design to bring to pass,
has been the great endeavor of All the Reconciler's Arguings.

For, the main force of all his Arguments for Condescension to the Dissenters,
have tended to nothing more, than to break down the Hedge of all our Good Laws
and Orders for Uniformity and Conformity, and to introduce an Unbounded
Licentiousness and Confusion.

And therefore, we may very truly Conclude,

The Reconciler's Design in Publishing his Book, as Managed by him, to be
Malicious and Treasonable toward the King, the Church and the State, as now
Established.

CHAP. VIII. The Reconciler's Proposition Proved to be False.
His Proposition is this, scil.

THat Things Indifferent (considering the Circumstances our Church and State at
present are in) ought not to be Imposed by the Legislatours, Prot. Recon. c. 1.
p. 4.
as Conditions of Church Communion.

This Proposition, as it is propounded by the Reconciler is to be considered
two ways, 1. Simply and Absolutely in it self, 2. Relatively, as it refers to
the present Circumstances our Church and State are in.


In both respects it will appear to be false.

1. For take it Absolutely, as simply considered in it self, And then his
Proposition, which is the main hindge and Herculean Pillar on which his whole
Book depends, runs thus, scil.

That at no time Things Indifferent ought to be imposed upon the People as
Conditions of Church Communion.

The Falsity of this Proposition is Proved, 1. By the Testimony of Sacred
Scriptures to the contrary. 2. By the Authority and Canons of the first and
most Ancient Councils, And by the examples and practices of the Primitive
Christians in their Church Government. 3. By Reason, and the Natural Grounds of
Ecclesiastic Polity and Government.


All these speak the expediency and lawfulness (if not Necessity) of imposing
Things Indifferent as Conditions of Church Communion.

The prosecution of these Arguments at large, we shall leave for an entire
Discourse of it self.

And at present only touch briefly upon them in their order.

And therefore, as to the first.

1. Several Instances in Canonical Scripture speak it lawful to impose things
Indifferent as Conditions of Church Communion; For God, in the very first
founding of all good Order and Government, between Himself and Mankind, did
Impose a thing in it self Indifferent, to wit, the not eating of the Forbidden
Fruit, as a necessary condition of Communion and Fellowship with Himself.

And God Excommunicated Adam and Eva his presence, his love and favor, for not
observing that Ceremony and Imposition of not eating the Forbidden Fruit, which
fruit might have been eaten, as well as any other fruit in the Garden of Eden
(as Clem. Alexandrinus notes) had not God by a strict Imposition commanded the
contrary, on purpose to try the sincerity of Man's obedience to him his Lord
and Creator.

And farther, under the Mosaical Law, God Himself, and Moses by his Command,
Imposed many indifferent and unnecessary things, as necessary conditions of
Church Communion, such as All or most of the Levitical Rites and Ceremonies
were, whose observation was enjoined upon pain of Excommunication, and
sometimes of Death, in case they were wilfully neglected.

And God gave Authority not only to Moses and Aaron, but also to other his
Vicegerents, such as the Judges and Kings of his chosen people the Jews to
impose things Indifferent as Terms and Conditions of Church Communion, such as
the use of Blood, Oil, Salt, and other things in their Sacrifices, such as the
use of Garments, Ephods, Veils and Surplices, and Bowings in Divine Worship;
Washings and Purifications of their very Garments. And all manner of Music,
such as their Superiors, especially such as King David and King Solomon should
judge most conducing to God's Glory, and to the better stirring up of the
Peoples Devotions and Affections in the Worship and Service of God.

The Imposition of Holy Days is the Imposing of a thing Indifferent, for all
Days in themselves are alike. And yet, God highly approved of Queen Esthers and
her Uncle Mordecai's Imposition of the Holy Days called Purim, upon the People,
for ever to be solemnly kept, as necessary Conditions of Church Communion: And,
it is to be noted, that this Imposition was laid upon the People without any
Command from God, in time of Banishment, when the Church was in Persecution,
yet, even then, in such Circumstances as those, did Queen Esther use her
Authority, as to the Imposing of things Indifferent. And if so, then surely
much rather may Kings and Queens use the same Authority in times of Prosperity.

The Feasts of Dedication of the Temple and of the Altar, but especially of the
Wall of Jerusalem, Dr. Keller. Tricen. l. 1. c. 5. part. 8. p. 23.
was in it self a Thing Indifferent, and yet they were so strictly Imposed, as
that whosoever wilfully neglected their Observation, was under an Anathema
Maranatha.

And it is very Remarkable, that our Lord Jesus Christ who came to fulfill all
Righteousness, and to set an unerring pattern and example of Obedience unto all
under Command, Did himself approve of the Feast of Dedication instituted by the
Macchabees; ( l. 1. c. 4. v. 59.) Judas and his Brethren, with the whole
Congregation of Israel, Ordained, that the days of Dedication of the Altar
should be kept in their season, from year to year, by the space of eight days.)

For, St. John 10.22. It was at Jerusalem, the Feast of the Dedication, and it
was Winter, and Jesus walked in the Temple, etc.

So that (if you read on) our Savior Christ did not only honor with his
Presence these Holy Days of the Macchabees appointment, But he also confirmed
the lawful use and Imposition of them, by his working of Miracles on those
very Holy Days.

And farther, That Christ might set a perfect Example of Obedience unto all
Subjects, as to things Indifferent, when by Lawful Authority imposed,

Christ himself did therefore observe all the Minuter Rites and Ceremonies of
the Law, and of the Passover, which none ever did, or was able to do, before
him.

And lest Christ should give any offense to the Superiors then in power, he
observed the Impositions and Ceremonies of the very Pharisees, which they by
their own Laws had enjoined upon the People, as Terms and Conditions of their
Church Communion. And particularly, Christ observed the Pharisees Religious
Orders of Washing the Feet at Feasts, and at the Passover; which was only an
Ordinance of Humane Invention. St. Luke 7.44.
And Christ did publicly blame the Pharisee for not giving him Water to Wash
withal, according to the Pharisees Orders and Impositions.

St. Peter positively determines against the Reconciler's Proposition, not
only Categorically, but also Universally, commanding Submission and Obedience
unto every Ordinance of the King and Governors, which is not against the
written word of Cod, 1 St. Pet. 2.13.18. Submit your selves to every Ordinance
of Man for the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors as unto them that are sent by him; Eras. and Grot. in Loc.
that is, sent by God and the King, such as are Magistrates in the State, and
Bishops in the Church, all sent, and set over the People, by God and the King.

And in v. 18. of that Chapter, St. Peter adds, as the Whole Duty of Man, this
Injunction, Fear God, Honor the King: Thereby plainly intimating unto us this
excellent Truth, scil.

That if we will not peaceably submit to every Ordinance of the King, as to
Things Indifferent, but will become Mutinous and Rebellious, and make a Schism
and Faction in the Church and State, by our Disobedience, then, notwithstanding
our high Profession of Religion, we neither Fear God, nor Honor the King.

Secondly, The Practice of the Primitive times of Christianity sufficiently
Declares the Reconciler's Proposition (as taken absolutely and simply in it
self) to be false.

In the First place, if we consider the Author of our Christian Religion Jesus
Christ, and his Practice, we shall find,

That although Christ Instituted the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, and
commanded Bread and Wine to be used in the Celebration thereof,

Yet He (even Christ) left it to the prudence of the Governors of the Church
to determine the things Indifferent in that Holy Sacrament.

As for instance, He left it wholly to the Governors of the Church to
determine what kind of Bread, whether Barley, Oaten, or Wheaten; whether fine
or course, whether (as among the Jews at the Passover) only unleavened, or
leavened Bread;

As also what kind of Wine, Red or White, whether Wine only, or Wine mixed
with Water, as is the use of many Churches in Remembrance of Water and Blood
that issued out of Jesus his side on the Cross. In like manner, Christ
determined nothing, as to the Priests and Ministers Garments, nor as to the
Peoples Posture and Gesture (whether Sitting, Kneeling, or Standing, or Lying
along) at the Receiving of the Sacrament; But he left these indifferent things
wholly to the Determination of the Governors of every National Church: And, as
Christ determined nothing in these particulars,

So, neither did the Apostles, nor does any part of the Canonical Scriptures
Determine, what Form and Liturgy, what kind of Garments, what Posture and
Gesture, the Priests and People shall use and observe in Divine Worship, and in
Receiving the Lord's Supper, But leaves all such circumstances and things of
Indifferency unto the Prudence of the Supreme Governors.

And therefore, Counterm. c. 4. p. 41.
it is judiciously noted by the Countermine,

That although the Sacred Scriptures are a perfect Rule for Faith and Doctrine,
yet they do not lay down particular Rules for particular Discipline and Modes
of Worship; Nor do they determine that in such a particular Garment, Posture or
Way and in no other, All Nations shall in the Sacrament, or in Divine Worship
serve God.

For God (in his infinite Wisdom) has left the Particular Rules of Discipline
and Modes of Worship, unto the Care, Wisdom and Prudence of the Supreme
Magistrate to determine.

Only, the Scriptures lay down certain General Rules, which the Supreme
Magistrate, and all Imposers of Laws (whether Civil or Ecclesiastic) are bound
in Conscience to observe, such as,

1. To enact, and do all things to the Glory of God.

2. To do all things with Decency and Order.

3. To be Moderate toward all Men, that is, not to be bitter and wrathful,
but meek and mild toward all men, as far as Law and Reason will permit, Vid.
Mr. Evans Excellent Discourse on the True Notion of Moderation, Preached before
the Lord Mayor of London.
with all Resolution and Firmness of Mind to hold fast the Form of sound words,
of Good Order and Discipline; it being inconsistent with the Honor, Trust and
Dignity of the Superiors and Governors, to be tossed to and fro with every wind
of Doctrine, or Popular Persuasion.

This is the Moderation, and these are the General Rules which the Scriptures
enjoin the Legislatours to observe in their Impositions of things indifferent.

As for the Ancient Councils and Fathers, they declare (by their practice) the
Lawfulness, and sometimes the Necessity of Imposing things Indifferent, as
Conditions of Church Communion.

Take for instance,

The First Christian Council that ever was, to wit, that at Jerusalem, where
St. James (Bishop of Jerusalem) presided; In which, Abstention from the use of
things, Indifferent in themselves, was Imposed: Such as the Abstaining from
Pollutions of Idols, i.e. from Meats and Drinks offered to Idols: and from
things strangled and from blood: These things, in themselves, were good, for
every creature of God is good, and nothing is to be refused, if it be received
with thanksgiving, for it is sanctified by the word of God and prayer, 1 Timothy
4.4.

And yet, the Apostolical Council Imposed the Abstaining from the use of these
things, Good in themselves, as necessary conditions of Church Communion, Act.
15.20, 28, 29.

It is confessed, That the Reconciler makes mention of this Apostolical Council
at Jerusalem: But in his Notes upon it, he gives himself a shrewd Box on the
Ear, Prot. Recon. c. 8. p. 302.
p. 302. for his words are --

The things imposed by the Apostles, were, in their nature, things Unnecessary
-- But yet for preservation of the Churches Peace and Union, and for prevention
of Scandal to the Believing Jews, they were necessary to be Imposed, as
Conditions of Church Communion, etc.

Now, from the Reconciler's words, we thus argue, scil.

That if the Apostles did Impose things Unnecessary and Indifferent, when they
saw it necessary for the Good, i. e. for the Peace and Union of the Church, and
for the prevention of Schism and Scandal; Then may the King and Governors Now
Impose things Indifferent and Unnecessary, when they see it is Necessary, for
prevention of Scandal and Offense unto the Episcopal-Protestants, who are the
Only Supporters of the Established Government in Church and State: And
Thousands of these Canonical, Pious Conformists do think in their Consciences,
the present Ceremonies in the Church ought to be Continued, for the Fame, Peace
and Uniformity, of the Glorious Church of England, which ever used them; And
for their own great Antiquity, Decency and Vtility; Hook. Eccles. Pol. 1.5.
as Judicious Hooker Argues.

Farther, as the First Christian Council at Jerusalem, so the Four First
General Councils, did Impose things Indifferent upon both Clergy and Laity, as
Conditions of Church Communion; as any one may know, who will but consult their
Acts and Deeds.

The observation of Easter Day, whether on the Jews Passover Day, or on the
First Day of the week, was a thing Indifferent, and some observed it at one
time, as did the Jews, others observed it at another time, as did the
Romanists. But, for Uniformity sake, the First General Council at Nice (the
Emperor Constantine being present) determined, Eusebius. in vit, Constable. 1. 3.^ 18.
That all Christians throughout the World should celebrate Easter on one and
the same Lord's Day in the year.

To Pray unto Almighty God on Sundays, whether Kneeling or Standing was in it
self a thing Indifferent,

But yet, the General Council at Nice, Canon 20.
for Uniformity sake, Imposed upon the People the Posture of Kneeling in
Prayer-Time on the Weekdays, but Standing in time of Prayer on the Lord's
Days, commonly, called Sundays.

And Tertullian informs us, that in his time, Die Dominico jejunium Nefas
ducimus, vel de Geniculis adorare, etc. It was counted a Sin on the Lord's Day,
Tertull. Corona Mil. c. 3^
either to Fast, or to Pray and Adore God Kneeling.

To Dip, or Sprinkle the Party Baptized, was a thing Necessary in Holy Baptism
to be observed;

But, to Dip, or Sprinkle the Party Baptized more than Once, was a thing
Indifferent.

But yet, by the Ancients, it was Imposed upon the Clergy and People, that the
Party Baptized should be thrice Dipped or Sprinkled, in Reference to the Three
Sacred Persons in the Holy Trinity. Hence that of Tertullian, Tertul. Ibid.
Apostolical Can. 49.
Dehinc ter Mergitamur, etc. And the same Order was commanded upon the pain of
Deposition. And Zonaras, on that Canon, says, (as our Reconciler himself well
notes) (...). That it is an ungodly thing to dip in Holy Baptism but Once.
Tertullian mentions many things Imposed upon the People as terms of
Church Communion, and he says, the Ground and Warrant for those Impositions was
not the Scripture, Tertull. Coro. Mil. c. 4.
but Ancient Custom and Tradition. Harum and aliarum ejusmodi Disciplinarum si
Legem expostules Scripturarum, nullam invenies: Traditio tibi proetendetur
Auctrix, Consuetudo Confirmatrix, and Fides Observatrix.

Thirdly, As Reason speaks a necessity of making Civil Laws for prevention of
disorder, and confusion in the State, so Reason speaks it as necessary to make
Laws Ecclesiastical for preventing the same Mischiefs and Inconveniences in the
Church.

And when such Laws are made, and nothing can be found in them which is
absolutely sinful, then Reason, as well as Religion, commands Obedience to
them.

As Moral Wisdom preserves Common Life, by ordering what is Convenient, so
Civil and Ecclesiastic Wisdom preserves Life in the State and Church, by
ordering what is Necessary and Expedient.

And (as the Learned Hooker notes) Whatever the Church, Hook. Eccles. Pol. l.
5. p. 136, 138.
by her Ecclesiastic Authority shall, in matters of Order and Comeliness,
probably think and define to be True or Good, must, in Congruity of Reason
Overruled all other inferior judgments whatsoever, and must be thought
Convenient: And all things in the Church which are void of Superstition, and
are of long Continuance in the Church, are things which edify, and are not
lightly to be altered: Nothing is unfit or inconvenient, which the King and
Governors shall think fit and convenient:

Unless the said thing imposed be against, 1. The Sacred Scriptures. 2. Right
Reason. 3. The practice of Piety.


Whatever is otherwise thought to be inconvenient by the Subject, it is the
Result either, 1. Of Pride, or 2. Of an unsettled Mind, a Melancholic phanoy
and imagination, or 3. Of Capriciousness.


And now, let the Reconciler choose and tell us, which of them is in the
Dissenters, and is the Cause of their Noncompliance with the King's Lawful
Commands, as to things Indifferent.

Thus far, Scripture, Councils and Reason conclude the Reconciler's
Proposition, as considered absolutely and simply in it self, to be false; for,
by these Testimonies, it is a very great Truth, scil.

That things Indifferent may, and sometimes necessarily ought to be Imposed, as
Conditions of Church Communion, Contrary to what the Reconciler has Suggested
to the Vulgar.

Secondly, If we consider the Reconciler's Proposition Relatively, as it Refers
to the Circumstances our Church and State are in, then it will appear also to
be very False, and Unseasonably Propounded.

The present Circumstances of our Church and State, Are either Good, or Bad.



Consider we them as Good, And then they are,

1. The enjoyment of present Peace and Quietness, in stead of the late
Intestine Wars and Rebellion.

2. The enjoyment of good Order and Settlement, in stead of the late Confusion
and Anarchy. God be Praised! Now, our King sits on his Throne of Inheritance:
Our Bishops and Clergv are repossessed of their Dues quoad Officium and
Beneficium, both as to Office and Benefice.

And the People, Nobles, Gentry and Commons, are now restored to their Rights
and Privileges.

3. We enjoy Justice and Equity, in stead of the late Oppressions, Extortions
and Tyranny: Our King demands and takes no more than what by Law is his Due.
And the People receive and enjoy all that by Law and Inheritance is their Right
and Property.

4. As to our Impositions, in reference to Religious Worship, they are all the
very same which the Primitive Christians observed, who died Confessors and
Martyrs for the Truth.

And they are not more, than were at the first Reformation, in King Edward the
Sixth's and Queen Elizabeth's Reign, when there was, less Talk, but greater
Exercise, of Conscience and of Godliness, than is now adays.

Nay, in this our Day, there is an enjoyment of greater Liberty of Conscience,
than ever was granted by any Prince, or by any Law or Act of Parliament
whatever, since the Reformation in England.

For now, by Act of Parliament, Men of all Persuasions may, in their own
Families, use what Liberty they please, as to their private Modes of Worship;
which Freedom none could enjoy under Popery. Whereas, now, there is by Law a
Toleration for all Sects and Religious Persons to Meet, not exceeding the
number of Five, and to serve God after their own Desire.

And pray, What Kingdom is there in the Christian World, where, by Law, Greater
Moderation and Clemency is shown, than this?

These are some of the Good circumstances our Church and State are in, at
present: And therefore, for any man to desire that our present Laws, especially
those of Uniformity, may be altered, it is really to desire,

That our present Good State and Condition may be Altered, especially in the
Church, whose Good and Welfare does, and ought to go hand in hand with that of
the State.

And although an Alteration of the Established Laws may possibly be for the
better, yet, it is an hundred to one, but such an Alteration may be infinitely
for the worse, if we duly consider the great Divisions, Heats, Animosities,
and Bloudy-Plots on foot among us, and all under the Pretense of Reformation,
and of setting up a more holy and purer way of Worship, than what is
Established by Law.

And therefore, these things considered, it seems to be the wisest and safest
way, to keep our present Station, and to be what we are, that is, Well and
Prosperous; Lest, by Changing, we prove to be otherwise, that is, Convulsive,
Sick and Unsettled in both Church and State.

Secondly, If we consider our present circumstances as to the Time we live in,
then, in truth, they are bad enough.

For our Church and State, as now established, have Enemies abroad, and (which
is worse) at home.

The times we live in are full of Deceit and Hypocrisy, of Divisions and
Distractions: full of Plots and Treasons, And these Clandestine Treasons are
Hatched not only by Papists, but also by Dissenters.

So that, our King and Governors have no real Friends, no True Trojanes to
Trust unto, but only the Episcopal Protestants of the Church of England; whose
Honor and Glory it is, that they were never sound Guilty of any Treasons or
Plots against their King and his Government.

And in truth, it is impossible, They should ever be Disloyal, unless they
shall renounce their own professed Principles, and act contrary thereunto: and
then they would cease to be Episcopal Protestants.

Whereas, on the other side; it is impossible for the other Parties, whether
Papists or Dissenters, ever to be constantly Loyal and Faithful to the King
and his Government, if they shall continue to act according to their own
professed Doctrines, as has already been proved.

For, Sinon will ever be a Sinon. And if King Priamus shall hearken to his
Advice, Sinon will persuade him to break down Troy's Wall, and let in the
Trojan-Horse, Nirgil. Aen. l. 2.
and then in the Nightime of Security, Sinon (contrary to his Vows and
Promises, his Plighted Faith and Troth, Sinon) will Betray the over-credulous
King, and the (Coeci furore) Citizens, into the hands of the Grecians, and set
City and all into a Combustion.

And as my Lord Verulam observes, the Wolf will ever be a Wolf, though in
Sheeps Clothing: And the Fox will ever remain a Fox: No Art nor Argument can
ever prevail with the one, to lay aside his Ravening and Cruelty; Nor with the
other, to lay aside his Deceit and Cunning.

And therefore, it can be no part of Prudence, nor of Fidelity, in the
Shepherd, to let either the Wolf or the Fox into the Fold among the Flock, lest
the Sheep and the Lambs become a prey to them both. Wherefore Queen Elizabeth,
for the preservation of Peace and Good Order in Church and State, and for the
prevention of Error, Heresy and Schism, did wisely make a strict Law for
Uniformity, and She Severely punished the Rebellious and Obstinate Offenders,
Notwithstanding their great and earnest Plea of tenderness of Conscience for
their Nonconformity. And She hanged some of the first Independents that ever
were known to be in England, Full. Hist. l. 9. p. 169.
such as Mr. Barrow, Elias Thacker, and John Coping, for their Seditious and
Treasonable Practices.

But to show, that she could be Merciful, as well as Severe, she graciously
pardoned Mr. Brown the Independent.

But our present Gracious King, has, in Acts of Mercy, infinitely outdone
Queen Elizabeth, for he has saved from Death many of the Presbyterian and
Independent-Regicides, and has pardoned the whole Body of them for that and
other their Treasons.

But, because he found, that they, and the rest of their Dissenting-Brethren,
were restless, and by their daily Separations made a Dangerous Schism in the
Church, and as Pernicious a Faction in the State, setting up Church against
Church, Government against Government, and thus rendering the Kingdom Divided;

Therefore was the King and Governors forced to make Laws, to Restrain them,
and to bring all things into their Pristine Order and Uniformity.

And forasmuch as the Causes and Occasions of the said Laws of Uniformity are
still in Being,

Therefore, the said Laws themselves ought, in Reason and Prudence, to be
continued, and to stand still in their full force and power.

And if our King should execute the Laws of Uniformity with Rigor and
Severity, yet, His Majesty would do no more than what the Independents in New
England have done for the Suppression of Dissenters among themselves.

For they Excommunicate and Banish all Anabaptists into Long Island; All
Quakers into Road-Island, or other parts; and all Episcopal-Men they Expel
their Territories.

And it is not to be forgot, how Severely they dealt with Mr. Dunster, the
first Master of Harvey College in Cambridge in New England, whom the
Independents first Excommunicated out of their Congregational-Church at
Cambridge, then deprived him of his Mastership, and Expelled him the said
College, and after all they Banished him and his Wife out of their Dominions,
upon Suspicion of his being an Anabaptist, or rather, as some believe, for his
being an Arminian, and for uttering some words in favor of the Church of
England's Episcopacy.

Nor may we pass by their Severity toward two or three Quakers, whom they
Hanged, for returning after Banishment, and for disturbing their Congregations
in New England.

Thus the Reader may see what Strict Laws the Dissenters (where they have
power) do make, for maintaining their own Ecclesiastic Orders and Impositions,
and how severely they execute them upon the Offenders.

And therefore, neither the Dissenters (nor the Reconciler) have any Reason to
complain of our King, for want of an Indulgence and Condescension toward them,
when by executing His Laws for Conformity, He does but give them their own
Measure, and does only par pari refer, Do to them, as they do to others.

This being Granted: We may now from the Premises, Rationally Conclude against
the RECONCILER and his Proposition,

That, Considering the Circumstances of Treason and Rebellion, of Schisms and
Factions, our Church and State, our King and Governors at present are Molested
withal, Therefore, Things Indifferent ought the rather, by Strict Laws of
Uniformity and Conformity, to be Imposed, as Conditions of Church Communion.

FINIS.

