THE TRAITOR TO HIMSELF, OR Man's Heart his greatest Enemy.

A Moral Interlude IN HEROIC VERSE.

Representing, The Careless Hardened Returning Despairing Renewed Heart.

With Intermaskes of Intepretation at the close of each several Act.

As it was Acted by the Boys of a Public School at a Breaking up, And
Published as it may be useful, on like occasion.

OXFORD, Printed by L. L. and are to be sold by Edward Forest, Booksellour in
Oxford, and Hugh Keat Booksellour in Evesham, Anno Dom. 1678.

TO THE READER.
It Is not my design by this address to court my Reader to a good humor, since I
know how usual it is for Epistles in that kind to fail of their intent, and
will as certainly fall under censure, as any thing else so exposed to public
view, the general fate will be pro captu Lectoris.

I only intend an account of the following Trifle, its Birth, and reason of
appearing in Print.

My employment for some years past having been to educate Boys in a public
School, such Exercises as the ensuing Poem was part of what was provided at the
breaking up, and chiefly for the entertainment of the Governors of the School,
who with a fatherly care yearly honored us with their presence, therefore the
Prologue and Epilogue are chiefly directed to congratulate them.

It seemed unreasonable to me to treat them altogether in a language of which
the greater part understood little or nothing, and so could neither receive any
satisfaction to themselves, nor be competent Judges of what they heard. And as
unreasonable is it that Boys should pretend to be so far proficients as to
perfrom exercise in another language; and yet never be taught to be so far
acquainted with their own, as to speak or read it as though they understood it,
and perchance thought to do bravely in Latin, when not able to write two lines
of tolerable sense in English, nor pronounce them as they ought.

I pretend neither to be the first, that has seen the want of English
Exercises in Schools, nor the first that has attempted to repair that defect,
but I speak this to vindicate such a practice in general, and my own in
particular which is by several English Exercises both Prose and Verse to inure
them both to write and speak understandingly, and in a tolerable style, which
also initiates them to this more solemn Exercise: not to exclude Exercise in
other Languages, both commendable, suitable, useful and usual in all Schools,
but to mix with them, which I have found to be helps to each other; since in
Latin Exercises, Boys for the most part, mind words more than things, and in
speaking observe the sound more than sense. But English, with which they are
sooner acquainted, quickens their Fancy and enriches the conception and
Judgment, and they are sooner able to speak it understandingly, and by tha^
brought to look after Sense and Reason in what they compose or speak in other
Languages, so that they may understand it.

For the manner of writing by way of Parable on such a Subject, I think I have
the best of Men for example, and know no reason why Delight and Profit may not
thus be mixed, and the Principles of seriousness thus instilled into Youth by
Parable and Poesy.

As to the Mode of Interlude, I thought it a good way, fit for Boys, to bring
them not only to a good habit of speaking, but carriage of Body, because the
variety that is in this way cannot be in set Speeches; and I find that this
kind of action does inspirit such as before appeared but dull; and temper them
with a fitting boldness, and convenient confidence in other things.

I had not published this but on thoughts that it might be of use to others, in
the like purpose of breakings up. I am not ignorant of the multitude of Plays
that are already extant, but I could never find any that in my apprehension was
suitable to such an occasion, being either full of Vanity: and so apt to
corrupt young Minds, or with Women's Parts, which I never thought fit to put on
Boys, or number of Actors so many as were not easily contracted or altered
without manifest maiming the design and loosing the Plot.

As for the Style and Language I have nothing to say in its defense, but that
the obscurity of my converse gives me no better. I had not time, or if I had,
not mind to pollish it for a critical Reader. I hope you will find Sense and
Reason, and pertinent to what is designed, which I always thought Language good
enough, a natural strain which runs without forceing, which some, as I observe,
attempting, under pretense of pollishing have so clouded, that a sharp Eye
could scarce discern what was intended.

THE PROLOGUE
Spoken by four Boys in Parts. First Boy. WElcome grave Senate, as the early
light,
And still and quiet Morn;
To Seamen after Storm;
And tedious minutes of tempestuous night.

Second. Welcome as peace to those who long have found,
The Conquering Sword of War,
All quietness debar;
Making their Country one bleeding Wound.

Third. Welcome as freedom to the shackled Slave,
Who wastes with toil and pain,
And counts even Death a Gain
Hopeing for no release, but in his Grave.

First. Welcome, thrice Welcome you our Port, our peace,
Our Storms are overblown, All three repeat thrice Welcome together.

Second. We 've peace and Conquest won,


Third. Our Shackles you knock off and give release


First Never did Council on a Trial Day
More wish to gain applause,
Gain, and the Cause,
Then we have wished to see You Grace our Play.

Second Never was young Heir more pleased to be at Age;
When Debts and Iutors hands,
Press with unkind Commands;
Then we are pleased to see You fence our Stage.

Third. No wanting Landlord wished the day of Rent,
With half such strong desire,
As we do now aspire;
This Tribute to our Patrons to praesent.

First. Welcome, Thrice Welcome, this our Trial Day
We hope for your applause, Thrice Welcome spoken by all three together.
Heirs to the Cause;
That Is our acquittance, though the Rent You pay.

Fourth boy. See what a fond delight leaps in your Breast,
As if you're sure to please To the three Boys.
And gain your ease,
By what shall be by us this Night expressed.
Grave Patrons! no, Turning to the Presence. we dare not be so bold
To hope to satisfy
If we enjoy;
Tour Patient Pardon it is our Mine of Gold.
That we are bold to hope you used to give,
And from our Labors beg a short repreive,
Your goodness often does us so relieve,
We in our Studies by Your favor live.

ACTORS
Names. Qualities. oral Signification. Cardian, Governor of the City. The
Heart of Man. Idos, Two Faithful Councellers but slighted. Knowledge. Sunidos,
Two Faithful Councellers but slighted. Conscience. Pathus, Two mean Servants
who by flattering grow great favorites but prove Traitors. Passion. Anoetus,
Two mean Servants who by flattering grow great favorites but prove Traitors.
Folly. Kerux, A Leiger Ambassador. The Word of God. Lupa, An Herald or
Messenger. Affliction. Scrutator, One doubting the frame of his Heart.
Interpres, Interpreter of the meaning of the several passages.

ANTIMASKE
Scrutator, After a Pause speaks. LOst in the Shades of Night, and lost at Home,
A Stranger there, while Man's wild thoughts de Roam,
Searching abroad he thinks he something knows,
But then the knowledge of himself does loose.
How vainly do Men boast of what they find?
While the great Mystery of Man's own Mind,
Remains a secret, an unridled doubt,
From which the World can never help me out,
But yet in vain I muse. Foulding his Arms stands silently as studying.
Enter Interpres and speaks. Who Is that in melancholy Dumps, I see?
My Friend Scrutator? He has need of me. Goes to him.
Still in this musing Vein, what means my Friend?
Will thy unsettled doubts nere have an end?
How now Man? Planet struck? cannot thy Tongue?
Propose its usual questions, right or wrong?
Come, come, I can no longer this endure,
He to thy Melancholy give a Cure.
Scrut. Pray Sir forbear, I fear 'twill be in vain,
My wound's invisible, an inward pain
Afflict that part, which I shall never see,
Nor ever understand my Misery.

Inter. Yet dear Serutator, let Interptes know,
Under what doubts thy laboring Mind does bow,
Friendly relief from me you have often found,

Scru. That Is a confessed Truth, and gives me ground
To hope for satisfaction, after you
Have cleared my cloudy mind, and set in view
What I with restless thoughts in vain have sought,
But now my doubt's be yond the reach of thought.

Inter. But yet conceal it not, no doubt I fear
But by the light of Knowledge I can clear.

Scru. Often has your kind assistance made me know,
How all things in the greater World do go.
Which when my thoughts had swiftly traveled ore,
Just as the Sun when there remains no more,
I found my self where I set out before,
No more advanced then when I first began.
For there is the little World, a slender Span,
The unseen Heart, the peevish part of Man.
I never traveled, that is the Mystery
That to my self I should a stranger be.
Now setting forth to travel over my self,
I find I am thus struck upon the Shelf.
My Bark's unmovable, the Stormy Waves
Of restlesas thoughts, my crasy Vessel braves.
Threatening a Wrack, or sinking in the Flood,
Nor can I see how one can be withstood.

Inter. This Rocky Mystery, wherewith you're toiled,
Is that, where all Philosophy is foiled.

Scru. My Heart I fain would know, but cannot see
The various Intrigues of Policy
That there transacted are, though I do act,
I find my self a Stranger to the Fact,
What subtle Power Rules there, that makes me do
Those very things I cannot consent unto.
When for my self I should do all things well,
My Heart betrays me to the works of Hell.

Inter. It Is true Scrutator, you a doubt have named,
Which to find out all Humane help is maimed.
But help Divine lends our weak Eyes a Light,
Whereby we are guided how to judge aright,
And from that Light I Will borrow one small Spark,
To bring your clouded Mind out of the Dark.
And in an Interlude this Evening show
That hidden World, which you desire to know.
In a short Parable, which I Will unfold,
The secret you desire here shall be told.
The great Imposter Heart I will discry,
With all its fatal Cheats, and Treachery
Against its self: its own most deadly Foe,
Which the experienced Souls with Sorrow know.
And will discover, how this Traitor may
Be taught the Paths of Truths most Holy way.

Scru. The ways of Truth may dwell in Poesy,
I Will pay my Thanks, and lend my Mind an Eye, They Retire to the Curtain and
stand as Spectators.

ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Cardian, Sunidos, Idos: who walk on, while Pathus and Anoetos stand bare
at the Curtain as Servants. Card. BRight as the Noon Days Sun my Glory stands,
This City prospers, ruled by my Commands.
Ali'd by Birth to our most potent King,
The Blood that fills my Vein's derived from him.
On me depends the welfare of you all,
With me you stand, If I but shake, you fall.
Peace, Plenty, and Prosperity do fill
My happy City, and the Fields we Till.
What then remains but that our fond cares cease?
And we untroubled taste the Fruits of Peace.

Path. And of those Fruits who does deserve to have,
The largest share, but you, who quiet gave?

Ano. Inferiors may a taste of those enjoy,
But Governors may all their time employ,
To bath themselves in the smooth streams of pleasure,
The richest, safest, most assured treasure.

Card. Well, well, Anoetiu you flatter me.


Ano. Not I my Lord, it is but what does agree
With our great Governors most high renown,
The greatest happiness below the Crown.

Path. Your Princes favor is so good a Guard,
That you will abuse it with a Cowards fear,
To think that any Enemies so hard,
To dare assault you while his favors near,
It Is folly then to give your self to care,
Since he cares for us, do you that labor spare.

Card. Though Millions of my Foes my Walls assail,
I shall not fear that any shall prevail.

Ido. Sir In this Cities welfare we have share,
And in the Government you use our care,
Nor can its peace, without our care endure,
Though you are pleased to think your self secure.

Sunid. It Is from our potent Princes higher Throne
Our safety comes, he owns us as his own.
It Is his high Power has fortified us so,
We need not dread what foreign Foes can do,
Strongest assaults we from abroad may scorn,
Yet may rebellion within our Walls be born,
The boldest foreign Enemy we brave,
Fear only danger from the home-born Slave.

Car. Still thy ill boding Mind (Sunidos) fears,
In midst of greatest pleasures Sighs and Tears.

Ido. It Is not (great Sir) our cowardice but Love,
That those expressions on our Tongues do move.
Nor in true safety would we dangers make,
But Reap those Joys our Prince gives leave to take.
But so to take, that he may have renown,
Our Loyalty gives glory to his Crown.
Nor can we better Loyalty express,
Then when his strength, our weakness, we confess,
Nor do we that confess, unless prepare
In times of Peace, for the assaults of War.
For how can we succor from him expect,
If we our selves and his commands neglect.

Sunid. Our Prince is safe, above the Sword of War,
But yet his Cities still in danger are,
And though the Governors his Favor boast,
If they their charge neglect his Favour's lost,
The charge we know to see his Laws obeyed,
To have his Forces still in Arms arrayed,
And trust me Sir our care cannot be too great,
Since Enemies for our surprizal wait.
And though at present, all things seem as calm,
The Seas smoath brow always foregoes a Storm.

Ido. The time of Peace must not be thrown away
In Idleness, to Eat, and Drink, and Play,
But to prepare for Combat. Swords will rust:
If not well used, fatal polluting dust
Will spoil our Arms, if not sometimes put on,
Soldiers not mustered will in need be gone.
If Council err, that to this care does guide,
It Is but an error on the safest side.

Card. Then for our safety go do you provide,
I would not for a World the King should think
I slight my charge, or at our dangers wink.
I Will see due Execution shall be done
In what you order. Exeunt Sunid. Ido.

So I Am glad they are gone, Tell me of Fears, and Dangers, none can see
But Cowards Eyes, they nere shall trouble me.
Reach me my Chair, I must sit down and rest,
To Sleep those thoughts out of my troubled Breast.
Ance. Pathus set a Chair. Card. Sits. Anoe. Sit down my Lord, there is no such
cause of dread:
But we may well supply an Army's stead.

Path. Or should not all the Laws be obeyed in the Town,
What need you fear for that the Princes frown.
Must you give answer for each petty thing,
That these Men would believe offends the King.

Car. What think thou Pathus of my Glorious State?


Path. A happiness above the reach of fate,


Car. And what Anoetus think thou of me?


Anoe. A Glorious Prince above comparity,
The Glory of the World, and wonder too,
Wise, Honorable, Prudent, Knowing, you
Are all of these, and in all these secure.

Sunid speaks within. But if you sleep none of these will endure.


Car. How! break my rest? abuse the use of Night?
I Will rather Night and Day sweet Sleep invite, Sleeps.

Anoe. So, hushed as Midnight, why should you pursue
A fear, that will too soon appear in view.

Card. starts, and calls. Car. Anoetus, Pathus,


Path. Sir we are here,
Although you Sleep we don't forsake your Chair.

Car. What noise is that? A noise within, he starts again.


Anoe. Fear not my Lord we are by,
We Would guard you safe or in your quarrel Die.

Enter Idos hastily and wakes him. Ido. A wake my Lord, the Town's Beleagur'd
round,
Innumerable Foes cover the Ground,
Their bloody Ensigns declare War in view;
And bid defiance to the Prince, and you.

Car. This Army Man, is but thy Coward Fear,
When Danger's ten Mile off thou think it is near.

Ido. My Lord! I saw Amartans Mighty Band
Of many Legions under his Command.
Appolyon the grand Enginere, begun
To draw the Lines of their approach to the Town.
And stops all Passages, that no relief
May come, from our Kings General in chief.

Ano. Well let them come, we will easily defend
The Fort, till they their utmost courage spend.

Car. Go summon out your Forces, Man the Line,
Prepare your Cannon,

Ido. But they will Undermine, Card, Starts up.


Car. What though they do? is not our Force enough?
Our Weapons good as theirs, our Armor proof?

Ido. It Is true, my Lord, if you your self appear,
And with your presence all your Army cheer.
And rally up your scattered Troops, which stand
Unmovable, though Sunidos and I Command
It Is all but vain:

Car, I will not go, Sleep bids a little stay. Offers to sit down.


Ido, Not go My I ord? What weighty reason may?
Now Honor calls, your Courage thus delay,
Can you to Sleep a Moments space afford,
When Honor calls, and Triumph waits your Sword?

Car. Let Triumph hither come, to it I will not go,
Stay till to Morrow it is a civil Foe.

Ido. But if my Lord we are surpised this Night?


Car. Tell them I Am not at leisure now to Fight,
I Will venture all their Force: what can they do?
I will not break my rest this Night for you.
And though they win the Town before to Morrow,
Sleeping to Night I shall not know my Sorrow.

Ano. Come in, my Lord, to rest, and while you sleep,
You Will fear no dangers, rest in Peace does keep.
In Sleep there is no fear of Fortunes frowns,
The Beggar feels no want, nor maimed Wounds. Exeunt,

End of the First Act.
INTERMASKE
Interpres and Scrutator meet, Salute, and Walk on, etc. Scrut. You Have
undertook the task: now I Will impose,
Read me the Ridle of this first Acts close.
What careless Fool is this: that has this trust,
Yet neither to himself nor Prince is just?

Inter. This careless Man does represent Man's Heart,
The Cities Man, governed by that chief part,
Which boasts its self by Birth to be Divine,
Owning it does by borrowed Luster Shine.
Trusting to that, no want nor danger fears,
Resolving for it self to take no cares.

Scrut. Who are his four attendents? two of which
Foster his Folly, rub his careless Itch,
The other two, seem to advise him well,
In real Love his threatening dangers tell.

Inter. These four are the inbred Guests of th'natural Heart.
Passion and Folly Act the Flatterers part,
Cheating poor Man, blind both his Ear and Eye,
He sees not Knowledge, hears not Concience cry,
Those are the two oppose this Treachery.

Scrut. Yet Knowledge both and Conscience speak his Power,
No force can win the Hearts united Tower
But Rebels from within.

Inter. Man's his own Foe.
His inbred Lusts betray himself to woe.

Scrut. What means this Seige which Knowledge does declare?


Inter. Man's born a Combatant designed for War,
Satan and Sin his Foes the Seige begin.
Man's Heart's the Citi's Fort weakly walled in,
Yet careless Heart, it self does care deny,
With Sloth endures all their Battery.
Mindless of its own good: no watch does keep,
But in the greatest Dangers Fosters Sleep.
And the next Scene shall set before your Eye,
The Hearts great danger false Security.

The Curtain drawn discovers Cardian Sleeping in his Chair Anoetus and Pathus
behind him, a Sword drawn with the point downward hanging over his Head,
Interpres speaks. Inter. The careless Heart (my dear Scrutator) sees,
By irksome Folly taught to seek false ease.
The Sword of Vengeante drawn, hangs over his Head,
Yet careless Sleeps as if he'ed nothing dread.

Scru. Will none awake him?


Inter. That this next Act will show,
Yet warnings slighted he will more careless grow.

They retire to standing at the Curtain: ACT. II.
Enter Kerux, Idos, Sunidos, and walk to the end of the Stage. Ker. What Is that
I see? suits this with the renown
Of him, that Governs this most famous Town?
Is this your care? that have been thus preferred
To be his Council.

Sunid. Sir we cannot be heard.
We Have done our duty, and his dangers shown,
Therefore he lest us thus to sleep alone.

Ker. Who blinds his Eyes, and thus deludes his Mind?


Ido. Sir there you see, his Slaves attend behind

Advanced to favor, we excluded are,
And never called, or if we press more near,
Looked on but as Intruders, tyresome Friends
Whose Words against his inclination bends.
We Are weary Sir of being slighted so,
Whilst Pathus, and that Slave for Favorites go.

Ker. Yet do your duty and be faithful still,
We may redeem him from the worst of ill.
Go and awake him tell him who is here.

Ido. and Suni. go and shake him. Suni. Awake, my Lord Ambassador is near.


Car. Who Is that disturbs me? and renews my fear, Speaks drowsily sees not
Kerux.
My Foes I had forgot, nor felt a Wound,
Heard not the Drums alarm, nor Trumpets Sound.

Ido. Yet those, who to false peace do you betray,
Under the greatest danger make you stay.

Sunid. Look up my Lord? and then you soon will see
What Danger's near, how far from Peace you be.

Card. looks up: seeing a Sword: starts up amazed Speaks to Anoe. and Path.
Car. Is this your care?


Path. This was but a mistake.
Nor had it troubled you but that you wake.

Car. Well, then I Will shist my Place and Sleep again, Curtains drawn his Chair
see out, he sits down.
Since waking does betray me to this pain.

Ker. My Lord I Am much surpised to find you so
Careless, and to indulge that Folly too.
Forgetting your high Birth, and Trust, and Place,
When Honor calls in Sloth to seek disgrace.

Card As not having seen him before rises to receive him. Car. My Lord your
Pardon, I did not know you were here,
Reach for my Lord Ambassador a Chair. Chair brought Ker. sits.
We Are ready Sir to hear those high Commands
Our Prince has sent unto us, by your hands:

Ker. The King my Master bids me let you know
You're in great danger, though you think not so.
And you neglect the Counselors he gave,
And to your ruin trust a wretched Slave.
When this neglect shall you to ruin bring,
How can you answer it before the King?

Car. I think my Lord Ambassador speaks true, To Sunid.
I in my Councels must be ruled by you.

Suni. Yet hear him further what he has to say.


Car. Speak on my Lord, I your commands obey.


Ker. Those threatening dangers, which about you stand,
Call forth your courage, and your armed Hand. While this is spoke Card.
whispers with Sunid. Ido. Anoe. Path. by turns, and at last Sleeps.
And it is your Princes will that you should Fight,
Stand in the Battle, and maintain his right.
Nor shall you want Assistance, nor Reward,
If you his Honor, your own good regard.
The Foe would change those Laws which he does give,
And without which this City cannot live.
Those then you must preserve inviolate,
Which while you do, no Foe can work your fate.
To Loyalty your own high Birth does move,
And the endearments of your Princes love.
Your Conquest, by resisting, you will obtain:
And from your Prince Immortal Glory gain.
He Will send his Son with Power the Seige to raise,
And Crown your Heads with never dying Bays.
To this your Councels, Idos, Sunidos will
Prompt and Instruct you: That do you fulfill.
But if to home born Rebels you give way,
They Will to compliance with your Foes betray.
And if you basely yield, expect to be
A Slave in Chains of base Captivity. Card. Sleeps.
From which you will hardly ever be redeemed:
Nor by your Prince, nor your own Slaves esteemed.
My Lord you mind not sure what I have said.

Car. Yes, yes my Lord, but I Have a busy Head, Drowsily.
The present troubles do distract my Mind,
But you in me shall all obedience find.
And so commend my Service to my Prince. Rises. So Ker.

Ker. That Service by your deeds you must evince:
Take heed your Service be not only words,
That will expose your Breast to all the Swords
Your Enemies can draw, nor can there be
Nor to your self, nor Prince, worse Treachery.

Exit. Ido. Sunid. attending him. Car. This tedious, doting, old Fool staid so
long,
That I began to fear he would nere be gone,

Path. And now his two grave Friends will be so bold,
That you must be by their advice controlled.

Car. No, I'can hear with patience what they will say,
But it is in my choice what to obey.

Enter Sunid. hastily, his Sword drawn. Sunid. My Lord! call all your force to
Battle straight,
The Enemy attempts to force the Gate,
Rebels within prepare to let them in,
It Is time to show your self and th'Fight begin.

Car. What shall I do? I fear I cannot withstand
This mighty force, with my weak armed Hand.

Suni. Sir, you forget whose Battle it is you Fight,
The Prince will help you to maintain his right;
If once they see his Banner you display,
Their very courage then will melt away.
Your Sloth and Fear give courage to their Brow:
That arms their Hands, and gives them Conquest too.

Car. Then I will go, and Conquer where I go, Draws, so de Anoe. and Path.
No slothful fear shall me betray to Woe.
And over suspected Rebels set such Spies,
Shall check rebellion e're it can arise.
Come, we are ready. Offers to go out but starts back.

Buy stay who must command? Sunid. These are too weak their fury to withstand,
If you rely on them, they will betray
You to your Foes, and open them the way.

Card. Accuse them not, they do but seek my ease.


Suni. They Will work your Death under pretense of Peace.


Car. If I do Fight, I am resolved they lead.


Suni. Then for the Sword prepare your careless Head. Exit. Angrely.


Car. This saucy Fellow sure would Govern me.


Anoe. And make you rule chained in his Slavery.


Path. We Will ease you of this trouble if you will
Give us command to Act, while you sit still.
We'el meet your Foes, and if we find them strong,
A Peace or Truce we will make, that cannot be wrong
To you, nor to the Prince.

Car. Well, then I Will take my rest, Puts up his Sword. Anoe. Exit. they put up.
And leave you two to do as you think best.

Path. Then will we our own interest first secure,
And make these Counselors in Prison sure.

Anoe. They hinder but the Peace, what need we Fight?
On easy terms we will make a Peace this Night.

Path. And in the Morning, the City shall enjoy
The love of them, it now seeks to destroy.

Anoe. Let us about ir straight, lest discontent
In Idos and Sunidos, us prevent. Exeunt,

End of Second Act.
INTERMASKE
Interpres and Scrutator meet, Salute, and Walk on, etc. Scru. ALas poor Heart!
methinks in this I see
That very carelessness that troubles me.

Inter. True Sir, you judge aright, as Face to Face
Answers in Water, so is it in this case,
The same corruption fills your Heart, and mine,
In this Poetic Glass we see them shine.

Scru. How soon he is reconciled to those Slaves
That set him in the danger, and again
Will trust the Knaves.

Inter. So quickly Men forget, that Lusts do lead
Them to the Paths and Chambers of the Dead,
And soon again repeat their base desires,
Though vengeance Sword threatens Eternal Fires.

Scr. Who Is this Ambassador? and who the Prince?
That does with Truth the drowsy Heart convince,

Inter. The Prince is our great Governor above,
Who in Divine and never failing Love
By chosen Messengers speaks to the Heart,
His living Words Direction to impart,
To know his dangers, and his Friends and Foes,
With this advice Knowledge, and Conscience close.
The Heart by this is of the Truth convinced,
Inclines to yield Obedience to his Prince.

Scru. He seems to honor the Ambassador,
Commends his Words, and lends a patient Ear.
Yet I observed, that all the while he spoke
The Sweets of Truth, that Cardian did make
But small observance, ever seemed to talk;
Continual whispering his Tongue did walk,
Sometimes with one, and sometimes with another;
In silent whispers secret thoughts did smother,
At last directly Sleeps.

Inter. 'Twas well observed, that secret whispering
Shows the poor careless Hearts vain wandering,
Which when the Ear is set to hear in show,
Ofttimes the Heart does in loose wand'rings flow.
Sometimes with Conscience the Word approves, and then
The worldly Toys enjoy the Heart again.
So strange a mixture, Man would blush to see
Such Follies in his Heart transacted be.
Who thus himself deceives, does only bring
A dead, and hartless Carcass, to his King.

Seru. Yet after all his fair pretense of Love,
His resolutions otherwise do move.
To his dull careless way,
His Slaves do easily sway.

Inter. Thus holy resolutions quickly fail,
Passion and Folly easily prevail,
And all advice is very soon forgot;
The careless hear, as if they heard it not.
And thus the Heart it self betrays to woe,
Deceiving others does it self undo:
Till carelessness the Heart so hardens over,
It loves those Enemies, it feared before.
That Curtain drawn will show the hard seared Heart,
Half dead in Sin feels not the greatest smart.

Curtains drawn: discovers Cardian sitting, black patches on his Eyes: stopping
his Ears with his Hands: Anoetus Pathus on each side stand thrusting Swords at
his Side. Scru. What black is that which covers over his Eyes?


Inter. Thick Scales of blindness from carelessness arise.


Scru. What means his Hands?


Inter. With those he stops his Ears,
Lest he the voice of Truth, or Conscience hears.
And there his inbred Lusts their drawn Swords dart,
Levelling unrebated points at's Heart.
So hard, he nothing feels: but now no more,
The rest you will see e're the next Act be over.

Shut the Curtains and retire to Standings: ACT. III.
Enter Pathus, Anoetus. Anoe SO now the work is done, our peace is made,
Nor are we longer of our Foes afraid,

Path. What Folly had it been for us to Fight,
When such sweet charms do us to peace invite?

Anoe. Now we alone the Governor shall sway,
While Idos and Sunidos are away.

Path. But are you sure they are in Prison bound?


Anoe. I saw them both fast chained unto the ground,
Nor is it likely they escape again;
Since Cardian is delighted with their pain.

Enter Cardian. Path. My Lord! we bring you most surprising news.


Car. What comes from you I never shall refuse.
But I already understand your care:
How without fighting we in quiet are.
Methinks I now do rule, grown absolute,
Impris'ning those, that my commands dispute.
As if nothing were done without the King,
But all my actions to his Laws would bring,
To try by them if all were right and good,
As though I nothing ever understood.

An. But Peace is now confirmed the Articles signed,
Such as agree with your Imperial Mind.
And should the King this Covenant dislike,
He Is far, and will be long e're he can strike.

Pa. What need we think of him? cannot you alone
Govern this City? let him mind his Throne.
It Is much below his Honor, and Renown,
To mind the little tricks of every Town.

An. Those sly Informers that would troubles make,
Quarelling those which you to union take.
Are fast enough.

Gar. -- Nay I their quarrels slight,
So much I in this new made Peace delight,
And the sweet carriage of my once feared Foes,
For all their words I Will not these pleasures loose.

Exeurs. Enter Kerux alone. Ker. What dreadful mists do blind Cardians Eyes
That he is now become the Rebels prize.
All warnings lost to him, all reason vain?
Flattered by Foolish Passion, to never dying pain.
His Enemies suffered to rule in part,
But will hereafter quite subdue his Heart:
His faithful Counselors in Prison cast,
His Loyalty does base rebellion blast,
Yet to my Prince and him I Will true remain,
And show him yet what spots his Mind do stain.
The Prison is not far where there do lie
His best of Friends in darkest Misery.
This is the Door I will look in and see
How sar I can regain their liberty.

Draws the Curtain: within are discovered Idos and Sunidos: as in Prison bound
and gagged. What fatal crime has brought you to this place?
Or what sly Traitor wrought you this disgrace? After Pause,
What cannot you spoke? Alas you are gagged I see,
Well I will loose your Tongues, and set them free.
Takes out the Gags. Said. Basely betrayed, the Enemy drew near,
And we together did his forces cheer,
Instead of Fight, he basely does compound;
And none but we did feel the smallest wound.

Ido. And for our care the Prison's our reward,
Anoetus and Pathus head his Guard.
And our expulfion for false peace does pay,
That they more safely may his Life betray.

Ker. I have restored your Tongues, now see that you
Employ them to inform him what is true.
He Is come ere long this way, when he draws near,
Be sure that he may both your Voices hear.

Shuts the Curtains and walks off. Now though he hate me I to find him go,
Of this false Peace his certain Sorrows to show.
Exit. Enter Cardian Solus. Car. How sweet a Life is this! all fears are gone,
My City's safe and I command alone:
My Enemies are now become my Friends,
And I their Sorvice use to my own ends,
I neither fear my Prince, nor seek his aid,
No terrors near to make my Heart afraid.

Enter Pathus. Path. Sir here is Kerux the Ambassador,


Car. His absence to his presence I prefer.
Say I am not at leisure now to lend
An Ear to th tedious message he intends.

Path. I fear he is not be so put off, he is come,
And presses after me to the next Room.

Car. Tell him, O tell him any thing, that so
He may depart, or I from hence may go, Offers to go and Enter Ker. anotherway
and Anoetus with him.

Pa. It Is now too late, see where he does appear.


Car. What ere he says, I'se not regard not hear.


Retire to the Curtains, stop his Ears. Ker. Sir, I am come your danger to
declare,
You think you have Peace, but a more dreadful War
Is coming to your Gates: rebellious places
Provoke their Prince unto their own disgraces.
They who refuse to have their Prince their Friend,
Call for his Wrath in pieces them to rend.
Your feigned Friends cannot help you, for one frown
Of his can make the strongest Forts fall down.
His Son his Army leads, and wont delay,
But comes to punish those that disobey.
To those that slight his love and Mercies day,
His Arm to swift revenge will cut his way.
How now? not hear?

Path. Sir he can rule alone,
Nor fears your Princes Frowns, nor from his Throne
Desires help:

Ker. If then your Ears you stop: open your Eyes, Shows his Commission.
Can you his Precepts written here despise?

Path. These pretty Fancies Sir he foorns to see, Path. Anoe. put their hands
bespre his Eyes.
They cannot shake him from security.
He will not doubt to find his Princes love,
You in his mind do needless terrors move.

Ker. Nay then he is lost; your Treachery has won;
He by rebellion has himself undone.

Ano. The threatened Man lives long, he may do so,
Go and insecret now lament his voe,
While we laugh at the unseen (...) blow.

Car. So he is gone at last what was 'the said, Exit. Keru. and then teke down
their hands.


Path. Nothing you either need regard or dread.


Ano. Amartan by the Articles of Peace
Is made high Steward, and he claims his Plade.

Car. Well, he shall be instail'd this day, but you
See that he be unto our interest true.

Suni. within. Hastening that ruin, that to your Folly's due.


Path. Ha! How got you your Tongue at liberty? starting back.
Your bawling cease or you shall stifled be.

Anoe. When Amartan the Stewardship has got,
He Is punish you with Death, or Prison rot,
Or clap the searing Iron to your Throat.

Car. Well I can hear and yet not mind his Voice. Exit. Car.


Path. It Is that will make Amartans Heart rejoice.


Anoe. Come let us go to his Chamber to consult
To keep Cardian, lest he should revolt.

Path. But in dark Paths we must our Councels guide,
Lest our designs should be by him descried.

Anoe. Nor must the smallest whisper this convey,
To Idos or Sunidos, for should they
Discover what we do, though they are bound,
They Will make our deeds out of the Prison sound.

Path. And should he either back from Prison call,
He would grow Loyal, and so ruin all. Exeunt.

The End of the Third Act.
INTERMASKE.
Interpres and Scrutator come and Salute and walk on, etc. Scru. WHat means
this Peace, dear Sir! which they so boast?
As though it never could again be lost.

Inter. This Peace they Boast, is but a slippery tie,
And no true Peace but false security,
Which the Heart never has until it wound
Its Knowledge, and can keep its Conscience bound.

Scru. Yet he here at rejoices as if free,
His Princes Laws shook of, he at liberty.

Ina. Thus when the Heart its Power gives up to Sin,
To slight the Laws Divine it does begin,
Flattering himself, says the most high don't know,
Or not regard the things done here below.
Pleased with his Folly slights his Conscience call.

Scru. Yet Kerux here once more discovers all,
And does again untie the Conscience Tongue.

Inter. The Power of the Word Divine is strong,
And gives new Voice to Conscience, whose strong cry
Never forsakes the Sinner, though he die:

Scr. All Is well he thinks, and now no danger near,
But Kerux brings new motives unto fear.
First he avoids to see'm, and when he is come:
His Ears are stopped, Eyes shut, and Tongue is dumb.

Inter. This shows what shifts the heardned Heart does use
To shut out Truth, and so it self abuse.
The danger threatened, is at the dreadful Day,
When Justice shall to all their own works pay.
By Peace with Sin, the Peace above is broke,
The Heart exposed to Vengeance dreadful stroke.
But the Heart by degrees does grow so hard,
As neither threats or promise to regard,
With Death in Covenant, at Peace with Hell,
Flatters it self, as if all things were well.
And Truths advice will neither read, nor hear,
Blind with Presumption will not danger fear,
For love still hopes: forgets Justice of God,
Laughs at the thoughts of his revenging Rod;
But who continues proffered Love to slight,
Shall find his Portion in Eternal Night.
And here I thought to stop, but will proceed
To show the Heart under Convictions bleed.

They retire too Standing at the Curtains. ACT. IV.
Enter Cardian Solus. Card. THis Insolence I can no way endure,
But must find out some way to ease, or cure.
Amartan now is greater grown then me,
All him Obey, and my Commands they fly.
What have I got by yiedling? small content,
Nothing that lasts, but a short blandishment.
Councels are held from me, in secrecy,
The grand Cabal does in his Lodgings lie.
Nor ever can I know what it is they do,
Till it is in Action, and half finished too.

Suni. within. And all will end in this to ruin you.


Car. Well, Sir, I hear, but cannot that believe, As slighting.
Nor yet from Prison will I give reprieve.
But Idos shall in part my favor find,
I want his Council to instruct my mind.
If he will contented be to know nothing
Besides my self, to be his Lord and King,
And keep his foolish Tongue from prating more,
Dreadful Alarms, upon the Princes score:
And only teach me how I may Command
Those Slaves, that do begin to hold my hand.
I find their rudeness makes me something weak,
Which if continued all my strength will break,
I am resolved to try what Idos will do. Pauses.
Perchance now he has th'Prisons sadness tried,
Those Chains may put a curb unto his Pride.
But if he will not be ruled, I will again
Send him to Prison, to his former pain.
I know these new come Friends will never agree
That he should be restored to Liberty.
Therefore it is my own hands that deed must do,
That favor will the more oblige him too.

Opens the Curtains, Idos and Sunidos in Prison as before Has yet the weight of
Prison taught you how
With low Obedience, to my Precepts bow?
Suni. Ah Sir! will you at length some pity take
On our unjust restraint, for your own sake?
It Is you will feel the grief that we are confined,
In our release you to your self are kind.

Caer. Peace Slave, for you I yet no kindness have,


Sn. Ah Sir my wounds will bring you to your Grave.
Those cruel wounds which they inflict on me,
By fatal Magic they transfer on thee:

Car. Sir for your part you shall in Prison lie,
You still are insolent, but I Will untie Unbinds him, he rises, and bows, shuts
the Curtain.
The Bonds of Idos: and thus set him free.

Ido. I own you the Author of my Liberty.


Car. Let your unruly Tongue keep within bounds'
And no more utter old distastful sounds.

Ido. I cannot forbear if dangers are in view,
I cannot conceal them, but must say what is true.

Car. If dangers real be, but do not feign
Pretended dangers, to renew my pain.

Ido. These your pretended Friends great perils be,
Which you will discover by their hate of me.

Car. That they will not like your liberty I grant,
Yet they will never let me Pleasures want,
But those on me in such disorder press,
I seek advice disorders to redress.

Ido. That cannot be while thus you do remain,
Their seeming pleasures always end in pain.
A little tickling fills your Mind, and then
Your former Sighs oppress your Heart again.
And though at my advice you always chafe,
I know you cannot think that you are safe
In their Protection, whatso'ere you say,
You cannot find, nor hope, they will Obey.
If you neglect, what to your Prince is due,
How can you hope, Slaves should prove true to you?
Who against his Prince rebels, betrays his Heart
To every sneaking Slave, that takes his part.
And if our Prince sends forth his armed Bands,
You Will find them first betray you to their hands.

Enter Pathus and Anoetus and draw. Path. Slave who has been so bold to loose
your Bands? To Idos.


Car. Hold your rude Weapons, 'twas at my Command.


Strikes down their Swords. Ano. Then Sir your Articles of Peace are broke,
And for Amartans high displeasure look. Angry.

Car. What? is Amartan greater grown than I?


Ano. You Will find it Sir unto your misery.


Car. Must then Amartan now become your Lord?


Ido. See Sir by this what help they will aford.


Car. It Is I have freed him and to curb your pride.
Without his help I cannot the City guide.
When this unto our Steward you discrie,
And he demands who freed him, say 'twas I.
You're foolish Traitors you had quite forgot,
To keep your Treason close I Will spoil the Plot. Exeunt. Car. Ido.

Path. Is it then come to this? are we so low
That Idos must upon our ruin grow? Put up their Swords.

Ano. Shall he triumphant stand while we do fall?
Rather than I Will see that, I Will venture all.

Pa. Though he by this thinks our design overthrown,
We'll take his Life though we expose our own.

Ano. They that dare plot rebellion against their King,
Must never ^^ck at any smaller thing.

Path. Amartan easily poison can convey,
Or lay a Train of Powder in his way
To blow him up, let us consult within,
He that loves treason 'twil at last reach him. Exeunt.

Enter Lupa. Lu. Thus far I Am unresisted come to bring
The last and fatal message from our King.
It Is true no force can stop me but I find
No armed Guards to any Gate designed.
All in confusion, a regardless rout
To fence a City, and keep danger out.
How does this fond security, expose
The Rebels to their Princes wrathful blows.
To what poor strength does weak rebellion trust.
As though the Prince to punish were not just.
They seek not Peace, nor seek to ward his blows,
But to his Sword their naked Heads expose.
'Twill not be long ere Cardian come this way,
My Message is to him, and here I Will stay. Stands by.

Enter Cardian and Idos. Car. Let poor tame Fools weakly their power resign
To others, I Will by my own Glory Shine.
Nor any strength shall weigh my Power down,
I Will make these Rebels know I rule the Town,
And use their Service though the Prince do frown,

Lupa steps before him Lu. I bring you Summons Sir, in the grea Kings name.


Car. Summons to me Man? know thou who I am?


Lu. Yes very well Sir, base Amartans Slave.


Car. Must I be thus abused by a little Knave? Offers to draw.


Ido. Hold Sir, he is the great Kings Messenger,
Slighting the Servant provokes the Masters Ire.

Car. Well what is your Message?


Lu. Sir this Command I bring
You must Accounts prepare to give the King.

Car. What has the King to do with mine or me?
Cannot I rule here, from his trouble free?
Let me have Peace, I do'nt molest his Throne,
I must make War, if he disturbs my own.
I fear not all his Power, his dwellings far

Lu. With this slight stroke, he thus begins the War,
Lupa lays his hands on Cardians Neck and he sinks, bows down on his stick.
Look to it, Sir, since you your Prince defy
And War proclaim, he will make you yield or die.

Car. What have thou done? I now want streng to stand,
My strong Back bows under thy heavy hand:

Id. He, but his hand upon your Neck did lay,
You find your boasted strength did soon decay,
And will or will not now you must Obey.

Car. But I will shake it off; Amartans Company Strive to stand upright but
cannot. Calls aloud.
Shall free me from this seeming Misery
Ha! Pathus and Anoetus bring here
Amartan straight, my drooping Mind to cheer.
Tell him he must my failing strength restore,
And set me upright as I stood before.

Id. You call to them in vain, I Am sure 'twas they
That left you Cuaroless, and to this betraie.
Since first you them unto your Bosom took,
They have prepared for you this fatal stroke.

Lu. 'Twas they indeed that opened me the way,
And to your Princes fury you betraie
They make you first offend, and then accuse,

Car. And now I cannot at all their succor use. Lays his hand on his Breast.
This Heart of Steel that no Impression felt
From him whose Word the Stony Mountains melt,
Drops down like melting Wax, at this slight blow.
Thou do the Art of Magic use I know,
What makes thee come thus to torment me now?

Lu. Sir, it is not I torment, those you allow
As greatest Favourtes gave you this Wound,
And 'twas their Magic, that has kept you bound
In Shades of Niht: benumbed you could not feel
Those Wounds you had from their envenomed Steel.
Amaatan poisoned for them: I Am your Friend.
Your Prince has sent this Summons to the end
You might discover their base treachery;
Then will you loath them, and rejoice in me.

Ido. My Lord I Will lead you to the hollow Vail, Takes him by the Arm
To our renowned famous Oracle.
To which, when you your pressing grief disclose,
That gives you comfort, and your Cure shows.

Card. Pray will you stay behind, To Lupa.


Lup. No Sir, I Will go,
Do not you think that I Will be shook off so,
But as your Shade will follow you to bring
You back to Loyalty unto your King.
But if from him you still resolve to part,
From him I Have power ever to vex your Heart.

Exeunt Cardian led of by Idos, Enter Pathus Anoetns. Path. So now, he is paid,
when his strength's almost spent,
He Will seek our help, to banish discontent.

Ano. We'll let him come, we'll entertain him still,
Till with our pleasures we his Heart do kill.

Pa. But if he Lupa entertain, we must
Look to our selves, not in his Favor trust.

Ano. Let with Amartan all your force be joined,
That be may not the blows of Lupa mind.
He us discovers: And if regarded will
Sunidos free: and arm him us to kill. Exeunt.

Enter Cardian, Idos, Lupa, and go on to the end of the Stage. Ido. This is the
place my Lord, if you unfold
Your pressing grief, the Cure shall soon be told:

The Echo is Acted within by Sunidos and Kerux: the last taking only the last
Sylable, as a double Echo. Car. Under the pressure of strong grief I bow.


Echo I know -- know


Car. What power can teach me to escape from this?


Echo This -- his


Ca. The help of him that now comes from my Prince?


Echo Thy Prince -- Prince?


Car. My Prince that sent it must I trust him then?


Echo Trust again -- again


Ca. How dare I trust him, who I Have thus disgraced?


Echo Thou may -- may


Ca. How shall I then my Princes Favor find?


Echo Kind -- kind


Car. Thou bablest Echo I dare not believe.


Echo Believe -- lieve


Car. Can I believe when thus he does torment?


Echo Therefore sent -- sent


Car. But then I must let forth Sunidos free?


Echo Sunidos free -- free


Car. This is no Echo but Sunidos Tongue.


Suni. within. It Is true Sir, but I tell you nothing wrong,
To Council then to council straight,
It Is the last turning of the fate,
If you this Messenger refuse,
The King will not another use,
Or should you flatter him away,
And in your former courses stray,
His angry Army then must take their turn,
The Town consumed, you in its flames must burn.

Car, I now begin to fear all this is true,
And to all comfors I must bid adue. Excunt,

End of the Forth Act,
INTERMASKE
Interpres and Scrutator Meet, Bow, and walk on, etc. Scru. SIr, this oblieging
favor you bestow,
Binds me with all respect my thanks to show, Bows.
I have observed each passage of each Scene,
But underfland not clearly what all mean.
Must beg your help to teach me once again.
Why in Security does he complain?

Inter. The Heart of Man's not satisfied with Sin,
Though as one ends another does begin.
For though in acts of Sin the Heart seems glad,
Yet in and after it is in secret sad.

Scru. What means their secret council that it is unknown
To him what is a doing till it is done.

Inter. The Heart habituate to Sin, still goes
So blindly on he sins before he knows.
And therefore willing to have knowledge free.
For without that his way he cannot see
In worldly things, and therefore would confine
Knowledge, to them alone: nothing Divine
Cares he to hear: But Knowledge cannot forbear.

Scru. But while that Conscience under restraint does stay,
The words of Knowledge are but cast away.
But yet his League of Peace is broke with Sin,
By that he is seeming to return again,
Yet moves but slowly.

Inter. Some spark of grace may be remaining still,
Though it is so small it is hardly visible,
But as a Man by dreadful lightning shot,
Has still some Life, although he knows it not.

Scru. But who is this new come Messenger, that now
With one small stroke makes all his strength to bow,
Who strongest Guards could not keep out, yet he
Says he had entrance, by their Treachery.

Inter. This Lupa is Affliction, which does shake
The strongest earthly Heart, unfit to make
A good Account before the King of Kings.
This to remembrance calls the forepast Sins,
They bring Affliction, from Sin it first began
Affliction shows how weak's the strongest Man
Sin lets Affliction in, Sid cannot withstand
When the most high by that lays on his hand.
The Worl's too weak to keep Affliction out,
Though fenced with worldly comforts round about
'Twill find a passage to the Heart.
And though he threatens help of Sin to seek,
That cannot help, but all its power's too weak.

Scru. But yet the wicked Heart is loath to see
The hand that does inflict this Misery.

Inter. So Man forgets from whence affliction's sent
To Chance or Magic ascribes punishment.

Seru. Yet Luta tells that he does bring no ill,
But only whence his evils come does tell.

In. It Is Sin that wounds: Affliction does but snow
The wounds of Sin, that make the Heart thus bow.

Scru. What means the bringing to the hollow Vail


Inter. Conscience and Truth speak in the Oracle,
Sorrows to silent cogitations lead
Seeking retirement, or the afflicted bed.

Scru. Conscience here says, this Message is the last,
It Is favor too, if scorned his ruin hasts.

Inter. Chastizing warnings find nor every one,
Some are cut off by swift destruction.
And swift destruction; always does await
Such as do scorn reproof, and dare their fate,
By fond delays.

Scru. -- Sir I have been to hold,
You by impertinence thus long too hold,

Inter. If these but pardon, and are satisfied, To the Presence
I shall encourage you rather than chide
Now view the end, and, and see how dreadful fear
Pursues the trembling Heart, in black despair.

ACT. V.
Curtains drawn. Cardian discovered sitting in his Chair as melancholy, Lupa,
Anoetus, and Pathus attending him, after a pause he starts up in a rage,
Curtains shut. Car. AMartan! O tame easy Fool that I ragingly strikes his
Breast.
Should ever trust my deadly Enemy.
His fatal Poison reaches every part,
And with whole Legions now assaults my Heart. Lays hand on Breast.

Ano. This is the kindness of your friendly King.


Lu. It Is love to show the State you have brought him in,


Pa. Can this be love to vex him thus with grief,


Lu. You vex, his Prince calls him to seek relief.


Car, A martan that vile Slave has poisoned me,
I fear it too was by your treachery: To Anoetus and Pathus.

Ano. What ours my Lord? cheer up we hope to see
You merry once again, from this stroke free.

Pa, Shake that attendant off, your Prince forget Points to Lu,
And there is no doubt you may be merry yet.

Car. Flatter nor tempt no more, I know you now:
Your falsehood 'twas that makes me weak and low.
I for Sunidos to the Prison sent,

Ano. His coming Sir, will give you small content,
Instead of comfort he will your torment be.

Car. I fear his coming will not much comfort me.
But he that feels the pains that I endure,
Will ask of all he may to find a Cure.

Enter Sunidos, lead in by Idos. See where he comes, who I so long did slight,
And now his very Presence does affright. Turns away.
Though he is my Servant, I did so disgrace
His faithful love, I scarce dare see his Face.
Anoctus and Pathus run behind the Curtain. Ido. What? do you hide your Heads?
it is time to go,
That have you Master thus betrayed to woe.

Lu. It Is time to go and fit you were confined,
That were most cruel, when you seemed most kind.

Sunid. Sir you have sent for me, but I Am so weak
By Wounds and Prison, I can scarcely speak.

Car. 'Twas I that gave those Wounds, and now I feel
My self am touched by the envenomed Steel.
O how I reel and totter, that once though Staggers.
My strength too great to be to weakness brought.

Ido. Had you our council taken, none of this
Had ever come to interrupt your bliss.
But now your Friends are weak, your strength surpised,
By Rebels siding with your Enemies,

Su. Your Prince provoked by your rebellion
To your destruction swiftly hastens on.
Your self grown weak, you cannor now oppose
Your Princes strength, nor comfort find in those
You entertained as Friends, and trusted to,
It Is their infectious Wounds that ruin you.

Id. O! whether can you turn to seek for aid?


Lu. Or where indeed can any help be had?
Your Prince provoked abroad, your Friends at home
Put out of Power, those you have trusted come
To work your ruin, and now too late you find,
You're wounded both in Body State and Mind,

Sunid. But if you had but heard our Councels call
You Would stood in Triumph, now in ruin fall.

Card. Enough, Enough of this, forbear, no more,
This is no ease, but torment to my sore.
What Counselors did I negiect and scorn?
My Heart now trembles and my Flesh does mourn.

Su. To think what Prince, and Friends you have forsook,
What Poisonous Vipers, to your Breast you took.
Whose venomed bites you shall forever feel,
Bound in your Princes Chains of flaming Steel.
Which justly you deserved, that slighted so
His often warnings, and would to ruin go.
Joined with his Foes, and so your self betrayed,
The Town you had to govern Slaves are made
By your deceit, thinking to cheat your King,
Unto your self you do this ruin bring.

Ido. His favour's lost that promised you a Crown,
And now you must appear before his frown,
'Twill not be long before he takes the Town.

Lupa. Yet seek to win his Favor once again:


Card. No that is too late, would I could ease this pain,
His Favour's gone for ever: Now I find,
I Have so provoked him, he will no more be kind.

Su. Yet try him once again you do not know
But he may have compassion on your woe.

Card. O would I could but cure Amartans Wound,
And once again exclude him from my Ground.

Ido. Send Sir, and find out Kerux, He Is your Friend,
I Am confident he will affistance lend,
To reconcile your Prince, and make your Peace,
Cast out your Foes, and cure your Wounds with ease.

Card. No, No, it is all too late my time is gone
I dare not now approach my Princes Throne.
Too iate for Peace, his Army's marching round,
Methinks I hear his Drums, and Trumpets sound.

Anoe. You have but left this only remedy,
To draw your Sword, and be at pains to Dye.

Card. It Is all I have to trust to this relief,
It Is Death alone can cure all my grief.

Draws, sets the Hilt to the Ground, point to his Breast, prepares to fall on
his Sword. Suni. starts out and holds him Suni. Hold Sir, Though weak my
strength's not so much spent,
But love makes strong, your ruin to prevent.
If thus you Wound your self you will find too late,
Death is not half the easing of your fate.
This will far more the Kings displeasure move,
Then all you yet have done to forfeit's love.
How kind he yet may prove you do not know,
Throw not away his kindness at one blow.
If you do live his love may reinstate,
If thus you dye you will sure provoke his hate, Idos and Lupa whispers
Living, at worst you but his favor doubt,
But dying thus you shut all favor out.

Car. Must I then live -- taking up his Sword


Sunid. Your Prince will have it so,
You must your life unto his Favor owe.

Lu. I Am sure he is there and I Am as sure he will come. To Idos.


Ido. No way but that now to prevent his doom. Exit. Idos.


Anoe. They Are sending Sir, for Kerux, why should you,
Expose your self in torments to his view.
You need him not as yet, stay but one day,
What harm can be in such a short delay,

Snnid. Villain no more he now discerns your spite
Would lead him to the shades of everlasting Night.

Enter-Kerux and Idos. Kerux. How now Sir? do you find my words were true?
These are the dangers I foretold to you.

Car. Too true I find what I would not believe.
But can you in such Dangers comfort give?
Tormenting pains do all my bowels fill,
Which baffle all Physicians and their skill.
Chirurgions may a wounded Body rear, Points to his Breast.
This Poison wounds my heart, and who can bear.
And in this state my King is coming on,
To punish me for my rebellion.
Trusting, against my self, my Poes and his,
O who can any comfort give to this?

Ker. I must confess you have great cause to fear,
Joining with Rebels, and the Kings Army near.
And those you trusted now you find your Foes,
Who would your Head to the Kings Sword expose.
Yet, if you willing are from those to fly,
And trust your self to the Kings Clemency:
I doubt not but some remedy to find.

Card. O do not flatter my deluded Mind.


Ker. If to your Loyalty you will return,
I Will make your Enemies, your dangers mourn.
If Idos and Sunidos you restore,
Unto those Offices they held before;
Exclude your Slaves from Power, and drive away
Amartan and his Troops who you betray.
And send a true submission to the King,
I Will undertake I will your Pardon bring.

Car. But how shall I now make them quit the Town?
They Have poisoned me and all my strength put down.
Amartans Guards possesses every Fort,
And make my loss and danger all their sport.

Ido. Give me commission I Will such force convey
Into the Town, shall drive the Foes away.

Suni. The Princes Banner on the Walls discrie,
They dare not stay but presently will fly.

Car. But though all this be done and they should go,
My past rebellion makes my King my Foe.

Ke. Come doubt no more, but cheer your drooping mind,
I do assure you your Pardon's signed.
You had a Friend, you thought not on, at Court,
The Kings own Son spoke to his Father for it.
And now his powerful Army this way bends,
To worst your Foes, and to defend your Friends.

Car. But Sir, those poisonous wounds I yet do fear,
Till cure, of them I dare not to appear.
Before my King.

Ido. To heal them, nothing's good,
But the vile Poisners Death, and Conquerers Blood.
He Is like a Scorpion, whose Sting being bruised,
Cures the Venom, that his Sting infused.

Ker. That I Will obtain: That Valiant Champion,
Your best of Friends, and our Kings only Son,
In Combat has this Foe Amartan found,
And given him, in Fight, a mortal Wound.
The Blood he shed, to gain that Victory,
To work your Cure, I Will to your Wound apply.

Card. Methinks this news to me new Life returns,
Unutterable Joy in my Heart burns.
Welcome dear Lupa, if thou had not come
I poisoned might have dropped into my Tomb
And died unpitied, hated by my King:
Thou came and dawnings of new Life did bring. To Id. and Sunidos.
Your Pardon dearest Friends Cardian craves,
I will no more abuse you as my Slaves.
But you dear Kenux, have such favor shown,
That all my thanks seem due to you alone.
My Hearts too narrow this swelling Joy to hold,
My Tongue would tire to speak't, all cannot be told.
Now to your guidance I my self resign,
And hope by my Kings love again to shine.

Ker. Sir, thank not us, it is your Kings free love,
We as his Agents, in our places move.

Car For you my Slaves, to you will I be Just, To Anoetus and Pathus.
And see you pai'd, for your abused trust.

Ker. Come Sir let us go, and all this work complete,
In honor reinstate you in your Seat.
Guard and disarm those Slaves, that they no more To Lupa.
May hope to rise, and trouble, as before. Disarms Anoetus and Pathus.
Thus the great power, that rules in the Skies,
Subdues the Base, and makes the Worthy rise. Exeunt.

The End of the Fifth Act.
INTERMASKE
Interpres and Scrutator meet, Bow, and Walk on, etc. Inter. COme Sir I Have
almost done, what think you now
O'th 'Hearts sharp torment? and the bitter woe?
Sensible of a Sin polluted State,
From the most high justly deserving hate.

Scrut. This dreadful Scene so discomposed my Mind,
That I can scarcely yet it settled find
Yet by the sweetning and refreshing close,
In Sympatizing Joies my fancy flows:
Here I observe, that Lupa still does stay,
By force nor flattery will he away.

Inter. When once Affliction has seized the Heart,
By the Divine Command, 'twill never part,
Either it will to reformation bring,
Or set a point upon the Conscience sting.
The Sparks of torments fire with it bears,
Which are not quenched but by repentant rears.

Scrut. What means Cardian's fierce complaint and rage?
Which all their comforts hardly can assuage.

Inter. That shows the Hearts sad State, and dreadful fear,
Poisoned with Sin when Death and Judgment's near,
Where now unreconcil'd it must appear.
The sense of Sin raises that thick black Cloud
Where slighted Mercy Comforts Face does shroud.

Scrut. And yet those Slaves are interposing still,
What false hope flatters in the midst of ill.

Inter. Folly and Lust Repentance do oppose,
But sharp Affliction shuts the Mouth of those.

Scrut. His faithful Counselors add to his grief,
To aggravate his crimes is small relief.
Sunidos weak to help does grief inflame,
Idos no comfort gives but shows his shame,
Neglecting Councels in his Princes name,
Threatens his frowns, and sudden lasting blame:
Advising him so weakly yet to move,
Again to seek his angry Princes love,
That Folly soon persuades to end that strife,
To cut off fear and trouble with his life.

Inter. So Knowledge of offense: Conscience of Sin,
When by Affliction, they are both called in,
Do set the Soul on rack; small comfort give,
The Heart does rather choose to die than live
In deep despair.
Conscience, though weak, stops the too forward hand,
And puts that resolution to a stand;
Showing, though he in danger was before,
That this new Sin will make his danger more,
Death's not the way a Sin sick Soul to cure,
Nor ends Sins grief, which ever will endure,
Such a dispairing stroke will make Damnation sure.

Scru. But the Ambassador now comes again,
Offering him to free him from all pain.
Promises help, Pardon, and Princes love,
His Foes from their usurped Power to move,
If he but willing be, clears every doubt,
Only unwillingness can keep comfort out.

Inter. See here, the charming sweets of love Divine,
Which in the sacred Oracles do shine.
Affliction teaches Knowledge them to seek,
Which heal the sick in Soul, confirm the weak,
Only unwillingness, or unbelief,
Chain up the doubting Soul in drooping grief.
Faith breaks those bands, makes willing to return
And new inliv'ning flames of Joy do burn.
Renews obedience to the great Kings will,
That arms his hands his Lust and Sins to kill.

Scru. And thus restored to hope his thanks are paid
To those that, for him real kindness had;
Lupa himself who first did make him bow,
Finds grateful kindness is returned him now.

Inter. The Heart being thus renewed, in Peace and calm,
^inds that Affliction brought not wounds but balm,
A remedy against Sins sharpest ill,
Now taught thereby Gods precepts to fulfill.
Conscience, and Knowledge, as best Friends he chears,
Taught to seek saferie by their real fears,
But the sweet word, of promises Divine,
Does above all with greatest Luster shine;
And justly challenges his greatest love:
By that new life his Sin dead Soul did move.

Scru. I thank you Sir, you have performed your task,
There now remains no doubt for me to ask.

Inter. But now I doubt, but not of you, but these, Points to the Presence.
Whether these empty toys them can please
Your Pardon it is I beg, and patient Ear,
The Joys of the renewed Heart to hear.

Curtains drawn within is discovered, Cardian, Crowned with Bays, encompassed
by Kerux, Idos, and Sunidos, who join Hands, and hold drawn Swords in their
right hands upright, by them kneel Anoetus and Pathus, their hands bound
behind, and Lupa standing behind, holds a drawn Sword over their Heads,
Interpres with Scrutator standing at the lower end of the Stage, thus describes
it: Inter. Scrutator, there a double Emblem sees,
The Heart triumphant: and safety of Peace.

Seru. Methinks my Eye discovers, as it stands,
When faithful Counselors with joined hands
Encompass in the Govern our a round,
In Peace, and safety by their hands he is crowned.
The Rebels, there to good behavior tied, Points to Anoetus and Pathus.
Peace, and Protection, guards every side,

Inter. Sir, For the outside, thus you judge aright,
While concords bands Governors Hearts unite,
Truth, Wisdom, Knowledge, in those three are spoke;
That threefold Cord cannot be easily broke:
Where ever these together live in Peace,
There flourishes Prosperity, and Ease.

Scru. Now, let my Mind beguided by mine Eye,
To taste the sweets of the Morality.

Inter. Conscience and Knowledge, do united join,
Guided, and strengthened, by the Word Divine,
The Heart's at peace, and safe: Corruptions bound,
Broke by Affliction, chained unto the ground,
No more arise to rule. -- Points to Anoetus and Pathus.

Scru. Thus then, those that would live before they die,
Must Flesh subdue and dear Lusts mortify.

Inter. Now leave the Fable, and the Moral taste, To the Presence.
What Is spent on that cannot be accounted wast.

Scru. We seek our selves to learn, and teach,
The Heart deceitful we impeach.

Inter. Man may Man persuade amiss,
But out main desire is
To teach aright and plainly show,
That which virtue bids us do,

Scru. Where we fail we Pardon crave,
We yet, but small Experience have,

Inter. But by your graver Councels guide,
Hope to keep the safest side.
And what we learn, so to improve,
To walk in Virtues which you love.

They retire bowing to the Prefence: and then Card. speaks. Card. Forth from
the depth of black despair, I Am brought
To Happiness, above the reach of thought.

Ido. Your Peace now made, by our great Kings kind Son,
You have a pardon for Rebellion.

Sunid. But now you must no more to Folly turn,
In those hot Flames you have felt, avoid to burn.

Ker. And then the Bays, that now bud on your Brow,
Sall to Eternity for ever grow.

Path. While thus you guarded, and advised stand,
There needs no other Chains to bind our hands.

Lupa. Strugle you may, but rule you shall no more,
While thus I guard, to endanger as before.

Ano. We cannot command, and now we will obey,
Your Councels guide us in a righter way.

Ker. But from your King, although your Pardon's come,
Yet must you here expect another Doom.

Card. What must I do then?


Ido. -- Step forth, and beg their smile,
Acknowledge our Offenses all this while.

Suni. And beg their Pardon too, for should they frown,
'T would be a second loosing of the Town.

They loose hands, and Cardian steps forth, taking off his Crown of Bays
speaks, THE EPILOGUE.
Car. Unerown'd again, I now to you appear,
Methinks, your presence does renew my fear,
But now I Am taught
Not to despair but hope,
Your former kindness easily bought,
That gives my boldness scope,
I dare petition for our Pardon now,
When we have hoped 'twas granted long ago.
But, when our own unworthyness I view,
Methinks my hopes are false, my fears are true.
Offenses now
We do a new commit,
To raise an Anger on your Brow,
To make you thus long sit,
To hear us speak but poorly broken sense,
In ill placed Words increases our Offense.
Besides it is an unpardonable Crime,
To mix with Fables, things Divine in rhyme.
Therefore my Bays Throws down his Wreath of Bays.
I here throw at your Feet,
It Is you that must condemn, or raise,
As you think meet.
But yet methinks you smile, your looks are kind,
And gives new hope to our dispairing mind.
My Bays I venture therefore to assume, Take up Bays.
Begging that Pardon you are wont to give,
It Is that alone can clear our dusky fume,
My Bays else wither: if you are pleased they live.

Exit. FINIS.

