OF THE CONVERSION OF Five Thousand and Nine Hundred EAST-INDIANS, In the Isle
FORMOSA, near CHINA, To the Profession of the true GOD, in JESUS CHRIST* By
means of (...) a Minister (...) Pastor on D^^en^rie there, in a Latin Letter.
Translated to further the Faith and Joy of many here, by H. JESSEI, a Servant
of JESUS CHRIST. With a POSTSCRIPT of the Gospels good Success also amongst
the VVEST-INDIANS, in New England.

ISAI. 49, 12. Behold, these shall come from far; and lo, these from the
NORTH, and these from the WEST; and these from the Land of SINIM.

CHINA is called SINARUM Regio; Ptolom. lib. 7. cap. 3. Vide F. Iunii,

Annot. Isai. 49.12. Imprimatur, JOSEPH CARYL.

LONDON, Printed by John Hammond, and are to be sold at his house voer-against
S. Andrews Church in Holborne; and in Popes-Head-Alley, by H. Allen. 1650.

To his Christian Friends, in ENGLAND, NEW ENGLAND, or elsewhere, that pray for
the Coming in of the fulness of the Gentiles, that so all Israel may be
saved; H. Jessei wishes from his soul, increase of joy, and peace in
believing.
Dearly beloved,
THere are three things, that (with many of you) I have greatly longed for;
yea, four that I am in travel with, and must not cease, till they be brought
forth: namely, First, that on Earth, where the Lords Name has been greatly
dishonored, there his Name may be greatly glorified, Psalm. 113.3. Psalm. 67.2.
Mal. 1.11. Secondly, that here, where his people have been generally
reproached, and their souls exceedingly filled with the scorning of those
which are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud, Psalm. 123.4. that their
reproach may be turned into honor, and their mourning into the garment of
praise, Isai. 61.3, 7. Isai. 35.10. Thirdly, that the Earth may be so filled
with the knowledge of Jehovah, that all his people may be one visibly, and
serve Jehovah with one shoulder; and all differences and envies amongst them
may be removed far away, Isai. 11.9. Zeph. 3.9. John 17.21, 23. And fourthly,
for all the Ends before-said, That the fulness of the Gentiles might come in,
and that so all Israel (the remainder of Natural Israel being thereby provoked
to emulation) might be saved, Romans 11.1, 11, 25, 26. Luke 21.24. For which
glorious time on Earth, the very creature (which has no hope of Heaven)
groaning and being in travel, earnestly expecting, waits for, being subject to
vanity, until that Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God: How much more may
we, whose Souls are already freed, wait for that appointment for his Sons,
the freedom of our Bodies also from all Thraldom? as Romans 8.19, 23.


Therefore, what great matter of refreshing was administered to my Spirit, when
it was credibly reported by M. Edw: Cresset, (then of Chelsey, now of London)
That some Thousands of Indians had of late been converted, by means of a
Dutch Minister conversing amongst them! What hopes were hereby raised, that the
Fullness of the Gentiles was ready to come in, and thereby of enjoying my
Souls longings shortly! I delayed not therefore to go to Chelsey, to hear of
this more fully from himself; a man well reported of, and well known to M.
Lawrence, of the House of Commons; and to M. Nigh, M. Thomas Goodwin, and M.
Simson, and M. Bridge, lately of the Assembly: I found, that he and his
household lived there, but himself by a Providence, was then abroad: Enquiring
therefore of Mistress Cresset, she certified me as follows; which I writ down:

That her Husband and she (with their Family) came lately from Delft in
Holland, where M. Junius was then living, and of good repute among the
Ministers and best People there. He told, of above four thousand Indians that
were brought to confess Christ, and were Baptized: That himself (being a
Dutch Minister) was sent over many years ago by the Dutch Agents to their
Dutch Plantation amongst the Indians: where, in some years space, having
learned their Language, he Preached to the Indians, and thereby many were
brought to the professing of Christ, and by himself were Baptized. And his
Wife dying there, some reasons moved him to return for Holland. At his
departure, the Indians showed great affection to him, being greatly desirous of
his stay: But not prevailing with him, they desired him to promise, either that
himself would return to them, or else that he would instruct one in their
Language, and send him over to them* to teach them further: This he undertook.
And at his departing from them, they brought him many Presents; so that he
returned worth the value of about ten thousand pounds. M. Junius, since his
return to Holland, married again; and he has endeavored to instruct a young
man in their Language, to send to them; and has Printed some Catechismes in
that Tongue, to send over unto them: the substance hereof, M. Cresset had from
his own mouth, when they were at Delft.

This was testified by Mistress Cresset to me, in the fifth Month, called July,
about the seventh day, 1646. I returned to London, much filled with joy, upon
this Relation by Mistress Cresset; which was confirmed by M. Cressets Letter to
me, of the same Week: for your better satisfaction, take his own words.

SIR,
I Was on Thursday at Tower Hill, with a desire to have seen you, but
Providence has otherwise ordered it for the present. I was very sorry I was
not at home when you came hither: I am desirous to give you the best
satisfaction I can, about the Work you heard of. There is (or at least was
very lately) living in Delft in Holland, (and one of the Pastors of the Church
there) one surnamed Junius (borne of Scottish Parents) in Rotterdam. The man I
believe to be godly, and he is very well reputed of by the better part there.
The man lived diverse years in the East Indies; during which time, he gained so
much knowledge in the Language there used, as that he was able to Preach to the
Natives. Of whom, by his own report to my self, he baptized about four
thousand. How strong his Call was to leave them, I know not: But at his
departure from them, they bountifully laded him. He has labored to teach
their Language to some young men; and according to his promise, to send one
over to them. And he has gotten a Catechism, and some other things, Printed
in their Language, to send to them. Thus much I heard from him my self.

Whilst I was writing to you, there came one to me, whose Name is M. Halhead,
who now lives at Kensington: he lived near two years in my house at Delft,
and being a Scholar, had conversed with M. Iunius; and he mentions all the same
things that I have written, and thus much more: That about seventeene thousand
of those Indians were turned from their Paganism so far, as that in several
places they came to hear him willingly, and that he baptized above four
thousand of them. If it may be to your further satisfaction, I shall, God
willing, by the first Ship write to him, and desire to know all, mo^e
particularly: which, I assure my self, he will satisfy me in; and then I
shall willingly do the like for you.

EDW. CRESSET.
Saturday, Jul. 11. 1646.

Having read this Letter with joy in the Lord, I entreated his performance of
what he had kindly offered; viz. That he would write to M. Iunius himself,
that I might be the more fully satisfied in several particulars which I
mentioned in my Letter to M. Cresset: Which accordingly he performed, in
sending the same to M. Junius in Delft. For more full Answer to which
Particulars, M. Junius sent back to M. Cresset a Book in Latin, in whose
Dedicatorie Epis^le to M. Junius, the same things are mentioned: Of the truth
whereof, by his own sending it back for such an end, he thus certified his
approbation. M. Cresset having received this Book, he left it for me with the
honored, the Lady Mayerne, (Wife to Sir Theodore Maye^^e, Baron of Albo^t:) of
whom having received it, I was so affected with it, that I delayed not to
Translate it, out of ^atine into our English Tongue, whatsoever in it was
material to the purpose beforesaid; some other things, for brevitie -- being
passed over: Adding in the Margent some of the Latin, in some nomeniall
passages, or expression^, which might be the more satisfactorie, and desirable,
to some that understand the Latin Tongue.

Touching this M. Iunius, and also the Author of that Latin Epistle, I have
further enquired of M. Ed: Richardson, now a Preacher in Yorkshire, formerly in
D^lft for some time together: who gives a very good commendation of them both,
as good as of any Dutch Ministers he was there acquainted with, judging them
very credible persons; and said, that those two Dutch Ministers were familiarly
acquainted each with other. And it seems this M. Junius was willing, that this
so Glorious a Work, tha^ the Lord had done by him among these East-Indians,
should rather be published by his good Friend, ( to avoid vainglory and the
appearance thereof) then by himself: As a Glorious Work begun amongst the
West-Indians, by means of M^ Eliot* was published rather by his (and my) most
dear Friend M. Shepherd, then by himself. Part of which West-Indian
Relation, I intend to add as a Postscript to the end of this following
Epistle,
concerning the Conversion of those four thousand and more of the East-Indians.

From which Epistle it self, I will no longer detain you; but only to
entreat you, That whilst you read, or hear this Relation following, you
would often lift up your hearts to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, with
joyful thanks and praise, and with earnest prayers to the God of Mercy, who
is the God of the Harvest. That he would send forth his Messengers, to be his
Laborers, to the four Corners of the Earth; and that you, who are the Lords
Remembrancers, would give him no nest, until he establish, and till he shall
make Jerusalem (that long has lain in the dust) to be a Praise in the Earth,
Isa. 62.6. And until he perform the other Three things beforesaid; That so
our joy may be full. In the believing whereof, ( in the midst of outward
distractions) exceedingly refreshed has often been the heart of

Your Compani^n in Tribulation, and in Witnessing, of Jesus Christ, and in the
assured hope of Glory with him, H. JESSHI.

THe Isle FORMOSA ( alias Penmosa, according to Iod. Hon^^us) is in the Ocean
of CHINA, bordering within three Degrees on the South-east of Foquiem China,
being as far North-west from the Philippine Islands, near the Isle Lequeo,
almost under the Tropic of Cancer about the 24 Degree of Latitude, and 155 of
Longitude.

THE LETTER OF Mr C. SIBELLIUS, Relating that EAST-INDIAN Conversion
beforementioned, here follows.
Reverendo, Pietate tque Doctrina Clarissimo Dei Viro, Domino ROBERTO IUNIO,
nuper de Ecclesia Dei apud Gentes optime merito; nunc Gregis Dominici apud
DELPHOS, Pastori Vigilantissimo. [ Mutata consulto in Tralatione persona.]
QVum superiori Anno, nomine and jussu Reverenda Synodi Ecclesiarum
Trans-Isalanae, Venerandae Synodo Ecclesiarum Hollandiae Borealis Harlemi,
Sancti firmique consensus testandi and servandi causa, interessem; magno omnium
applausu, and summa admiratione ea excipiebantur, quae de faelici Ecclesiarum
Dei in Orientali Statu atque increm^ toque commemorabantur. Tua imprimis
Doctissime JUNI, indefessa praedicabatur diligentia, and singularis, Deique
benedictione socrata De r^eritas, in Plantandis, Rigandis, and gubernandis
Ecclesiis apud FORMOSANOS.

Ego mox apud animum meum statu^bam, dignum esse praeclarum illud Dei in caecas
Gentes per te collatum benefictum, quod toti Mundo innotesent, and cujus
immemor non sit omnium saeculorum Posterita.

Quum vero id hactenus a nullo quod sciam t^ntatum, nedum factun^ sit; Ego
primo, INGRESSUM ^^um in sanctam istam Vocationem; secundo, PROGRESSUMQUE in
illa; and tertio, EGRESSUM ex eadem, ad Dei glorium, perpetuamque rerum
gestarum memoriam, ^^u^is sideliter exponam.

A Monument, to the Glory of God, and the blessed Memorial of the Reverend man
of God, very eminent in Piety, and in Learning, M. ROBERT JUNIUS, lately of
the Church of God, among the Heathen, in the Isle FORMOSA best deserving; now
of the Lords Flock in DELPH, a most vigilant Pastor.
WHen in the former year, [ viz. 1645] in the Name, and by the Assignement of
the Reverend Synod of the Churches of Overisle, I was present at the Honored
Synod of the North-Holland Churches at Harleim (for the testifying and
conserving our holy and firm Agreement:) There, with great applause of all,
and with highest admiration, were those ( Glad Tidings) received, which made
mention of the happy state, and the increase of the Churches of God ( among
the Heathen) in the Eastern Coast: Where, the unwearied diligence of the most
Learned IUNIUS, and his singular Dexterity, accompanied with the Blessing of
God, both in Planting, Watering, and Governing of Churches amongst the INDIANS,
in the FORMOSA Island, publicly was spoken of, and commended.

I presently concluded in my self, that this singular favor of God, by means
of him conferred upon those blind Heathen, was fit to be made known to the
whole World, and that the Posterity of all Ages should never be forgetful of
the same.

And because, that hitherto this is not enterprised, much less performed, by
any that I know of; I shall briefly and faithfully set forth, to the glory of
God, and the perpetual memorial of the things done; First, his INGRESSE, or
Entrance into that holy Vocation; then, secondly, his PROGRESS in the same;
and thirdly, and lastly, his EGRESSE from the same.

I. Of his INGRESSE.
TOuching his Ingresse, Quod ad Ingressum, etc. Per Pium inclytae Belgarum
foederatoru^ ad infidos Orientalis Expeditionis Senatu^ convertendis --
or his Call thither: This M. Iunius, being ordained of GOD thereunto, was
Nominated by the Honored and Pious Senate of the Famous Expedition of the
United Provinces of the Low Countries, for the Conversion of Easterne-Indians,
for the bringing them to the Knowledge and Faith of Christ, and so for the
furthering the A rare Pattern for Pious States and Ministers
Conversion of those INDIANS in particular, in the Island called FORMOSA, who
were blind and miserable worshippers of the Devil, and slaves unto him.

This great Task, and Charge, he readily and willingly yielded unto; and
seriously considered of the diligent and faithful administration thereof.

And certainly, nothing is more honorable to God, nothing more acceptable to
all good men, nothing more conducible to the appeasing of Consciences, nothing
more salutiferous to the Heathen, that sit in the darkness of Idolatry, and
Errors, and woeful shadow of Death; then the sending forth of faithful* able,
and painful Laborers into the Harvest; Act. 26.18.
for opening the eyes of the blind, and turning them from Darkness to Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive remission of
sins, and an Inheritance amongst them that are sanctified by Faith that is in
Christ.

To be an instrument of saving one soul (snatched out of the jaws of that
infernal Wolf) far exceeds all other gains. A Note of a true Minister,
that indeed shows love to Christ, Ioh. 21.15, 16.
The faithful Servant of the most High rejoices more in this, if he may gain
to Christ a poor wretch, that is most contemptible in the eyes of the world;
then if all the Treasures of the world were offered unto him. He that shall
convert one sinner from the error of his way, shall save a soul from death,
and shall cover a multitude of sins, as the Apostle James says, ( James
5.20.)

To proceed: M. Iunius being carried by the good hand of God to the Formosan
Island, in the East Indies, preached in Dutch, his Mother Tongue, amongst them
Integro biennio, and quod excurrit.
for above two years together, laying open the Mysteries of Salvation.

But the Natives there not understanding Dutch, he being moved with an
exceeding desire of their Conversion and Salvation, and of freeing and
discharging his own Conscience, with great pains and speedy diligence, in a
short time, even now in his adult age, he happily learned the barbarous
Language and rude Idiome of those Heathen, Indians preached unto, in their own
Language, Twelve years.
who were of differing Speech and Manners; and wisely framed himself to speak
to their Capacity and Edification. And there they heard him speaking to them
plainly in their own Tongue, wherein they were borne, the Wonderful
Mysteries of the Gospel of Christ, for Twelve years together; [ viz. from the
year 1631, to the year 1643.]

II. Of his PROGRESS.
NOw touching his Progress, Progressum in Vocatione.
or proceeding on, and success amongst them; he was unwearied in his constant
daily p^ines with them, for their souls health, both publicly and privately:
and the Lord assisted him with special dexterity, and gave a wonderful
blessing upon his pains amongst them. Nam (ut de Dorko and Tirose dicer^
supersedeam) in sex seprent. Insulae Formosae celebr. etc. The good success of
Preaching.
For (to say nothing of Dork and Tirose) in six of the most famous Towns in
the Northern parts of the Formosan Isl^nd, viz. Tavacan, Sincklan, Bacluan,
Matthauw, Soulang, and Terurang, the Lords Work had such wonderful Success;
that it has moved, and still does m^ve the greatest admiration to all Godly
people, that have notice thereof.

As touching the Fruit and efficacy of the Preaching of the Word: by the Light
of Heavenly Truth, Expulsis nefauda Idelolatria, bruta ignorantia, horribili
coecitate, foeaissimo Daemoniorum cultu -- etc.
Idolatry, not to be named, brutish ignorance, horrible blindness, and most
filthy worship of Devils being discovered* and expelled; very many of the
inhabitants were brought to the saving knowledge of, and true faith in God, and
the Redeemer, Jesus Christ.

And so great and laudable Progress both of men and women, young and old,
Summi, medioxumi, atque infini.
chief ones, middle sort, and mean ones made therein; that every one of them
could not only rehearse without haesitating acurately the chief Heads or
Principles of true Religion, but also were able to Answer wisely and solidely
to most Questions about Religion, that one would propound or put forth to them.

And this their Knowledge and Profession of Faith, many of them did so adorn,
by their Piety toward God, and Righteousness and Love to their Neighbor,
and Sobriety and Temperance in themselves; They may shame us.
that may cause shame and blushing to many amongst us, that are borne of
Orthodox Parents, and from the Childhood have been trained up in the
Christian Religion.

They pray Morn and Even, and at Meals fervently, in conceived Prayer.
Moreover, many of them are so able, in such fervencie of spirit, to pour out
their prayers before God, Morning and Evening, and before and after taking of
Meat, and in other Necessities; and that with such comeliness and fitness of
speech, and with such moderation and decency of gesture; that may provoke
tears to such as hea^e and behold them. And there are some of them, that being
called to pray about any matter or business, are able to perform it in
conceived prayer, ex tempore, so readily, in such fit expressions, and with
such arguments and pithinesse, as if they had been spending some hours for the
contriving and so framing of them.

The unclean Spirit forced out, attempts returning, urges to keep their old
accustomed way, as those in Ier. 44.16, 17.
And when the Prince of Darkness, being molested by this glorious Light, so
kindled and set up there, would extinguish, or suppress it; he stirred up
some, especially impudent wretched Women, Inchanters, Whoorish, deceitful
ones, covetous of filthy gain; that went about and endeavored to turn these
back to the worship of Devils and Idols, as their forefathers had done, and to
abandon the Truth ( as a Noveltie, or new upstart Doctrine:) Some of these
themselves, by the pains taken with them, were through the Lords goodness
converted, and brought from the Power of Darkness unto God; and others of them
were so convinced, or otherwise by the Pious Magistrate restrained, that they
could no longer hinder the Course and Progress of the Gospel among them.

And whereas the Gentiles or Heathen are first to be instructed and Preached
unto, Mat. 28.18, 19.
that they may believe, before they should be baptized; This Reverend M. Iunius
took great pains daily, in first instructing them in the Grounds of Religion,
Catechizing them, to bring them to believe: So Vt ex Formosanis Adultis
QUINQUIES MILL and NONGENTI utriusque sexus, Nomina sua Christo dederunt. Et
-- fidie suae professionem etc.
that of persons grown up in that Isle of Formosa, FIVE THOUSAND and NINE
HUNDRED, of both Sexes, gave up their Names to Christ; and professing their
Faith, and giving fit Answers to Questions propounded out of the Word of God,
were BAPTIZED by him* ( Cum quibus infantes ex Formosanis foederatis ^^ti,
atque sacra aqua tinct^, non annumerantur V.M.IX.C. First, taught, and believe;
then Baptized, and enjoy the Lords Supper.
of which number of persons, so Dipped in-Water, the Infants of persons in
Covenant, are not reckoned;) and to such persons in Soulangh, and Sinekan, and
elsewhere, being instructed well in the Doctrine of the Lords Supper, was that
Ordinance of Christ also administered with much reverence, joy, and edification.

M. Iunius promoted Reading and Writing, and many to be Schoolemasters.
And because the instructing of persons to Read and to Write, tends much to
further, not only Civil and Political good, but also Spiritual; herein also
M. Iunius took much pains, in furthering of both; instructing some to Teach
others, and in Visiting and Ordering the Scholars.

Praeter paucos Praeceptores Belgas, in supradictis sex pagis Indigenae
Quinquaginta, a Te Christo Lucrifacti, atque instituti and scientia, industria,
dexteritate, sedulitate, ac pietate insignes, sub discessum tuum Sexcentos
Discipulos legere and literas pingere docebant: and tam adultos, quam pueros
rudime^tis Christianae fidei imbuebant.
And besides a few Dutch men, that were Teachers of others; in the six Towns
before said, of the Heathenish Natives that he gained to Christ, ab^ut Fifty
of them he so instructed and fitted for this Work, that excelled in
Godliness, Knowledge, Industry, Dexterity, and Sedulitie; that before his
Departure thence, they had taught Six Hundred taught to Read and Write.
Six Hundred Scholars to Read and to Write; and that instructed, as well the
elder as younger persons, in the Rudiments of Christian Faith.

And it is not easy to judge, whether the Scholars, for their dociblenesse
and obedience, or their Masters, or Teachers, for their pains and diligence,
were more to be commended. M Iunius in the mean time collected the chief
Heads of Religion, and some for daily Prayers, and translated certain Psalms
into the Formosan Islanders Language.

Also his care and pains was not only in behalf of those Six Northern
Towns there, Churches planted in six Formosan Northren Towns, and in xxiij.
Southern.
beforesaid: but for the Southern parts thereof also: where, in three and
twenty Towns, he planted Churches, and furthered the Worship of the true God.
And the Lord vouchsafed such abundant Blessings upon his Labors and Endeavors
amongst them, whom he both planted and watered, (feeding them with sound
Doctrine, good Example, and Love unfeigned; not counting his Life too dear to
venture in this Work, for their gaining and building up:) that he has left
such a Report and Memorial behind him at his Departure, as will be precious
and blessed so long as this World endures.

III. Of his REGRESSE.
AND now lastly, Of his Return home.

Pauca de Egressu. etc.


touching his Regresse, or Departure from thence; The Occasions and Causes were
these:

The Churches there being so happily planted and watered, The Causes of his
return

Three are here mentioned.


and they having diverse Pastors, Teachers, and Overseers set over them; his
own body was grown very weak, and more unserivceable by Diseases that were
renewed, with which he was long and painfully afflicted.

First, He was moved with a great desire of seeing his aged and most dear
Mother, before her, or his Death, whom he had left in the Netherlands.

And secondly, of seeing again his own dear Country, that by the joyful
Tidings of the Lords Blessing his pains among those Heathenish Indians, he
might refresh the hearts of the Churches, Ministers, Brethren, and Friends.

And thirdly, that he might the more promote and further, (by means of those
here, that had the chief managing and governing of those Indian Affairs,) the
proceeding on for the Conversion of the Lords Vineyard, that is already
Planted and Watered in the Formosan Island, and for further help in propagation
of the Gospel amongst them: He having declared to the Ilanders there, these
and the like Grounds for his return; [they being put into so good a posture
for their good proceeding on, in their Churches, Scholars, and every way: not
without being greatly desired by them, at last they yielded to dismiss him.]

This so joyful a Narration of the Conversion of so many of the East-Indians
in the Island Formosa, is recorded and published in Latin by Master Caspar
Sibellius, Pastor of the Church in Daventrie in the Netherlands.

Being Scripsi Daventria, xxv. Julij Anno 1646. Reveretiae Tua Studi efissimus,
CASPARUS SIBELLIUS, Ecclesia Daventri enfis Pastor.
writ by him there, July 25. 1646. (himself being dearly beloved of, and
acquainted with this blessed Instrument, Mr. ROBERT JUNIUS:) and is perfixed to
his Book, called Antidotum Ambitionis, beforesaid: [ Printed at the Charge of
I. Iansonius Amsterd:]

Who so desires, Further Confirmations of the Truth of these glad Tidings.
and such as would see more about this History, and the certainty thereof,
they may search and see these Ad Literas, acta, et Testimonia Publica provoco,
ex quibus, optima fide haec excerpsi. Loquu^tur Acta Synodi Eccl. Hol.
Borealis, Har ^ei habita --.
Letters, Acts, and public Testimonies extant, (which confirm the same; out
of which Mr. Sibellius gathered much of the Relation before said:) viz. The
Acts of the Synod of the Northren parts of Holland, held at Harlem, Anno 1645.
the twentieth Article. The Acts of the Visitation of the Churches and Scholars
of the Northern Formosan Ilanders: which Three Faithful Pastors of those
East-Indian Churches, accompanying the Elder of Tayovan, two of the States
Senators being present, ordered and performed in the year 1643. in the Months
of September and October.

Also Letters from the Eldership in Tayovan, Presbyterio Tayovanensi.
and from otbers, to the Classes in Amsterdam, and in Walachria, written
specially about this busines^ To which may be added the excellent and most
ample Testimonall, wherewith the Ecclesiastical Assembly at Soulang the Eight
of October 1643, dismissed the said Mr. ROBERT JUNIUS. All these were seen, and
read, and examined diligently by me, (so affirms,) C. SIBELLIVS.

And upon my desire and request, to have the clearest Evidence herein, with the
particulars thereof most fully; the Relation beforesaid, (writ by Mr. Junius 's
familiar friend) was sent by Mr. Junius himself, to Mr. Cresset, as is before
mentioned, for me, H. I.

Later News of Formosan-Indians.
BEfore the Eight Month October 1649. the Relator hereof H. I. had entreated of
the said Mr. Cresset, that he would write again to Delph, to be informed of
the further proceeds about those Indians in the Isle FORMOSA. Who having
written thither accordingly to M. E. H. his friend in Delph; he received back
this Account following.

SIR;
I Have conversed with Mr. Junius about your desire, how it goes with the
Formosan Indians: And he certifies me, that as he was there, alone; so now
there are there four Ministers already: (Blessed be God for it;) to the
great increase of his Church and People; for his superabundant Glory, and our
great Rejoicing and Comfort.

For the Conversion of the Heathen, is according to his Promise in his sacred
Word. -- The Company have concluded and agreed, to send three Ministers more,
whom they, with Mr. Junius, think most fit, to perform that great Work. And
Mr. Junius does instruct them that are to go, in the Language; that they may
(with Gods mercy) be the better enabled to perform that great Work, which
they are sent for, etc.

Your loving friend, E. H.
Delph 25. of October. 1649.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
I. GOOD NEWS of the DAY-BREAKING. II. Of the CLEAR SUNSHINE. III. Of the
Glorious PROGRESS of the Gospel breaking forth upon many WEST-INDIANS in
NEW ENGLAND.
PRecious is that Promise in Isaiah 59.19. From the WEST they shall fear the
Name of JEHOVAH, and from the Rising of the Sun his Glory. Some First Fruits
from the East, we have heard already; from the West, here follows a Brief:
Mat. 9.38.
Of the Harvest from them both, we much long to hear, and earnestly pray for
it to the Lord of the Harvest.

In the year 1630. before the Birth of Christ, (according to H. Broughtons
Concent, Genesis 47.9. Deuteronomy. 10.^^
) to enjoy temporal food, Israel with 70 Souls went down into Egypt. And in
the Year 1630 The Voyage of Mr. Winthrop, Sir Rich. Saltonstal, Mr. Dudley,
etc.
from the Birth of Christ, These words are in the Epistle Dedicated to the
Parliament, before the second Book, called The SVNSHINE of the Gospel,
subscribed by these twelve. viz. St. Marshall. Th. Goodwin. Philip Nigh. Ed.
Calamy. Simeon Ash. W. Carter. Io. Downam. Ier. Whitaker. Thomas Case. S.
Simpson. W. Greenhill. Sam. Bolton.

To enjoy Spiritual Food, the Liberties of the Gospel, a great number of our
English Brethren were forced hence [ to New-England] by the Contrivers and
Promoters of Destructive Designs, for Introduction of great Evils, both in
Church and State. -- The Adversaries end was to suppresso, but Gods to
proprogate the Gospel.

A long time it was, [about twice seven years,] before God let them see any
further and, then to preserve their Consciences, and provide for their
sustenance. But when Providence invited their return, he let them know, it was
for some further Errand, that he brought them thither: giving them some Bunches
of Grapes, some Clusters of Figs, in earnest of the prosperous success of
their endeavors upon those poor Outcasts, those WEST-INDIAN-Natives. Whose
Language Mr. I. ELIOT of Roxburie, (who had lived in Essex nigh Chelmsford,)
and Mr. Thomas Mahew junior had endeavored to attain.

Mr. Winslow in the third Book, called, The Glorious Progress of the Gospel
amongst the Indians in New England. Page 1.
In the Year 1646, it seemed good to the most high God, to stir up some
Reverend Ministers of the Gospel in New England, to consider, how they might
be serviceable to the Lord Jesus, in furthering the Native-Indians* -- Hence
they sought the Lord, to direct them in a right way, and for a blessing upon
their endeavors.

Upon See the First Book, called the Day-breake, with Indians in New England.

Page 1.


October 28. 1646. Four of us, ( says the Honored Relator,) (having sought
God) went according to appointment, to the Wigwam ( or Tent made of Boughs, and
Mats,) of Waaubon, an Indian-Governour: Where he found many Indians gathered
together from all quarters to learn of us the Knowledge of God.

( Waaubon having yielded up his eldest Son to be educated by the English in
the Knowledge of God.)

The Sum of Christian Religion was declared in their own Tongue; the Indians
attending diligently; and professing they understood all that was taught them:
Of Sin, and Mercy, of Christ, of Faith, and Repentance, etc.

(The Sermon was above an hour.) Then we propounded Questions.

1. Whether they all understood? They answered with multitude of voices, they
all understood, all that was spoken. Then we desired them, if they would, to
propound Questions to us. Which they readily did.

The first Question, How may we come to know Jesus Christ? (Some words in the
Answers, needed the help of our Indian Interpreter: But a few words from the
Preacher, were more regarded, then many from him.)

The second Question was, Whether God, or Jesus Christ, did understand Indian
Prayers?

The Occasion was this. The party said, he was lately praying in his Wigwam,
that, God and Jesus Christ, would give him a good heart. -- and his fellow
Indian interrupted him, and told him, Jesus Christ had been used to hear
Englishmen pray, and understood them: but understood not Indians.

The third Question by another; Whether English- men were at any time so
ignorant of God, and Jesus Christ, as they? And three Questions more, and we
propounded three to them.

And thus having spent three hours with them, we asking, If they were not
weary? they answered, No. When we concluded, the Chief of them asked, When we
would come again? So we appointed the Time.

II Time.
The second time, was November. 11. 1646. at Waaubons Wigwam again; where we
found many more Indians met, then the formertime: and they had prepared Seats
for us. After Prayer we asked three Questions of the younger Indians, and gave
them Answers in the Indian Tongue.

Our Questiions.
1 Quest. Who made you, and all the world?

Ans. God.

2 Quest. Who do you look should save you from Sin, and Hell?

Ans. Jesus Christ.

3 Quest. How many Commands has God given you?

Ans. Ten.

In these three, we made them all perfect; encouraging them to learn, by
giving somewhat to each Child, and desiring their Parents to teach them
perfectly afterward.

Then we Preached to them, as formerly; of God, of Christ, of Sin, of its
Punishment, of Gods now offering Salvation to them. -- Hereby some were greatly
affected: One wept much.

After Sermon, we would have them ask Questions of us.

An old man asked, Their Questions.
Is it not too late for one so old as I, to repent, or seek after God?

2. Another asked, Seeing we all come from one father; how came the English to
know God, more then we?

3. Quest. How may we come to serve God? These we Answered.

One asked, About Restitution.
If a man have stolen, and restored again, and was not punished by the Sachim,
( or Indian Governor:) what then? is all well?

Ans. Gods anger burns like fire against all such sins; but if he fly to
Gods mercy in Christ, and repent, God will forgive, and pity him.

Upon this Answer, Much affected.
the man drew back, hung down his head, as smit at the heart, his eyes ready
to drop, he said, Me little know Jesus Christ, else I should seek him better.
We encouraged him.

One said, We much thank God for your coming. We told them, God is Musquantum
(that is, very angry) for the least sin, in their thoughts, words, or actions.

They assenting. Such as dye in sin, after death should be Chechainuppan,
that is, tormented alive. (the nearest of their words we knew.) Believers,
after death, wowein wicke Jehovah, live in all bliss with Jehovah.

The third time, III Time.
November 26. 1646. was our third meeting with Indians, where they had built
more Wigwams there. The Preacher had heard, that other Indians, had threatened,
and discouraged these; therefore he encouraged them: They put to him six
Questions.

The same week one Wimpas a sage Indian, The fruirs on some.
with two stout young men that had been deeply affected in hearing, came to
that Preacher, bringing his Son and three other Indian children, desiring they
might be brought up with the English, to know true God, and not to grow rude,
as at home they would. The two young men offered their service to the English,
for the like end; All were accepted. These two certify us, that the old man [
who had asked if such an one could be saved,] his wife and one of his six Sons,
which were Pawaws [that is, charming Witches,] God has convinced of that
sin: and they resolve to hear the Word, and seek to the Devil no more.

IIII Time.
The fourth time, was December. 4. where another Pawaw had some terror struck
into him, upon a Question propounded.

The said two young Indians, related, how some become Pawaws; and that their
employment is, to cure the sick, by certain odd gestures, and beatings of
themselves: and blowing, etc.

The Lord has moved the English in their General Court to purchase so much
Land for the Indians, as to build them a Town near the English, for their help,
calling it Noonatomen, that is, Rejocying. This pleased the Indians greatly:
who about that time, made these Laws.

Indian Laws with fines.
1. If any be idle a week, he shall pay 5 s. 2. A Man that that commits
Whordome, shall pay 20 s. 3. If any beat his Wife, his hands shall be tied
behind him, and punished. 4. Young men without service, shall set up Wigwans,
and plant. 5. Women that cut their hair, or let it hang loose, shall pay, 5 s.
6. If Women go with naked breasts, they shall pay 2 s. 6 d. 7. Men that wear
long hair, shall pay 5 s. 8. If any now kill their Lice between their teeth,
to pay 5 s. [That by it, they might not offend the English.]
The fifth meeting was, V Time. Further fruits.
December. 9. 1646. After Catechizing and Preaching, the Indians offered to us
all their Children to be brought up by us. Of their Complaints against their
naughty hearts; Resolution to keep the Sabbath, their words in Prayer, etc.
You may see more at large in the Book called, The DAY-BREAKE. From which, this
Collection is the more full, because that Book is very scarcely to be had; It
was sold on Fish-street-hill, by Mr. Clifton.

The next Book, called, The CLEAR SUNSHINE, etc. Commended by the Epistles of
Mr. Marshall, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Nigh, etc. as before said, is sold by Mr. Bellamy,
in Cornhill, London.
To which I refer you for your further satisfaction in the things that here
are but briefly hinted.
THe Sachim (or Indian Governor) about Concord, hearing of those things before
said* Another Sachim convinced.
came to Noonanetums-Indian Lecture: where the Lord so met with him, that he
cast of his old Indian wild and sinful courses. Hence diverse of his men,
secretly opposed him; which he perceiving, said, to this effect:

His speech*
Whilst you lived after the Indian fashion, did not the higher Indian Sachems
take away your Skins, Kettles, Wampan, ( that is their Money) at their
pleasure? But you may see, the English seek not your goods, but your good;
they oppress not, but give to you - etc.

Laws.
Then he made Laws for their more Religious and Civil Govrnement, and is very
active for good.

Hence they desired M. Eliot might come to them to p^each to them. The Sachim
desired, they might have ground amongst the English to dwell there. Being asked
his Reason; he answered, Else the Indians would not care to come far to hear
Gods Word, nor would they pray, etc.

Page 4.
Conclusions and Orders agreed upon by diverse Sachims about Concord, in the end
of the 11 Month ( called Januarie) 1646.

1. That for every time that one is drunk, he shall pay 20 s.

2. There shall be no Pawawing. Else the party and procurer, to pay 20 s.

29. Laws in all; See in the A Book so called.
SVN-SHINE. The Thief to restore four fold. He that greazeth himself, is to
pay 5 s. For Fornication, the Man 20 s. the Woman 10 s. Adultery Death. No
Indian to come into English-mans house, except he first knock: and this they
expect from the English, etc.

Page 7.
March 3. 1647. (current,) I went to Noonanetums Lecture, Mr. Wilson, Mr.
Allen, Mr. Dunster, etc. being present. Their Women's Scruples, or Quere's are
to be propounded by their men.

1. Question was, Whether do I pray, when I speak nothing, if my heart goes
with that which my Husband prays?

2. Whether a Husband should pray, if he still continue in passion against his
Wife, though not so much as he was?

Mr. Eliot preached once to the Indians about Cape Cod, Page 8.
near New Plymouth, New Plymouth.
where an aged Indian, said openly, These things that Mr. Eliot taught us of
the Worlds, making by one God, and of his Commands, etc. we have heard from
some of our old men, that now are dead, and after they fell into a great sleep;
when we awoke, we forgot all.

June 9. 1647. Page 11.
Being the first day of the Synod, then at Cambridge, there was in the
afternoon the Indian Lecture by Mr. Eliot: where was a great confluance of
Indians, whose Questions after the Sermon wete these.

Where was Christ borne? Where is he now? How may we lay hold on him, and
where; he being absent? etc.

These Questions, and their gracious attending the Word, much affected the
godly Magistrates, Ministers, and People there met. An old Indian man, much
wondering at Gods goodness to them, that were in such gross Ignorance and
Darkness; He spoke with such strong actings of his eyes and hands, as the
more affected them, his words being interpreted.

Another time in the cold Winter, Mr. Eliot gave him a promise of an old Suit
of Cloths: to which he affectionately said, I see, God is merciful. Thus he
saw Gods Mercy, in the promise of old Cloths.

The Winter before going, Mr. Edward Iackson of Cambridge, sent to Mr. Shephard
the Relator, these Questions of the Indians.

Why some are so bad, that they hate such as would teach them good? whether the
Devil or Man were made first?

A Squaw or Indian woman, queried, May I pray in the wood, in a private place,
when Sanop (the Man) is from home? She being ashamed to pray before others. How
they may know, that their Faith and Prayers are good? Why did not God kill the
Devil? How can we sanctify a Sabbath?

Mr. Iackson also wrote, that passing by an Indian Wigwam early, on April 25.
1647. he heard an Indian at prayer therein: and that in September following, he
observed an Indian, call in his Children, from gathering Corn in the Field; at
his craving a blessing on his homely fare; and that he did it with much
affection.

This may shame many professed Christians.

Page 15.
The Order of the General Court at Boston, May. 26. 1647. concerning Indians,
(Justice, Education, etc.) is expressly set down.

Page 17.
Part of Mr. Eliots Letter to Mr. Shephard, Sept. 24. 1647. follows.

That which I first held out to Indians, was, the Law, to civilize and humble
them. Gal. 3.19. But they were soon weary, and despised it.

Some wise Indians said amongst them, that in forty Years some Indians would
be all one English: and all Indians so, in a hundred Years.

When I heard this, I encouraged them; In time they saw, that our Magistrates
and Ministers, and all good People were glad of the desires of some to be
instructed. Then the Lord bowed many of their hearts, to desire to be taught,
to know God, etc.

This Change the LORD has wrought among them.

1. Forsaking all their Pawaws.

2. Praying to God.

3. Some Pawaws forsaking Pawawing: others are fled, to trade better else where.

4. Many instruct their Children in what I Catechiz^, till old and young be
perfect,

5. They sanctify the Sabbath, having enquired how they should be then
employed.

6. Referring Cases for convincing of some, to me, on Lecture days ( three or
four instances are set down.)

7. Admonitions then to Offenders, have been greatly blessed by the Lord.

Of their Questions, one by a Sachim was thus; Before I knew God, I thought all
was well: But now, I find my heart full of sin: I sometimes wish I might
die, rather then be so again. Whether is this a sin in me?

When I had preached on 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. against Lust, old Mr. Brown (being
present) observed, some were deeply affected, and wept.

After my return, this Question was sent to me as from them all, Whether any
of them should go to Heaven, seeing they sound their hearts so full of sin,
especially of Lust? (which they call Nanwunwudsqas, that is, Mad after Women,
which occasioned my next Sermon, on Matthew. 11. v. 28. Come to me, all ye that
labor, etc.

Another Question has often been. If they leave off Pawawing, what shall they do
when they are sick? Great need there is of Physicians, to prevent the snare of
Pawawing.

Sept. 24. 1647. One Question this day after Lecture was, Because other
Abergenians (or Indians) ask us thus; What get you by praying to God? you go
naked still, and our Corn is as good as yours; else we would pray to God
too: what shall we answer to this?

Another Question often put, is this; They being informed of the unlawfulness of
all Gaming for Wages, where there is any Lot: Whether they should pay such
Debts, as they came into by Gaming?

The Answers hereto, and the desires of some Titacu^ Indians to have Mr. Eliot
come to teach them; and what Berries and other things Indians now bring to
Mercate commonly: and what use of all, Master Shephard makes, and some more of
their Questions and Answers thereto, especially about the putting one of two
Wives away, if the latter had Children, and the first had none: Of these, and
other Passages, you may see more fully in the Book called, The SUNSHINE
breaking forth upon the Indians in New England, sold by Mr. Bellamie near the
Exchange: to which you are referred for your more full satisfaction.

The third Book, called, The GLORIOUS PROGRESS Of the Gospel, amongst the
(WEST-) INDIANS in NEW- ENGLAND.
Printed for H. Allen in Popes-head-Alley.
PArt of a Letter writ by Mr. Mahew junior ( from Great-Harbor in Capawack
Island, now called Martha's Vineyard.) Who also preaches there to Indians in
their own Language.

SIR;
THe encouragements I met withal touching the Indian Conversion, The sum of
Mr. Mahew's Letter.
next to Gods Glory, was their zealous enquiring after true Happiness; together
with the knowledge I had of their Tongue: Besides several Providence.

1. The Lord raising up by Prayer, Three Providence.
old Ieogiscat, whom all the Pawaws, gave over for a dead man.

2. Another called Saul, so dying, upon his return to Pawaws.

3. The Recoverie of a Sagamors Son, after Prayer, and some means used.

4. The Speech of that Sagamor Towan quattick, Lamenting their loss of
Knowledge; he said thus to me, A Sagamors Speech, by way of a Parable.
A long time ago, we had wisemen, that taught the People Knowledge: they dead,
their Wisdom buried. Now men live giddy life in ignorance, till white hairs.
-- I wonder English thirty Years here, and we Fools still.

And he coming to me, desiring my help, said, You to us, as one standing by
running River, silling many vessels: so you us, with everlasting Knowledge.

So I undertook to give them a Meetting once a Month: then upon their desire,
I performed it once a Fort-night, -- Pray that to the Heathen may be preached
the unserchable Riches of Christ, that so the Root of Iesse, standing for an
Ensign, the Gentiles may seek^ unto it, and his Rest shall be glorious. Amen.


The sum of a second Letter from Mr. Eliot, writ November 12. 1648.
Worthy SIR,
Mr. Eliots second Letter.
YOur Work of preaching Christ to these poor Indians, I bless God, goes on,
not without success.

Of a good Woman's Death.
Touching the first Woman whose case was put about joining in heart with her
Husbands Prayer; Whether then she prayed to God?

I often visited her in her sickness, she took in Childbed; asking her about
her Spiritual estate, she said, I still love God, Her gracious Speech.
though he made me sick. I resolve to pray to him, whilst I live: and no Pawaw.
-- I believe God will pardon all my sins, Her Faith.
because Jesus Christ died for me: and God is well pleased in him. I am willing
to die, I shall go to Heaven, and live happily with God and Christ there.

Before her Death, she called her up-growne Daughters, with her other Children,
and said to them; Her Deathbed Charge.
I shall now die; Then your Grandfather, and Grandmother, and Uncles, --
will send for you, to come ^ack to live there, and promise you much. -- But I
charge you, never go; for they pray not to God, nor keep Sabbath: sin, and
not punished, etc.

Soon after she died. And these being so sent for, this Case by the Father, on
the Lecture day, was put to me: so came I to the knowledge hereof.

Our Cutshamoquin has some Subjects in Martha's Vineyard, Regis ad examplu^.

Examples of Superiors prevail much.


that hearing of his praying to God, do so too. -- But our Western Indians do
more earnestly embrace the Gospel, as Swahanon does, the great Sachim of
Nashawog. This last Summer four times have I been there: its near forty miles
hence. They desire I should come ofter, and stay longer.

Also to Pautuchet, there being a great concourse of Indians at the Springs
Fishing time, I went the two last Springs, and had great encouragement in
Preaching to them: Where their Profaneness is turned by many, into praying to
God, and observing Sabbath --. Yea the old Sagamor Papissaconnaway, that has
been a great Pawaw, excusing his absence before* came the latter time: where I
preached from Mal. 1.11. From the rising of the Sun, to the going down, etc.
The worst of Indian Kings, now desires Instruction.
After which, some asked, If it be thus, then former Indians are they all gone
to Hell? -- The Sagamor said, he believed, what I taught was true. He had not
called on God; but now he would, and would so persuade his sons.

His eldest Son present, Sachem of Wadchuset, consented thereunto. And in this
mind he continued, desiring Capt. Willard and I, would come and dwell there to
instruct them better. -- Oh that the Lord would raise up many Laborers amongst
them!

Mr. Eliots Gifts, and Hospitality to Indians.
I never go empty handed amongst them, nor take gratuitie unrewarded; only
when one poor Creature thrust somewhat into my hand, with much affection, I
found, it was a Pennyworth of Wampam (which is Indian Money: 1 Timothy 3.2.
) I kindly accepted it, inviting him to my house: where I would refresh all
Indians that come.

The next Spring I intend to go thither, and to another great Fishing place,
about three score miles hence, belonging also to Papissaconaway.

Some of the Questions by the Indians near us, are these that follow: by which
you may guess at their Spirits, and Progress.

Questions by the Indians.
Quest. How many good People were in Sodom, at its burning?

How should I pray to Christ? dwells the Devil in us, as we in a house?

When God says, Honor thy Father; means he three Fathers? our Father, our
Sachim, and God?

What says a soul, when it goes to Heaven or Hell?

If one speak of another faults, and not to himself: is it a sin? (a) ( a)
Mat. 18.15. Pro. 25.9. See Page 31. line 2. ( a)

Why did Christ dye in our steed? Why, and how should We love our Enemies?

How does Christ redeem us from sin? Ephesians. 1.7


When every day my heart thinks, I shall dye, and go to Hell for my sins,
what shall I do? Act. 2.37.


May a good man sin sometimes, and yet be a good man?

If a man think a Prayer, does God know it, and reward it?

Who killed Christ? If a man be almost a good man, and dye so, whither goes
his soul? See Page 31. (a)


If two Families dwell in one house, and one prays not: what shall the other
that prays, do to them?

Now Indians desire to go to heaven, what shall they do?

I find I want wisdom, what shall I do to get it?

Why does God make good men sick?

I see why I must fear Hell; and I do so: Why must I fear God?

May a woman that prays to God, marry one that does not?

If my Wife works the night before, or after the Sabbath; is it a sin?

If I sin, and know not it is a sin; what will God say to that?

Is Faith in my heart or in my mind? Why did Christ dye for us?

By these Questions you may see, -- their Souls are in a searching Condition,
after God, and Christ, Salvation -- And I will say this solemnly --; were they
but in a settled way of Government -- together, and I called -- to live amongst
them; I durst freely join into Church Fellowship, with many of them.

Yours, I. ELIOT.
Roxbury this 12. of Nov. 1648.

The sum of another Letter of Mr. Eliot, to a Gentleman of NEW ENGLAND,
residing here at presient.
SIR;
Help is desired for Apparel, Tools, Schooling.
YOur care about the good of these poor Indians, -- for their Apparel; For
employment of them, in Planting -- they wanting Apparel, and Tools -- are
willing to follow my advice, in any reasonable thing. Of an unknown helper
therein.
-- For their Schooling, a Gentleman in London, (whose Name I could never
learn,) gave x. li. toward it, the last year. Paid by Capt. Harding.

Lin Indians are all naught, Regis ad exmplum.-
for such is their Sachim.

Yours, I. ELIOT.


Part of another Letter from him, writ the xii. Month of the last year, 1648.
(current 1649.)
Sundry of them ( viz. of these Indians,) enquire after Baptism, and Church
Ordinances, and the Way of Worshipping God, as the Churches here do. -- I take
this to be one special and eminent smile of God upon the Work, that he has
stirred up, See afterward at this Mark, Page 32.
The Parliament of England, taking it into Consideration, -- to think on some
meet way, how they might advance it.

I have noted some more of the Questions by the Indians: for by them, you may
guess at their PROGRESS.

Questions by Indians.

Questions.
Why have not Beasts a Soul, as Man has; seeing they have Love, Anger, etc.
as Man has?

How is the Spirit of God in us? O that professed Christians, would thus
enquire!


Why does God punish in Hell for ever? Man will let out of Prison.

What is Faith? O that professed Christians, would thus enquire!
Do you think I have Faith? O that professed Christians, would thus enquire!


How shall I know when God accepts my Prayer? O that professed Christians,
would thus enquire!


How makes Christ Peace, between God and man?

In Wicked See Eccles. 5.7.
Dreams, does the Soul sin?

If my heart be full of ill thoughts, and I repent O that professed Christians,
would thus enquire!
pray, and yet its full, again and again: What will God say?

What means this? God will not hold him guiltless, that takes his Name in
vain?

If a man will force his Daughter to marry one that she does not love; what
will God say? etc.

Sir, I am Yours in any service, I can in Jesus Christ. I. Eliot.
Roxbury this second of the 12 Month 1648. (1649. current.)

The rest of the Letter, and of other Letters, and more of the Indian
Questions, the Reader may see, [with many more remarkable Passages, and
profitable Observations and Applications (with conjectures) made, in an By Mr.
I. D. Directions to the desirous Reader.
APPENDIX thereunto;] in a Book, Published by Mr. E. Winslow, called Sold by
H. Ailen.
The GLORIOUS PROGRESS of the Gospel, amongst the Indians in New England. To
which Book, with the two former Books of the same Subject, viz. The DAY-DREAKE
of the Gospel with the Indians. (sold by Mr. Clifton on Fishstreet-hill, and
the CLEAR SVN-SHINE. -- (sold near the Exchange by Mr. Bellamie,) The Godly
Reader, (to whom these Glorious and Honorable Works of God, Psalm. 111* 2, 3.
Page 30.
are most precious,) is referred for his further satisfaction.

The Parliament of England, for the advancing of this good Work, made an 27.
July 1649.
ACT called, An ACT for promoting and propagating of the Gospel of JESUS
CHRIST in NEW ENGLAND. [ 27. Iulie 1649. Ordered by them to be Printed.] (Sold
by Mr. Husbands.) A Breviate whereof follows.
A worthy Act of Parliament, to promote the Gospel amongst the Indians in
New England.
WHereas the Commons of England, assembled in Parliament, have received certain
Intelligonce -- from diverse godly Ministers, and others in New England, that
diverse of the Heathen-Natives -- through the pious care of some godly English
-- who preach the Gospel to them in their own Indian-Language: not only of
Barbarous, are become Civil; but many of them forsake their accustomed Charms
and Sorcerses, and other Satanicall Delusions, do now call upon the Name of
the Lord, and give great Testimony of the power of God, drawing them from
Death and Darkness, to the Life and Light of the Glorious Gospel Jesus Christ.
Which appears by their lamenting with tears their misspent Lives; Where many
are converted, by 2 English Preachers.
teaching their Children, what they are instructed themselves; being careful
to place -- them in godly Famalies and English Schools; betaking themselves to
one Wife, putting a way the rest: and by their constant Prayers to Almighty
God, morning and evening in their Families; expressed (in all appearance) with
much Devotion, and zeal of heart. All which considered, we cannot but in
behalf of the Nation we represent, O England, rejoice and help on this Work.
rejoice, and give Glory to God, for the beginning of so glorious a Propagation
of the Gospel amongst those poor Heathen.

Which cannot be prosecuted with that expedition -- as is desired, unless fit
Instruments be encouraged and maintained to pursue it. Schools, -- Clothing,
-- be provided* and many other Necessaries. -- Be it therefore Enacted -- by
this present Parliament, -- that for the furthering so good a Work, A
Corporation for propogating the Gospel in New England,
-- there shall be a Corporation in England, consisting of sixteen (viz.) a
President, Treasurer, and fourteen Assistants; And that William Steel Esquire
Harbert Pelham Esquire James Sher'ey, Abraham Babington, Robert Houghton, Richard
Hutchinson, George Dun, Robert Tomson, William Mullins, John Hodgson, Edward
Parks, Edward Clud, Richard Lloyd. Tho: Aires, John Stone, and Edward Winslow,
Citizens of London, be the first sixteen Persons, -- out of whom the said
sixteen Persons, or the greater number of them shall choose one of the said
sixieene to be President, -- another to be Treasurer.

-- They, or any nine of them, -- to appoint a Common Seal. A Collection.
-- And -- be it Enacted -- That a general Collection be made for the
purposes* beforesaid, through all England and Wales. -- And -- that the
Ministers -- read this Act -- and exhort the people to a cheerful --
Contribution -- to so pious a Work. --

Hen: Scobell, Clerie, Parliamenti.

Ezr. 7.27.
Blessed be Jehovah the God of Heaven, who has stirreh up such a thing as
this, in the heart of Parliament of England, to promote the Gospel, amongst
those West-Indians in New England: and into the hearts of the Ministers of
several Colleges in Cambridge, Cambridge and Oxfords Letters for that
Collection.
and of the Delegates of the Universitie of Oxford, to provoke the Ministers of
England and Wales, to stir up their Congregations to a liberal Contribution of
pecuniarie helps -- toward the promotion of so glorious undertaking: As by
their Letters may more fully appear. Dated at Cambridge, October. 24. 1649.

Subscribed, Subscribers to Cambridge Letter.
Ant. Tuckney Procanc. T. Hill, Io. Arrowsmith, Benj. Whitchcock, S. Bolton, W.
Spurston, La. Seaman, Rich. Love, Rich. Minshall, W. Del, Rich. Vines.

Oxford dated October. 22. 1649. To Oxfords.
Signed in the Name and by the Authority of the Delagates -- Ed: Reynolds,
Vice. Canc. OXON.

I wish those pithy, savoury Letters, may be read, for the more affecting the
Hearts of all Godly people, that they may not sow sparingly, but liberally, as
hoping for a Harvest and reaping plentifully.

Conclusion with Application to us.
Thus you have heard the joyful Relation of the Conversion of many Indians,
both in the East, and in the West; and evident Confirmations of both. And now,
is this nothing to you, all ye that read, or hear of those things. Iam. 1.12.


Is there no Application hereof that we should make, for our own further
profit and Edification? Surely, as every Word of God, is for our 2 Timothy 3.16.
good; All Scripture being by inspiration of God, is profitable.

So also are all the Works of God; Especially such Glorious Works of God as
these are; [which his very Enemies Act. 4.16
may be enforced to confess, that Digitus Dei hic: This is the Finger of God;
the Lords mighty Work indeed.] If then your eyes be not Act. 28.27.
closed from seeing, and if you have ears to hear; These wonderful Works,
may be profitable, for your 1 Instruction, 2 Reproof, or Conviction, 3
Correction or Reformation, and for 2 Timothy 3.16.
leading you on in Righteousness, unto Persection.

The first Use: Use of Instruction.
This may instruct us, that the Lord is exceeding merciful, gracious, and
compassionate indeed; as the Father of the Prodigal, before Confession made,
runs to him, having bowels of mercy, falls on his neck, and Luke 15.20.
kisseth him. So here, as he says, Isa. 65.1.
I am found of them, that asked not after me. These Indians, not first asking
for the Gospel; by means of our English, and of the Dutch Plantations, (which
hereby he greatly favors) the LORD sends, and offers the Gospel, and Grace
to them. Then certainly, every one that seeks after enjoyment of Gods Love in
Christ, and follows on, shall surely find. Mat. 7.8. H^s. 6.3.

There is no cause for such to despair, though you have been as base, or baser
then the Prodigal, or Jews, or Heathen.

[Such may see some sweet encouragements and Directions, in a Book called,
Printed for Mr. Brewster close by Paul's at the three Bibles.
A store house of Cases of Conscience, Page 25.29. to 39. Newly Published.

The second Use: Use for Conviction.
This Relation may be for Reproof and Conviction of Multitudes both English
and Dutch, who have long enjoyed the Gospel, and have not so prized it, nor
brought forth such fruit, as these Indians, that have enjoyed it but a short
time.

O Read this over again, and Try 2 Cor. 13.5.
your selves whether ye be indeed 1 These. 1.3. 2 These. 1.3.
effectually believers, or but Gal. 5.6.
Temporary believers. O be ye convinced: and the Lord convince you.

How sad for thee is it, if Publicans Mat. 21.31, 32.
and Harlots, if Witches and Worshippers of Devils, (as many Indians were,)
shall enter into the Kingdom of God, and ye shall Lu. 13.28.
see it, and be shut out? Except ye Repent.

Use, for Correction.
The third Use: For Reformation; Remember how far thou art fallen from such
Zeal, Love, Desire, and other good Affections that were once in thee; and
Repent: and seek a sure Foundation for thy Building, and consider what it will
cost thee, if thou beginnest not in time, or, if thou beginnest without a Mat.
7.26
sure Foundation: Least, the Kingdom of God be suddenly taken from thee; and
thy Amos 8.9.
Sunset at noone. Consider the Lord says, Jer. 3.12.22.
Return, O backsliders, I will heal you, for I am merciful, and gracious, --
I Eze 33.11.
delight not in the death of a sinner. Why will ye die?

Luke 13.34.
How often would I have gathered you? Say Hos. 14.2, 3.
Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously. Jer. 3.22.
Behold, to thee do we return. Do thus especially before, and after Sermon:
wait on the most lively affecting means. And the Lord give thee a waiting
Spirit; remembering him in his ways; Isa. 64 5.
After Sermons, get a part, and ponder it seriously. 1 These. 5.17.
O quench not the spirit.

Use.
The fourth and last Use: Remember often, that when thou have done all thou
can, that that art an unprofitable servant. Luke 17.10.
Yea, that all thy Prayers, and hearing, and other good deeds, are so stained
with the evil of thy Mar. 7.21
unclean heart, that all thy Isa. 64.6.
righteousnesses, are but as a menstruous bloody clout. And that thou are quite
undone in all thy duties, if there be not the Rev. 8.3.5.
incense of Jesus Christ. And, that God, (against whom thou have rebelled and
fought,) has Jo. 3.16.17.
so loved the world, that sent his son not to condemn, but to save, all that
come to him, and believe in him; that will receive him, for their Savior,
Teacher, and King: and that none of these shall Jo. 6.35*37.
perish.

And though thou art never so poor, and reproached, and persecuted; yet if it
be for Christ's sake, thou shall receive a hundred fold, Mat. 19.28.
at the Regeneration of the World* [when thou shall Rev. 5.10
Reign with him a thousand Of this Thousand Years, a Book is newly printed
for Mr. Brewster beforesaid*
years, Rev. 20.4. Romans 8.17.
and thou shall have everlasting life. Here it is best to leave thee.

PSALM. 107.8.15.21. -- O that men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and
for his wonderful Works. --


Part of another Letter, writ by Mr. ELIOT, to Mr. HUHG PETER'S.
SIR;
I Have a Request to you in the behalf of these poor Indians, We are about to
make a Town, and bring them to a Cohabitation and Civilitie; For the
accomplishment whereof, we want a Magazine of all sorts of Edge-tooles, and
Instruments fit for Husbandry, for Clothing, etc. As Mr. Pelham, and Mr.
Winslow can inform you: and I think the best way to be supplied, is, -- to
gather a Collection of the things themselves: which any man can better spare
out of his Shop, then half so much money to buy them. -- So shall I, and all
these poor Indians, rest engaged, to pray to the God of Heaven. -- etc.

Your loving Brother, and Fellow Labourer in the Lords Work, I. ELIOT.
Roxbury October. 12. 1649.
FINIS.
ERRATA:
He that has suffered by his own Errata, is desired that with his Pen he will
correct these. viz. in Title Page read Iunij Annot. Page 2. end, put out, --
Secundo, Page 5, end, read both men. Page 15. line 5. read We found -- Page 25.
line 7. read, Mr. Mahew. Page 26. line 20. read, seek unto it.


