The Humble Petition of WILLIAM JENKIN sometimes Minister at Christ-Church
London, Prisoner in the year, 165^. Presented to the Parliament.
Most humbly Shows:
THat your Petitioner, is unfainedly sorrowful for all his late miscarriages,
whether testified against him, or acknowledged by him, and for the great and
sinful unsuitableness of them to his Calling and Condition. That upon earnest
seeking of God, and diligent inquiring into his will, your Petitioner is
convinced, that the alteration of Civil Governments, are ordered by, and
founded upon the wise and righteous Providence of God, who removes Kings, and
sets up Kings, rules in the Kingdoms of men, and gives them to whomsoever
he will.

That the providence of this God, have in the judgment of your Petitioner, as
evidently appeared in the removing of others from, and investing your Honors
with the Government of this Nation, as ever they appeared in the taking away,
or bestowing of any Government in any History of any Age in the world.

That he apprehends that a refusal to be subject to this present Authority,
under the pretense of upholding the Title of any one upon Earth, is a refusal
to aquiesse in the wise and righteous pleasure of God, such an opposing of the
Government set up by the Sovereign Lord of Heaven and earth, as none can have
peace, either in acting in, or suffering for; and that your Petitioner looks
upon it as his Duty, to yield to this Authority, all active and cheerful
Obedience in the Lord, even for Conscience sake, to promise (he being required)
truth and fidelity to it, and to hold forth the Grounds of his so doing to any,
as God sall call him thereunto.

That though an Imprisonment, accompanied with the loss of estate, and to be
followed (without your gracious prevention) with a speedy Arraignment, before
an High and Eminent Judicatory, are far from being pleasing to Flesh and
Blood; and though the enjoyment of your Grace and Favor be a blessing most
deserving to be reckoned among the best of Temporals, yet that neither the
feeling or fearing of the former, nor the expectation of the latter, could have
induced your Petitioner against the light of his own judgment, and the
prepondering part of his own Conscience to have made, or presented this
acknowledgement; he sadly forecasting, that a whole skin is but a contemptible
recompense for a wounded Conscience.

That nevertheless (he trusts) he shall be excutable in tendering thus far,
even his outward condition, as to represent to your Honors, that he is in most
apparent danger of his irreparable loss of his health (the sweetest of outward
blessings) unless by your gracious Grant, be may speedily enjoy a more free and
open Air, then this his close confinement will allow him.

And this Christian Favor (which even for Christ's sake your poor Petitioner
most humbly begs) your Honors are as able to enlarge, even to a pardoning of
his offenses, and a perfect releasing of him, from his imprisonment, as he is
submissively forward in desiring them, though confessedly far from deserving
them.

He nevertheless promising, that your compassionate affording hereof, shall be
a strong and standing engagement upon him, daily beseeching the heart-making,
and heart-changing God, that all those who either through former
accustomedness, or present inadvertancy, do not clearly discern the mind of
God concerning the Alteration of this Government, may by observing your prime
and pious industry, to advance throughout this Commonwealth, the power of
godliness, a Scripture Reformation, and the Truth as it is in Jesus, be won to
a yielding to your Honors, conscionable obedience, and not only in word, but
in heart and life, may be true and faithful to this present Government.

WILLIAM JENKIN.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament.] That Mr. William Jenkin be
pardoned, both for Life and Estate, for and in respect of the Treasons, and
Crimes, whereof he is accused; and that Mr. Attorney General be authorized and
required to prepare a pardon in common form for that purpose, to be passed
under the great Seal of England, and that the Lords Commissioners for the great
Seal be authorized and required to pass the same under the great Seal
accordingly.

Resolved upon the Question by the Parliament.] That Mr. Wilham Jenkin be
forthwith discharged of his Imprisonment, and Bail, and that his Estate be
discharged of, and from Sequestration; and the Commissioners for compounding,
and other Officers are to take notice hereof, and observe the same accordingly.

Upon several humble Petitions of Mr. Thomas Cafe, Mr. Ralph Robinson, and Mr.
Thomas Watson Ministers, the Parliament did grant unto each of them the like
Pardon for life and Estate, and discharged them from Imprisonment, and the
Sequestration of their Estates.

Upon the humble Petition of Mr. Arthur Jackson Minister, the Parliament
granted him a Pardon for his Life and Estate. Upon Mr. Attorney Generals Report
of the humble and penitent Demeanor of Dr. Roger Drake, at his trial at the
High Court of Justice, confessing the Treasons laid to his charge, and his
bumble Petition, the Parliament did pardon him for Life and Estate, and ordered
his release out of Prison, and his Estate discharged from Sequestration.

The Parliament upon Report by Mr. Attorney General, of the like deportment of
Livetenant Colonel Iackson, Livetenans Colonel Joseph Vaughan, and Captain Hugh
Massey. The Parliament likewise Ordered for each of them a Pardon for Life and
Estate, and discharged them from Imprisonment, and their Estates from
Sequestration.


