A HELP FOR THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURE.

Intended chiefly for the assistance and information of those that use
constantly every day to read some part of the Bible, and would gladly always
understand what they read if they had some man to help them.

The first part.

Containing certain short notes of exposition upon the five books of Moses, to
wit, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomie: Wherein First, all
such passages in the Text are explained as were thought likely to be questioned
by any Reader of ordinary capacity; Secondly, in many clauses those things are
discovered which are needful and useful to be known, and not so easily at the
first reading observed; and Thirdly, many places that might at first seem to
contradict one another are reconciled.

By ARTHUR JACKSON, Preacher of Gods word in Woodstreet, LONDON.

MATT. 24. 15. Who so reads let him understand.

Act. 8. 30. 31. And Philip ran thither to him and heard him read the Prophet
Esaias, and said, Understandest thou what thou read? And he said, How can I
except some man should guide me?

Omnes qui legimus nitimur hoc indagare atque comprehendere quod voluit ille
quem legimus.

Aug. Confess. lib. 12. cap. 18. Printed by Roger Daniel, Printer to the
University of Cambridge: And are to be sold at the sign of the Angel in
Lumbards;treet.

ANNO DOM. MDCXLIII.

To my well*beloved friends and neighbors of my charge in WOOD STREET LONDON.
Right dearly beloved in the Lord,
THis poor work of mine, the first fruits of my labors in this kind, must
needs pass through your hands to the public view, not only in regard of the
special interest you have in me, whom your selves were pleased many years
since to choose to be your Pastor to feed your souls, but also in regard the
work it self was at first collected, and composed purposely for your service
and use.

It is now above twenty years since the Lord was pleased to open a door unto
me for the preaching of the Gospelof Christ amongst you, wherein, though with
much weakness, I have endeavored to the utmost of my power, I bless God, to
build you up in the knowledge of God and of Christ* and need no other witnesses
then yourselves, that I have not sought yours but you, as having indeed from my
first entrance amongst you resolved with the Apostle, very gladly to spend, and
to be spent for you, though the more abundantly I loved you the less I were
loved by you.

Amongst other ways wherein I have studied to be serviceable to your souls, it
pleased God to put into my heart that I would undertake the unfolding of such
passages of the holy Scripture as were somewhat more difficult and obscure to
such as would come in and partake of my labors therein; and the end I
propounded to my self in this was, both that I my self might hereby be the
better enabled in public also to declare unto you the whole counsel of God,
as occasion was offered; and that you likewise might with the more advantage
and comfort exercise your selves in your private reading of those sacred
volumes.

Now having for several years spent some time every Lords day in this
imploiment, I was at length importuned by some friends, that were partakers of
my labors therein, to prepare those Annotations for the Press, which were the
chief substance of that which I had collected for that service. They alleged
what satisfaction and comfort themselves had received in the hearing of them,
and what an advantage it might be both to them and others, if they might have
them ready at hand at all times to inform them in any thing they scrupled in
their private reading; and so far I was swayed with what they said, that I
resolved in the publishing of one part of them to make trial whether they
would find that approbation and welcome abroad, that might give encouragement
to send ^orth the rest after them.

These indeed come forth in a sad time, when arms are in far more request
then books; but we must herein submit to the good will of God. It has fared
with this Book in this, as with many a traveller that has prepared for a
journey when the sun shined fair, and yet was constrained at last to go forth
in a storm. When I began first to transcribe these Notes for the Press the
sky was clear and shined upon us, and yet now when they should go forth, the
whole kingdom is overspread with a cloud, that is like to pour down showrs of
blood upon the whole land: the Lord give us grace to turn to him, who has
promised to be a refuge from the storm. Well, but yet the book being passed the
Press, and being withal to go upon Gods business, I was unwilling to forbear
the publishing of it, especially when I began to consider, that the drift of it
was to help men to read the Scripture with profit, and that there is never
more need for men to be much in studying Gods word then in troublesome and sad
times, God having there stored up those cordialls for us which in such times
must cheer up the sick fainting spirits of his poor afflicted servants:
unless thy Law had been my delight, says David, Psalm. 119. 92. I then had
perished in my afflictions. Having therefore resolved to publish it, and to
leave the success to the good providence of God, I here present it to you in
the first place, to whom it does of right belong. If it may prove a means to
bring you, whose souls God has committed to my charge, to be in love with the
Scripture, or add any thing to your stock of knowledge and grace, I have if
not all, yet my chief desire. Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God even
our father, which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation and
good hope through grace, comfort your hearts and stablish you in every good
word and work. And so I commend you to Gods grace, and desire likewise your
prayers unto God for him who is

Yours in the surest band of Christian affection ARTHUR JACKSON.

from reading his word, because there are some places they shall meet with
which they shall find above their reach; yet because of this we press t^em to
be the more careful to search diligently for the meaning of what they read,
to be wary of perverting the good word of God, and to that end both to pray
unto Go^ often that he would therein reveal the truth unto them, and to make
use of those for their help whom God has furnished with gifts above others for
the re^olving of such doubts as they shall meet with in their reading.

And indeed that I might be serviceable to the weaker sort of Gods people
herein, have I yielded to publish the^e Annotations, which at first I gathered
for the more private use of my self and some others. Many I know there are that
are careful every day to redeem some time from their worldly employments for
the reading of the Bible, that yet ^eap not that profit they might by their
reading, because they pass over many places which they understand not; and how
useful it would be for them if they had some larger Notes of exposition by
them, then those can be that are in the margin of some Bibles, which they might
jointly read together with the chapter they read, we may ^asily judge by the
advantage which those short marginall notes have yi^lded to those that have
made use of them. Now though I dare not hope to go through such a work as this
would be (neither my strength nor years will allow me to propound such an aim
to my self) yet I hope it will be accepted if I may but contribute somewhat
toward it, and others may perhaps be stirred up to join their help to the same
service.

I have a^ready through Gods assistance passed through the Historical part of
the old Testament, and would hope to go forward if the Lord would be pleased to
remove from us that heavy judgment of the sword, and restore unto us ^eaceable
times. But for the present I could only transcribe for the Press this first
part, upon the five books of Moses; and besides, I am desirous to see what
approbation this may find amongst those whose judgment may be far better
then mine own, before I would adventure to send forth the rest.

There are only two particulars wherein I shall need to give satisfaction for
what I have done. First, I have not at all meddled with the many doubts that
have been raised by Interpreters concerning the different ways of translating
some passages in the Original Text, but have only endeavored to unfold the
meaning of the Text according to our last Translation; only I have for the
most part taken in that reading also which is added in the margin of our
Bibles. If there be any man that stumbles at this, I desire him to consider
that I intended this work chiefly for those that only understand their own
language, and such knotty disputes concerning the Original must needs have
mightily puzzled such readers, but could never have been any way profitable for
them. And this I trust will satisfy him.

Again, having made use of many learned Expositours, in searching out the
meaning of those places that I have undertaken to explain, some may perhaps
wish that I had some way ins^rted their names, as I went along, to the end that
for t^eir better satisfaction those that questioned any exposition might have
had recourse to their works, to peru^e what they had written therein. And the
truth is, that had I from the beginning intended to publish these Notes it is
most like that I should have taken that course: but considering (as I said
before) that I looked chiefly to the satis^^ing of those that are not skilled
in such Authors, I could not think it worth the while to revise the whole book
for the doing of this.

This is all that I have to say; only I shall desire that those that will
vouchsafe to peruse th^se my poor labors, would have a Bible by them, and
still read the text there as they go; for else I dare say they will not find
that benefit by their reading, which observing that course I hope they may find.

I shall leave all to the good blessing of God, and desire that if any good be
done hereby the glory may all redound to him, w^o is able to do much good by
weak means. To him I commend thee, Christian Reader, and rest,

Thine in the Lord Jesus ARTHUR JACKSON.

ERRATA.
Page 133. l* 3. read^ m^nner to appear to him. 135. l. 14 r. me; th^s 152. ^.
25 r. ^^t. 1. 2. 158* l. 2^. r. re^. 171. l. 2. r. Lord Jeh^vah. ^96 l. ^5. r.
Her. 202. l 4 r. Sanctuary and the 204 l. 2^. twinne^. 219. l. 7 del^ most.
244* l. 41. Levit. 1. 261. l. ^. hands 264 l* 20. light holy. 2^6 l. 41.
commended. 278. l. ^4. five sacr ^ices. 30^. l. 30. dwelt. ^^2 l 3. our Go^l.
328. l ^4. ^he tent. 339* l. 18. L^v 2 2. 380. l. ^4. Aaron. 382. l. 30 l ght
holy. 385. l. 40. t wa^. ^97. 35, 38 Suphah. 40^. 14, 15, 20. Ch^mosh 40^. l.
14* right unto; thus. 430. l. 40. thi^ it. 4* 7. l. 33. d^le l. y. 50^. l 41.
pe^son^. 5^7. l* 30. a basket ^48. l. 1. him, l. 14 aff^cted.

ANNOTATIONS On the first book of MOSES called GENESIS.
CHAP. I.
IN the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.] Many of our best
Expositours, and that not without good probability, conceive these words to be
a general proposition concerning the whole creation (which is afterward more
particularly unfolded, by setting down in what time, and in what order and
manner this was done, and what were the several works of the six days;) to
wit, That in the beginning God created the heaven and the earth, that is, that
all things were at first created by God, the heavens, and the earth, and all
the host of them, as it is afterward expressed chap. 2. 1. or the world, and
all therein, as S. Paul spoke, Act. 17. 24. This Moses affirms here in the
first verse; but then how, after what manner, and in what order they were
created, that is afterward related in the following part of the chapter. Yet
others again (and that I think most probably) understand this which is here
said, to be the work of the first days creation, to wit, that God in the
beginning, on the first day, created the heaven, that is, the highest heaven,
the dwelling place of the Angels, called the heaven of heavens, 1. King. 8. 27.
and the earth, that whole confused Chaos of earth and water, which was as yet
without form and void, as it is afterward described in the second verse. And
indeed because it is said, Job 38. 6, 7. that the morning stars sang
together, and the sons of God shouted for joy, when God laid the foundations
of the earth, which is meant of the Angels; it seems most probable, that this
highest heaven, and so the Angels together with it, were first created, and so
was a main part of the work of the first day. It is true, there is no mention
made of the angels, neither here, nor in any other part of the chapter; but
that is, because Moses purposely intended to relate only the creation of
things corporal and visible, and that happily as having regard therein to the
rudeness and weakness of that infant-Church of the Jews, for whom he wrote
this history. For that the angels were at first created by God of nothing, as
all other things were, is evident by many other places of Scripture, as Psalm.
104. 4. Who makes his angels spirits. Col. 1. 16. By him were all things
created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth, visible, and invisible,
etc. Psalm. 148. 2* 5. Praise ye him all his angels, let them praise the name of
the Lord, for he commanded, and they were created. And though we cannot
expressly say, on which of the six days the angels were created, because there
is no express mention made of them* yet it is most likely that they were
created together with the highest heavens, the chief place of their habitation;
and that on the first day, because then at the laying of the foundations of the
earth the angels did praise their Creator, as was before noted, Job 38.

Verse. 2. And the earth was without form, and void.] That is, the earth was on
the first day created, and when it was at first created, it had neither the
shap^ nor ornaments that it has now: it was not round, solid, dry,
distinguished here and there with valleys and hills; it was without form, a rude
and indigested lump; and again it was void, or empty, not having trees, herbs,
and slowers to adorn it, nor beasts, birds, or people to inhabit it* as it has
now.

And darkness was upon the face of the deep.] By the deep, is meant that
confused Chaos, or indigested Mass of earth and water* of which before he had
spoken; by darkness* is meant a mere privation of light: this Chaos or deep
was wholly hid and involved in darkness; in the whole surface of it* there was
no light at all, wherewith it should be seen.

And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.] The word here
translated moved, is metaphorical, taken from the motion of birds, that
flutter over their young, and implies that the holy Ghost did sustain and
cherish this Chaos, or Deep, by his secret, but effectual power and motion,
even as birds do their new-hatcht young ones, by so fluttering over them.

Verse. 3. And God said let there be light.] That is, God the Father, having
created of nothing, this confused Chaos of earth and water, did the same first
day create also the light, which was a bright shining quality upon the face of
this deep, whereby it became apparent and visible; and this he did by saying,
Let there be light, that is, by his almighty word and command, Psalm. 33. 6. By
the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the
breath of his mouth: not any word uttered or spoken after the manner of men,
but by his ^ssentiall Word, the Son of God, who is the word and wisdom of
the Father. John 1. 1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God. 1. Cor. 1. 24. Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God, and by whom the Father made all things whatsoever. John 1. 3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
made.

Verse. 4. And God divided the light from the darkness.] Hereby is employed* 1.
That God did not wholly abolish the darkness all over the deep, but divided
the light from the darkness, so that whilst there was light on one part of the
deep, it was still dark on the other. 2. That he ordained that there should be
for ever a natural and formal repugnancy and contrariety between them, and
that they should mutually succeed and expel one the other, that so every where
about the b^dy of the earth it should be successively, as the light and
darkness moved and followed each other, sometimes day, and sometimes night. 3.
That even in the three first days of the worlds creation, before the sun was
made (the motion whereof does now measure out the day) there should be a
successive going* and returning of light and darkness, according to the time of
day and night, as well as afterward when the sun was created to give light
unto the world, as it moved about the body of the earth.

Verse. 5. And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night.]
That is, he made this succession of light and darkness to be for those
distinct times* which his will was should afterward be called Day and Night, to
wit, by Adam when he gave names unto all things.

And the evening and the morning were the first day.] The evening, which is the
beginning of the night, and the morning, which is the beginning of the day, are
here put for the whole time of night and day, which joined together are said to
make one entire day, to wit, in a large sense comprehending both night and day,
which is with us the space of 24 hours: whereas the time whiles the light
shines is the day strictly taken, in which sense Christ says, There are
twelve hours in the day, John 11. 9. Now the evening is set before the
morning, because darkness was in time before the light, and thereupon the Jews
always began their large day at evening: Levit. 23. ^2. From even unto even
shall ye celebrate your Sabbath.

Verse. 6. And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters,
etc. The firmament God called Heaven, verse. 8. It is called in the Hebrew an
expansion, or stretching forth, because the Heavens are stretched forth as a
curtain. Isai. 40. 22. God stretches forth the heavens as a curtain, and
spreads them out as a tent to dwell in: and in Greek, Latin, and English a
firmament; because of the constant and enduring firmness of it which is not
worn with its continual motion, but remains such as it was framed of God in
the beginning. So that by the firmament here is meant, whatsoever is contained
in that vast space from the surface of the earth, to the uppermost heavens,
with the Regions of the air and the heavenly Orbs, etc. Now of this firmament
it is said, that it was made in the midst of the waters, and that to divide the
waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the
firmament; and from hence many learned men have concluded, that doubtless a
great part of those waters that did at first cover the face of the deep were on
this day lifted up by the almighty command of God, above all the heavenly orbs
comprehended under this word firmament, and so there continue still as in the
place appointed them of God, and are spread as an orb of water round about the
highest part of the visible heavens. But because the main reason whereon they
ground this opinion is, that by the words of Moses they say it is plain, that
the whole firmament must be in the midst of the waters, and must divide the
waters that are beneath from the waters that are above; and this reason must
needs also overthrow this conceit of theirs, seeing it is manifest that there
are some waters always in the middle region of the air, even when it does not
rain (whence it is noted as one of the mavelous works of Gods providence, Job
26. 8. He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent
under them) and in this regard it cannot be said that the whole firmament,
comprehending the regions of the air as well as the heavenly orbs, does divide
the waters above from the waters beneath, therefore it is certainly more
probably held that it is said here that the firmament should divide the waters
which were under the ^irmament from the waters which were above the firmament;
not because there are any waters above the heavens, where the sun, moon, and
stars are set, which are a part of the firmament, verse. 17. but because they
are above that part of the firmament, which is from the face of the earth and
sea to the clouds, which is also called the open firmament of the heaven,
verse. 20. for by the waters which are above, watery clouds are meant, as is
evident in many other places of Scripture: Psalm. 18. 11. His pavillion round
about him were dark waters, and thick clouds of the skies. Psalm. 104. 3. Who
lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds his
chariot, etc. Psalm. 147. 8. Who covers the heaven with clouds, who prepares
rain for the earth. Jer. 10. 13. When he utters his voice, there is a
multitude of waters in the heavens. And so the firmament is said to be in the
midst of the waters, because part of those waters of the deep forementioned
were lifted up by the mighty power of God, and spread abroad into thin
vapors bound up in thick clouds, Job 26. 8. and so that part of the firmament
wherein the birds ^ly (verse. 20.) was in the midst of the waters, and divided
the waters above from the waters beneath.

Verse. 9. And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
unto one place, and let the dry land appear.] God having the first day created
the earth, but as yet without form, verse. 2. a rude and indigested lump of a
slimy and muddie substance, and drowned, as it were, in a deep gulf of waters,
now on the third day it was by the same almighty power of God compacted into a
solid Mass and received its form, and so the waters descended to the place
that God had found^d for them, Psalm. 104. 8. They go up by the mountains, they
go down by the valleys to the place thou have founded for them; to wit, those
concavities, and vast hollow places in the body of the earth, wherein the Seas
and other waters are now held, called therefore the Storehouses where God laid
up the depth. Psalm. 33. 7, He gathers the waters of the sea together as an
heap; he lays up the depth in Storehouses: and thus the earth and water
together made an entire Globe. Nor need we be troubled that the waters are
said to be gathered together into one place: for besides that all seas and
rivers are but as so many branches and arms of the great Ocean where into they
all run (E^cl. 1. 7. All the rivers run into the Sea, yet the sea is not
full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again.)
the meaning of those words may be only this, that the waters under the heaven
were to be gathered and run together, each to their several place.

Verse. 11. And God said, Let the ^arth bring forth, etc.] And thus the Lord in
great vvisdome, 1. caused the earth to yield her increase before the sun was
created, by the heat whereof now the earth is vvarmed and so does fructify
that hereby we might learn to ascribe the fruits of the ^arth to God rather
then to the sun; 2. He made ready all kind of food for the living creatures
that were afterward created on the sixth day.

Verse. 12. And the earth brought forth grass and herb yielding seed, etc.]
Hereby is meant both that God did then by his almighty word give to the earth
a power to bring forth all kind of herbs and plants and trees unto the end of
the world, and also that he did at the present cause it actually to bring them
forth, and that in their full perfection, the herb yielding seed, and the tree
yielding fruit (as man afterward was created not a child, but a perfect man)
and therefore we see that when the serpent tempted him (which was
immediately after his creation) the tree of knowledge of good and evil had
fruit fully ripe upon it. Chap. 3. 6. The woman saw that the tree was good for
food, and that it was pleasant for the eyes; which is indeed an argument of
much weight to prove that the world began with the Autumn, and that at
first the year was counted to begin then.

And God saw that it was good.] That is, God approved them all to be good. And
indeed even those poisonous herbs and plants which were on this day created
are good and useful in their kind, and meat for some creatures; nor should
have ever been hurtful to man, if man had not sinned.

Verse. 14. And let them be for signs.] That is, to signify things to come,
both natural and ordinary, and supernatural and extraordinary. For so we find
by continual experience, that the diverse color and hew of the Sun and Moon,
as likewise the rising and setting of diverse Constellations of the stars, do
foreshew fair and foul weather, storms and tempests, etc. and hereby both
seamen and husbandmen and physicians receive very helpful insinuations of the
fittest opportunities for their several affairs: yea oftentimes by Eclipses,
Comets, and sometimes by other supernatural signs, God foreshews the heavy
calamities he intends to bring upon men, insomuch that those that dwell in the
utmost parts of the earth are afraid at his tokens, Psalm. 65. 8. so it is said,
Luke 21. 25, 26. There shall be signs in the Sun and in the Moon, and in the
Stars, and upon the earth distress of Nations with perplexity, the sea and
the waves roaring, men's hearts failing them for fear. and Act. 2. 19, 20. I will
show wonders in heaven abov^, and signs in the earth beneath, blood, and fire,
and vapor of smoke. The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon
into blood: and yet this is no warrant for fortune tellers and such as by
searching under what Planet men are born will undertake to for^tell and divine
what good and evil shall befall them both in their life and death: for this is
a vanity and wickedness, which the Sc^ipture does every where deride and
condemn, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. There shall not be found among you any one that makes
his son or daughter to pass through the fire, or that uses divination, or
an observer of times, or an enchanter, or a witch. Isa. 47. 13. Let now the
Astrologers, the starregazers, the monthly prognosticatours stand up and save
thee from these things that shall come upon thee.

And for seasons.] To wit, Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn, which come by
the course of the Sun, as that approaches nearer to us* or goes further from
us: yea God has appointed the Moon also for seasons, Psalm. 104. 19. for
thereby we account the months and their several seasons; and the Stars
likewise and Constellations which arise and set, some at one time of the year,
and some at another.

Verse. 16. And God made two great lights.] However the Sun is indeed the
greatest of all the heavenly lights* being 166. times bigger then the earth,
yet it is well known to the learned, that the Moon is the least but one of all
the Planets, and that it has little or no light of it self, but is made
lightsome by the Suns shining upon it, and so by re^lection shines upon the
earth, as a looking-glass will do. But Moses here speaks of the Sun and
Moon, as they appear to the eye of man* to which the Moon seems the greatest
light next to the Sun, because it is nea^est to the earth of all the Planets.

Verse. 20. And God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving
creature that has life, and fow^ that may fly.] Some Expositours hold that
this place does no more prove that the waters were the matter of the which
the fovvls of the air were made, or the place in which they were created,
and out of which they came, then the same can be proved concerning the earth,
because it is said, chap. 2. 19. Out of the ground the Lord God formed every
beast of the field, and every fowl of the air. The meaning therefore is only
this, that as God commanded the waters to bring forth the moving creatures, to
wit, that live in the water, as fishes, etc. so he also commanded that fowls
should fly above the earth in the open firmament. But yet considering that the
nature and quality of fish and fowl are so like in many regards, and that the
one do move in the air much as the other do move in the waters, I see not but
that these words, Let the waters bring forth abundantly, may have reference not
only to the fish that swim in the water, but also to fowl that were to fly
in the air; especially if by the water we understand the upper waters, to wit,
the vapors or mists that arose out of the waters which brought forth fowl
abundantly, even as the waters did the fish, and the earth afterward the
beasts. As for the place chap. 2. 19. Out of the ground the Lord God formed
every beast of the field, and every fowl of the air; either these words, and
every fowl of the air, must have r^ference only to those words, the Lord God
formed, and not to those, out of the ground, as if it had been thus expressed,
out of ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, and likewise the
Lord God formed every fowl of the air; or else we must hold that the fowl are
there said to have been formed out of the ground; because though the waters did
at first bring them forth, yet there was in those waters of which they were
made a mixture of earth, and in that regard it might be said also that they
were formed out of the ground.

Verse. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our image after our likeness.]
Having made the whole world for man's use, at the last the Lord created man, for
whom all those things were beforehand provided. And this he is here said to
have done, not without deliberation and consultation, Let us make man, etc.
wherein God speaks of himself after the manner of men, thereby only to imply
the excellency of the work he had now in hand. The persons consulting are
doubtless the holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, those
three in heaven, which are one God, the Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost,
1. John. 5. 7. who resolve to make man after their likeness and in their
image; not because God took upon him a humane shape when he created man, but
because, in regard of the spiritual essence of his reasonable and
understanding soul, in regard of his lordship and dominion over the creatures,
but especially in regard of his wisdom, righteousness and holiness he was
made like unto God, and resembled his Creator: Col. 3. 10. Put on the new man,
which is renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that created him; and
Ephesians. 4. 24. Which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness.

Verse. 29. And God said behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, etc.]
This grant of the fruits of the earth to be for food both for man and beast may
seem to imply that in the state of innocence, wherein man was at first created,
there should have been no other meat requisite or desired for man's sustenance.
But that this continued thus until the Flood, when the eating of flesh was
expressly allowed, Genesis 9. 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for
you, etc. seems not so probable: for 1. they wore the skins of beasts, and
therefore it is likely they eat also the flesh; 2. had they not made use of
cattle for food in those sixteen hundred years and upwards before the Flood,
the earth would have been overburdened because of their great increase; 3. they
then offered sacrifices of their cattle, Genesis 4. 4. Abel brought of the
firstlings of his flock, etc. and they used not to sacrifice to God any thing
but what God had granted to them for their own use.

Verse. 31. God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good.]
Hereby it appears, that even those wicked angels, whom we call devils, were at
first created holy and good, though afterward they abode not in the truth, but
sinned. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil, he abode not in the truth
because there is no truth in him, etc. 2. Pet. 2. 4. God spared not the angels
that sinned, etc. and so kept not their first estate, but left their
habitation, and were thrown down into hell. How soon after their creation it
was that they sinned, the Scripture does no where make known; only that it was
before Adam and Eve sinned we are si^e* because by the devil in the serpent
they were seduced, as is afterward related in the third chapter.

CHAP. II.
ANd all the host of them.] That is, all the creatures both in heaven and in
earth: which are here called an host or an army, because there is of them an
innumerable multitude, many several troops, and all placed and ranked in
admirable order, even to the astonishment of those that behold and consider it,
and are all under the command of God their Creator, and as his servants, Psalm.
119. 91. stand always ready as in battel-array to execute his will, to fight
against and destroy his enemies if he speaks but the word. Esai. 45. 12. I have
made the earth, and created man upon it: I, even my hands, have stretched out
the heavens, and all their host have I commanded. Judge. 5. 20. They fought from
heaven, the stars in their courses fought against Sisera: And hence God is so
frequently called in the Scripture the Lord God of hosts, Psalm. 95. 5. and
(where the Hebrew word is retained) the Lord of Sabbath, Romans 9. 29.

Verse. 2. He rested on the seventh day from all the works which he had made.]
That is, he did not on the seventh day create any thing as he had done on the
foregoing six days, because all was already finished which he had purposed to
make. The Creator of the ends of the earth faints not, neither is neary,
Isa. 40. 28. only it is said that he rested on the seventh day, because he
ceased from the work of creation: for as concerning the sustaining and
governing of the creatures, the Father works hitherto, and Christ works,
John 5. 17.

Verse. 3. And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it.] The second word,
sanctified, is added by way of explaining the first word, blessed; and the
meaning is, that God set apart the seventh day for the special work of his
service, and blessed it, with this singular privilege, that it should be wholly
consecrate to him and his worship. Some Expositours indeed hold that there was
not any law imposed upon Adam and his posterity for the keeping of the seventh
day holy, till at mount Sinai it was commanded the Israelites; and so they take
this here to be mentioned by Moses by way of Prolepsis, to wit, that because
God rested from his work of creation upon the seventh day, therefore he did
afterward ordain, that every seventh day of the week should be kept holy by
the Israelites as a Sabbath of rest unto the Lord. But the words will not bear
this exposition; and there are many reasons besides that do evidently enough
discover that God did from the first creation appoint that the seventh day
should be kept as a holy Sabbath: as 1. Because it is expressly spoken of the
very next day after the Lord had ended the worlds creation: Now if that were a
Sabbath sanctified and set apart for holy employments, we cannot think that
this ordinance beginning then was not afterward continued. 2. Because it is no
way probable that the Church had for so many ages before the giving of the Law
no set day set apart for holy employments. What though there be no mention made
in the Scriptures of the Patriarchs keeping a Sabbath? Many things they did
which are not mentioned: and how could the distinction of several weeks be
kept till the Law? yea, how could they have known the weekly seventh day from
the creation, if it had not been constantly kept from the Creation till that
time? 3. Because it is plain that the Jews did keep the Sabbath defore the Law
was given: for before the Law was given, that was spoken by Moses, Exodus
16. 23. To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord. and 4. Because
the Apostle Heb. 4. 3. does evidently enough imply that there was a rest
which Gods people did observe sin^e the finishing of Gods work from the first
foundation of the world.

Verse. 4. These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, etc.] That
is, in this order and manner, as has been declared, were the heavens and the
earth* at first created and made, and all the plants and herbs of the field,
when as yet there had been no such thing growing thereon according to the
course of nature as now they do.

Verse. 5. For the Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, etc.] As
if he should say, it must needs be yielded that God did at first by his
absolute power cause these things to grow out of the earth, for there had
been as yet none of those ordinary means whereby the earth is now made
fruitful, no rain to water it, no man to till it.

Verse. 6. But there went up a mist, etc.] Junius reads this negatively, Nor
went there up a mist, etc. and takes it to be a further confirmation of that
which before was said, that the creating of things by the mere word of God
cannot be denied* because as yet there had not been so much as a mist to water
the ground. But if we read it, as in our Translation, it must be understood
(as I conceive) to be added by way of preventing an objection: for whereas it
might be said, How then continued they to grow after they were created,
being there was neither rain to water the earth, nor man to till it? Moses
tells us, There went up a mist, etc.

Verse. 7. And breathed into his nostrils the breath of life.] That is* by his
almighty power the Lord did create and infuse into the yet livelesse body of
Adam a living reasonable soul, which being instantly united to the body in an
incomprehensible manner, his body was quickened and enlivened, which soon
appeared by the breath in his nostrils. Thus the soul was not, as the body,
made of the earth, but created of nothing, and so joined to the body.

Verse. 8. The Lord God planted a garden Eastward in Eden.] To wit, on the
third day of the Creation, when the Lord commanded the earth to bring forth
all herbs, trees, and plants vvherevvith it is now adorned: for as he then
made the earth all over to bring forth some kind of increase or other for the
use of living creatures, and of Adams posterity, as they should increase; so
for the present habitation of these our first Parents, he then also made in
Eden, a country that lay Eastvvard from Canaan, mentioned often in the
Scriptures, Isa. 35. 12. Ezekiel. 27. 23. a most goodly pleasant and fruitful
garden, abounding with all things that could be therein desired, and so
curiously ordered in every respect as if it had been planted by art, and
hereinto Adam was put. This Garden is by the Greek Interpreters called
Paradise, and is in the Scripture termed the garden of the Lord, Genesis 13. 10.
and for the pleasantness of it made a figure of the heaven of heavens, which
is therefore called Paradise, Luke 23. 43. To day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. 2. Cor. 12. 4. He was caught up into Paradise, etc.

Verse. 9. The tree of life, etc.] This tree was so called, 1. because it was a
memorial or monitorie sign of that life which he had received from God; 2.
because it was a sacramental sign annexed to the covenant of works, assuring
life and glory upon condition of perfect obedience; 3. as some conceive,
because of the power which God had given it to sustain the body of man in
perfect strength without any decay until they were translated to heavenly
glory; which they take to be the ground of that which is said, Genesis 3. 22. Lest
he take also of the tree of life and eat and live for ever: therefore the Lord
God sent him forth from the garden of Eden.

Verse. 10. And the tree of knowledge of good and evil.] So called, not because
the fruit thereof had any such quality or virtue, that being eaten it would
work in man any increase of knowledge or quickness of wit; but because it was
another sacramental sign annexed to the covenant of works, sealing death and
damnation to them in case of disobedience, and so assuring them of the event
that would follow if contrary to Gods command they should eat of it, namely,
that they should to their cost experimentally know the difference between good
and evil.

Verse. 16. The Lord God commanded the man saying, etc.] Besides the moral law,
the law of Nature written in Adams heart, whereby he knew exactly all things
wherein he was bound to obey his Creator, the Lord gave him also this positive
and particular commandment concerning a thing of it self indifferent, but by
Gods command made unlawful, that the Lords absolute Dominion over him might be
hereby made known, and his disobedience might become the more manifest.

CHAP. III.
NOw the serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field, etc.] That it
was the devil who in and by the serpent did seduce Eve, is plain enough in
other places of Scripture. John 8. 44. Ye are of your father the devil: he was
a murderer from the beginning. 2. Cor. 11. 3. But I fear lest by any means, as
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds, etc. 1. John 3.
8. For the devil sins from the beginning. Rev. 12. 9. That old serpent
called the Devil and Satan which deceives the whole world. But why then does
Moses speak no one word of the devil, but only mentions the serpent? Surely
for the same reason that before he had omitted the express mention both of the
creation and fall of the angels, because his purpose is to report the story
according to the outward visible carriage of it* herein accommodating himself
to the rudeness and capacity of that infant Church, who had need of milk, not
of strong meat; and of this serpent it is said, that he was more subtle then
any beast of the field, to imply the reason why the devil made choice of this
instrument rather then any other.

And he said unto the woman.] The serpent, speechless in himself, had his
mouth opened by Satan, who caused him to speak, or spoke in and by him, as the
Lord by an angel opened the mouth of Balaams ass. Numb. 22. 28. And the Lord
opened the mouth of the ass, and she said, etc. Why the woman was not
astonished to hear a dumb creature speak, is but a curious and causeless
question: there is nothing said here to the contrary but that she might at
first be afraid, and yet afterward be imboldned to talk with him.

Verse. 5. For God does know that in the day that ye eat thereof, then your eyes
shall be opened, etc. That is, God knows that upon the eating of this fruit ye
shall obtain a further, yea a divine, degree of knowledge, equal unto that of
God himself, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: and thus the serpent does
cunningly wrest to a wrong sense, the name formerly given unto this tree, but
upon another ground.

Verse. 7. And the eyes of them both were opened, etc.] The eyes neither of body
nor mind were opened by any virtue or e^ficacie of the fruit they had eaten:
for why then were not the woman's eyes opened so soon as ever she had eaten,
before Adam was seduced? no, this was another kind of opening the eyes, then
that which the serpent promised, to wit, an enlightening of their consciences to
see the enormity of their sin, and the misery whereto they had thereby
brought themselves.

And they knew that they were naked.] Naked both in soul and body, which were
bereaved of the image of God, deprived of his glory, and subjected to
inordinate lusts, and thereupon to shame, according to that, Exodus 32. 25.
Aaron had made them naked to their shame amongst their enemies. Questionless
they saw, and knew that they were naked before; else why is it said, chap. 2.
25. that they were not ashamed? but now they saw it with shame, which they did
not before.

Verse. 8. And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden, in
the cool of the day.] There needs no scruple be made, either of the voice, or
walking of God, if we conceive that he appeared in humane shape, as afterward
usually unto Abraham. And that this was in the cool of the day, is added, not
only to show the time of the day (and it may be meant either of morning or
evening; for in both cool winds are wont to arise) but also to imply by what
means the voice came to them, to wit, by the whisking of the wind.

And Adam and his wife hid themselves, etc.] Being conscious of their sin,
and therefore fearing the Majesty of God, stricken with horror and
amazedness they know not what to do, but do what they can to hide themselves.

Verse. 11. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked?] As if he should
have said, Thou were naked before* without fear or shame; and therefore whence
comes it that thou art now ashamed? surely because thou have eaten of the
forbidden fruit.

Verse. 14. And the Lord God said unto the serpent, etc.] Though Moses names
only the serpent, for the reasons above mentioned, yet both are here
condemned; the serpent as the instrument (even as a father breaks the sword
wherewith his child was slain) and the devil as the chief author: and
therefore is the judgment so expressed, that whilst all is fitted to the serpent
in a literal sense, some particulars (if not all) do most fitly also, though
in a mystical sense, include the curse in^licted on the devil.

Upon thy belly shall thou go, etc.] Either because he had extolled himself
against man, his creeping and feeding on the earth (which before should not
have been ignominious) is accursed and made reproachful now; or (which is more
agreeable to the plain meaning of the words) this going on his belly, and
feeding on dust, was not the natural gate and food of the serpent before, but
now he is adjudged thereto because of this fact.

Verse. 15. And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed.] This is spoken, 1. of the natural Antipathy betwixt
mankind, and those detestable beasts, the serpents; 2. of the natural enmity
betwixt mankind and the devil and his angels (for though through Satan's
su^^iltie, covertly insinuating himself under another person, men do indeed
cleave to him and serve him, yet naturally all men do abhor and sly the
devil as an enemy) 3. of that holy enmity betwixt Christ, together with all
true believers the members of Christ, and the devil and his angels, together
with all the wicked as they are the seed of the serpent* John 8. 44. Ye are of
your father the devil, etc.

It shall bruise thy head.] This is spoken, 1. of men's destroying serpents; 2.
and especially of Christ's destroying the kingdom and power of Satan, For as
much then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself
likewise took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the devil, Heb. 2. 14. whereby also all
believers do become conquerours over those spiritual enemies of their souls.

And thou shall bruise his heel.] This is meant, 1. of the serpents lying in
wait to sting and hurt mankind; 2. of the devils assaulting Christ in his
temptations, a^flictions, death and burial; and the faithful in their
temptations and troubles, which to him and them is but as the bruising of the
heel.

Verse. 16. Unto the woman he said I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy
conception.] That is, thy painful conceptions, or the sorrows of thy
conceptions, faintness, sick fits, peril of abortion, etc.

Thy desire shall be to thy husband.] That is, thy desire shall be subject to
thy husband, upon his will and pleasure all thy desire must depend. For in this
sense the same phrase is used, Genesis 4. 7. concerning Abels subjection to Cain,
as the firstborn. It istrue by the law of creation the woman should have lived
in subordination under her husband and should have been governed by him: for
Adam was first formed, then Eve, 1. Tim. 2. 13. and 1. Co^. 11. 9. Man was not
created for the woman, but the woman for the man: but being here denounced as a
chastisement for sin, it implies a further degree of subjection then that
which should have been by the law of Nature and Creation; as indeed by reason
of the corruption of our nature it is made every where somewhat irksome and
hard to be born, but amongst some a very yoke of bondage.

Verse. 18. And thou shall eat the herb of the field.] And so neither the herbs
or fruits of Paradise.

Verse. 21. Unto Adam also and to his wife did the Lord God make coats of
skins, etc.] This may be meant of the Lords doing this presently, before they
were turned out of Paradise, by the ministry of angels, or how else it pleased
him, to wit, that by the skins of slain beasts he made them garments, and so
clothed them therewith; or rather, that the Lord taught Adam and Eve, and gave
them directions how they should of the skins of beasts make themselves
garments for the covering of their nakedness, and to shelter their bodies from
the injury of the weather: for seeing there is no question to be made, but that
the Lord did immediately teach them the worship of offering sacrifices, as
signs and types of that reconciliation and atonement which was to be expected
in the promised seed (and therefore we read, in the following chapter, of the
Sacrifices that were offered by Cain and Abel) it cannot be thought improbable
that withal direction was given to make them coats of the skins of the beasts
slain. However by this kind of clothing chosen for them, they were taught
betimes not to have so much respect to delicacy as to usefulness in attiring
themselves; 2. in the spoils of those dead beasts to wear the remembrances of
their own mortality, yea of that brutish condition whereinto by their sin
they were fallen. And to this that bitter taunt seems to have reference in the
following verse, Behold the man is become as one of us, to know good and evil,
etc.

Verse. 22. And now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of
life, etc.] Some Expositours conceive that the fruit of the tree of life being
eaten by man should have prevented all decay of natural strength, and have
made him immortal, or at least have kept him in perfect health and strength
until he was taken up from earth into heaven; and that either by means of a
created power and efficacy, which to this end and purpose God had given to this
fruit, or by an extraordinary and supernatural blessing, which God had
ordained should go along with the eating of this fruit: and hence they say it
was that when Adam and Eve had sinned, God now resolved to turn them out of
Paradise that they might not taste of the tree of life, either in mercy, to
prevent their living for ever in misery; or in judgment, that the curse of
Death which God had threatened as the reward of sin might not be prevented by
eating of this fruit. But this conceit is justly rejected by the best
Expositours. It was no ways possible that any created food should frustrate
Gods decree, that Death should be the wages of Sin. Whatever effect might
have followed upon the eating of this ^ruit, had man continued in the state of
Innocence; yet when his body was dead because of sin, as the Apostle speaks,
Romans 8. 10. it was not the eating of this fruit that could make his dead body
to live for ever. The true reason why the Lord cast Adam out of Paradise to
prevent his eating of the tree of life, was doubtless that having by his
disobedience and sin made himself liable to death, he might not now meddle
with this sacramental seal of life and salvation, which now because of sin
he had nothing to do with: Only as before the Lord had upbraided them for
their vain affectation of being like unto him in that ironicall expression,
Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil, meaning that by
his sin they were become most unlike him; so in these words ironically he
upbraids him after the same manner for that certainty of death he had brought
upon himself, determining to cast him out of the garden of Eden, Lest (says
the Lord) he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and
live for ever; not because there was any danger of his living for ever, but in
derision of any such hope or expectation, if happily he should entertain any
such motion, as formerly of gaining an increase of knowledge by eating of the
tree of knowledge of good and evil.

Verse. 24. And he placed at the East and of the garden, etc.] Where was the
entrance into Paradise, there at the East end of the garden he placed Cherubims
and a flaming sword, that is, Angels armed with a flaming sword; for Moses
uses this word, that he might speak to the capacity of the Jews, who had
Cherubims figured in their temple to represent the angels.

CHAP IV.
Verse. 3. ANd in process of time it came to pass, etc.] Abel and Cain had
been doub^lesse taught of God, thus to worship him, and therefore it is said,
Heb. 11. 4. that by faith, (to wit* grounded on Gods word) Abel offered
sacrifice.

Verse. 4. And the Lord had respect to Abel, and to his offering.] This Cain
perceived; and therefore it was manifested by some outward sign, either
ordinary, by giving good success to Abel in all things and not to Cain; or
extraordinary, as by sending fire from heaven to consume Abels sacrifice and
not Cains, as we see the like, Levit. 9. 24. There came a fire out from before
the Lord and consumed upon the Altar the burnt offering, etc. 1. Kings 18. 38.
Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, etc.

Verse. 7. And if thou do not well sin lies at the door.] That is, the
punishment of sin, whether terror of conscience, or external plagues, will
lie watching like a sergeant or thief ready at hand to ^lie upon thee and tear
thee.

And unto thee shall be his desire.] This is added to allay his anger toward
his brother: still God had left Abel subject to Cain as the firstborn, so that
his desire must be subject to his brothers; and therefore it was fit that Cain
should love and cherish him, as all men do those that are in subjection to them.

Verse. 8. And Cain talked with Abel, etc.] To wit, in a brotherly manner, as he
had wont to do, so dissembling his hatred and bloody purpose of killing him,
that he might the better effect it.

Verse. 10. The voice of thy brothers blood cries, etc.] This expression is
used to intimate to Cain his folly and madness in thinking to hide the murder
of his brother, or to escape unpunished; since this crying and horrid sin was
as well known to God, and did as strongly engage the justice of God to punish
it, as if his blood had had a voice to cry aloud upon God for vengeance.

Verse. 11. And now thou art cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth,
etc.] This is added by the way, 1. to aggravate the sin of Cain; 2. to show
the fitness of the punishment: as if he should have said, the earth did as it
were in compassion receive into her bosom that blood which thou did
cruelly ^hed; and therefore the earth, which has thy brothers blood, shall
plague thee for shedding of it: a punishment the more proper also, because Cain
was a Tiller of the ground.

Verse. 12. A fugitive, and a vagabond shall thou be, etc.] That is, thou shall
^lie (as a banished man) from thy fathers family, from the Church; and being
gone shall be still pursued with thy conscience, and so still wander from place
to place, as no where finding security and peace.

Verse. 14. Behold thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth.]
This he says, because he was excluded from the common right of men, God having
left him never a corner of the earth, where he might rest quietly and safely,
and so was inde^d condemned as no lawful inhabitant of the earth.

And from thy face shall I be hid.] Being banished from the presence of God in
his Church, he takes himself to be quite cast out of his favor and protection.

And it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me shall slay me.] It
is not probable that Adam and Eve, after Cain and Abel were born, continued
barren unto this time: these only are mentioned because of this famous story,
but other sons and daughters no doubt they had, and childrens children
perhaps to many generations. Now these Cain feared, and withal, the posterity
the earth should be peopled with in his time afterward, yea and peradventure
the very beasts of the field.

Verse. 15. Therefore whosoever slays Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him
sevenfold.] Therefore, that is, to prevent this: whereby we see that God did
not this in mercy to Cain but to prevent bloodshed, and the cutting up of that
root from whence yet many serviceable branches might grow.

And the Lord set a mark upon Cain.] What this mark was, it is but curiosity
to enquire: some visible mark it was, whereby the Lord knevv men would be
restrained from hurting him, happily some mark that made him a horrible
spectacle of Gods wrath and fury against so foul a sin.

Verse. 16. And Cain went out from the presence of the Lord.] God having thus
examined him, and condemned him, no doubt (as usually at other times) in a
visible apparition: so soon as ever he was gotten out of the presence of the
Lord, he fled as a banished man from his fathers dwelling place, and dwelled in
the land of Nod: and so it may be true also in another sense, that he went from
the presence of the Lord, because he went from the place of his word and
public worship, the place where he had wont to appear to Adam and his sons,
of which it might be said, as Genesis 28. 17. This is no other but the house of
God, and this is the gate of heaven.

Verse. 17. And he builded a city.] The question concerning them that should
build or inhabit this city is vain; for if Abraham's stock in less then 400
years amounted to six hundred thousand persons, what might Cains posterity be
ere he built this city? Neither does this work thwart that curse verse. 14. And
I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth. It is probable he built it
out of that inward horror and fear from whence those words proceeded; neither
do we read that he found any inward rest or security in it, when he had done
it, if he did ever finish it.

Verse. 20. And Adah bare Jabal, he was the father of such as dwell in tents,
etc.] So are they usually esteemed and named, that are either the first
inventers of any art, or men of fame for excellent inventions in the skillful
use of such arts which were not practiced till they found them out. Thus was
Jabal the father of shepherds, and Jubal the father of musicians; at least
amongst Cains posterity.

Verse. 23. I have slain a man to my wounding, etc.] An obscure place, and
therefore many several ways expounded: but most ground their expositions upon
some conceits or other that have no warrant in the text, all which must needs
therefore be weak and uncertain. It is true indeed the Hebrew text admits two
diverse readings, and accordingly two somewhat different expositions: for if we
read it as it is in the margent, I would slay a man in my wounding, and a
young man in my hurt, then the words seem to have been a vaunt of Lamechs to
his wives, perhaps fearing that his fierceness and violence would at some time
or other so ^arre provoke those he wronged as to bring some mischief upon him,
viz. that whosoever should meddle with him they should pay dearly for it; he
would be the death of the sto^test man that should strike or hurt him; adding
withal that if he should be avenged sevenfold that should offer to kill Cain,
far heavier vengeance should be taken of him that should set upon Lamech: but
following that whereunto our Translatours, it seems, did most incline, because
they have set it in the text, the meaning of the place I conceive is this;
Lamech a wicked proud fierce man had committed murder (for so he speaks in the
preterp^* fecttense, I have slain, etc.) and in doing of it had received some
hurt: coming home in this plight, his wives are affrighted and in great
perplexity and fear: he labors to appease them, but in a fierce and insolent
manner, as scorning and despising their fear, and thinking it a disparagement
to his greatness that they should be afraid of Lamech, and he gives a reason,
if sevenfold vengeance should light upon him that killed Cain, what then upon
him that should kill Lamech? which is spoken either in a kind of Athe^sticall
scorn, as if he should say, Why, women fear not, if God set a guard upon Cain,
that he might not be killed, I will warrant you Lamech shall escape well enough;
or else as supposing that he had juster cause for that which he had done, and
therefore might be more secure, that if Cains death should be avenged, much
more his.

Verse. 25. For God, said she, has appointed me another seed, etc.] Seth
signifies appointed; by this it is clear that Cain slew Abel not long before
the 130 year of Adams age, at which time Seth was born, as we see Genesis 5. 3.
and therefore she rejoices that her number was in him filled up again, the
rather because it is likely, that by the spirit of God she foresaw that he
should tread in the steps of faithful Abel, and be the stock of that righteous
progeny, wherein the Church was afterward established.

Verse. 26. Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord.] Was not the name
of the Lord called upon before, by Adam and Eve, Abel, Seth, and perhaps some
others of Adams sons and daughters? yes undoubtedly: But it seems the greater
part were corrupted with Cains wicked progeny, and now the family of the
righteous increasing in the days of Enos, the worship of God began to be more
public and solemn; there began to be a more notable separation and difference
betwixt the righteous and the wicked, and religion in this pious and now
growing family of Seth seemed in a manner restored again, when it had been in
the paucity and privacy of the truly faithful almost buried.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. ANd called their name Adam.] That is, Man. So Adam or Man was the
common name both of man and woman, because both were of the earth (from whence
the name Adam was taken) Man being immediately made of the earth, and Eve of
Adam, and both by marriage so joined again together, by the ordinance of God,
that they were both one flesh.

Verse. 22. Enoch walked with God.] That is, he lived a holy, just, and
righteous life, and that in some degree of eminency above other the servants
of God that lived in those times; though the age wherein he lived grew very
corrupt, yet he was not carried away with the stream of the times, but framed
his life carefully according to the will of God, with whom he enjoyed a sweet
communion; the Lord in a more then usual manner revealed his secrets to him
(for he was a Prophet, and one clause of his Prophecies is recorded in the
Scriptures, to wit, in the Epistle of Jude, verse. 14. 15.) and he on the other
side did continually set the Lord before his eyes, and sought to approve
himself to him in all his ways.

Verse. 29. And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us,
etc.] That Noah was a man of eminent piety, we read Chap. 6. 9. and this
therefore I conceive to be a Prophetical presaging of the comfort, which this
son in future times should yield unto his parents. By the work and toil of
their hands, he means not only that particular curse, Genesis 3. 17, 19. Cursed
is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it, etc. In the sweat
of thy face shall thou eat bread, etc. but also all the miseries which the
sin of their first parents had brought upon them: So that I conceive the
meaning of this speech ^f Lamech to be, as if he had thus said, Many are the
miseries, labors, troubles and sorrovvs which sin has brought upon us; we
live in a wicked unjust world, and suffer much in these uncomfortable times,
but you shall see this child will be a comfort to us in the midst of all these
miseries, and by his goodness yield us quiet and rest in our minds, maugre all
the sorrovvs which we shall otherwise sustain.

CHAP. VI.
ANd it came to pass when men began to multiply, etc.] This must reach further
then the age of Noah, of which he spoke in the latter end of the foregoing
chapter, namely to the first increase of Cains wicked progeny. As the world
began to be filled with them* so did it more and more increase in wickedness:
for the men here spoken of, are those men whose daughters the sons of God
married, as is clear by the last branch of this verse, namely those that were
out of the Church, never reputed members of Gods Church, or the sons of God,
but (as I may therefore say) mere men: 1. Cor. 3. 3. Walk ye not as men?

Verse. 2. That the sons of God saw the daughters of men, etc.] Though all
other wickedness did no doubt abound, yet this is noted as the chief cause of
Gods displeasure, that even the sons of God also, that is, the men of the
Church of God (for such are esteemed the sons of God, Deuteronomy. 14. 1.) without
any respect of the Religion they professed, promiscuously matched with the
daughters of those outcasts, Cains wicked progeny, from whom they had been
hitherto separated, taking them wives, yea perhaps many wives, of all that
their eyes liked, not at all minding what for matter of religion or manners
they were.

Verse. 3. And the Lord said, etc.] The Lord made known this his purpose to that
wicked generation, namely by Noah, (yea and happily by Methuselah and Lamech,
who were then also living) to whom he revealed so much that except they
repented within 120 years the world should be destroyed.

My spirit shall not always strive with man.] That is, I have now a long time
labored to reclaim this wicked generation; my spirit has contended with them
both by the outward ministry in the mouths of the Patriarchs (as is
expressed, 1. Pet. 3. 18, 19.) and also by inward motion and check of
conscience: but all is in vain: and therefore I will no longer trouble my self
with them, but at once sweep them all away with a general deluge.

For that he also is flesh.] That is, even man also, whom I created after mine
own image, is become as brutish as the beasts that perish; he is wholly carnal,
no course that I can take will do any good on him; therefore I will destroy him.

Yet his days shall be 120 years.] 120 years are granted for trial of their
repentance; whence we see that this was revealed to Noah in the 480 year of his
age: for he was 600 years old when the Flood came* chap. 7. 6. and consequently
but 480 when he had this warning of 120 years, which was 20 years before the
birth of his sonn^s Shem Ham and Japheth, though that be mentioned before in
the former chapter.

Verse. 4. There were giants in the earth in those days.] Men who for their
extraordinary stature and strength were even admired in those days, to wit, in
that age before spoken of, when the sons of God did promiscuously match with
the da^ghters of men; at that time and before that time, that is, in that age,
there were these giants on the earth, who in the pride and confidence of their
huge strength did without all fear of God or man (as lawless men) commit any
villainy, and like savage and wild beasts destroyed and wa^ted the countries
and people where they lived. Amongst other the corruptions of those times this
Moses instances peculiarly in, to let us see how insufferably wicked mankind
was grown, when they did in a manner even fight against God.

And also after that when the sons of God, etc.] Yea, and after that age, the
progeny of these unlawful matches, betwixt the sons of God and the
daughters of men, became many of them such giants, the curse of God follovving
such unequal mixtures of the seed of Seth with that of Cain. And hereby also
Moses gives us to understand, that even among the outvvard members of the
Church these villainies grevv rife, yea and after the holy Patriarchs had by
Gods commandment threatened them with that del^ge which afterward came upon
them.

Verse. 6. And it repented the Lord that he had made man, etc.] God is not as
man, that he should repent* or that he should be grieved for any thing that is
done, 1. Sam. 15. 29. The strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he is
not as man, that he should repent: and that because he is not mutable in his
purposes, as being the Father of lights, Jam. 1. 17. with whom there is no
variableness nor shadow of changing; neither can any thing happen to cross
him in his counsel, which he did not foresee from everlasting, nor can he be in
danger to err in his purposes, and to find out any thing in process of time
that is better then that which before he determined should be done: yet here,
as elsewhere in several places of Scripture, the Lord is said to repent and to
grieve, 1. because the Lord now intended to do what men, that repent and are
grieved for that which they have formerly done are wont to do, that is, to undo
what he had done, and to destroy the work of his own hands, and therefore
speaks thus of himself, after the manner of men, as stooping to our capacity;
and 2. to imply thereby the grievousnesse of their transgressions and
provocations, that should move the Lord to destroy so great a part of those
creatures which he had made for his own glory, and as it were to repent of
making man, in whom he had determined to honor himself above all the creatures
besides: He must needs be a desperate wicked wretch that makes his father that
tenderly loves him wish he had never been born.

Verse. 16. And in a cubit shall thou finish it above.] That is, the Ark. The
meaning is this, When he had built up the Ark thirty cubits high, then he was
to finish it, or cover it* which covering went up sloping, so that the ridge
was a cubit higher then the side of the Ark.

Verse. 19. Two of every sort, etc.] That is, pairs of every sort, a male and a
female: the number is set down afterward, chap. 7. verse. 7. Of every clean
beast by sevens, the male and his female, etc. here only the kind, and that he
should take them by twoes or by pairs.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 2. OF every clean beast, etc.] That is, such as might be offered in
sacrifice.

Verse. 11. In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, etc.] So then the Flood
began in the seventeenth day of the month Zin, which was about the beginning
of our May, as some Authors think, Anno Mundi 1656. or the beginning of
October, as others hold.

Verse. 12. And the rain was upon the earth forty days, etc.] It rained
therefore unto the twenty seventh day of the third month.

Verse. 16. And the Lord shut him in, etc.] That is, the Lord either by the
ministry of the angels, or by his own immediate power, caused the door of the
Ark on the outside to be sure and safe against the rain and violence of the
waters; and so, what could not be done by any care, or skill, or labor of Noah
himself, was supplied by Gods providence: whereas reading this history men
might be ready to question in their minds, How Noah could possibly so shut the
door on the inside, but that still there would be danger of the waters working
through the joints and crevises on the outside, where Noah could not cover it
with pitch, as it was within, all such imaginations, which our own curiosity
might suggest, are cut off with this short clause, that the Lord shut him in,
that is, that the Lord by his own immediate hand and almighty power did as it
were so fasten and shut up the door upon them, that by no means the floods of
water beating upon it should be able to loosen it, or any way break in to the
endangering either of man or beast.

Verse. 20. Fifteen cubits upward did the waters prevail.] That is, so much
higher then any mountain did the waters rise.

Verse. 24. And the waters prevailed on the earth an hundred and fifty days.]
That is, for one hundred and fifty days after the beginning of the Flo^d, the
waters did either increase or continue in their full strength* to wit, unto the
end of the sixteenth day of the seventh month.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 4. ANd the Ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of
the month, etc.] Which must needs be the next day at the furthest after the
waters began first to decrease; for from the beginning of the Flood to this
seventeenth day of the seventh month are but an hundred fifty and one days at
the most. Nor is this strange that the Ark should rest so suddenly, if the Ark
did draw thirteen cubits water, as is very likely; when the Flood was at the
highest, the bottom of the Ark was not above two cubits higher then the
highest mountains, and two cubits it might well fall in one day.

Verse. 5. In the tenth month, on the first day of the month were the tops of
the mountains seen.] That is, seventy three days after the Ark began to rest,
not only the top of that mountain was dry, the Ark standing there wholly out of
the water, but also the tops of many lower mountains.

Verse. 6. And it came to pass, at the end of forty days.] That is, forty
days after the tops of the mountains were discovered; which was the eleventh
day of the eleventh month.

Verse. 8. Also he sent forth a dove from him.] Seven days after he had sent
out the raven: (for verse. 10. he speaks of seven other days) and that was upon
the eighteenth day of the eleventh month.

Verse. 9. But the dove found no rest, etc.] Because the tops of mountains were
yet muddy and standing with water: and besides the dove delights not in
mountains, but in the tops of houses and lower grounds.

Verse. 10. And again he sent forth the dove.] Namely on the twenty fifth day
of the eleventh month.

Verse. 12. And he stayed yet other seven days, and sent forth the dove, etc.]
Namely on the second day of the twelfth month.

Verse. 13. And behold the face of the ground was dry.] That is, as is said
before, the water was gone from the earth, so that the superficies, the face of
the ground was dry; but lying under the waters a whole year it was not yet fit
to bear the heavier bodies either of man or beast.

Verse. 14. And in the second month, etc. was the earth dried.] That is, it was
now thoroughly dried, hard, and fit for the use both of man and beast; so that
after the upper face of the ground was dry* Noah and the rest stayed welnigh
two months in the Ark.

Verse. 20. And offered burnt offerings on the altar.] By way of thankfulness,
and according to that form of worship, which God had before established in his
Church.

Verse. 21. And the Lord smelled a sweet savor.] Still we see that the
Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men, who are delighted and
refreshed with sweet odours, Isa. 3. 24. The meaning is, that God having in his
displeasure punished man severely, was now at peace with these, and did
graciously accept of this service which Noah had now performed.

And the Lord said in his heart, etc.] That is, God decreed that he would never
destroy the world as now he had done, speaking of that decree which was
afterward revealed to Noah, chap. 9. verse. 8.

For the imagination of man's heart is evil, etc.] The same words are used, cap.
6. verse. 5. as a reason why God would destroy the world, that are here used as
a reason why God would not destroy it, and in both fitly; there to show the
just cause the Lord had to punish; here to show that even hence God in the
riches of his mercy resolved to spare them: for (sai^s he) they are corrupt
altogether by nature, and should I deal with them according to their desert, I
must be continually sweeping them away with a deluge; but I will henceforth
deal more particularly with men, and not overturn the general course of nature
any more.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 2. ANd the fear of you, and the dread of you, etc.] That absolute
sovereignty over the creatures, which man lost by rebellion against God* is not
now restored; only that remainder of sovereignty, which man had enjoyed since
the Fall, was now by promise confirmed unto Noah and his posterity, whence
it is that even the most savage of them do naturally fear the face of man,
though sometimes by the just judgment of God they do as it were rebel, rise
up upon him, and hurt him.

Verse. 3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat, etc.] That is, you may
eat of any of the creatures as freely as of the herbs that grow out of the
ground. Not that before the Flood they did eat nothing but herbs, etc. methinks
(besides many other arguments that might be brought against this conceit) that
which is said Matthew. 24. 38. implies a greater liberty in feasting, As in the
days that were before the Flood they were eating and drinking, etc. only God
now restores unto Noah the lavvfull use of these things which were in a
manner taken from them by the Flood; and the rather was this here made known
to Noah, to make way to that which follovveth in the next verse, which is
added as an exception to this general grant, to wit, that though they might
eat freely of any of the creatures, yet not of things strangled, out of which
the blood was not first let forth. Hovvever it is sufficient for us hence to
learn, that now it is lawful to eat of any of the creatures, and that the law
which made some beasts, etc. unclean, and not allowed for food was not yet
given to the Church of God.

Verse. 4. But flesh with the life thereof, which is the blood, etc.] The blood
is called the life of the flesh, because it is, as it were, the seat of the
life and the vital spirits, Levit. 17. 11. For the life of the slesh is in the
blood. And therefore though they might eat the slesh of beasts, yet not with
the blood, that is, not except it were first orderly mortified and cleansed o^
the blood; and this restraint doubtless was imposed upon them, to make them
the more fearful of shedding man's blood: And we see the Apostles, Act. 15. 20.
enjoined the Christians of those times to observe this command, the rather
happily because it had been of such ancient use, and so long observed amongst
the people of God, and would not easily therefore be left on a sudden.

Verse. 18. And Ham is the father of Canaan.] This is both here and after, verse.
22. added, both to imply the reason why* verse. 25. the curse is denounced
against him, Cursed be Canaan; and also that the Israelites might know the
accursed stock from whence those nations of the Caananites sprang, with whom
they had so much to do in the days of Moses.

Verse. 25. And he said, Cursed be Canaan.] Noah knowing what had passed
(whether by revelation, or by the relation of his other sons, we need not
enquire) does as a Prophet by the inspiration of Gods spirit denounce this
judgment, that the curse of God should fall upon him and his posterity for
this wicked fac^, and namely upon the Canaanites, who are therefore
particularly mentioned, because in them this curse should be most remarkably
seen.

A servant of servants shall he be, etc.] That is, a most base and vile
servant: This is meant of the Canaanites, the progeny of Canaan, who were
conquered and made bondslaves by the Israelites (therefore called Canaans
brethren, because they were the posterity of Shem the brother of Cham) yea and
by those Western nations which were the posterity of Japheth.

Verse. 26. And he said, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem.] Noah foresees by the
instinct of Gods spirit, that God would enter into a special covenant with the
posterity of Shem, taking them to be his peculiar people, and binding himself
to be their God. Now ravished with joy in the consideration of this
extraordinary privilege, he does not barely pronounce this blessing, that God
would be the God of Shem and his posterity, but expresses it covertly in this
thanksgiving, whereinto he breaks forth in the excess of his joy, Blessed be
the Lord God of Shem.

Verse. 27. God shall enlarge Japheth.] This (according to our translation) must
needs be a prediction of the great increase of Japheths posterity.

And he shall dwell in the tents of Shem.] A prophecy of that which came not
to pass till many hundred years afterward, namely, that the Gentiles, the
posterity of Japheth, having been along time separated from the Church of God,
which was to be established amongst the Isra^lit^s, Shems progeny, should at
last be persuaded by the preaching of the Gospel to join with them in the
worship of the same God, in the profession of the same says and so to become
fellow members of the same Church. Ephesians. 2. 13. But now in Christ Jesus, ye
who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blo^d of Christ; which was
fulfilled when the Gentiles became Christians.

CHAP. X.
NOw these are the generations of the sons of Noah.] We cannot with any
probability conceive that all the children, or grandchildren of Shem, Ham* and
Japheth are here particularly named, but only such as were in their
generations men of renown, such as by their several plantations gave name to
several nations descending from their loins.

Verse. 5. By these were the Isles, etc.] For the full understanding of this, we
must know that the posterity of Noah kept together for many years; till the
greatest part removed to that plantation in Shinar, whereof we read, chap. 11.
Now* says Moses, after the tongues were there divided, these sons of
Japheth, according to their several languages, did plant several Colonies in
all the regions and countries of Europe, and those that border the
Mediterranean sea, now usually called, the Isles of the Gentiles: for this is
all, which Moses intends in these words, that all those Sea-countries,
severally divided amongst men of several families, of several languages, were
all the posterity of Japheth, so placed by those of his issue formerly
mentioned, after whose names they were many of them called.

Verse. 8. And Cush begat Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one in the earth.]
That is, whereas hitherto the heads of families did in a mild and gentle way
guide and order the rest, rather by the voluntary submission of those that were
governed then by the compulsion of power, this Nimrod with viol^nce usurped a
more imperious government, and enlarging still his dominions by forcing those
about him to undergo his yoke, he became a mighty one, that is, a man of great
power and might, famous in his time for the dominions he had.

Verse. 9. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord.] In many places of Scripture
persecutours and oppressors, such as invade any people, and by a strong hand
subdue them, and then waste and oppress them, are called hunters: as Jer. 16.
16. Behold, I will send for many fishers, and they shall fish them; and for
many hu^^ers, and they shall hunt them, etc. Lam. 4. 18. They hunt our steps
that we cannot go in our streets. Such a one Moses under this Metaphorical
speech describes Nimrod to have been, a tyrannous invad^r and oppressor of
those that lived about him; and this he did before the Lord, to wit, openly
without fear of God.

Wherefore it is said, etc.] Thence it grew to be a common proverb, that when
any man took the course of oppression and tyranny, he was called, as I may
say, another Nimrod.

Verse. 11. Out of that land went forth Ashur, etc.] According to ^he
translation of Junius (which is added in the margin) the meaning is this, That
Nimrod having built those four cities before mentioned in the land of Shinar,
enlarged his dominions further, even in Ashur or Assyria, and there built
Nineveh, Rehoboth, etc. But methinks this other translation is not without
cause retained in the text, namely that Ashur (not the son of Shem, but one
of the same name of Hams progeny, as in Genesis 4. we have many of Cains progeny
of the same name with those of Seths) went forth out of Shinar, and built
Nineveh, etc. in the kingdom of Assyria: and indeed whence may we think it
took the name of Assyria, if Nimro^, not Ashur were the founder of that Empire?

Verse. 18. And afterward were the families of the Canaanites spread abroad.]
Having spoken of the sons of Canaan, Sydon, Heth, Jebus, etc. he adds that
in aftertimes there were several families spread abroad in the land of
Canaan, which took their names as is before expressed from these sons of
Canaan.

These are the sons of Ham, after their families, etc.] That is, these are
the sons of Ham, who according to their several families and languages were
the founders of several nations in several countries.

Verse. 21 The father of all the children of Eber.] That is, of the Hebrews.

Verse. 25. The name of one was Peleg.] Peleg signifies division; and he was so
called because about the time of his birth languages were divided.

CHAP. XI.
ANd the whole earth was of one language* and of one speech.] Now Moses returns
to relate more particularly that memorable story of the building of Babel,
premising this in the first place by way of Introduction, that the whole earth
was of one language, that is, that the men of the earth before the building of
Babel spoke all one language, and so had done 1757 years. Now that this
language was Hebrew, it is by almost all learned men commonly agreed; and not
without cause, both because all the names of the Patriarchs before and after
the Flood are made of Hebrew words, and because it is not likely but the first
language was continued by God amongst his Church, in that better progeny of
Noah, that had no hand in the building of Babel.

Verse. 2. And it came to pass as they, etc.] To wit, The men or the
inhabitants of the earth before spoken of, which is thus generally expressed,
only because the greatest part of them removed in this Colony together with
Nimrod the captain and chief of the Plantation; for that Noah, Shem, and the
rest of Noah's better progen^e were not present at the building of Babel, this
(if nothing else) would plainly prove, because the first language continued
still in that holy line. The greatest difficulty of this place is, how it can
be said of this Colony of men, that came now to the land of Shinar, which was
Chaldea, that they journeyed from the East, since Armenia, where it is commonly
held that Noah went out of the Ark, and near to which therefore the posterity
of Noah had doubtless hitherto dwelt, did not lie on the East of Chaldea where
the tower of Babel was built. But to this I answer, that if we take the hills
of Taurus or Caucasus between the East Indies and Scythia to be those mountains
of Ararat, where the Ark rested (for so some conceive) then this place is
clear; for they lie Eastward from the land of Chaldea, here called the land of
Shinar: If we retain the common opinion, that those mountains of Ararat were
the hills of Armenia, we must conceive that they had removed formerly from the
place where the Ark rested, and settled themselves in some country that lay
East of Chaldea, and thence turned again Westward, and planted themselves in
this place.

Verse. 3. And slime had they for mortar.] A kind of natural lime plentiful in
those parts, and slimie like pitch.

Verse. 4. Lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the earth.] That is,
left hereafter when this place proves too strait for us, we be scattered abroad
upon the face of the earth in several Colonies to several places, let us now
whilst we are together do some thing that may get us a name, leave some
monument standing that may be famous throughout the world.

Verse. 5. And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower.] Here, as
ordinarily elsewhere in the Scripture, God speaks of himself after the manner
of men. God is every where present, and sees all things at all times that are
done upon the face of the earth, neither can he be properly therefore said to
remove from one place to another; so that this expression of the Lords coming
down to see the city and the tower, etc. is only to imply, 1. That however the
Lord did awhile wink at this their mad and proud attempt, and suffered them
to go on, as if he took no notice of it; yet at length by his judgment upon
them he discovered that he was present with them, and saw all their
proceedings; and 2. That this arrogant attempt of these Babel-builders was
such, as did indeed upon exact enquiry, deserve the severity of Gods ensuing
proceedings against them, and that God was most just and righteous in all that
he did to them.

Verse. 26. And Terah lived seventy years and begat Abram, Nahor* and Haran.]
That is, he began to beget them; one of these his sons was then born, to wit,
Nahor: for that Abram was not born till the hundred and thirty year of his
father Terahs age, is most plain, if we compare diligently these places
together: Genesis 11. 32. And the days of Terah were ^wo hundred and five years;
and Terah died in Haran. Genesis 12. 4. And Abram was seventy five years old when
he departed out of Haran. Act. 7. 4. And from thence when his father was dead
he removed him into this land, etc. For had Abram been born in the seventieth
year of his fathers age, when his father died two hundred and five years old,
he must needs be one hundred thirty five years old: which cannot be. For when
Abram went into Canaan, which was after his fathers death, Acts 7. he was but
seventy five years old, Gen 12. 4. But on the contrary, if Abram was seventy
five years old when his father died in Haran two hundred and five years old, it
must needs follow that Abram was born when his father Terah was one hundred and
thirty.

Verse. 29. Milcah the daughter of Haran.] If this were (as some conceive)
another Haran, and not the brother of Abram, and so the following clause, the
father of Milcah, the father of Iscah, be added to distinguish this from that
other Haran, the brother of Abram; then is there no difficulty in this place.
But the most of Expositours conceive otherwise* namely that both M^lcah and
Sarai (otherwise called Iscah) were the daughters of Haran the son of Terah,
and married to their uncles Abram and Nahor; and yet is this no proof that such
matches were then lawful. Rather we may think that both Nahor and Abram were
in a manner necessitated to marry their nieces, the sisters of Lot, and
daughters of their brother Haran, because they would not match with strangers
in those corrupt times that were generally fallen from the true Religion; and
that these matches were by special toleration or dispensation from God,
either at first permitted, or at least afterward allowed and approved, though
otherwise unlawful by the common rule and law of Nature.

Verse. 31. And Terah took Abram his son.] To wit, Abram having first
discovered to him, how the Lord had in a revelation charged him to leave his
country, and go into a land which he would show him, to wit, Canaan: for
it is clear* Act. 7. 2. that God appeared to Abram in Vr of the Chaldees,
before he came to Haran, and commanded him to go into Canaan; so that Abram
first motioned this remove, though Terah be here first named, because he was
the father of the family.

And they came unto Haran and dwelt there.] This first remove was with a
purpose to go into Canaan; but being stricken in years, or otherwise disabled
for travel, he stayed there in Haran, and after a fevv years died.

CHAP. XII.
NOw the Lord had said unto Abram, etc.] Now Moses returns to show the cause
both of Terahs removal with his family from Ur of the Chaldees, and of Abrams
removal, after his father was dead, from Haran, where for some years they
had stayed: for why did he not abide in Haran? Moses tells us, because when
God appeared to him in Ur of the Chaldees he had (as is here related) appointed
him to go unto a land that he would show him, namely, unto Canaan; which
though God did not at first reveal unto him, yet afterward he told him.

Verse. 2. And thou shall be a blessing.] That is, He shall not only be
blessed, but a blessing it self, namely, to his posterity, to whom it should
be a blessing that Abram was their father; yea so blessed should he be, that
he should be a form of blessing, men saying ordinarily, The God of Abraham
bless thee, etc. and so making Abram an example of one singularly happy and
blessed.

Verse. 6. And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem.] Moses
calls these places whither Abram removed by the names whereby they were
afterward known, as sitting his speech to the men of that age werein himself
lived.

Verse. 11. Behold now I know that thou art a fair woman to look upon.] It is
eviden^ that Sarah was at this time above threescore years old: for Abram was
seventy five years old when he came first into the land of Canaan, verse. 4. and
Sarah was but ten years younger then Abram, Genesis 17. 17. yet no wonder it is
though Sarah was at these years fair, yea, (verse. 14.) very fair, not in the
eye of her husband only, but of the Egyptians also; even her barrenness was
doubtless some help to the continuance of her beauty. But besides in those
times when they lived so long the strength and beauty of women we may well
think continued longer fresh and without any great decay then in these days;
whereto if we add, that it is most likely that God did also by his Providence
in a more special and extraordinary manner bless Sarah in this regard, even
in her otherwi^e declining years, it will not seem any way improbable, that
Sarah should at this time be so wondrous beautiful.

Verse. 13. Say, I pray thee, thou art my sister.] That the Egyptians, knowing
her to be his wife, might not kill him that then they might marry her, Abram
advises Sarah not to deny but to conceal this truth, that she was his wife,
and to say only that she was his sister. Now though this were in a sense true,
as Abram afterward told Abimilech, Genesis 20. 12. because she was his near
kinswoman, his brothers daughter, and such in those times were usually called
brothers and sisters; yet because by saying she was his sister, Abram intended
that the Egyptians should conceive that she was not his wife, but free to be
married to any other, and so did expose her to great danger in this regard, the
course he took could not be warrantable, but proceeded from weakness of faith
and humane frailty, though withal he might have some hope that God would
prevent that mischief.

Verse. 15. The Princes also of Pharaoh saw her.] Pharaoh was the common name of
all the Kings of Egypt, as Caesar was of all the Roman Emperors.

And the woman was taken into Pharaohs house.] I take it for granted, 1. That
she was not abused by Pharaoh, because the Lord did so tenderly preserve her
ch^stity upon a second exposing her to this danger, chap. 20. 4. But Abimelech
had not come near her; 2. That notwithstanding, she was some time in Pharaohs
house: the particulars afterward mentioned of Pharaohs enriching Abram, and God
plaguing Pharaohs Court, cannot be conceived to be all upon a sudden done. It
is likely therefore that this taking her into the house was, both that the king
might make known his pleasure of taking her to be his wife, and that she might
be prepared for the match (as we see the like, Esther 2.) and that she might be
entertained as beseemed her that was so beloved of Pharaoh.

Verse. 17. And the Lord plagued Pharaoh, etc. with great plagues.] What ^hese
plagues were, the Scripture being silent, it is but a foolish curiosity to
inquire.

Verse. 18. And Pharaoh called Abram and said, etc.] Pharaoh understanding
either by revelation, as Abimelech, chap. 20. 3. God came to Abimelech in a
dream by night, and said, etc. or by the conf^ssion of Sarai her self, or by
some other means that Abram was Sarais husband, he presently apprehends that
for this it was that he and his house were so plagued; and therefore makes
haste to restore her.

Verse. 20. And Pharaoh commanded his men, etc.] The reasons of this dismissing
Abram and Sarah out of Egypt may be probably these: 1. Because he desired to
have Sarah gone out of his sight; 2. Because of his present displeasure, who
no doubt was offended that by their means he was thus punished; 3. Lest his
houshold-servants or people stung with the sense of what they had suffered,
or envying the riches which Abram had there gathered, should offer them
violence, and so the land should be again plagued for them. And therefore we
see he does not only dismiss them, but also gives his servants charge to see
them safely conducted out of his Dominions.

CHAP. XIII.
ANd Abram went, etc. into the South.] Meaning the Southern parts of Canaan,
which lay next to Egypt, Genesis 12. 9. And Abram journeyed going on still
toward the South: for otherwise, when he went out of Egypt tovvard these
parts, he went Northvvard.

Verse. 5. And Lot also that went with Abram had flocks, and herds, and tents.]
Which implies also many servants that dwelled in those tents. This Moses would
imply, that although Lot had hitherto gone along still with Abram, yet he had
an estate, a stock apart by himself; they had their several tents, flocks,
herds, and servants, etc.

Verse. 6. And the land was not able to bear them.] There was not pasture and
watering places enough for such a multitude of cattle; and thence it seems the
strife arose betwixt their herdsmen.

Verse. 7. And the Canaanite and the Perizzite, dwelled then in the land.] This
is added to show, that by reason the Canaanites and the Perizzites (which
seem to be a family or colony of the Canaanites, Genesis 10. 18. Afterward were
the families of the Canaanites spread abroad) had settled themselves long
before in that part of Canaan, and taken up the greatest and best part of the
pasture, therefore Abram and Lot were straightened for their cattle; and besides
there may be a reason implied in these words, why Abram was so careful to
stop all dissension betwixt them, lest it might have been an offense to the
Heathen.

Verse. 10. And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, etc.
like the land of Egypt, as thou come unto Zoar.] This clause, as thou come
unto Zoar, must in the sense of it be joined to the first part of the sentence,
and beheld all the plain of Jordan: for the meaning is this, That all the plain
of Jordan even unto Zoar was exceeding fruitful and pleasant like to Paradise
and Egypt, which by the overflovving of Nilus was ever esteemed a most
fruitful country.

Verse. 15. For all the land which thou see.] That is, the whole land of
Canaan: for he says not, so much of the land as thou see; but, all the land
which thou see.

To thee will I give it, and to thy seed for ever.] To clear this place fully,
we must know that in this promise of the land of Canaan, as under the
sacramental sign, the true and heavenly Canaan was also included. Heb. 11.
10. For he looked for a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is
God. Again, we must know that by the seed of Abram may well be meant, 1. the
people of Israel, as usually; 2. Christ, as Gal. 3. 16. And to thy seed which
is Christ; and 3. all the faithful members of Christ, both Jews and Gentiles,
who in Christ are made the seed of Abram, children by promise. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called. That is, they which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the Promise are
counted for the seed. Now as the heavenly Canaan is here implied, this clause,
for ever, we may extend to eternity: for it is conferred upon Christ, and
those that believe in him, the true seed of Abram for ever and ever. But the
Promise has primarily respect unto Canaan, that land which Abram now beheld
with his eyes: and so conceiving the words, we must know that it is promised to
Christ absolutely, who is the true Lord and owner not only of the land of
Canaan, but of the whole earth, and so shall be for ever. Psalm. 2. 6, 7, 8. Ask
of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession; and then to the Israclites it
is promised for ever; but conditionally, if they should ever walk in obedience
before God. But there is no such condition expressed. I answer, 1. that the
condition of temporal promises and threatenings is not always expressed: as
Jonah 3. 4. Yet forty days and Nineveh shall be overthrown; 2. that this
condition is expressed elsewhere, Deuteronomy. 4. 25, 26. When thou shall beget
children, and childrens children, and shall have remained long in the land, and
shall corrupt your selves, and make a graven Image, or the likeness of any
thing, and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to
anger: I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall
soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto ye go over Jordan to possess
it; and then 3. that it is employed here though not expressed: I will give it
(says the Lord) to thy seed for ever: implying that if once they began to
degenerate, and proved not a right faithful seed, John 8. 39. then he would
be no longer tied to this promise.

CHAP. XIV.
ANd it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, etc.] It is not
possible certainly to determine who these kings were, and what their
tecritories were; but most probable it is, that they were but only
governors of cities.

And Tidal king of Nations.] In the Hebrew it is, King of Gojim, which may be
kept unchanged, but the Greek and Chaldee translate it Nations. It seems they
were of sundry families or populous; as Galilee in that regard is called
Galilee of the Nations, Isa. 9. 1.

Verse. 3. All these were joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the
salt sea.] That is, in the days of Moses, when he vvrote this history, this
vale of Siddim, where this battle was fought by the kings before named, was
become a lakeo^ sea, and called the Salt sea. For after the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and those other cities that stood in this vale, either by
the confluence of many waters and brimstone into it (being before full of
slime pits, or salt pits, as some read it* verse. 10.) or by some other
special and extraordinary work of God, that it might remain a continual
monument of Gods fierce indignation against the wicked inhabitants of that
place, it became a standing pool of putrid and unsavory waters, and was
therefore called the Salt sea, Josh. 3. 16. as likewise the lake Asphaltites,
and the Dead sea; because in those corrupt and stinking waters not so much as
a fish could live; yea, as Histories report, the birds that flevv over it were
usually stif^ed with the noisome exhalations that did thence arise.

Verse. 5. And smote the Rephaims.] A people in the land of Canaan, Genesis 15. 20.
And doubtless the chief reason why Moses relates how those four
confederate Kings did subdue and destroy both these and the other nations here
mentioned, is the more to magnify the goodness of God to Abram, in making him
victorious over an army that had so easily before subdued and overrun so many
strong and potent nations.

And the Emims.] A people inhabiting formerly the country which after the
Moabites possessed, Deuteronomy. 2. 9, 10. And the Lord said distress not the
Moabites, etc. For I will not give thee of their land for a possession, etc.
The Emims dwelt there in times past.

Verse. 6. And the Horites.] A people that dwelt in mount Seir until the
children of Esau drove them thence. Deuteronomy. 2. 22. As he did to the children of
Esau that dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them.

Verse. 7. And smote all the country of the Amalekites.] That is, all that
country which in aftertimes was inhabited by the Amalekites. Amalek, of whom
the Amalekites descended, was the grandchild of Esau, Genesis 36. 12. who was not
yet born. It was not therefore the Amalekites that were now subdued by these
Kings, but some other people that did now inhabit that country wherein
afterward the Amalekites dwelt.

Verse. 10. And the vale of Siddim was full of slime pits.] This is mentioned as
that which was an hinderance in their slight, and so a means of their greater
loss.

And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there.] That is, were
vanquished and overthrown there; many of their soldiers slain, many falling
into those pits, as we may well conceive they needs must, being once routed and
in that disorder chased by the enemy. But the king of Sodom escaped, we see,
verse. 17. And the king of Sodom went out to meet him.

Verse. 14. He armed his trained men.] This word, trained, may be meant both of
civil, military, and religious discipline. But however since these men that
Abram now carried forth with him were armed for war, it is likely that he
chose such of his men as were fittest for that service, and that had been
trained up in the use of their arms, and are in this sense therefore called his
trained men. Concerning the justice of this enterprise of Abrams, some question
may be made: But for that we must consider, that though Chederlaomer had a just
quarrel against the king of Sodom and the other neighboring kings, whom he
had now vanquished (which cannot be certainly assirmed, because it is not
expressed upon what grounds they had now cast off his yoke, having 12 years
before been his vassals and tributaries) yet Abrain undertaking this expedition
only for the rescuing of his kinsman Lot, and that doubtless by the special
instinct of the spirit of God, this is abundantly enough to justify what Abram
now did in pursuing and vanquishing these kings that had taken Lot prisoner,
and were carrying away both him and his and all that they had.

And pursued them unto Dan.] One of the springs of Jordan, where was also a
town afterward called by that name of Dan.

Verse. 18. And Melchisedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine.] That
is, He brought forth provision wherewith to refresh both Abram and those that
were with him: for so the like phrase is used, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4. An Ammonite or a
Moabite shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord, because the^ met you
not with bread and with water in the way when you came forth out of Egypt.
Being one of the neighboring kings of Canaan, king of Salem (which seems to be
the same that was afterward called Jerusalem. Psalm. 76. 3. In Salem also is
his, tabernacle) by way of congratulating Abrams victory over these kings,
whose prevailing power might otherwise have proved very prejudicial to them
all, he brought forth provision of several sorts wherewith to feast Abram, and
his confederates, and their soldiers. M^ichisedek signifies king of
righteousness; and king of Salem, is by interpretation king of Peace. In both
which respects S. Paul makes this Melchisedek, Heb. 7. 2. a type of Christ, who
is the King of his Church, the king of Israel, John 1. 49. and not only
perfectly righteous in his own person, and therefore called Jesus Christ the
righteous, 1. John 2. 1. but also, Romans 10. 4. The end of the Law for
r^ghteousnesse to every one that believes, as was of old prophesied, Jer. 23.
6. This is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our righteousness:
and so likewise, The Prince of peace, Isa. 9. 6. who has by his death
reconciled us unto God, and made our peace through the blood of his Cross,
Col. 1. 20. Again, because the Scripture no where tells us who he was, or who
were his parents, or of what stock he came; nor makes any mention either of his
birth or death, but presents him to us as one without father, without mother,
without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, Heb. 7. 3.
and that purposely that he might be a figure of the Messiah (which cannot be
said of Job, Daniel, and others, who, though there be no mention made of their
stock, birth and death, yet they were not also Kings and Priests unto God, as
Mel^hisedek was) therefore in regard of these also the Apostle makes him a
notable type of Christ; or one made like to the Son of God, who was indeed
in regard of his humane nature without father, and in regard of his Godhead
without mother, without descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of
life.

And he was the priest of the most high God.] That we may not vvonder at that
which follows, that a Canaanitish king should speak so religiously of the
most high God, and vvithall take upon him to bless Abram, as one much
inferior to himself, (Heb. 7. 7. Without all contradiction, the less is
blessed of the better;) or that Abram should pay him tithes, etc. Moses
therefore tells us that this Melchisedek was not only a worshipper of the
true God, but also a Priest of the most high God, most eminent in those times
undobtedly, in regard of that special dignity, that he was both king of
Salem, and Priest of the most high God. And herein also the Apostle makes him
a most remarkable type of Christ, Heb. 7. 2, 3. because he was both king and
Priest, and especially because he is here presented to us without any partner
in his Priesthood as the Priests of Aarons order had, without any mention of
any to whom he succeeded in his Priesthood, or that succeeded him, and so as
one that typically abides a Priest for ever, as the Apostle there speaks: for
so indeed Christ is the one eternal Priest of his Church, as the Apostle
says, Heb. 7. 24. This man, because he lives for ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood. Very strange indeed it may seem that such a King and Priest should
be found amongst the cursed nation of the Canaanites: but God can raise unto
himself faithful servants wherever he pleases, and confer upon vvhomsoever
he will an eminent measure of grace; yea though the Church was to be
continued in the posterity of Abram, yet there is little question to be made,
but that as yet there were some fevv of other families that were the true
servants of God, as Job and his friends afterward were amongst the Edomites.

Verse. 19. And he blessed him and said, etc.] By the authority of his office,
and in the name of God, he gives Abram his blessing, as the Priests in the law
did the people, Number. 6. 23, 27. Speak unto Aaron and to his sons saying, On
this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, etc. verse. 27. And they shall
put my name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them. It is likely
he used a more ample form, and manner of blessing, then is here expressed: But
if so, in this abbridgement which Moses gives us we have no doubt the sum of
all: for this manner of blessing, though uttered prayer-vvise, implies an
assured promise that the most high God should most abundantly bless him.

Verse. 20. And he gave him tithes of all, etc.] He, that is, Abram, Heb. 7. 4.
gave Him, that is, Melchisedek, tithes of all, that is, the tenth of all the
spoil, Heb. 7. 4. Now consider how great this man was unto whom even the
Patriarch Abram gave the tenth of the spoils: for though he would take nothing
of the spoil, which had been carried from Sodom, unto himself, yet he might
give of it to Melchisedek; and besides he took questionless much from the
vanquished which belonged not to Sodom. However the tithes he gave unto
Melchisedek, and that surely by way of homage and thankfulness to God: for what
was given to him in regard of his office was given to God: for Melchisedek
himself being a king had no need of them.

Verse. 22. I have lift up my hand to the Lord, etc.] This may be meant either
of an oath that he had taken, for that was an usual custom in swearing to
lift up the hand to heaven, Dan. 12. 7. And I heard the man clothed in linen
which was upon the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand, and his
left hand unto heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever; or (which differs
very little) of a vow made to God in his prayer.

Verse. 23. Lest thou should say, I have made Abram rich.] That is, lest thou
(or any other) should hereafter say, that by this victory I enriched my self,
and so the extraordinary blessing of God upon me and mine should not be
discerned and acknowledged; and withal lest thou should think or say
hereafter, that I pretended the rescue of the afflicted, but did indeed look
after the prey. Thus he preferres the glory of God, and the honoring of his
Religion before his spoil which by right of war belonged to him.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. THe Lord came unto Abram in a vision.] By this word vision, is
sometimes meant a Revelation of God given to his servants in their sleep by a
dream, which are also for distinction sake called nightly visions, Genesis 46. 2.
And God spoke unto Israel in the visions of the night: but this I cannot
conceive to be such, chiefly because we have such a vision afterward following
this, verse. 12. A deep sleep fell upon Abram, and lo an horror, etc. Again, by
visions, are sometimes meant those apparitions which the servants of God have
had being cast into a trance, which were only spiritual objects of the mind,
not of the bodily sense: This seems not to be such neither; for many things are
here said to have passed betwixt God and Abram, which cannot well be thought to
have been only in a trance, and not really done, as the killing and dividing
of the heifer of three years old, etc. verse. 9, 10. and besides, there would
not have been then so great difference betwixt this vision, and that dream or
trance mentioned verse. 12. and therefore I rather conceive this vision to have
been an open apparition, which Abram beheld waking with the eyes of his body,
though happily the Lord appeared in a more glorious manner then usually; and
therefore it is now added, that this was done in a vision.

Fear not Abram, etc.] This is spoken both that he might not be afraid of the
majesty of God, who now in this vision appeared to him; and also to comfort him
in regard of that fear and trouble of mind wherewith he was oppressed, in
regard that after so many promises from God he continued still childlesse, as
appears by his answer; and happily also to cheer him up against the fear of
those kings he had vanquished, who might now threaten revenge; and therefore
God tells him that he would be a shield to him to defend him against his
enemies.

Verse. 2. And the steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus.] Abram does
not herein complain that Eliezer of Damascus, that is, who was born of parents
of Damascus, was his steward; but that he had no other stay of his house, that
is, that he being childlesse wanted the comfort which other fathers had, he had
not a son under him the guide and stay of his family, but all was in the
hands of a servant at present, and would be enjoyed by him, he being dead, for
want of an heir.

Verse. 3. And Abram said, Lo, one born in my house is mine heir.] The sum of
this complaint is only thus much; That he had no other heir in his house, none
to inherit that which he had, but only his home-born servant, (for we need not
suppose that Abram had adopted any servant and made him his heir) which Abram
here bewails as one perplexed betwixt hope and fear, not as rejecting the
promises of God concerning his seed, but as commending to God his sad estate
and condition, and intimating his desire that God would at length remember the
promise he had made to him, and send him an heir.

Verse. 5. And he brought him forth abroad, etc.] This therefore was done when
the stars might be seen, either early in the morning (and if so, then was
there a whole day spent, as there might well be, in those passages afterward
related) or else in the evening; and then it is here related beforehand, not in
the order of time wherein it was done: for afterward Moses speaks of what was
done at sunsetting, verse. 17. And it came to pass, that when the sun went
down, and it was dark, etc.

Verse. 9. And he said, Take me an heifer, etc.] God appoints these things to be
thus done, partly as a sacrifice to be offered to him, partly that they might
be as signs of the covenant which he now makes with Abram; for, because it was
the manner of men when they made a solemn covenant to cut beasts in twain, and
to pass between the parts thereof, as it were wishing the like to themselves
if they brake the covenant, Jer. 34. 18. And I will give (to wit, into their
enemies hands) the men that have transgressed my covenant, which have not
performed the words of the covenant, which they had made before me, when they
cut the calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof; therefore is the
Lord pleased to use the same manner here with Abram.

Verse. 13. Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is
not theirs, and shall serve them, etc.] This must be understood to be spoken
not only of their bondage in Egypt, but also of the whole time of their
sojourning both in Canaan and Egypt. The whole time of Jacobs going thither
till the Israelites went forth with Moses cannot be found above two hundred and
fifteen years. The four hundred years therefore here spoken of must begin with
Isaacs birth: He was born Anno Mundi 2109. and from thence to the year of
Isreal's going out of Egypt is but four hundred and five years, which small
odd number is not reckoned, as it is usual in the Scriptures to leave out
such small numbers in computation of times.

Verse. 14. And also that nation whom they shall serve, will I judge.] This is
added particularly concerning Egypt, because there they suffered the heaviest
affliction.

Verse. 16. But in the fourth generation they shall come hither again.] By
Generations, I conceive, is meant the succession of children, grandchildren,
and so forth in their several ages; and in reckoning of these four
generations we must begin with the children of the Patriarchs, who with their
father Jacob went down into Egypt, and were ever reckoned the twelve several
stocks, out of which the Israel of God did grow in their several tribes: so
that the children of the twelve Patriarchs we account the first generation,
their children the second, and so forward; and this promise we see evidently
performed, where we find Eleazar parting the land of Canaan. Josh. 14. 1. And
these are the countries which the children of Israel inhe^ited in the land of
Canaan, which Eleazar the Priest, etc. distributed for i^h^ritance unto them.
For Cohath the son of Levi who went with Jacob into Egypt, Genesis 46. 11. we
must reckon of the first generation, Amram his son of the second, Aaron his
son of the third, and Eleazar his son of the fourth.

Verse. 16. For the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full.] That is, the
Amorites and those other sinful nations mentioned afterward; this one,
amongst whom Abram now dwelt, being by a figu^ative speech put for all.

Verse. 18. In that same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram.] This is added
to show the end of those visions formerly related, namely, that they were
signs of the covenant which that day God had made with Abram.

Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt unto the great
river, etc.] That is, from the river Sihor unto the great river Euphrates. Some
think that by the river of Egypt here Nilus is meant: but because we read not
that ever the Dominion of the Israelites reached so far, and elsewhere in
describing the bounds of this land, to wit, Josh. 13. 3. the river Sihor is
mentioned as the river of Egypt, and Jer. 2. 18. Sihor and Euphrates are as
here opposed one against the other, What have thou to do in the way of Egypt to
drink the waters of Sihor, or what have thou to do in the way of Assyria to
drink the waters of the river? that is, Euphrates, called by way of eminency
the river; therefore most probably it is thought that by the river of Egypt
Sihor is meant. A more difficult question concerning this place is, whether the
bounds of the Israelites land did ever reach the other way so far as
Euphrates. But for this we must know that though the land which they inhabited
reached no further Northward then Hamath, Numb. 34. 8. which was far on this
side Euphrates; yet in the days of David and Solomon all that country as
far as Euphrates became tributarie to them, as we may see 2. Sam. 8. 3, etc.
and 1. Kings 4. 21. Solomon reigned over all the kingdoms from the river,
(that is, Euphrates) unto the land of the Philistines; and in this regard
Euphrates is sometimes made the utmost bounds of the Dominions promised to
Abrams posterity.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. ANd Sarai said unto Abram, Behold now the Lord has restrained me
from bearing.] This shows when Sarai began to think of procuring the promised
seed by this course, namely, when it ceased to be with her after the manner of
women, chap. 18. 11. for so much the words imply, as if she had said, As long
as there was any hope I have waited, but now the Lord has restrained me from
bearing, that is, I perceive now there is no hope, the Lord has locked up my
womb now for ever bearing; and therefore we must seek the promise some other
way.

Verse. 5. And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong be upon thee, etc.] Though it be
not expressed how Hagar discovered her contempt of her mistress, yet
considering that Sarai was so grave a Matron, of a svveet and meek spirit, and
for her obedience therefore propounded as a pattern to other wives, 1. Pet. 3.
6. by the violence of her passion at present expressed in such bitter language
to her husband, we may probably gather that it was some notable insolency in
Hagar that had so highly provoked Sarai: for if we note them well, every word
she speaks is excessively sharp; for in these words, my wrong be upon thee,
either she lays all the blame upon him, as if she had said, Thou art the cause
o^ all the wrong I have suffered, I blame not her so much as thee, thereby
implying that either by showing her too much respect, or by his connivance at
her petulancy, he had emboldned her to carry her self with that insolence as
she did; or else she wishes that her wrong, that is, the punishment of that
injury, which she had sustained, might fall upon him, who had been the cause of
it; yea and perhaps she particularly desired, that since Hagar had despised
her, and he had suffered it, that she might likewise at length carry her self
as insolently toward him, and so her wrong might be upon him: And then again in
the next words she upbraids him for his unworthy requital of that respect she
had shown to him in giving her handmaid into his bosom, that he might have
children by her, and thereupon concludes with an imprecation, that God would
judge and punish him for it, and so make it manifest what wrong he had done
her: for that is the drift of those last words, The Lord judge between me and
thee: all which discovers how strangely Sarai was at present overborn with
passion: But thus in these bitter effects of Hagar being given to Abram, God
was pleased to correct both Abram and Sarai for seeking to gain children to
Abram by such an unwarrantable way.

Verse. 7. And the Angel of the Lord found her by a fountain of water, etc.]
This Angel is expressly called J^hovah, verse. 13. And she called the name of the
Lord, or Jehovah, that spoke to her, Thou God see me; and he ascribes unto
himself that which is the only proper work of God, verse. 10. And the Angel of
the Lord said unto her, I will multiply thy seed exc^edingly, etc. both which
are undeniable arguments, that this Angel was no other but Christ the son of
God, who is also called the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Neither is it
without cause that the place where Hagar was found is here thus particularly
described; for we may hence probably gather, 1. that she was flying home to
Egypt her native country, for Shur was a town in the wilderness between
Canaan and Egypt, Exodus 15. 22. So Moses brought Israel from the red sea, and
they went out into the wilderness of Shur. 2. That wandering in this desert,
where she might best escape, though they sent out after her, she was wearied
and afflicted with travel and thirst, and thereby brought to rest her self at a
fountain of waters; and hereby the bitterness of her spirit is seen, in that
she was content to endure such inconveniences rather then abide in her mistress
house.

Verse. 11. Because the Lord has heard thy affliction.] He intends both
Sarai's rough usage, and the misery wherein at present she was; this affliction
the Lord is said to have heard; her afflictions spoke when she held her peace,
and God heard, that is, took pity of her in her trouble.

Verse. 12. And he will be a wild man.] This is principally spoken concerning
Ishmael, but in a second place concerning his posterity also. In the original
it is a man like a wild ass; the meaning of it is this, he shall be of a
fierce, warlike, untamed disposition, so that his hand shall be against every
man, etc. that is, of such power and invincible courage and strength shall he
be, that though all about him set themselves against him, he alone shall match
them all, they shall get no good by opposing him; and this must needs be a
comfort to Hagar, to hear that her son should be of such might: And this
therefore I conceive is especially meant by these words, though happily the
vvild and savage condition of his life may also be implied. Genesis 21. 20. And
God was with the lad, and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became an
Archer.

And he shall dwell in the presence of his brethren.] That is, He and his
posterity shall dwell near unto his brethren, the other sons of Abram and
their posterity: As if he had said, Though Abram shall have other children,
yet shall Ishmael thy son be great amongst them: for in these words is
employed* 1. that his seed as a several Nation should dwell apart by
themselves; 2. that this their country should border upon that of their
brethren; 3. that he should be of that power, that though his brethren should
envy his prosperity, he should yet dwell i^ their presence, and they should not
be able to overbear him.

Verse. 13. And she called the name of the Lord that spoke unto her, Thou God
see me.] That is, under this name, and for this cause, she magnified the
Lord, that his eye of providence had watched over her, to comfort her in this
her a^fliction, and to reduce her again into the right way: As if one should
say of David, in regard of that we read, Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear
prayer, etc. that he called the name of the Lord, Thou God that hear prayer.

For she said, Have I also here looked after him, that sees me?] This is
rendered as a reason, why she magnified God under that attribute, Thou God see
me, to wit, because by this appearing of God to her she now ^ound by experience
that the eye of God did watch over her for good; and this she expresses by way
of an interrogation, the better to set forth the joy of her heart, Have I also
here looked after him that sees me? as if she should have said, How can I
enough wonder at this favor, that the Lord Jehovah, whose eye does ever behold
me, should afford me the honor to behold him, even me that am a poor
bondmaid, and that here in the wilderness, when I was run away from my
mistress, yea and that I should see him too without peril to my life, being
still alive after I have seen the Lord my God, and so able to look after him.
And indeed this phrase which she uses, of looking after him, seems to have
reference to her gazing after him when he ascended up from her; and by this
phrase, it is likely she expresses her beholding God rather then by any other,
because at his departing he manifested his glory more then before, which made
her gaze after him: as the angel did to Gedeon, and therefore it is said that
when the angel departed Gedeon perceived that he was an angel of the Lord: And
Gedeon said, Alas O Lord God: for because I have seen an angel of the Lord face
to face, Judges 6. 22. and Christ at his ascension, which made the angels say,
Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? Acts 1. 11. This I
conceive is the plain meaning of this place. Yet there is another exposition
which seems not improbable, namely, that Hagar does in these words acknowledge
the mercy of Gods preventing grace, in that he ^ad taken care of her even when
she minded not him, and blames her own blockishnesse and disregard of Gods
providence over her: Have I here, says she, looked after him that sees me? as
if she had said, God has long watched over me for good, and I never regarded
it; it is well that yet at length through Gods preventing grace, in appearing
to me here in my distress, I have been quickened to take notice of his
fatherly care over me, and so to look after him that sees me.

Verse. 14. Wh^refore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi.] That is, the well of
him that lives and sees me; and thus Hagar makes the name of this well a
memorial to all posterity, how the eye of the ever-living God did vvatch over
her in the time of her affliction.

CHAP XVII.
Verse. 1. I am the almighty God, walk before me and be thou perfect.] That is,
I am thy God, almighty and all-sufficient to do all those great things which I
have promised thee, however impossible they may seem in the eye of reason, and
whatever can be expected from me; and therefore trust in me, and let thy whole
conversation be always as in my presence, perfect, that is, upright and
sincere, to do all that I have commanded thee.

Verse. 4. And thou shall be a father of many nations.] This is meant both of
Abrams natural posterity (for out of his loins came the Ishmaelites, the
Edomites, and many other nations by the children of Keturah) and also of all
Christian nations in the world, as Paul expounds it, Romans 4. 16, 17.
Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise
might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to
that also which is of the faith of Abraham who is the father of us all, as it
is written, I have made thee a father of many nations. Gal. 3. 28. Ye are all
one in Christ; and if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's s^ed, and heirs
according to the promise.

Verse. 5. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, etc.] Abram
signifies a high father; and the first letter of Hamon (an Hebrew word
signifying a multitude) being put to it makes Abraham, as if it were
Abrahamon, that is, a high father of a multitude of nations.

Verse. 10. This is my Covenant, etc.] The circumcising of the Israelites male
children, here enjoined Abraham and his posterity, is said to be Gods covenant,
because it was a token of the covenant, as is expressed in the following verse;
a sign and seal both on Gods part, that he would give them the Lord Christ,
the promised seed out of the loins of Abraham, and in him accept of them for
his peculiar people, forgive their sins, and cleanse them from their natural
corruptions (which was signified by the paring away of their foreskins) and on
their part that they would believe in this their Messiah, and as Gods peculiar
people put off the old man with all his deceiveable lusts, and as new creatures
serve the Lord their Creator in holiness and righteousness all the days of
their life; and therefore is circumcision called the s^al of the righteousness
of faith, Romans 4. 11.

Verse. 13. And my covenant shall be in your flesh, etc.] That is, Circumcision
shall be in your flesh unto the coming of the Messiah, as long as ever the
Church shall continue only in thy natural seed; for an ^verlasting covenant,
that is, for a sign of that everlasting covenant which I have made with you:
for though the outward sign was changeable, yet the covenant it self remains
one in substance for ever.

Verse. 14. And the uncircumcised man-child, whose flesh of his foreskinne is
not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off, etc.] That is, That man, who not
being circumcised in his childhood did afterward also wilfully and
contemptuously neglect that sign of Circumcision, shall be cut off from his
people; and that because* as is expressed in the following words, such men had
broken and wilfully despised Gods ^ovenant, which cannot be said of infants
dying in their infancy. Now the cutting off from Gods people here threatened,
was, 1. that God would not reckon him one of his people, nor receive him
hereafter into the society of the Saints in heaven; and 2. that the Israelites
were to esteem also of him as an heathen; for that the Magistrate was appointed
to cut off such an one by the sword, we do not any where certainly find.

Verse. 15. Thou shall not call her name Sarai, but Sarah.] The same letter is
added to her name, that was to her husbands before, that it might be to both a
pledge and sign of the same promise, to wit, that out of them should come a
multitude of people: which the name also in part signifies; for Sarah signifies
a Lady or Princess.

Verse. 17. Then Abraham fell upon his face.] This bowing of himself, was not
only an expression of reverence, but also of thankfulness and was therefore a
sign that he believed, what God now promised.

And laughed.] He laughed not at the promise, as thinking it a fable, and
concluding it impossible, but as being overjoyed and even amassed with those
welcome tidings. Romans 4. 19. And being not weak in faith, he considered not his
own body now dead, etc. nor yet the deadness of Sarahs womb.

And said in his heart, Shall a man-child be born to me, etc.] By this it
appears that his carnal reason began to struggle against his faith: neither
yet is this contrary to that which the Apostle says, Romans 4. 20. That he
staggered not at the promise of God through unbelief: for he did not stand in
suspense whether he should believe the promise or no, he did not thus stagger;
but even whilst he embraced the promise with joy, his reason made this
objection: and thereby his faith becomes more glorious, that his carnal reason
thus opposing it self, yet his faith prevailed so far, that he would not
hearken to this suggestion, but resolved to hope even against hope.

Verse. 18. And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee!]
Abraham speaks not this as rejecting Gods promise, as if he had said, having
Ishmael I desire no more; nor as despairing of the promise,, as if he had said,
I should have but little hope, if I had not more hope in Ishmael already born,
then in the promised son of Sarah; indeed it is not possible that we should
have a son at this age, and therefore, O that Ishmael might live, etc. but
these words proceed chiefly from Abraham's fatherly affection toward Ishmael;
being thus assaulted by those forementioned thoughts of his carnal reason,
whilst his faith opposed them, suddenly his affections, moved with the thought
of Ishmael, make him as it were to forget all other things to beg for him: as
if he had said, Though I cannot conceive how it should be, yet I gladly embrace
the promise; but however, oh that Ishmael might live in thy sight! do not cast
off Ishmael, but let him live in thy favor: So that this is spoken out of a
mind that did yield to the promise, but yet was troubled, and perplexed, and
solicitous for Ishmael.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day.] That is, at
noontide. This is expressed, both to show the occasion of his sitting in the
tent door, to cool and refresh himself; as also to imply the reason of the
courtesy he proffered to these Angels (whom he supposed to be strangers)
because at such time travelers are wont to wax faint and hungry.

Verse. 2. And to, three men stood by him, and when he saw them he ran to meet
them.] Their appearance being undoubtedly such, as made it manifest to Abraham
both that they were strangers traveling that way, and also such strangers as
were worthy both of that entertainment and respect which he afforded to them.

Verse. 3. And said, my Lord, if now I have found favor in thy sight, etc.] He
directs his speech to one, as it seems, because he appeared in more excellency
and with signs of greater worth then the rest.

Verse. 6. Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal.] That is, as it is
probably thought, three pecks, or thereabouts, whether more or less.

Verse. 8. And they did eat.] For as these Angels had true bodies for the time,
and did truly walk and speak, so they did also truly eat: if there were no
necessity of food, for the sustenance of those their assumed bodies, which
were erewhile happily to be dissolved again by the power of God, yet it was
requisite for the present dispensation of that service, which God had imposed
upon them, to wit, their appearing to Abraham, that he might not yet know but
that they were men, till God was pleased to discover it to him.

Verse. 9. And they said unto him, Where is Sarah thy wife.] Thus by naming
Sarah they first discover themselves to be not men but angels.

Verse. 10. And he said, I will certainly return unto thee according to the time
of life.] We do not find that this return was by the angels appearing again,
but by the accomplishment of the thing promised, in regard whereof it is said,
chap. 21. 1. And the Lord visited Sarah as he had said, to wit, when Isaac was
born. And by this phrase, according to the time of life, cannot be meant any
thing but this, that so many months thence, as is usually (according to the
ordinary course of Nature) from a woman's first conception to the birth of her
child, Sarah his wife should have a son: for that promise when God appeared
before in the former chapter was just a year before Isaac was born, chap. 17.
21. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear unto
thee at this set time in the next year; since when Abraham had been
circumcised, and had recovered the pain and soreness thereof.

Verse. 12. Therefore Sarah laughed within her self.] Because she deemed it so
unlikely, if not impossible, that she should now have a child, she did inwardly
laugh at what she heard spoken. She laughed within her self, she did not break
out into loud and open laughter, but was inwardly affected as those use to be
that laugh at any thing related, which they desire but cannot believe it will
ever be: and this concerning the secrecy of her laughter, that it was within
her self, is thus particularly expressed, to intimate, 1. Why she did so
readily deny it, because it was indeed an inward smiling rather then an
outvvard direct laughter, and such as could not therefore by others be heard or
discerned; 2. Why she was afraid when he took notice of it, to wit, because
she began now to conceive that doubtless he was more then man that could
discern the inward affections of her heart. Hovvever, doubtless she laughed,
not as Abraham before did for joy, but as doubting the accomplishment of what
was spoken, and was therefore reproved; though afterward she believed, when
she knevv who it was that said it: and therefore is her faith commended, Heb.
11. 11. Through faith also Sarah her self received strength to conceive seed,
etc.

Verse. 13. Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I of a surety bear a child
which am old, etc.] Though these be not the very words of Sarah, mentioned v.
12. yet they are the very same in effect: for in those words, After I am waxed
old shall I have pleasure, my Lord being old also? by affirming that both she
and her husband, by reason of their great years were now past the natural
pleasure of the marriage bed, her aim was to imply how much more unlikely it
was, that she should conceive at those years and bear a child; yea, perhaps
these very words here alleged by the Lord, were then also added by Sarah,
though they be not there expressed: for the Scripture in setting down such
passages of the History does not always express all that was spoken, but
only the sum and substan^e of what was spoken.

Verse. 14. At the time appointed, etc.] Compare this place with chap. 17. 21.
and the 10. verse of this chapter.

Verse. 18. S^eeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation
and all the nations, etc,] This is the first reason why the Lord would not
hide from Abraham what he meant to do unto Sodom, to wit, because he was so
precious in his eyes, and one whom he had hitherto honored above others as
his special favorite. Having appointed him to be the stock of so great and
mighty a nation, his peculiar people, yea the stock out of whom that blessed
seed should spring, in whom all the nations of the earth should be blessed, he
would not execute so notable a judgment upon a people so near to him, and not
acquaint him with it: which agrees with that, Amos 3. 7. Surely the Lord
God will do nothing, but he reveals his secrets unto his servants the
prophets.

Verse. 21. I will go down now and see, etc.] This is a figurative speech,
usual in the Scriptures, wherein God stooping to our capacity speaks of
himself after the manner of men. He being every where present, cannot move from
one place to another; and knowing and seeing all things, needs not make any
search or inquisition to inform himself; yet thus is he pleased here to speak
of himself, 1. To show that there was manifest and just cause for the Lords
severitie in punishing the Sodomites, as afterward he did; 2. To intimate
how patient and long-suffering the Lord was toward them, and how
unwilling to destroy them; had they not been so extremely and desperately bad,
as they were; and 3. To teach Judges by his example not to punish rashly, but
alvvayes to try and examine causes before they pass sentence.

Verse. 22. But Abraham was yet before the Lord.] In the beginning of the
chapter verse. 2. mention is made of three men that appeared to Abraham, as he
sat in his tent door, to wit, the Lord Christ, who is often in this chapter
called Jehovah, and two angels that attended him; and verse. 16. that they
went away from Abraham's tent, and that Abraham accompanied them: But now the
Lord having (as they went along) imparted to Abraham what he meant to do to
Sodom, two of the three went away toward Sodom, to wit, the two angels,
as they are expressly called, chap. 19. 1. And there came two angels to Sodom;
and the third, who is here called the Lord Jehovah, stayed still with
Abraham, and that (as these words seem to imply) because Abraham (though they
had as it were dismissed him, and taken their leave of him) yet stood still
before the Lord, as men use to do, that being to part, yet stir not, because
they have somevvhat to say; and so the Lord abode still with him, and
condescended to hear the requests which he made for that sinful city.

Verse. 25. That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the
righteous with the wicked, etc.] The righteous are sometime taken away in the
same public calamity together with the wicked, but the end is diverse: the
one are taken away by the hand of justice, the other in mercy; as the chaff and
wheat are beaten by the same flail. Now God had spoken of the Sodomites as men
to be destroyed by his hand of justice, and in a way of vengeance; and in this
sense does Abraham reply, assured that God would not so cut off the righteous
with the wicked.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. ANd they said, Nay but we will abide in the street, etc.] Thus by
this civil refusing at first the courtesy prosfered, they make the better
trial of the affection of this holy man; and besides, it is likely their
purpose was indeed to abide in the streets, that so they might observe the
manners of the people, had not Lot been so importunate with them.

Verse. 3. And they did eat.] See chap. 18. verse. 8.

Verse. 4. But before they lay down the men of the city, even the men of Sodom,
compassed the house round, etc.] Doubtless the outward appearance of the two
angels that were come to Lot was as of young men of rare and extraordinary
beauty and comeliness of person, whereof there being notice taken by some of
the profane inhabitants of the city, the report thereof was soon spread abroad
in the city, and so presently they flocked together from all places, and joined
together in this horrible and abominable attempt which is here related.

Verse. 8. I have two daughters which have not known man; let me, I pray you,
bring them out unto you, etc.] Questionless this prosfer of Lots was
unwarrantable and sinful: for though in evils of punishment we may choose a
less to avoid a greater, yet in the evils of sin all choice is unlawful: if
we may not do evil that good may come of it, Romans 3. 8. much less may we do
any evil to prevent others from doing some greater evil. It would not have been
lawful for Lots daughters to have yielded themselves to have been defiled by
these varlets, thereby to have taken them off from that fouler sin of Sodomy,
which they had resolved upon; much less was it lawful for him to resolve that
he would bring them forth and deliver them up to the lust of this rabble, that
they might do what they list to them: for he had no such power over his
daughters, especially if he had already espoused them to husbands, though they
were not married, as many Expositours think he had. But yet it was no wonder at
all that Lot, though a righteous man 2. Pet. 2. 7. and highly beloved of God,
should thus forget himself, considering 1. that in such a sudden disturbance
caused by the fear of such a horrid villainy so violently pursued, he could
scarce have so much liberty as to ponder any thing that came into his mind; 2.
that his zealous care for preserving his guests against such a horrid
wickedness might so far transport him as to make him on a sudden judge it
better to yield to any thing then to give way to their detestable desires; and
3. that he might deceive himself with a vain hope that in this strange proffer
made by a father they would read so much of the grievous distraction of his
mind, as would make them relent, and neither desire what he had proffered, nor
prosecute what they had at first desired.

Verse. 9. This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge.] By
this it may appear that Lot had not only grieved inwardly and vexed his
righteous soul with the unclean conversation of these wicked men, but had also,
as occasion was offered, reproved them for their wickedness, and done what he
could to teach them better, and to dissuade them from those lewd courses, which
were otherwise likely to bring Gods judgment upon them; and hence it is that
they now twit him with taking upon him to be a judge amongst them, and with
thinking (a stranger though he were) to govern them and to order them in every
thing as he pleased.

Verse. 11. And they smote the men that were at the door of the house with
blindness.] Their continuing to seek for the door, and departing home when
they had wearied themselves in vain, argues that they were not utterly deprived
of sight; only their eyes were dazzled in such a manner that they were as men
blind in regard of that object they looked after; though they saw other things,
they could not see his door; or happily though they saw the door before them,
they knew not where it sto^^, nor how to come at it.

Verse. 14. And spoke unto his sons in law.] Some understand this of certain
men in the city that were contracted to his two virgin daughters, of whom
mention was before made, verse. 8 and that they were yet therefore in their
fathers house; but others understand it of the husbands of other daughters of
his, that were already married into the city, which seems best to agree with
the text. But if so, then we must farther consider though his sons in law are
here only mentioned, as the heads of the families, yet their wives if living
were also spoken to. And hence it may seem was Lots lingering, that he should
leave his children to be destroyed; and the Angels command, verse. 15. Take thy
two daughters that are here, intimating that he might not wait for the other
that were not there.

Verse. 17. And it came to pass, etc. that he said, etc.] To wit, one of the
Angels; to whom Lot therefore afterward directs his speech in the singular
number, because it was he that had given him the charge of flying to the
mountain.

Look not behind thee.] This was enjoined Lot, 1. thereby to express how
detestable the inhabitants of Sodom were, a people hated of God, and unworthy
of the commiseration of good men, for whom it was not fit he should take the
least thought or care; 2. To teach him hereby, that he was so to be affected
with Gods me^cy in delivering him from that wicked cursed place, and the
judgment that was now to fall upon them, that he was not to mind nor regard
his house, cattle, or whatever other riches he was to leave behind, or in the
least degree to repent of his coming away; and accordingly is the very same
phrase used, Luke 9. 62. No man having put his hand to the plow and looking
back is fit for the kingdom of God; 3. To intimate with what speed they were
to haste away, not to hinder their flight so much as by looking back upon the
city.

Verse. 19. And I cannot escape to the mountain, etc.] Because the mountain was
so far off, he fears lest ere he could get thither the destruction should be
poured forth, and he should be overtaken in it; and therefore desires that Zoar
might be the place of refuge for him, which was nearer at hand.

Verse. 21. And he said unto him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this
thing.] The Angel, not without Gods direction undoubtedly, yields to the
weakness of his faith, and grants his request; but as God does usually grant
his servants those requests which he does not approve of, that they may by
their own experience see their folly, and that it is still better for them to
follow his direction: for thus it was with Lot, who afterward verse. 30. feared
to dwell in Zoar, and then therefore found that he had done best it at first he
had followed the angels counsel in flying to the mountain.

Verse. 22. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.] Which signifies
little: before it was called Bela, chap. 14. 2. And the king of Bela, which is
Zoar.

Verse. 23. The sun was risen upon the eart^, etc.] This I conceive is thus
expressed, 1. To show how narrowly Lot escaped the destruction that fell upon
the Sodomites: It was break of day when the Angels hastened him and his to get
them out of Sodom, verse. 15. And when the morning arose, then the Angels
hastened Lot, saying, Arise, etc. and by that time the sun was risen, the
judgment threatened fell upon Sodom, whereby no doubt Lot was brought to see
and acknowledge both his own folly in lingering so long, and the goodness of
God in forcing him away, and not suffering him to stay there any longer; and 2.
to make it the more manifest that this judgment was extraordinary and
supernatural, and how suddenly the inhabitants of these wicked cities were
overwhelmed with the storm of Gods fiery indignation, without any warning given
them, when doubtless they had not the least fear of any such mischief that was
coming upon them. The sun rose as fairly that day, as upon other days: and
yet presently a shower of fire and brimstone fell upon them, and consumed them
all.

Verse. 24. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah, etc.] Sodom and
Gomorrah are here mentioned as the chief; but withal Admah and Zeboiim were
also destroyed. Deuteronomy. 29. 23. Like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah
and Zeboiim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger, etc. Now, from the Lord is
here added in the end of this clause, Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon
Gomorrah brimstone, and fire from the Lord, the more emphatically to express
that it was not by any ordinary course of nature, but by the immediate almighty
power of God. And doubtless it was the supernatural and miraculous work of
the Lord, and not from any natural cause, that such showers, not of water, as
when the old world was drowned, but of fire and brimstone should fall from
heaven upon these cities, who did therein fit the punishment to the sins of
those that were destroyed thereby. They burned with vild and unnatural lusts,
and therefore against the ordinary course of nature fire falls down from heaven
and devours them, and their stinking abominable filthiness is punished with
the stench of brimstone mingled with fire; yea this fire and brimstone was
but a forerunner of their everlasting punishment in that lake which burns
with fire and brimstone, for evermore, Rev. 21. 8. for so the Apostle S. Jude
says that Sodom and Gomorrah suffered the vengeance of eternal fire, Jude 7.

Verse. 26. But his wife looked back from behind him, etc.] That is, Lot going
before, and his wife follovving behind him, she looked back from behind him
toward Sodom, to wit, as doubting whether any such judgment would fall
upon Sodom as was threatened, or lingering in her desires after those friends,
that wealth and estate which they had left behind them; and thus she did
rebel against the express commandment of the Lord given before to Lot, verse.
17. and in him unto all that were with him, and that when God had afforded
her such an extraordinary mercy to fetch her away by his angels from Sodom
when it was to be destroyed, and so was turned into a Pillar, or statue, of
salt, not such salt as we ordinarily use, which being wet will melt and
turn into water (for it was to stand as a monument of her infidelity and
disobedience) but a kind of rockie mineral salt, which will endure all
vveathers and not waste away.

Verse. 29. God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the
overthrow.] That is, God remembered his promise, whereby he had engaged himself
to Abraham, not only to bless him in his own person, but those also for his
sake that were dear unto him, chap. 12. 2. And thou shall be a blessing: I will
bless them that bless thee: and he remembered the requests which Abraham had
made to him for Sodom, and that in the behalf of those fevv righteous ones,
that might be in that city, pressing him particularly with this, that the
righteous might not be destroyed with the wicked, and so he saved Lot for
Abraham's sake. It is true indeed that God had respect to the piety and
righteousness of Lot in delivering him: for so the Apostle faith, 2. Pet. 2.
7, 8. That he delivered just Lot, and that because the righteous soul of this
good man was vexed from day to day in seeing and hearing the filthy
conversation of those wicked vvretches; but this does not exclude that which
is here said concerning Abraham. There may be diverse causes of one and the same
effect: the main cause of all was Gods free grace both to Abraham and Lot, and
not any merit in them; but subordinate hereunto there were also other
inducements, to wit, the joint respect that the Lord had to the righteousness
of Lot his faithful servant, and to the intercession of Abraham, as here is
expressed.

Verse. 30. For he feared to dwell in Zoar, etc.] The cause of this fear is not
expressed, but may probably be thought to have been, either that seeing the
abominable sins of that city, he feared lest God would also destroy that;
or else, that he doubted lest because of his escape the people would fall upon
him, as the cause of the overthrow of those neighboring cities: and indeed
his hiding himself in the cave makes this most probable.

Verse. 31. And there is not a man on the earth to come in unto us, etc.] Some
conceive that they did verily think that all nations of the earth were
destroyed by fire; but many things make this improbable: 1. Their knowledge
that Zoar was not destroyed, and that the Angels had promised that it should
not be destroyed; 2. Their seeing that the shower of fire, which had burnt up
those cities of the plain, reached not so far as the mountains wherein at
present they were; 3. The remembrance of Abraham their uncle, a righteous man,
not like to be destroyed; and 4. That last clause, after the manner of all the
earth, which seems to be spoken of the time present, that they were deprived of
that society with man which everywhere else they did enjoy. Others conceive
that she meant only this, that there was not a godly man, with whom only they
durst marry. They take the perishing of their sisters in Sodom, to be a
punishment of God upon them for their marrying with the wicked Sodomites; not
daring to do so therefore, and grieving by this means to be deprived of the
common blessing of mankind, they resolve upon a more wicked course. But I
rather conceive thus of the place: Lot and his daughters flying in some great
fear into the mountain, and being there in a manner mured up in a cave, his
eldest daughter utters these words as a complaint that by this solitary life
they were deprived of all hope of marriage (the common blessing of all the
earth) There is not a man in the earth to come in unto us: That is, here we
live in a cave without society of any but our selves, and it is to us all one,
as if there were not a man upon the earth; Come let us make our father drink
wine, etc. But indeed any of these expositions may be embraced: for whatever
absurdity there is in their resolutions, must be ascribed to their fear, that
passion blinding men, and driving them upon any absurd thoughts or courses.

Verse. 32. Let us make our father drink wine.] To wit, the wine which they had
brought from Zoar.

Verse. 37. And called his name Moab, etc.] Moab, is by interpretation, of the
father, and Benammi, is son of my people, or son of my kindred. In both
names ^here was a memorial of their incestuous procreation: That which these
daughters of Lot it seemed boasted of, was their having children of their own
kin, not of the f^ithlesse and cursed nations.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd Abraham journeyed from thence, etc.] The cause of this remove is
not expressed; but in likelihood it was, because of some inconveniency arising
from the late fearful destruction of Sodom.

Verse. 2. And Abimelech, king of Gerar, etc.] Abimelech was the common title of
the kings of Palestina, as Pharaoh was of the kings of Egypt. Psalm. 34. the
title, A Psalm of David when he changed his behavior before Abimelech.

Verse. 3. But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night.] By that which we
read, verse 17. So Abraham prayed unto God, and God healed Abimelech, and his
wife, and his maidservants, etc. it appears that presently upon the taking of
Sarah, the Lord struck Abimelech with a dangerous sickness, and plagued his
Court with a strange disease: Now in his sickness the Lord by a dream (the
extraordinary glory whereof was undoubtedly such, that Abimelech might easily
perceive it came from heaven) informs him of the cause, and tells him he was a
dead man, which must be understood conditionally, unless he restored Abraham's
wife, verse. 7. Now therefore restore the man his wife; for he is a Prophet, and
he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live: and if thou restore her not, know
thou, that thou shall surely die, etc.

Verse. 4. Will thou slay also a righteous nation.] That is, him and his people,
verse. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombes of the house of
Abimelech.

Verse. 7. For he is a Prophet.] They are called Prophets in the Scripture to
whom the Lord did more familiarly reveal his will, then to other men, and by
whom he did teach and instruct others: Such was Abraham, Genesis 18. 17, 18, 19.
And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do? seeing that
Abraham shall surely become a great nation, etc. For I know that he will
command his children and his household after him, etc. And of this the Lord
gives notice to Abimelech, 1. That he might not dare to detain Sarah, because
her husband was not an ordinary man, but a Prophet, one in special favor with
God, whose wrongs God would surely avenge, Psalm. 105. 15. Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm; 2. That he might hope by his prayers
(being a man so prevalent with God) to have the plague removed that was laid
upon them.

Verse. 12. And yet indeed she is my sister, etc.] He adds, to excuse himself,
that it was not altogether false which he had faid, because it was true in a
sense, that she was his sister (as in the same sense Lot and he are called
brethren, Genesis 13. 8. For we be brethren) namely, because she was the daughter
of his father, though not of his mother: And for the clearing this, the Hebrews
hold that Sarah was that Iscah, the daughter of Haran, Abraham's brother, as
being the son of Terah, though by another woman; for this being yielded, she
was indeed the grandchild of Terah, Abraham's father, and so might be called the
daughter of his father (as Jethroes daughters are called Revels, who was their
grandfather, Exodus 2. 18.) and yet withal not be the daughter of his mother,
because descended from the former of Terahs wives, whereas Abraham was born of
a latter wife.

Verse. 16. Behold he is to thee a covering of the eyes, etc. thus she was
reproved.] This place is diversely translated, and accordingly there are
several expositions given of it, but according to this translation of ours,
the meaning must needs be this; Abimelech puts her in mind that her husband
ought to be as a veil unto her, to cover her as it were from the eyes and
desires of all others; and therefore Moses adds, thus she was reproved, that
is, though this speech of his may not seem at first to imply so much, yet in
truth he did thereby though covertly yet sharply reprove her; for it was all
one as if he had told her, that by denying her husband, she had in a manner
unveiled her self, and laid her self open to the unlawful desires of other
men, and was guilty her self of those dangers, whereinto she had fallen. God
had made her husband the guardian of her chastity, and by denying him she had
exposed her self to the lusts of others. Thus was godly Sarah, to her greater
shame, reproved by a profane king, and instructed how better to carry her self
hereafter.

Verse. 18. For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombes of the house of
Abimelech.] What closing up of the womb this was, it is hard to say. Some
think only that God had restrained them from conceiving: and this may be; for
this judgment might be inflicted and cured, and yet not discerned by
themselves. But I rather think it was some other extraordinary closing of the
womb, 1. Because of that word fast closed, which implies a judgment unusual;
2. Because all were closed up; 3. Because it is related as an apparent noted
cure that followed Abraham's prayer.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 3. ANd Abraham called the name of his son, Isaac.] Which signifies
laughter, to wit, because of the joy they had in this their son.

Verse. 9. And Sarah saw the son of Hagar, etc. mocking, etc.] Ishmael looking
with an envious eye upon Isaac at all times, was, as it seems, stung with the
joy and jollity that was made at the weaning of him, and this repining of his
heart brake forth at this time (as no doubt it had done often formerly) into
some scornful language and derision of him, mocking him as their young master,
and he that must forsooth be heir of all.

Verse. 10. For the son of this ^ondwoman shall not be heir with my son.]
Sarah therefore perceived that this mocking proceeded both from Hagars and
Ishmaels repining that Isaac the younger son should be the heir.

Verse. 12. And God said unto Abraham.] By a vision in the night, as appears by
verse. 14. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, etc.

Verse. 14. And took bread, and a bottle of water, etc.] For the full
understanding of this, we must know, 1. That the casting of them out, which
Sarah required, was not only putting them out of his house, but an absolute
casting them off, as if he had had nothing to do with them (for might he have
provided for them in another place it would not have been so grievous to him)
2. That God had enjoined him to hearken to Sarah in all things, the rather, no
doubt, that the misery of their casting out might punish them for their sin,
who in mocking Isaac had despised the blessed seed promised in him. 3. That
Abraham thus yielding to cast her off, does only give her what she could not
be without (because she was to go through the wilderness that lay in the way
to Egypt) bread, that is, such victuals as she could carry with her, for this
in the Scripture is usually called bread, as we may see Mark 6. 36. This is a
desert place, and now the time is far passed, send them away, that they may
go into the country round about, and into the villages, and buy themselves
bread; which bread, Matthew. 14. 15. is termed victuals, His Disciples came to
him, saying, This is a desert place, and the time is now past, send the
multitude away, that they may go into the villages, and buy themselves
victuals; and a bottle of water, which she might else want in those dry barren
places.

Verse. 14. And she wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.] The bottle of
water might have sufficed till she had come to some place of succor, had she
not missed the direct way, and wandered up and down, as they might well in those
desert places, not knowing where they were, nor which way to go.

Verse. 15. And she cast the child under one of the shrubs.] He that was
growing apace to man's stature is often in Scripture called a child, as Ishmael
here, who was about eighteen years old; and Hagar is said to cast the child
under a shrub, because she left him being sick and fainting for thirst,
whereas before she had supported and cherished him.

Verse. 17. What aileth thee, Hagar?] Words of expostulation, as if he had said,
What meanest thou thus to take on, having had experience of Gods providence
over thee?

Fear not for God has heard the voice of the lad, where he is.] Both here and
before mention is made of the lads voice, not Hagars; because he it was that
was in extremity, and her weeping was for him. God has heard the voice of the
lad, that is, God has taken notice of his misery, and will preserve him: and
these words where he is, are added to express, the better to Hagars
apprehension, that God had taken notice of his danger, and would help him; as
if he had said, The child which you have yonder cast off, as hopeless of his
life, God has heard, and will preserve and succor him.

Verse. 19. And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well, etc.] That is, she was
brought to observe and take notice of it, which she did not before, either by
reason of passionate grief, or for some other reason. For thus it is said of
the Disciples that talked with Christ, Luke 24. 16. But their eyes were holden
that they should not know him: And, verse. 31. their eyes were opened, and they
knew him.

Verse. 20. And became an archer.] This is expressed to show, not only that he
did by this means nourish himself with beasts killed by shooting, but also that
he was a warrior, and so that oracle was fulfilled, Genesis 16. 12. And he will
be a wild man, etc.

Verse. 21. And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran.] next adjoining to the
desert of Sinai, through which the Israelites went. Number. 10. 12. And the
children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai, and the
cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.

Verse. 24. And Abraham said, I will swear.] Though this country of Abimelechs
was a part of the land promised to Abraham, yet he knowing that it was his
posterity only, that were in time to come actually to enjoy it, and to root
out the inhabitants thereof, and that himself was to live as a stranger and
sojourner in the land, no marvel it is though he acknowledged Abimelechs
sovereigntie in that land, and took an oath for himself, that he would no way
hutt either him, or his son, or his sons son after him.

Verse. 27. And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and sent them unto Abimelech.]
Besides that it was the custom to give some such gifts at the making of
covenants, these seem to have been given by Abraham by way of Homage to
Abimelech, as the king of the country.

Verse. 30. For these seven ew-lambes shall thou take of my hand, That they may
be a witness unto me, etc.] That is, the receiving of these seven ew-lambes,
shall be as a witness that this well formerly taken from me, verse. 25. is now
acknowledged to be mine, that so all controversy about it for the time to come
may be prevented.

Verse. 3^. And they returned into the land of the Philistines.] That is, That
part of the land where the Philistines dwelt: for otherwise Beersheba, where
they had now covenanted with Abraham, was also in the land of Palestina, verse.
34. And Abraham sojourned in the land of the Philistines many days.

Verse. 33. And Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there on the
name of the Lord, etc.] That is, in the Grove* which he had planted in
Beersheba, which no doubt he purposely planted for this religious use, that
under the shade of those trees they might the more commodiously offer up
sacrifices, and perform all other the public duties of Gods worship and
service, which within their tents they could not do. And hereby Moses gives us
to understand, 1. That Abraham did at length here enjoy some settled rest, and
dwelt here a long time together, to wit, whilst his new planted Grove was
grown up and fit for the service he intended it; 2. That at this time the use
of Groves in Gods worship was not unlawful: However afterward, when men began
to esteem such places holy, and to think superstitiously that God was better
worshipped there then in other places, and so it became a general custom
amongst all Idolatrous nations to set up their Idols in Groves, and there to
sacrifice to their false Gods, the Lord did thereupon by his law forbid the
Israelites all planting of Groves for religious uses, Deuteronomy. 16. 21. Thou shall
not plant thee a Grove of any trees near unto the Altar, etc. and this planting
of Groves became one of the chief abominations for which God reproved the
Israelites in future times, Judge. 3. 7. And the children of Israel did evil in
the sight of the Lord, and forgot the Lord their God, and served Baalim and the
Groves. 1. Kings 14. 15. For the Lord shall smite Israel, as a reed is shaken*
in the water, and he shall root up Israel out of this good land, which he gave
to their fathers, etc. because they have made their Groves, provoking the Lord
to anger; yet, I say, at present it was no sin in Abraham; both because as
yet God had not forbidden it, and Abraham did it only for convenience to
shelter them from the heat, not as think^ng God was better worshipped in
Groves then in other places.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. GOd did tempt Abraham.] That is, he did try and prove him. It is
said, James 1. 13. that God tempts no man, to wit, by seeking to seduce
them, by soliciting and provoking them to do that which is evil. Thus men are
tempted by Satan, who is therefore called, The Tempter, Matt. 4. 3. and, by
their own lusts, James 1. 13. but God, in this sense, tempts no man. He is
therefore here said to have tempted Abraham, only because by enjoining him to
sacrifice his son Isaac (in whom God had promised to make his seed as the
stars of heaven, and that in his seed all the nations of the earth should be
blessed) God did singularly prove and try his obedience and faith, to wit,
whether he would believe still the promise made him concerning Isaac, even
when he was enjoined to do that which might seem utterly to overthrow that
promise, and do what God commanded, even when reason must needs conclude,
that if he did obey, the promise concerning Isaac could not be performed: Thus
God did tempt Abraham. And because the command of such an inhumane fact, as
was the sacrificing of his own son, might not startle those that should
read it, or make them think that it was rather some fit of sudden phrensy, or
some delusion of Satan, that made him undertake such a thing as this* in the
very entrance of this story this is therefore expressed, that God commanded
this, but it was only to try him. God required in Abraham a readiness of
will, really to do what was spoken to him, but never intended that he should
do it; only as men use to make experiments of the faithfulness of their
friends, so now God made proof of Abraham's faith and obedience; and that, not
because God needed any such way of discovering it to himself* for he knows how
the hearts of all men stand affected, but because he would hereby have it
manifested to others: so that herein also the Scripture speaks of God after the
manner of men.

And he said, Behold, here I am.] That is, ready to do whatever thou will
enjoin me.

Verse. 2. Take now thy son, thine only son.] So called, both because he
was the only son of the freewoman, and also because Ishmael was now quite
cast out. Chap. 21. 14. And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took
bread, and a bottle of water, and gave it unto Hagar and the child, and sent
her away, and she departed, etc.

And get thee into the Land of Moriah.] Which was the place, where afterward
the temple was built, as 2. Chron. 3. 1. Then Solomon began to build the house
of the Lord at Jerusalem, in Mount Moriah, etc.

Verse. 4. Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.] For by this
time God had told him, according to the promise before mentioned, verse. 2. in
what particular place of the land of Moriah he was to sacrifice his son, as
it is plainly afterward expressed, verse. 9. They came to the place that God had
told him of* Now Abraham's seeing the place before he came at it, is thus
particularly expressed, because doubtless the first sight of this place, where
he was to perform such a doleful work, did exceedingly wound his heart, and
yet notwithstanding he shrunk not, but persevered constantly in his resolution
of doing what God had enjoined him.

Verse. 5. Abraham said to his young men, Abide you here with the ass, etc.]
That his servants might not oppose and hinder him in the work he had to do, he
enjoins them to stay with the ass at the foot of the hill, to wit, the ass
whereon himself rode, or whereon they had brought the wood they were to use in
the sacrifice* for happily they all went on foot, and only used the ass for
the carrying of the wood, or perhaps only Abraham by reason of his age did
ride, and the rest went on foot.

And I and the lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.] Thus by
the all-ruling Providence of God he prophesies of that, whereof he knew
nothing. It cannot be that he distinctly knew that he should bring back his
son again; for then what great matter was there in this that he did? rather
surely he spoke this as a man astonished and amazed: neither need we be so
careful to clear Abraham from seeking by this dissembling to keep his servants
from suspecting that which he went about; rather let us admire the wisdom
and goodness of God, that he suffered Abraham in this greatest of all humane
actions to show a little frailty, that we might not look for perfection here.

Verse. 6. And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon
Isaac his son.] But how was he able to carry so much wood as would serve
for the burning up of the sacrifice? I answer, 1. it appears by this that he
was now a youth well grown; 2. it may well be that Abraham carried with him
some lesser quantity of dry choice wood to begin the fire, resolving to furnish
himself with the rest upon the mountain; 3. happily Isaac carried it at
several times, though that be not here expressed, but only so much as would
serve to show how even in this he was a Type of Christ, John 19. 17. And he
bearing his cross, went forth, etc.

Verse. 9. And bound Isaac his son.] It is not likely that all particulars are
here expressed: no doubt Abraham, before he bound him, acquainted him with the
commandment of God, and urged the necessity of obedience, the promises and
power of God, and whatever might prepare him to yield himself to be
sacrificed, as God had commanded: but these Moses relates not, but only that
Abraham bound him, etc. that so we might know that in not resisting* but
meekly suffering his father to proceed, Isaac was also a Type of Christ; Mark
15. 1. The chief Priests held a consultation, etc. and bound Jesus. Acts 8. 32.
He was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the
shearer, so opened he not his mouth.

Verse. 11. And the Angel of the Lord called unto him.] That is, Christ the
^ternall word of his father, who speaks of himself as God, verse. 12. For now
I know thou fear God, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only
son, from me; and is called Jehovah, verse. ^6. And the Angel of the Lord
called unto him out of heaven the second time, and said, By my self have I
sworn, says the Lord, etc.

Verse. 13* And Abraham lifted up his eyes.] Hearing this voice from heaven, he
looked about, and behind him he espies this ram, which he took as sent of God,
to supply Isaacs room; or, it may be, he lifted up his eyes purposely to look
for a sacrifice.

Verse. 14. As it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be
seen.] In the mount, that is, in d^e time and place, or in like manner as once
to Abraham; in the mount it shall be seen, that is, it shall be provided for,
God will help, and that his children shall see: for both these were employed in
this Proverb, which upon this occasion grew so ordinary in following times, to
wit, both that God would provide for his servants in their extremities, and
that it should be done in such a manner, that they should plainly see it came
from God.

Verse. 16. By my self have I sworn, says the Lord.] This does not prove that
it was not Christ, the eternal word of the father, who now spoke to Abraham;
the like we have, Psalm. 2. 7. The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my son,
etc.

Verse. 17. And thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies.] That is, thou
shall subject them, and bring both their strength and government under command;
for by the gate of the enemy is here meant their strength and government;
their strength, because there they had their strongest fortifications; their
government, because there the Magistrates sat in judgment, Deuteronomy. 22. 15. Then
shall the father of the damsel, and her mother, take and bring forth the
tokens of the damsells virginity, unto the Elders of the City in the gate.

Verse. 24. And his Concubine, whose name was Reumah, etc.] The Hebrew word
translated Concubine signifies a half wife, or divided and secondary wife,
which was a wife for the bed (and therein differing from a whore) but not
for honor and government of the family; 1. Kings 11. 3. And he had seven
hundred wives Princesses, and three hundred Con^ubines.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 2. ANd Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, etc.] The most of Expositours
hold that both Abraham and Sarah had now removed their dwelling from Beersheba
to Hebron; and that this therefore which is here said, that Abraham came to
mourn for Sarah, is only to be understood of his coming to Sarahs tent: for
Abraham and she had several tents, Genesis 24. 67. And Isaac brought her into his
mother Sarahs tent. Yet many also hold that Abraham dwelt still at Beersheba,
and that Sarah, upon some occasion not expressed being at Hebron, fell sick and
dyed, and so Abraham hearing of it came thither to lament and bury her: which
is the more probable, because verse. 4. as a stranger he s^es for a burying
place, which he would not in that manner have done if he had been a dweller
among them (as it is expressly noted of Ephron that he was) and also because
Isaac dwelt afterward near Lahai-roi which was not far from Beersheba.

Verse. 3. And spoke unto the sons of Heth.] That is, the Governors, and
Elders of the Hittites, the inhabitants of Hebron.

Verse. 4. Give me a possession of a burying place with you, etc.] That is, give
m^ liberty to purchase, though a stranger, a possession of a burying place.

Verse. 10. And Ephron d^velt amongst the children of Heth.] Others read, And
Ephron sat amongst the children of Heth, not unfitly: Abraham, not knovving the
man, had spoken of him as of one absent: ere Ephrons answer therefore be
inserted, Moses shows that he sat there amongst the other Elders, and so
immediately replied to Abraham's demand. Hovvever if we read it as our
translations render it, And Ephron dwelt amongst the children of Heth, it comes
all to one. For his dwelling among them is expressed only to imply, that he
being himself one of the chief inhabitants of that city sat at that time
amongst the other Governors and Elders, and so presently ansvvered for himself
to that request which Abraham had made.

Verse. 13. But if thou will give it, etc.] Other translations supply this
imperfect speech thus, if thou be that Ephron, etc. which seems to imply, that
he had only formerly heard of him, not seen his face.

I will give thee money for the field.] Abraham persists to refuse it of gift;
because he would not by any bounty of theirs enjoy one foot of that land
which God had given him entire for his possession.

Verse. 17. And the field of Ephron, etc.] That this was not that purchased
burying place, whereof Stephen spoke, Act. 7. 16. is evident; because that
was in Sichem, this in Hebron; that was bought of Emor the father of Sichem,
this of Ephron.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd Abraham was old, etc.] His age puts him in mind to provide for
his sons marriage, he being now an hundred and forty years old: for Isaac
was forty, Genesis 25. 20. And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah
to wife, and he was born when Abraham was an hundred, Genesis 21. 5. Abraham
was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto him.

Verse. 2. And Abraham said unto his eldest servant, etc. This in likelihood
was his steward Eliezer, who was born in his house, Genesis 15. 2, 3. And the
steward of my house is this Eliezer of Damascus. And Abraham said, Behold to me
thou have given no seed; and lo one born in my house is mine heir.

Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh, etc.] A sign which Jacob also
required of his son Joseph, Genesis 47. 29. either in token of homage, and to
signify subjection, that as their hand lay under the thigh of him that
enjoined the oath, so they acknowledged themselves under his power, bound to
obey his command; or for a further mystery of the covenant of Circumcision, or
rather of Christ the promised seed, who was to come out of Abraham's loins or
thigh. Genesis 46. 26. All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came
out of his loins, etc.

Verse. 3. That thou will not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the
Canaanites, etc.] Not only because they were a profane idolatrous people, but
especially because he would not have his seed mix themselves with that
accursed nation, in whose place they should succeed, when God had destroyed
them according to his promise.

Verse. 5. Must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence thou
came?] Abraham having required his servant to swear (as is related in the
foregoing verses) that he should not take a wife for his son of the daughters
of the Canaanites, but that he should go unto the land from whence he came, and
there amongst his kindred provide a wife for him, in these words the servant
objects a case that might happen, and desires direction therein, to wit, if
there were not a fit wise found amongst his kindred, that would leave her
country to come into Canaan, nor yield to marry Isaac, but upon condition that
he should leave Canaan, and come into the land where she dwelt, whether in this
case he should be so strictly bound by his oath to provide him a wife amongst
his kindred, that of necessity he must consent to this condition, rather then
not to marry him to one of them; this I say is doubtless the drift of these
words, Must I needs bring thy son again unto the Land from whence thou
came? Only further yet to clear them, two things must be noted: 1. That
those words, Must I bring thy son again into the land, etc. must not make us
think that Isaac was now by reason of his tender years under this servants
government, and at his disposing to be carried up and down whither he pleased,
for he was now well-nigh forty years old, Genesis 25. 20. Isaac was forty years
old when he took Rebekah to wife. but are only meant as an enquiry whether he
should in treating about a wife for him consent to that condition of Isaacs
removing to dwell amongst his fathers kindred, and persuade Isaac to it, who it
seemed had undertaken to his father to be guided by this servant in the
business of his marriage; and 2. Though Isaac was born in Canaan, and had
never dwelt in the land from whence his father came, yet he says, Must I bring
thy son again into the land from whence thou came? to wit in relation to
his fathers former dwelling there, as with the like phrase, Genesis 15. 16. it is
said that the Israelites should in the fourth generation come again into the
land of Canaan, out of Egypt, though their fathers only, not themselves, had
been there before.

Verse. 6. Beware thou that thou bring not my son thither again.] That is,
yield not to any such condition, undertake no such thing when you treat with my
kindred about a wife for him: I will by no means have my son leave this land,
and go thither to dwell; and therefore be sure that you yield to no such
condition, nor persuade my son to it when I am gone. Now this Abraham does
thus earnestly give in charge to his servant, not only because he knew his
kindred were not so free from Idolatrous corruptions in Religion as he desired,
though they worshipped the true God, and therefore had respect to his son
therein; but especially because he knew that the Lord had called him out of
that Land into Canaan, to take possession of it, as it were, both for him and
his posterity, and that therefore his sons going to dvvell elsewhere would
be a kind of renouncing the land of promise: As therefore himself by faith had
hitherto abode there, Heb. 11. 9. so he would have his son do also, choosing
rather to have him live as a stranger and sojourner in the land of promise,
then to have him live amongst his kindred in the land of his forefathers
nativity.

Verse. 10. And the servant took ten camels, etc.] The reason why he took so
many camels and servants also answerable, as is expressed, ver. 59. They sent
away Abraham's servant and his men, was doubtless partly because the journey
was very long* and much of it through desert places, and so it was necessary
that he should take store of provision along with them; partly because he was
to carry many rich presents with him of all sorts, to give amongst his Masters
kindred; and partly because it was fit he should go the more richly attended,
that thereby his Masters kindred might see what a mighty man of wealth his
Master was, and the more readily embrace the motion of a match to be made
with his son. And because it might happily seem strange that he should so
freely take for his journey of his Masters goods what he pleased himself, this
clause is added, For all the goods of his Master were in his hand, that is,
they were alvvayes at his command, so that he might take what he thought fit,
to whose vvisdome and care the managing of this business was wholy left.

And went to Mesopotamia.] As Mizraim is in Greek and other tongues called
Egypt, Genesis 12. 10. so Aram-Naharaim is in Greek called Mesopotamia, because it
lay between the rivers.

Unto the city of Nahor.] That is, the city where Nahor dwelt; so that is
called Christ's city wherein he dwelt, Mat. 9. 1. And he entered into a ship,
passed over, and came into his own city: And this city here spoke of was
Haran: whereby it is evident that if Nahor came not to Haran with Abraham from
Ur of the Chaldees (as it seems he did not, Genesis 11. 31. Terah took Abraham his
son, and Lot the son of Haran, and Sarah his daughter in law his son
Abrams wife, and they went forth with them from Vr of the Chaldees, etc. and
they came unto Haran and dwelt there) yet afterward he removed thither.

Verse. 11. And he made his camels to kneel down.] That is, it being now
evening, he caused them to lie down to rest themselves. This phrase of kneeling
down, is used, because after this manner camels use to lie down, first to fall
down on their knees, and then to cast their bodies on the ground to rest
themselves.

Verse. 12. And he said, O Lord God of my master Abraham, etc.] It is said this
was but a speaking in his heart, verse. 45. As for that which he now desired of
God, to wit, that the damsel who should when he desired drink of her, answer
him, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also, might be the maid whom God
had appointed to be Isaacs wife, no doubt it came into his mind to desire this
by the special instinct of Gods spirit; yet he chooses such a token as might
be withal a probable sign of an ingenuous disposition in her that did it.

Verse. 17. And the servant ran to meet her.] He was at the well before Rebekah
came thither, verse. 13. Behold I stand here by the well, etc. but having stood
a little aloof off the well, till she had filled her pitcher and was going
away, he then ran to meet her, etc.

Verse. 28. And the damsel ran and told them of her mothers house these
things.] It seems that it was the custom of those times and places for the
women to dwell apart by themselves, verse. 67. And Isaac brought her into his
mother Sarahs tent.

Verse. 29. And Laban ran out unto the man to the well.] By the appointment
happily both of his father Bethuel, and his mother.

Verse. 48. To take my masters brothers daughter unto his son.] For Rebekah
was the daughter of Bethuel, the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother: and it is
usual in the Scriptures to call grandchildren, sons and daughters.

Verse. 49. Tell me, that I may turn to the right hand or to the left.] That is,
that I may somewhere else look out for a wife for my masters son. And thus he
opposes the right hand and the left, to that right way mentioned in the former
verse, wherein the Lord had led him to take his masters brothers daughter unto
his son.

Verse. 50. Then Laban and Bethuel answered.] The son is set before the
father, because, as it seems, he spoke in the name of them all, his father
being old, and therefore, it may well be, not so able to return the answer.

We cannot speak unto thee bad, or good.] That is, we cannot speak any thing at
all against it: he speaks good against any thing propounded, that contradicts
it upon good ground; he evil, that speaks against an apparent good motion out
of some evil affection: Laban therefore in this proverbiall speech
acknowledges that good could not be said against this motion, and evil he
would not speak.

Verse. 51. Let her be thy masters sons wife, as the Lord has spoken.] That
is, we perceive plainly by the whole carriage of this business that this match
is made in heaven, God has decreed that she shall be his wife; and therefore
God forbid that we should oppose it, Let it be as the Lord has spoken. The
same phrase David uses, speaking of Gods decree, 2. Sam. 16. 10. The Lord has
said unto him, Curse David.

Verse. 59. They sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse.] Whose name was
Deborah, Genesis 35. 8. But Deborah Rebekahs nurse died, etc.

Verse. 60. Let thy seed possess the gate of those that hate them.] See the
notes upon Genesis 22. 17. Thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies.

Verse. 65. Therefore she took a veil and covered her face.] A s^gne of
modesty, as also of subjection: 1. Cor. 11. 5, 6, 10. But every woman that
prays or proph^sieth with her head uncovered, dishonors her head: for that
is even all one as if she were shaven* for if the woman be not covered, let her
also be shorn: but if it be a shame for a woman to be shorn or shaven let her
be covered. For this cause ought the woman to have power on her head, etc.

Verse. 67. And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarahs tent, and took
Rebekah.] That is, having conducted her into the tent of Sarah his deceased
mother (which it seems had been reserved ever since Sarahs death for Isaacs
wife) within some convenient time after, he took her, that is* he was in a
solemn manner, after the rites of those times, married to her, and so she
became his wife.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. THen again Abraham took a wif^, and her name was Keturah.] That is,
after Sarah was dead, and that weighty business of his sons marriage
dispatched. But how then does the Apostle say, that Abraham's body was dead, in
the hundredth year of his age, for matter of begetting children, if now by
another he have so many children forty years after? I answer, 1. By the
deadness of his body is meant his unlikelyhood to have children in regard of
great age, not that it was absolutely impossible by the ordinary course of
nature; 2. That grace of God that strengthened him for the generation of Isaac
did continue unto him this vigor of nature, for many years after, for farther
procreation of children. Indeed considering, 1. that there is no mention
neither of Keturah nor of her children, in all the foregoing story; 2. that
Sarah caused Hagar and Ishmael to be cast out, and therefore much less would
have endured another; 3. that when Isaac was to be sacrificed he is called
Abraham's only s^nne, I see not how we can hold that Abraham married Keturah,
in Sarahs lifetime.

Verse. 6. But unto the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham
gave gifts, etc.] That is, unto the sons of Hagar and K^turah. The Hebrew
word signifies a half-wife or a divided and secondary wife; and it seems by
this place, that not only they were called concubines, who (as Hagar) were
taken after a man was married, to be, as it were, partner-wives for the right
of the bed, though not for honor and government of the family, but also second
wives married after the first was dead, because their children also had no
right of inheritance.

And sent them away from Isaac.] Thus testifying his faith, that Isaac and his
seed should only enjoy the land of Canaan.

Unto the East-countrey.] A part of Arabia; and hence is mention made of the
sons of the East. Job 1. 3. it is said of Job, that he was the greatest of
the sons of the East.

Verse. 8. An old man, and full of years.] Hereby is meant a willingness to
die, without desiring longer life on the earth.

And was gathered unto his people.] This phrase signifies the immortality of
the soul, and that men, when they die, die not like beasts, but that their
souls pass to an everlasting estate and condition.

Verse. 16. These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their
towns, and by their castles.] That is, after these names were their several
castles and towns called.

Verse. 18. And he died in the presence of all his brethren.] Some read, and he
dwelt: however, see chap. 16. 12. He shall dwell in the presence of all his
brethren: for certainly the same is intended here as accomplished, that was
there foretold.

Verse. 20. The daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan-aram.] By Padan-aram, is
meant a part of Syria, the same that is called, Genesis 24. 10. Aram-naharaim in
the Hebrew; for the Greek turns them both, Mesopotamia of Syria. Padan, in
the Syrian tongue signifies a pair or couple; and it seems therefore that this
part of Aram or Syria was so called, because it lay betwixt two rivers.
whence also the Greek word Mesopotamia, as it were, in the midst of the
rivers.

Verse. 21. And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife.] That is, he prayed many
years together, and at length God heard his prayers.

Verse. 22. And she said, If it be so, why am I thus?] These words I conceive
to be spoken out of an admiration, and fear; If it be so, why am I thus? that
is, if I be with child, as I have hitherto believed, what is the reason of
this strange and extraordinary struggling in my womb, this is not like the
motion that other women feel at their quickening, and what should I think is
the reason of it? And therefore is it, that she presently went to enquire of
the Lord, that is, she went into some secret place to pray, and received the
following answer by some revelation from God.

Verse. 23. Two nations are in thy womb, etc.] This answer God returned Rebekah
to satisfy her concerning that strange and supernatural struggling of the
children that were in her womb: wherein she is informed, 1. that she had two
sons in her womb that should be the heads of two several nations, the
Edomites, and the Israelites, the one the posterity of Esau, the other the
posterity of Jacob; 2. that these two nations should differ much the one from
the other, and not agree together, but be cross and contrary, one to the
other: the which is employed in these words, two manner of nations shall be
separated from thy bowels: as they should be divided in regard of their
habitation, seated in two several countries; so they should differ much in
their laws, Religion, and manners, and be so far from living at unity, as
brethren that descended from the same loins, that they should be almost always
at variance one with the other; and indeed to signify this it was that these
two Twins did now so struggle together in her womb; 3. that the one people
should be stronger then the other, that is, the Edomites, the posterity of Esau
the elder brother, should be stronger then the Israelites, the posterity of
Jacob; the truth whereof the story of these two Nations does sufficiently
manifest. As Esau was stronger then Jacob, and therefore Jacob was forced to
fly from his fury, Genesis 27. and at his return From Mesopotamia to crouch to
him, and by presents to seek his favor, Genesis 32. and Genesis 33. 3. He passed
over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came
near unto his brother; so the Edomites were a long time a Nation far more
potent then the Israelites, as may be seen by their churlish answer to the
Israelites, Number. 20. 18. And Edom said unto him, thou shall not pass by me,
lest I come out against thee with the sword; and 4. that notwithstanding the
elder should be the stronger, yet in the conclusion the younger should prevail,
and get the better of the elder, and so the elder should serve the younger. How
this was accomplished carnally, to wit, in the Israelites subduing of the
Edomites, is evident in several places of sacred story, 2. Sam. 8. 14. He put
garrisons in Edom, throughout all Edom put he garrisons, and all they of Edom
became David's servants. 1. Kings 22. 47. There was then no King in Edom a
Deputy was King. Obadiah. 17. 18. And the house of Jacob shall possess their
possessions: And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in them, and
devour them, and there shall not b^ any remaining of the house of Esau, etc.
But withal we must know that under this expression (which most evidently has
respect to fleshly prerogatives) there is also covertly foretold the
pre-eminence and superiority of the younger brother and his posterity above the
elder, in regard of spiritual privileges, as, 1. that his should be the
birthright; 2. that the inheritance of the land promised to Abraham should be
settled upon him; 3. that out of his loins the Messiah should spring; and 4.
that the blessing of the Adoption and Covenant, etc. should be conferred upon
him and his posterity: To these spiritual privileges S. Paul applies these
words, Romans 9. 11, 12. For the children being not yet born, neither having done
any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election might stand,
not of works but of him that calls, it was said unto her, The elder shall
serve the younger. And though it is evident that ^saac did not thus understand
this Oracle, because he sought to confer the blessing upon Esau, chap. 27.
and it were unreasonable to think that Rebekah did not acquaint her husband
with this which God had revealed to her concerning her children, or that he
would wittingly seek to cross that which God had made known to them; yet it
may be most p^obably conceived that Rebekah did thus understand this prediction
concerning the pre-eminence of the younger, and upon that very ground, because
she knew it was so decreed of God, did so confidently afterward plot to have
the blessing conferred upon the younger, against Isaacs intention.

Verse. 25. And the first came out red all over like an hairy garment; and they
called his name Esau.] Which signifies made or perfected; because he was born
hairy, more like a man then a child.

Verse. 26. And his hand took hold on Esau's heel; and his name was called
Jacob.] That is, one that held by the heel, or supplanted; because when he was
born he came out of his Mothers womb immediately after his brother that was
born before him, holding him by the heel, as if he would have pulled him back,
that he might be born before him: which doubtless was purposely so disposed by
the providence of God, as a sign presaging what should afterward come to
pass, to wit, that he should by cunning supplant his brother, and get the
pre-eminence of the birthright and blessing from him.

Verse. 27. And Esau was a cunning hunter, etc.] Their different conditions are
herein expressed: Esau was a man that followed his pleasure, a cunning man and
valourous; Jacob, a plain man, that is, a man of little note in comparison of
his brother, there was not that show of outward strength and valor in him; he
was a good plain man dwelling in tents, that is he lived a plain shepherds
life, and was not so conspicuous for outward glory. It is true indeed that the
word in the Original, here translated plain, signifies upright, sincere, and
without gulle; neither do I deny but that this also may be intended in this
place, to wit, that Jacob was a candid, plain-hearted man: for such Jacob was
doubtless in his whole conversation, though in that particular of getting away
the blessing from his brother, being carried away with his mothers counsel, and
his desire of the birthright, he failed through infirmity, and used more
disse^bling and fraud then upright and plainhearted men can in any business
well endure to use. But yet I say, that exposition concerning the plainness of
his course and condition of life does best suit with the drift of this place,
as is evident by the opposition we may note betwixt that which is said of
Esau and that which is said of Jacob, Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the
field, and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in tents.

Verse. 28. And Isaac loved Esau because he did eat of his venison.] That is, he
loved him best, his affection was most to him, as Rebekahs was most to Jacob,
though she loved Esau too. Now because it may well be thought, that it did
not beseem so great and so good a man as Isaac was, to prefer Esau in his
affection npon so slight a ground, and so po^re a reason as this was, because
his venison pleased his palate; it is conceived by some Expositours, that it
was not merely for the venison sake that he loved him so dearly, but because
his son Esaus care and diligence in providing for him the meat which he saw
he delighted in, was in his apprehension a sign that he did greatly reverence,
respect, and love his father, and that he would prove the most able and active,
the fittest for great employments, and the best and stoutest stay and support
of their family.

Verse. 30. And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me I pray thee with that same red
pottage.] The word Pottage is not in the Hebrew, but only the word red is
doubled, with that red red; and the cause of this, was either that not knowing
what to call it, he only describes it by the color, and that doubtless,
because it was very red; or else, because coming home weary and ready to faint,
verse. 29. he speaks as one in haste and greedily longing for it: undoubtedly
he might have had other food in his fathers house, and therefore this so sudden
and earnest desire of that food, which his brother had provided for himself,
must needs proceed, 1. from the extremity he was in, being ready to faint; 2.
from the eager desire of his appetite toward that meat which in this
extremity his eye first pitched upon.

Therefore was his name called Edom.] That is, Red. When, and by whom this name
was given him, it is uncertain, happily it was in process of time when he had
lost his birthright, which might make this passage the more seriously thought
on: but however this was the occasion, because of this his immoderate desire of
this red broth he was called Edom; and so this name was a kind of brand set
upon him for his greediness and profaneness.

Verse. 31. Sell me this day thy brithright.] The birthright made them first in
honor under their parents, Genesis 49. 3. Reuben, thou art my firstborn, my
might, and the beginning of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the
excellency of power; 2. it gave them a double portion of their fathers goods,
Deuteronomy. 21. 17. He shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the firstborn by
giving him a double portion of all that he has; 3. it advanced them to the
government of the family, Genesis 4. 7. Unto thee shall be his desire, and thou
shall rule over him; and, as some think, to the Priesthood too; and withal, it
was an outward sign and pledge of being one of those firstborn, Heb. 12. 23.
which are written in heaven, fellow-heirs together with Christ of the heavenly
kingdom, the heavenly Canaan. Jacob therefore upon this advantage of Esaus
desiring his pottage bargains with him for the birthright, and gets it from
Esau; in the managing whereof to free him from sin is a needles^e labor,
since we know that God is often wont to bring good out of evil.

Verse. 34. And he did eat and drink, and rose up, etc.] Never troubled at all
for that which he had done.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. ANd Isaac went unto Abimelech, etc.] See the note upon ^ chap. 20.
verse. 2.

Verse. 2. Go not down into Egypt, etc.] God would not allow him to remove into
Egypt, whither it seems he was purposed to have gone, but limits him to
Palestina; both because he would thereby show him how his affections should
cleave to the land promised to him and to his seed, and also that he might try
his faith, with bringing him to rest upon his promises whilst he lived in a
land where the famine did perhaps in part prevail.

Verse. 3. And I will perform the oath which I swear, etc.] To wit, the oath
which I swear to thy father Abraham whilst thou were by. For immediately after
Isaac should have been offered as a sacrifice did the Lord swear this to
Abraham, chap. 22. 15, 16, 17, 18.

Verse. 9. And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she is thy
wife.] This he had said because, verse. 8. he saw Isaac sporting with Rebekah:
so holy and unblamable was Isaacs life, that worse then this he never suspected.

Verse. 15. All the wells which his fathers servants had dug, etc. the
Phi^istines had stopped them, etc.] This injury was great, because of the
scarcity of waters, and against their covenant and oath, Genesis 21. 30. For
these seven ew-lambs shall thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness
unto me that I have dug this well, etc.

Verse. 24. And the Lord appeared unto him the same night.] As it seems, to
comfort him in regard of the envious proceedings of the Philistines against him.

Verse. 29. Thou art now the blessed of the Lord.] This also is spoken to
further the peace desired: as if he had said, Thou have here prospered amongst
us, we sent thee away in peace, and so now through the blessing of the Lord
thou art grown great, and therefore let there be a Covenant betwixt us.

Verse. 33. And he called it Sheba, etc.] To wit, the well which his servants
had found: This well was formerly so called by Abraham, Genesis 21. 31. He called
that place Beersheba, because there they swear both of them, to wit Abraham and
Abimelech* but having been stopped by the Philistines, and now opened again by
Isaacs servants, the old name is again imposed upon the same occasion.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. ANd his eyes were dim.] Blindness is incident to old age; yet was
this, no doubt, thus disposed in Isaac by the special providence of God, that
Jacob might be blessed: for he lived after this above forty years.

Verse. 4. Make me savoury meat, etc. that my soul may bless thee before I
die.] That is, that I may bless thee; for so Rebekah repeats these words of
Isaac, verse. 7. Make me savoury meat, that I may eat and bless thee before my
death. Many several ways men are said to bless others in the Scripture: as,
by praying to God to bless them, Bless those that curse you, says our
Savior, Luke 6. 28. by pronouncing a blessing upon them, and that by warrant
of authority derived from God, as when the priests blessed the people, of which
the Apostle speaks, Heb. 7. 7. Without all contradiction the less is blessed
of the better; and by a prophetical prediction of the blessings that should
come upon men, as when Moses by the special instinct of Gods Spirit did
foretell how the twelve Tribes should be blessed of God, Deuteronomy. 33. 5. And this
is the blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the children of Israel.
But this blessing here spoken of, was peculiar to the Pa^^iarchs. They, having
received a promise of the Covenant of grace for them and their seed after them,
were wont before they died, in the name of God, and by the guidance of the holy
Ghost, to foreshew upon which of their seed this Covenant of grace should be
continued; and so did, as it were by will and testament, pass over the right
of the Covenant and promise of grace to those of their children, who were to be
heirs of the Covenant, and in whose families the Church and the Covenant of
grace was to be propagated unto the coming of Christ; whence is that phrase of
inheriting the blessing, Heb. 12. 17. And thus Isaac intended now to bless
Esau; and that doubtless because he knew not Gods will and purpose herein; for
it is not probable, that so good a man would wittingly seek to cross the known
decree of God concerning his sons. It cannot be but Rebekah acquainted Isaac
with that Oracle, Genesis 25. 23. where the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in
thy womb, and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; the one
people shall be stronger then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger;
and being her self persuaded thereby that God intended the blessing to the
younger, did what she could to convince her husband likewise that it was so.
But, it seems, though God were pleased thus far to enlighten her mind, and
powerfully to incline her heart to believe this truth, yet still he suffered
him to err herein; yea, even now at the last, though he enlightened his
understanding by a prophetical illumination as concerning the blessing he
pronounced, yet withal at the same time he did neither enlighten his
understanding, nor bend his will to the right person, but left him herein to
his own spirit; and so being carried by his carnal judgment concerning the
prerogative of Esaus being his firstborn, and by his affection to him,
intended him the blessing, but was disappointed by Gods providence, that it
might be the more evident that it was not by the will of man, but of Gods free
grace and singular favor, that Jacob had the blessing and not Esau. Why Isaac
desired savoury meat, such as he loved, before he performed this work, it is
hard to say. The most probable reason given is this, that being aged and
feeble, he desired this refreshing to cheer up his spirits, that he might be
the fitter instrument of the holy Spirit of God in pronouncing this
prophetical blessing; as Elisha, when he was moved against king Jehoram,
called for a musician to allay his passion, and quicken his spirit, before he
prophesied to them in the name of the Lord, 2. Kings 3. 14, 15. However
doubtless God by this means intended to give Rebekah the advantage of this
time, to plot for the transferring of the blessing in Esaus absence upon Jacob,
to whom of right it did belong.

Verse. 6. Rebekah spoke unto Jacob her son, etc.] Rebekah being strongly
persuaded that the blessing belonged to Jacob, to wit, 1. By Gods answer to her
at the struggling of the children in her womb, Genesis 25. 23. The elder shall
serve the younger; 2. By that remarkable passage of Gods providence, when Jacob
was born holding his brother by the heel; 3. By Esaus selling the birthright to
Jacob; and 4. By Esaus profaneness, and Jacobs piety; and perceiving that her
husband was now ready, as much as in him lay, to cross the counsel and purpose
of God, she resolves to assay to disappoint her husband, and that by subtilty
and deceit, and so instructs Jacob how to deceive his father; wherein, though
she did many things that are not warrantable (unless she were moved by the
special instinct of Gods Spirit, which does not appear) yet thus far she is
praiseworthy, that understanding rightly the Oracle of God, she sought to
prevent the error of her husband, and to procure the blessing to him for whom
God had appointed it.

Verse. 13. And his mother said unto him, On me be thy curse, etc.] Relying upon
that which God had revealed to her, she was fearlesse of that which Jacob
feared, not doubting but God would prosper their design, whilst they sought to
effect that which was according to Gods counsel, and to further that which he
had decreed: yet because the way cannot be judged warrantable whereby she
sought it, to wit, by deceiving her blind husband, and causing her son by
dissembling and lying to beguile his father, doubtless she was over-confident,
and had no just ground for what she said; only God was pleased of his own free
grace to let it be according to her hope.

Verse. 20. Because the Lord thy God brought it to me.] Jacob perceiving that
his father began to be jealous of some deceit, because the venison came so
soon, wondering how Esau should take it by hunting, and dress it in so short a
space, he answers that it was by the special providence of God that he took it
so suddenly: and to intimate that God therein had testified his usual
provident care over his father and those things that concerned him, he says
not, The Lord God brought it to me, but, The Lord thy God, etc. and thus still
he is further and further ensnared in doing that which was not lawful, that
his father might not discover the fraud, but might give him the blessing.

Verse. 27. He smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him.] Rebekah had
put upon Jacob Esaus choycest garments, goodly raiment, verse. 15. which it
seems according to the customs of those times and countries were perfumed (for
that land abounded with sweet spices) which Isaac smelling, he took that
occasion to begin the blessing thus, See, says he, the smell of my son is as
the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed.

Verse. 28. Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, etc.] This is both a
prayer and a prophecy; neither must we understand it only of the person of
Jacob, but of his posterity (for the Lordship over his brethren promised, verse.
29. Be Lord over thy brethren, etc. was not literally fulfilled till many years
after, when the Idumeans were servants to the Israelites) nor only of
temporal blessings which are only expressed: we must know that in those times
God did chiefly make known his will concerning Christ, and those spiritual and
heavenly gifts that are given us in Christ, darkly and obscurely, under the
promises of earthly things, as types of heavenly blessings; and therefore
though these outward things be only mentioned, yet this prophecy must be
extended to all that was included in the promise of Abraham.

Verse. 33. And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, etc.] The following
words uttered by him in this perplexity and fear, do best show what was the
ground of his fear: that enquiry which in his astonishment he makes after the
party blessed, Who where is he that has taken venison, and brought it me, etc.
argues methinks plainly a sudden fear that seized on him, lest he had settled
the inheritance of the blessing where he should not; and yet withal his
confirming of the blessing unto Jacob in the close of his speech, implies as
plainly, that remembering what God had said, Genesis 25. 23. The elder shall serve
the younger, etc. and comparing it with this which now happened, it struck him
with a great fear that he had gone about as far as in him lay to cross the
purpose and decree of God. Thus therefore I conceive of this place, That Isaac,
as a man suddenly astonished and amazed, is at first distracted with several
fears, and knows not what to fear most; yet at last perceiving how evidently
the hand of God was in this business, he shakes off all carnal affections,
and confirms the blessing to Jacob; I have eaten of all before thou came, and
have blessed him; yea and he shall be blessed.

Verse. 34. Bless me, etc.] Esau in his passion and bitterness of spirit
craves his share in the birthright-blessing, though he could not have it alone.
But this was spoken in a passion; otherwise he could not be ignorant that this
could but be conferred upon one: for though Jacob blessed all his sons, yet
this with the birthright went to Judah, Genesis 49.

Verse. 35. Thy brother came with subtilty, and has taken away thy blessing.]
That is, the blessing of the birthright, which according to the ordinary course
of nature, unless God did otherwise dispose of it, belonged to the elder, and
which Isaac had before promised Esau, and did really intend to confer upon
him, though now it were settled upon Jacob, to whom by Gods decree and purpose
it did of right appertain.

Verse. 36. Have thou not reserved a blessing for me?] Finding himself wholly
excluded from the birthright-blessing, he enquires whether no blessing were
reserved for him.

Verse. 37. And what shall I do now unto thee my son?] As if he should say,
comparatively all other blessings are nothing.

Verse. 39. Behold thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth.] Upon Esaus
bitter lamentation and weeping, mentioned in the former verse, Isaac now
foretells the earthly blessings that should befall Esaus posterity: but as for
the prime and chief blessing, that was settled upon Jacob, neither had Isaac
the least thought of altering what he had done herein, as the Apostle says
concerning Esau, Heb. 12. 17. When he would have inherited the blessing he was
rejected; for he found no place of repentance, though he sought it with tears;
that is, all his crying and weeping could not move Isaac to repent of what he
had done, or reverse the blessing, which, though unwittingly, he had conferred
upon Jacob. Yea some note a difference betwixt Esaus blessing here concerning
outward things, and that of Jacobs, verse. 28. to wit, because though the same
outward blessings be here promised to Esau that were before promised to Jacob,
the dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth; yet they are promised to Jacob
in another manner then they are to Esau: for to Esau it is only said that he
should have these things, thy dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and
of the dew of heaven, to wit, by the ordinary dispensation of Gods providence;
but now to Jacob it is said, that God should give him these things, namely as
gifts and pledges of his singular love and favor toward him, verse. 28. God
give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of the earth, etc.

Verse. 40. It shall come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, etc.] That
is, after the Edomites, thy posterity, shall have been a long time in
subjection to the Israelites, they shall at length become more mighty then they
had been, and then shall cast of the yoke of the Israelites; which was
accomplished in the days of Jehoram king of Judah, 2. King. 8. 20, In his
days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah.

Verse 41. Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father, etc.]
Yea afterward he spoke what at first he only purposed in his mind, and by
that means, as is noted in the next verse, these words of Esau her elder son
were told to Rebekah: at first he only determined this in his mind, but
afterward not able to contain himself, nor to conceal his purposes, he uttered
what he intended in the hearing of some body, and so it was known, and at last
told Rebekah.

Verse. 42. Thy brother Esau, as touching thee, does comfort himself, purposing
to kill thee.] Esau is here said to comfort himself with his thoughts of
killing Jacob, either 1. because not only revenge it self is sweet to men that
are greatly enraged; whence the Lord speaking of himself, after the manner of
men, says of the Jews, Ezekiel. 5. 13. I will cause my fury to rest upon them,
and I will be comforted, but even the very resolution and purpose of revenge in
time to come does somewhat ease the minds of men enraged, when they have
determined within themselves how and in what manner they will revenge
themselves upon those that have wronged them; or else, 2. because he chuckerd
himself with some kind of hope, by this means to recover his birthright again:
for indeed wicked men do usually harden themselves against the known word and
will of God, as we see in Saul, who sought by all means to cut off David,
though he were fully convinced in his mind that God had chosen him, 1. Sam. 18.
28. Saul saw and knew that the Lord was with David; yet he became David's enemy
continually.

Verse. 45. Then I will send and fetch thee from thence.] Some Expositours
conceive that though Rebekah hoped that Esaus anger would be soon forgotten,
yet it proved otherwise, and that when Jacob had stayed in Padan-Aram about
twenty years, at his return Esaus malice was as hot and violent against him as
ever, had not God miraculously changed his heart; which if it be granted, no
wonder it is though Rebekah sent not for Jacob all that time, as here she
promised him, since she found it not safe, and therefore was content to be
without him rather then to hazard his life; and so indeed never saw her Jacob
again, but dyed about three years before his return home.

Verse. 45. Why should I be deprived also of you both in one day?] That is,
Jacob, by being murdered; and Esau, by the vengeance of God, which she knew
would follow him because of that fact, or by the sword of Justice (for by the
common law of Nations such an execrable murder would even then have been
punished with death) or at least by Esaus voluntary withdrawing himself from
the presence of his Mother, as not daring to look her any more in the face.

Verse. 46. And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the
daughters of Heth, etc.] That is, Esaus wives, which Genesis 26. 35. were a
continual grief of mind both unto Isaac and to Rebekah: Because she would not
grieve her husband in his old age, nor enrage him against Esau, she deemed it
not best to impart to him what she had heard concerning his cruel and bloody
resolution for the slaying of his brother, but took another occasion to procure
from Isaac that Jacob might be sent away to Padan-Aram, to wit, lest he should
marry amongst the Canaanites, as Esau had done, to their great and continual
vexation and sorrow.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him.] Thus the blessing, for the
better confirming of Jacobs faith, is by his father again settled upon him; and
indeed Jacob had need of it, considering how many straits and difficulties he
afterward went through, wherein, notwithstanding the Prerogative of the
blessing, he might think himself in a far worse condition then his brother
Esau.

Verse. 4. That thou may inherit the land, wherein thou art a stranger.] This
is added to prevent the weaking of his faith, that he might not think the
blessing vain, when he should spend all his life as a stranger and sojourner
in that land, and never come to the possession of any part of it: It is as if
he had said, It Is true, thou shall be as a stranger in this land, vvandring here
and there; yet, be not discouraged, thine it is, and to thy seed it shall be
given.

Verse. 9. Then went Esau unto Ishmael.] That is, unto the Ishmaelites: for
Ishmael himself was already dead. Genesis 25. 17. These are the years of the life
of Ishmael, 137 years, and he gave up the ghost and died.

The sister of Nebajoth, etc.] Nebajoth was, Genesis 25. 13. the first born of
Ishmael, and here mentioned, because Esau had his sister to wife from him,
Ishmael being now dead: And the ground of Esaus taking this wife seems to be,
that either he might insinuate himself into his fathers affection, and so
procure that the birthright might be reversed and settled upon him; or at least
that by this affinity with the Ishmaelites he might strengthen himself against
his brother Jacob.

Verse. 11. And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all night,
because the sun was set, etc.] Traveling on foot with his staff in his hand,
as is expressed chap. 32. 10. he was overtaken with the night, and could not
get to the city Luz, which was not far from this place, ver. 19. and so lay
all night alone in the field. It may well indeed seem strange that Jacob
should be sent away to procure him a wife amongst his Mothers kindred in so
mean a manner, especially if we consider with what attendance and large
provision Abraham sent his servant thither about the same business, Genesis 24.
But for this we must know, 1. That since Abraham left Haran, and was come into
the land of Canaan, it was not known to his kindred he left there behind him
how God had blessed Abraham, and in what state and condition he lived; and
therefore it was fit that Abraham should send his servant in such a manner ^as
might discover how wealthy he was become in Canaan, that so they might the more
willingly condescend to match with his son: But since that time doubtless
Bethuel and Laban knew well enough in what condition Isaac and Rebekah lived,
and therefore there was no need in this regard to send their son Jacob in
such a manner. 2. That Abraham's servant went to fetch a wife immediately for
Isaac, but Jacob went purposely to stay and sojourn with his uncle for a time,
till his brothers fury was over, and therefore Rebekah might happily think it
inconvenient to send any company along with him. 3. That it is most likely that
Jacob did steal away secretly, purposely that his brother Esau might not lie in
wait for him by the way to do him a mischief.

Verse. 12. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder, etc.] The end of this vision
was doubtless that God might testify unto Jacob that he would take care of
him, and so might thereby comfort him in this his desolate condition, and
strengthen his faith against all those discouragements he should meet with in
this journey. There can be therefore no question made but that by this Ladder
was signified the Providence of God in governing the world, and particularly
his provident care over Jacob, and that, as it is Psalm. 113. 5, 6. Though God
dwells on high, yet he humbles himself to behold the things that are in the
heaven, and in the earth, and disposes all things according to his will, and
that especially by the ministry of his Angels, according to that of David,
Psalm. 91. 11, 12. For he shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee
in all thy ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy
foot against a stone. But yet because Christ is the only foundation of that
reconciliation that is wrought betwixt God and Man, and of that special care
which God takes for the welfare of his Church and people, in and through whom
they are made the sons of God, and heirs of heaven, and enjoy the ministry of
the Angels, Heb. 1. 13. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation? therefore also questionless
by this Ladder Christ was represented, the promised seed, in whom all the
promises are yea and amen, 2. Cor. 1. 20. as methinks our Savior himself did
intimate in those words of his concerning himself, John. 1. 52. Verily, verily
I say unto you, hereafter ye shall see heaven open and the Angels of God
ascending and descending upon the son of man. In his two natures personally
united, heaven and earth are as it were joined together: By him our only
Mediator is man reconciled to God, and both the things in heaven and the
things on earth are reconciled through the blood of his cross, Col. 1. 20. By
his only merit and intercession both the ministry of the Angels, the gifts of
the holy Ghost, and all other heavenly blessings do descend upon us: and by him
likewise we have access unto God and entrance into heaven. And thus by this
vision Jacob was assured that through the promised seed, Christ, he should
enjoy the guard of the holy Angels, and that he should be by them defended both
in his going out and returning home.

Verse. 16. Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not.] Being awaked
he perceived that God had appeared to him, and therefore admires, and extolls
this goodness of God toward him: as if he had said, I thought God had only
in this manner revealed himself in my fathers house, I looked not for such an
Apparition in this place; but now I find that God who is every where does also
in this place by these special testimonies of his presence manifest himself.

Verse. 17. And he was afraid, etc.] Stricken with a reverent fear of the
majesty of God.

This is none other but the house of God.] This is spoken because God had
manifested himself there unto him in his glory.

Verse. 18. And set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.] The
stone which Jacob had laid under his head all night, he set up for a pillar, as
a memorial of that vision, and then poured oil upon the top of it, either to
consecrate thereby that place and stone to a holy and religious use, as
afterward for the same cause Moses was commanded to anoint with oil the
Tabernacle, and all that was therein; or else rather as an offering to God:
Having no other sacrifice at hand, of the oil, which he had about him either
for food, or to anoint his body in his travel, he poures forth an offering of
thanksgiving unto God, as David, 2. Sam. 23. 16. poured out the water to God,
which his three worthies had fetched for him from the well of Bethlehem not
without extreme peril to their lives.

Verse. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, etc.] Jacob
being much affected with Gods gracious goodness to him in the glorious vision
he had seen, and the many precious promises therein made to him, does here, by
way of thankfulness, vow a vow unto God, not only in general, verse. 21. that
then the Lord should be his God, that is, he would then for ever acknowledge
the Lord God of his Fathers to be the Author of his welfare and salvation,
love, worship, and serve him, yea and him only; but also particularly verse.
22. 1. that the stone which he had now set up for a pillar should be Gods
house, that is, he would account that stone or pillar, or that place where that
stone was erected (for both are included figuratively) a holy place,
consecrated to Gods worship and service, and would there perform the duties of
his worship (which part of his vow he made good, Genesis 35. 6, 7. when at his
return out of Mesopotamia he built there an altar and offered thereon
sacrifices to the Lord) and 2. that of all that God should give him, he would
give the tenth unto God, that is, that he would set it apart for Gods special
service, as by employing it in building altars, and sacrifices, and relieving
the poor upon any occasion. Indeed concerning the first of these some doubt
may arise in our minds, How Jacob could vow that upon such and such conditions,
then the Lord should be his God, which may imply a resolution on the contrary
that in case such conditions were not performed, or did not come to pass, then
the Lord should not be his God. But to this I answer, 1. That men that wait in
expectation of receiving some special blessing from God, may vow upon the
obtaining hereof to perform their duty to God, which otherwise by covenant they
are bound to perform, and yet not intend that in case they fail of this they
desire, then they will not; only thereby they profess that this shall be a
new engagement to bind them to perform their duty herein, and to make them the
more solicitously careful to carry themselves herein as they ought to do: and
2. That with a conditional vow something may be, and is usually added, which
shall not depend upon the premised conditions, but is only annexed as a
necessary concomitant of the vow; as if a man should vow, if God should bless
him according to his hopes in a voyage he is to undertake, that then he would
for ever honor his poor parents, and give them such a yearly maintenance; the
paying of this yearly maintenance is the thing conditionally vowed, and that
clau^e of honoring his parents is only annexed as that which must necessarily
go along with his vowed maintenance: and so it is here, that which is vowed by
Jacob conditionally is that the stone which he had now set ^p for a pillar
should be Gods house, and that of all that God should give him, he would give
the tenth unto God, and this clause, Then shall the Lord b^ my God, is only
annex^d as a necessary adjunct, and the ground of his yielding this honor unto
God.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. THen Jacob went on his journey and came into the land of the people
of the East.] That is, Mesopotamia, which lay Eastward from Canaan, Job 1. 3.
He was the greatest of all the men of the East. Isaiah 41. 2. Who raised up the
righteous man from the East.

Verse. 5. Know ye Laban the son of Nahor.] That is, the grandchild: for he
was the son of Bethuell, who was the son of Nahor.

Verse. 7. It is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be
gathered together.] That is, into the fold, there to rest all night.

Verse. 8. And they said, We cannot until all the flocks, etc.] Their meaning
is, either that they might not by right do it, they might not water their sheep
till all the flocks came together; so the like phrase is used Genesis 34. 14. We
cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that is uncircumcised, that is,
we may not do it; or else rather that they were not able to do it: which I
rather approve* because verse. 2. there is express mention of the greatn^sse of
the stone; and upon Rachels coming it was rolled away before all came together:
or why may not both be included? we cannot, that is, we neither may do it, nor
are we able to do it.

Verse. 10. And rolled the stone from the wells month.] To wit, either by his
own strength, or with the help of the shepherds.

Verse. 12. And Jacob told Rachel that he was her fathers brother.] That is, his
kinsman, his sisters son; for near kinsmen in the Scripture are usually
called brethren: Genesis 13. 18. Though Abraham were Lots uncl^, yet says he, Let
there be no strife between me and thee, for we be brethren.

Verse. 13. And he told Laban all these things.] That is, what had been formerly
related concerning Jacob, who were his parents, what had passed betwixt him and
his brother, how he was sent away thither by his father, and what had befallen
him in his journey: else Laban might have wondered to see him come so
unfurnished, whereas he had seen Abraham's servant come so richly provided when
he fetched thence Rebekah.

Verse. 14. And Laban said to him, Surely thou art my bone and my fle^^.] This
is either an acknowledgement that he was satisfied concerning his person, to
wit, that he was inde^d his si^ters son; or else, a courteous reply to his
relation, verse. 13. as if he had said, However, be the occasion of thy journey
what it will, thou art my near kingsma^, and must expect loving entertainment
here.

Verse. 15. Because tho^ art my brother, should thou therefore serve me for
naught.] Laban perceiving in this months time of Jacobs abode with him,
mentioned in the former vers^, that he was wondrous able and active for his
business (for it seems Jacob not vvilling to be burdensome to his uncle, nor
to eat the bread of idleness, did presently buckle himself to do him what
service he might) he begins now to tamper with him about giving him some
recompense for his labor, under a pretense that it was not fit that he should
do him service for nothing, though he were his near kinsman, but aiming indeed
to bind him thereby to some farther stay there, because he saw his service
would be very profitable to him.

Verse. 18. I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.] It
was it seems the custom in these Eastern countries, that at making up of any
match of marriage, both the husband and wife did mutually give dowries the one
unto the other, as is evident chap. 34. 11, 12. And Shechem said unto her
father, and unto her brethren, what ye shall ask I will give; ask me never so
much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say unto me: but
give me the damsel to wife. 1. Sam. 18. 25. And Saul said, Thus shall ye say
to Dav^d, The King desires not any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, etc. and 2. Sam. ^. 14. And David sent Messengers to Ishbosheth,
Saul's son, saying, Deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an
hundred foreskins of the Philistines. Jacob therefore being in a strange place,
and having nothing else to give, and being withal carried away with the
strength of his affection to Rachel, that he might prevail with his uncle,
whose base covetousness by this time he had discovered, tenders him seven
years service for his daughter Rachel.

Verse. 19. It is better that I give her to thee, then I should give her to
another man.] Laban, regarding more his own profit then to deal fairly and
ingenuously with so near a kinsman, makes advantage of the affection of Jacob
to his daughter, and accepts of his proffer; yet because his words are so
ambiguous, and not an express promise, It is better that I give her to thee,
then that I should give her to another: abide with me; it may be probably
supposed that h^ did purposely equivocate, and had already some thought of
dealing doubly and deceitfully with Jacob.

Verse. 20. And Jacob served seven years for Rachel.] Junius conceives that
immediately after Jacob had agreed with Laban to serve with him seven years for
his daughter, the marriage was solemnized, and having then Leah given him in
stead of Rachel, he then made a new agreement for Rachel, and so married them
both in the very beginning of his foureteen years service: But that cannot
agree with his relation; for first, it might then as well have been said here,
that he served fourteen years for Rachel; again secondly, it is said, verse. 27.
Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also, for the service which thou
shall serve with me yet other seven years; and thirdly when Jacob expostulates
the wrong which Laban had done him, ver. 25. he says, Did not I serve with
thee for Rachel? which shows that seven of his years service were spent ere
Leah was imposed upon him.

And they seemed unto him but a few days for the love he had to her.] Love
makes men think every day a year till they enjoy the party loved; and therefore
this must be understood with reference to his labor and service, that the
service of seven years seemed as nothing to him, because of the great love he
bare to Rachel.

Verse. 25. And it came to pass, that in the morning, behold it was Leah.] He
perceives it not before, both because it was the custom for brides to be
veiled, and also because by her fathers direction she might be silent, which
he might impute to her modesty.

Verse. 27. Fulfill her week, and we will give thee this also.] The marriage
feast or solemnity used to be kept a week, Judge. 14. 12. I will now put forth
a riddle unto you: If you can certainly declare it me within the seven days of
the feas^, etc. this Laban desires him to fulfill with Leah, that so by this
his voluntary consent the marriage might be confirmed, and then he promises to
give him Rachel; so then we see that he married Rachel within a week after
Leah, and served seven years for her after the marriage.

Verse. 31. And when the Lord saw that Leah was hated.] That is, not simply, but
in comparison of Rachel, ver. 30. He loved Rachel more then Leah.

Verse. 35. And left bearing.] That is, for a while: for afterward she
conceived again, Genesis 30. 17. And God hearkened unto Leah, and she conceived and
bare Jacob the fifth son. See the Note in the following chapter upon ver. 9.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. GIve me children or else I die.] That is, either let me have children
by thee, as well as my sister, or I am but a dead woman, I shall never be able
to endure it, and it will be my death, and indeed, I had rather die then live
in this condition; and this Rachel says to Jacob, not as seriously thinking
that Jacob was able to give her this blessing, which God had hitherto denied
her; but as those that are in a passion do many times speak they scarce know
what, so she in a womanish heat and passion cries out to her husband to give
her children, never considering to whom she spoke, or why she should crave this
of him, or by what means he should be able to satisfy her desire.

Verse. 3. She shall bear upon my knees.] That is, children, that might be
brought up and nursed on her knees as her own. Genesis 50. 23. The children also
of Machir the son of Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees: and it
seems most probable that this was done about the third year after her marriage.

Verse. 4. And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife.] A secondary wife or
concubine; for so also she is called, Genesis 35. 22. And it came to pass when
Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his fathers
concubine.

Verse. 5. And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a fonne.] Happily the same year
wherein Levi was born of Leah.

Verse. 9. When Leah saw she had left bearing, etc.] Considering that Leah had
her six sons and one daughter (besides these two by her handmaid) within the
compass of the last seven years service of Jacob with Laban, it must needs be
that it was not above half a year that she stayed ere she conceived again; yet
so inordinate was their desire of children, and emulation one against another,
that she also gives her maid to her husband, and so her maid bringing her a
son, and her self being also at that time with child, that might be one
inducement to name the child G^d, that is, a Troop, etc.

Verse. 14. And Reuben went in the days of wheat-harvest, and found mandrakes.]
A kind of flovver or fruit very pleasant to the eye (which may seem the ground
of their name, for the Hebrew word signifies lovely, or amiable) and very
odoriferous, Cant. 7. 13. the mandrakes give a smell: whether they were the
same we now call mandrakes, or no, it is uncertain; these Reuben, being a child
then about four or five years of age, gathers in the field, as children are
wont to do, and brings them home to his mother.

Give me I pray thee of thy sons mandrakes.] It seems that mandrakes were in
great esteem amongst them, though the child only casually lighted on them, and
plucked them because of their glorious show; and hence so great ado was made
about these mandrakes which Reuben found.

Verse. 15. Is it a small matter that thou have taken my husband, etc.] For the
full understanding of this pa^sage, we must know, 1. that these contentions
were not merely carnal, but partly also for desire of Gods ordinary blessing
in propagation, and chiefly for the increase of the Church, and obtaining the
promised seed for salvation; 2. that Jacob did most frequently converse with
Rachel, whom he did most affect, and did comparatively neglect Leah, for which
being highly offended with Rachel, she thus snaps her up, and denies this small
request she makes to her.

Verse. 16. And Leah went out to meet him.] This she does, to make sure he
should not go in to Rachel (as for the most part he was wont to do) and tells
him what had passed betwixt Rachel and her, and so prevails with him to go in
to her.

Verse. 17. And she conceived.] The same year that Gad was born of Zilpah, ver.
10.

Verse. 25. Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own
place.] That is, the land promised to him, Genesis 28. 13. The land whereon thou
li^st, to thee w^ll I give it, and to thy seed; and the land where his father
lived, and where himself was born. No doubt the respect he had to the promise
made him earnest that he might return thither.

Verse. 26. Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee, etc.]
That is, let me by thy good leave depart now home with my wives and children;
for thou know that the years of my service are expired, and that I have
therein done thee faithful and good service.

Verse. 29. Thou know how I have served thee, etc.] Though Jacob did before
really intend to return home, yet now considering with himself that it would be
better to get somewhat for him and his before he went, then to go away with a
great family having nothing to sustain them, and being vvithall so earnestly
pressed by the importunity of Laban, and not knovving how to get from him
whether he would or no, in this reply he labors to make it appear what good
reason there was that if he did stay it should not be altogether without
respect of some benefit to himself.

Verse. 31. Thou shall not give me any thing, etc.] He did not intend to serve
him without some just recompense and reward; but the meaning is this, that he
would not require any thing out of Labans present estate, and that which he had
gotten already, but that he would receive his hire out of the future increase
of his flocks, and that in a way, as afterward he tells him, which was likely
to be most advantageous to Laban, and wherein he for his part was content to
rest upon the providence of God, to wit, that having under his charge only
those sheep and goats that were all of one color, whether black or white, none
spotted, he would have for his hire only such kids and lambs as were speckled
and spotted, bred of the old ones under his charge, that had neither speck nor
spot in them. A condition which Laban, verse. 34. imbraceth very greedily, I
would it might be according to thy word; both because such covetous churls do
more hardly part with that which they have in their present possession, then
that which may come in hereafter, and because according to the ordinary course
of nature cattle are wont to bring forth such as themselves are, and therefore
in this way Jacob was like to have a poor bargain of it. But in all this
doubtless the Lord directed Jacob what he should do, who by this means
adjudged a good reward to Jacob, which otherwise Laban would have kept from
him, chap. 31. 9, 10, 11, 12.

Verse. 38. And he set the rods which he had pilled before the flocks in the
gutters, etc.] His end in this was, that the ews being in the heat or strength
of a double desire, whilst they were both drinking greedily, and vvithall
coupled with the males (for he did this only in ramming time) they might
conceive such young ones as they saw shadows of in the water; for the color
of the rods made also the shadows of the rams, that were leaped upon them,
to appear parti-colored.

Verse. 40. And Jacob did separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks
toward the ring-straked, etc.] This was another course he takes to increase
his flock, because all the flock would not conceive just at watering time,
having gotten some spotted lambs by his first devise of the pilled rods, these
he sets before the faces of Labans flock, that by the sight of the speckled
cattle they might bring forth lambs like them that were in their eye.

And he put his own flocks by themselves.] This was a third device he used for
his greater advantage: his own flocks that were ring-straked, speckled, and
spotted, when they were likely to conceive, he would not let them be amongst
Labans flocks, lest they looking upon them that were all of one color, should
bring forth young ones that were all of one color, which then it seems should
have been Labans.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1. OF that which was our fathers has he gotten all this glory.] That
is, all this wealth, which they call his glory, because commonly a man^
wealth procures him honor, and makes him glorious in the eyes of vvorldly
men; whence is that, Psalm. 49. 16, 17. Be not thou afraid when one is made
rich, when the glory of his house is increased: For when he dies he shall
carry nothing away, his glory shall not descend after him.

Verse. 3. And the Lord said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy fathers,
etc.] By the foregoing words it appears, that the envy of his brethren, and
the frowns of his father in law Laban, made Jacob entertain some thoughts of
returning home; but being vvithall it seems perplexed with some fears how he
should be able to get away, how his wives friends might deal with him, and
whether his brother Esaus wrath were appeased or no, to remove all these
scruples from his mind, the Lord now appeared to Jacob, and willed him to
return, and promised to be with him and bless him in his journey.

Verse. 7. Your father has d^ceived me, and changed my wages ten times.] If
sheep in that country bring forth young ones twice a year, as it seems they
did, in the space of six years, so often his wages might well be changed; yet
ten times may here be put for many times, as it is usually elsewhere, Job 19.
3. These ten times you have reproched me. Number. 14. 22. And have tempted me now
these ten times; and in many other places.

Verse. 11. And the Angel of God spoke unto me, etc.] Who is called, verse. 13.
the God of Bethel; and therefore it was undoubtedly Christ.

Verse. 13. I am the God of Bethel.] This was to put Jacob in mind of his
promise and vovv, which then and there he made to God.

Verse. 15. For he has sold us, etc.] To wit, for 14. years service, and our
money, that is, the money and profit which he has gotten by this sale of us,
he has quite devoured, that is, he has w^oly converted it to his own use,
whereas of right he should have given it us (...) portion.

Verse. 21. And passed over the river.] That is, Euphrates, which was between
Chaldea and Canaan: Josh. 24. 2, 3. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the
flood, in old time, etc. And I took your father Abraham from the other side of
the flood, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, etc.

Verse. 22. And it was told Laban on the third day, etc.] For so many days
journey were Labans flocks, which his sons kept (whether Laban was now gone
to the sheep-shearing) off from Jacob. chap. 30. 36. And he set three days
journey b^twixt himself and Jacob and Jacob fed the rest of Labans flocks.

V^rs. 23. And pursued after him s^ven days journey.] That is, being returned
home (wherein three days were again spent) he gathers his company together,
and in seven days pursuit overtakes him; so that Laban went as far in seven
days as Jacob had gone in thirteen, to wit, the three days of the messengers
going to Laban, the three days of Labans return home, and the seven days of
Labans pursuit after Jacob.

Verse. 24. Take heed that thou speak no^ to Jacob either good or bad.] That i^,
respectively to that end for which thou have pursued him; thou shall not seek
to detain him, neither by flattering speeches, nor by evil language.

Verse. 35. For the custom of women is upon me.] Not that women whilst they
are in that condition are not able to rise, but because they are often at those
times stomach-sick, troubled with headache, and many several ways not fit to
be disquieted; and besides in those hot countries perhaps that diseas^ of women
was stronger upon them then it is in these parts.

Verse. 42. Except the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, etc.] Jacob
calls God the fear of Isaac, that is, the God whom his father Isaac feared
and worshipped, as the only true God who alone is to be feared; as God is
elsewhere called the hope of Israel, that is, the God on whom all his people do
put their whole trust and confidence.

Verse. 46. Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones.] That is, he exhorted
the sons of Laban and other his kindred and allies that were come thither
with Laban, that they would put to their helping hand to raise up a heap of
stones that might be a witness of the covenant that should be now made betwixt
them: for in the 51. verse, it is evident that not Jacob only and his family,
but Laban also and those that were with him, did gather and make this heap of
stones.

Verse. 47. But Jacob called it Galeed.] That is, a heap, a witness: they both
give it the same name; only Laban called it so in his tongue, the Syriack; and
Jacob in his, the Hebrew.

Verse. 53. And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac.] That is, whereas
Laban swear by the God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, and Terah, the father
both of Abraham and Nahor (of whom it is said that he served strange gods,
Josh. 24. 2. Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old times,
even Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor; and they served
other gods) Jacob only swear by the fear of his father Isaac, that is, the God
whom his father feared and worshipped.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 2. ANd he called the name of that place, Mahanaim.] That is, two camps,
because the Angel appeared in two camps or troops, happily on each side of him,
as it were to guard and defend him.

Verse. 3. And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the
land of Seir.] Here the Horites dwelt, Genesis 14. 6. And the Horites in their
mount Seir; but Esau and his children destroyed them afterward, and dwelt in
their stead. Deuteronomy. 2. 22. As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in
Seir, when he destroyed the Horims from before them, and they succeeded them,
etc. Now Esau being removed thither at this time from his fathers house, Jacob
that was necessarily to pass that way, sends thither to him to get his favor.

Verse. 4. Thy servant Jacob says thus.] Jacob does not by this submissive
speech renounce his blessing, but yielding temporal subjection for a time (as
David to Saul, though he were even then the anointed king) he thereby labors
to appease his brothers wrath, still waiting by faith for the promise which was
to be accomplished in future times.

I have sojourned with Laban, etc.] This he says, that the consideration of
what he had already suffered might cause Esaus anger to c^ase; and also, that
this his readiness to render an account (as it were) of his time spent might
seem a kind of submission unto him.

Verse. 5. And I have oxen, etc.] This is added to prevent suspicion, that he
might not think he was come as one that gaped after his fathers riches, or to
suck any thing from him, or that he now sought his favor for his own profit
sake.

Verse. 6. We came to thy brother Esau, and also he comes to meet thee, and
four hundred men with him.] Whether Esau came with this troop against Jacob
with a purpose to destroy him, and so to be revenged on him, as long since he
intended, it is not evident in the text: the most Expositours are of that mind,
and that God did miraculously change his heart by that time they met together.
Yet others judge it more probable, that Esau meant not to cut off Jacob; and
indeed they allege a very probable reason for it: for if, say they, out of
reverence to his father, Esau restrained himself when he was in the freshest
and hottest of his passion, it is not likely that now after twenty years
absence he would have no respect to the grief of his aged father (who was still
living) but by slaying his brother bring his gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave. However, evident it is that the messengers feared he came in his
displeasure, and to that end brought such a band of men along with him, which
no marvel it is though Jacob were very ready to believe.

Verse. 16. And put a space betwixt drove and drove.] This he did that his
presents might make the fairer show, and by these distant spaces the heat of
Esaus rage might be abated; and also that if he fell in hostile manner upon the
first, the other might seek the better to escape.

Verse. 20. And say ye moreover, Behold thy servant Jacob is behind us.] This he
urges to be especially remembered by his servants, that Esau might not think
that he sent these in this manner before to delude him, that he in the mean
season might escape some other way.

Verse. 21. And himself lodged that night in the company.] That is, the night
after he had sent away these droves by his servants, as is before related: it
was not therefore that night, mentioned verse. 13. the night after he heard
that his brother Esau was coming toward him with four hundred men, but the
night follovving, the day betvveen being spent in sending away the presents to
Esau.

Verse. 22. And passed over the ford Jabbok.] Jabbok was a river whereof mention
is again made, Deuteronomy. 2. 37. Thou came not unto any place of the river Jabbok:
and that Jacob passed over this river, is expressly set down, because this
testified that after he had prayed to the Lord he was well confirmed and
settled in his mind concerning the Lords protection, because otherwise he would
not have passed the river but have made a stand on the other side, where with
less difficulti^ he might have escaped away, had his brother in an hostile
manner set upon them.

Verse. 24. And there wrestled a man with him.] That is, Christ appearing in the
form of a man, therefore called after, and by the prophet Hosea, God and an
Angel, Hose. 12. 3, 4. And by his strength he had power with God: Yea he had
power over the Angel, yea, the Angel that redeemed him from all evil, Genesis 48.
16. The Angel that redeemed me from all evil bless the lads. Jacob having
wrestled with God by prayer (as no doubt to that very end he stayed behind
alone) and that not without bitter tears, as Hose. 12. 4. he wept and made
supplication unto him, at the last the Lord appeared, set upon him, and
wrestled with him, and that to this very end, that he might be assured that
though he wrestled with many afflictions, yet he should be victour in them all.

Verse. 25. When he saw that he prevailed not against him, etc.] This is spoken
with respect to that assistance and measure of strength wherewith God was
pleased, in that assumed body wherein he wrestled with Jacob, to struggle with
him, and over which Jacob with his might and power prevailed.

And the hollow of Jacobs thigh was out of joint.] This was for the present to
humble him, that he might not be exalted above measure, being a discovery of
his weakness and of the Lords indulgence, whereby only he prevailed; and it
was withal for the future a memorial and remembrance unto him of this most
comfortable Apparition.

Verse. 26. And he said, Let me go, for the day breaks.] The Angel speaks thu^
1. after the manner of men, whose shape he had taken, as if he had haste to be
gone; 2. to put Jacob in mind of his affairs, that it was fit he should make
haste to his wives, etc. and 3. to intimate unto him that he would not have his
glory by the rising light be revealed to him, and much less to any of his
family that might now come to him.

And he said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me.] His desiring to be
blessed by him argues that he acknowledged himself to be inferior to him, with
whom he wrestled, and that though he did what he could to hold him, yet if he
procured not the blessing by begging it at his hands, he might happily miss of
it: and so some understand that place of the prophet, Hos. 12. 4. to wit, that
it was at this time that he wept and made supplication to the Angel, with whom
he had wrestled.

Verse. 28. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel.] That is, not so
much Jacob as Israel, which signifies one that has princely power with God.

Verse. 29. Tell me I pray thee thy name.] Though he knevv at length with whom
he vvrestled, at least that he wrestled with an Angel sent from God, ver. 30.
For I have seen God face to face, etc. yet he desires a surer and clearer
knowledge.

Verse. 30. I have seen God face to face.] To wit, in the Apparition before
mentioned, for otherwise to see the face of God, that is, to see the glory of
God as he is in and of himself, it is altogether impossible for men* Exodus 33.
20. Thou can not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live.

Verse. 32. Therefore the children of Israel eat not of the sinew which shrank
etc.] To perpetuate hereby the memory of this honor which God afforded Jacob
in this conflict which he had with him.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 3. ANd he passed over before them.] This proceeded not only from his
fatherlike affection, but also from his faith, exposing himself to danger
rather then his children, in whom he expected the promises should be
accomplished.

And bowed himself to the ground seven times.] That is, many times: 1. Sam*
(...) 5* so that the barren has born seven, etc.

Verse. 8. What meanest thou by all this drove which I met?] The servants had
told Esau the reason of this before; but yet he asks now the reason of Jacob,
that he may take an occasion courteously to refuse them.

Verse. 10. For therefore I have seen thy face, etc.] That is, for because I
have seen thy face; and a like speech we have Genesis 18. 5. For therefore are you
come to your servant, etc. for as there Lot gives that as a reason why he
desired them to eat something, to wit, because they were come to him, and being
there he would not have them go away till they refreshed themselves; so here
Jacob gives this as a reason why he desired that Esau would accept his
presents, to wit, because he had seen his face as the face of God, etc.
implying that since Esau had been so kind and loving to him, it was fit he
should show his thankfulness in those presents he had sent. As for that
expression which Jacob here uses, I have seen thy face as though I had seen
the face of God, either it is spoken hyperbolically, to express how
wonderfully comfortable that kind meeting of Esau had been to him; or else in
this phrase he acknowledges that this reconciliation of his brother was Gods
work, and so says, that the light of Gods countenance was evident in the
cheerful countenance of his brother.

Verse. 11. Take I pray thee my blessing.] That is, the gift which by the
blessing of God I am enabled to give, and do give with a vvilling heart: 1.
Sam. 25. 27. And now this blessing which thy handmaid has brought unto my
Lord, let it even be given unto the young men, etc.

Verse. 17. And Jacob journyed to Succoth, and built him an house, etc.] To
wit, after he had according to his promise, verse. 14. visited his brother in
Seir, and stayed there avvhile. Some conceive that hovvever he intended at
first to have follovved his brother to Seir, yet afterward through fear of
the vvorst, or by special direction from God, he changed his mind, and went
another way, and so came to Succoth: But indeed it is no way probable that
being newly reconciled to his brother, he would again provoke him anew to
displeasure, by such a manifest contempt and disregard of him, and by such a
palpable breach of his promise to him, but that he did indeed go to Seir, as he
had told Esau he would. Besides, though by his building a house and making
booths in this place (which was thence afterward called Succoth* that is,
Booths) it is clear that Jacob resolved to dvvell there; yet questionless,
hovvever he might leave his carriages there, he went presently to his fathers
house (and perhaps his brother Esau with him) and then afterward returned to
Succoth again. There is indeed no mention made of his coming to his father till
chap. 35. 27. And Jacob came unto Mamre unto his father, etc. But the story of
the slaughter of the Shechemites, related in the 34. chap. was so long after
Jacobs coming into the Land of Canaan, to wit, when his sons were grown
lusty and strong men, who were very young at their coming into Canaan, that
it cannot be thought that Jacob in all that time went not home to his fathers
house.

Verse. 19. And he bought a parcel of a field, etc.] This was that portion of
land which Jacob when he lay upon his deathbed in Egypt gave unto his son
Joseph, Genesis 48. 22. Moreover I have given thee one portion above thy brethren:
for that was near unto Shechem, Josh. 24. 32. And the bones of Joseph, which
the children of Israel brought up out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a
parcel of ground which Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of
Shechem, etc. and consequently it was here that Christ had a conference with
the woman of Samaria, and converted her and her neighbors: for Shechem it is
that is there called Sychar, a city of Samaria, John 4. 5.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd Dinah the daughter of Leah, etc.] This must needs be ten years at
least since their coming from Laban, else Dinah could not be sixteen years old.

Verse. 5. And Jacob held his peace until they were come.] Not having any into
whose bosom he might so fitly pour out his complaint for the ravishing of his
daughter, or whose counsel he might seek.

Verse. 7. And the sons of Jacob came out of the field, etc.] By the
computation of most Expositours, Reuben was now about two and twenty years old,
Simeon one and twenty, Levi twenty, and Judah nineteen.

And they were wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel.] The disgrace of
the Church was the chief ground of their anger.

Verse. 13. And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem, etc.] Though there be
mention made of Jacob, the father of Dinah, in Hamors treaty with Jacobs
sons, concerning Shechems marriage with Dinah, verse. 11. And Shechem said
unto her father, etc. yet it is altogether improbable that Jacob knew any thing
of this proposition which his sons made, that if the Shechemites would be all
circumcised then they would consent to this match: for is it likely that he
would consent to such an horrible profanation of the Sacrament of Circumcision,
the seal of Gods covenant? this they propounded apart by themselves, not
intending what they said, but plotting their destruction, which to do they
thought they had good reason: and therefore it is said that they answered them
deceitfully, because he had defiled Dinah their sister.

Verse. 19. And he was more honorable then all the house of his father.] The
great esteem he had amongst the people is here mentioned as one ground of his
prevailing so far with them in so strange a request.

Verse. 23. Shall not their cattle, etc. be ours.] That is, by having commerce
with them, by making marriages with them, by receiving them in to be as one
people with us.

Verse. 25. And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore.] The
third day is counted the critical day by Physicians, when wounds are often at
the worst, most painful, etc. and therefore then they chose to make this
massacre in the city, as it is here said, that then two of the sons of Jacob,
Simeon and Levi, Dinahs br^thr^n took each man his sword, etc. whether any of
their servants joined with them, as some think, we need not enquire; since it
is probable enough that Simeon and Levi might do it alone, there not being a
man able to stir in the city. But that the other sons of Jacob joined not
with them in this fact, is plain, 1. by these express words, two of the sons
of Jacob; 2. because the boldness of the fact is noted as observable, they
came upon the city boldly; 3. because the other are said to come in to the
spoil, which implies that in the former act they had no hand; 4. because they
only are mentioned, Genesis 49. 5. Sim^on and Levi are brethren, instruments of
cruelty are in their habitations. Being the brethren of Dinah not only by the
father, but by the mother, they were the more sensible of her dishonor, and
ready to revenge it; yea and perhaps they might be stirred up and encouraged to
do it by their mother Leah.

Verse. 30. And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, etc.] Though Jacobs charging his
sons with the offense they had given to the inhabitants of the land, and the
danger which thereby they h^d brought both upon him and all his family, be
only here expressed, Ye have troubled me, to make me to stink amongst the
inhabitants of the land, (and that to make way to the story of his removing to
Bethel, which follows in the next chapter) yet there is no question to be made
but that he did also charge upon them the grievousnesse of the sin they had
committed against God, as he did again at his death, Genesis 49. 5, 6, 7. Simeon
and Levi are brethren, instruments of cruelty are in their habitations. O my
soul come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine honor, be not
thou united: for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they
dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath,
for it was cruel, etc. What shall we then think of the book of Judeth, but that
it is Apocryphal, wherein by Judeth this fact of Simeons is so highly
extolled, Judeth 9. 2. O Lord God of my father Simeon, to whom thou gave a
sword to take vengeance of the strangers, who loosened the girdle of a maid to
defile her, etc.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 1. ANd God said, Arise, go up to Bethel.] Bethel was distant from
Shechem Southward about thirty English miles. Now Jacob being at this time
perplexed with fear because of that which his sons had done to the
Shechemites, and perhaps advising with himself about removing to some other
place, the Lord appeared to him, and appointed him to go up to Bethel, and to
build there an Altar unto God that appeared to him when he fled from the face
of his brother Esau, thereby calling to his remembrance the gracious promises
which God had there made to him, and the vow which he there had made to God,
chap. 28. 22. And this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be Gods house;
and of all that thou shall give me, I will surely give the tenth unto thee.

Verse. 2. Then Jacob said unto his household.] That is, not only to them of his
own proper house or family, but also to all that were of his retinue, that
pitched their tents with him, and as appertaining to him, still removed whither
he removed; of which there might be a great number, servants born in the house
and bought with money, Genesis 14. 14. And when Abraham heard that his brother was
taken captive, he armed his trained servants, born in his own house, three
hundred and eighteen persons.

Put away the strange gods that are amongst you.] Being quickened by the danger
he had apprehended, as likewise by the Lords late appearing to him, and
enjoining him to go to that place which he had formerly found so dreadful,
even as the house of God, and as the gate of heaven, Genesis 28. 17. and where he
was to perform the vow which he had made, he deemed it requisite that they
should in a special manner prepare and sanctify themselves; and of this he
informs them of his family, and wills them in the first place to put away the
strange or the strangers gods that were amongst them, that is, idols which
other nations worshipped, but might not be endured amongst those that
worshipped the true God. And hereby I conceive that he intended not Labans
gods, which Rachel had stolen (for it is not likely that this good Patriarch
did all this while suffer his wives and children either to worship, or with his
knowledge to keep, strange Gods amongst them) but rather the idols of the
Shechemites, which by his children or servants might be taken for the worth of
them, when they spoiled the city, and such idolatrous and superstitious
monuments as were brought forth of Mesopotamia by those of his retinue, whom he
suspected to be still too much addicted to the superstitions of that country:
and yet perhaps both those which Rachel had stolen, and any other secretly kept
amongst them, were now brought in upon these words of Jacob.

And be clean, and change your garments.] It is clear by this place, that as
the Lord did enjoin the Patriarchs many rites of sacrificing which were
afterward more fully enjoined the Israelites by the written Law, so also he
taught them many of those external rites of purifying themselves by washing in
water, and changing of their garments, of which we read expressly in the Law,
Levit. 15. 13. And when he that has an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he
shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes,
etc. and Numb. 31. 23. Every thing that may abide the fire, you shall make it
to go through the fire, and it shall be clean: Nevertheless it shall be
purified* with the water of separation; and all that abides not the fire ye
shall make to go through the water; which were even in these times as so many
shadows of the spiritual cleansing of men from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, that renewing by faith and repentance, which God requires
especially of all those that draw near to him in the duties of his worship.

Verse. 4. And all their earrings that were in their ears.] To wit, which were
Idolatrous jewels and superstitious monuments. Hos. 2. 13. I will visit upon
her the days of Baalim, etc. wherein ^^e decked her self with her earrings
and her jewels. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. The graven Images of their Gods shall ye burn
with fire; thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them.

And Jacob hid them under the oaks, etc.] He hid them from the knowledge of his
family, buried them in the ground as unclean things, under an oak, where they
might not be easily found again.

Verse. 7. And he built there an Altar, etc.] And so performed the vow which he
had there formerly made unto the Lord, chap. 28. 20, 21, 22. And he called the
name of that place Bethel, etc. And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be
with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat,
and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace; then
shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set for a pillar shall be
Gods house; and of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth
unto thee.

Verse. 8. B^t Deborah Rebekahs nurse died.] This place makes me without any
scruple to conclude, that though the coming of Jacob to his father Isaac be not
yet mentioned, he had been there long before this (for who can think that Jacob
would be ten or twelve years in Canaan after he was come from Laban, with whom
he had served twenty years, and never go in all that time to see his aged
father) undoubtedly there was continual intercourse betwixt them; and so
Deborah being come at this time to Jacob (it may be upon Rebekahs death, or
some other occasion) there died, and with great mourning was buried.

Verse. 10. But Israel shall be thy name.] God had given him this name before,
Genesis 32. 28. And he said, Thy name shall be no more called Jacob but Israel:
but now the Lord confirmed this name to him the second time; as Jacob also,
ver. 15. confirms the name of the place, Bethel. And Jacob called the name of
the place where God spoke with him, Bethel.

Verse. 14. And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him.]
Whether the pillar set up here before, Genesis 28. 18. And Jacob rose up early in
the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his pillow, and set it up
for a pillar, was defaced or overthrown it is uncertain; but this was
questionless another pillar, as appears, because it is said to have been set
up just in the place where God had this second time appeared to him.

And he poured a drink offering thereon.] See Genesis 28. 18.

Ver. 18. But his father called him Benjamin.] That is, the son of my right
hand, to wit, because he should be his beloved, tendered, and especially
regarded, he should be ever at his right hand, according to that expression,
Psalm. 80. 17. Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand; and thus does
Jacob as it were correct the immoderate sorrow of his wife shown in the name
she had given him Benoni, the son of my sorrow, and also prevents the
frequent renewing of his sorrow by that name which might often have brought to
remembrance the loss of his dear wife.

Verse. 19. And Rachel died.] To wit, immediately after she was delivered of her
child; and thus she that ere while in a passion quarrelled with her husband,
Give me children or I die, now died by her bearing of children.

And was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Beth-lehem.] It has both
names, Micah 5. 2. But thou Beth-lehem Ephratah, etc.

Verse. 29. And Isaac gave up the ghost and died.] This is here set down by way
of anticipation: for that which is related in the two follovving chapters fell
out before Isaac died.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the generations of Esau, etc.] This is related to show
the accomplishment of that temporal blessing, vvherevvith his father blessed
him, Genesis 27. 39. And Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy
dwelling shall be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from
above, and by thy sword shall thou live, and shall serve thy brother; and it
shall come to pass when thou shall have the dominion, that thou shall break
his yoke from off thy neck; as likewise of the promise to Abraham, Genesis 22.
17. In multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and
as the sand upon the sea shore; and the oracle given to Rebekah, Genesis 25. 23.
And the Lord said unto her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two manner of
people shall be separated from thy bowels.

Verse. 2. Adah the daughter of Elon, etc.] The wives of Esau are here set
down by other names then formerly. The first is Adah, who Genesis 26. 34. is
called Bashemath, and the daughter of Elon the Hittite, as here also she is
said to be. And indeed it was usual in those times to have two names: for
thus Esau was called Edom, and Jacob Israel; Maachah daughter of Abishalom 1.
King. 15. 2. is called Michaiah daughter of Uriel, 2. Chron. 13. 2. His second
wife here named is Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon,
the Hivite: now this doubtless is the same who is called Judith, Genesis 26. 34.
only because her father was called both Anah and Beeri, here she is said to be
the daughter of Anah, and there, the daughter of Beeri; and because this Anah,
who was also called Beeri, was the son of Zibeon, therefore Aholibamah is
said to be not only the daughter of Anah, but also the daughter of Zibeon
(because she was his grandchild, namely Zibeons) and that to distinguish this
Anah the father of Aholibamah, Esaus wife, from another Anah, mentioned ver.
20. who was the brother of Zibeon, and so the uncle of this Anah. Indeed Anah
or Beeri the father of Aholibamah or Judith, though here termed the Hivite, yet
is said to be a Hittite, chap. 26. 34. but this is because the Hivites
comprehended also the Hittites, as the Britains the English and Welsh.

Verse. 3. And Bashemath.] This was Esaus third wife, called Machalath Genesis 28.
9.

Verse. 6. And Esau took his wives and his sons, etc.] Esau dwelt in Seir
whilst Jacob was in Mesopotamia, chap. 32. being removed thither, as may well
be thought, either upon some displeasure, or for that he was allied by marriage
to the Hivites, verse. 2. Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan,
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite: but this
cannot be meant of that removal; for now he goes from the face of his brother
Jacob, and that verse. 7. because their riches were more then that they might
dwell together: Questionless therefore after Jacobs return from Mesopotamia,
Esau, not yet having removed his goods, etc. from Canaan, nor fully
accomplished his designs in Seir, returned also to his father; but after Isaac
was dead and buried, partly because (as it fared once with Abraham and Lot) the
place where they dwelt was too strait for him and his brother, both being now
grown exceeding rich; and partly because, no doubt, he had already hope to get
the possession of the land of Seir, he removes thither again with all that he
had, God in his providence thus disposing it, that he should thus leave Jacob
as it were in the possession of Canaan, which was appointed for his posterity.

Verse. 12. And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esaus son.] She was sister to
Lotan, the son of Seir, verse. 22. And Lotans sister was Timma. Thus not only
Esau, but Eliphaz his son, matching into the stock of the Chorites, by this
occasion they thrust in themselves into the government of Mount Seir (Deuteronomy 2.
12. As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in Seir, when he destroyed
the Horims from before them, and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead,
etc.) and so he got his living by his sword, Genesis 27. 40. By thy sword shall
thou live, etc.

Verse. 18. Duke Korah.] This is not the same Korah mentioned before, verse. 16.

Verse. 20. Seir the Horite.] The Horite and Hivite seem to have been all one:
for Anah elsewhere called a Hivite comes of this race.

Verse. 24. This was that Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he
fed the asses of Zibeon his father.] Interpreters are of very different
judgments concerning the word in the original here translated the Mules; but
taking it as it is in our translation, that which is noted here concerning this
Anah must needs be this, That as he kept the asses of his father Zibeon in the
wilderness, by putting he-asses amongst certain mares that they might cover
them, these mares brought forth those creatures which we call Mules, a kind of
beasts that never breed themselves, but are only begotten of mares and
he-asses, and so he is said here to have been the first, at least in those
parts, that found out Mules. And this I conceive is noted concerning Anah,
because he was Esaus father in law, verse. 2. the father of Aholibamah, and
perhaps also did advance his estate by finding out these mules, which became by
degrees to be much esteemed by the inhabitants of those countries.

Verse. 31. And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom etc.] This
is added to show the accomplishment of Gods promise to Abraham. Genesis 17. 16.
Yea I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations: Kings of people
shall be of her.

CHAP. XXXVII.
Verse. 2. JOseph being seventeen years old, etc.] Hereby it appears that these
things were done before Isaacs death. Joseph was thirty years old when he stood
before Pharaoh, chap. 41. 46. and then was Jacob 121 years old (for nine years
after, when the seven years of plenty were spent, and two of the famine, he was
but 130) therefore Jacob was but 108 now when Joseph was 17, and Isaac but 168
(for he was but 60 years older then Jacob. Genesis 25. 26. And after that came his
brother out, and his hand took hold on Esaus heel, and his name was called
Jacob: and Isaac was 60 years old when she bare them) whereas he lived 180
years, chap. 35. 28. a little after the time that Joseph stood before Pharaoh.

And the lad was with the sons of Bilhah and Zilpah:] As there was always
great emulation between Rachel and Leah, so it was likely enough to be
continued amongst their children: and therefore it is very probable that Jacob
did purposely place Joseph amongst the sons of the handmaids, rather then
amongst the sons of Leah, that he might be trained up in the knowledge and
skill of ordering his cattle, amongst those that were not so likely to malign
him, and that the rather also because he might well hope that Bilhah (who was
Rachels handmaid) and her sons would even for Rachels sake be the more tender
over Joseph.

And Joseph brought unto his father their evil report.] That is, Joseph
returned to his father their evil words and deeds; and principally I conceive
it is meant of their evil dealing with him, though other their evil carriage be
not excluded, because that which follows in the next verses seems to be added,
to show the reason of this evil, whereof Joseph accused them, to wit, that
because of Jacobs singular love to Joseph, his brethren hated him, and would
not speak peaceably unto him.

Verse. 5. And Joseph dreamed a dream, and told it his brethren.] To wit, not
out of a vainglorious boasting, but out of youthful simplicity, and because
himself wondered at it: yet withal doubtless there was a special providence
of God in causing him thus to reveal his dreams, that by this prediction of his
future exaltation, his father and brethren might the more plainly see when it
came to pass that it was of God.

Verse. 6. Behold we were binding sheaves in the field, etc.] This dream,
concerning their sheaves of corn, was the fitter to represent their bowing down
before Joseph; because it was for corn that they afterward went down into
Egypt and sued to Joseph, when they did (as was now foretold) in so submissive
a manner yield obeisance unto him.

Verse. 10. And his father rebuked him.] Not knowing that these dreams were of
God, to foreshow what should befall Joseph; and being carried away at first
with a sudden fear lest they proceeded from his own ambitious thoughts, and
should stir up the envy of his brethren against him, he gives him a gentle
reproof, both to prevent the exalting of Joseph's mind, and that his brethren
might not imagine, to the increase of their envy, that he had any thought of
preferring Joseph before them: though afterward when he came to consider with
himself that he had two dreams tending both to signify the same thing, and
withal bethought himself what excellent gifts of mind God had bestowed on him,
he began to think that there might be somewhat in it more then yet they
perceived, and so laid it the more to heart, as it is said verse. 12. His father
observed the saying.

Shall I and thy mother, etc.] The mother of the family, and so his stepmother,
whether Leah, or Bilhah; for Rachel was now dead.

Verse. 13. Do not thy brethren feed the flock in Shechem, etc.] Shechem was, as
is generally held, above 16 miles from Hebron, where Jacob now dwelt, the very
place where that massacre was by his sons committed, Genesis 34. However his
sons were gone thither to feed their flock, because happily the place was
ever since uninhabited, at least they having been gone from thence so many
years since were not likely to be there known; yet this might make him the more
careful to inquire of their welfare, and though happily he had of late kept
his Joseph at home, to prevent all discord betwixt him and his brethren, yet
now he sends him to see how they did, because this might also procure him
favor amongst them. All which does aggravate the following wickedness of
Jacobs sons, that did so ill requite the love of their caref^ll father.

Verse. 15. And a certain man found him, etc.] All this is thus particularly
related, that his pains in seeking them might aggravate their cruelty to him.

Verse. 21. And Ruben heard it, and he delivered him out of their hands, etc.]
That Reuben did at first dissuade them earnestly from offering any violence, is
evident by his own words to his brethren when they were in Egypt, chap. 42.
22. Spoke I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the child, and ye would
not hear? But now he delivered him by persuading them not to kill him, but to
cast him into a pit, and there to let him lie, intending withal to draw him
out secretly afterward, and so to restore him to his father. Observable indeed
it is that Reuben should do this, who (being Jacobs eldest son, and that by
Leah) had most cause to be jealous of, and enraged against, the suspected
superiority of this son of Rachel: But herein was the power of God
magnified, who made him the instrument of delivering Joseph that was most
unlikely to have done it: and yet there may be some reasons withal conceived,
why Reuben above all the rest should seek to rescue Joseph out of their hands;
for having lately repented him of that his foul incest, with Bilhah his fathers
concubine (for we cannot think that the Patriarchs when they fell so
grievously did also run on in a state of impenitency) he was doubtless the
more tender of having any hand again in such a high degree of wickedness, and
was happily glad to have so fair an occasion to assuage his fathers
displeasure, conceiving evil against him for his former sin, and fearing lest
this intended wickedness, should it come to his fathers knowledge, would be
chiefly charged upon him, even because of his former offense.

Verse. 28. Then there passed by Midianites.] The Merchants to whom Joseph was
sold are in several places called sometimes Ishmaelites sometimes Midianites,
who yet were two distinct nations, the one of Ishmael Hagars son, the
other of Midian Keturahs son, Gen 25. 2. but because they dwelled both in
Arabia, it is most likely that there was in this company of Merchants both
Ishmaelites and Midianites, who did traffic together, and to that purpose
were going together into Egypt, and are therefore called sometimes
Ishmaelites, sometimes Midianites.

And they drew and lift up Joseph out of the pit.] Reuben being formerly upon
some pretense slipped away from them, that he might go about some other way,
and take Joseph out of the pit without their knowledge, in his absence they
sold him to these Arabian Merchants, and chuckerd themselves no doubt with
thinking how far they should be now from crouching to him, that was himself
made a bondslave. Doubtless Joseph did both before when they cast him into the
pit, and now again, earnestly beg of them with many tears that they would not
do it, as is evident by their own confession, Genesis 42. 21. And they said one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear; but malice had
for the present hardened their hearts.

Verse. 29. And he rent his clothes.] As the custom was in those times, when
any grievous calamity or sorrow befell men, either thereby to express how
their hearts were broken and torn with grief and anguish of spirit, or else how
little comfort they took in any thing, and how little they cared what became of
them, not minding those things which were most useful for them.

Verse. 30. And he returned unto his brethren, and said, The child is not.]
Hereby meaning not only that he was not in the pit, but also that they had
slain him in his absence, as at first they intended; for in Scripture those
that are dead are said not to be, Jer. 31. 15. Rachel weeping for her children
refused to be comforted, because they were not. Questionless Reuben (for the
reasons before noted upon ver. 21.) was seriously and heartily distressed for
that they had done; yet evident it is on the other side, that when they had
told him, that they had only sold him to the Ishmaelites, and had not slain
him, he consented to conceal this their fact from their father, and to deceive
him with a forget tale, because he should otherwise have stirred up the hatred
of all his brethren against him, wherein though he cannot be excused from
sinning greatly, yet he was far less guilty then the rest of his brethren.

Verse. 35. And all his daughters rose up to comfort him.] He might have other
daughters besides Dinah, though they be not mentioned: but however, hereby may
be meant his sons wives or their daughters.

But he refused to be comforted.] That is, so far did his passions prevail
over him that he minded not what they said to him, but even gave way to the
extremity of his sorrow; which is noted as an infirmity in this good
Patriarch, but chiefly to aggravate the wickedness of his sons, who had
brought this sorrow upon their father, yea upon Isaac their aged grandfather
too, for he lived thirteen years after this, as is before noted ver. 1. and had
therefore his share doubtless^ in this sorrow.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass at that time, etc.] It is very hard to determine
of what time this is meant, when Judah went to his friend Hirah the Adullamit^,
that is, that dwelt in Adullam, a city mentioned Josh. 19. 35. and so by his
means married the daughter of Shuah the Canaanite; and that because it is
evident that from the time of Joseph's being sold into Egypt unto the time of
Jacobs going down thither to him, there were but three and twenty years at the
most (for he was sold at seventeen years old, chap. 37. 1. Joseph being
seventeen years old was feeding the flock, etc. from which time till he was
exalted in Pharaohs Court, there were but thirteen years, chap. 41. 46. And
Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh King of Egypt, etc.
to which if we add the seven plenteous years that were in Egypt after his
exaltation, and the two years and upwards, that were spent of the famine, ere
Joseph sent for his father and his family, chap. 45. 6. For these two years
has the famine been in the land, etc. this will make up, at the time of his
coming into Egypt, about three and twenty years: and yet it must needs be
yielded, that all these things, related in this chapter, were done before Jacob
removed out of Canaan into Egypt, and how they could be done within the
compass of so few years, it may seem very questionable. Some Expositours hold,
that these words, And it came to pass at that time, must be strictly taken,
with reference to that which went before, in the former chap^^^, ^o wi^, that
Judah did this in that very year or thereabout when Joseph was sold into Egypt,
and that 1. because the words are so express that, at that time, Judah thus
married; neither can there be any probable reason given why the relation of
those things that concern Joseph should be broken off to insert these things
concerning Judah, but only this, because presently upon the selling of Joseph
Judah made this marriage with the daughter of Shuah; 2. Because till Joseph was
sold into Egypt, Judah dwelt amongst his brethren, and therefore, as is likely,
it was after this that he went aside and matched himself with the daughter of
Shuah the Canaanite: And that all these things here related, concerning Judah
and his children, might well be within the compass of three and twenty years,
they show thus, to wit, 1. That Judah might marry and have his three sons,
Er, Onan, and Shelah by his wife, the daughter of Shuah, in the first three
years after Joseph was sold into Egypt; 2. That Er might be marriedto Tamar
when he was sixteen years old, and Onan also the following year, which was
toward the latter end of the seven plenteous years in Egypt, about eighteen
years after Joseph was sold thither; and 3. That in the five following years
Tamar might by Judah, as is here related, conceive with child, and bring forth
Pharez and Zarah, a little before their going into Egypt. And whereas it may be
objected that Pharez had two sons, Hezron, and Hamul, when Jacob went down
into Egypt, Genesis 46. 12. The sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul: to this
they answer, That Hezron and Hamul are there reckoned amongst those that went
down with Jacob into Egypt, not because they were then born, but because they
were of Jacobs family in Egypt, vvhilest Jacob was yet living: Thus, I say,
some Expositours understand this place, that Judah married this Canaanites
daughter (contrary no doubt to his father Jacobs mind, who was himself
strictly forbidden to marry amongst them by Isaac) that very year that Joseph
was sold into Egypt. But 2. because Hezron and Hamul are so expressly reckoned
amongst those that went down with Jacob into Egypt, Gen 46. 12. therefore
many Expositours, yea the most, conceive that these words, And it came to
pass at that time, must not be taken strictly, that Judah married thus at that
time, when Joseph was sold into Egypt; but that it was done about that time,
that is, say they, at Jacobs first coming into the land of Canaan, when he
left his uncle Laban: and the ground of this their opinion is this, because
Jacobs coming from Laban (which was when Joseph was six years old, as is
evident if we compare Genesis 30. 25. And it came to pass when Rachel had born
Joseph, that Jacob said unto Laban, Send me away, etc. give me my wives and my
children for whom I have served thee, and let me go, etc. with Genesis 31. 40.
Thus have I been twenty years in thy house: I served thee fourteen years for
thy two daughters, and six years for thy cattle, etc.) was but eleven years
before Joseph was sold into Egypt, and consequently not above four and thirty
years at the most ere Jacob went down thither to Joseph; all which time
will be strait enough, if not too little, for all these things to be done in
that are here related, and for the birth of Ezron and Hamul, the sons of
Pharez, who are reckoned amongst those that went down with Jacob into
Egypt: for though Judah married the daughter of Shuah about two years after
their coming into Canaan (and yet was he then but thirteen years old, as being
at the utmost but five y^ars older then Joseph) and had by her Er, Onan, and
Shelah, in the three next years after his marriage; and though he then married
Er, his eldest son, to Tamar, when he was also but thirteen years old,
which was sixteen years after their coming into Canaan, three years at least
after Joseph was sold into Egypt, to this if you add but three years for the
death of Er, the marriage and death of Onan, the going home of Tamar to her
fathers house, Judahs incest with her* and the conception and birth of her two
twins Pharez and Zarah, the fruit of that incest, and then fifteen years more
ere Pharez could be marriageable, and have those his two sons Hezron and
Hamul, who are numbered amongst those that went down with Jacob into Egypt,
this will make the whole number of four and thirty years from Jacobs coming
into Canaan till his removing into Egypt. And so they conclude, that doubtless
the time here spoken of, when Judah married this Canaanites daughter, was
within a while after their coming into Canaan: And indeed neither of these
Expositours do suppose any thing impossible; yet the first may seem most
probable, because it were very strange if Judah and his sons Er and Pharez
should all marry at twelve or thirteen years of ag^.

Verse. 7. And the Lord slew him.] The like also is said of Onan his younger
brother, verse. 10. and the meaning in both places is, that they died not an
ordinary, natural death, but that they were taken away in an extraordinary
manner, by some remarkable judgment, whereby it was manifest unto others that
they were cut off by the revenging hand of God for their notorious wickedness.
And this was the fruit of Judahs marriage with a daughter of that accursed
nation of the Canaanites, that were in time to come to be rooted out, that the
Israelites might dwell in their room; his children that he had by her proved
sons of Belial, and were destroyed by the just judgment of God upon them.

Verse. 8. Go in unto thy brothers wife, etc.] By this it appears that God had
given this in charge to the Patriarchs (as many other things) which was
afterward established by the written Law, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. If brethren dwell
together, and one of them die, and have no child, the wife of the dead shall
not marry without unto a stranger; her husbands brother shall go in unto her,
and take her to him for wife, and perform the duty of an husbands brother unto
her.

Verse. 11. Remain a widow in thy fathers house till Shelah my son be grown.]
It is evident that in these words Judah thought to assure Tamar, that as soon as
his son Shelah was marriageable, he also should take her to wife, and raise
up feed to his deceased brethren: but withal it is most probable, that he
meant nothing less, but only intended to put her off, and that as suspecting
that she had some way been the occasion of the death of his other two sons,
as the words following do import, For he said, (to wit, within himself) Lest
peradventure he die also, as his brethren did. And indeed, why ^lse did he send
her home to her father? she might have stayed awhile unmarried with him; and
when Shelah was grown, we see Judah minded not the performance of his promise,
as is noted verse. 14. yea his own confession makes it manifest, verse. 26. where
he accuses himself of doing her wrong, She has been more righteous then I,
because that I gave her not to Shelah my son.

Verse. 12. Judah was comforted and went up to his sheep-shearers to Timnath.] A
city in the Philistines country, which also befell Judahs children for a
possession, Josh. 15. 20* 57. This is the inheritance of the tribe of Judah,
etc. Cain, Gibea, and Timnath.

Verse. 14. And sat in an open place.] Such open places harlots used, Ezech.
16. 25. Thou have built thy high places at every head of the way. Jer. 3. 2.
Lift up thine eyes unto the high places, and see where thou have not been lien
with. Prove. 9. 12. For she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the
high places of the street.

Verse. 15. When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot, because she had
covered her face.] The meaning is not, that he judged her to be an harlot
because she had covered her face (for this was a sign of modesty, rather then
of whorish impudency, Genesis 24. 65. Rebekah took a veil and covered her self,
when she saw Isaac coming toward her) but that seeing her set in such a
manner, in an open place, as harlots used to do, and doubtless in the dress
and attire of such light women, he imagined she was an harlot; and these words,
because she had covered her face, are added to intimate what it was that made
him thus to mistake, being she was his daughter in law, to wit, because she was
veiled, and so her face being hidden he could not know her.

Verse. 16. And she said, What will thou give me?] This she said, both as
following the custom of harlots, Ezekiel. 16. 33. They give gifts to all whores;
and also especially that she might have somewhat to witness by whom she had
conceived, if she proved to be with child. It may seem somewhat strange, that
when she began to speak to him he should not know her by her voice: but for
this we must consider, 1. that if she spoke with a low and soft voice, under a
pretense of secrecy, in that case a known voice may be easily mistaken; 2.
that much art may be used by a subtle woman in changing the ordinary tone of
her voice and speech; 3. that Judah having now his lust inflamed, and being
carried away with a violent passion, might easily be so far blinded and
transported as not to discern a fraud of this nature, which he had no cause in
the world to imagine or suspect.

Verse. 24. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.] By the law
of God afterward given, to defile a betrothed woman (which was here Tamars
case, in regard she was promised to Shelah, and by the law he was to marry her)
was adultery, and as adultery to be punished with death. Deuteronomy 22. 23, 24. If a
Damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto her husband, and a man find her in
the city, and lie with her; then ye shall bring them both out unto the gate of
that city, and ye shall stone them with stones that they die: And it seems
such was the law and custom of these times, yea though they were widows;
only, as by that law, they were to be stoned, so by the law in these times and
places they were to be burned: which Judah was very forward to press against
Tamar, out of a desire to b^ rid of her, that he might be no longer in danger
of her being married to his son Shelah: yea, so far was he transported with
his passion herein, that he would have burnt (which was against the light of
nature) both her and the fruit that was conceived in her womb. Concerning
Judahs power of pronouncing such a sentence against her, the judgment of
Expositours differs much. 1. Some conceive, that at this time in those
countries there was not that exact form of a Commonweal established amongst
them, as was afterward in process of time, nor such a strict legal way in
judicial proceedings, but that every one that was the head of a family had in
his own family power of life and death; and so Judah did indeed pronounce
sentence of death against Tamar, who belonged to his family: which indeed may
seem the more probable, because when, being brought forth, she had discovered
by whom she was with child, there was no further proceeding against her, which
shovvs the judgment was much in his power. Nor is that argument of any great
strength that is brought against this, to wit, that she dwelt now with her own
father, over whom Judah could have no such power to fetch her thence, and
punish her as he pleased; since she might be fetched to Judah under some other
pretense, and then he might proceed against her. But 2. others conceive that
Judah had no such power to pronounce sentence against her, but only made known
his will to have a strict course taken against her; Bring her forth, says he,
and let her be burnt, that is, let her be carried before the magistrate, and be
punished with burning according to the law of the country. And this indeed is
the common opinion of the most Expositours.

Verse. 25. When she was brought forth she sent to her father in law, etc.] This
she did being apprehended, or brought forth to trial, either to stay his
proceedings against her, if Judah were to be her judge; or at least some way
to smother it, before it came to a public hearing.

Verse. 26. She has been more righteous then I.] That is, my fault was greater
then hers, I did it of mere lust, she as provoked by my injustice, because I
gave her not to Shelah my son, and so I was also the occasion of her sin.

Verse. 28. When she traveled, the one put out his hand.] This shovvs that her
labor was most hard and dangerous, the child coming not according to the
ordinary course of nature, the Lord therein correcting both Tamar and Judah for
their sin.

And the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread.] As persuading
her self that she would have tvvins, and that this would be the first born,
she ties a scarlet thread upon his wrest, that might be a mark to know him
from the other, a mark that to him belonged the primogeniture honor: but
herein she was deceived, for this child, who was afterward called Zarah,
drevv back his hand, verse. 29. and then the other came forth and was born
first, called thereupon Pharez, who was to be the stock out of whom should
come the promised seed; and therefore (as an obscure testimony thereof)
contrary to the ordinary course of nature he brake out first.

Verse. 29. This breach be upon thee.] That is, the breach is thine thou have
made it, and shall carry the name of it upon thee: for Pharez in the original
signifies a breach. And indeed principally to show the birth of Pharez, who
was one of Christ's progenitors, were all these things here related
concerning Judah, there being nothing spoken of the marriage of the other
sons of Jacob, except Joseph; and that because hereby we may learn, that it
was of mere grace, that this family, the fruit of incest, was chosen to be
the stock from whence the Messiah should spring, and that he will not reject
great sinners, that would be the son of those that were guilty of such
infamous sins.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse. 2. ANd he was in the house of his Master the Egyptian.] This is added to
show, that though Gods blessing went along with him, yet still he suffered him
to be in servitude; or else to express Joseph's patient bearing of his
affliction, that he remained there, and ran not away to his father again; or
else that whereas some servants are employed in more servile businesses
abroad, Joseph in regard of his ingenuitie was employed at home in the house.

Verse. 4. And Joseph found grace in his sight, and he served him, etc. This is
his first advancement, that he is taken to attend upon his masters person; the
next is that he was made his steward, and had all committed to his hands.

Verse. 6. And he knew not ought he had.] That is, he suffered all things to be
at Joseph's disposing, and so was without all care himself, only eating and
drinking such things as were provided for him.

Verse. 14. See, he has brought in an Hebrew to mock us.] The more to
^xasperate her husband against Joseph, both here to the servants, and afterward
to himself, ver. 17. she lays the blame of her being so used upon his folly,
in bringing such a one into the house: See, says she, showing his garment unto
the servants, he has brought in an Hebrew unto us (so she names him in
contempt, for the Hebrews were an abomination to the Egyptians, chap. 43. 32)
to mock us, that is, by a dishonest attempt to dishonor and disgrace us. To
make the more show of modesty, she uses the most modest terms she can devise,
in speaking of his pretended attempt to ravish her.

Verse. 20. And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison.] Though
Joseph questionless pleaded his innocence, and made known to his master the
truth of the business, yet, having never formerly suspected his wife of
incontinencie, no marvel it is though he believed his wife and not him, and so
in his rage cast him into prison: rather we have cause to admire the providence
of God in restraining him so far, that he did not presently in his rage fall
upon him and kill him, especially if we consider how violent the rage of
jealousy is, and that he was a heathen not awed with the fear of God, and
might have done what he pleased to his servant.

Verse. 21. But the Lord was with Joseph, and gave him favor in the sight of
the keeper of the prison.] At first he was more hardly used, Psalm. 105. 18.
whose feet they hurt with fetters, he was laid in iron; but was by degrees
(perhaps not altogether at last without Potiphars consent) allowed more
liberty and kindness.

CHAP. XL.
Verse. 4. ANd the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them.] That is,
Potiphar Joseph's master; whereby is evident, that either by finding just cause
at least to suspect that his Mistress had accused him falsely, or by some other
means, his wrath was assuaged, so that now himself appoints Joseph to this
employment.

Verse. 5. And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man according to the
interpretation of his dream.] That is, no vain dreams, but significant,
containing predictions of things which did accordingly come to pass.

Verse. 6. And behold they were sad.] So dreams and visions sent of God use much
to affect men, Genesis 41. 8. Pharaoh slept and dreamed, etc. and it came to pass
in the morning that his spirit was troubled. Dan. 2. 1. Nebuchadnezzar dreamed
dreams, wherewith his spirit was troubled. Mat. 27. 19. For I have suffered
many things this day in a dream, etc.

Verse. 8. And there is no interpreter of it.] That is, being prisoners they
could not go to the southsayers, and wise men of Egypt, as that people was wont
to do, Genesis 41. 8. And it came to pass in the morning, that his spirit was
troubled: and he sent and called for all the Magicians of Egypt, and all the
wise men thereof.

Are not interpretations of God? tell me them, etc.] Joseph finding by the
instinct of Gods spirit that he should be able to interpret their dreams, and
having happily had experience formerly that God had given him this
extraordinary gift, he bid them tell him what their dreams were.

Verse. 15. For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews.] That
is, out of the land of Canaan, wherein the children of Abraham the Hebrew
dwelt, and to whom it was to come for an inheritance: thus he speaks by faith
in Gods promises. And observable it is, that though he made known that he was
stolen away, yet he mentions not by whom it was done, as having respect to
the credit of his brethren and fathers family.

CHAP. XLI.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh
dreamed, etc.] That is, after he had expounded the Butlers and Bakers dreams;
and thus was the faith and patience of this dear servant of God the better
tried, that he might be an example unto others to wait patiently upon God in
long-continuing afflictions; and withal he was taught not to ascribe his
deliverance to the favor of this Courtier, who never minded him so long a time
together, but to the watchful care and providence of God over him.

Verse. 2. And behold there came up out of the River seven well favored kine,
etc.] The ordinary means of the fruitfulness or barrenness of Egypt was from
the overflowing (as it was much or little) of the river Nilus; therefore are
both the fat and lean kine said to come out of the river: Neither could any
thing be fitter to represent the plenty or scarcity of a land then were these
visions of kine and ears of corn; because indeed corn and cattle are the two
principal things which a land yields for the use of man, and where these
abound the scarcity of other things is but little felt.

Verse. 5. And behold seven ears of corn upon one stalk, etc.] A clear sign of
incredible plenty.

Verse. 8. Pharaoh told them his dream, but there was none that could interpret
them unto Pharaoh.] Thus God makes the wisdom of the wise to perish, Isaiah
29. 14. For the wisdom of their wise men shall perish.

Verse. 9. I do remember my faults this day.] It was not doubtless without a
special providence, that the chief Butler spoke not to Pharaoh concerning
Joseph till he had made trial of the Magicians and Wise men of Egypt, and
could receive no satisfaction from them; for this must needs make Pharaoh to
prize Joseph the more, and so it made way to his advancement. As for the
complement, wherewith the chief Butler begins his speech to Pharaoh, it was
doubtless to curry favor with his great Lord and Master, lest the mention of
his imprisonment, should seem to be spoken out of discontent for that which he
then suffered (as Kings are full of jealousies in this kind) by this humbling
of himself Courtier-like, I do remember my faults, etc. he seeks to prevent all
suspicion that might arise in the Kings mind in this regard.

Verse. 16. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.] An expression of his
hope or desire, namely, that his dream should be a prediction of nothing but
peace; yea happily he might by the spirit of God be assured that the dream was
such as did portend nothing but peace and prosperity to Pharaoh and his
kingdom.

Verse. 34. And take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven
plenteous years.] That this fifth part was taken up for the King, is evident;
because he afterward sold it to the people, chap. 47. 14. And Joseph gathered
up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of
Canaan, for the corn which they bought: but whether he took it up by way of
tribute or purchase, buying it of the people, it is not expressed; most
probable it is that both means were used, and that this store was gathered
into the Kings granaries and storehouses, partly upon the Kings payments and
engagements for it, and partly by advancing of his yearly tributes, which
might be the more easily born by the people, both because of the exceeding
plenty of those years, wherein the remaining four parts were more then the
whole increase of other years, and abundantly enough and to spare for their
own supply, and because they might know that this provision was made for the
supply of the country against a time of scarcity which was feared, or
known to be coming upon them.

Verse. 38. A man in whom the spirit of God is.] This he grounds upon that
prophetical gift of interpreting dreams, and foretelling things to come,
which by a divine power was conferred upon him. And observable it is, that
as dreams were before the occasion of his bondage, so dreams were now again
the occasion of his exaltation.

Verse. 41. See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.] This word see, he
uses, as having respect therein to th^se outward ornaments and signets
wherewith this honor was to be conferred and confirmed unto him.

Verse. 42. And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, etc.] That is, his
signet, which he was to use, as his Viceroy in his name, and by his authority
to publish under his seal, whatever he should be pleased to decree.

Verse. 43. And he made him to ride in the second chariot he had.] Kings had two
chariots, for more honor and use, 2. Chron. 35. 24. His servants therefore
took him out of the chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had. By
setting Joseph hereon the king honored him (as Mordecai was by riding on the
kings horse) and sought to make it known that he had taken him to be the next
man under himself in the kingdom.

Verse. 44. I am Pharaoh, etc.] That is, I am king, that authority which I have
given thee I am able and will make good unto thee; or else it may be a kind of
oath, so true as I am Pharaoh, without thee shall no man lift up his hand, or
foot in all the land of Egypt, which is a proverbiall speech, and the meaning
is, that the least thing should not be done, to wit, in matters concerning the
ordering and government of the kingdom, but by authority from Joseph.

Verse. 45. And he gave him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah, etc.]
It is expressly noted that Poti-pherah, the father in law of Joseph, was
Priest or Prince of On, a chief city in Egypt, not only to show into what an
honorable family Joseph was matched, by the care and favor of Pharaoh, but
also to distinguish him from Potiphar, the captain of the guard, to whom Joseph
was sold when he was first brought into Egypt (because their names are much
alike) neither is it likely that he would marry the daughter of Potiphars wife,
whom he knew to be dishonest, and by whose false accusation he had suffered so
much reproach and misery. As for his marrying with the daughter of an idolatrous
Priest or Prince, we must consider that it was an extraordinary case, there
being no other in the land of Egypt, neither could he go elsewhere to seek a
wife without deserting that great office, vvhereto, for the benefit of the
Church, God had advanced him; and besides he might by some special instinct or
revelation from God be moved to accept of Pharaohs favor herein.

Verse. 51. For God, said he, has made me forget all my fathers house.] By
forgetting his fathers house, is not meant, that now he did not at all think
upon his father or brethren, or mind the family from which he was taken (for
this had been sinful in Joseph, and a dishonor to him, and not a matter to be
rejoiced in) but that God had comforted him in regard of his former sad
thoughts for his being sold away from his father and all his friends, by
advancing him to a condition wherein it was better with him for all outvvard
things, then in his fathers house it could have been; and besides he might in
these words have especial respect to his marriage, concerning which it is
said that A man must then leave his father and his mother, and cleave unto his
wife. It is true indeed (and very strange it may seem) that Joseph neither in
his bondage, nor in the eight years after his exaltation, did ever send word
to his father where and in what condition he was, which was doubtless of
God in some extraordinary way; and most probably we may conceive, that having
that extraordinary gift of interpreting dreams, even the meaning and event of
his own dreams might be revealed to him, to wit, how his brethren should in the
famine come down into Egypt for corn, and so bow down before him, and that
therefore he sent not to his father, but waited for the accomplishment of that
which God had beforehand revealed to him.

Verse. 57. And all countries came into Egypt, etc.] That is, all the
neighbour-countreys round about Egypt.

CHAP. XLII.
Verse. 1. NOw when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt.] To wit, by the
relation of the Canaanites, who in his sight did daily bring it home.

Verse. 6. And Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves before him,
etc.] It seems that however there was corn sold unto the natives, throughout
all the land of Egypt, by subordinate officers deputed by Joseph to that
service, yet the strangers that came from other countries for corn, came
immediately to Joseph, and bought it of him; by which he had opportunity of
sifting them, and informing himself concerning any thing that might be for the
advantage of Egypt, and God withal did accomplish what in his dreams was long
since foreshown, that his brethren should in an humble and submissive manner
bow down before him.

Verse. 7. He knew them, but made himself strange unto them, etc.] Had Joseph at
first made known himself to his brethren, he might fear lest they would assay
to hide from their father what had befallen him in Egypt, lest their
wickedness in selling him, etc. should thereby come to knowledge: neither
would they happily have dealt sincerely with him, in telling him how it fared
with his father, and with his brother Benjamin (concerning whom he had cause
enough to suspect them, because of that they had done to him, and because he
was not now with them.) To prevent therefore these inconveniences, and that he
might first bring them to make a full relation of the present state of their
family; secondly, humble them the better with the remembrance of their former
sins; thirdly, make their joy the greater when the truth of things should be
discovered to them; fourthly, clear the more fully the accomplishment of his
dreams, when being under his jurisdiction and power they should in such an
humble manner prostrate themselves before him, and make supplication to him for
their peace and liberty, he made show of his displeasure, accused them to be
spies, and prosecuted the accusation, as is related in this, and the following
chapters.

Verse. 9. And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them.] That is,
he called to mind how now in their bowing down before him his dreams were
accomplished: for we must not understand these words, as if he had never
thought upon his dreams before.

Verse. 11. We are all one man's sons.] They apprehend the ground of Joseph's
charge to be, because they came in that company like conspiratours, and
therefore in this answer they imply, that they came thus together because
brethren, and the more unlike spies who use to disperse themselves; as also
because one man would hardly expose almost all his sons at once in so
dangerous an employment.

Verse. 14. That is it that I spoke unto you.] That is, this discovers that to
be true that I charged you with: Is it possible that one man should have
twelve such sons? or why should not one have served to fetch corn? or if you
would come together, why should one only stay at home?

Verse. 20. But bring your youngest brother unto me.] Though Joseph could not
but fear that his father would be very loath to send his Benjamin with them
into Egypt, yet not knovving how to trust his brethren concerning his life and
safety except he might see him, and hoping vvithall that his father would by
his present bountiful dealing with them conceive that no vvrong should be
done him, he commands this straightly that they must be sure to bring their
youngest brother with them.

Verse. 21. We are verily guilty concerning our brother, etc.] That is, it is
our sin long since committed against our brother Joseph that has brought
this misery upon us: whereof they are the more assured by comparing together
their former sin and present misery: they had sold their brother into bondage,
and they were now deprived of their liberty; Joseph in the anguish of his soul
besought them, and they would not hear him, they therefore had now done what
they could to persuade the Governor concerning their fidelity, and he would
not be persuaded by them; they had deluded their father with a lie, and now
when they spoke the truth they could not be believed.

Verse. 24. And he turned himself about from them, and wept.] Moved with their
acknowledgement of their fault, and especially with Reubens sharp upbraiding
them.

And took from them Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.] Though Reuben,
that had no hand in selling Joseph, was for three days imprisoned with the
rest of his brethren, because Joseph had no color to show him more favor then
the rest, yet now when Joseph was to take one of them to stay behind in bonds,
till the rest went home and fetched Benjamin, he passes by Reuben the eldest
(remembering how he had pleaded for him) and took Simeon Jacobs second son,
the rather perhaps because he was the forwardest in Joseph's troubles, which may
be the more probably conceived, because he was by nature bold and fierce, as is
evident by that fact of his upon the Shechemites, Genesis 34. 25. Two of the
sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinahs brethren, took each man his sword, and
came upon the city boldly, etc. and to humble them the more, and to make them
the more careful speedily to return with Benjamin, he bound him before their
eyes, though happily when they were gone he might ease him of his bonds, and
only keep him in prison till their return.

Verse. 25. Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to restore
every man's money into his sack.] To wit, lest his father should be in want; and
yet this he does secretly, because as yet he would not be known.

Verse. 28. And their hearts failed them.] Finding their money in one of their
sacks, as men perplexed in conscience are wont to fear every thing, they
suspect some plot laid for their ruin; or at least that some danger hereby
would befall Simeon: and therefore this their fear was increased when at their
coming home they found it so in all their sacks, verse. 36. And when both they,
and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid. And Jacob their
father said unto them, Me have you bereaved of my children: Joseph is not, and
Simeon is not.

Verse. 36. All these things are against me.] As if he should have said, Though
they be not very grievous to you, they are like to fall heavily upon me.

CHAP. XLIII.
Verse. 3. THe man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my
face, etc.] Both these words of Joseph here repeated by Judah, and other
passages mentioned verse. 7. were no where before expressed; whereby is manifest
that many things passed particularly betwixt Joseph and his brethren which are
not so expressly related in the story.

Verse. 8. Send the lad with me, etc.] That is, Benjamin: it is manifest that
Benjamin was not above seven years younger then Joseph: for Joseph was born in
the end of Jacobs foureteen years service with his uncle Laban, Genesis 30. 25.
26. And it came to pass when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob said unto
Laban, Send me away, etc. and when Jacob had served six years longer for his
cattle, the next year as they were returning into Canaan Benjamin was born,
Genesis 35. 16, 17, 18. So that Joseph being now nine and thirty years old (the
seven plenteous years, and two years of famine being passed since his
exaltation, when it is expressed that he was thirty years old, Genesis 41. 46.
Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh) it must needs follow
that Benjamin was now above thirty years old; yet Judah here calls him the
lad, according to the phrase of the Scripture, to wit* comparatively, because
he was the youngest of all his brethren. See also the former note upon Genesis 21.
15.

Verse. 12. And take double money in your hand, etc.] Not treble money, as some
hold, that is, thrice as much as they carried before (namely, the money which
was brought back in their sacks, and twice as much to buy new provision, for
fear the price was raised) but double money, that is, that which they should
have paid for their former corn, and the same quantity again for new provision;
for that clause which follows, And the money that was brought again in the
mouth of your sacks carry that again in your hand, is added to explain what he
meant by double money, to wit not only money for a present supply of corn, but
also that which they found in their sacks.

Verse. 14. If I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved.] As if he had said,
Send him I must, and therefore I shall resign him into Gods hands; if it be
his will to bereave me of my children, I must and will be content, Though he
kill me, yet will I put my trust in him.

Verse. 21. Every man's money was in the mouth of his sack.] In the former
chapter we find that in the inn one of them only is said to open his sack,
and find his money, chap. 42. 27. As one of them opened his sack, etc. he
espied his money; and the rest at home in presence of their father, chap. 42.
35. And it came to pass as they ^mptied their sacks, that behold every man's
bundle of money was in his sack, where also it is said that seeing it they were
afraid. Here they report it otherwise, that they all opened their sacks in the
inn: Some therefore conceive that they all opened their sacks, and found their
money in the inn (as here they say) but that also they knit up their sacks
again, that so their father when they came home might see how it was. But
rather we may think, that here they speak as men in haste, and so join together
both what was done in the inn, and what was discovered at home; every man's
money indeed was in the mouth of their sacks when they were in the Inn, but
they saw it only in one of their sacks, till they came home, and poured out
their corn before their father, and then they found that it was so in all their
sacks; and therefore it is added there, that when both they and their father
saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.

Verse. 26. They brought him the present which was in their hand into the house,
and bowed themselves.] This bowing of themselves before Joseph, when they came
with their presents, was not only in their own name, but also in the name of
their father, who had sent those presents to him, whom therefore also they term
his servant, verse. 28. Thy servant our father is in good health. And thus was
Joseph's dream accomplished concerning the sun, and the moon, and the eleaven
stars, making obeisance, chap. 37. 9.

Verse. 32. Because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews.] Because
the Hebrews were known to be keepers of sheep, and so to kill, eat, and
sacrifice such cattle as the Egyptians worshipped: Genesis 46. 34. For every
shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians. Exodus 8. 26. And Moses said, It
is not meet so to do; for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians
unto the Lord our God.

Verse. 33. And the men marvelled one at another.] That is, they looked upon one
another, as men use to do when any thing that is strange befalls them, with
wonder and astonishment, to wit, marvelling why the Governor of Egypt should
show them that were strangers so great favor, and should feast them so
royally, especially having a while before entertained them so roughly: others
refer their wondering to that which is before mentioned in the foregoing
words, concerning their sitting at the table, conceiving that Joseph had placed
them in that manner, every man according to his age, and that they wondered how
he could place them in that order that were strangers unto him. But because it
is not expressed that Joseph did so order them, but that themselves rather sat
down in that manner, the former exposition is far more probable.

Verse. 34. And he took and sent messes unto them, from before him, etc.] It was
it seems, the custom of those times, that great men would send some choice
thing' from their table to those whom they meant to grace and honor. Again
they used not in those times to set provision on the table for all the guests
in common, as we nowadayes are wont to do, but to set a portion for every guest
by himself, as many ancien^ ^riters do witness, and may be gathered from other
places of Scripture, as 1. Sam. 1. 4, 5. He gave to Peninnah his wife, and to
all her sons and her daughters portions: but unto Hannah he gave a worthy
portion. 1. Sam. 9. 23, 24. And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion
which I gave thee, of which I said unto thee* Set it by thee. And the cook took
up the shoulder, and set it before Saul, etc. 2. Sam. 6. 19. And he dealt unto
all the people, etc. to every one a cake of bread, and a good piece of flesh,
and a flagon of wine, etc. and thence it was that Joseph's brethren had every
one their mess apart and by themselves, and so Benjamins mess was five times
so much as any of theirs; which was purposely so ordered by Joseph, both to
testify thereby his singular affection to him, and to make trial whither his
brethren would envy him for it.

CHAP. XLIV.
Verse. 2. ANd put my cup, etc. in the sacks mouth of the youngest.] This he
does to humble them yet more, and withal especially to make trial how they
stood affected to his father and brother Benjamin, as conceiving that if they
envied Benjamin* as they had formerly envied him, they would be glad to see him
apprehended for theft and cast into prison.

Verse. 5. Is not this it in which my Lord drinks, and whereby indeed he
divineth?] Because he was so famous for his prophetical interpretation of
dreams, the common opinion of the Egyptians was that he used divination, as
their Magicians and Wisemen did: Joseph therefore appoints his steward to say
thus according to the opinion the Egyptians had of him, 1. That he might the
better conceal himself from his brethren; 2. That he might make their fault
seem more heinous, little less then sacrilege, to steal so sacred a thing; 3.
To intimate that it was not strange that their theft was discovered so soon
after they were gone. Neither is it any wonder that the best of Gods servants
should discover (as Joseph did in this) some mixture of humane infirmity in
all their actions.

Verse. 15. Wot ye not that such a man as I can certainly divine?] See verse. 5.

Verse. 16. God has found out the iniquity of thy servants.] Because Judah had
particularly engaged himself to his father for the bringing home of Benjamin,
chap. 43. 8, 9. Send the lad with me, etc. I will be surety for him, of my
hand shall thou require him, etc. therefore he amongst all the rest undertakes
to speak in this cause: and though doubtless he was at first resolved to plead
for Benjamin, and to discover to Joseph the great straits they were in, yet
first he wisely begins with an ingenuous acknowledgement of that which was
plainly discovered, and a yielding up of themselves to the punishment of
bondage, to which, when search was made for the cup, they had formerly
consented: for though it is not likely that he was convinced that Benjamin had
stolen the cup (not only his brothers known fidelity and honesty, but also
their former finding of their money in their sacks, which was put there they
knew not how, might well persuade him it was not so) and therefore afterward
he speaks so warily in this regard, We are all my Lords servants, both we and
he also with whom the cup is found, not, he that has stolen the cup; yet
because they had no way to clear themselves before men, nor could object any
suspicion of wrong secretly done them, without danger of provoking him who had
power to do with them what he pleased, he deemed it best to yield and submit,
which is the surest means to procure favor from a generous spirit. God, says
he, has found out the iniquity of thy servants: in which words though Judah
might have respect to Gods just bringing this upon them for their former
iniquity, yet doubtless withal he spoke them by way of acknowledging that
iniquity which was now charged upon them; as if he should have said, Not only
he in whose sack it was found, but generally all of us deny the stealing of it:
but alas though each man knows his own innocence, nor have we any cause to
suspect one another, yet plain it is that the cup was found with us, and God
has thereby taken away all excuse from us, we must therefore yield our selves
as guilty to the punishment deserved.

Verse. 28. And I said, Surely he is torn in pieces.] Hereby might Joseph now
perceive by what means his brethren had kept his father from knowing what they
had done to him, to wit, by pretending that some wild beasts had devoured him.

Verse. 30. Seeing that his life is bound up in the lads life.] That is, his
life depends upon Benjamins life, and unless therefore he knows it be well
with Benjamin he will not be able to endure it, it will be his death. So in
regard of the like strong affection it is said, 1. Sam. 18, 1. that the soul of
Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and that he loved him as his own soul.

CHAP. XLV.
Verse. 1. CAuse every man to go out from me.] This he did, both because he
thought it not seemly for a man in his place to discover his passion before any
but his brethren, as also lest any mention of his brethrens cruelty to him
should make that fact known to their discredit, which might also have caused
Pharaoh not to think so well of them as Joseph desired he should.

Verse. 3. And his brethren could not answer him, etc.] To wit, being astonished
at that which they heard, partly because it was a thing so wonderful that
their brother Jo^eph, whom they had sold for a slave, should be the governor
of Egypt; and partly by reason of terror of conscience which now struck them
for the wrong they had done him, and the fear of his power who might now
revenge himself as he pleased upon them.

Verse. 4. I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.] He mentions that
they sold him into Egypt, not to upbraid them with the injury they had done
him, but to assure them thereby that he was indeed their brother Joseph, by
telling them that which no body knew but themselves only.

Verse. 5. Now therefore be not grieved, nor angry with your selves.] Be not so
far dejected as not to your comfort to look up to the providence of God,
which has turned your very sin to good.

Verse. 6. Yet there are five years in the which there shall neither be earing
nor harvest.] That is, there are five years of famine behind, wherein there
shall be neither ploughing, sowing nor reaping, neither tillage nor harvest:
whereby must needs be intended, either that throughout the land of Egypt there
should be no tillage nor sowing, to wit, for lack of corn, which Joseph
supplied them with in the last year, chap. 47. 23. Lo, here is seed for you,
and ye shall sow the land; or that it should be little or nothing that should
be done in this regard, there being few that would attempt to sovv their land
in those years of famine, which Joseph had foretold, and little or nothing
there would grow up of that which was sovvn.

Verse. 8. And he has made me a father to Pharaoh.] That is, a counselor or a
guide. The like is said of Mi^hah's Levite, Judge. 17. 10, 11. And Michah said
unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a priest, etc. and the
young man was unto him as one of his sons: and the drift therefore of these
words here is to show that by his advice and counsel Pharaoh had yielded
himself to be directed, as a son follows the direction of his father.

Verse. 15. And after that his brethren talked with him.] Having now overcome
their former astonishment and fear, they talk with him about all things
wherein either he or they might desire to be satisfied.

Verse. 22. He gave each man changes of raiment.] That is, robes or upper
garments which they used in those countries often to change, as we our cloaks
and govvns; or else by change of rayments is meant, choice garments, called so,
to distinguish them from such as are vvorn every day. And these with other
gifts he conferres upon them, not only to show his love, but also that they
might confirm the truth of their message, and make both wives and others the
more vvilling to come down into Egypt.

Verse. 28. It is enough.] That is, Here is proof enough that Joseph is alive:
or else he speaks it to express his joy that he was alive; be he in so happy a
condition or not, this is enough for me that he is alive.

CHAP. XLVI.
Verse. 3. FEar not to go down into Egypt.] There might be many causes of Jacobs
fear: 1. because in the like necessity Isaac was forbidden to go thither, Genesis
26. 2. And the Lord appeared unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt. Again,
because this removal was a kind of forsaking the land of promise, which must
needs be the more bitter, because the land of Canaan was also a sacramental
pledge of the heavenly Canaan. 3. Because he might remember that which God had
said to Abraham, Gen 15. 13. That his seed should be afflicted in Egypt many
years. 4. Because he might fear lest his seed should be infected with the
idolatry or other sins of Egypt; all these the Lord removes in this
comfortable vision.

Verse. 4. And I will also surely bring thee up again.] Though the dead body of
Jacob wore brought back out of Egypt into Canaan, Genesis 50. 7. And Joseph went
up to bury his father, etc. yet the return of the Israelites his seed is
principally meant.

And Joseph shall put his hand upon t^ine eyes.] Herein is couched a promise
that he should die in peace, in the presence of Joseph and the rest of his
children.

Verse. 6. And came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him.] To wit,
besides his servants, who also no doubt went with him, though they be not
named. And now was that accomplished which God had said unto Abraham, Genesis 15.
13. Thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs.

Verse. 10. And Shaul, the son of a Canaanitish woman.] That cursed stock with
whom the Israelites might not ordinarily marry, Genesis 28. 1. Thou shall not take
a wife of the daughters of Canaan.

Verse. 12. And the sons of Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.] These grandchildren
of Judah are here numbered with the rest, because of Hezron Christ came, though
it be most probable that they were born in Egypt, as is before noted upon the
first verse of the thirty eighth chapter.

Verse. 15. All the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty and
three.] Counting Jacob for one, and leaving out Er and Onan, who died in Canaan.

Verse. 26. All the souls were threescore and six.] The several numbers before
particularly mentioned arise to a greater sum: for three and thirty, verse.
15. and sixteen, verse. 18. and fourteen, verse. 22. and seven, verse. 25. being
put together make up seventie, which is indeed the full number mentioned in the
following verse. But therefore we must know that in this sum of threescore
and six, 1. Jacob is left out, because here he sums up only his posterity
that came out of his loins; and 2. Joseph and his two sons are here left out,
because they were in Egypt before Jacob came thither, and his purpose is here
to sum up only the number of those of his posterity that went down with him
into Egypt. Indeed it cannot be well conceived that Hezron and Hamul, the
sons of Pharez, and grandchildren of Judah, went down with Jacob into Egypt,
but that they were born in Egypt, as is before noted, chap. 38. 1. But first
they were the posterity of those that did go down into Egypt with Jacob, and
were numbered amongst Jacobs family whilst Jacob was yet living; and then there
was not the same reason for mentioning all the rest that were born of Jacobs
family, because of Hezron Christ the Messiah descended; and therefore the
sons of Pharez are added to the rest.

Verse. 27. All the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were
threescore and ten.] Here the whole family before particularly set down are
summed up together, and even Jacob and Joseph and his two sons are here
included, that were left out in the total sum in the former verse. The whole
family of Jacob were seventie souls, which is purposely noted, that we might
take notice what a miraculous work of God it was, that this family of Jacob
should within the compass of two hundred and fifteen years multiply so
exceedingly, that at their departure there should be of them six hundred
thousand that bore arms, besides the Levites, old men, women and children. It
was indeed a strange and miraculous increase, and therefore we see Moses
reckons it as one of the most wonderful works which God had done for that
people, Deuteronomy. 10. 22. Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten
persons, and now the Lord thy God has made thee as the stars of heaven for
multitude. The greatest difficulty concerning this place, is, how it may be
reconciled with that relation which Stephen makes of this, Acts 7. 14. that
when Jacob went down into Egypt, he and his kindred, there were of them
threescore and fifteen souls. But to this there are two answers given by
Expositours, either of which may give satisfaction, to wit, 1. That Stephen, or
S. Luke relating the words of S. Stephen, did purposely follow the translation
of the Septuagint in this place, who have here indeed seventie five, and not
seventie souls; and that because the Greek translation of the Septuagint was
most frequently used in those times, and though it were corrupt in this place,
and not according to the Hebrew original, yet he would not therefore in a
matter of so small consequence set down the number of Jacobs family otherwise
then it was there, especially considering that in some sense also it was a
truth, that there went down of Jacobs family at least seventie five souls, to
wit, if their wives also should be added to the number: or 2. That S. Stephen
speaks of the whole family of Jacob that are here mentioned by Moses; and
indeed leaving out Jacob, and numbering all of his family that are named here by
Moses, to wit, Er and Onan, the sons of Judah that died in Canaan, and the
four wives which are mentioned here by Moses, though not cast up in the total
sum, it is clearly true that there are here named of his family or kindred
seventie and five souls.

Verse. 28. And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face unto
Goshen.] That is, to give him notice of his coming, that he might come to
Goshen, and meet him there; which doubtless he did both out of an earnest
desire to see Joseph so soon as possibly he could, and likewise that by Joseph's
authority both he and his family might be there disposed of, to prevent any
grudge or discontent amongst the native inhabitants.

Verse. 29. And he fell on his neck, etc.] That is, Jacob fell on Joseph's neck,
and wept on his neck a good while; Joseph's carriage of himself at their meeting
is expressed in the former words, to wit, that he presented himself before his
father, falling down before him in a lowly manner, and that the rather to
manifest thereby that his honor and advancement in Egypt did not make him
forget the duty which, as a son, he did owe to his father; and now in these
words is expressed what Jacob did, to wit, that he fell on the neck of Joseph,
thus bowing before him, and wept on his neck a good while, and then brake into
those words recited in the following verse.

Verse. 30. Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, etc.] As before, when
he heard of Joseph, he said, I vvil go and see him before I die, chap. 45. 28.
so now having seen him, he breaks out into this expression of joy, Now let me
die, since I have seen thy face; for though ordinarily men are most desirous to
live when things go well with them, and most desirous to die when they live
in affliction and sorrovv; yet it was not thus with Jacob, he was alvvayes
desirous to be with God in heaven, and therefore though since the time that he
heard of Joseph's safety and advancement in Egypt (vvhereto these words have
chiefly reference) he desired earnestly no doubt that he might live to see his
face, yet now having to his great comfort received satisfaction, herein he
professes his willingness to die whensoever God should be pleased to call
for him, even as old Simeon did when he had seen Christ, which he had long
vvaited for, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace according to
thy word, Luke 2. 29.

Verse. 32. And the men are shepherds.] There were many reasons why Joseph
might desire to have his father and brethren dvvell together in the land of
Goshen: 1. Because it was a fruitful pasture-countrey, fit for breeding
cattle; 2. That they might not be corrupted with the idolatry and
superstition of the Egyptians; 3. That they might not be an offense to the
Egyptian^ who abhorred all keepers of sheep; 4. Because Goshen, being the
nearest part of Egypt toward Canaan, stood most commodiously for the
Israelites return out of Egypt whensoever God should be pleased to call them
back again into the land of Canaan. Now though Joseph had promised his
brethren before that they should dvvell in Goshen, yet he would not settle
them there without the Kings express consent; and though he doubted not of
procuring his consent, yet the more easily to effect it, h^ resolves to
acquaint Pharaoh that they were shepherds, that so he might think it most
convenient to dispose of them by themselves in the land of Goshen, the outmost
parts of Egypt, that they might not be an eyesore to the Egyptians that could
not endure men of their occupation.

Verse. 34. For every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.] To wit,
because such people did usually eat and sacrifice those cattle which the
Egyptians worshipped as their gods, as is before noted, Genesis 43. 32. It is
evident indeed that the Egyptians had flocks of sheep, both the king and
people: for, chap. 47. 6. Pharaoh profers Joseph to make his brethren rulers
over his cattle: and Exodus 9. 3. we read of a grievous murrain that God sent
among the Egyptians cattle, and amongst the rest upon their sheep; but it seems
they kept them rather for their wool and milk then any thing else, and happily
those that kept them were strangers rather then Egyptians.

CHAP. XLVII.
Verse. 4. FOr to sojourn in the land are we come.] That is, not to settle our
selves here, but only to stay here for a time for our succor and relief in
this time of famine; whereby it is evident that the purpose of Jacob and his
sons was not to leave Canaan, though afterward for Joseph's sake they
continued in Egypt even after the famine was ended: which is the rather to be
noted, to discover the injustice of the following kings of Egypt, who, against
all laws of hospitality, did afterward detain them there by force, and made
very bondslaves of those that only came at first to sojourn in their land.

Verse. 9. The days of the years of my pilgrimage are an hundred and thirty
years.] Jacob called his life a pilgrimage, not only with respect to his
traveling up and down, and living as a stranger first in Mesopotamia,
afterward in Canaan, now in Egypt; but also especially with respect unto that
heavenly inheritance which is the rest of Gods people, to which they are still
traveling, esteeming themselves but pilgrims here in this world: for so it is
expressly said of the patriarchs, Heb. 11. 13. that they confessed themselves
strangers and pilgrims on the earth, and sought a better, even an heavenly
country. As for the age of Jacob here expressly made known to Pharaoh, it
helps much to the understanding of the time of other passages of this history:
for Joseph being now nine and thirty years old when Jacob was an hundred and
thirty (for he was thirty years old when he was first exalted in Egypt, chap.
41. 46. and since that there had been seven years of plenty and two years of
famine, chap. 45. 6.) it must needs follow that Jacob was ninety one when
Joseph was born in the fourteenth year of his service with Laban, and
consequently that he was about seventy seven when he first went down into
Mesopotamia, flying from the rage of his brother Esau.

And have not attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers,
etc.] For Abraham lived an hundred seventy and five years, Genesis 25. 7. And
these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred
threescore and fifteen years, and Isaac an hundred and fourscore years, Genesis
35. 28. And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.

Verse. 15. And when money failed in the land of Egypt, etc.] This is generally
spoken, not with relation to each particular man; the Egyptians had for the
most part spent all their money, and so were forced to sell their cattle.

Verse. 18. They came unto him the second year.] That is, after their cattle
were sold, which seems to have been the sixth year of the famine.

Verse. 21. He removed them to cities from one end of the borders of Egypt,
etc.] This may be taken in a double sense: 1. That he removed them from one end
of Egypt to the other (that is all the land over) out of their
countrey-dwellings into the cities, and so by this means, 1. They give up the
possession of their land to Pharaoh; 2. They are the more commodiously
nourished out of the kings granaries; 3. The desolate places of the cities are
filled up, and so many only as are necessary are sent out to till the ground,
the famine being ceased; or else (which I rather think) the meaning is only
this, that he transplanted them from one town unto another, not leaving them in
that which was their own, that so it might appear the land was his, and they
only his servants.

Verse. 29. And the time drew nigh that Israel must die.] Which he knevv,
happily not only as other men may, by the great decay of his natural
strength, but also by special revelation from God.

Put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh, etc.] Concerning this custom of
putting the hand under the thigh when an oath was taken, see the note on Genesis
24. 2. Jacob being near his end made Joseph svvear that he would not bury him
in Egypt, but carry him into Canaan, not out of a suspicion that Joseph would
not do this which he required of him, but 1. that Joseph might allege this to
Pharaoh, and so decline the envy of the Egyptians, who might else have taken
it ill, as if Joseph had scorned and despi^ed the land wherein he had been so
highly esteemed and advanced; and 2. especially to show of what great
importance it was which he now r^quired of him, not proceeding from any
carnal or ambitious conceits, but from the assurance of faith, and to
strengthen the faith of his children herein, that God would undoubtedly bring
them back to Canaan, and give them that land for a possession as he had
promised, and a sign of his expectation and desire of that heavenly
inheritance, whereof the land of Canaan was a type and pledge.

Verse. 31. And Israel bowed himself upon the beds head.] Namely to God, by way
of thankfulness, both for those promises (in the faithful expectation
whereof he had desired to be buried in the land of Canaan) and for this
present mercy that now by Joseph he was assured that he should be buried in
the promised land. Now because he was bedridden through weakness or age, or
at least lying upon his couch, Moses shows how he bovved himself, to wit,
that turning his face to the bed, and so rearing himself upon the bolster at
his beds head, he then bovved himself and worshipped the Lord. And indeed such
was the zeal of the good servants of God in those times, that when they were
bedridden, it seems they endeavored in the best manner they could with some
devotion and bowing of their bodies to worship the Lord: for so it is said
also of David when he kept his bed by reason of weakness in his old age, 1.
King. 1. 47. that the king bovved himself upon his bed. Indeed the Apostle
renders this place otherwise, Heb. 11. 21. to wit, That Jacob when he was a
dying worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff; and the ground of this
difference all Writers conceive to have been this, that the Hebrew word in
this place (when the vovvel points are not added) signifies both a bed and a
staff, and that the septuagint Greek Translatours making use of a copy that
had not the vovvel points did mistake the word, and translated this place, And
Israel bowed himself upon the top of his staff, which translation of the
Septuagint the Apostle follovved in that place of his epistle to the Hebrevvs.
But whereas it may seem improbable that the Apostle, who vvrote by the
inspiration of the holy Ghost, should follovv a corrupt translation; to this it
is ansvvered, 1. That it is no impeachment to the Apostles divine illumination
that he should cite a place as it was in the Greek translation which the
Hebrevvs did most commonly use in those times, considering that even according
to that translation it served fitly to the purpose for which he alleged it;
and 2. That it is true that Jacob, when he raised up himself upon his pillovv
toward his beds head that he might bovv unto the Lord (as is here expressed)
vvithall the better to help himself in his great weakness, he leaned upon the
top of his staff, and the Apostle knovving this also to be true, did not
therefore stick to allege the place according to the Greek translation.

CHAP. XLVIII.
Verse. 4. I Will make of thee a multitude of people.] That is, thirteen
populous tribes.

Verse. 5. And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, etc. are mine, as
Reuben and Simeon are mine.] That is, being by birth my grandchildren they
shall by adoption be my sons, and therefore accordingly in the division of
the promised land, they shall have the privilege of my sons, each of them a
twelfth share, no less then Reuben and Simeon: thus has Joseph a double
portion, the privilege of the firstborn, 1. Chron. 5. 1. Now the sons of
Reuben, the firstborn of Israel; for he was the firstborn, but forasmuch as
he defiled his fathers bed, his birthright was given unto the sons of Joseph
the son of Israel, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. But he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated for the firstborn, by giving him a double portion.

Verse. 6. And thy issue which thou begettest after them shall be thine, and
shall be called after the name of their brethren.] That is, shall be counted of
the stock and tribe of Ephraim or Manasseh, as if they were their sons, not
their brethren; therefore though there be no other sons of Joseph mentioned,
yet that is no proof that he had none: for it is here appointed that they
should be called after the name of their brethren.

Verse. 7. And as for me, when I came from Padan Rachel dyed, etc.] That is,
though the Lord promised at Luz (as I have said) that he would so exceedingly
multiply my seed, yet as for me, my hope of having more children by your
mother, my beloved Rachel, was soon taken from me by her death, (for even a
while after she dyed a little short of Ephrath, and was there buried by me) so
that my hope for the accomplishment of Gods promise must be in my childrens
children; and since I had by her but thee and thy brother, therefore thy two
sons shall be mine, etc. it may be thou may have more; but as for me,
Rachel dyed, and left me but only you two.

Verse. 8. And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?] His eyes
being dim by reason of age, he could not perfectly discern whether they were
Joseph's sons or no, and therefore he asked them who they were.

Verse. 12. And Joseph brought them out from between his knees.] Jacob had
hitherto only testified his love by embracing and kissing them; Joseph
therefore does remove them as it were from the bosom of the old man, first the
one and then the other, that the next work might be done which was of most
moment, namely the Patriarchall blessing of them, which it seems was usually
done with imposition of hands.

And he bowed himself with his face to the earth.] To wit, in reverence to his
aged father, and by way of thankfulness for the work in hand, the adoption of
his sons.

Verse. 14. Guiding his hands wittingly.] That is, though Jacobs eyes were
dim, as is before noted, verse. 10. yet that was not the reason why he laid
his right hand upon Ephraim that was the youngest, and his left hand upon
Manasseh that was the eldest, but he did it wittingly: why else should he
cross his arms, that he might lay his right hand upon the youngest that stood
at his left hand, and his left hand upon the eldest that stood at his right
hand, but that he did it purposely as a sign of that which afterward he
foretold, to wit, that Ephraim which was the youngest should have the
pre-eminence; yea, this was one of the chief evidences that he did all he did
in this business by the special revelation of the spirit of God, because
being so ill sighted that he could not discern which was the eldest, and which
the youngest, yet he did purposely cross his arms that he might lay his right
hand upon the youngest, and his left hand upon the eldest.

Verse. 15. And he blessed Joseph.] That is, in his children.

Verse. 16. The Angel which redeemed me from all evil bless the lads.] That is,
Christ the eternal son of God, who is called the Angel, or, Messenger of the
covenant, Mal. 3. 1. and of whom it is said, Exodus 23. 21. that Gods name is in
him. And indeed to say that a created angel redeemed Jacob from all evil, or
might be prayed to by Jacob, that he would bless the sons of Joseph, and
make them grow to a multitude in the midst of the earth, is to ascribe to the
creature Gods peculiar Prerogatives. Doubtless no other angel is here meant,
but he that is one God with the Father, and therefore here joined with God: to
the clearing whereof also observable it is, that this word, bless, is here in
the original of the singular number, though it have relation both to God and
the Angel mentioned in the foregoing words, The God which fed me all my life
long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads;
which should not have been, if in both clauses Jacob had not spoken of one and
the same almighty God.

And let my name be named on them.] That is, though they were born in Egypt out
of my family, yet let them be numbered amongst my sons, and so let them
inherit the blessings promised to Abraham and his seed for ever.

Verse. 17. And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the
head of Ephraim, etc.] Though Joseph knew that his father was in this action
guided by a prophetical spirit, to wit, in blessing his children, yet
supposing that he might be mistaken in this circumstance of the imposition of
his hands, by reason of the dimnesse of his sight, he seeks to reform this
error as he deemed it, by informing his father that he had laid his right hand
upon the younger. Neither is it questionable but that this was done so soon as
ever he saw his father lay his hands in that manner upon them, even before he
had added the blessing set down in the former verses, though here it be related
by Moses after the blessing.

Verse. 19. But truly his younger brother shall be greater then he.] This was
most evidently fulfilled in the days of Jeroboam, in whom the dignity of that
kingdom was settled upon the tribe of Ephraim: whence all those ten tribes are
usually called Ephraim, Esai. 7. 2. And it was told the house of David, saying,
Syria is confederate with Ephraim.

Verse. 22. Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren, etc.]
Because there was one portion of land in Canaan, which was Jacobs not only by
Gods donation, as was all the land of Canaan; but also by a special civil
right, this he now bequeaths to Joseph, to whom he intended to transfer the
dignity of the firstborn, 1. Chron. 5. 1. His birthright was given unto the
sons of Joseph, the son of Israel, etc. for though it was now as well as
the rest of the land in the hand of the Canaanites, yet he did assuredly
believe that God would cast out the inhabitants, and plant his posterity in
their room, and therefore as a pledge hereof, to confirm Joseph's faith herein,
and the better to take off his affections from the delights of Egypt, and to
pitch them upon the expectation of Gods promise herein, he now bequeaths to
him this parcel of land, which should be his childrens over and above that lot
which in the common division of the land should befall them. That this portion
of land which Jacob gave to his son Joseph was nigh unto Shechem (which in
process of time was corruptly called Sychar) is evident by the words of the
evangelist, John 4. 5. Which is called Sychar, near to the parcel of ground
that Jacob gave his son Joseph: And there though many Expositours understand
it of the city Shechem with all the field or territories adjoining, which, say
they, according to this prophecy of Jacobs, fell to the sons of Joseph when
the land was divided amongst the tribes, Josh. 17. 7. The coast of Manasseh
was from Asher to Michmethah, that lies before Shechem; yet I conceive it is
only meant of that parcel of land which there he bought of Hamor Shechems
father for an hundred pieces of money, as is related Genesis 33. 19. which
hereupon became his own proper inheritance, and there afterward therefore
Jacobs sons fed their fathers flocks, Genesis 37. 12. and there Joseph's bones
were buried by the Israelites when they came into Canaan, as in the inheritance
peculiarly bequeathed him by his father Jacob, Josh. 24. 32. The bones of
Joseph buried they in Shechem in a parcel of ground which Ja^ob bought of the
sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver, and it
became the inheritance of the children of Joseph. Nor is it of any great moment
that is objected, that so small a parcel of ground was not worth the
bequeathing to so great a man as Joseph was now: for we cannot think it was
so small a tract of ground that Jacob bought for the feeding of his cattle that
were very many. But besides not so much the quantity as the quality of the
gift is to be regarded: for this being all he had in Canaan by way of
purchase, Jacob, by bequeathing this in special to Joseph, did as it were
design him his heir, and confer upon him the dignity of the firstborn,
which was no small Prerogative. The greatest difficulty in these words is,
why Jacob says that he took this portion of the land of Canaan now
bequeathed to Joseph, out of the hand of the Amorites with his sword and with
his bow? And for satisfiing this doubt, there are several answers given by
Expositours: for first some say that it is usual in the Scripture to speak
prophetically of things to come, as if they were done already: so the birth of
Christ is foretold by the Prophet Esai. 9. 6. under these terms, Unto us a
child is born; and so, say they, here Jacob, out of the assurance of his faith,
speaks of the Israelites taking this land out of the hands of the inhabitants
by force of arms as if it were done already: 2. Others hold that he speaks
this with reference to the slaughter of the Shechemites by the svvord of his
sons and servants, which fact hovvever he detested and abhorred, yet because
they armed themselves as it were under his name, and in revenge of vvrong done
to him and his, and because through ^ods just vengeance upon the Shechemites
and his singular favor to Jacob, the land, the inhabitants whereof they had
utterly destroyed, fell to him, the neighboring inhabitants not daring to
oppose him by reason of a divine terror vvherevvith they were stricken, and
so he through Gods providence reaped the benefit of that desolation which his
sons had wickedly made in those parts; therefore he affirms here, that he
took it out of the hand of the Amorite with his sword and with his bow: 3. Some
again conceive that when Jacob removed to Hebron, after the slaughter of the
Shechemites, the bordering inhabitants entered upon the territories of Shechem,
and together with the rest also took into their hands that parcel of ground
which Jacob had there purchased; which when they would not restore, Jacob did
by force of arms drive them out, and so recovered his own rightful possession;
which however it were not before related, sufficient it is, that it is here by
Moses occasionally mentioned: And lastly, some conclude that these words, Which
I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow, are
figuratively spoken, and meant only of the purchase that he made of it
(accordingly as we use to say that a man gets a thing suo Mart, or suis
cop^is, when he gets it with his own proper charge and labor) and that of
purpose thereby covertly to protest against the cruelty of his sons in
sacking that place and destroying the inhabitants, and against any title that
he laid to it upon that ground, and to make known that he challenged it not by
virtue of that cruel fact of theirs, but by virtue of a just price paid for
it, which he calls his sword and his bow, as in opposition to their arms;
because those were the weapons wherevvith he got it out of the hands of the
Amorites, that is the Hivites, the inhabitants of Shechem, for Amorites was the
common name of all the inhabitants of Canaan, as we may see Genesis 15. 19. Josh.
24. 8. And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on the
other side Jordan, etc. and indeed these two last answers I conceive to be
the most satisfactory, because it is evident that he challenges this portion
of land to be his by a special right which he now gives unto Joseph; and he
might as well have said that he had taken the whole land of Canaan by his
svvord and by his bovv, as this particular portion, if he had spoken
prophetically concerning the conquest of the land in time to come by his
posterity; and partly because it is not probable that Jacob would allege the
cruel massacre of the Shechemites as the ground of his rightful interest in
this parcel of land which he did always so abhor and detest, or that he
would call their weapons his sword and his bow, which immediately afterward he
calls instruments of cruelty, or, weapons of violence, chap. 49. 5.

CHAP. XLIX.
Verse. 1. GAther your selves together that I may tell you that which shall
befall in the last days.] That is, in time to come, yea long time hereafter:
for these words are frequently used in Scripture, not only for the last days
of the world, nor, as some will have it, only for the time of the new
Testament, but generally for the time to come. See 1. Tim. 4. 1. The Spirit
speaks expressly (says the Apostle) that in the latter times, (...), some
shall depart from the faith, which yet came to pass not long after the
Apostles time.

Verse. 3. Reuben thou art my firstborn, my might, etc.] The firstborn are
usually in the Scriptures called the beginning and chief of their parents
strength, Deuteronomy. 21. 17. But he shall acknowledge the son of the hated for the
firstborn, etc. for he is the beginning of his strength. Psalm. 105. 36. He
smote all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength; and
that both because they are begotten in the prime of their parents strength; and
because children being accounted the strength of their parents, Psalm. 127. 4,
5. As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man, so are the children of the youth:
Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not be ashamed;
but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate, consequently the firstborn
are the beginning and chief of their strength, the principal pillar and stay
of their family. But now Jacob says this of Reuben, only by way of yielding
what he should have been, had it not been for his sin, and that to make him
the more sensible of the loss which his sin had brought upon him: Reuben
thou art my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the
excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power; by the ordinary course of
nature the greatest honor and authority should have come to thee and thy
children; but now hear a contrary doom, Unstable as water, etc.

Verse. 4. Unstable as water, thou shall not excel.] This expresses his sudden
downfall from the dignity of his birthright, even as waters do naturally roll
down from high places, and will not continue there, or else it is meant of his
weakness and of the weakness of his posterity, in comparison of what they
should have been had he not lost his birthright. And indeed frequently in the
Scripture the dissolving and weakening of men's strength is compared to the
pouring forth of waters, I am poured forth like water, says David, Psalm. 22.
14. and all my bones are out of joint; and John 7. 5. The hearts of the people
melted and became as water; as we also use to say of feeble men, that they are
as weak as water: which well agrees with the condition of Reubens posterity,
of which tribe we read not that ever it came to any excellency among the
other tribes.

He went up to my couch.] Jacob, as out of an indignation of the fact, turns
his speech from Reuben to his brethren, and shows how just cause there was to
pronounce this s^nt^nce against him.

Verse. 5. Simeon and Levi are brethren, etc.] That is, as brethren by birth of
the same father and mother, so also true brethren in iniquity: for so this
word Brother is sometimes taken, as Prove. 18. 9. He that is slothful in his
work, is brother to him that is a great waster. And observable it is how
unpartially Moses her^ relates that brand of infamy that was set upon Levi, the
stock of that tribe whereof himself was; which makes it evident that in writing
this story he was not guided by his own private spirit, but by the spirit of
God.

Verse. 6. O my soul, come not thou into their secret; unto their assembly, mine
honor, be not thou u^ited.] This is spoken to show his detestation of that
execrable fact of theirs, in massacring the Shechemites, and to protest against
the least consent that he should give thereto. No, says he, when they
consulted together, and contrived that cursed plot, they did it secretly
without my knowledge; and when they assembled together to put in execution
their barbarous design, I knew not of it: yea, God forbid that my soul should
ever join in the plotting of such a villainy. By his honor, in the second
clause, he means, as in the first clause, his soul, because the soul is the
chief excellency of man, and the glory of the body, without which the body is
nothing better then a livelesse lump of earth: yet sometimes by a man's honor
or glory in the Scriptures is meant his tongue: so my glory, Psalm. 16. 9. My
heart is glad, and my glory rejoices, is by the Apostle rendered my tongue,
Acts 2. 26. My heart did rej^yce, and my tongue was glad; and that because the
speech of man is also his glory, as being that gift of God wherein he excels
all other creatures; and so therefore it may be here also taken, unto their
assembly, mine honor, be thou not united, implying that he would not give the
least consent or approbation to a fact so foul. Now this severe censure of that
treacherous and bloody cruelty of Simeon and Levi in the slaughter of the
Shechemites, is a notable evidence that the Author of that Apocryphal book of
Judeth, where this fact of Simeons is highly extolled, wrote not by the
inspiration of that spirit of God, by which the Patriarch Jacob was guided when
he uttered this prophecy, and consequently that that Book is no part of the
Canonical Scripture.

Verse. 7. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.] Jacob
speaks here as in the person of God; as usual it is in the Scriptures to
ascribe the work of God to the Prophets who are only his messengers to
foreshew what he will do. How this prophecy was fulfilled in the tribe of Levi,
every one knows; who were here and there dispersed abroad, and placed in
several cities all the land over, that so they might teach and instruct the
people in the law of God: wherein also the goodness of God is observable, that
turned, as it were, this curse into a blessing; for though the dividing and
scattering of them was in it self a punishment, yet that they were dispersed
for that end, to be as the mouth of God unto the people, to feed them with
knowledge and understanding, herein they were exceedingly honored. As for the
tribe of Simeon, how this prophecy was accomplished in them we may see also,
Josh. 19. 1, etc. who were not planted apart by themselves in the land of
Canaan, as the other tribes were, but had their inheritance intermingled with
that of Judah, out of whose lot in several places here and there those of
Simeon had certain cities and villages assigned them: and therefore we see
that when Moses blessed the several tribes before his death, Deuteronomy. 33. he
made no mention at all of this scattered tribe of Simeon; and that afterward
they were forced, many of them at least, to seek a new habitation, partly in
Mount Seir, and partly in Mount Gedor, 1. Chron. 4. 39, 43. by force of arms
driving out the Amalekites, and other inhabitants, and so planting themselves
in their room. Now herein also was the punishment denounced against Simeon
svveetned also, in that though they were thus divided and scattered, yet it
was an honor to them that they were at first joined with the royal tribe
of Judah, and that afterward God made them victorious over those
uncircumcised nations in whose country they planted themselves, when their
first habitation, by reason they multiplied so greatly, was too little for
them.

Verse. 8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise.] Alluding to his
name, which signifies confession, or, praise, Genesis 29. 35. And she conceived
again, and bare a son, and she said, Now will I praise the Lord. And the
meaning is, that the name of this tribe should be famous and eminent amongst
the rest, not only in regard of the temporal government, but much more in
regard that out of him Christ should come, Heb. 7. 14. For it is evident that
our Lord sprang out of Judah.

Thy hand shall be in the neck of thy enemies.] That is, thou shall put them to
flight and subdue them. This prophecy of the valor and prevailing power of
Judah was fulfilled when that tribe became the leader, Number. 10. 14. In the
first place went the standard of the camp of the children of Judah. Judge. 1. 1,
2. The children of Israel asked the Lord, saying, Who shall go up for us
against the Canaanites first to fight against them? And the Lord said, Judah
shall go up; as also in those Worthies of this tribe, Othniel, Judge. 3. 9, 10.
David, 2. Sam. 8. 1. Solomon, 1. Chron. 22. 9. but especially in Christ, who
has vanquished all the powers of darkness.

Thy fathers children shall bow down before thee.] This is spoken in relation
to that regal power that should be established in the tribe of Judah, to which
all the Israelites should submit themselves; and purposely that he might
comprehend all the posterity of Jacob, even all the tribes of Israel, he says
not, thy mothers children, but, thy fathers children shall bow down, etc. Yet
it is most exactly accomplished in the spiritual kingdom of Christ, Phil. 2.
10. That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow.

Verse. 9. Judah is a lions whelp, etc.] The tribe of Judah is here compared to
a lion, thereby the better yet to express their mighty strength and courage,
how terrible they should be unto their enemies, and how great and glorious
their conquests should be; that look as a lion, the king of beasts, flies upon
any beast he meets with, and tears them in pieces, and returning from his prey,
coucheth down, and feeds upon his prey, or lies at rest, and none dare
disquiet him, or offer to take his prey from him; so should Judahs kings
conquer and subdue their enemies, and then returning with victory should
quietly and peaceably enjoy their spoils and conquests without disturbance. But
especially is this spoken in relation to Christ's unresistable power, and
glorious conquests, who is therefore called* the lion of the tribe of Judah,
Rev. 5. 5.

Verse. 10. The scepter shall not depart, etc. till Shiloh come.] Shiloh, is by
interpretation, the Prosperer, the Safemaker, the Prince of peace: or, as
others think, his son, or, her son, and is doubtless meant of the Messiah,
the Lord Christ, who is indeed the only Savior of mankind, the only
Peacemaker betwixt God and us; and the son of Judah, and that as being the
son of the Virgin Mary, who was of Judahs tribe: so that the drift of these
words was to foretell of what tribe the Messiah should be, to wit, of the tribe
of Judah; and at what time he should come, to wit, that after once the regal
dignity should be settled in that tribe, which was done when David was
anointed king, the government should never be taken from him, at least so far
but that there should be a Lawgiver from between his feet, nor his kingdom and
commonwealth be utterly ruined and abolished until the Messiahs coming. The
chief difficulty of this place is, in making good the truth of this prophecy,
concerning the continuance of Judahs principality and kingdom until the
Messiahs coming, and that because it is evident, 1. That after Jechoniah and
Zedekiah, the two last kings of Judah, they had no more any king of that royal
house of David, nor of the tribe of Judah: for so Jeremiah prophesied
concerning Jechoniah, Jer. 22. ^0. Thus says the Lord, Write ye this man
childlesse, a man that shall not pro^per in his days: for no man of his seed
shall prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling any more in Judah;
yea so Ezekiel prophesied concerning the utter overthrow of that crown and
regal dignity, Ezekiel. 21. 27. I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it
shall be no more until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him; 2.
That after their return from their captivity in Babylon, though in the
principality of Zorobabel, and perhaps of some of his posterity, there was a
little reviving of the dignity of Judahs tribe, yet within few years, the
supreme, yea the regal, power came into the hands of the Macchabees, who were
of the tribe of Levi, and yet ruled many of them as kings over the Jews, until
Herod did wholly take away their principality from them. Now to this objection
some answer, That though in the time of the Macchabees, who were indeed of the
tribe of Levi, the chief power was removed from the tribe of Judah, yet there
was then a Lawgiver from between his feet, to wit, the Sanhedrin, that great
Council of seventy Elders, to whom the cognizance of the weightiest causes
appertained, and the establishing of laws, and who were still elected out of
the tribe of Judah, and continued constantly in the exercise of this power
until a little before the birth of Christ, Herod who was a mere stranger
became king of Judea, and rooted them quite out; yet because the chief thing
alleged in this answer to satisfy the objection, to wit, that the Sanhedrin
were all chosen out of the tribe of Judah, is taken for granted, but cannot be
well proved, a more full answer I conceive is given by others in these
following particulars: 1. That by Judah here is meant the whole nation and
kingdom of the Jews, after the ten tribes of Israel were separated from them,
and became a kingdom apart by it self, and that because although there were of
the tribes of Levi and Benjamin amongst them, yet they were as it were
incorporated into the tribe of Judah, and the whole commonwealth had their name
from Judah, and was called the kingdom of Judah; insomuch that in the
eleaventh chapter of the first book of the kings, three several times, to wit,
verse. 13, 32, 36. it is said that there should be only one tribe reserved to
the kings that were of the posterity of David; and 1. King. 12. 20. it is
said, There was none that followed the house of David but the tribe of Judah
only; yea and after their return from the captivity out of Babylon, they were
all chiefly planted in the lot and territory that appertained to the tribe of
Judah: whence it is, that though after Nehemiahs time, the chief government was
in the hands of the priests, yet because the whole people were called by the
name of Judah, the kingdom and commonwealth of Judah, therefore still the
government may be said to be in Judah; yea and this therefore may well be
thought to be the main thing intended in this prophecy, that whereas those of
the kingdom of the ten tribes of Israel, after they were carried away captive
into Assyria, did never return thence again to become a kingdom and
commonwealth as before, yet those of Judah, after seventy years captivity in
Babylon, returned again into their own land, and became a kingdom and
commonwealth as before, though not so glorious, living under the government of
their own laws, and the command of their own rulers, and so continued, until
a little before Christ's coming the government was wholy taken from them, and
not long after the death of Christ, their kingdom and commonwealth vv^s by
the Romans utterly destroyed. 2. That even at that time when the supreme
power was in the priests, they had it by the choice and appointment of the
people of Judah, who conferred this honor upon the Macchabees because of
their zeal and valor in fighting against their enemies. 3. Though all the
Sanhedrim were not of the tribe of Judah, yet doubtless the greatest part of
them were of that tribe, as it is evident, because the greatest part by far
of those that returned from Babylon were of that tribe, which is sufficient
to make good this prophecy, That there should not cease to be a Lawgiver from
between Judahs feet, that is, of his seed and progeny, until the Messiah came.

And unto him shall the gathering of the people be.] That is, whereas a little
before the coming of Christ Judah shall seem to have lost his authority, in
Christ it shall be recovered again, to whom not only the Jews but all other
nations shall come in as to their king, and submit themselves to his scepter.

Verse. 11. Binding his fool unto the vine, etc.] This last passage of Judahs
blessing is wholy a prophecy concerning the vvondrous fruitfulness of that
part of Canaan, which should fall to Judahs lot and portion, to wit, that it
should abound with vines and fat pastures, insomuch that wine and milk should
be as plentiful and common in a manner as water amongst them.

Verse. 13. Zebul^n shall dwell at the haven of the s^a.] Though Issachar were
older then Zebulun, yet Jacob blesses him first, because his lot was next in
the division of the land, Josh. 19. 10. And the third lot came up for the
children of Zebulun, etc. and prophesies of his dwelling by the sea, alluding
to his name which imports dwelling, Genesis 30. 20. Now will my husband dwell
with me, etc. and she called his name Zeb^l^n: and indeed his borders were both
to the main sea Westward, and to the sea of Galilee Eastward, Josh. 19. 10. And
their border went up toward the sea, etc. Isa. 9. 1. When at the first he
lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun, and the land of Naphtali, and afterward
did more grievously afflict her by the way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in
Galilee of the nations.

Verse. 14. Issachar is a strong ass, etc.] Jacob here foresheweth how
different the disposition of this tribe of Issachar should be from that of
Zebulun, whereof he had before spoken, as Moses also does, Deuteronomy. 33. 18.
Rejoice Zebulun in thy going out, and Issachar in thy tents; to wit, that
whereas those of Zebulun should be altogether for tradin gand trafficking
abroad at sea, these of Issachar should be wholly for a quiet life, and
country employments at home. Issachar is a strong ass, etc. The meaning is,
that this tribe should be of great strength, but of a more servile disposition;
that his portion should fall in a fertile and fat soil, and that accordingly
his strength should be employed in tilling the ground and other country
labors; and last of all, that he should rather undergo any tributes and taxes
that should be laid upon him, then be drawn from that quiet which at home he
did enjoy. But then withal we must know that this is spoken only concerning
the condition of this tribe for the general; for even in this tribe there were
sometimes some that were of a more noble and a more heroical spirit. Judge. 5.
15. it is said, That the princes of Issachar were with Deborah, even Issachar
and also Barak; and 1. Chron. 12. 32. it is said that many of the children of
Issachar resorted to David to Hebron, who were men of eminent understanding,
and ready armed to the war, as it is verse. 23. and came purposely to settle
the kingdom upon him, according to the word of the Lord.

Verse. 16. Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel.] Dan was
the eldest son of Bilhah, Rachels handmaid, and his name was given him as a
memorial that God had judged Rachel in giving her a son by her handmaid (for
Dan signifies judging) Genesis 30. 6. says Rachel, God has judged me, and has
also heard my voice, and has given me a son; therefore ^alled she his name
Dan; alluding therefore to his name he pronounces this blessing upon him, Dan
shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel; and the meaning
doubtless is that however he was the son of a handmaid, yet his posteritle
should be one of the tribes of Israel, and enjoy all the privileges of a
tribe, as well as the posterity of his freeborn sons, of whom before he had
spoken; to wit, they should have an equal share in the land of Canaan, and as
other tribes had their heads and elders to judge and decide causes amongst
them, so should they. Some conceive the raising up of Sampson to be one of the
judges, who was of the tribe of Dan, to be the accomplishment of this prophecy;
but questionless the blessing here promised is more general, and meant of the
common privileges which as a tribe Dan should enjoy in the common government
of the people together with the rest. And Dan being the eldest of the sons of
the handmaid, by expressing that he should enjoy this privilege, the like is
employed concerning the rest.

Verse. 16. Dan shall be a serpent by the way.] A prophecy that this tribe
should rather by cunning then open force get the better of their enemies. Some
footsteps whereof we have in Sampsons acts, and also in that exploit of this
tribe against Laish, which they suddenly surprised, Judge. 18. 27. And they came
unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet, and secure; and they smote them
with the edge of the sword, etc.

Verse. 18. I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord.] This ejaculation thus
interposed, is not strange in a dying man; yet the ground might be, his
foreseeing the troubles of his posterity, and that tribe of Dan in special.

Verse. 19. Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall overcome at last.]
Herein Jacob foretells that Gads posterity, being placed in the utmost skirts
of the land of Canaan, should be often sorely annoyed with the incursions of
the bordering nations that should be enemies to Israel, to wit, the Ammonites,
Moabites, and others, who should often by troops make inroads upon the Gadites
that lay next to them, but at length they should gather their forces together,
overcome them, and drive them out of their country again, and so afterward
peaceably enjoy their possessions. Now because Gad signifies a troop; A troop
comes, says Leah concerning this firstborn son of her handmaid Zilpah, and
therefore she called his name Gad, Genesis 30. 11. in allusion to his name, Jacob
thus expresses his blessing, Gad, a troop shall overcome him, but he shall
overcome at the last.

Verse. 21. Naphtali is a hind let loose, he gives goodly words.] Herein is
chiefly prophesied (as I conceive) that this tribe should also have a fruitful
and pleasant portion in the land of Canaan, wherein they should be as a hind
let loose, that has scope and liberty, and so in choice of pastures find
plenty of feeding; 2. That they should live as in plenty, so in peace, as a
hind let loose, that is, a hind that must not be hunted, but is preserved and
cherished as the delight of the owner; but 3. It may also be meant of their
cunning and active nimblenesse in dealing with their enemies, that they should
be light-footed both to pursue enemies, and to escape danger, Psalm. 18. 34. He
makes my feet like hinds feet; whereof one instance we have in the story of
Barak, Judge. 4. 10, 15, 16. And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh,
etc. And the Lord discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his host
with the edge of the sword before Barak, so that Sisera lighted down off his
chariot, and fled away on his feet; but Barak pursued after the chariots, etc.
and all the host of Sisera fell upon the edge of the sword, and there was not a
man left. As for the second clause, he gives goodly words, thereby is meant in
general, that this tribe should be fair-spoken* courteous, and of friendly
behavior, and therefore beloved; or it may be more particularly intended, 1.
of their eloquence, and fair speeches, whereby they should rather keep
themselves safe, then by force of arms; 2. of the songs of thanksgiving, the
praises and blessings which they should return unto God, both for their
fruitful land, their peace, and conquest of their enemies; of which last we
have an instance in that song of Deborah and Barak, Judge. 5.

Verse. 20. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.] That is, the portion which in the division of the land of Canaan
shall fall to this tribe, shall be fat, and fertile, abounding with wine and
oil, but especially with the choicest and finest wheat; and so indeed it was
one of the richest and fruitfullest parts of all that country.

Verse. 22. Joseph is a fruitful bough.] Because of him came two tribes.

Verse. 23. The archers have sorely grieved him, etc.] His brethren that sold
him, his mistress that accused, and m^ster that imprisoned, did what they could
to r^ine him; but through Gods assistance he proved too strong for them all.

Verse. 24. From thence is the shepherd, stone of Israel.] That is, from the
mighty God of Jacob it was, that Joseph became the shepherd, the stone of
Israel* a shepherd, in that he fed both his father and brethren in the time of
famine; the stone of Israel, in that he was a rock of refuge to them, providing
a hiding place for them in Egypt when they were in so great distress, and in
that he was the only stay and support of his father and all his family. And
herein was Joseph a figure of Christ, who is the shepherd of his Israel, the
foundation and corner stone of his Church and people, Acts 4. 11. This is the
stone which was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of the
corner.

Verse. 26. The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my
progenitors, etc.] This place is diversely rendered by Interpreters, and
accordingly they differ much in giving the sense and meaning of the words. But
according to our translation the meaning of the first clause is evident, to
wit, that Jacob therein affirms that the blessings wherewith he had blessed his
children, and Joseph especially, were of far greater efficacy and
excellency then those wherewith his progenitors had blessed their children.
If we understand it to be spoken concerning all his children, and that it is
afterward particularly applied to Joseph in the following words, They shall be
on the head of Joseph, etc. and thus we must know that he preferres the
blessings wherewith he had blessed his children before those of the Patriarchs
that were before them, 1. because they were more particularly explained and
applied; 2. because they were and should be more suddenly, clearly, fully and
effectually accomplished in them: for till their increase in Egypt, where was
that seed to be seen that should equal, as it were, the number of the stars?
yea what likelihood was there of such an increase? 3. because whereas the
promised seed made to Abraham was ratified only unto Isaac, and so Ishmael and
the rest of his sons were excluded, and afterward it was confirmed only to
Jacob, and so Esau was cut off, now it was ratified unto all his children, and
upon the condition of faith to all their posterity. But if we understand it
particularly of Joseph, the blessing wherewith Jacob had blessed him is said to
surpass the blessings wherewith his progenitors were blessed, 1. because it
should not now be long ere the promises made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
concerning the multiplying of their seed. etc. should be performed: hitherto
there was no appearance of that which God had promised, but now as in the other
sons of Jacob, so in Joseph also, the promise of God should be accomplished;
2. because he should have this privilege above the rest, that his two sons
should be the heads of two several tribes; 3. because Joseph was in regard of
temporal blessings far happier then ever Jacob, or any of his progenitors
had been, being advanced in Egypt to the highest pitch of honor next under the
King, and so living and dying in great prosperity. The greatest difficulty is
in the next words, Unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, and the
most probable expositions that are given thereof are these* 1. That they are a
comparative expression of the surpassing excellency of those blessings
wherewith he had blessed his children, and Joseph especially, and how far
they exceeded those of his progenitors, to wit, as far, as the utmost tops
of the hills and mountains are above the ordinary level of the earth; 2. That
they are an amplification of that which went before concerning the blessings
wherewith he had blessed them, showing that they were blessings not only
temporal, but also spiritual and eternal, such as should reach beyond the
continuance of the mountains and hills, which yet should continue till time
should be no more, and are therefore called, everlasting hills: whence is that
of the prophet, (...) 54. 10. The mountains shall depart, and the hills be
removed, but my kindness shall not depart from thee, etc. that is, my
kindness to thee shall be more stable then the mountains that cannot be
removed, but shall continue to the end of the world. And indeed herein was the
chief and surpassing excellency of Jacobs blessing above those of his
progenitors, that all his sons were appointed heirs of the promise, and of
the covenant of grace, not one of them being excluded, as Ishmael and Esau
were; and 3. they are added to set forth the riches of the portion of land
which should befall the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh in the division of
Canaan, which as it should abound with all other desirable blessings, so also
with the chief things of the ancient mountains, and the precious things of the
lasting hills, as Moses calls them in his blessing of Joseph, Deuteronomy. 33. 15. And
indeed if we observe how evident it is that Moses does there, as it were,
explain and unfold this blessing of Jacob, we may the more readily incline to
think that what is there expressed concerning the ancient mountains and lasting
hills in Joseph's portion is also covertly intended here.

Verse. 26. They shall be on the head of Joseph, etc.] Comparing the blessings
wherewith God had blessed him to the oil wherewith Princes are wont to be
anointed, he says, They should be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of
the head of him that was separate from his brethren, that is, whom the Lord
has separated and set apart from the rest of his brethren, advancing him to a
high and singular degree of honor: and in this sense he was a Nazarite, as the
word is in the original.

Verse. 27. Benjamin shall ravine as a wolf, in the morning he shall devour the
prey, etc.] Because the wolf is a strong and fierce beast, and goes forth
usually both mornings and evenings to seek his prey, Jacob here compares this
tribe to a ravening wolf, and that to signify, they should be a very strong
courageous and warlike people, and that they should with admirable violence
vanquish and destroy their enemies, and return from the battle laden with the
spoils. And indeed that this tribe of Benjamin was in future times of a warlike
disposition, we find in many places of the sacred history, and especially in
those bloody battles which they fought with their brethren of the other tribes,
where though there were of the other tribes four hundred thousand armed men,
and themselves were but five and twenty thousand and seven hundred, yet they
twice overcame them, and slew of them eight and thirty thousand; and it is
there particularly noted of these Benjamites (which shows what active men they
werefor the war) that there were amongst them seven hundred chosen men
left handed, thatcould every one sling stones at a hairs breadth and not miss,
Judge. 20. 16. and in the conquests of Saul, the first king of Israel, who was
of this tribe.

Verse. 28. All these are the twelve tribes of Israel.] That is, these are the
heads from whom descended the twelve tribes of Israel; indeed there were
thirteen tribes: but Ephraim and Manasseh are comprehended in one, under the
name of Joseph their father; and besides when the land of Canaan was divided
amongst the tribes, the Levites had no share amongst them, because the Lord was
their portion, and so they were still called the twelve tribes of Israel. And
by this mentioning of the tribes, the holy Ghost does, as it were, direct us to
look for the accomplishment of these prophecies, not so much in the persons of
Jacobs sons, as in their posterity.

Every one according to his blessing, he blessed them.] That is, he foretold
the several blessings which God had allotted to them. But did he not rather
pronounce three of them accursed, namely, Reuben, Simeon, and Levi? I answer,
1. That the temporal chastisement threatened was but a fatherly correction for
their amendment, and so a blessing and not a curse: but 2. They are blessed
also in that he concludes them within the number of the tribes, and so
comprehends them within the Covenant: for by this means they have an equal
right with the rest to the land of promise, and by faith to the heavenly
Canaan, whereof the other was a type.

CHAP. L.
Verse. 3. ANd forty days were fulfilled for him.] That is, forty days were
spent in embalming him, according to the custom of the country.

And the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days.] That is, thirty
days after they had done embalming him did the Court, and the Egyptians mourn
for him, ere he was carried to be buried.

Verse. 4. Joseph spoke unto the house of Pharaoh, saying.] Though Joseph was
still in as high esteem with Pharaoh as ever before, yet he made use of the
mediation of the Egyptian courtiers, to procure the kings consent that he might
go into Canaan, to bury his father, partly thereby to endear himself the better
to them, and to testify his own modesty, who in a business that concerned
himself would do nothing, but what should be approved of all; partly to prevent
all suspicion of any purpose that he should have to get quite away out of Egypt
upon this occasion; and partly also perhaps, because mourners used not to come
into the presence of Princes. Esther. 4. 2. For none might enter into the kings
gate clothed with sackcloth.

Verse. 5. In my grave which I have dug for me, etc.] Thereby implying, that
it was not in any contempt of Egypt, to decline the envy of the Egyptians, who
might be ready enough to surmise that he despised their land, as not worthy to
be the grave of his father, he makes known that he desired this only because
his father had long since, before he came into Egypt, dug a grave for
himself there where his ancestors and wife were buried, and made him swear
that he would bury him there.

Verse. 10. And they came into the threshing floor of Atad, etc.] This
threshing floor of Atad I conceive to have been not far from Hebron, the
place intended for the sepulcher of Jacob, chosen happily by Joseph and the
rest, as the most convenient place to perform the solemnities of his funeral
rites by so great a multitude. And it is said to be beyond Jordan, with respect
unto Moses, who was on the outside of Jordan in the wilderness where he wrote
these things, Deuteronomy. 1. 1. These be the words which Moses spoke unto all Israel,
on this side Jordan, in the wilderness, etc. Deuteronomy. 3. 25. I pray thee let me
go over, and see the good land that is beyond Jordan.

Verse. 18. And they said, Behold we be thy servants.] This is spoken by way of
submitting themselves to Joseph, because of the wrong that they had formerly
done him; as if they should have said, We sold thee for a servant into Egypt,
and behold we now yield up our selves to be thy servants.

Verse. 19. For am I in the place of God?] Can I, or dare I (think you) be
offended with that which I know was Gods work, or seek to revenge my self on
you whom God has forgiven? or turn that to your destruction, which God did for
your preservation? this were to make my self equal with God, yea to challenge
to my self a power to cross and overturn the will and purpose of God.

ANNOTATIONS On the second book of MOSES called EXODUS.
CHAP. I.
NOw these are the names of the children of Israel, etc.] When the Israelites
went out of Egypt (which was but two hundred and fifteen years after Jacob went
thither with his family) there were of them, Numb. 1. 46. six hundred thousand,
three thousand five hundred and fifty, fit for war, besides the Levites, old
men, women, and all under the age of twenty years, which might well be three
times so many. Here therefore in the beginning of this story the names of those
that went down into Egypt are thus particularly set down, that by considering
how few there went down thither, we might the more plainly in the multitude
that went out from thence see the accomplishment of those promises made to
Abraham, concerning the wonderful multiplying of his seed.

Verse. 5. And all the souls that came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy
souls.] Reckoning with the rest Jacob, Joseph, and his two sons. See the note
on Genesis 46. 27.

Verse. 7. And the children of Israel were fruitful, etc.] Moses expresses
their multiplying with many several words, to show, that it was indeed a most
incredible and miraculous increase.

Verse. 8. Now there arose up a new king over Egypt, which knew not Joseph.]
That is, there arose up another king (for so Stephen expresses it, Act. 7.
18.) who because he knew not the person of Joseph, nor lived in his days to
see the good that he did for the kingdom of Egypt, never minded the good
service that he had formerly done for his predecessor, nor in the least manner
regarded either his posterity, or fathers family for his ^ake. And so indeed it
is usually with many men, they only mind present things, and are only
affected with such things as happen in their own days, the memory of that good
which has been done for their ancestors, they never regard. Some indeed hold,
that this king that dealt thus hardly with the Israelites was not of the
posterity of that Pharaoh that exalted Joseph, but was chosen of another stock
to rule over Egypt; and that therefore it is said, There arose up a new king
over Egypt. But this cannot be grounded on those words: for the son that
succeeds his father in the throne is usually called a new king; and Solomon
says concerning his succeeding of his father in the kingdom of Israel, 1.
King. 8. 20, I am risen up in the room of David my father. However it seems
that Joseph sought not to advance his children in Egypt, but was content they
should live in a mean condition amongst his brethren, waiting in hope for the
promised inheritance; by reason whereof the memory of Joseph was the more
likely not to be continued amongst the Egyptians.

Verse. 9. Behold the children of Israel are more and mightier then we.] It
cannot be questioned but that the Egyptians were more in number, and of greater
riches and strength then the Israelites were: either therefore this must be
understood by way of proportion, to wit, that those parts of the land that were
inhabited by the Israelites were far more populous then other parts of the
land, the Israelites multiplying far more then the Egyptians did, and that
they flourished more in wealth and plenty of all things (the might, here
chiefly intended) which indeed is no wonder, considering that besides their
industry, and the fertility of the land of Goshen wherein they were placed, an
extraordinary blessing from God was upon them in all their endeavors; or else
it was spoken by Pharaoh, only to incense his Lords and Counselors of State
to whom he propounds this motion, and so he lash^th out, as men that speak out
of envy and disdain are wont to do, beyond measure, and intimates withal that
this it would come to, if it were not prevented.

Verse. 11. Therefore they did set over them taskmasters, etc.] To wit, that
they might hereby both impoverish them, and waste their estates, and withal
keep them from multiplying so exceedingly, as they had formerly done: for
whilst they took them off from their own employments, and as bondslaves,
forced them to work in the Kings service, without allowing them any equal
recompense for their labors, this must needs soon bring them very low in their
estates; and then withal by overburdening them with extreme labor, toil, and
drudgery, they hoped to waste their strength, and to consume them by degrees
through weakness and sickness, and so much to abate their number, and to
prevent their increase. All which misery the Lord suffered the Egyptians to
bring upon this his peculiar people, 1. Because in this time of their
^ojourning in Egypt, the Israelites began many of them to be corrupt in their
religion, and to commit whoredom with the Idols of Egypt, and so the Lord
cast them into this fiery furnace of the Egyptian bondage, that he might purge
them from these pollutions: hence is that of Joshua to the Israelites, Josh.
24. 14. Put away the Gods which your fathers served in Egypt, and that
complaint of the Lord concerning his people, Ezekiel. 23. 3. That they committed
whoredoms in their youth in Egypt, and chap. 20. 7, 8, 9. that when they
rebelled against him, and did not every man cast away the abominations of their
eyes, nor did forsake the Idols of Egypt, yet he wrought for his names sake in
bringing them forth of the land of Egypt* 2. Because hereby the Lord intended
to keep them from setting their hearts upon Egypt, and to make them long after
Canaan the promised land, to cause them to leave Egypt willingly, to remove to
Canaan when God should call them thither, and that they might have no desire to
return thither again when they were once gone: which if they did when Egypt had
been to them a land of bondage, and of such bitter service, Number. 11. 5. and 14.
4. And they said one unto another, Let us make a captain, and let us return
into Egypt, what would they have done if they had lived in ease and plenty
there? and 3. Because the Lord would have the juster occasion given for the
Israelites casting off the yoke of Egypt, and for his punishing that tyrant
Pharaoh and his bloody people with so many great and wonderful plagues for the
better manifestation of his justice and almighty power, y^a his faithfulness
also and tender compassion toward his people.

Verse. 14. And in all manner of service in the field.] That is, in the most
sordid and toylsome labors of their countrey-imployments, as digging and
cleansing of their ditches, carrying out their dung, plowing and tilling their
grounds, etc.

Verse. 15. And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of which the
name of one was Ship^rah, etc.] Pharaoh perceiving himself crossed in his first
device, and that because the more they afflicted the Israelites the more they
multiplied and grew, he now seeks to bring his purpose to pass another way,
andthat is by persuading the Hebrew midwives to smother or strangle all their
male-children, a sure way to prevent their multiplying, even in the very birth,
that so there might be no suspicion that it was purposely done, but that it
might be ascribed to chance, or to the woman's hard labor, and difficulty of
birth. Indeed so strange it is that he should hope to persuade the midwives, if
they were Israelites, to lend thus a helping hand to the utter destruction of
their own people, that thereupon some Writers have concluded, that
questionless the midwives were Egyptians, and the Hebrew women were forced to
make use of them. But methinks it is far more unlike that the Hebrew women
should ever admit to employ Egyptian midwives in that service, then that
Pharaoh should hope partly by great promises, and partly by severe threatenings
to win the Hebrew midwives to do this that he enjoined them. And besides it
would have been in vain for the king to hope to have the business carried so
secretly, and that the people should think that their male-children dyed in the
birth, and were not at his command made away, if he had violently imposed on
them Egyptian midwives, who upon such an occasion must needs be presently
suspected. And to this we may add also, that the commendation that is here
given the midwives, that they feared God, does always in the Scripture
signify the fear of the true God, and a higher degree of true pieti^ then
could be in the Egyptians by the mere light of nature. And therefore I conceive
that the midwives were not Egyptians but Israelites; to which our Tran^latours
seem to en^line in translating the Hebrew word here used not the midwives of
the Hebrews, but the Hebrew midwives. As for these two that are here named, we
must not thence conclude that there were no more (for it is not possible that
two midwives should be sufficient for this employment amongst so many thousand
women of the Israelites) but these two are only named, because they were the
chief, and perhaps the rest were under their direction and command; or rather,
because he called these first, and having made trial of them, meant afterward
to give the same command to the rest, till finding that these h^d deceived him,
he gave over this course, and then his rage brake openly forth, and he enjoined
by public command that all their male-children should be drowned.

Verse. 21. And it came to pass because the midwives feared God, that ^e made
them houses.] Though the midwives ^inned in lying to Pharaoh, yet the Lord
according to his wonted goodness passed by this infir^itie of his poor
servants, and rewarded their pi^ti^ and ^ear of him, in saving their
men-children alive, and made them houses, that is, did greatly increase their
posterity (for so the like phrase is used Ruth. 4. 11. The Lord make the woman
that is to come into thine house like Rachel, and like Leah, which two did
build the house of Israel, and withal did prosper them exceedingly in their
outward estate, according to that of the Psalmist, Except the Lord build the
house, they labor in vain that build it, Psalm. 127. 1.

Verse. 22. And Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, etc.] Failing of
bringing about his purpose secretly by the help of the midwives, he now openly
at last discoverd his rage, and by public procla^ation e njoyns the Egyptians
to take the Israelites male-children so soon as they were born by force from
them, and to drown them in the river: That the Egyptians did accordingly with
much strictness put in execution this bloody command of their King, is
evident, because Moses parents could not long hide him from those that were
employed in searching after them; but yet, that by degrees they gave over the
prosecuting of this cruelty, and that it continued not all the time of the
Israelites bondage in Egypt, is also clear, because there were so many under
twenty years old when they went out of Egypt. Perhaps this Pharaoh within a few
years died, and then this cruel decree, which the very light of nature must
needs abhor, was not, at least so violently, pursued as it was at first.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a
daughter of Levi.] To wit, as we read, Exodus 6. 19. Amram the son of Kohath,
and grandchild of Levi, married Jochebed his Aunt, the daughter of Levi, as she
is here called, whom her mother bare unto Levi in Egypt, as is expressed Number.
26. 59. and so the sister of his father Kohath. And though such marriages
between the aunt and nephew were afterward expressly forbidden by the law, as
incestuous and against the law and light of nature, Levit. 18. 12. Thou shall
not uncover the nakedness of thy fathers sister; yet considering the confusion
of those times, no wonder it is though even the faithful servants of God did
not see and consider the evil thereof, but did what was customarily done though
not warrantable, till God gave them an express law against it. However
observable herein again is the faithfulness of Moses, who would not conceal
the truth herein, though it were no little blemish to him, that he was born of
such an incestuous marriage.

Verse. 2. And the woman conceaved, and bare a son.] To wit, Moses; but yet
this was not their first child: for Mary or Miriam a daughter, and Aaron a
son, were both born before him, as it is evident Exodus 7. 7. and Moses was
fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three years old, etc. and in the
fourth verse of this chapter, And his sister stood afar off, to wit what
would be done; where we see that Miriam was set to watch what became of her
brother, because she as a child would be least in danger of being suspected.
And hereby it is manifest that Amram and Jochebed, the parents of Moses, were
married, and had their two elder children Miriam and Aaron, before that cruel
edict came forth, for the drowning of all the male-children of the Israelites,
about the time when Pharaoh sought by the help of the midwives to make them
away in the birth, and that Moses was born immediately after he had commanded
them to be drowned.

She hid him three months.] That is, his mother; for though it is evident that
his father did also yield his consent and help hereto, Heb. 11. 23. By faith
Moses when he was born was hid three months of his parents, yet Moses here
ascribes it particularly to his mother, because she had the chief hand in the
managing of it, and perhaps did first motion it to her husband. And herein
their faith was observable, as the Apostle has noted, because out of their
natural affection to their child, quickened by the rare beauty they beheld in
his countenance, they resolved to do what they could to save him, being not
afraid of the Kings commandment, but trusting that God would be with them, and
so hid him three months; and then when they could hide him no longer, because
happily some notice was taken of it, or some stricter search was to be made,
they laid him out in an ark of bulrushes, setting his sister withal to watch
what became of him.

Verse. 10. She brought him unto Pharaohs daughter, and he became her son.]
That is, she made him her adopted son, and accordingly afforded him such
princely education as was seemly for her son, training him up in all the
learning and wisdom of the Egyptians, Acts 7. 22. And thus the Lord by his
secret providence fitted him for the service for which he intended him, his
known wisdom and singular learning being afterward no doubt a special means
to make him the more feared and honored both amongst the Egyptians and his own
people, and every way the fitter for the government of the Commonwealth of
Israel.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he
went out unto his brethren, etc.] To wit, when he was full forty years old,
Acts 7. 23. from the time of his weaning (when by his mother-nurse he was
brought home, and delivered up to Pharaohs daughter) unto that age he continued
in the court of Egypt as her adopted son, and became famous amongst them,
mighty both in words and deeds, as S. Stephen says, Acts 7. 22. that is, of
great abilities both for discoursing, and giving counsel concerning any
business propounded, and for the wise and successful managing of any affairs
that he undertook. During this time it cannot well be thought, that he never
went out to visit his brethren, as compassionating their miseries, since most
probable it is, that his mother having recourse unto him, as his nurse, would
instruct him, and put him in mind of all things that concerned him as one of
Gods Israel* But this going forth unto his brethren, which Moses here speaks
of, was when at forty years age he went forth with a full purpose to abandon
his honors in Pharaohs Court, and to join himself to the poor oppressed
people of God, and to lend them what help he possibly could for their
deliverance, and that as finding himself inwardly, as by a special instinct of
Gods spirit, called thereto; whence it is that Stephen said, Acts 7. 25. that
when he slew the Egyptian that wronged the Israelite, he supposed that his
brethren would have understood, how that God by his hand would deliver them; of
which the Apostle also speaks, Heb. 11. 24, 25, 26. By faith Moses, when he was
come to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaohs daughter, choosing
rather to suffer affliction with the children of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches
then the treasures in Egypt.

Verse. 12. And he looked this way, and that way, and when he saw there was no
man he slew the Egyptian, etc.] Moses had doubtless the warrant of an
extraordinary calling from God to slay the Egyptian, as it is evident by those
words of Stephen before mentioned, Acts 7. 25. He supposed ^is brethren would
have u^derstood how that God by his hand would deliver them: for though the
time which God had ordained for their deliverance was not yet come, yet God
intended that hereby he should give even at present some intimation to the
people, both of Gods purpose to deliver them by him* and ofhis willingness to
undertake the work. But why then did he thus look about, as afraid to have it
known? I answer it is no wonder though at his first calling his faith was mixed
with doubtings and fears; but besides, he might do this out of a prudent
circumspection and care not to have it known, and not out of fear, because he
knew that things were not yet in a readiness for the public deliverance of
the people, even as Magistrates will sometimes execute offenders the more
privately, when they fear any tumult amongst the people.

Verse. 14. And Moses feared, and said, etc.] What the Apostle therefore said of
Moses, Heb. 11. 27. By faith he forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King, must be understood of his second leaving Egypt, when he carried away the
Israelites with him. Now he left Egypt for a time only, and that to save
himself from the wrath of a King who sought to slay him: but then he quite
forsook Egypt, and boldly carried away his brethren, though he might well
suspect that Pharaoh would pursue them, not fearing his wrath and malice in
this regard, but looking to that invisible God who was able to defend him.

Verse. 15. Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to slay Moses.] Not
only to punish that fact of his in slaying the Egyptian, but also doubtless
especially out of a jealousy which hereupon he had conceived concerning Moses,
knowing him to be an Hebrew, and having by experience found that he was a man
of rare abilities, and singularly wise and learned, when he saw that he had
left the Court, and joined himself to his own people, and had now in revenge of
an Israelites wrong slain an Egyptian, no marvel though he suspected what
Moses might hereafter attempt, on the behalf of that people, and so resolved
presently to cut him off.

Verse. 16. Now the Priest of Midian had seven daughters.] The word in the
original signifies either a Priest, or, a Prince, but because this employment
of attending and watering their fathers flocks was more likely to be the
employment of a Priest then a Princes daughters; and secondly, it is no way
probable that the shepherds durst daily offer such violence to their Princes
daughters, as we read here they did to these, it is more probable that in this
place the word in the original is to be understood of a Priest then a Prince.
A Priest of the true God, we may well think he was, because Moses married his
daughter, yet withal perhaps he was corrupt in his religion, and had gone
aside to many heathenish superstitions, till by Moses in the time of his abode
there he was more perfectly instructed. The most difficult question concerning
these words is, Who this Priest of Midian was, that had seven daughters,
whether the father or the grandfather of Zipporah, who was doubtless one of
these seven daughters, and afterward became the wise of Moses. It is manifest
that in the next verse but one this Priest of Midian is c^lled Revel, When
they came to Revel their father, he said, How is it that ye are come so soon
to day? and verse. 21. that he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife. But
because the father of this Zipporah, and father in law of Moses, is elsewhere
called Jethro, yea immediately in the first verse of the next chapter, Moses
kept the flock of Jethro his father in law, the Priest of Midian, and also
Hobab, Judge. 4. 11. Heber the Kenite was of the children of Hobab, the father
in law of Moses; and this Jethro or Hobab the father in law of Moses is said to
have been the son of Raguel the Midianite, Number. 10. 29. Moses said unto Hobab
the son of Raguel the Midianite, the father in law of Moses, etc. it may seem
very questionable, why this Revel, the Priest of Midian, is here spoken of as
the father of these seven daughters, of whom Zipporah the wife of Moses was
one. The most of Expositours do hold that Revel this Priest of Midian was the
grandfather of Zipporah, and the same that is called also Raguel the Midianite
Number. 10. 29. Jethro, who was also called Hobab, was (they say) the father of
Zipporah, and the son of Revel or Raguel, and so they hold that Zipporah is
called the daughter of this Revel, because she was his son Jethro's
daughter: and indeed usually in the Scriptures grandfathers are called fathers,
and grandchildren sons and daughters; so Laban says of his daughters
children, Genesis 31. 43. These children are my children; and Maachah is called
the mother of Asa, who yet was his grandmother, 1. King. 15. 13. But yet
because there can be no probable reason given, why in this place there should
be no mention made of the father, but of the grandfather only, and though the
grandfather be sometimes in the Scriptures called a father, yet no instance can
be given where in setting down the number of a man's daughters, it is yet meant
of his grandchildren, I rather conceive that this Priest of Midian, here spoken
of, that had seven daughters, was the father of Zipporah, and father in law of
Moses, and so consequently that he had three names, Revel as in the 18. verse
of this chapter, Jethro chap. 3. 1. and Hobab Judge. 4. 11. and that Raguel the
Midianite, mentioned only Number. 10. 29. was the father of this Revel.

Verse. 17. And the shepherds came, and drove them away. etc.] That is, though
these daughters of the Priest of Midian had with all diligence hastened to the
well, that they might water their flocks first (which happily in those dry
countries they did the more earnestly strive for, because those that came last
were sometimes scanted of water) yet when the shepherds came, they barbarously
drove them, and their flocks away, and with the water, which these Virgins had
drawn, sought to water their own cattle, and so to make them wait till they had
done: the injustice whereof when Moses perceived, he stood up in their defense,
withstood the shepherds (though a stranger) and helped them to water their
flock. Probable enough it is, considering in how great esteem Moses had lived
in Egypt, that he had some servants attending him, that might aid him herein;
if he were alone, there was doubtless a special hand of God in it, that one
man should by force prevail against all the shepherds.

Verse. 20. Why is it that ye have left the man?] That is, being a stranger, and
now thus late toward evening, unprovided happily of a place to lodge in, why
did you not bring him home with you?

Verse. 21. And he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.] That is, Revel, the
Priest of Midian, gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife. How long after
Moses his coming this match was made, it is not expressed; most likely it is
that it was not till by living a while together they had learnt by experience
that which might induce them on both sides to desire it: which we may the
rather incline to think also, because forty years after his coming into
Midian, when God commanded him to return into Egypt, one of his two sons by
his wife Zipporah was but a very little one, and as yet uncircumcised: chap. 4.
25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her son,
etc.

Verse. 22. And he called his name Gershom: for he said, I have been a stranger
in a strange land.] Gershom is by interpretation a desolate stranger: Now so he
named his eldest son, both to testify his faith concerning the land of
promise, which he looked upon, because of Gods promise, as his true country,
and the inheritance of his children; and professed therefore that his children
were but strangers in the land of their nativitie: and likewise to express his
thankfulness to God for affording him this comfort to support him in the time
of his affliction, when he lived after the manner of a banished man in a
strange country. Another son Moses had by his wife Zipporah, whom he called
Eliezer, as we may see, chap. 18. 4. but the firstborn only is mentioned here.

Verse. 23. And it came to pass in process of time, that the king of Egypt
died, and the children of Israel sighed, etc.] The death of the king of Egypt
is here mentioned, to show the misery of the poor Israelites, who were no way
eased of their burdens upon the death of the former oppressing tyrant, but had
as much cause of sighing under their burdens as ever they had before.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. NOw Moses kept the flock of Jethro, etc. the Priest of M^dian.].
Either this Jethro was the same that is before called Revel chap. 2. 18. or
else if Jethro were the son of Revel, he also was Priest of Midian, as his
father had been, the son succeeding in his fathers office; and that happily
because Revel was now dead, this being forty years after Moses coming
thither, as we see Acts 7. 30. And when forty years were expired there
appeared unto him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai.

And came to the mountain of God, even to Horeb.] Horeb is called here by
anticipation, the mountain of God, both because of this following vision,
wherein God appeared to Moses in so miraculous a manner; and also especially
because there afterward the Lord came down to Moses, and delivered him the
law, and made a covenant with his people, Exodus 19. for it is said expressly,
that this apparition was at mount Sinai, Acts 7. 30. And when forty years
were expired there appeared unto him in the wilderness of mount Sinai an angel
of the Lord in a flaming fire in bush: and there we know the Law was given,
Exodus 19. 1. It seems therefore that the whole mountanous track or circuit
where mount Sinai stood was called Horeb; or else (as some of the Jewish
Rabbis hold) this mountain was formerly called Horeb, but after this
apparition of God in the bush it was called Sinai, from the Hebrew word, S^neh,
which signifies a bramble bush.

Verse. 2. And the angel of the Lord appeared unt^ him in a flame of fire out of
the midst of a bush, etc.] It is ^vident that it was the Lord God himself that
now appeared unto Moses: for verse. 7. it is said, that the Lord Jehovah spoke
unto him, and verse the fixth he says, I am the God of thy father, etc. and
(which is most to be observed) verse. 5. he that appeared to Moses required that
worship and honor which is due only to God, namely, that he should present
himself before him barefooted, as a poor caytiffe, not worthy to stand in the
presence of so great a Majesty. Nor is there any just cause why we should
question this, because it is said here, The angel of the Lord appeared unto
him; since it is evident that Christ the eternal son of God is called the
Messenger, or, Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3. 1. Now as concerning the burning
bush, wherein the Lord appeared to Moses, it was doubtless intended not only
to cause Moses with the more reverence and humility to attend to what should
be said unto him, but also to be a sign representing to him the state and
condition of his people, concerning whom the Lord now gave him a charge, to
wit, that though his Israel had been long in the fire of affliction, the enemy
seeking with all possible fury to destroy them, yet hitherto they had been
miraculously preserved, and so still should be; and that because the Lord was
amongst them to preserve and defend them, and would now rescue them from the
power of their oppressors.

Verse. 3. And Moses said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight,
etc.] It is hard to say, which some affirm, that Moses concluded that this was
some secret of nature that the bush burned and was not consumed, and so out of
curiosity did rashly resolve to approach nearer that he might search out the
cause of it. No such thing can be concluded from these words; rather his
calling it a great sight may seem to imply that he thought it some vision. But
indeed the most probable opinion is, that he neither concluded the one nor the
other, but being suddenly stricken with admiration at the sight, and not
knowing what to think of it, he determined at last to approach nearer, hoping
thereby to be the better informed, and waiting with reverence to see what the
issue would be.

Verse. 4. God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and said* Moses
Moses, etc.] This calling of Moses by his name, and the redoubling of his name
in such a familiar and loving manner, was both to make him know that the vision
he saw was of God, thereby to stir him up the more carefully to intend what
was done and said; and also to intimate the great love and favor of God to
him: and indeed considering how strange and terrible the apparition was, and
that Moses though all alone and in a desert place was not yet so astonished,
but that when he heard himself called by name from the midst of the burning
bush, he could answer so readily here am I, we may well think that it was this
gracious manner of Gods calling upon him that did thus far encourage him.

Verse. 5. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet.] The putting off of shoes was
used as a sign of mourning and humiliation, Ezech. 24. 17. 23. Forbear to
cry, make no mourning for the dead, etc. and put on thy shoes upon thy feet
etc. 2. Sam. 15. 30. And David went up by the ascent of mount Olivet, and wept
as he went up, and had his head covered; and he went barefoot, etc. Esai. 20.
2. 4. Go and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put off thy shoe from
thy foot, etc. So shall the King of Assyria lead away the Egyptians prisoners,
and the Ethiopians captives, young and old, naked and barefoot, etc. And upon
this ground no doubt is Moses here enjoined it, both that this outward
ceremony might strike him with the greater aw and reverence of Gods Majesty,
into whose presence he might not be suffered to approach but in so lowly and
submissive a manner; and also that it might be an outward expression of the
inward religious affection of his mind, that he did indeed acknowledge the
disproportion betwixt God and him, etc. And in this may also be included the
putting off all earthly and carnal affections and thoughts, and such a
spiritual preparation of the mind as beseems him that knows he must come into
the presence of so great a God.

Verse. 5. For the place whereon thou stand is holy ground.] To wit, because
of the present vision; for it is all one as if he had said, because thou come
into Gods presence.

Verse. 6. I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, etc.] Because the
Israelites were Gods peculiar people by virtue of the covenant which God had
made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to whom he had promised, that he would be
their God, and the God of their seed after them, and that he would give them
the land of Canaan for an inheritance; therefore does the Lord style himself
here the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. As for the
Lords expressing this as in the present tense, I am the God of Abraham, etc.
speaking of men long since dead, it was doubtless not only in the regard of
the immortality of their souls, but also in regard of the certain resurrection
of their bodies too; and therefore did our Savior allege this place to prove
the resurrection, Mat. 22. 31, 32. As touching the resurrection of the dead,
have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying, I am the God of
Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living; and it is noted verse 34, that therewith he put the
Sadduces to silence. Look as Adam after he had sinned was dead whilst he lived
in regard of the sure decree, and sentence of God, Genesis 2. 17. In the day that
thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; so the Patriarchs, when dead, were
yet living, not only because their souls died not, but returned unto God that
gave them; but also in regard of the sure promise of God concerning their
resurrection.

And Moses hid his face, etc.] To wit, out of an awful reverence of the
Majesty of God: as Eliah for the same reason in this very mountain did the
like, when God spoke to him in a still small voice; 1. Kings 19. 13. He wrapped
his face in his mantle: and of the angels it is said, Esa. 6. 3. that with
their wings they cover their faces. No doubt so soon as he heard himself named
out of the burning bush, he was convinced of the presence of God, and was
accordingly affected with reverence and fear: But yet after that God had called
upon him to pull off his shoes and to present himself in such an humble manner
before him, because the place whereon he trod was holy ground; this assured him
that the Lord meant in some extraordinary manner to him; and so being stricken
with the deeper apprehension of Gods glorious majesty and his own baseness and
weakness, he hid his face.

Verse. 8. Unto a land that flows with milk and honey.] That is, a land
abounding with all the blessings of a fruitsull land, not only for necessity,
but also for delight; a land that should yield them plenty even of the choicest
dainties: for under these two, milk and honey, all other blessings of the like
nature are comprehended.

Verse. 10. Come now therefore, etc.] The secret inspiration which Moses had
before from God, when he killed the Egyptian, whereof Chap. 2. 11. is now
become an open calling and a full commission.

Verse. 11. And Moses said unto God, Who am I, etc.] This he says, not so much
out of diffidence or disobedience (though there might be in it some mixture of
humane infirmity) as out of modesty and humility, acknowledging that God
might have chosen many more able instruments. At his first calling he was very
forward, and killed the Egyptian; but his following flight out of Egypt made
him now better think of the business.

Verse. 12. This shall be a token unto thee that I have sent thee, etc.] Some
understand the vision of the burning bush to be the token whereof God here
speaks to Moses; and then the following words, When thou have brought forth the
people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this Mountain, they conceive are
added as a promise of that which should follow upon the deliverance of the
Israelites out of Egypt, to wit, that upon that mountain, where the Lord had
now appeared to him, they should be taught how to worship God, and so should
there offer up sacrifices to him. But others again (and that more probably, as
may appear by the connection of the words together) hold, that the sign whereof
the Lord here speaks is that which is added immediately in the following words,
to wit, That when he brought forth the people out of Egypt, they should worship
God upon that mountain. Nor is it any wonder that a thing, that should so long
after come to pass, is propounded to him as a sign or token for the present
strengthening of his faith concerning his calling: for though this token served
principally for the confirmation of his faith in time to come, when he should
see this token come to pass; yet even for the present, the prediction of such
a particular passage that should certainly befall them upon their deliverance
out of Egypt might well be a great help to the persuading of his heart, that
God would indeed deliver the Israelites by him; for just such a token was given
to Hezekiah, to strengthen his faith concerning Gods promise of destroying the
Assyrians that had besieged Jerusalem, 2. Reg. 19. 29. This shall be a sign
unto thee; ye shall eat this year such things as grow of themselves; in the
second year, that which springs of the same; and in the third year, sow ye,
reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof, which was not fully
accomplished till after the Assyrians were destroyed.

Verse. 13. They shall say unt^ me, What is his name? etc.] He conceives that
because he was in a manner unknown to them (for from his infancy to his grown
years he lived in Pharaohs Court, and now had lived for forty years as a
banished man in the land of Midian) therefore they might question whether he
were indeed sent of God, and to try that, might demand of him under what name
or title God had made known himself unto him: if this should prove so he
desires to know what an answer he should mak^ them; not that he was ignorant of
Gods name, or had hitherto worshipped an unknown God, but only desires by
carrying them Gods own answer, to have that as an effectual pledge of his
calling: under what name or title God is pleased to send unto them, that he
will use; as in a business of great moment, he desires as particular
instructions as may be.

Verse. 14. And God said unto Moses, I am that I am.] This is the name whereby
God expresses his essence to us, so far as we are able to conceive him. And
it implies, 1. his incomprehensiblenesse: as we use to say of any thing we
would not have others to pry into, It is what it is; so God says here to
Moses, I am what I am; 2. his immensitie, that his being is without any limits:
a man is a man, an angel is an angel, that is, every creature has a being, but
bounded and defined within such a compass, but God is an immense being, that
cannot be included within any bounds; 3. that he is of himself, and has not a
being depending upon any other; I am, that is, by and from, and of my self; 4.
his everlastingnesse, I am before any thing was, and shall for ever be; there
never was, nor shall be time, wherein God could not say of himself, I am; 5.
that there is no succession of time with him: for the understanding whereof see
John. 8. 58. Before Abraham was I am; and then, 6. that he gives being to all
things.

Verse. 16. Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, etc.] That is, the
heads of their Tribes, who doubtless had some place of authority and power
amongst them: for though in Egypt they lived in much disorder and confusion,
yet it cannot be thought but that they had some kind of government amongst
them, as is yet more evident chap. 5. 14. where we read of officers of the
children of Israel. Now these the Lord commanded Moses to assemble, and to
deliver this message to them, both that they might afterward acquaint their
brethren of the several tribes with this message which God had sent; and also
that they might join with Moses in the name of all the people to desire of
Pharaoh what God enjoined them to desire.

Verse. 18. And now let ^s go (we beseech thee) three days journey into the
wilderness, etc.] God appoints them to petition only for so much liberty,
that the denial of this might render Pharaoh inexcusable, and make the justice
of God the more manifest, both in destroying Pharaoh and delivering Israel:
neither was it necessary that either God or they (having other direction from
God) should reveal their whole counsel. See Deuteronomy. 2. 28. and 1. Sam. 16. 2. And
the Lord said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to sacrifice unto
the Lord.

Verse. 19. And I am sure that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no not by
a mighty hand.] If we read this place as it is in the margin of our Bibles, I
am sure that the King of Egypt will not let you go but by a mighty hand, the
meaning then is plain, to wit, that Pharaoh would not let the Israelites go
till God by a strong hand forced him to let them go. But reading it as it is in
our Bibles, which agrees best with the original, it may happily be questioned
how it can be said, that the King of Egypt would not let them go, no not by a
mighty hand, since it is evident that he did give them leave to go, chap. 12.
31. and so the Lord tells Moses here in the following words, I will stretch out
my hand and smite Egypt, etc. and after that he will let ye go. To which I
answer, that though upon the slaying of all the firstborn in Egypt Pharaoh
gave them liberty to go; yet it might be well said that he would not let them
go, no not with a mighty hand, because after that God had with a strong and
mighty hand, that is, by many grievous plagues, endeavored to make him yield,
yet a long time he persisted in his obstinacy, and would not let them go, till
at last he was even constrained to bid them be gone: and indeed even then he
said that more out of displeasure then a yielding spirit; and therefore he soon
repented of what he had said, and when they were gone pursued after them with
an army to fetch them back again.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me,
etc.] That is, at first perhaps they will not believe me this; being supposed,
what shall I do then? Considering that the Lord had now immediately before told
Moses that the Israelites would hearken to him, chap. 3. 18. they shall heark^n
to thy voice, we cannot well think that Moses did now absolutely question the
truth of what God had said, but that only he objected that it may be at first,
till they saw something to move thereto, they would be shy of giving credit to
his words; and so intimated his desire to know what in that case he should do.
And this indeed he had cause enough to suspect, because by reason of Pharaohs
great power they were like enough to doubt much at first, especially whether
Moses would be able to rescue them from their bondage, the rather, because they
regarded him so little at first, when upon his slaying of an Egyptian in the
defense of an Israelit^, he supposed his brethren would have understood, how
that God by his hand would deliver them, as Stephen said, Act. 7. 25.

Verse. 3. And he said, cast it on the ground, etc.] The general end of this,
and the other following signs, was to confirm the faith of the Israelites
concerning the calling of Moses; the more special end of this first miracle of
turning his rod into a serpent, and then into a rod again, was to assure both
Moses and the Israelites that God could and would make his shepherds crook, so
base and contemptible in it self, terrible as a serpent to Pharaoh, but
comfortable to the Israelites, that is, that the rod of his government should
affright the one, but be the means of much good and happiness unto the other.

Verse. 6. Put now thine hand into thy bosom, etc.] The end of this sign was
also to put them in mind of Gods almighty power, who was able thus suddenly to
change things, whereby both the Israelites might be comforted, remembering that
however they had been despised and abominable in the sight of the Egyptians,
yet God was able to give them favor in their sight, and however to restore
them to their former liberty by an outstretched arm; and withal Moses might
be encouraged, as considering, that however his estate might now seem base and
contemptible, even as a thing leprous and vile, yet God was able to make him a
glorious instrument of Isreal's deliverance.

Verse. 10. O my Lord, I am not eloquent, etc.] That is, I am not a man of a
free and ready speech, as it is fit they should be that are employed in such a
service, but of a slow speech, and a slow tongue. Nor does this contradict, if
thus understood, that which S. Stephen said of Moses, Acts 7. 22. that he was
mighty in words and in deeds: for a man that is of greatest ability to speak
wisely, learnedly, and perswasively, may yet have some great imperfection in
regard of his utterance and pronunciation: and so it seems it was with Moses,
though he were an excellent speaker for the substance of that which he spoke,
yet some defect he had in regard of his utterance, which some conceive to have
been that he was of a stammering tongue, and thereto apply that which he
afterward said, How shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips,
chap. 6. 12.

Verse. 12. I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say.] It is
evident that the imperfection of Moses speech and utterance continued after
this; for still we see he complained of his uncircumcised lips, chap. 6. 30.
and because of this Aaron was his spokesman, in delivering Gods message unto
Pharaoh* This therefore which the Lord here says to Moses, I will be with thy
mouth, is not meant of helping him of that natural imperfection in his speech,
but that God would direct him what he should say, and so prosper him in his
message, that his slownesse of speech should be no hinderance to him, but that
he should with comfort to his people, and terror to their enemies, dispatch
the business which God had imposed upon him.

Verse. 14. And he said, Is not Aaron the Levite, thy brother? I know that he
can speak well, etc.] Thus was Moses comforted, hearing that his brother Aaron,
from whom he had been absent now forty years, was still living and well; and
withal encouraged by knowing that he should have him joined with him in
commission, of whose fidelity he could make no question, and whom he knew of
good abilities for the delivering of their message to Pharaoh.

Verse. 16. And thou shall be to him in stead of God.] That is, thou shall as
from God, and in Gods stead, make known to him what he shall say unto Pharaoh.

Verse. 18. And Moses went and returned to Jethr^ his father in law, and said
unto him, Let me go, etc.] Moses did not ask his father in law leave to go into
Egypt, as questioning whether he should obey Gods command in going, unless he
would give him leave; but only as judging it fit that he should acquaint his
father in law with his purpose, and crave his approbation, and not go rudely
away with his daughter and her children without giving him any notice
beforehand of it, espe^ially considering that he had no cause at all to suspect
either the wisdom or courtesy of his father in giving him liberty. Moses
therefore was not herein to be blamed; rather his modesty and humility herein
discovered was worthy admiration, who after so glorious a Vision was no way
puffed up with it, but carried himself in such an humble and lowly manner
toward his father in law. As for his alleging no other reason to Jethro for
his returning into Egypt, but only his desire to visit and see his brethren,
Let me go I pray thee, and return unto my brethren which are in Egypt, and see
whether they be yet alive, therein also his modesty was discovered, in that he
could forbear to tell his father in law of the glorious vision he had seen, and
the honorable employment which God had put upon him; and likewise his wisdom
in managing this business: for doubtelesse he did purposely conceal this, that
hewas sent to fetch the Israelites out of Egypt, both because he judged it not
fit to impart this secret to Jethro, who was not of the stock of Israel though
a godly man, before he acquainted the Israelites themselves with it; and
likewise especially lest the difficulty and danger of the work should make his
father in law unwilling to let him go.

Verse. 19. And the Lord said unto Moses in Midian, etc.] To wit, either before
he had asked his fathers leave, or after that. The other appearing of God to
Moses was in Horeb, this in Midian; but whether this his appearing to Moses in
Midian were before he asked leave to go or after, we cannot certainly conclude:
if it were after that, then either Moses, even after leave obtained from
Jethro, yet hastened not his journey as was fitting, and therefore by this
second apparition God quickened him again; or else he took it that in the first
vision in the burning bush, God had only called him to the work of going into
Egypt for the deliverance of the Israelites, but had not expressly told him
the time when he should go, and so he waited till now that in this second
vision in the land of Midian God again appeared to him, and commanded him
immediately to go thither, adding this encouragement to what he had said
before, that all the men were dead which sought his life. And doubtless all
the time of his sojourning with his father in law in Midian, he thought of what
God had formerly revealed to him in Egypt, concerning the Lords employing him
in that service; only he waited to see when God would call him thereto: and
that happily might be the reason why in so many years he did not send to know
in what condition his brethren were in Egypt, because he was resolved wholly to
cast himself herein upon the providence of God, and to do nothing without
direction from him.

Verse. 20. And Moses took his wife and his sons, etc.] Hereby it appears that
Moses either carried his wife and his children into Egypt, or at least that he
was upon his journey intending to carry them with him thither: Indeed, as
evident it is, when Moses went with the Israelites out of Egypt, his wife and
children were with his father in law in Midian: for Exodus 18. 5. it is said*
that Jethro his father in law met him in the wilderness when he encamped at
the mount of God, and brought his wife and his sons thither to him. It seems
therefore that either when he was upon the way going thither, he sent them back
again to Jethro (perhaps upon the occasion of the following story of the
circumcising of his son) or at least that when he was in Egypt, finding some
inconvenience in their being there, he took order to return them to the safe
custody of his father in law, that himself might the more freely and wholly
intend the business he had undertaken.

And Moses took the rod of God in his hand.] It was doubtless the same rod or
shepherds crook which Moses used at other times to carry in his hand, and which
he had in his hand when God spoke to him out of the burning bush; only it is
here called the rod of God, because it was that wherewith God had appointed
that Moses should work so many glorious miracles, and so to intimate that it
was merely of God and not of any power in Moses or in the rod that so many
strange things were done by it.

Verse. 21. But I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.]
See ch^p. 7. 13.

Verse. 22. Thus says the Lord, Israel is my son, even my firstborn, etc.]
Many several reasons may be given why the Israelites might be called Gods
firstborn son, to wit, 1. to intimate how dear they were to God, even as
men's firstborn children are usually to them; 2. in regard of their
pre-eminence and dignity above all other Nations that were at that time upon
the face of the earth; 3. with respect to the Gentiles, that were afterward to
become the people of God, and to be received into the covenant of being Gods
sons and daughters, the Israelites being first admitted to this peculiar
privilege of being Gods people; so that those of the Gentiles that were
afterward received to this dignity were but as Isreal's younger brothers; 4.
because the root of primogeniture rested in them, in that he was to be born of
this people who was to be the firstborn among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. But
the chief reason, and that which I conceive was principally intended in this
place is, because God had chosen the Israelites to be his peculiar people, and
heirs, as his firstborn, of the land of Canaan, the type of the heavenly
inheritance, wherein they were to live under the laws and governmeut of God
unto the coming of the promised Messiah: for if we mark it, this is alleged as
the ground why Pharaoh was bound to let the Israelites go. Now their being
received into a covenant of adoption did not infer any necessity of being
freed from Pharaohs service; but Gods choosing them to be his firstborn people
that were to inherit Canaan, and there to live under his government, could not
stand with their continuance under the tyranny of Pharaoh: and therefore upon
this ground Pharaoh is required to dismiss the Israelites, Israel is my son
even my firstborn; and I say unto thee, Let my son go that he may serve me,
etc.

Verse. 24. The Lord met him, and sought to kill him, etc.] How the Lord
endangered the life of Moses, whether by sickness, or rather by appearing with
a sword drawn in his hand, it is not expressed: it is therefore sufficient for
us to know, that Moses was in danger to be killed by the hand of the Lord, and
that the cause was at the same time by the Lord himself revealed to him; for
though this be not expressed yet it is clearly enough employed: for why else
should his wife so readily circumcise her son, had it not been told them that
their neglecting hitherto to circumcise that their son was the cause of Moses
danger. And this the Lord did not till now that he was upon his way going into
Egypt, partly for the trial of his faith, to see whether upon this occasion he
would turn his back upon that great service to which God had called him; and
partly because there was now a necessity of doing it, there being a manifest
incongruity in it, that he should undertake to be as a judge and governor of
Gods circumcised people, himself neglecting this badge of the covenant in his
own child.

Verse. 25. Then Zipporah took a sharp stone, and cut off the foreskin of her
son. etc.] To wit, Eliezer, her youngest son: whence it seems probable
(especially if we observe how his wife at this time carries her self) that
Moses had hitherto neglected the circumcising of this his youngest son,
because she was so highly displeafed at the circumcising of the first.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd afterward Moses and Aaron went in, and told Pharaoh, etc.] They
went to Pharaoh, and with them some good number of the Israelites: verse. 4.
Wherefore do you Moses and Aaron let the people from their works? g^t you unto
your burdens.

Verse. 3. Lest he fall upon us with p^stilence, etc.] Herein Moses and Aaron do
not only discover to Pharaoh, that it stood them upon to do what in them lay
that they might obey God in this which he required of them, even to prevent the
judgment which otherwise they might well fear he would bring upon them; but
withal likewise they covertly intimate to him how justly he might fear lest
the Lord should bring the same or some greater judgments upon him, and his
people, if he should refuse to let them go, as God had commanded him.

Verse. 6. And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people,
etc.] The taskmasters were doubtless Egyptians, appointed to require and
receive from the Israelites the work, which for the kings service they were
enjoined to do; but their officers, here mentioned with them, were Israelites,
appointed to have the oversight of their brethren in their labor, and to see
that every one did the task that was set them as is evident, verse. 14. And the
officers of the children of Israel, which Pharaohs taskmasters had set over
them were beaten, etc. because the people had not done their task.

Verse. 7. Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, etc.] For in
making brick they used straw, both for covering their new-made bricks, that
they might not be parched and chapped with the sun before they came to be
dried by the fire; and also for firing in their kilnes where they burnt their
bricks.

Verse. 8. And the tale of the bricks which they did make heretofore, etc.] That
is, though some of them be sent about the country to gather straw where they
can get it, yet those that are left to make the bricks shall make the full
number of bricks which they did all make before: and thus did Pharaoh seek to
make the Israelites hate and abhor Moses and Aaron, as the cause of this
misery that was fallen upon them.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 3. But by my name Jehovah was I not known to them.] This is not meant of
the syllables and letters of these two names, as if the Patriarchs had never
heard of this name Jehovah, but only that of God Almighty (for the contrary
is manifest, Genesis 22. 14. And Abraham called the name of that place,
Jehovah-jireth, etc.) but it is meant of that which is signified by these
names. This name Jehovah denotes, both Gods eternal being in himself, and
also his giving of being unto others, that is, the performance of his promises*
and in regard of this he says, that he was not known to their fathers by this
name: They being sustained by faith in Gods almighty power, rested upon the
promise, not enjoying the thing promised; but now to their children the promise
should be performed, and so they should have full knowledge and experience of
the efficacy of that name Jehovah. But withal we must know that this is only
spoken comparatively: As the glorious ministration of the law is said to have
had no glory, in respect of the excellent glory of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. 10.
so the fathers are said not to have known God by his name Jehovah in comparison
of that which their posterity knew.

Verse. 9. But they hearkened not unto Moses for anguish of spirit and for cruel
bondage.] That is, so grievous was the bondage and misery they lay under, and
so oppressed they were with sorrow by reason thereof, that they could not mind
what Moses said to them, nor believe any thing that was spoken concerning their
deliverance, as deeming their condition desperate, and past hope of recoverie.

Verse. 12. How then shall Pharaoh hear me who am of uncircumcised lips?] That
is, if the Israelites would not regard what I said to them, what hope can I
have that Pharaoh should mind my words, especially considering that I am a man
that have an imperfection in my speech? for doubtless it was with respect to
his bad utterance that Moses called himself a man of uncircumcised lips.
Because circumcision was with them the first badge of Gods people, and
therefore those that were not circumcised were counted profane, and their
uncircumcision was counted a grievous blemish; hence it was that in a
figurative kind of speech they called those things that had any natural or
moral blemish uncircumcised, as a heart a mind or tongue uncircumcised.

Verse. 14. These be the heads of their fathers houses.] Moses his chief
intention is no doubt to show the natural stock of himself and Aaron, that he
was a true Israelite, of the tribe of Levi, though he was brought up in
Pharaohs court, and afterward ^led into the land of Midian; yet for order sake
he begins first with the children of Reuben and Simeon, Levies elder brethren.

Verse. 16. And the years of the life of Levi were an hundred thirty and seven
years.] This express mention of their age is of great use in Chronology,
especially for the opening of that speech concerning Isreal's peregrination.
Exodus 12. 40. The sojourning of the Children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt was
four hundred and thirty years. It is evident in the 30. chapter of Genesis
that Joseph was not above four years younger then Levi. If therefore Joseph
was 39 years old when Jacob went down into Egypt (as may be clearly gathered
from Genesis 41. 46. because Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before
Pharaoh, and when the seven yea^s of plenty were gone, and two years of the
famine, then Jacob came down into Egypt) consequently Levi was then three and
forty years old; and since he lived, as it is here said, an hundred thirty
and seven years, it must needs follow that he lived in Egypt ninety and four
years, or thereabouts.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. I Have made thee a God to Pharaoh.] Not only because by Aaron (as
God is wont to do by his prophets) he should in Gods name decla^e his will unto
him for the delivering of his people; but also because of the divine authority
given unto him in bringing those great plagues upon Egypt, which made Pharaoh
to fear him as God, etc.

Verse. 7. And Moses was fourscore years old, etc.] The age of Moses and Aaron
is here inserted, 1. for the further evidence of the truth of the story, and
the computation of the Chronology of those times; 2. to set forth Gods glory
the more by this intimation of the weakness of his instruments; 3. to show how
long God in his wise providence had suffered the Egyptians to oppress the
Israelites with such cruel bondage, even from before the birth of Moses till he
came to be fourscore years old; and 4. the more to commend the obedience of
Moses and Aaron, that did not because of their great years shrink from this
weighty employment which God had imposed upon them.

Verse. 10 And they did so as the Lord had commanded, etc.] that is, 1. They
again required Pharaoh in the name of the Lord to let the children of Israel go
out of his land; for this God had commanded Moses and Aaron, chap. 6. 11. and
it was a notable evidence of their faith and courage, that they durst again
desire this of that proud king notwithstanding they had so enraged him formerly
by the first deliverie of this their message, that in a fury he oppressed the
people more then he had done before; and 2. when Pharaoh hereupon either by way
of derision, or out of a captious device to try what they could do, or because
he had heard of the miracles wrought, and the Israelites did will them to show
him some sign, if they would have him know that their God had sent them, Moses
thereupon spoke unto Aaron to cast his rod upon the ground, and said it should
become a serpent; which Aaron accordingly did. For though it be not here
expressed that Pharaoh asked a sign, yet may we justly conclude it from the
foregoing verse, where the charge given to Moses was, When Pharaoh shall speak
unto you, saying, Show a miracle for you; then thou shall say unto Aaron, Take
thy Rod, and cast it before Pharaoh, and it shall become a serpent; and then it
follows in this verse, And they did so, as the Lord had commanded, etc.

Verse. 12. They also did in like manner with their enchantments.] That is, they
caused their rods in outward show and appearance to become serpents. These, or
the chief of these, were Jannes and Jambres, whereof S. Paul speaks, 2. Tim. 3.
8.

But Aarons rod swallowed up their rods.] And thus the Lord discovered that the
power whereby Moses and Aaron had wrought their miracle, was infinitely fa^re
above that of Satan, whereby the Magicians had endeavored to equal the work
which Moses had done.

Verse. 13. And he hardened Pharaohs heart that he hearkened not to them.] Though
hardness of heart be a grievous sin, yet the hardening of the heart is not
always sin: and therefore is it here said of God, who cannot be the author of
sin, that he hardened Pharaohs heart, to wit, not by making his heart hard that
was soft before, nor by infusing any evil into him whereby his heart should be
hardened; but in a way of judgment and punishment for his former sins: 1. by
withdrawing and withholding that grace whereby he should be won to repent,
and yield unto the Lord, as the sun causes darkness by withdrawing his
light; 2. by delivering him up to the power of Satan, and leaving him to his
own corrupt lusts and affections; 3. by doing those things to him, which the
Lord knew well would prove occasions actuating and exciting the evil that was
in him, and cause him more and more to harden his heart against God.

Verse. 17. I will smite with the rod that is in mine hand upon the waters etc.
and they shall be turned into blood.] They had shed the blood of the Israelites
children, and drowned them in the river, and now God in his just judgment
makes the river to yield them nothing but blood.

Verse. 18. And the fish in the river shall die, and the river shall stink.]
This is added to show the greivousnesse of the plague: for first it deprived
them of that which was in Egypt their chief food, fish, as may easily be
discerned by comparing these places together, Number. 11. 5. We remember the fish
that we did eat in Egypt freely. Esai. 19. 8. where the Lord threatens this as
a great judgment to Egypt, The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that
cast angles into the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the
waters shall languish: and Exodus 8. 26. where it seems that the Egyptians did
abhor to eat of such cattle as the Israelites used to sacrifice, It is not
meet for us so to do, says Moses, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of
the Egyptians, etc. Secondly it deprived them of drink: for they used to drink
the waters of Nilus in Egypt, Jer. 2. 18. What have thou to do in the way of
Egypt, to drink the waters of Sihor, etc? there being very seldom any rain in
that country. Deuteronomy. 11. 10, 11. The land whither thou go in to possess it,
is not as the land of Egypt, from whence ye came out, where thou sowedst thy
seed, and wateredst it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs: But the land
whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinks
water of the rain from heaven.

And the Egyptians shall loath to drink of the water of the river.] The
Israelites were therefore free from this plague also, as from others after,
Exodus 8. 22. And I will sever in that day the land of Goshen, in which my
people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, etc.

Verse. 22. And the Magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments.] But
whence had they waters, since already they were all turned into blood? surely
either from the land of Goshen, where it was likely the waters were not turned;
or rather from the pits which the Egyptians dug, ver. 24. And all the
Egyptians dug round about the river for water to drink: for it is unlikely
they stayed for the doing of this till water could be fetched from the land of
Goshen.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 3. ANd the river shall bring forth frogs abundantly, which shall go up
into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, etc.] By expressing these
persons that should be plagued with these frogs, the exempting of Israel seems
to be employed, as after it is plainly expressed, ver. 22. And I will sever in
that day the land of Goshen in which my people dwell, etc.

Verse. 4. And the frogs shall come up both on thee, etc.] The despicablenesse
of the creature wherewith they were annoyed did no doubt aggravate the plague.

Verse. 8. Entreat the Lord that he may take away the frogs from me, and from my
people.] Though the turning of their water into blood all the land over was
doubtless a very grievous plague, yet this of the frogs was more grievous then
that: against the first they found some help, though not without great trouble,
by digging for fresh water round about the river, chap. 7. 24. and perhaps
Pharaoh and the richer sort of his people had other sorts of drink in store for
their own use; but now against this plague of the frogs, they could find no way
to help or ease themselves, no not the greatest of them all* and therefore this
forced Pharaoh to stoop a little, and to desire Moses and Aaron to pray unto
the Lord that he would take away their frogs from them.

Verse. 9. And Moses said unto Pharaoh, Glory over me.] The most conceive this
to be spoken of the honor which should be done unto Pharaoh, that he should
prescribe the time himself when the frogs should be taken away. But I rather
think that it is such a kind of yielding to his desire, wherein Moses does also
imply his fear concerning the event, that Pharaoh would brag and boast when he
had got the frogs removed, and not keep promise with him in letting Israel go.

When shall I entreat for thee, etc.] That is, that you may know that it is the
mighty work of God, and that it is not by chance or by any natural means that
the frogs are destroyed, prescribe the time your self when they shall be
destroyed, and at that very time it shall be done.

Verse. 10. And he said, To morrow.] He was so loath to be beholding to God, or
Moses, that he rather chooses to endure the plague till next day, that he might
make trial whether they might not go away of themselves, hoping that they came
by some natural cause, and so would again go away.

Verse. 14. And they gathered them together upon heaps.] God could have driven
them into the river again, or have caused them to vanish away; but thus it
pleased him to let them remain as a spectacle, unto the Egyptians, both to show
that it was a true miracle, and by their ill favor to put them in mind of
their sin, that made them stink before God.

Verse. 16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Say unto Aaron, etc.] Because Pharaoh
had mocked God, promising and then not performing, the Lord, to manifest his
indignation, commands his servant to strike now without giving him warning
beforehand (as at other times) what he meant to do. Stretch out thy rod, says
he, and smite the dust of the land, that it may become lice, etc. and thus
again too he trampleth on the pride of the Egyptians, punishing them by such
base and contemptible creatures.

Verse. 17. All the dust of the land became lice, etc.] That is, the dust in
every part of the land* for it is an hyperbolicall speech.

Verse. 18. And the Magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth
lice, and they could not.] The Lord disables them in making this smallest and
basest creature, for their greater confusion; and so the folly of these their
Wisemen was made manifest to all men, 2. Tim. 3. 9.

Verse. 20. *Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh; lo, he
comes forth to the water, etc.] It seems to have been usual with Pharaoh in
the morning to go forth unto the waters, either for his health and pleasure, or
rather of a superstitious mind, as attributing divine honor to the river
Nilus. There therefore Moses is appointed to meet him; both because he had no
access into Pharaohs presence in his palace, and also that withal his
threatening him with the ensuing plague might be the more public.

Verse. 21. Behold I will send swarms of flies upon thee, etc.] That is, mixed
swarms of wasps, hornets, and all kind of flies Psalm. 78. 45. He sent diverse
sorts of flies amongst them.

The houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the
ground whereon they are.] That is, the ground whereon the Egyptians are: the
meaning is, that they should be on all the land whereon the Egyptians dwelt,
but not in Goshen where the Israelites dwelt, as in the following verse is
expressed: and this exemption of Israel is here first mentioned, to put Pharaoh
in mind of it, as a most remarkable thing, which if he would well think on must
needs work upon his conscience.

Verse. 24. And the Lord did so; and there came a grievous swarm of flies, etc.]
Here is no mention of Aarons rod, and happily there was no use made of it, that
Pharaoh might see the work was Gods and not man's.

Verse. 25. Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.] That is, in the land of
Egypt: being terrified with this fourth plague of the swarms of flies, that
were sent amongst them, Pharaoh yields at first thus far, that they should go
and sacrifice unto the Lord, so that they went not out of Egypt. And hereby it
is evident that during the time of their bondage in Egypt the Israelites were
not suffered openly to offer sacrifice to the Lord, but what they did this way
they did in private secretly; as indeed it is not likely that all the time of
their being in Egypt they did wholly neglect this duty of Gods worship and
service.

Verse. 26. For we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord
our God, etc.] That is, that which the Egyptians abhor to have sacrificed:
the beasts which they worshipped, they could not endure to kill, or see them
killed for sacrifice; and these were such as the Israelites were to offer up in
sacrifice, namely bullocks (and the Egyptians worshipped a certain pyed bull or
calf, called Apis) and also sheep and rams, as we may see, Genesis 46. 34. For
every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. THen the Lord said unto Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh.] This phrase that
is here used, go in unto Pharaoh, makes it most probable that when Moses was
sent to denounce this following plague, he was not appointed to meet him at the
river as formerly, but to go into his palace to him.

Verse. 2. If thou refuse to let them go, and wilt hold them still.] This word
still is to put Pharaoh in mind ofhis intolerable impudency if he should still
refuse, God having so many ways testified his displeasure against him.

Verse. 3. Behold the hand of the Lord, etc.] Here is no mention neither of
Moses rod. See chap. 8. verse. 24.

There shall be a very grievous murrain.] Or Pestilence: for so is the word,
here used in the original, translated, chap. 5. verse. 3. Lest he fall upon us
with pestilence.

Verse. 6. And all the cattle of Egypt died.] That is, the greatest part of all
sorts: for that all died not, is evident verse. 19. where before the inflicting
of another plague, it is said, Send therefore now and gather thy cattle, etc.

Verse. 7. And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, etc.] Here is no mention made
of Pharaohs desiring Moses prayers: Now therefore it seems he did not so far
yield as formerly, and we may well conceive that the reasons were these, 1.
Because the cattle died presently that were slain by this plague, and so the
plague could not be removed by his prayers; and 2. Because his envious heart
swelled more then ever against the Israelites, and thereupon it is likely he
resolved to make up the loss they had sustained in their cattle, by taking
away the cattle of the Israelites from them, and therefore he resolved that he
would not let them go.

Verse. 8. Take to you handfulls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle
it, etc.] And so Aaron also, though Moses as the chief be here only mentioned:
for why else were they both appointed to take handfulls of ashes of the
furnace: As for this sprinkling of ashes toward the heaven, it was but only
an outward sign to let Pharaoh know that the ensuing plague came from the God
of heaven: and the sign was the fitter, because as they oppressed the
Israelites with furnace-work in burning brick, so they are now punished with
burning sores which came of ashes taken out of the furnace.

Verse. 9. And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt.] That is,
upon the casting up of these handfulls of ashes into the air, there shall be a
small dust, that shall fall both upon man and beast throughout all the land of
Egypt. It is not necessary, I conceive, to hold that those very handfulls of
ashes were turned into such a cloud of dust, but only that they should be a
sign of that which should follow, to wit, that immediately there should be
small dust showred down both upon man and beast: yet others do hold that those
very handfulls of ashes, which Moses and Aaron threw up into the air, did
miraculously by the mighty power of God become a cloud of s^all dust
overspreading the whole land of Egypt, and so fell down both upon man and beast.

And there shall be a boil breaking forth with blains.] That is, this dust
where it falls shall cause a boil breaking out* that is, not yet ripe (for then
are such boyls most painful) yea a boil breaking forth with blains; The word
in the original signifies scalding blains, or boiling blisters, and the hot
ashes out of the furnace were intended as a sign that such they should be. The
word is not used but in this place: it was an extraordinary and incurable boil:
for so it is called, Deuteronomy. 28. 27. The boil of Egypt whereof thou can^t not be
healed.

Verse. 11. And the Magicians could not stand before Moses, because of the
boyls, etc.] Because the Magicians could not by their enchantments bring forth
lice, and were thereupon forced to acknowledge concerning that plague that it
was the finger of God, chap. 8. 19. it is most probable that they did no more
after that attempt to do the like to that which Moses had done; and therefore
in the fourth and fifth plagues there has been no mention at all made of them.
But yet on the other side because here in this sixth plague it is plainly
employed that the Magicians were standing before Moses, it seems most probable,
that even after they were so far convinced by the failing of their Art in
bringing forth lice, they still continued to embolden Pharaoh not to be moved
with those things which were done, and were still ready at hand to resist Moses
and Aaron as far as they could: and therefore now by the shame and pain of
these boyls that rose upon them they were driven away, and forced to give over
their fighting against God.

Verse. 14. For I will at this time send all my plagues, etc.] This word
includes all the following plagues: for the Lord would have him know that
though his hand had been already heavy upon him, yet there were many far
worse plagues still behind, plagues that should sting him to the heart, which
now he would pour forth thick and threefold upon him.

Verse. 15. That I may smite thy people with pestilence, and thou shall be cut
off from the earth.] This must needs be meant of the killing of the firstborn,
chap. 12. as likewise that which follows, thou shall be cut off, etc. must
needs be meant of his perishing in the red sea.

Verse. 18. I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been
in Egypt since the foundation thereof.] That is, since it became a land
inhabited: for so this is explained verse. 24, there wa^ hail, etc. such as
there was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a Nation. And
hereby also it is manifest, that there was sometimes rain and hail too in
Egypt, though very rarely, and not so ordinarily as in other lands.

Verse. 19. Send therefore now and gather thy cattle, etc.] This he says,
chiefly to set forth the terror of this plague: if you provide not, says
Moses, all will be lost; and withal it aggravates the sin of the Egyptians,
that having had experience of Gods displeasure yet would not be forewarned,
that would not be won by judgments nor mercy.

Verse. 23. The Lord sent thunder and hail, and the fire ran along upon the
ground, etc.] The description here given us of this strom of hail is to show
that i^ came not by the ordinary course of nature, but was a supernatural and
extraordinary work of God, as appeared, 1. in that it fell upon all the land of
Egypt, verse. 25. whereas storms of hail seldom extend so far; 2. that it
came at the very hour almost prefixed beforehand by Moses, verse. 18; 3. that
only in the land of Goshen, where the Israelites dwelt, there was no hail,
verse. 26. 4. that the hail that fell was of such a bigness, and that in Egypt
where there seldom was any hail at all, that it did not only destroy their
corn and herbs, but also brake their trees and killed both man and beast that
were in the storm, verse. 25. and so also the Psalmist says, Psalm. 78. 47, 48.
He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sicamore trees with great
hailstones: He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts: and so again, Psalm. 105. 32. 33. and 5. that notwithstanding
there was not lightning but fire mingled with the hail, even fire that ran
along upon the ground, yet were not the hailstones melted with the heat of the
fire, nor the flaming fire quenched with the hail.

Verse. 27. I have sinned this time.] That is, now I cannot but acknowledge my
sin: he intended not, doubtless, to intimate that he was formerly innocent,
and had been punished unjustly, though now indeed at this time he had sinned
against God; but his purpose was to make known that now he did plainly see, and
therefore did willingly at this time acknowledge it, that he had sinned against
God, and therefore that God was righteous, and he and his people wicked.

Verse. 29. As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands
unto the Lord.] This time was set by Moses, that as soon as he was gone, etc.
he would spread abroad his hands, to wit, in prayer, unto the Lord, either with
respect to that privacy of retiring by himself, which he intended when he
undertook to perform this duty; or else to testify his own confidence in God,
that was not afraid to go out into the open field, notwithstanding this
fearful storm of hail which God had sent upon the land.

Verse. 30. I know that ye will not yet fear the Lord God.] That is, though ye
have seen and felt so much of Gods power and wrath, and now seem to yield and
to beg for mercy; yet I am sure that as yet ye will not truly repent, and
fear the Lord. This Moses might well say he knew, because of their carriage of
themselves at present, in that they sought not after the way of worship of the
true God, but only cried out to have the plague stayed: But besides, God had
told Moses that Pharaoh should harden his heart, until he were destroyed; and
this he tells Pharaoh before he prayed for him, that so Pharaoh might not
boast, when the plague was gone, that he had deceived Moses; and to let him
know that he saw cause sufficient why he should at this time make trial of him
yet once more by praying that this plague might be removed as he desired,
though he knew beforehand that he would be never a whit the better for it.

Verse. 31. And the flax and the barley were smitten.] It seems that in Egypt
they sowed their barley at the same time with their wheat (which we do not) and
there the barley would be by far the forwardest.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 5. ANd they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which
remains unto you from the hail, etc.] Hereby it appears that it was some
good time after the plague of hail ere these locusts were sent, to wit, when
the wheat and the rye might be destroyed, which when the hail fell were not yet
grown up, chap. 9. 32. and the like we must hold concerning the other plagues.

Verse. 6. Which neither thy fathers nor thy fathers fathers have seen, etc.]
The meaning of this is not that they had never before seen locusts in Egypt
(for all Histories witness that Egypt is often troubled with locusts) but that
they had never seen such multitudes of them, nor any that did so much mischief
as these should do.

Verse. 7. How long shall this man be a snare unto us?] This word, Snare,
usually signifies the means of destruction. See chap. 23. 33. They shall not
dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me: for if thou serve
their gods, it will surely be a snare unto thee. Josh. 23. 13. They shall be
snares and traps unto you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes,
until you perish, etc. and so the word is taken here.

Verse. 10. Let the Lord be so with you, as I will let you go, etc.] This is
spoken scoffingly, expressing his firm resolution that they should not all go,
as they desired, and that by way of scorn and derision, Let the Lord be so with
you, as I will let you go: as if he should have said, May your great God you
boast of be with you, and prosper you, if I consent to this which you desire of
me; you have a high opinion of your mighty God, and what great things he will
do for you; if I let you go upon those terms that you propound, let it be
thought that your God was with you, and that he delivered you.

Look to it, for evil is before you.] That is, ready to fall upon you. Some
expound this to have been spoken by way of reproof, as understanding by evil,
the evil purpose of the Israelites; evil is before you, that is, though you
pretend only a desire to go a little way to offer sacrifice, yet you have a
wicked fraudulent intention her^in, even to carry away this whole people from
being under my government: but doubtless it is rather spoken by way of
threatening, and by evil is meant the evil he would do to them, if they would
not accept the favor now proffered them, but persevere to require of him: Look
to it, (says he) for evil is before you; if you trouble me further I shall
make you smart for it.

Verse. 13. The east wind brought the locusts.] Or grasshoppers, and with them
caterpillars, Psalm. 78. 46. He gave also their increase unto the caterpillar,
and labor to the locust: Psalm. 105. 34, 35. He spoke, and the locusts came,
and caterpillars, and that without number, and did eat up all the herbs in
their land, and devoured the fruit of their ground.

Verse. 16. I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you.] To wit,
against Moses and Aaron, by using them so scornfully and reprochfully, by
threatening them for the faithful discharge of their duty, and driving them
away out of his presence, as in the 10. and 11. verses; or else the Israelites
in general, by the cruel bondage under which he had held them, and by refusing
to dismiss them, and to grant them that liberty of going forth to serve the
Lord, which by Moses and Aaron they had so often desired of him.

Verse. 17. Now therefore I pray thee forgive me my sin only this once.] That
is, pardon the wrong I have done you, and procure that the Lord may not further
be offended with me; and if this be done this once, I require no more; for if I
fail you any more, and not do what I promise, I desire not that you should ever
any more afford me the least favor. Yet withal we must know, that the main
thing which Pharaoh intended in desiring that his sin might be forgiven, was
that the plague might be taken away, which now lay upon them: for he was far
from a sincere desire of reconciliation with ^od*

Verse. 17. Entreat the Lord your God that he may take away from me this death
only.] That is, this deadly plague or destruction. And so he calls this plague
of the locusts, not only because it killed and destroyed all the fruit of the
ground, but also especially because by this means it deprived them of that
which was to be food both for man and beast; it was likely if it continued to
bring a grievous famine, and so death and mortality amongst them. As for that
opinion of some Expositours, that these locusts with their biting killed even
men themselves, it is altogether uncertain, and cannot be concluded from these
words. Yet probable it is, that there were sometimes in those countries some
kind of locusts that killed men with their biting, and that therefore Rev. 9.
5. it is said of those cruel enemies of the Church, that are compared to
locusts ascending out of the bottomless pit, that, their torment was as the
torment of a scorpion when he strikes a man.

Verse. 21. Even darkness which may be felt.] The darkness threatened is here
called darkness that may be felt, either by way of an hyperbole to signify
what an exceeding great darkness it should be, or else because the air should
be so thickened with gross mists and vapors, that it might be felt; which in
such an extraordinary horrid darkness as that was might indeed well be.

Verse. 23. They saw not one another, neither rose any from his place for three
days.] They saw not one another, because neither it seems had they any light
by sun moon or stars from above, nor yet from fire or candle beneath, the
thick clouds wherewith the air was darkened being such, that either they did
put out the fire; or at least wholly hide and cover it from the sight of men.
And being thus deprived of all light whatsoever, and that by a divine hand of
judgment, no marvel though with the terror thereof, they durst not so much
as move from the places where they were, as is here expressed. How easily the
Israelites, that had light in their dwellings, might have gone away with all
that they had, whilst the Egyptians lay thus for three days together
imprisoned in darkness, we may easily conceive; but they had learnt to depend
and wait upon God, and would not stir but by his appointment.

Verse. 24. And Pharaoh called unto Moses, and said, etc.] Pharaohs sending for
Moses, and charging him not to see his face any more, ver. 28. argue plainly
that this was done after the three days darkness was over. But is it likely
that when the plague was removed he would relent? To which I answer, And is it
likely that lying bound in the chains of darkness he would not have yielded to
let the cattle go, or at least have desired the help of Moses prayers as at
other times?

Only let your flocks, and your herds be stayed.] And this he desired chiefly
that they might be as pledges of their return again.

Verse. 28. I will see thy face again no more.] That therefore which follows in
the next chapter, concerning the death of their firstborn, was spoken
immediately by Moses at this time before he went from Pharaoh, and therefore it
is said, chap. 11. 8. that he went out in a great anger.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord said unto Mo^es yet ^ill^ I bring on^ plag^e more upon
Pharaoh.] That is, the Lord had said unto Moses, yet will I bring etc. for this
message Moses r^ceived from the Lord immediately, before Pharaoh sent last for
him chap 10. 24. when he charged him not to see his face any more; and it is
here added as the g^ound of Moses confidence in answering so readily as we have
it in the last verse of the former chapter, that he would come to him no more;
the reason was, because God had before that last coming to Pharaoh told him
this which is here recorded. It is true, God had told Moses at first somewhat
of the Israelites borrowing of the Egyptians jewels of silver and gold, Exodus
3. 21, 22. And it shall come to pass^ that when y^ go, ye shall not go empty,
but every woman shall borrow of her n^ighbour, and of her that so^ou^neth in
her house jewels of si^ver, and jewels of gold, etc. as also of this plague of
slaying their firstborn, Exodus 4. 23. Let my sonn^ go that he may serve me;
and if thou refuse to let him go, behold I will slay thy son, even ^hy
firstborn. But this message which is here related, he received from the Lord
immediately before that his last going to Pharaoh, whereof mention is made in
the 24. verse of the former chapter: and therefore he says, Yet will I bring
one plague more upon Pharaoh, etc.

Verse. 3. The man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of
Pharaohs servants, etc.] Implying tha^the reverend esteem the Egyptians had of
Moses was a furtherance to the enclining of their hearts thus to lend their
jewels to the Hebrews.

Verse. 4. And Moses said, Thus says the Lord, etc.] That is, immediately after
he had told him that he would see his face no more, chap. 10. ver. 29.

Verse. 5. Even unto the firstborn of the maidservant that is behind the
mill.] That is, grinding at the mill: se^ chap. 12. 29. Now those that did thus
work at the mill were said to be behind it, because they used to thrust the
mill before them as they wrought.

Verse. 7. But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his
tongue.] Which yet are wont to bark in the night at the least noise: The speech
is proverbiall, and signifies that they should not have the leas^ disturbance
among them, but should all quie^ly take their rest in their beds. This is
spoken as it were in opposition that which Mos^s had immediately* before said
concerning the Egyptians; when as there should be a great cry amongst them
because of the death of their firstborn, amongst the Israelites all should be
still and quiet, not so much as a dog should amongst them move his tongue*
either against man or beast.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and A^ron in the land of Egypt, etc.]
It is not precisely expressed when the Lord spoke this which here follows to
Moses and Aaron concerning the institution of the Passover; yet most probably
it may be gathered that it was before the three days darkness, wherewith the
Lord punished the Egyptians: for the Passover was kept on the foureteenth day,
the day after the firstborn of the Egyptians were slain; and it seems it was
but the day before the thirteenth day, when Moses being sent for to Pharaoh,
immediately after that darkness was over, and finding he would not dismiss
the Israelites, denounced that last plague, the death of the firstborn, and
that it should befall them the night following, chap. 11. 4, 5. Thus says the
Lord, About midnight will I go out into the midst of Egypt, and all the
firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die. Now these directions concerning the
Passover were given before the tenth day of this seventh month; for upon the
tenth day they were enjoined (as we see her ver. 3.) to set apart the lamb
which was to be eaten at the Passover.

Verse. 2. This month shall be unto you the beginning of months.] That is, the
month Abib. See chap. 13. 4. This day came ye out in the month Abib, which in
the Chaldee tongue was also called Nisan and contained for the most part some
of our March, and some of our April; whereas formerly they began their year
with the month Ethanim, or after the Chaldees Tisri, which agrees with our
September, as is evident Exodus 23. 16. where we may see that one year ended,
and another began at the feast of in gathering, which was after all their
harvest. Now in remembrance of this their miraculous deliverance they were
appointed to begin it with this month, which was formerly the seventh in
number. And yet this account was af^erward kept only in Ecclesiastical
affairs: for the Jubilees and such other civil affairs, it began as it had done
before, Lev. 25. 8, 9, 10.

Verse. 3. In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a
lamb, etc.] To wit, the very day whereon afterward the Israelites enter d the
land of Canaan, Josh. 4. 19. The people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day
of the first month. Now a lamb, or a kid (for that is added ver. 5. Ye shall
take it out from the sheep, or from the goats) was appointed to be set apart on
this day for the Passover; and that no doubt as a significant type and figure
of Christ, who is therefore called our Passover sacrificed for us, 1. Cor. 5.
7. and by the Baptist, John 1. 29. the lamb of God which takes away the
sins of ^he world. For as these lambs were taken away from the rest of the
flock, so was Christ taken from among men, Hebr. 5. 1. and was indeed a man as
other men are, and sent into the world by his blood to save us from death: and
the lamb being of all creatures the most harmless, meek, and profitable, it
was the fitter to be a shadow of him in whom the truth of these things was
transcendently eminent.

Verse. 6. And ye shall keep it up until the foureteenth day of the same
month.] There is no mention made of this separating the Paschall lamb from
the flock four days before the feast, in other places where the Passover is
commanded. At this time it was thus ordered, both that it might be in a
readiness, and not be to seek when they were encumbred with business about
their going away; especially that in this, as in other things, it might be a
type of Christ, who was holy, harmless* undefiled, and separate from sinners;
and that there was such a degree of perfection required in him who was to be
offered up as a sacrifice of propitiation for us, as was no where amongst men
to be found.

And the whole assembly of the congregation of Isra^l shall kill it in the
evening.] In the Hebrew it is between the two evenings. The meaning of this may
thus be understood: The natural day from sun to sun the Jews used to
divide into four parts, the first was from sunnerising to nine in the
forenoon; the second contained the three following hours, from nine to twelve,
and was called the sixth ho^re; the third contained the three next, from twelve
to three in the afternoon, and was called the ninth hour; the fourth reached
from thence unto sunsetting: so that between three a clock in the afternoon
(which was the first evening) and sunsetting (which is here reckoned the other
evening) was the time appointed for the killing of the Passover, at which time
also Christ the true Paschall lamb dyed for us, as is evident Matthew. 27. 46.
50. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, Eli, Eli, etc.
verse. 50. Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the
Ghost. And so, Once in the end of the world appeared to put away sin by the
sacrifice of himsef, Heb. 9. 27.

Verse. 7. And they shall take of the blood, and strike it on the two sideposts,
etc.] In the 13. verse the reason is expressed why the Lord enjoined the
Israelites thus to strike the blood of the Paschall lamb, on the two
sideposts, and on the upper dorepost of the houses wherein they did eat it, The
blood (says the Lord) shall be to you for a token upon the houses where you
are, and when I see the blood I will pass over you, and the plague shall not
be upon you to destroy you. And hence we may probably gather, that this also
was ordained only for this Passover in Egypt, when the destroying angel was
to pass over the Israelites houses that had their doors sprinkled with the
blood of the lamb, and not for future times; 2. That hereby also was signified
the applying of Christ's blood by faith, to the hearts of believers, which is
called the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1. Pet. 12. 3. That where
two smaller households joined together for the eating of the Paschall lamb,
either they all continued together that following night in the house wherein
they eat, or else that the doors of both their houses had the blo^d of the
lamb sprinkled upon them.

Verse. 8. And they shall eat the flesh in that night; roast with fire, and
unleavened bread, and with bitter herbs, etc.] This rosting of the lamb was
chiefly enjoined, with respect unto the great haste and speed they were to
make, because, it might be sooner made ready by rosting then by seething; and
withal it signified the bitterness of Christ's passion. So likewise the
unleavened bread did betoken haste also, for unleavened cakes are sooner made.
But withal it signified, if they will be Gods peculiar people they must be
purged from all those old superstitions and corruptions wherein they live that
have not this interest in God* 1. Cor. 5. 8. Therefore let us keep the Feast,
not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness; but
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. And as for the bitter herbs
that were eaten with it, they were a memorial of their bitter bondage in
Egypt, and withal a type of our mortification, and read^nesse to undergo
afflictions with Christ.

Verse. 9. Eat not of it raw, nor sodden at all with water, but roast with fire,
his head with his legs, etc.] Meaning that the lamb must be roasted all and
whole: not so much but the inward parts (after they had been taken out and
washed) must be put in again and roasted with the rest: whereby may well be
signified our communion with Christ whole and undivided, 1. Cor. 1. 13. Is
Christ divided? etc. Gal. 2. 20. I am crucified with Christ: Nevertheless I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the son of God, etc.

Verse. 10. And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning, etc.]
Because he would not have them employed to any other use then what he had
appointed. And besides it might signify that when the morning of the Gospel
came, there should be no more use of those Legal shadows.

Verse. 11. And thus shall ye eat it; with your loins girded, your shoes on your
feet, etc.] These ceremonies were also peculiar to that Passover in Egypt, and
therefore not observed by Christ. They were principally intended as an
expression of their faith concerning their sudden going out of Egypt, which God
had promis^d.

Verse. 12. And against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment, etc.] It
may well be meant, of Gods confounding their Idole-Gods by punishing the people
that worshipped them, and delivering the Israelites whom they had kept in
bondage: for hereby God discovered the vanity of those Idols, and as it were
laid their honor in the dust. But because, Numb. 33. 4. Moses speaks of this
executing judgments upon their gods, as a several act from that of killing
their firstborn, I rather conceive, that hereby is meant either the killing of
the firstborn of those beasts which they worshipped as gods; or else, that
some such notable accident befell the Egyptian Idols as did the Philistines
Dagon before the Ark.

Verse. 14. And this day shall be unto you for a memorial, etc.] Here begins
the direction for the observation of the Passover in succeeding generations.

You shall keepit a feast by an ordinance for ever.] That is, until the coming
of Christ who is our Passover for ever; since whose passion there is a like
sacrament used also in the Church of the new Testament, in remembrance of his
death until he come.

Verse. 15. Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread, etc.] This number of
days was appointed, both because seven (being a full and perfect number)
figured the whole time of their life, wherein they were still to remember with
thankfulness this deliverance; and also because the destruction of the
Egyptians in the red sea followed seven days after the Israelites went out of
Egypt. Now the first of these seven days was the fifteenth day of this month,
and began at the evening, immediately after the eating of the Passover, which
they did at the very latter end of the fourteenth day.

Whosoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day,
that soul shall be cut off from Israel.] This phrase in this place signifies
not only the cutting of them off from the communion and society of the Saints
both in this life and in the next; as in Genesis 17. 14. The uncircumcised
manchild, whose flesh of his foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be
cut off from his people; but also the cutting of them off by death, as in the
like case, Exodus 31. 14. Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore, etc. every one
that defiles it shall surely be put to death: for whosoever does any work
therein, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

Verse. 16. No manner of work shall be done in them, save that which every man
must eat, that only may be done of you.] And yet this might not be done on the
Sabbath, as is clear Exodus 16. 5. 23. 29. On the sixth day they shall prepare
that which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
To morrow is the rest of the holy Sabbath* bake that which you will bake to
day, etc. and Exodus 35. 23. Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations
upon the Sabbath day.

Verse. 22. And none of you shall go out at the door of his house until the
morning.] This also was only for the Passover in Egypt (for Christ with his
disciples went out that night. Matthew. 26. 30. And when they had sung an hymn,
they went out into the mount of Olives) and it was commanded, by this sign to
teach thee that it was the blood of Christ, the true Paschal lamb, whereby
they must be defended from the destroying angel.

Verse. 24. And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance for thee and for
thy sons for ever.] That is, the commandment of the Passover, and the feast
of unleavened bread (but not those ceremonies, verse. 7, 11, 12. which were
appointed for this Passover in Egypt only) you and your children shall
observe them for ever, to wit, during the time of the Sanctuary and the Legal
service: for thus this word for ever is often used in the Scripture* with
respect to the thing spoken of, as Psalm. 89. 1. I will sing the mercies of God
for ever, that is, as long as I live.

Verse. 25. When ye be come to the land which the Lord will give you, etc. ye
shall keep this service.] The command for keeping the Passover was therefore
chiefly intended for the land of Canaan, howbeit they kept it once in the
wilderness, Numb. 9.

Verse. 29. Unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon, etc.]
Where they ground at the mill, Exodus 11. 5. Even unto the firstborn of the
maid servant that is behind the mill.

Verse. 30. And there was a great cry in Egypt: for there was not a house where
there was not one dead.] Either therefore the eldest and chief of the family
was slain in those houses where there were no children; or else the words must
be taken figuratively, there was not a house where there was not one dead, that
is, there was not a house that had a firstborn where there was not one dead;
or there was scarce any house without one dead in it generally, the firstborn
were slain in every house, as elsewhere the Scripture uses the like
expression; Jer. 5. 1. Run ye to and fr^ through the s^reets of Jerusalem,
and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a
man, if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I
will pardon it. John 12. 19. Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing? behold* the
world is gone after him.

Verse. 31. And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, etc.] That is, Pharaoh
sent messengers to Moses and Aaron, to call them up, and bid them presently to
go away with the Israelites as they had desired. For that Moses and Aaron went
not now to Pharaoh, may be probably gathered from that which Moses had said to
Pharaoh a while before, chap. 10. 29. Thou have spoken well, I will see thy
fac^ again no more. Yea indeed so violent were the people in hastening them
away, that it is not likely they would allow the delay of their going to
Pharaoh.

Verse. 33. And the Egyptians were urgent with the people, etc.] With humble and
earnest entreaties, Exodus 11. 8. And all these thy servants shall come down
unto me, and bow down themselves unto me, saying, Get thee out, etc.

Verse. 35. And they borrowed of the Egyptians jewels of silver, etc.] To wit,
at that time when they were going away. I know that many Expositours hold tha^
this was done before, betwixt the plague of the three days darkness and this
last of the death of their firstborn. But I see no reason why we should not
think it was done in the order as here it is related, especially considering
that when the Egyptians were now in such distraction of sorrow, and thereupon
so importunate with the Israelites to go, they were most likely to lend them
whatever they would desire to borrow, that they might hasten them to be gone.

Verse. 36. And they spoiled the Egyptians.] To wit, by carrying away their
jewels and other ornaments which they had borrowed of them. It is evident
(according to our translation) that the Israelites, alleging that they we^e to
keep a solemn feast unto the Lord in the wilderness, desired of their
neighbors the Egyptians their jewels of silver and gold for their use at that
time, and that the Egyptians lent them those things, as not knowing nor
believing any other but that they intended only a three days journey into the
wilderness, there to sacrifice unto the Lord; yet withal as evident it is
that they never intended to restore them again, but to carry them quite away,
and that not only by Gods permission but by his expr^sse command; for he had
enjoined them by Moses to do so, chap. 11. 2. and had told them that by this
means they should spoil the Egyptians, chap. 3. 22. So that the most that can
be conceived in the behalf of the Israelltes herein* is this; that they did not
say they would bring these things again, but only desired them of the
Egyptians for their use in keeping a feast unto the Lord concealing and
dissembling what farther they intended, to wit, to carry them quite away with
them. Now in all thi^, notwithstanding we cannot charge the Israelites with
sin, because they therein obeyed the commandment of God, whose word to obey
can never be ^^il: And much less can we charge God with unrighteousness, God
forbid: His will is the supreme rule of all righteousness* and needs it must
be good and just which he commands. Besides all that is in the world is Gods;
and is it not lawful for him to do what he will with his own? Matthew. 20. 15.
The riches of the Egyptians were more Gods then theirs: and most just it was
with God by this means to recompense the Israelites for the hard service and
injuries they had suffered in Egypt, and as it were to pay them their wages,
which the Egyptians had most unjustly detained from them.

Verse. 37. The children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth.] Which
signifies boothes; so called, because there the Israelites made them boothes
of the boughs of trees, in remembrance whereof was the feast of tabernacles,
Levit. 23.

About six hundred thousand foot, that were men, besides children.] This shows
the virtue of that promise, Genesis 46. 3. I am God, the God of thy father; fear
not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.

Verse. 38. And a mixed multitude went up also with them, etc.] That is,
strangers, men of several Nations, both such as were servants to the
Israelites, and others sojourning there, who were moved by Gods mighty works to
go out of Egypt with them; and that doubtless the rather, because Egypt must
now needs be in a sad estate, by so many grievous plagues, as God had brought
upon them.

Verse. 40. The sojourning of the children of Israel, who dwelt in Egypt, was
four hundred and thirty years.] The speech is figurative: for the meaning is,
that from Abraham's calling out of Chaldea to sojourn in the land of Canaan,
unto this departure of the Israelites out of Egypt, was four hundred and
thirty years: as St Paul explains it, Gal. 3. 17. And this I say, that the
Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which was four
hundred and thirty years after cannot disanull, etc. See the notes upon Genesis
15. 13.

Verse. 46. Neither shall ye break a bone thereof.] This was enjoined the
Israelites, as most other of the ceremonies that were to be observed in eating
the Paschall lamb, that it might put them in mind in what haste they were at
their going out of Egypt, when they were first commanded to keep this
ordinance; and that because they that eat in haste do not use to stand breaking
of the bones that they may pick out the marrow from thence. But withal God
intended hereby the more manifestly to discover that the Paschall lamb was a
type of Christ our Passover, or Paschall lamb, as the Apostle calls him, 1.
Cor. 5. 7. in whom there should be an exact accomplishment of the truth of this
figure: for when the soldiers had broken the legs of the two thieves that
were crucified with Christ (which they used to do to them that were crucified
before they were yet dead, thereby to mak^ their sufferings the greater) coming
to Christ and finding that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: And
these things were done (says St John chap. 19. 36.) that the Scripture should
be fulfilled, A bone of him shall not be broken.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 2. Sanctify unto me all the firstborn, etc.] That is, make known unto
my people that they are to be put apart to holy uses for me and my service. Now
the firstborn were thus consecrated as a kind of first fruits, to signify
that all Gods people, which are a congregation of firstborn, being redeemed
from death by the blood of Christ, were bound to consecrate themselves to the
service of the Lord; Romans 12. 1. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the
mercies of God, that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service.

Whatsoever opens the womb among the children of Israel both of man and of
beast, it is mine.] To wit, by a peculiar right, because he preserved them in
Egypt when the Egyptians were killed: and therefore such might not be given
as a vovv of free will offering, Levit. 27. 26. Only the firstling of the
beast, which should be the Lords firstling, no man shall sanctify it, whether
it be ox or sheep.

Verse. 5. And it shall be, when the Lord shall bring thee into the land of the
Canaanites, etc.] He mentions the goodness of the land which he had promised,
h at it was a land flowing with milk and honey, as a spur to quicken them in
Gods service; and makes known that the celebrating of this solemnity should not
begin till they were entered the land of Canaan, the better to assure them, that
though there were now so many strong Nations dwelling in that country, yet
they should drive them out and possess their land.

Verse. 9. And it shall be for a sign unto thee upon thine hand, and for a
memorial between thine eyes, etc.] That is, this feast of unleavened bread
shall be as a continual means to call to your remembrance your deliverance out
of Egypt: as when men use to put a ring, or to tie a thread upon their fingers,
or to hang jewels upon their foreheads, hanging between their eyes (a custom
it seems in those times) to put them in mind of something which they are very
careful not to forget.

Verse. 13. And every firstling of an ass thou shall redeem with a lamb.] That
is, the firstling of all unclean beasts: for this one kind is put for the rest,
because there were great store of them in that country. See Numb. 8. 15. The
firstborn of man shall thou surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts
shall thou redeem.

And all the firstborn of man shall thou redeem.] When and at what price, see
Numb. 18. 16. And those that are to be redeemed, from a month old shall thou
redeem, according to thine estimation for the money of five shekels, after the
shekel of the sanctuary, which is twenty gerahs.

Verse. 17. Left peradventure the people repent when they see war, and they
return to Egypt.] The Philistines were enemies to the land of Egypt; and hence
we read that whilst the Israelites lived in Egypt, in the days of Ephraim
the son of Jacob, the men of Gath that were born in that land, slew some of the
sons of Ephraim because they came down to take away their cattle, 1. Chron.
7. 21. much more therefore was it likely, that now they would deny them passage
though their country. Now should they see war where the easiness and
shortness of the way they had gone might invite them to escape, and avoid that
trouble by a speedy return back again into Egypt, it is likely the fear of the
enemy would soon have made them turn their backs upon Canaan. To prevent this,
God leads them a way where the red sea, and troublesome wilderness, through
which they had passed, might beat them off from attempting to return, though
they should meet with enemies that should make war against them.

Verse. 18. And the children of Israel went up harnessed out of the land of
Egypt.] Some by this word harnessed, understand only that they went away girt
up and prepared for their journey, as travelers used to do* But others, and I
think more probably, understand it of their going up armed in a military order;
whereto agrees also that Translation of this word which is set in the margin of
our Bibles, that they went up five in a rank: for considering 1. that the same
word in the original is used both here and Josh. 1. 14. where it is translated
ye shall pass before your brethren armed; and 2. that immediately after they
were in the wilderness they fought with the Amalekites, I see not why we may
not think that they went up in a military manner armed: for though they were in
bondage to the Egyptians, yet being such a numerous people, living together in
the land of Goshen, it is not probable that they were left wholly unfurnished
of arms, wherewith they were to defend that part of the country. However the
drift doubtless of this place is to show that they went not away in a confused
manner, as men that fled, but that being all me^ together at Succoth (a place
which before they had appointed for their Rendevouz) they marched away from
thence in battel-array.

Verse. 19. And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him.] Though the removing of
the bones of Joseph as chief be here only mentioned, and that because of the
oath that was made to him concerning this, Genesis 50. 25. Joseph took an oath of
the children of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry
up my bones from hence; yet doubtless either the bones of the other Patriarchs
were now carried away with Joseph's; or else the Israelites had before when they
died carried their dead bodies out of Egypt, and buried them in Canaan, as they
did Jacobs. For of all the Patriarchs Stephen said. Act 7. 16. that they were
carried over into Sichem, and laid in the sepulcher that Abraham bought for a
sum of money of the sons of Emor the father of Sichem.

Verse. 21. And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, etc.]
That is, the Lord to show the Israelites which way they should go, caused a
cloud, the sign of his presence, to go before their camp, not only by day,
but also by night too, when they had any occasion to travel in the night; and
the fashion of it was always like that of a pillar, ascending round and
straight from the earth toward the being in all other respects by day like
other clouds, only by night it was re^d in appearance like fire, Numb. 9. 15.
called therefore here, a pillar of fire: and so it served not only to direct
them which way to go (for which way soever that went in the forefront of the
camp, the Israelites still followed it, and when they were to stay in any
place, then that removed backward into the midst of the Camp, and rested upon
the tabernacle, Numb. 9. 18.) but besides it served in the night to give them
light, and in the day to cover and shelter them from the extremity of the
suns heat. He spread a cloud for a covering (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 105.
39.) and fire to give light in the night: for though it ascended up a great
height in the air straight like a pillar, yet there it dispersed it self
abroad, it seems, at least when need was, like any other cloud, and so did
shadow them from the sun (as smoke uses to do) concerning the which the like
phrase is used, Judge. 20. 40. The flame began to arise with a pillar of smok^.
And therefore it is said, Numb. 14. 14. that this cloud stood over them. Now in
all these respects this figured Christ's guidance and protection of his Church
in their travels toward the heavenly Canaan; and hereto the Prophet seems to
allude, Esaias 4. 5, 6. The Lord will create upon every dwelling place in Mount
Sion, and upon her assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a
flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defense.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, etc.] That is, before their
removal from Succoth, though it be here set down after it: for there they
began to turn aside toward these straights. That we may know that Moses did
not ignorantly bring them into such a place of danger, where they had the sea
before them, the mountains on one hand, and the tower or city Migdol, a
garrison of the Egyptians, on the other, and so no place to pass out, but to
return upon the face of the enemy; I say, that we might not misjudge of this
action, Moses tells us that it was done by Gods special direction, and that to
these ends: 1. To avoid war with the Philistines; 2. To harden Pharaohs
heart, and to draw him forth upon a supposed advantage gotten; 3. To try the
faith of the Israelites.

Verse. 3. For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in
the land, etc.] That is, when Pharaoh shall begin to think, that by reason of
the difficulties of the wilderness you know not how to escape away, this shall
embolden him to pursue you to his own destruction.

Verse. 5. And it was told the King of Egypt that the people fled.] That is,
that they were making away as fast as they could, and went not only to
sacrifice unto the Lord. It is not meant of flying for fear (for it is
afterward said, ver. 8. that they went out with a high hand, that is, boldly
powerfully in good array of battle as in chap. 13. 18. The children of Israel
went up harnessed, etc.) but it is meant of their marching away with a purpose
to get out of his service.

Verse. 8. The children of Israel went out with a high hand.] Not like
fugitives, but like a free people rescued out of their bondage by the mighty
power of God (so to sin with a high hand, is to do it boldly and openly,
Numb. 15. 30.) and as men that now thought themselves secure and out of danger
of the Egyptians.

Verse. 10. And when Pharaoh drew nigh, the children of Israel lift up their
eyes, etc.] Implying that they were the more terrified because they never
feared this danger, till unexpectedly looking forth they saw the Egyptians
close at their heels.

And the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord.] That is, in the
suddenness of the danger they cried out for help, but without faith, as men
that knew not what they did.

Verse. 13. And Moses said unto the people, Fear ye not, stand still, etc.]
Implying that they should not need to stir in the business: if they would
only be quiet, and with a settled mind wait upon the Lord for help, he would
deliver them without their help.

Verse. 14. The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.] That
is, be still, not be put to any trouble in the least resistance of them: for
this phrase, of holding the peace, is often applied to actions, and then it
signifies being still, and not moving to do any thing, Psalm. 50. 3. Our God
shall come, and shall not keep silence. and Psalm. 83. 1. Keep not thou silence,
O God; hold not thy peace, and be not still. Esa. 42. 14. I have long time
holden my peace, I have been still, and refrained my self.

Verse. 15. And the Lord said unto Moses, Wherefore criest thou unto me?] This
may be meant of the time before Moses had so encouraged the people, as is
expressed in the former verses; and then it is here related as the ground of
that his confident promise, ver. 13. As for those words of God to Moses,
Wherefore criest thou unto me? they imply that he did call upon God, though it
were not before mentioned. Neither does God mislike or reprove him for this,
but only hastens him to do what was to be done, and to strike the sea with his
rod that it might be divided, and so give way to the Israelites to pass over.

Verse. 19. And the Angel of the Lord which went before the camp, etc.] That is,
Christ, called Jehovah, Exodus 13. 21. And the Lord went before them by day,
etc. and he is said to remove, only because the signs of his presence went to
another place.

Verse. 22. And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the
dry ground.] That is, they went into the channel of the red sea upon the
dry-ground, and so were in the midst of the sea, having the sea both on their
right hand and on their left. So far were the people now encouraged, that had
ere while with much bitterness murmured against Moses and Aaron, partly by the
removing of the cloud betwixt them and the Egyptians, partly by the miraculous
dividing of the sea upon Moses lifting up his hand over it, but chiefly by the
working of Gods Spirit in their hearts, that Moses leading the way, they were
not afraid to follow him, notwithstanding the terror of the waters standing up
on each side as they went; whence it is that the Apostle says, that by faith
they passed through the sea, Heb. 11. 29. and therefore it is also that the
Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 2. that they were all baptized unto Moses in the
cloud and in the sea; to wit, because the condition wherein they were, as they
were led by the ministry of Moses under the cloud and through the sea, was a
notable figure or representation of our Baptism, to wit, in that as they by
the cloud were covered from the heat of the sun, and were enlightened in the
way they should go; so those that are baptized by the water and the Spirit of
Christ, are covered from the burning wrath of God, and enlightened to the saving
knowledge of the way of life: and as they in the red sea passed as it were
through death to life, the red sea being the means of saving them, and of the
destruction of the Egyptians; so Christ by the waters of Baptism, as the
outward sign, does save us, our enemies, sin and death, being utterly
destroyed.

And the waters were a wall unto them, etc.] That is standing up as a heap.
Psalm. 78. 13. He made the waters to stand as an heap; and so as a wall of
defense to them, on their right hand and on their left.

Verse. 24. The Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar,
etc.] That is, whereas hitherto the Lord had suffered them to go on, and seemed
not to regard them* now he began to show himself in his displeasure against
them.

And troubled the host of the Egyptians.] That is, the Lord caused grievous
tempests and storms to fall upon them, thunder and lightnings, and hail and
rain: See Psalm. 77. 17, 18. The clouds poured out water, the skies sent out a
sound: thine arrows also went abroad. The voice of thy thunder was in the
heaven, the lightnings lightened the world, the earth trembled and shook. Hereby
he struck them with an apprehension of Gods wrath, overthrew their tents, put
them all into disorder, and made such a tumult in their host, that flying in
this disorder they run one against another, and were troubled in their flight.

Verse. 25. And took off their chariot-wheels, that they drove them heavily,
etc.] That is, the Lord by his rain and tempests had so softened the ground that
their wheels were clogged, and sunk into the ground, whereby some might be
broken and taken off; all drove heavily, and had much ado to get forward.

Verse. 30. And Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the seashore.] The
Israelites, being gotten over to the other side, saw, no doubt, how upon Moses
stretching forth his hand again over the read sea the waters, that stood before
up on heaps, came rolling in upon the Egyptians, who had followed the
Israelites close behind them, and so drowned them; and so it is said in the
following verse, that Israel saw that great work which the Lord did upon the
Egyptians. But afterward they saw also the dead bodies of the Egyptians upon
the shore; and if they waited not some time for this, it was doubtless an
extraordinary work of Gods power, since dead bodies that sink under water do
not usually flote upon the water, that so they may be driven upon the shore,
till they have been some few days under water. But happily indeed the
Israelites might wait so long by the sea side, expecting to furnish themselves
with the spoil both of the dead bodies and their carriages. Nor did the sight
of the Egyptians, being now but dead carcases, cross the truth of that which
Moses had said, ver. 13. The Egyptians whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see
them again no more for ever.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 2. THe Lord is my strength and song.] That is, the Lord it is that has
subdued and destroyed our enemies; being weak in our selves we are strong in
him, who has fought for us, and the Lord it is therefore of whom I mean to
sing, and whose praise I desire in my song to set forth: and this is the first
song which we meet with in the Scriptures.

He is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation.] Moses here by the spirit
of prophecy foresheweth that the people should build a peculiar tabernacle for
the Lords service.

Verse. 7. And in the greatness of thine excellency thou have overthrown them
that rose up against the^.] That is, by many glorious and miraculous works,
declaring the transcendent greatness of thine excellency, have thou overthrown
the Egyptians, who in rising up against thy people did rise up against thee.

Thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them as stubble.] That is, which
did suddenly and utterly consume them: for stubble is consumed when the fire
takes it, and is gone on a sudden; and whereas when wood is burnt there will be
coals left, when the stubble is burnt, it scarce leaves any ashes behind it.
Whence is that also of the Prophet, Isa. 47. 14. Behold, they shall be as
stubble, the fire shall burn them, there shall not be a coal to warm at, nor
fire to sit before it.

Verse. 8. And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were gathered
together.] In this phrase, the blast of thy nostrils, it may well be conceived
that Moses had respect both to the wind wherewith God divided the red sea,
chap. 14. 21. (for so he seems to explain himself in the 10. verse of this
chapter, Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them; as also to the
anger and wrath of God which caused him thus to divide the sea; for so usually
the wrath of God is expressed in Scripture, and that by a metaphorical speech
taken from men, who in their anger use to snuff and blow with their nostrils
thicker and stronger then at other times, as Job 4. 9. By the blast of God they
perish, and by the breath of his nostrils are they consumed; and so in many
other places. And though the dividing of the red sea was a work of mercy in
regard of the Israelites, yet was it an effect of his high displeasure against
the Egyptians. Yea therefore did the Lord lead the Israelites that way, that
the Egyptians following them might be taken as in a trap, and overwhelmed with
the waters.

Verse. 11. Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders?] That is, there is none either amongst the false Gods of the heathen,
or amongst their great ones, Gods upon the earth, that is in any degree worthy
to be compared to thee, O Lord, who art glorious in holiness, etc. where by
the holiness of God is meant that transcendent purity and singular perfection
in every regard which is in God alone, which is that indeed which makes God
incomprehensibly glorious, and fearful in praises; because we cannot think of
those praises which are due unto the Lord, but we must needs be stricken with
an awful fear of his Majesty: and he is said to do wonders, because he is of
infinite power to do whatsoever may seem most wonderful in the eye of man.

Verse. 12. Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.] The
Egyptians, that were drowned in the red sea, are here said to have been
swallowed up of the earth, not only, because they did at first sink down into
the earth, in the bottom of the sea, but also because being cast up by the
waves upon the shore, many of them at least were there no doubt thrown into
pits by the Israelites, and buried, to avoid the corruption of the air; and so
did all of them return to the earth from whence they were taken.

Verse. 13. Thou have guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation.]
That is, toward the land of Canaan: for by the Lords holy habitation, here is
doubtless meant that land of promise where God had long since promised to seat
his people, and there to dwell amongst them by the gracious signs of his
presence, not in the tabernacle only, but especially also in the temple, which
God chose to be his resting place, Psalm. 132. 14. and where the promised
Messiah did afterward dwell amongst them, and accomplish the work of man's
redemption: and though they were yet but newly gotten out of Egypt, yet Moses
says, Thou have guided them unto thy holy habitation, both because this was
the place whither the Lord was now leading them (for this purpose had he
brought them out of Egypt, that he might carry them to Canaan, and plant them
there) as also because it was most certain that God would at length carry them
thither: and usual it is with the prophets to express the certainty of that
which shall afterward be, by speaking of it as if it were done already.

Verse. 15. The mighty men of Moab trembling shall take hold of them.] See Numb.
22. 3. And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many; and Moab
was distressed because of the children of Israel.

Verse. 17. Thou shall bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine
inheritance, etc.] That is, in mount Sion, which the Lord had chosen to be the
place of his habitation, where his temple and sanctuary should be built,
wherein he would dwell amongst his people: yet figuratively under this one, the
most eminent part of the land, the whole country of Canaan is comprehended;
and it is called the Lords inheritance, because he had prepared it for the
habitation of his firstborn Israel.

Verse. 20. And M^riam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, etc.] Though Moses
and Aaron were brothers, and so Miriam was the sister of Moses as well as the
sister of Aaron; yet she is peculiarly called the sister of Aaron, because
through Moses absence, when he fled out of Egypt, her reference to Aaron was
best known.

Verse. 21. And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, etc.] When the men
had sung a verse or staff of the former song, then she with her women took her
course, and sung it over again; or at least she still repeated this one clause
here expressed, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the
horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea, which was happily the burden
of the song, as in Psalm. 136. For his mercy endures for ever.

Verse. 22. And went out into the wilderness^of Shur.] Called also the
wilderness of Etham, Numb. 33. 8. One might be the general name of the whole
desert, the other of some part of it, where the Israelites pitched their tents:
It is said indeed chap. 13. 20. that they were in the wilderness of Etham
before they passed over the red sea; but it seems the wilderness on both sides
the red sea was called the wilderness of Etham.

Verse. 25. And the Lord showed him a tree, etc.] This may seem to imply that
there was in this tree a natural virtue of sweetning the waters it was cast
into, because it is said that God showed it him; yet I see no reason why we
should thus conclude: for why may it not be as well that God showed him a tree,
that was likely in its own nature to make the waters bitterer, that so the
miracle might be the more manifest? The changing of the waters taste was rather
by the mighty power of God then any virtue in that wood.

There he made a statute, and an ordinance, and there he proved them.] Some
Expositours conceive that hereby is meant, that in this place God gave the
Israelites certain general laws and statutes necessary for the well ordering
and governing of the people, until at Sinai they should be more perfectly
afterward taught concerning the whole law and will of God; which happily may
be true. But yet doubtless the statute and ordinance chiefly, if not solely,
here intended, is that which follows in the next verse, where the Lord
enjoined the people to obey him, and moves them thereto with a promise, that if
they would so do, he would then protect them from the plagues of Egypt. So that
this clause, There he made a statute, and an ordinance, and there he proved
them, has reference to that which immediately after is expressed in the 26
verse, And said if thou will diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy
God, etc. and the meaning is, that after God had thus tried them with want of
water, and upon their murmuring had so miraculously healed the bitter waters of
Marah, he then admonished them by Moses hereafter to take heed of this sin
they had fallen into, and to carry themselves more obediently toward him; and
so made this as a statute and ordinance, that if they would thus do that which
is right in his sight, then he would be a gracious God unto them: and thus
there he proved them, to wit, not only by their former want, but also byhis
present favorable dealing with them, not punishing them for their murmuring,
butonely admonishing them, and so making proof whether they would thereby be
won or no.

Verse. 26. I will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have brought
upon the Egyptians.] That is, none of the plagues: see Deuteronomy. 28. 60. Moreover
he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt which thou wast afraid of,
and they shall cleave unto thee. The meaning is, that he would not deal with
them as with the Egyptians, but as at present he had done; for the present
mercy in healing the bitter waters, which is the ground of this speech, shows
plainly that all external plag^es are employed: and thus likewise all external
blessings are comprised under health. See Prove. 4. 22. For they are life to
them that find them, and health to all their ^lesh. Psalm. 103. 3. Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases.

Verse. 27. And they encamped there by the waters.] Staying there at Elim, as it
seems, many days, because the place was so pleasant, and convenient for them
by reason of the waters.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd all the congregation of the children of Israel came unto the
wilderness of Sin, etc.] From Elim they turned back to the red sea, Numb. 33.
10. And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the red sea (which no doubt the
Lord did, that he might try them again) but this remove is not here mentioned,
because no memorable matter happened in that place; and so he passes over it,
and only mentions the next station: for from the red sea they turned back
again to the wilderness of Sin.

Verse. 3. Would to God we had dyed by the hand of the Lord in the land of
Egypt, when we sat by the fleshpots, etc.] That is, when we had daily plenty
of flesh, and might peaceably and freely ta^e our fill of it. Doubtless
considering their hard bondage, we may well think that though they had flesh in
Egypt, yet they had no such plenty, at least that they had no such liberty to
^it by it, having such tasks daily imposed upon them, that the day scarce
afforded them time to dispatch their days work. But thus those that are
discontented at their present condition are wont beyond the bounds of truth to
extol what they formerly enjoyed.

For ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole
assembly with ^unger.] Their provision being so far spent which they brought
out of Egypt, that they saw no means to sustain themselves in this wilderness,
where no food could be gotten.

Verse. 4. And the people shall go out, and gather a certain rate every day,
etc.] That is, as verse 16. an omer for every man: and thus God fed them from
hand to mouth, giving them still no more but provision for one day, that they
might be still kept in dependence upon God; to which also agrees that petition
which our Savior taught us, Matthew. 6. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.

Verse. 6. At even, then ye shall know that the Lord has brought you out from
the land of Egypt.] When God should give them quails in such abundance, then
they should know that the Lord had brought them out from the land of Egypt, and
not Moses and Aaron of their own heads, as was objected by the Israelites,
verse 3. For ye have brought us forth, etc.

Verse. 7. And in the morning then y^ shall see the glory of the Lord.] That is,
the Manna, that glorious work of his (for so Moses expounds himself in the next
verse) and glory is often used for glorious works. See Numb. 14. 21. All the
earth shall be filled with the glory of the Lord. John 11. 40. Said I not unto
thee, that if thou would believe thou should see the glory of God?

For that he hears your murmurings against the Lord.] Thatis by reason of
your murmurings this the Lord will do, to justify us his servants. Thus he
puts them in mind of their sin, and wishes them to observe that this message
which God had sent them concerning the Quails and Manna did show that God had
heard their murmurings; and therefore they had need take heed, it may be he
would not always deal with them as he had now.

And what are we that ye murmr against us?] That is, we durst never of
ourselves have undertaken this great work of bringing you out of Egypt, from
the bondage of Pharaoh; nor can you think that we by our own power have done
those miraculous works which you have seen done in this b^sinesse, and which
now you shall yet further see; since therefore it is the almighty God that has
done these great things for you, and we only his instruments, your murmurings
are not against us, but against the Lord.

Verse. 10. They looked toward the wilderness, and behold the glory of the Lord
appeared in the cloud.] Aaron having given charge to the Israelites (as is
expressed in the former verse) to come near before the Lord, and there being at
that time, before the tabernacle was built, no other visible sign of Gods
presence amongst them but only the pillar of the cloud; toward that therefore
they turned their faces, and perceived that God did in a more glorious manner
then ordinarily therein manifest the brightness of his presence. Now because
the cloud was in the forefront of their armies, leading them still farther into
the wilderness, therefore it is said that they looked toward the wilderness.

Verse. 11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, etc.] This the Lord had said to Moses
before: only here it is repeated, to show that he did nothing without a
warrant, and that as God had spoken, it came to pass.

Verse. 13. At even the quails came up and covered the camp.] Being happily
brought in by a wind, as those afterward were at Kibroth-hattaavah, Numb. 11.
31. where God again gave them quails to eat, and that for a whole mone^h
together; whereas now they came in only this one evening before the Manna
was given them.

Verse. 15. And when the children of Israel saw it, they said one to another, It
is Manna.] Which is all one as if they had said, what is this? (for so the
Hebrew word may signify) or this is a meat which God has prepared for us
without our labor (for Manna in the Hebrew signifies prepared) and
therefore it is added in the next words, For they wist not what it was, that
is, they knevv not what more particular name to give it.

Verse. 16. Gather of it every man according to his eating.] Proportionably as
he has more or less in his family.

Verse. 18. And when they did mete with an omer, he that gathered much, etc.]
All were employed in gathering, and some (as more able) gathered more, some (as
less able) gathered less; but when all was laid together in the common heap
(whether of the family, or of the tribe, etc.) and then afterward it was
measured to every man an omer, according to the Lords direction, there was
nothing wanting for which they should pinch him that had gathered less, nor
nothing over for him that had gathered much; but every one had his just omer.
And hence it is that S. Paul by this example of the Israelites, one helping
another, and conferring what they had gathered in common, exhorts the Christian
Corinthians in like manner to supply the necessities of their brethren, 2. Cor.
8. 13, 14, 15. For I mean not that other men be eased, and you burdened: But by
an equality, that now at this time your abundance may be a supply for their
want, that their abundance also may be a supply for your want, that there may
be equality. As it is written, He that had gathered much, etc.

Verse. 19. Let no man leave of it till the morning.] Though every one in each
family had an omer allowed him, whether great or little, men or women, old or
young, and none might reserve any of their portion till the next day, yet it
cannot be thought that every man was enjoined to eat, or did eat the same
quantity; but what they left, they either burnt it, or cast it forth, or some
other way consumed it, and might not keep any of it to be eaten the next day.
See above, ver. 4.

Verse. 22. On the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for
one man: and all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.] To wit,
that the people had gathered, as they were appointed, twice as much on that
sixth day as they had on other days: and of this they informed Moses, both as
desiring thereby to glorify God, in the confession of this wonderful work,
that he had sent Manna so abundantly that day as before he had promised ver. 5.
And it shall be twice as much as they gather daily; and also chiefly that they
might receive directions from Moses how to order this their double portion.

Verse. 23. Bake that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that ye will seethe,
etc.] It may seem questionable, whether in these words the Israelites were
enjoined to bake and seethe so much of the Manna as they d^sired to eat so
dressed on the sixth day, and then to reserve the rest unto the morning; or to
bake and seethe both for that day and the next day which was the Sabbath. But
yet this last seems the most probable; and that because it was not likely they
only eat of it undressed, as it was gathered, on the Sabbath day* and
expressly afterward it was enjoined in the law, that they should kindle no
fire throughout their habitations on the Sabbath day, Exodus 35. 3. Yet I make
no question but that some part of it was reserved for the Sabbath, not only
because they did so eat some part of it on the other days; but especially also
that the hand of God herein might be the more evident, seeing they could no way
keep it, whether baked or sodden, on other days, until the next morning, but
they found it putrified; and which way soever they reserved it, whether dressed
or undressed, for the Sabbath day, it did not corrupt but continued good and
sound.

Verse. 31. And it was like coriander-seed, white, and the taste of it was like
wafers made with honey.] We must not so understand these words, as if the Manna
were said, to be like coriander-seed, because it was white (for the
coriander-seed is blackish) but that it is compared to coriander-seed in regard
only of its quantity and proportion, and then besides that it was of a whitish
color. So that we must read these words as expressing three qualities of the
Manna: 1. That it was little and round like the coriander-seed, ver. 4. There
lay a small round thing, as small as the hoar frost; 2. That it was for the
color of it white, like Bdellium, as it is expressed, Numb. 11. 7; 3. That it
was sweet like hony-wafers, namely, unbaked: for being baked the taste of it
was as the taste of fresh oil, Numb. 11. 8. In that Apocryphal book, called
the Wisdom of Solomon, chap. 16. 20, 21, it is said of this Manna, that it was
able to content every man's delight, and agreeing to every taste, and that
serving to the appetite of the eater, it tempered it self to every man's liking;
whence it has been by some conceived and maintained that the Manna rellished
according to every man's desire, and had the savor of any kind of meat which
they had a desire to eat of. But this is a weak conceit: for first there is no
evident ground for it, in these words; and then besides though it had been
intended by that Author, yet it is directly contrary to this description of the
Manna which Moses gives us; and again, if God had given this miraculous bread
such an extraordinary gift to satisfy every wanton appetite, that it should
taste like any meat they desired to taste of, why did the Israelites murmr
afterward against Moses, lusting for flesh and fish, and repining because they
had not the cucumbers, and melons, and leeks, and onyons, and garlic, which
they had in Egypt Numb. 11. 4, 5.

Verse. 33. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a pot, etc.] It was a golden pot:
See Hebr. 9. 4. Wherein was the golden pot that had the Manna. Moses rehearses
these things here to make a full end of the history of Manna, but they were not
done till afterward, when the Tabernacle was built wherein it was laid up
before the Lord.

Verse. 35. And the children of Israel did eat Manna forty years, until they
came to a land inhabited.] To wit, till they were gone over Jordan into the
land of Canaan, and then it ceased. This Manna (called by the Psalmist Angels
food, Psalm. 78. 25. Man did eat Angels food, etc.) was a notable type of
Christ, and is therefore called Spiritual meat, 1. Cor. 10. 3. And did all eat
the same spiritual meat: for Christ indeed is the true bread that came down
from heaven, Joh. 6. 33. upon whom feeding by faith, our souls are nourished
unto life everlasting: White, in regard of his purity and innocence; and
sweeter then the honey to the souls of believers: bruised for our
transgressions, and conveyed to us, in the dew of the word, as the Manna lay in
the dew upon the ground, and so is our spiritual nourishment all the time of
our traveling toward the heavenly Canaan, when there shall be no more use of
this food, but God shall be all in all to us.

Verse. 36. Now an omer is the tenth part of an ^phah.] And ephah, by the
judgment of the best Writers, was much like to our English bushel: Whereby we
may conceive how bountiful the allowance of Manna was which God allotted them
for their daily food.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. ANd all the congregation of the children of Israel journeyed from the
wilderness of Sin, after their journeyes, etc.] This clause, after their
journeyes, is added, to imply that Rephidim was not the next station after they
went from the wilderness of Sin; no, they went from Sin to Dophkah, from
thence to Alush, and from thence to Rephidim, Numb. 33. 12, 13. 14.

Verse. 2. Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord?] To wit, by their mutinous requiring
of water, as a sign of Gods presence among them, saying, Is the Lord among us,
or not? as it is afterward expressed verse 7. when men, not believing the
promises of God, will boldly prescribe God the time when, and the manner how,
he shall perform his promises, this is called a tempting of the Lord, because
thereby they do, as it were, try whether he be able and faithful to do what he
has said. And thus are the Israelites here said, to tempt the Lord. Having
Gods promise for their safe convoy through the wilderness to the land of
Canaan, and having had already evidence enough of Gods almighty power and
fatherly care over them; yet being now in some distress for want of water,
they came in a bold manner, and expostulated with Moses and Aaron, and cried
upon them to give them water, that they and theirs might not perish with
thirst: and herein they did tempt the Lord, because as the Psalmist says,
Psalm. 78. 41. They limited the holy one of Israel; they said, Is the Lord among
us or not? that is, the want they were in made them question Gods presence, and
they resolved now to put it upon this trial. Let Moses give them water, and
they would acknowledge it; but if that were not done, they would not believe
it. And hence was this place afterward called Massah, that is, temptation.

Verse. 4. What shall I do to this people? they be almost ready to stone me.]
Though there be no mention made in the foregoing expostulation of the people
with Moses, that they threatened to stone him; yet perhaps some intimation
hereof might fall from some of the rudest and most tumultuous amongst them: and
hereupon Moses might ground these words of his. But howsoever their behavior
being so full of fury as it was, he might well from hence complain to the Lord
that he had just cause to fear lest their rage should at last break forth into
this extremity.

Verse. 5. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go on before the people, etc.] That is,
toward the rock Horeb: and mention is made of going before the people, for the
encouragement of Moses; as if he had said, Fear them not, though they are thus
enraged, they shall do thee no harm.

And take with thee of the elders of Israel.] That is, all the people shall not
go up with thee to the rock to see the miracle, only some of the elders thou
shall take along with thee, that they may be eyewitnesses of that which is to
be done, and afterward affirm the truth of what they had seen amongst the
people. When many years after this the Lord did again, after the same
miraculous manner, give them water out of the rock, it was done openly before
all the people. Numb. 20. 8. Take the rod (says the Lord) and gather thou the
assembly together, thou and Aaron thy br^ther, and speak ye unto the rock
before their eyes, and it shall give forth his water: and this makes some
question, why God would not have it so now, but only that some few of the
elders go up with Moses to see the miracle wrought. But seeing there is no
reason given for it in the text, it is sufficient for us to say, that God in
his wisdom saw it fit to have it so: yet the most probable reason that can be
given is this, That God ordered it so the better to try the faith of his
people, and therefore having determined that the rock should give forth water
in some hollow place, where the entrance and passage into the rock was not wide
enough that the whole multitude of the people might come in to see the miracle
wrought, he only enjoined that some of the elders should go up with Moses to
be eyewitnesses of what was done, the rest of the people waiting below till
the streams of the water came rushing down amongst them, as it is expressed
Psalm. 78. 1. 5, 16. He clave the rocks in the wilderness, and gave them water
as out of the great depths: he brought streams also out of the rock, and caused
waters to run down like rivers.

And thy rod wherewith thou smotest the river, take in thine hand and go, etc.]
That is, the rod wherevvith thou smotest the river Nilus in Egypt, when the
waters thereof were turned into blood. See Exodus 7. 20.

Verse. 6. Behold, I will stand before thee there, upon the rock in Horeb.]
Hereby it is evident that when Moses came to the rock, there was there some
visible sign of Gods glorious presence to be seen there upon the rock (though
what it was the Scriptures being silent we cannot affirm) which doubtless
did vvondrously strengthen the faith of Moses and the elders that were with
him.

And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.] That is, he struck the
rock, and immediately the waters gushed forth. And thus the Israelites had not
only water for the quenching of their thirst, and that not for the present
only, but for some good time after, the stream of water that brake out of the
rock becoming a river that ran along in this desert unto several places,
where after this they had their stations (whence it is that the Apostle says,
that this rock followed them, meaning the water that gushed out of this rock)
but withal in the rock, and the waters issuing from thence they had an
extraordinary sacramental sign or type of Christ, and the benefits that
redound to poor sinners by him. For so the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 4. They
did all drink the same spiritual drink (for they drank of the spiritual rock
that followed them, and that rock was Christ) For as that rock in the
wilderness, being struck by the rod of Moses, gave forth waters for the
quenching of the Israelites thirst; so Christ upon the cross, being smitten
with the rod of Moses, the curse of the law, yields forth, both in his
righteousness and the spirit of grace derived to believers from him, that
living water, wherewith their dry and thirsty souls are refreshed so that they
shall never thirst again, as our Savior says, John 4. 16.

Verse. 8. Then came Amalek, and fought with Israel, etc.] That is, the
posterity of Amalek, a Duke of the posterity of Eliphaz, the son of Esau,
Genesis 36. 15. For fear lest the huge army of the Israelites should have passed
through their country, they came out to resist them, and lying in ambush,
smote the hindermost of them, even all that were feeble behind thee, Deuteronomy. 25.
18.

Verse. 9. And Moses said unto Joshua, Choose us out men, etc.] Thus early (it
seems) was Joshua chosen by Moses as his lieutenant, or at least one that
should have a special stroke in matters of war.

I will stand on the top of the hill, with the rod of God in mine hand.] There
Moses might be seen holding his rod in his hand, as an ensign to strengthen
the faith of the people.

Verse. 10. Moses, Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill.] This could not
be that Hur the son of Caleb, who was but forty years old when he searched
the land of Canaan. If we may credit Josephus, he was the husband of Miriam,
Moses and Aarons ^ister.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass when Moses held up his hand, that Israel
prevailed, etc.] And this lifting up of his hands was chiefly to hold forth the
rod as an ensign to strengthen the faith of the soldiers; but yet withal it
served to express the lifting up of his heart in prayer to God, the lifting up
of the hands being the usual gesture of one that prays: so that this
different success of the Israelites, accompanying the different gesture of
Moses body, was purposely by the providence of God appointed to be a real
expression both how forcible Moses prayers were, and also how weak the
Israelites were in themselves, if God (of whose assistance the rod was a sign)
should not stand on their sides.

Verse. 12. But Moses hands were heavy, and they took a stone and put it under
him, etc.] Which shows that he was weary with standing so long, as well as with
lifting up his hands.

And Aaron and Hur stayed up his hands, etc.] The common opinion is, that Moses
held up the rod of God in both his hands, and that his hands were weary at
length, and so sometimes sinking down not so much through his weakness by
reason of age (for forty years after this his natural force was not abated,
Deuteronomy. 34. 7.) as by the continual labor of reaching up his hands so long
together, and that too when his spirits were happily spent much with the
vehemence of his spirit in praying to the Lord: Aaron and Hur perceiving th^s,
and that withal the Amalekites prevailed against the Israelites, when he let
down his hands, they standing on each side of him stayed up his hands, the one
the right hand, and the other the left. But because we cannot well conceive but
that they would have been all wearied if it had been thus; I conceive it more
probable, that Moses held up the rod in one hand, shifting it as occasion was
from one hand to another; And so Aaron, and Hur in their turns helped to bear
up that hand which was next to them, and had by their turns a time to rest and
ease themselves.

Verse. 14. Write this for a memorial in a book, and rehearse it in the ears of
Joshua, etc.] Who was to succeed Moses, and therefore was to take special
notice of this decree of God concerning the utter extirpation of Amalek:
whether this were written in any other book, we cannot say; sufficient for us
it is that here we find it recorded by Moses, and that no doubt the rather,
because of this express command which was now here given him.

Verse. 15. And Moses built an altar, etc.] To wit, thereon to offer ^acrifices
of thankfulness, and that it might ^tand as a memorial in future times of
this first victory which God had given his people against their enemies the
Amalekites: and therefore also he called the altar, Jehovah Nissi, that is the
Lord my banner, that it might be a memorial to posterity that in that place
the Jehovah had as with a banner displayed gone forth and fought against the
enemies of his people, and had there as it were proclaimed that he would have
perpetual war with that Nation from one generation to another.

Verse. 16. For he said, Because the Lord has sworn that he will have war
with Amalek, etc.] Some read this place thus, Because the hand of Amalek is
against the throne of the Lord, therefore the Lord will have war with Amalek,
etc. and then the words intimate the reason why the Lord had determined that he
would have war with Amalek from generation to generation, to wit, because
Amalek had lifted up his hand against the throne of the Lord, in that he had
fought against them that were his peculiar people, whose Sovereigne Lord he had
undertaken to be. But if we read the words, as they are in our Translation,
Because the Lord has sworn that he will have war, etc. whereas in the Hebrew
it is word for word thus, the hand upon the throne of the Lord, then we must
know that the hand upon the throne, intimates the form of Gods swearing, to
wit, that laying his hand upon his throne, as swearing by his Majesty and Regal
power, and as he was the great King of the whole world, he had sworn that he
would have war for ever with Amalek. And this Moses alleges as the reason
why he called this altar, Jehovah Nissi.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 1. WHen Jethro the priest of Midian, etc.] See Exodus 2. 16, 18. also the
3. 1.

Verse. 2. Then Jethro Moses father in law took Zipporah Moses wife, after he
had sent her back.] See Exodus 4. 20.

Verse. 5. And Jethro, Moses father in law, came with his sons and his wife,
etc.] These words make known the coming of Jethro to Moses with his daughter
the wife of Moses, and her two sons; and particularly where Moses was when
they came to him, to wit, that he was encamped at the mount of God, that is at
Horeb (which why it is called the mount of God, is noted before upon Exodus 3.
1.) Evident therefore it is that though the removing of the Israelites from
Rephidim (where they vanquished the Amalekites) to the desert of Sinai, where
this mount of God was, be not mentioned till the beginning of the following
chapter, yet thither they were removed before Jethro came to them.

Verse. 6. And he said unto Moses, I thy father in law Jethro am come unto thee,
etc.] That is, Jethro sent this message to Moses; and therefore it is said in
the next verse, that hereupon Moses went out to meet him. Considering that the
armies of the Israelites were still watchful doubtless of enemies that might
set upon them, and the rather because the Amalekites had so lately assaulted
them, no wonder it is though Jethro did, before he came upon them with his
train, first send to inform Moses of his coming, that they might know who they
were, and why they were come. But besides it was requisite in point of
civility, that Jethro should beforehand send Moses word of his coming, that he
might do what to him seemed good for the receiving of them.

Verse. 11. I know that the Lord is greater then all Gods; for in the thing
wherein they dealt proudly he was above them.] That is, in redeeming the
Israelites out of their cruel bondage, concerning which Pharaoh and his
Egyptians carried themselves with such pride and insolency, as if they thought
it impossible that God should deliver them out of their hands, and resolved
that they would in despite of God hold them still in Egypt. And indeed if
Moses had now told Jethro, as it is likely he did, how arrogantly Pharaoh at
first disdained the message which Moses delivered to him from the Lord, saying,
Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go, chap. 5. 2. and thereupon laid heavier
tasks upon them then he did before; and howthe Magicians of Egypt strove with
Moses, and sought to work the same miracles that Moses, but were still
confounded, and forced at last to acknowledge the mighty power of God; and yet
their Magic, and the feats they wrought thereby, was the chief pride of Egypt,
and that wherein they most gloried; and lastly with what a high hand they
pursued the Israelites to fetch them back when they were come away, assuring
themselves that they should not escape; chap. 15. 9. The enemy said, I will
pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied
upon them; no marvel though Jethro thereupon now answered, that in the thing
wherein they dealt proudly, God was above them.

Verse. 12. And Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with
Moses father in law before God.] This clause, before God, is added, because it
was a religious banquet, eaten before the Majesty of God, and accompanying
their sacrifices, as was usual. See Deuteronomy. 12. 5, 7. Unto the place which the
Lord your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, there
ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye shall rejoice, etc. 1. Chron. 29.
21. And they sacrificed sacrifices unto the Lord, etc. and did eat and drink
before the Lord on that day with great gladness, etc.

Verse. 15. Because the people come unto me to enquire of God.] That is, to
enquire both concerning religious and civil affairs, wherein they are
doubtful what the will of God is.

Verse. 16. And I do make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.] That is,
I make known to them what the will of God is, and what he has determined shall
be done: for though they had not yet the law of God in writing, as afterward
they had when they came to mount Sinai; yet the Church was never without a law,
both concerning the duties of Gods worship, and their conversing with one
another, wherein Moses informed them when they made any question what the will
of God was, either by the direction and instinct of Gods spirit, or by
enquiring of God in cases that were more difficult, and there showing what
answer the Lord had given him.

Verse. 17. And Moses father in law said unto him, The thing that thou do is
not good, etc.] Thus was the Lord pleased to teach his servant Moses humility,
employing one that was a Midianite to advise him better for the well ordering
of the civil government then he himself could think of.

Verse. 19. I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee.] That is, I
make no question but that the blessing of God will testify Gods approving this
course which I shall now prescribe thee.

Be thou for the people to Godward, that thou may bring the causes unto
God.] That is, matters of less moment, easy to be decided, refer to some
inferior officers; but in matters of more importance, and greater difficulty,
where there is need of one to enquire of God, there do thou still employ thy
self, that is, both in consulting with God, and then in returning an answer to
the people.

Verse. 21. Rulers of thousands, and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and
rulers of tennes.] That is, of so many families: The meaning is, that there
should be a ruler or judge appointed over every ten families in each tribe;
and so another over every fifty families, etc. and so by this means a goodly
order was to be established amongst them, to wit, that every tribune appointed
to be judge over a thousand families had under him ten centurions, that is
judges over hundreds; and every centurion had under him two rulers over
fifties; and every ruler over fifty had under him five which were set over ten
families.

Verse. 23. Then thou shall be able to endure, and all this people shall also go
to their place in peace.] That is, whereas formerly, when Moses did all alone,
they often returned their controversies being undecided, or else were constrained
to attend a long time; now they should be soon dispatched, and so go to their
place, that is, their several dwellings or tents, in peace, that is, their
controversies ended, and their minds quieted, etc.

Verse. 25. And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, etc.] To wit, by the
peoples consent, who brought fit men unto him. Deuteronomy. 1. 13* 14. Take ye wise
men, and understanding, and known among your tribes, and I will make them
rulers over you. And ye answered me and said, The thing which thou have spoken
is good for us to do.

Verse. 27. And Moses let his father in law depart, etc.] Though this be here
added to conclude the story, yet it does not follow that he went presently
away: But of this see more, Numb. 10. 29.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 1. IN the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out
of the land of Egypt, the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai.]
That is, the very day of the newmoon, which was the first day of every month
among the Hebrews; so that they came into the wilderness of Sinai, about five
and forty or six and forty days after they came out of Egypt: for they came
out of Egypt on the fifteenth day of the first month; from whence if w^ count
fourteen days remaining of the first month (for their months were according
to the course of the moon) and the whole nine and twenty days of the second
month, the first day of the third month when they came before mount Sinai,
was the four and fourtieth day after they came out of Egypt; six days after
which the Law was given, wh^reon afterward was kept the feast of Pentecost,
that was fifty days after the Passover.

Verse. 4. And I bare you on eagles wings, etc.] This is meant of the whole
course of Gods providence over them, from their deliverance out of Egypt unto
this time, and implies how speedily, safely, and with what tender affections
and care he had brought them thither, carrying them over all difficulties out
of the reach of danger, in a manner, as if they had been carried through the
air.

Verse. 6. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation.]
That is, a nation whom God has by a special privilege separated from others,
and consecrated to himself.

Verse. 9. Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud.] That is, I will now out of
hand meet with thee upon the mount Sinai, in a thick cloud: for this is not
meant of that cloud which went before the Israelites, to show them their way
in their travails through the wilderness, and out of which God did usually
speak to Moses when it rested upon the Tabernacle; but of that cloud mentioned
afterward, verse. 16. wherein God spoke ^o Moses upon the mount; And it came
to pass on the third day in the morning, that there were thunders, and
lightnings, and a thick cl^ud upon the mount.

Verse. 10. Let them wash their clothes.] Hereby was signified how careful
Gods people should be to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of the flesh
and spirit, especially when they come into Gods presence.

Verse. 11. And be ready against the third day, etc.] Which was fifty days
after the passover, at which time the feast was afterward kept, usually
called Pentecost, the day vvhereon the fiery law was given, and the day
vvhereon the fiery tongues were afterward given for preaching the Gospel.
This therefore was not the third day of the month (for then it could not have
been the fiftieth day after the passover that the Law was given; and some
days after their coming to Sina^ on the first day of the month, verse. 1. had
been spent in that which has been hitherto related concerning Moses his going
betwixt God and the people) but the third day after God gave Moses this charge
concerning his preparing and sanctifying the people.

Verse. 12. And thou shall set bounds unto the people round about, etc.] This
was commanded, first, to strike their hearts with the greater reverence of God;
secondly, to bridle the curiosity of man in searching into Gods secrets, and to
teach them to be content with the bounds which he has set them; thirdly, to
provide for their weakness, who would else have been slain with the glory of
his presenc^. See chap. 20. 19. Let not God speak with us lest we dye.

Verse. 13. There shall not a hand touch it, but he shall surely be stoned, or
shot through, whether it be beast or man, etc.] Or touch him, that is, the man
or beast that shall touch the mountain: for that concerning the beast was
enjoined, to teach men the more carefully to avoid it: And the reason of this
command was, first, lest apprehending the offenders they transgress themselves
in touching the mountain, whence those two sorts of death were appointed, of
stoning, if they were near hand, of striking them through with darts, if
further off; secondly, to teach them how execrable the offender should be unto
them: as a thing that would defile them, they must not touch it, but stone it,
or strike it through.

When the trumpet sounds long, they shall come up to the mount.] By the
ministry of Angels there was a trumpet sounded: when this trumpet sounded long,
that is, with a long protracted sound (as trumpeters use to do when they are
about to make an end) then they were appointed to come up to the mount, that
is, to the bottom of the mount, so far as their limits and marks extended,
but not beyond. See ver. 16, 17. It came to pass on the third day in the
morning, that there were thunders, etc. and the voice of the trumpet exceeding
loud, so that all the people that was in the camp trembled. And Moses brought
forth the people out of the camp to meet with God, and they stood at the nether
part of the mount.

Verse. 15. Be ready against the third day, Come not at your wives.] Implying
that they were to lay by all worldly cares and carnal affections, that they
might be wholly intent to the hearing of the Law. See 1. Cor. 7. 5. Defraud you
not one the other, except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your
selves to fasting and prayer.

Verse. 16. There were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the
mount, etc.] Yea, together with thunder and lightnings, the earthquake, and
sound of the trumpet, there fell also great showers of rain, as David has
expressed it, Psalm. 68. 8. The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the
presence of God. Now all this terror was to signify and set forth the nature
of the Law, whose work it is to show the judgment prepared for sinners, and so
to terrify and amaze.

Verse. 19. And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long, and waxed louder and
louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice.] That is, they talked
together. What it was that Moses said, it is a weakness to enquire, since it
is not expressed: We are only hereby taught how that promise was accomplished,
ver. 9. that the people should hear the Lord speaking to Moses in a distinct
and audible voice: yet withal probable it is that now that was done whereof
the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 12. 21. So terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly fear and quake, and that the Lord hereupon cheared him up, and
spoke comfortably to him.

Verse. 22. And let the priests also which come near unto the Lord sanctify
themselves, etc.] By the Priests here doubtless were meant the firstborn of
every family, to whom the prerogative of the priesthood belonged, and who
hitherto were employed in offering sacrifices, till by Gods appointment the
priesthood was afterward settled in the tribe of Levi. Now the charge that is
here given Moses particularly concerning them, is not meant of that which
before was enjoyed all the people, ver. 10. that they might be prepared in a
holy manner to present themselves before the Lord, which doubtless the priests
did then observe no less then the rest of the people; but of a peculiar
watching over themselves, to keep themselves clean from all pollutions, and
particularly from being defiled with sin by touching the mount, which happily
they might have been the bolder to do in regard of their priesthood, if there
had not been a special charge given to them.

Verse. 23. And Moses said unto the Lord, The people cannot come up to mount
Sinai, etc.] Thus Moses replied, not by way of contradicting what God had said,
and to make known that this charge which God now gave him was needless; but by
way of further enquiry concerning Gods will: for hearing that charge again
repeated, Moses began to bethink himself whether he had not omitted something
of that which was before given him in charge, and so in an humble manner
professes how carefully, to his best knowledge, he had done what God had
commanded for the restraining of the people from touching the mount, covertly
intimating hereby his desire to be further informed, if he had hitherto omitted
any thing which ought to have been done.

Verse. 24. And the Lord said unto him, Away, get thee down, etc.]
Notwithstanding Moses former answer, the Lord again bids him haste away down,
adding the reasons, to wit, 1. that he might fetch Aaron thither to him; 2.
that he might again renew his charge to the people, that they should not come
near the mount, and especially to the priests, lest they should presume too
far in regard of their privilege.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. ANd God spoke all these words, saying, etc,] Namely after Moses was
gone down to the people, and had the second time, as God commanded, given them
straight charge not to pass the bounds that were set them, lest they provoked
the Lord to break forth upon them to slay them.

Verse. 18. And all the people saw the thundrings, etc.] This word is generally
used for seeing, hearing, or perceiving: Thus that which is said, Genesis 42. 1.
When Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, etc. is expressed Act. 7. 12. But
when Jacob heard that there was corn, etc.

Verse. 20. Fear not: for God is come to prove you.] God is not said to prove
men, by any thing he does, because thereby he comes to find out that concerning
those men which he knew not before; but because thereby he does that which
those do that prove men, that is, he discovers that either to the men
themselves whom he proves, or to others, which was not manifest before: And so
Moses here tells the Israelites that the Lord had spoken to them with so much
terror to prove them, that is, to discover how weak they were and unable to
endure Gods glorious majesty, and much less his wrath and indignation; and
also to make it manifest whether the apprehension of this majesty of God would
make them fear to offend him or no.

Verse. 21. And the people stood afar off* and Moses drew near unto the thick
darkness where God was.] That is, the people stood aloof from the mount, as
Moses had enjoined* but Moses went up into the mount, to wit, together with
Aaron* for so God had before commanded, chap. 19. 24. Thou shall come up, thou
and Aaron with thee. Yea and after this, because the people were so terrified
at the manner of the giving of the Law, when the Elders had desired of Moses
that he would recieve from God his statutes and judgments, that they then
afterward might recieve them from him, the Lord consented hereto, and so the
people were sent away to their tents, and Moses went up to the top of the
mount, Deuteronomy. 5. 30, 31. Go (says the Lord to Moses) say to them, Get you into
your tents again, but a^ for thee, stand thou here by me, etc.

Verse. 22. Say unto the children of Israel, Ye have seen that I have talked
with you from heaven.] This is premised as a reason of the following precept;
because ye only heard me speak out of heaven, ye saw no image, therefore ye
shall make no image: Now it is said here that God spoke unto them from heaven,
though he spoke to them from the midst of the fire on the top of Mount Sinai,
either because it was the voice of God, who dwells in the heavens; or because
the air is also usually called the heaven, as Genesis 1. 20. and fowl that may
fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.

Verse. 24. An altar of earth shall thou make unto me, etc.] This is meant of
such altars as they should be appointed to rear as they were upon the way,
until they came to the place which the Lord should choose to settle his
worship there; and happily of altars reared afterward upon extraordinary
occasions: And these they must make either of earth or of rough stone, as ver.
25. both that the worthlessenesse of the matter and form might show that God
would not have them places of his worship for perpetuity; and likewise that
they might be types of Christ's humane nature (for Christ is our altar, Hebr.
13. 10. We have an al^ar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
tabernacle) and of the mean and contemptible condition wherein Christ lived
upon the earth, of which the Prophet speaks Isa. 53. 2. He has no form nor
comeliness; and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire
him. See the note also upon Exodus 27. 1.

In all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee.] Together with that foregoing precept for the service of God, he adds a
promise of his presence, his gracious acceptance of their sacrifices and
service, as also his blessing that should attend them thereupon; only this is
limited to the places that he should choose to put his name there, as he speaks
elsewhere: Deuteronomy. 12. 5. But unto the place which the Lord your God shall choose
out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto his habitation shall ye
seek, etc. And the reason of adding this here seems to be, 1. to restrain them
from rearing altars wherever themselves pleased, they must do it only in
places which he should choose to record his name there; and 2. to restrain them
from having any superstitions conceits in time to come of these places where
altars had been raised for the worship of God: for, says the Lord, into
whatever places you come, if I there appoint you to build an altar, I will
accept of your service, and will bless you in one place as well as in another.
And for this very cause it was (as I before observed) that the Lord commanded
such slightness in making their altars, to prevent superstition, that the
people might see they were not intended for succeeding times.

Verse. 25. Thou shall not build it of hewn stone.] See the notes upon the
foregoing verses.

If thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it.] Namely by
transgressing the commandment of God. Thus that which in man's judgment, and
art, should polish it, Gods Law makes to be a pollution: so is it with humane
wisdom in preaching the Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 4. And my preaching was not with
enticeing words of man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the spirit, and of
power.

Verse. 26. Neither shall thou go up by steps unto mine altar, etc.] This was
also so given in charge concerning altars to be raised upon extraordinary
occasions, and which were not to continue for constant use: for it is evident
by the height of Solomon's altar, which was ten cubits high, 2. Chron. 4. 1.
that the Priests went up offer sacrifices thereon, though doubtless they were
not such steps as are in ladders, whereon whilst they went up there might be
danger of discovering their nakedness to those that were beneath them; and
though the altar which Moses made for the Tabernacle was but three cubits high,
yet it is said that the sacrificers did ascend up to it, and descend down from
it, Lev. 9. 22. Aaron came down from offering of the sinne-offering, and
therefore there was some kind of ascending to this altar also. Either therefore
it is meant of altars suddenly to be raised of earth or unpolished stones upon
extraordinary occasions, or else the steps forbidden are not all kind of
stairs, but such as are on ladders, whereon there might be danger of
discovering the Priests nakedness, which God would have prevented, 1. for
comeliness, and honesty sake; and 2. lest any uncomely thing in the Priests
should impair the honor of those sacred rites.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the judgments which thou shall set before them.] That
is, the judicial laws.

Verse. 2. If thou buy an Hebrew-servant, etc.] Diverse ways the Hebrews came to
be sold for servants to their brethren: for 1. sometimes being condemned for
theft, they were sold by the judges, that so satisfaction might be made to the
owner for the goods they had stolen, if otherwise they were not able to make
satisfaction, chap. 22. 3. If he have nothing, he shall be sold for his theft;
2. by reason of poverty they might sell their children for servants, as is
^vident in the 12. verse of this chapter; or themselves, Lev. 25. 39. And if
thy brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor, and be sold unto thee, etc.
3. in case of debt which they were not able to pay, they and their children
might be sold as servants, for satisfaction of the debt; whence is that
complaint of the poor widow, 2. King. 4. 1. The creditour is come to take unto
him my two sons to be bondmen; and that in the parable, Mat. 18. 25. For as
much as he had not to pay, his Lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife, and
children, and all that he had, and payment to be made. Now in all these cases,
here is a law given concerning the time of their service, namely that they
should serve those that had bought them only six years, and that in the
seventh year they should set them free. Elsewhere it is evident, that if the
year of Jubilee fell within the compass of those six years, their servants were
then also to be set free, though it were but a year after they had bought them,
Lev. 25. 40, 41. but otherwise, they were to serve them six years, as here is
expressed. Many learned Expositours, indeed the most, conceive that the seventh
year, wherein the Hebrew servants were to be set free, was the Sabbaticall
year, or the year of release, which was every seventh year, at which time they
were to set free their servants, how lately soever they had bought them: And if
we thus understand this place, then the meaning of these words is this, If thou
buy an Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve, that is, six years is the
utmost he shall at any time serve thee, and in the seventh he shall go out free
for nothing, that is, when the seventh year, the Sabbaticall year, comes, then
however he shall go out free for nothing. But 1. because where the Scripture
speaks of this Sabbaticall year, or year of release, as in the 25. chapter of
Leviticus, and in the fifteenth chapter of Deuteronomie, we find no express
Law given for the setting free of servants; and 2. because according to this
exposition of this Law their servants could never serve them six years, unless
they were sold to be servants immediately after the end of the Sabbaticall
year, and it seems manifest that this clause, six years he shall serve, is more
general then so, therefore I rather think that the setting free servants
before they had served six years was the peculiar privilege of the year of
Jubilee, which was every fiftieth year; and that the seventh year in this Law
intended, when they were to be set free, was always counted from the year when
they were first sold to be servants. Now the reason why the Lord would not have
the Israelites serve any longer, is expressed elsewhere, Lev. 25. 55. to wit,
because they were Gods servants, and so the Lord would teach them to put a
difference betwixt his people, and others that were not his people. And though
there is mention made here only of servants bought with money, yet if they
became any other way servants to their brethren, as by being taken in the
war, when there came to be any civil war amongst them, it is probable that
by the rule of Analogy this law was extended even to them also.

Verse. 3. If he were married, then his wife shall go out with him.] And so also
by the rules of Analogy we may gather, that if he brought children with him,
those children should also go out with him.

Verse. 4. If his Master have given him a wife, etc.] Here is an exception added
to the former law, concerning the setting free of the wife together with the
husband, to wit, that if his Master have given him a wife, in the time of his
service (namely one of his maidservants, either an Hebrew woman, or stranger,
both the manservant and maidservant consenting thereto) and she have born him
sons or daughters, in this case the man was to be set free alone by himself,
and his wife and children were to continue still servants to his Master. Nor
yet can we hence infer, That God approved any man's forsaking his wife: for
doubtless that Law stood firm which God had established from the beginning,
that a man must leave all and cleave to his wife, Genesis 2. 24. and that the bond
of marriage should be kept always inviolable, What God has joined together
let no man put asunder. But for the resolving of this doubt, we must consider,
first, that in some cases this might be only a parting with mutual consent
for a time, because if his wife were a daughter of Israel, bought with money,
she also was to be set free at the end of her six years service, if the year of
Jubilee did not happen before (Deuteronomy. 15. 12. If thy brother, an Hebrew man, or
an Hebrew woman, be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, then in the
seventh year thou shall let them go free from thee) and then might she return
unto her husband: Secondly, that no man was by this law forced to leave his
wife; by continuing in his former service, he might still enjoy her: only God
takes order that when himself is set free, he must not think under that
pretense to deprive his Master of her that was his lawful servant, but should
rather endure the enlarging of his own bondage, that he might enjoy her.
Thirdly, that this liberty given to a servant set free to go away, and leave
his wife behind him, was not an approbation of his forsaking the wife he had
taken: at the most, it was but a part or branch of that scope wherein this
people were left to themselves, for the hardness of their hearts, as Christ
says in another case, Matthew. 19. 8. and fourthly, That if the wife, given him
in the time of his service, was a stranger of another nation, and happily of
another religion, these marriages were never pleasing to God; and it was his
fault that he would yield to marry such a one.

Verse. 6. Then his Master shall bring him to the judges, he shall also bring
him to the door, etc.] To wit, that his Master might prove it fairly and
openly, that it was his servants free and voluntary act to continue with him.

His Master shall bore his ear through with an aul, and he shall serve him for
ever.] That is, all his life time, to wit, unless the year of Jubilee fall in
the mean time: for then indeed all Hebrew servants were absolutely set free
together with their children, Levit. 25. 40, 41. Now for the boring of his ear
to the door, or to the doore-post of his Masters house, it was happily partly
to shadow forth how blameworthy they are that prefer not the liberty of the
Gospel before the bondage of the law; but doubtless the main reason was, that
his bored ear might be an evidence concerning such a servant, that he had
voluntarily disclaimed the privilege that God had granted him of being set
free at the end of six years service: it was not so much a punishment
inflicted, as a mark set upon him to witness his consent to perpetual
service, and the misery thereof. And indeed a fit sign it was to signify
this. The ear is the emblem of obedience; because they that are obedient, are
willingly ready to hearken to the commands of their superiors, that so they
may do what is enjoined. The boring therefore of his ear was to signify that
he was now tied to his Masters house, and that as a servant he would be ready
always to hearken to his voice in all he should give him in charge: whence is
that phrase concerning the obedience of Christ, Psalm. 40. 6. Sacrifice and
offering thou did not desire: mine ears have thou opened, or, bored through,
as the word in the original signifies.

Verse. 7. If a man sell his daughter to be a maidservant, she shall not go out
as the menservants do.] That is, she shall not always be tied to six years
service as the menservants are, as is made evident by some particular
exceptions which are added in the following verses: This course of parents
selling their children is by many reckoned amongst those things which God did
not approve but tolerate in this people, because of the hardness of their
hearts. However Lord did here provide that in case parents, constrained perhaps
by extreme necessity, should sell their children, if it were a daughter which
they sold, she should not go out as the menservants do: and the meaning, I say,
is only this, that the Law concerning the setting free of such a maidservant
should not be in all respects alike with that of menservants, as namely because
though ordinarily maidservants were to be set free also at six years end, Deuteronomy.
15. 12, etc. yet sometimes they were to be freed before their six years service
was ended (which menservants never were) as appears by those cases propounded
in the following verses.

Verse. 8. If she please not her Master, who has betrothed her to himself,
etc.] That is, if her Master after he has bought he^ betroth her to himself,
and afterward dislike her, and so repenting of what he has done will not take
her to be his wife (which was likewise one of those things which God did
tolerate in this people, but not approve) he must let her be redeemed, that is,
he must not think to keep her still to be a servant, or sell her to be a
servant to others; at least he must procure her to be redeemed, either by her
self, or by her kindred, or by some other that would take her to be his wife.
In which case doubtless order was taken by the Judges, that it should be done
at a very reasonable price: for though the next clause may seem to imply, that
he was only restrained from selling her to one that was not an Israelite, To
sell her unto a strange nation he shall have no power; yet since they might not
do that to any Israelite servant whatsoever, therefore by a strange nation here
is meant (as Calvin takes it) any of another family, though an Hebrew; or else
his selling her to a strange nation is only expressly forbidden, because the
Hebrews would not buy her, knowing it to be contrary to Gods law. And indeed
the like favor is granted to a servant whom her Master had married, though she
were not an Israelite: for concerning such a one the law was, Deuteronomy. 21. 14.
that her Master should let her go whither she would, but should not sell her
and make merchandise of her, because he had humbled her.

Verse. 9. And if he have betrothed her unto his son, he shall deal with her
after the manner of daughters.] That is, both in the matter of dowry, and in
all other things he shall deal with her as if she had been a freewoman.

Verse. 10. If he take him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of
marriage shall he not diminish.] Now another case is propounded, What shall be
done, if a man having betrothed his servant to himself, or to his son (for
both may be here understood) do not in dislike cast her off, but take him
another wife? This we must not think God approves of, only he tolerates it for
the hardness of their hearts; but in this case he provides that the true wife
be not wronged, Her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage shall he not
diminish, which last clause may be meant of dowry, and all other things due by
marriage covenant; but doubtless that which St Paul calls due benevolence, 1.
Cor. 7. 3. is included, and indeed principally (if not only) intended.

Verse. 13. If a man lie not in wait, but God deliver him into his hand; then I
will appoint thee a place whither he shall fly.] To wit, the altar, whilst
they were in the desert; in Canaan, both the altar and the cities of refuge
also.

Verse. 16. And he that steals a man and sells him, or if he be found in his
hand, etc.] This law is again repeated by Moses, though in terms somewhat
different, Deuteronomy. 24. 7. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren the
children of Israel, and makes merchandise of him, or sells him, then that
thief shall d^e; so that by comparing them together we may see, first, That
though this place speaks generally of stealing a man, yet it is meant only of
stealing those that were their brethren of Israel: There was doubtless some
punishment inflicted on those that stole servants that were strangers of
another nation, to wit, according to the punishment of other thefts (for their
servants were their money) but it was only the stealing of Israelites, whether
men or women, that was punished with death: secondly, That whereas it is said
here, He that steals a man and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he
shall surely be put to death, the meaning is not, that though the manstealer
had not yet sold his brother whom he had stolen, but had him still in his own
possession, he should notwithstanding be put to death, no less then if he had
sold him (for the law in Deuteronomi^ does plainly enough intimate that the
manstealer was only to be put to death, in case that he had sold, and made
merchandise of his brother whom he had stolen; and indeed when the party
stolen might be restored, and had not yet endured the misery of being sold for
a slave, it is not probable that the thief was in this case to be put to death)
but the meaning is this, that though it could not be proved against the
manstealer that he had sold him, yet if it could be proved that he had been in
his ^and, it should be taken for granted that he had sold him, and he should be
put to death: and thirdly, That the reason why this theft alone was punished
with death amongst the Isra^lites, we may well conceive to have been this, to
wit, because it was such a debasing of man, made after Gods image, and much
more of Gods people redeemed from bondage by his outstretched arm, to be sold
as beasts; and because the miseries which such poor wretches endured in
bondage were indeed worse then death, especially when they were sold to
heathens (of which this law was meant; for they could not hope to conceal their
theft if they sold them in the land of Israel) where no mercy could be
expected, and where besides their souls were exposed to manifest peril. By all
which we may likewise gather what a grievous sin it is to bring men into the
worse bondage of sin and Satan, or of subjecting the conscience of Gods
people to be in thraldom to men, of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 7. 23.
Ye are bought with a price, be not ye the servants of men.

Verse. 17. And he that curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to
death.] By cursing here is not meant only express imprecations, when a child
should wish any mischief might befall his father or mother, nor yet any
unreverent and undutifull language, but all kind of malicious reviling
speeches, whether by way of imprecation or otherwise, as manifestly argued a
contempt of their parents: and therefore we see that Solomon says, with
respect doubtless to this law, The eye that mocketh at his father, and
despises to obey his mother, the ravents of the valley shall pick it out, etc.
Prove. 30. 17. and Christ having joined this law with the fifth Commandment,
Matthew. 15. 4. God commanded saying, Honor thy father and thy mother; and he
that curses father or mother let him die the death, he applies it to the
condemning of that Tradition of the Pharisees, who allowed men to withhold
necessary sustenance from their parents, so that what they withheld from them
they gave to the Temple, and concludes that hereby they made the commandment of
God of none effect by their Tradition: whence it is manifest that by the
judgment of Christ they transgress this law, and deserve death before God,
that shall either revile their parents, or under the pretense of any religious
vow shall whithhold from them that relief which by the law and light of nature
they are bound to afford them.

Verse. 18. If men strive together, and one smite another with a stone, etc.]
That is, by throwing any thing at him, or by the stroke of any thing held in
his hand.

Verse. 19. If he rise again, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that
smote him be quit, etc.] That is, if he recover so far as to go forth though
weakly, he that struck him shall not be put to death, though he die afterward.

Verse. 20. If a man smite his servant or his maid with a rod, etc.] Some
Expositours understand this law thus, that if a man, with any thing fit to give
correction with, do correct or beat his manservant or maidservant, yet if he do
it so immoderately that the servant dies under his hands, he shall be punished,
to wit, as a manslayer, with death: for the word in the original signif^eth,
he shall be avenged, and the vengeance to be in^licted by the civil magistrate
was the putting them to death that had wilfully been the death of others. Now
this law was concerning servants that were not Israelites: for it is meant of
servants that were absolutely their Maste^s money, as is expressed in the
following verse, which the Hebrew servants were not, but were only bought for
a time; and for Hebrew servants there is another law given, Levit. 25. ^9. If
thy brother that dwells by thee be waxen poor and be sold unto thee, thou
shall not compel him to serve as a bondservant, etc. But now others again hold
that the Israelites were not to be put to death for this correcting their
servants here spoken of, to wit, when their servants dyed under their hands.
And indeed it may well be questioned why it should not be said here as in other
laws of that nature, he shall surely die, but only, he shall be surely
punished, if it were not purposely done because in this case the guilty party
was to be left to the wisdom of the Judges to be punished as they should see
cause.

Verse. 21. If he continue a day or two, he shall not be punished; for he is his
money.] That is, it may be thought he intended not to bring that loss upon
himself, by killing him whom he had purchased with his money: and since it may
well be judged that he did not do it willingly, even the loss of his servant,
bought with his money, shall be deemed sufficient punishment.

Verse. 22. If men strive, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart
from her, and yet no mischief follow, etc.] That is, if a woman with child come
in to help her husband, or friend, when men are fighting together, or to part
them, or upon any other occasion be nigh them, and so do casually receive some
hurt, and by that means miscarry, yet so as that no mischief follow thereupon,
that is, neither the woman nor child die, or be maimed, in this case the party
that was the cause of the woman's miscarrying shall pay such a penalty as the
woman's husband will lay upon him; only it is in the next clause provided that
the woman's husband shall not be his own judge, but shall only require to have
such or such a penalty imposed upon him, which shall there be accordingly
awarded him by the judge, and he shall pay as the judges determine; whereby
also is employed, that the judges had power to moderate the penalty, if the
woman's husband demanded that which was unre^sonable.

Verse. 23. And if any mischief follow, then thou shall give life for life.]
Whether of the mother, or child having shape and life, as appears by that which
follows.

Verse. 24. Eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.] This
was the law amongst the Hebrews, which we call the law of Retaliation, whereby
the Magistrate was authorized to punish man that had done voluntarily any hurt
to their neighbors, according to the hurt which they had done them: And it was
doubtless most equal* as those times were, and frequently practiced amongst
them; yet withal very probable it is that it was in the Judges power in some
cases to allow a change or commutation of this penalty, and in stead of this to
award a pecuniary mulct or fine of money: first, Because in some cases the law
of retaliation could not be equal; as for example, If a man that had but one
eye should put out one of his neighbors eyes, the putting out of this man's
only eye in l^ew thereof would not be perfectly equal; or if the man that had
cut off his neighbors arm were of such a weak constitution, that it was
altogether unlikely that he should escape death if his arm should be cut off
too, by way of punishing that harm he had done his neighbor: s^condly, Because
that law, Numb. 35. 31. Ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a
murderer which is guilty of death, may seem to imply that except only in that
case of life and death they were allowed to take satisfaction in stead of
corporal punishments: thirdly, Because it is evident in the thirtieth verse of
this chapter, that when a man's ox had killed a man after warning had been given
to the owner to keep him in, though the owner was by the law to be stoned, yet
the Judges were allowed in some cases not to adjudge him to be stoned, but in
stead thereof to impose a sum of money: whence by the rule of analogy we may
conceive, that in this case of taking eye for eye, and tooth for tooth, etc.
the Judges had likewise the same liberty. In Matthew. 5. 39. our Savior having
repeated this law, adds, But I say unto you that ye resist not evil; whereby
he never intended to abolish this law, but only to clear it from the false
exposition of the Jews, who thence took unto themselves liberty for private
revenge, which Christ condemns, and rather enjoins his discipiles to bear
patiently any wrong done them then to be Judges and revengers in their own
cause.

Verse. 26. He shall let him go free for his eyes sake.] And so also for the
loss of any other member, the chiefest the eye, and the meanest the tooth,
being only expressed.

Verse. 28. If an ox gore a man or a woman that they die, then the ox shall be
surely stoned, etc.] One kind of beast (most usual amongst the Hebrews) is
here put for all.

Verse. 31. Whether he have gored a son, or have gored a daughter, etc.] The
same punishment that was allotted in the former verses, for the punishment of
him whose ox had killed any man or woman of grown years, is here also allotted,
though it be only a man's child, whether son or daughter, that is killed by
such an ox.

Verse. 32. If an ox shall push a manservant or a maidservant, he shall give
unto their Master thirty shek^ls.] The price at which Christ was valued, who
became a servant for our sakes, is here appointed to be paid in liew of a
servant killed.

Verse. 33. And if a man shall open a pit, etc.] Some conceive, that this must
only* be meant of pits mad^ in open and public ways, not of those which men
dug in their own private grounds. And whereas there is no punishment
appointed in case a child or any man or woman in the dark should fall into such
a pit, it is probable that this was left to the judges to be determined
proportionably to that which is determined in this and the former law, verse.
28. 29, 30.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. IF a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it,
etc.] For the understanding of this law, we must know first, that what is here
said concerning the stealing of ox or sheep, must also by the rule of
proportion be understood concerning any other cattle, the ox and sheep being
only mentioned, because they were the chief, and therefore verse. 4. the ass
is also mentioned; secondly, that upon the thief that stole cattle a greater
fine was set, then upon him that stole other things: for those that stole other
things were only allotted to pay double. verse. 7. but those that stole cattle
were to restore fourefold, or fivefold; and the reason was, because men's cattle
being left abroad were most in danger; and therefore such theft was to be
restrained with the greater severity; thirdly, that the reason why fourefold or
fivefold restitution was enjoined in case the cattle stolen were killed, or
fold, whereas if they were found in the hands of him that stole them, he was
only to restore double, verse. 4. was, because in him that had the cattle still
with him there might seem to be some remorse, or simplicity, but in him that
killed or sold it there seemed to be more cunning and boldness; and besides,
the owner was put to the greater charge or trouble in finding it out, and
therefore his penalty was the greater; and fourthly, that the thief was to
restore five oxen for an ox, and but four sheep for a sheep, because the loss
of an ox was the greater loss, and besides the owner lost the labor of his
ox, and therefore was this theft to be restrained with somewhat the greater
severity.

Verse. 4. He shall restore double.] That is, in case he has not made away the
ox or sheep, etc. he shall restore that which was stolen, and another as good,
or the full value of it. And indeed double restitution was the ordinary penalty
of theft, unless in the case before mentioned, when they stole cattle, and
afterward killed or sold them: for so it is expressly said concerning those
that stole other things, in the seventh verse of this chapter, If the thief be
found, let him pay double. And though it be said Prove. 6. 30, 31. Men do not
despise a thief if he steal to satisfy his soul when he is hungry; But if he
be found, he shall restore sevenfold; yet I do not thence conclude, that in the
days of Solomon theft was more severely punished then God by his law had
appointed, but rather conceive that by those words, he shall restore sevenfold,
is only meant that he should abundantly satisfy him, as the phrase is
elsewhere used, not for a set quantity, but for the abundant doing of any
thing, as Psalm. 79. 12. Render unto our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom
their reproach wherewith they have reproched thee, O Lord.

Verse. 5. If a man shall cause a field or a vineyard to be eaten, and shall put
in his beast, etc.] Under this particular expressed, all kind of hurting
another man's ground is here forbidden, as with trampling of cattle, etc. yet it
is not punished as theft, because it might be do^e unwillingly.

Verse. 7. If a man shall deliver unto his neighbor money, or stuff, and it be
stolen, etc.] To wit, of trust, and for no reward but of friendship.

Verse. 8. If the thief be not found, then the Master of the house shall be
brought unto the Judges, etc.] To wit, to have it cleared either by witnesses,
or the oath of the party, as ver. 11. (whose oath it was fit should be taken,
since the owner had trusted him with his goods) whether the goods left with him
were indeed, as he pretended, stolen from him, or whether he had himself made
them away.

Verse. 9. For all manner of trespass, whether it be for ox, for ass, for
sheep, for raiment, etc.] This is a general law inserted concerning the power
of the magistrate in deciding controversies of this kind, that so it might not
be repeated in every several law: As he had before ordered concerning dead
things, as money or stuff committed to the trust of any man, if any difference
did grow betwixt the owner and the party entrusted, the magistrate must decide
it; so here he shows that in the same manner in other trespasses, as if cattle
were committed to a friends trust, and were lost, or if any thing lost by the
owner were denied by the party that found it, or in any other trespass, the
magistrate must still award how it shall be: So that this Law does not as the
former and following Laws show how the Judge should determine, in what cases he
should condemn men to pay double, and in what cases he should absolve them;
but only takes order that the Judge should determine such differences, and as
he did absolve or condemn any man to pay double, so it should be, he shall pay
double unto his neighbor, that is, the party accused, if found guilty; and
happily the party falsely accusing, by virtue of that Law, Deuteronomy. 19. 16, 19. If
a false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him that which is
wrong; Then shall ye do unto him, as he had thought to have done unto his
brother.

Verse. 10. If a man deliver unto his neighbor an ass, or an ox, or a sheep,
or any beast to keep, and it die, etc.] As before concerning dead goods, so
here concerning cattle committed to the keeping of a friend, the Law appoints
how the judges must determine, to wit, that in case such cattle die, or be
hurt, or by force driven, not stolen away, no man seeing it, but the keepers;
because those losses are not to be prevented by the keepers care, therefore the
owner most bear them.

Verse. 12. And if it be stolen from him, he shall make restitution unto the
owner thereof.] Dead goods stolen from the keeper were not to be made good to
the owner, ver. 8. yet cattle must be restored: the reason is, first, because
there might be some neglect in keeping cattle abroad, which cannot be so likely
of things laid up in a man's dwelling house: secondly, it is most likely they
were paid for keeping cattle (because it required watching and charge) and then
it was just they should make it good, through whose neglect it was stolen
away. Whence is that of Jacob, Genesis 31. 39. Of my hand did thou require it,
whether stolen by day, or stolen by night.

Verse. 14. And if a man borrow ought of his neighbor and it be hurt or die,
etc.] The Law here concerning things borrowed that are lost or hurt whilst
they were with the borrower is this, That if the owner were by when the thing
borrowed did miscarry the borrower should not make it good, because the owners
presence made it manifest that the mischief could not be prevented; But if the
owner were not by, then the borrower was to make it good. Nor was the severity
of this branch of the Law unequal. For however it might miscarry without any
neglect of the borrower though the owner was not by, yet it was fit that such a
penalty should by Law be imposed to prevent all fraudulent dealing in the
borrower, and to make him the more circumspectly careful of the thing he
borrows; and so likewise by this means men had the more encouragement to lend
freely.

Verse. 15. If it be an hired thing it came for his hire.] That is, if it were
not borrowed gratis, but hired, then though it miscarry and the owner be not
by, he that hired it shall not make it good.

Verse. 16. If a man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her,
etc.] If a maid were betrothed, it was death to lie with her, Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24.
If a damsel that is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her
in the city, and lie with her; ye shall stone them with stones that they die:
but this Law is concerning the defiling of a maid that is not betrothed, in
which case it is here provided that if a man entice a maid, either by promise
of marriage, or otherwise, and lie with her, he was to endow her, and marry
her; and in case her father refused to let him marry her, he was then to pay
her a sum of money, according to the dowry of virgins, that is, according to
her estate and condition, as dowries used to be given with maids of like
parentage and estate. There is another Law much like this, Deuteronomy. 22. 28, 29. to
wit, that if a man did find a damsel, a virgin not betrothed, and did lay hold
on her and lie with her, and they were found, he was then to marry her, and
might never asterwards put her away, and was withal to pay unto the maids
father fifty shekels of silver. To show the disference betwixt these two Laws,
some say that this here is meant of such as by enticing maids did persuade them
to consent and so lie with them; but that the Law in Deuteronomie is meant of
such as did defile maids without their consent, and that therefore a greater
penalty is allotted to those there, then to these here that had the consent of
the maids they defiled. But because it is most probable that violent rapes,
where the maid no way consented, were always amongst this people punished with
death, therefore I cannot think that that Law in Deuteronomie is meant of those
that ravished maids: Rather the difference betwixt these Laws consists in this,
That in that place of Deuteronomie the Law speaks of defiling maids* that being
occasionally laid hold on, yielded presently to the lust of him that defiled
them, not being beforehand allured and persuaded by degrees; and that this
speaks of such as did entice maids with promise of marriage, and so defiled
them; and in this case the Law is not so severe. Indeed here nor there is there
any punishment at all appointed for the woman, though her sin was great; and
that because besides that the loss of her virginity was a brand of ignominy
to her, and the hope of marriage might chiefly deceive her, being under her
fathers power, and having nothing of her own, she could not be chargeable with
paying any mulct of money.

Verse. 18. Thou shall not suffer a witch to live.] The word here used in the
original is in the feminine gender, a woman-witch, to intimate that women in
this case were not to be pitied: But elsewhere the same is decreed both
concerning men and women, and withal it is expressed by what kind of death
they were to die, to wit, that they were to be stoned: Lev. 20. 27. A man or a
woman that has a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to
death, they shall stone them with stones. And some add that this Law against
witches is set next after those against fornication, because it was usual in
those times with men by witchcraft to win the hearts of maids to them.

Verse. 20. He that sacrifices unto any God, save unto the Lord only, he shall
be utterly destroyed.] Or, Anathematized, that is, put to death without mercy,
destroyed as an execrable and cursed thing.

Verse. 25. If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, thou
shall not be to him as an usurer, etc.] To such as these we are bound to lend,
not expecting so much as the principal, if they be not able to pay, much less
the use: Luke 6. 34, 35. And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive,
what thank have ye? etc. But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend,
hoping for nothing again, etc.

Verse. 26. If thou at all take thy neighbors raiment to pledge thou shall
deliver it unto him by that the sun goes down.] That is, which he lies in
by night, as is evident in the next verse, for that is his covering only; yet
under this is comprehended all other garments and other things whereof he has
present use, as tools to work with, etc. which must be restored against the
time he should need them; and therefore also such things as were of continual
use, they might not at all take for pawns, whereof an instance is given, Deuteronomy.
24. 6. No man shall take the nether or upper millstone to pledge. And indeed
this which is here enjoined, that they should at the going down of the sun
deliver back their neighbors bedclothes, which they had taken for a pledge, it
was all one in effect as if they had been enjoined not to take any such
necessaries of them to pledge: for doubtless it is meant of an absolute
restoring them without any expectation of receiving them again, there being
nothing fonder then that which some would have to be the meaning of these
words, that every night the lender was to restore them these pledges for their
use, and then in the morning to take them back again, which would have been a
continual trouble to the lender without any the least advantage to him; and if
they must absolutely restore them at sunne-setting, it was to no purpose to
take them at all. But however all this must be understood of the pawns of poor
people, that had not variety, and so were forced to pawn those things which
they could not be well without when the time came that they were to use them;
and not of rich men that had variety, as is evident, Deuteronomy. 24. 12. If the man
be poor thou shall not sleep with his pledge; where also another Law is given
concerning pawns, ver. 10, 11. to wit, that the lender might not go into his
brothers house, and take what pawn he pleased, but must stand abroad, and take
that pledge which should be brought out to him.

Verse. 28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, etc.] That is, those that sit in the
place of judgment, the judges, as it is in the margin of our Bibles; for so it
is explained in the following clause, nor curse the ruler of thy people: for
these in the Scripture are called Gods, as Psalm. 82. I have said, Ye are Gods,
etc. to wit, because they are Gods Vicegerents upon earth, and they have as it
were an impression of Gods majesty upon them, in whose stead they are, and
whose name they bear. And hence I conceive it is evident that S. Paul spoke
that ironically, Act. 23. 5. I wist not, brethren, that he was the high priest:
for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of the people: for
could we conceive that S. Paul knew not the high priest, which is altogether
unlikely, yet he knew that he was one of the judges, for so much his own words
discover, Sit thou to judge me after the Law, and command me to be
smitten contrary to the Law? So that it was no excuse for him to say he knew
not that he was the high priest, because however being one of the judges it was
against this Law to revile him: And therefore I say, though perhaps those that
heard him speak those words understood that he spoke them by way of excusing
himself, yet he spoke them ironically, by way of derision and scorn, as
disdaining that he should be accounted Gods high priest, or should sit in the
seat of justice, that would so unjustly command his officers to smite him on
the mouth: which will yet seem the more probable, if we consider how far that
Ananias was, of whom he spoke, from having any true right to that place and
power, to which he pretended, when Christ had abolished the Legal priesthood.

Verse. 29. The firstborn of thy sons shall thou give unto me.] See the notes
upon Exodus 13. 1, 2, and 13.

Verse. 30. Seven days shall it be with his damme, on the eighth day thou shall
give it me.] To wit, because till the eighth day it was not fit for the priests
use, for whom the firstborn of their cattle were intended, yet doubtless when
they saw cause they might keep them a while longer, so they did not delay the
bringing of them, as being unwilling to give them to the Lord, nor were bound
precisely to the eighth day, only they might not bring them sooner: for so we
find it was in the like case of bringing their sacrifices, Lev. 22. 27. It
shall be seven days under the damme, and from the eighth day and thenceforth
it shall be accepted for an offering made by fire unto the Lord.

Verse. 38. Neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field,
etc.] This restraint of the Israelites from eating that which was torn of
beasts was, 1. because all flesh of beasts that was not rightly purified from
the blood was unclean by the Law; 2. because the bodies of clean cattle became
legally unclean by being torn by wild beasts of prey which were all unclean;
and 3. to teach the Israelites by abhorring the flesh of beasts thus killed, to
abhor all rapine and cruelty, as sins most odious in the sight of God.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. THou shall not raise a false report.] Some read this clause as it is
in the margin, Thou shall not receive a false report: The word in the original
will bear both interpretations: and indeed if it be a sin to raise, that is,
to be the first author of a false report; then must it needs be also a sin
to receive such a report, and so to carry it and spread it abroad amongst
others.

Put not thine hand with the wicked to be an unrighteous witness.] That is,
afford not thine help and aid to those that combine themselves together to
accuse any man falsely before a magistrate; for he that lends a helping hand to
the furtherance of any such wickedness may in that sense be said to put his
hand to it. Yet because it is manifest that the Lord here speaks of helping by
bearing false witness, it may well be that this phrase, put not thine hand,
may be used here with reference to that ancient rite of men's putting forth
their hand to lay it upon something when they were to take an oath, as Abraham's
servant put his hand upon his masters thigh, Genesis 24. 2. and as we use to lay
our hands upon a Bible when we swear.

Verse. 2. Neither shall thou speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest
judgment.] That is, neither must the judge respect the multitude of the
parties friends upon whom sentence is to pass; nor the multitude of the judges
that consent to wrong judgment; nor must witnesses, or any other, either for
fear or favor of the many oppose the truth.

Verse. 4. If thou meet with thine enemies ox, or his ass agoing astray, thou
shall surely bring it back to him.] This is also meant of bringing home any
other thing that is lost. Deuteronomy. 22. 3. In like manner thou shall do with his
ass, and so shall thou do with his raiment, and with all things of thy
brothers which he has lost, etc.

Verse. 5. If thou see the ass of him that hates thee lying under his burden,
etc.] This is also meant of relieving the cattle any way endangered.

Verse. 7. Keep thee far from a false matter, etc.] Though all lying be
sinful, and may be here implicitly forbidden; yet I conceive that which is
here directly and principally forbidden, is lying in or at the seat of justice,
as is manifest by the following clause, and the innocent and righteous slay
thou not; which must needs be meant of innocent men's being put to death by
means of unrighteous judgment: so that the principal thing intended in this
Law is, that judges should be mavelous shy either to admit of a false
testimony from others, or to give false judgment themselves especially when it
is against the life of a man.

For I will not justify the wicked.] These words imply two reasons, why judges
must take heed of false judgment, and of condemning the innocent and
righteous. 1. Because the judge is not to do in Gods name what the Lord will
not do; and God will not justify the wicked and so condemn the righteous: 2.
Because the Lord will not justify such wicked judges, as condemn the
righteous, when they come before his Tribunal.

Verse. 11. But the seventh year thou shall let it rest and lie still.] That is,
neither plow it, nor sow it, nor gather those fruits which should this year
grow of themselves: for so we find this Law more fully expressed, Levit. 25.
20. And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? Behold we shall
not sow, etc. Where their distrust of want of food is answered with a promise
that in the sixth year the Lord would cause the earth to yield enough for three
years; Then will I command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall
bring forth fruit for three years. Now God appointed this Sabbath year, first
to give rest to the land (and it was a sign of a very fruitful country if it
lay fallow but once in seven years) secondly, to give rest to the servants, who
had by this much ^ase every seventh year; Thirdly to provide for the poor, who
now gathered freely of the fruit of every man's ground for their present use,
and this was given to the Lord who gave them the land; Fourthly, that they all
might have the more liberty to exce^cise themselves in holy things, as the
learning of the Law, which was this year with more then ordinary solemnity to
be read in the audience of all the people, Deuteronomy. 31. 10, 11, 12. And Moses
commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years thou shall read this
Law before all Israel, etc. And fifthly, that it might be a memor^all of the
creation and Gods rest on the seventh day, and a shadow of our rest in Christ,
and that the rest of the land might teach how exact God is in requiring his
Sabbaths.

That the poor of thy people may eat.] Namely such corn as grew this year of
it own accord (as it used to do in some good store in those countries) of the
grains scattered in the former harvest, as also the fruit of their vineyards,
and oliveyards, etc. and of this the owners might eat as well as the poor,
Levit. 25. 6. And the Sabbath of the land shall be meat for you, for thee and
for thy servant, etc. though they might not gather and store it up.

Verse. 12. Six days thou shall do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall
rest, etc.] One reason of repeating this Law here may be well thought to be
this, to let them know that they were not exempted from the peculiar
sanctifying of the seventh day on this Sabbath y^ar, but were rather bound more
religiously to keep it holy; and also besides by placing it amongst the
judicial Laws, the magistrate was enjoined to see that it was kept.

Verse. 13. And make no mention of the names of other gods, etc.] That is, let
them be so abominable to you, that you may detest to make any mention of them,
that it may be irksome to you to name them or hear them named. We must not
think that it was to the Israelites or is to us a breach of this Law any way or
upon any occasion to name the gods of the heathens, for we see they are often
named in the Scripture. The meaning of this Law we may gather from that place
of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 3. But fornication and all uncleanness or
covetousness let it not be once named amongst you. For as the Apostles meaning
there is only that those horrid sins should be an abomination to them; so
here the Lords meaning is only that they should abhor all false gods so as
to d^test their very names, and of this detestation of Idols is that spoken,
Hos. 2. 17. I will take away the names of Baalim out of her mouth, and they
shall no more be remembered by their name.

Verse. 15. And none shall appear before me empty.] To wit, at the feast of
unleavened bread, and so also at neither of the three feasts, whereon they were
all bound to appear before the Lord. See Deuteronomy. 16. 16, 17.

Verse. 16. And the feast of harvest.] Called also the feast of weeks, or, of
sevens, Exodus 34. 22. And thou shall observe the feast of weeks, etc. To wit,
because it was seven weeks after the former feast, upon the fiftieth day
following, called thereupon Pentecost; and it was celebrated not only in
remembrance of the giving of the Law, which was given the fiftieth day after
their going out of Egypt, but also by way of thanksgiving for their harvest:
and therefore the first bread or loaves of the new fruit was then offered,
Levit. 23. 16, 17. Even unto the morrow after the seventh Sabbath shall ye
number fifty days, etc. Ye shall bring out of your habitations two loaves,
etc. as in the end of the Passover, the first ears of corn.

And the feast of in-gathering, which is in the end of the year, etc.] The
feast of in-gathering, to wit of all the fruits, not only corn which was
before inned, but all other fruits, as wine, and olives, etc. It was also
called the feast of boothes, or, of tabernacles, Levit. 23. 24. The fifteenth
day of this seventh month shall be a feast of tabernacles, etc. and the time
allotted for this feast is said here to be in the end of the year, because
though Abib was appointed to be the first month for the computation of those
things that concerned religion, as their holy fea^ts, etc. yet the month
Tisri, the seventh in this account, was yet the first month for their civil
affairs; and so the feast of tabernacles being kept in this month, when one
year was ended and another began, therefore it is said to be in the end of the
year. Now this feast was kept, first in remembrance of Gods favor to them in
the wilderness, when they dwelt in boothes, Levit. 23. 43. I made the children
of Israel to dwell in boothes, when I brought them out of Egypt, etc. And
secondly, to show their thankfulness for the fruits which in this month they
reaped, Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14. Thou shall observe the feast of tabernacles seven
days after thou have gathered in thy corn, and thy wine: And thou shall
rejoice in thy feast, etc. And thirdly, to figure out Christ's coming into the
world at this time of the year, to dwell in the tabernacle of our flesh, John
1. 14. And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, etc. and their being
strangers and travelers here in this world.

Verse. 17. Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the Lord
thy God.] That is, at the three great feasts before mentioned, the feast of
unleavened bread, the feast of harvest or Pentecost, and the feast of
in-gathering, called also the feast of tabernacles; then all the males were
enjoined to appear before the Lord, and that in the place which he should
choose, Deuteronomy. 16. 16. namely, all that were able: for those that were sick,
infants and aged men, were doubtless excused. And though only the males were
by this law tied to this service, because women had many occasions to keep them
at home; yet even the women might if they pleased go up unto these feasts, and
often doubtless did: for so it is sa^d of Hannah, the mother of Samuel, 1.
Sam. 2. 19. She came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice; and of
the virgin Mary, Luke 2. 41. Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at
the feast of the Passover. As for the place where they met together, it was
doubtless first the tabernacle, and afterward the temple; because there God
dwelt, as it were, amongst his people; and therefore there it is said they
should appear before the Lord. And though it may seem somewhat questionable
where they met to keep these feasts, all the time the ark was in one place and
the tabernacle in another (as it was for many years after the ark was taken and
carried away by the Philistines) yet upon good consideration I think we may
well conclude that they were kept where the tabernacle was, because there was
the altar of burnt-offerings, and the offering of sacrifices was a main part of
the holy service of these feasts.

Verse. 18. Thou shall not offer the blood of thy sacrifice with leavened bread,
etc.] Because the very same words almost are repeated Exodus 34. 25. only there
the Passover is expressly mentioned, Thou shall not offer the blood of my
sacrifice with leaven, neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the
Passover be left unto the morning; therefore the most and best Expositours do
understand this place particularly of the Paschall Lamb, to wit, that they
might not eat any leavened bread with the Passover, and that they might not
leave any part of the Paschall Lamb until the morning; the fat being here by
a Synecdoche put for all, and specially mentioned, because this in all
sacrifices was offered to God. Yet I see not why this place may not be
understood generally of all sacrifices; since it is evident, first, that leaven
was forbidden in all meat offerings, which were always offered together with
their sacrifices: Levit. 2. 11. No meat offering which ye shall bring unto the
Lord shall be made with leaven; for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey in
any offering of the Lord made by fire. And secondly, that though the flesh of
some sacrifices might be eaten the next day, yet the fat thereof was to be
presently burnt upon the altar. See Levit. 7. 2, 3.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not seethe a kid in his mothers milk.] Either this must
be literally understood according to the very words, that they might not seethe
a kid, or a lamb, etc. in the milk of the damme, because this had some
appearance of cruelty, which the Lord by this ceremony taught them to abhor;
and indeed upon the same ground other like laws were given this people, as
Deuteronomy. 22. 6, 7. If a birds nest chance to be before thee in the way, etc. thou
shall not take the damme with the young. Or else rather it must be understood
concerning the age of the kid, to wit, that they might not offer a kid to the
Lord, or eat it themselves, whilst the flesh was only ^erely a milky frothy
substance, thereby to teach them to avoid all foolish intemperancie and
delicacie in their feeding: and upon this ground they were forbidden to bring
the firstborn of their cattle, or any other sacrifice, till they were eight
days old; because so long they were but as the dammes milk.

Verse. 20. Behold I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, etc.]
That is, the promised Messiah, the son of God, and Angel of the covenant,
Mal. 3. 1. Who led them by day in the pillar of a cloud, and by night in a
pillar of fire, and at last brought them into the land of Canaan; of whom it is
said, 1. Cor. 10. 9. that the Israclites in the wilderness tempted him, and so
were justly destroyed by him, therein finding that verified which the Lord here
says, verse. 21. that he would not pardon their transgressions.

Verse. 21. For my name is in him.] That is, he is the Lord Jehovah as I am, of
the same Essence, Power, Majesty, and Authority: for so it is said of Christ,
Heb. 1. 3. that he was the brightness of his Fathers glory, and the express
image of his person, and one God with him, The Father is in me, and I in him,
says Christ, John 10. 38. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, says the Apostle, 2. Cor. 5. 19. And so it was prophesied of him,
Jer. 23. 6. This is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness.

Verse. 28. And I will send hornets before thee, etc.] This may be meant of
stinging terrors, wherewith God struck the hearts of the Canaanites; or it may
be understood literally of true hornets sent before the Israelites, and the
rather, because first God had spoken of the fear wherewith the Canaanites
should be stricken in the former verse; and it is not usual in the Scripture
to express any thing plainly first, and then afterward figuratively and
obscurely. And secondly he tells the Israelites that God had done this for them
which he had promised. See Josh. 24. 12.

Verse. 31. And I will set thy bounds from the red sea, etc.] The bounds of the
promised land are here set down, to wit, first their Eastern bound, which was
the red sea; and secondly the sea upon which the land of the Philistines lay,
called the Mediterranean sea, which was their West border; and thirdly the
desert, which lay on the South of Canaan, to with the desert of Shur or Paran,
which was their South border, on which side ran the river of Sychar, Josh. 13.
3. called the river of Egypt, Genesis 15. 18. for it runs out of Nilus into the
Mediterranean sea: and therefore this also is there made the Southern bound;
and fourthly the river, which is the great river Euphrates, which was the North
bound.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd he said unto Moses, Come up unto the Lord, etc.] God having given
Moses those judicial laws set down in the former chapters, and Moses being now
to carry them to the people, upon their consent to make a covenant betwixt God
and them; the Lord before his departure gives him this command for his coming
up again with Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of Israel,
appointing him to leave the people at the foot of the mount, but to bring up
Aaron and his two eldest sons and the seaventy Elders into the mo^nt, that
is, a little way up into the mount, where they might be eyewitnesses of part of
Gods glory, as is expressed afterward, verse. 9, 10. being to approach nearer to
the Lord then the people were; and then there to leave them also to worship
afar off, whilst Moses went up higher to the top of the mount, into the dark
cloud, verse. 18. for so it follows, verse. 2. Moses alone shall come near the
Lord, but they shall not come nigh. It is questioned by Expositours who these
seventy Elders were: W^ read of seventy Elders that were chosen to bear part
of the government with Moses, and received therefore from the Lord an
extraordinary measure of gifts of Gods spirit to enable them thereunto, as you
may read Numb. 11. 16, 17. but that was done after the camp was removed from
Sinai, and pitched in Kibroth-Hattaavah, as it is Numb. 11. 34. which was the
next station beyond Sinai: Numb. 33. 16. And they removed from the desert of
Sinai, and pitched at Kibroth-Hattaavah. Nor can it be meant of those Judges
chosen by Moses before this, by the counsel of Jethro, as you read Exodus 18.
25. they were doubtless far more then seventy, seeing there were amongst
them Rulers over every ten families amongst all the tribes. I^ suffices us
therefore to know, that whereas there were always, even when they were in
Egypt, certain Elders in every tribe that were principal men amongst them* God
now appointed that of these seventy should come up with Aaron and his sons
into the mount: and these happily were chosen both now for witnesses, and
afterward at Kibroth-Hattaavah for helpers to Moses in his government: yea
some add, that God appointed seventy rather then any other number, as a
memorial of the seventy souls that went down with J^cob into Egypt, and
consequently of Gods blessing upon them in bringing them within a few years to
so great a multitude.

Verse. 2. Neither shall the people go up with him.] That is, they shall not at
all go up into the mount, as Aaron and the Elders did.

Verse. 4. And Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, etc.] To wit in a book.
See Hebr. 9. 19. The ten commandments in the stone tables were written by the
finger of God himself, but the judicial laws Moses wrote in a book. And thus
covenants agreed upon betwixt party and party are usually committed to writing.

And builded an altar under the hill, and twelve pillars, etc.] Both the altar
and the pillars were outward sacramental signs of the covenant which was now
to be established betwixt God and his people; the altar representing God in
Christ, the first and chief party in the covenant; and the twelve pillars, the
twelve tribes.

Verse. 5. And he sent young men of the children of Israel which offered
burntofferings, etc.] The common opinion of most Expositours is, that the
firstborn were the priests and sacrificers amongst the people* until the
Levites were taken in their stead, Numb. 3. 41. And thou shall take the Levites
for me in stead of all the firstborn, etc. and consequently that these were
the young men here spoken of* And indeed the word here used, in the original
does not always signify youths, in regard of years not yet grown up to man's
estate, but young men, fit for service and ministry to their Elders; as Genesis
14. 23, 24. I will not, says Abraham, take from a thread even to a
shoe-latchet, etc. Save only that which the young men have eaten; and Exodus
33. 11. His servant Joshua, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle.
And so in many other places. But because it is I think unquestionable that
before the people of God came to be a body politic, the chief and governors
of every family were the sacrificers; neither do we ever read that the
firstborn were set apart for public sacrifices, since the Lord challenged
them for his, upon the coming forth of his people, Sanctify unto me all the
firstborn, Exodus 13. 2. It is rather probable that Moses and Aaron, and their
chief Governors, had as yet the chief hand in offering public sacrifices, and
that then young men, perhaps of the firstborn, were only chosen to minister
to Moses and Aaron in fetching and killing the sacrifices, and other services
belonging thereunto; and are therefore said here to have offered
burnt-offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord. Where by
oxen other sacrifices are also employed, these being named as the principal i^
stead of all: for Heb. 9. 19. the Apostle speaking of this place, adds also
calves and goats.

Verse. 6. And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basins, etc.] Which
was so reserved to be sprinkled upon the people. This blood was to signify the
blood of Christ, by which we are reconciled to God, and by virtue whereof the
covenant of grace is established betwixt God and us: and the dividing of this
blood (half being sprinkled upon the altar, which represented God, and half
upon the people) signified that the performance of the covenant by both
parties, Gods favor and grace to his people* and the peoples faith and
obedience to God, was to be ascribed to the blood of Christ.

And half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.] And so also on the book,
Heb. 9. 19. Which as it seems was laid on the altar; making use herein also of
water, scarlet, wool, and hyssope, Heb. 9. 19. though Moses here names them
not* because so the legal sprinklings were usually done, for there was water
intermingled with the blood, because the blood otherwise growing cold would
have been thick, and not fit to be sprinkled, nor perhaps enough for the use.

Verse. 8. And sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold, etc.] That is, all
the people that stood about him, some for all* or all as they came to him; or
the Elders in stead of the people. See Levit. 4. 15.

Verse. 10. And they saw the God of Israel.] That is, the signs of Gods
glori^us presence; for never man saw God, nor can see him, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Whom
(...) man has seen nor can see.

And there was under his feet as it were a paved work of saphir stone, etc.]
Not that the Lord showed himself in any humane shape (See Deuteronomy. 4. 15.) but
this is spoken because of the situation of this saphir work, that it was
beneath the signs of his glory, as a pavement under the feet.

Verse. 11. And upon the Nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand.]
That is, though these Elders and Nobles of Israel saw the glory of God in an
extraordinary manner upon the mount, yet God was pleased to spare them, that
they received no hurt thereby; which is noted as a special mercy of God, in
regard that men, yea the greatest and noblest of men, by reason of their
frailty are not able to endure such a manifestation of glory, should not God
withold it from being ^urtfull to them.

Also they saw God and did eat and drink.] That is, Aaron and his sons. The
Elders and Nobles of Israel, before spoken of, saw the signs of Gods presence,
and yet were so far from receiving any hurt thereby, that returning home
again unto the people, where they had before their coming up into to the mount
offered up diverse sacrifices to the Lord, they did there with their
peace offerings feast together, rejoicing in the goodness of God to them, and
the honor he had done to them.

Verse. 12. And the Lord said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount, etc.]
Hitherto Moses stood afar off with the seventy Elders; now he is called
nearer, as God had before said, ver. 2. And Moses shall come near unto the
Lord, etc.

And be there.] That is, continue there. Thus God makes known to him that his
stay should be now longer then usual; and thereupon it is that he takes order,
ver. 14. that Aaron and Ur should in his room determine the affairs of the
people.

Verse. 13. And Moses rose up, and his minister Joshua.] Joshua was not before
mentioned, ver. 1. because he was as Moses minister and continual attendant;
and therefore it was not necessary that he should be expressed by name. See
chap. 32. ver. 17.

Verse. 14. Tarry ye here for us, etc.] Either this must be meant of such a stay
in that place of the Mount, as that withal they might go as often as they
pleased unto the people; or else rather, this word here must be taken in a
larger extent, comprehending the place where the people were in their tents,
and only implying that they should not go up with him to the top of the mount.

Verse. 16. And the seventh d^y he called unto Moses ^^e of the ^idst of the
cloud.] Moses having staid six days in the higher part of the mount, but
without the cloud, that in that time his mind might by degrees be taken off
from all worldly thoughts and cares, and raised up with a desire and longing
expectation of beholding Gods glory, to which he was not yet admitted, upon the
seventh day God called him, and he went into the midst of the cloud.

Verse. 18. And Moses was in the cloud forty days and forty nights.] To wit,
after he went into the midst of the cloud, and was there with God: for so it is
expressed, chap. 34. 28. And he was there with the Lord forty days, etc. All
which time Joshua it seems stayed upon the mount without the cloud, waiting for
Moses, sustaining himself happily all the while with the Manna that fell from
heaven, and the water of the brook, mentioned Deuteronomy. 9. 21. that descended out
of the mount; for there Moses found him when he came down from God; neither did
he know what the Israelites had done in the camp. See Exodus 32. 17. But for
Moses, he was with God within the cloud all those forty days and forty
nights; and therefore doubtless did neither eat nor drink (wherein his
condition was a shadow of the life of the glorified Saints in Gods presence in
heaven) but was continually employed in beholding the glory of Gods presence,
in receiving instructions from God about all things that concerned his people,
and viewing that pattern of the tabernacle, and all things belonging thereto,
which was shown him in the mount.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 5. ANd shittim wood.] This was doubtless some choice kind of wood, of
great esteem in those times, as Box and Ebony, and such sorts of wood are now
amongst us; which either they procured from the places adjoining in the
wilderness, where it grew (it seems) in great abundance (and thence happily
that place in the plains of Moab, where the Israelites pitched their tents, was
called Abel-shittim, Number. 33 49.) or else it was brought out of Egypt, at least
by the richer sort of them, for their own private use in their tents or
household utensils: which seems the more probable, because of that passage,
Exodus 35. 24. Every man with whom was found shittim-wood for any work of the
service, brought it: whereby it seems that some of them had it lying by them as
a choice treasure.

Verse. 8. And let them make me a sanctuary.] That is, the tabernacle
consecrated to God for the duties of his public service, the visible sign of
Gods presence with, and protection of his people, Levit. 26. 11, 12. And I will
set my tabernacle among you: and my soul shall not abhor you, and I will walk
among you, etc. It was a type, 1. of Christ's person, whence he is said to be,
Heb. 8. 2. A minister of the sanctuary* and of the true tabernacle, which the
Lord pitched and not man, by whom God does manifest himself unto us, and in
whom we have access unto God; and 2. of the Church, the habitation of God by
the spirit, 2. Cor. 6. 16. Ye are the temple of the living God, etc. and every
Christian, in whose heart God dwells, Heb. 3. 6. Whose ^ouse, are we, if w^
hold f^^t the confidence, and the rejoicing of hope firm unto the end.

T^^^ I may ^w^^l ^^ong^^ th^^.] This i^ add^^ (...) ^ ^^rong mo^i^e to make
the^ give (...) toward the ^^^ing of the (...).

Verse. 9. Aft^r the (...) of ^^e (...) and ^h^ (...) ^f (...) the (...)
th^^^^f, etc.] God did not only in word^ (...) to Mo^^^ aft^^ wh^t manner he
would h^ve every thing made in the ^abernacle, but th^^e was (...) in a vision
represented to his sight the very form and propo^^ion of th^^, ver. 40. Look
that thou ^ake the^ after their pat^ern which was (...) th^e in the ^o^nt: Ev^n
as he did also aft^rwards to David, for the m^king of the ^^^ple, and all the
f^rniture ^^^^eof 1. Chron. 28. 19. All this, s^id D^^^d, (...) Lord m^^e me
understand in writing, by his h^nd upon (...) ev^n ^ll the works of this
p^ttern. Now the reason why the Lord was so ex^ct herein, that ^o^es might be
sure to make all things according to his appointment, was partly because the
tabernacle and all things apper^^ining ther^unto were to be types and shadows
of spiritual and heave^ly things, ^ppertaining to Christ and his pri^^^hood;
to which end the Lord also ^he^ed him the p^ttern of those things above in the
mount. So that ind^^d the pa^^ern which was showed to Moses in the mount, was
not only a p^ttern of the tabemacle and those things app^rtaining thereunto,
which Moses was (...) ma^e; but withal likewise a pattern or sigure of those
spiritual and h^avenly things which concern^d the ^^^rnall priosthood of
Christ. And hence it is that the Apo^^le ^pplyeth this direction giv^n to
Moses, to make all things according to the pattern that was showed him in the
mount, to manifest that he did not unfitly call those legal utensils, which
Moses made, an example and shadow of heavenly things, Heb. 8. 5. Namely,
because if the pattern ^he^^d him in the mount was a shadow and type of
heavenly things, then necessarili^ those things that Moses made after this
pattern were also such too.

Verse. 10. And they shall make an ark of s^i^^im-wood.] The use of this was
principally to keep the two tables of the Law in it, ver. 16. And thou shall
pat into the ark the testimony* etc. And so it was a sign of Gods pre^ence
among^t them, as he was their Lord and Lawgiver, ordaining and requiring the
covenant of works, This do and live; and threatening death to them that
^^ansgressed his commandments.

Two cubits and an half shall be the l^ngth thereof* etc.] It is generally held
that a cubit amongst the Hebrews contained a foot and an half of our measures:
the ark therefore was a yard ^^d nine inches long, and three quarters of a yard
high and broad.

Verse. 11. And thou shall over-lay it with pure gold, etc.] As the gold spent
in the whole work of the tabernacle, and the holy things thereof, was to set
forth the majesti^ of that great God who had chosen that for his dwelling
place; so was this also wherewith the ark was overlaid; but besides also, this
of the ark was parti^ularly to teach them what pr^^ious account they were to
make of the Law of God, tha^ was laid up there in so costly a cabinet.

And shall mak^ upon it a crown of gold round about.] Or a border which was for
the closing of the cover of the ar^, and withal for ornament.

Verse. 14. And th^^ shall put tho stav^s into the rings by the ^ides of the
ark, etc.] And so not being suffered to touch the (...) they were taught
thereby the more reverently to esteem of it.

Verse. 16. And thou shall put into the ark the testimony, etc.] That is, the
two tables whereon the Decalogue was written, which were a testimony of the
covenant betwixt God and the people, and testified what it was that God
required of them. See Exodus 31. 18. also ver. 22. of this chapter, and Exodus
38. 21. Therefore also were they called the tables of the covenant, Deuteronomy. 9. 9.
and the ark wherein they were was called the ark of the covenant of the Lord,
Numb. 10. 33. as upon the same reason the book of the Law is also called the
testimony, 2. King* 11. 12. and the Gospel, 1. Cor. 2. 1. the testimony of God.

Verse. 17. And thou shall make a mercy-seat, etc.] Or, a propitiatory covering,
a type of Christ, whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, Romans 3. 25. by
whom we are covered from the wrath of God, and curse of the Law, so that the
handwriting that was against us, which was contrary to us, is taken out of the
way, Col. 2. 14. and have Gods will revealed unto us.

Verse. 18. And thou shall make two Cherubims, etc.] These Cherubs were to
represent the holy Angels, who continually attend God in heaven to do him
service, and were therefore signs in that place of Gods presence.

Verse. 20. And the Cherebims shall stretch out their wings, etc.] The wings of
these Cherubims being thus stretched forth did cover the top of the mercy-seat,
and compass in that place (their wings meeting together on each side of the
mercy-seat) from whence the Lord intended to speak unto Moses; by an audible
voice* of all things which he would give him in charge for the children of
Israel, ver. 22. And I will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, etc.
But withal by stretching forth of their wings was signified the readiness of
the Angels to do all willing service to God* to Christ, and to his Church and
people: And by their hiding of that place from whence the voice of the Lord
came to Moses, the Israelites were taught to content themselves with that which
God was pleased by his word to reveal unto them, and not to search further.

And their faces shall look one to another, toward the mercy-seat, etc.] Hereby
was sgnified that the Angels with one joint consent are always attentive to
execute Gods command, to wait upon Christ* his Church and people, into whose
mysteries now revealed in the Gospel they desire to look, 1. Pet. 1. 12.

Verse. 22. And there I will meet with thee, etc.] And indeed there specially
did God speak to them, though not there only. See chap. 29. 42. and Numb. 12.
5.

Verse. 23. Thou shall also make a table of shittim-wood* etc.] Hitherto God had
given Moses direction for the making of these things that were to be in the
most holy place: here he proceeds to give direction for those things that were
to be done in the Sanctuary or holy place within the vail, and so in the first
place for making of the table of shewbread. Now this table was 1. to be a
memorial of Gods miraculous feeding the twelve tribes in the wilderness with
bread from heaven* 2* to teach them when they came into the land of Canaan,
that all their provision there was from God* and that they were continually fed
at Gods table (for so much was employed, in that part of their food was still
set before God, as by way of acknowledgement that all was (...) that so they
might be thankful to him and use his gifts soberly and moderately, as if they
were at Gods table; ^^^^ly, to be a type of Gods feeding his people and family
with the true bread of life, Christ, and that both in the word and in the
sacrament of the Lords supper (for indeed therein we may truly say with
Solomon, Prove. 9. 2. The Wisdom has mingled her wine, and has furnished her
table; and as, Psalm. 36. 8. That we are abundantly satisfied with the fatness
of Gods house) and likewise of that fullness of joy which God has prepared for
the faithful in heaven, of which Christ speaking says, Luke 22. 29. 30. I
appoint unto you a kingdom* as my father has appointed unto me, that ye may
eat and drink at my table in my kingdom.

Two cubits shall be the length thereof, etc.] According therefore to our
measures it was a yard long, half a yard broad, and three quarters of a yard
high.

Verse. 24. And make thereto a crown of gold round about.] This crown was upon
the table by the very edge of it, to keep from falling such things as were set
thereon, and withal for ornament.

Verse. 25. And thou shall make unto it a border of an hand-breadth round
about.] This border was surely either the very frame wherewith the feet* of the
table, above close under the board, were joined together, and whereon the board
of the table was by some means fastened; or else rather, it was a border for
ornament round about the frame, as is usual, to hide the joints where the
frame and feet were joynted together.

And thou shall make a golden crown to the border thereof round ab^ut.] This
was not the same crown mentioned verse. 24. but another, which went round about
the frame of the table, upon or over the border, and that only for ornament.

Verse. 27. Over against the border shall the rings be, etc.] That is, close
under the border in the upper part of the frame, that it might be carried the
more conveniently.

Verse. 29. And thou shall make the dish^^ ther^of, etc.] Four kinds of vessels
are here named belonging to the table: hard it is to say for what purpose they
were severally used; yet according to our translation the most probable opinion
is, that first the dishes were to hold the loaves of shewbread, and some of
them happily to hold franckincense which was put upon ^ach row of the
shewbread, Levit. 24. 7. secondly, that the spoons were to put in the
franckince^^e into the dishes, and to take it out again when it was to be
burned upon the altar of incense, Levit. 24. 7. and thirdly, that the two last
kind of vessels were two several sorts of covers (as is evident in the text,
where they are called covers and bowls to cover withal) the one happily being
plates for the covering of the loaves, the other bowls* for the cov^^ing of the
dishes of franckincense, and which might also serve for the burning of the
franckincense.

Verse. 30. And thou shall set upon the table shewbread before me always,
etc.] To wit, twelve loaves or cakes, each containing two homers or tenth deals
of fine flower which were set in ^wo rows upon the table, and changed every
Sabbath day, Levit* 24. 5. etc. And were therefore called sh^w-bread, because
they were alw^y^s set forth and showed as inthe presence of God.

Verse. 31. Thou shall make a candlestick of pure gold.] This candlesti^k was a
type of Christ, and that as he is and always has been both by his word and
spirit the light of the Church, John 12. 46. I am come a light into the world,
that whosoever believes in me should not abide in darkness.

Verse. 32. And six branches shall come out of the sides of it, etc.] The shaft
went upright in the midst, and then from this shaft went out six branches,
three on a side, one above another, and they went out by couples* one on the
one side, and righ^ over against that another on the other side; ^^ither were
they all of one length, for the nethermost branches were the longer, and the
uppe^most the shorter* so that they were all of one height above. Now these did
denote the Prophets and Priests before, and the Apostles, Evangelists and
Pastors since the days of Christ; who did all in their several times, places
and degrees, receive their gifts and authority from Christ, and were as so many
burning and shining lamps, as it is said of the B^ptist* John 5. 35.

Verse. 33. Three bowls made like unto almonds with a knop, etc.] These bowls,
knops, and flowers, such as are usually in candlesticks, were only for
o^nament, yet might also signify the several gifts and ornaments wherewith
Christ dot^ endue his ministers; and there was three of each in every branch.

Verse. 34. And in the candlestick shall be four bowls, etc.] That is, in the
shaft of the candlestick: as in the branches there were bowls, and knops, and
flowers for ornament, so also in the shaft or body of the candlestick which
went up right in the midst of the branches; yet in this there were four of
each, whereas there were but three in the branches.

Verse. 35. And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same, etc.]
That* i^, just ove^ the first and lowest knop in the shaft came out two
branches, one on each side, and so over the second, and third; and then in the
upper part of the shaft, above the place where the branches went forth, was
there a bowl, a knop, and a ^lower.

Verse. 37. And thou shall make the seve^ lamps thereof.] That is, the sockets
where the oil was put to feed the light, which may well signify the many^old
gifts of the spirit, as Rev. 4. 5. And there were ^even lamps of fire burning
before the throne, which ^r^ the seven spirits of God. Now these seven lamps
^ere on the top of the shaft and the ^ix branches thereof.

That they may giv^ light over against i^.] That is, round about it. See Numb.
8* ^.

Verse. 38. And the to^gs thereof and the sn^ffdis^es thereof shall be of p^re
gold.] The tongs or s^uffers were appointed to raise up the wick of the lamps,
or to cleanse the droppi^gs of it, and the^ the (...) so taken away was put
into the sn^ffdishes.

Verse. 39. Of a t^lent of pure g^ld shall ^e make it.] That is, of a^ hundred
an^ twenty pound weig^^.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 1. MOreover thou shall make the t^bernacl^ with ten curtains, etc.] This
word tabernacl^ is sometimes taken in a larger sense, including the court also;
but h^re it is only taken for the enclosure of the ten cur^ains which did
compass^ the Sanctuary of the most holy place.

With Cherubi^^ of c^^ni^g ^^rk, etc.] Th^se Ch^^ubims w^r^ a visibl^ ^^g^^ of
Gods presence, and of (...) Angles ministry in the Church, whereof the
^^b^rnacle was a type.

Verse. 2. The length of one curtain, etc.] According to our m^asures every
curtain was four^t^^n yards long, and two yard^ broad; and so the breadth of
all the ten curtains togeth^r was tw^nty y^rds: and thu^ they w^r^ ordered,
they were laid in the length of them cross athwart the tabernacle, in the
breadth ofit, from the North to the South. Now the tab^rnacle b^ing fifteen
yards compass from the ground on the Southsid^ to the ground on the Northsid^
(for it was on both sid^s five yards high and on the top five y^rd^ bro^d*) the
curtain^ of four^t^^^ yards length would cov^^ i^ fr^^ one sid^ to the oth^^
within half^a yard of the ground on ^ach side: and again, the t^bernacle b^^ng*
fif^^^n yard^ long, the breadth of these t^^ curtains, making together twenty
yards, would cover the tabernacle in the length of it, and then four yards and
an half would b^ l^f^ to hang down as a coveri^g f^^ the fa^^he^t end of the
taber^acl^ Eastward, within h^l^^^ yard of the ground, as on the sides, and it
might lean over on the fore^^ont half a yard.

Verse. 3. The f^^^ curtains shall be coupled tog^th^^^ etc.] S^w^d or f^st^ned
together, and so should make two great curtain^* which were also coupl^d
tog^^her wit^ loop^ and ta^h^^, as is ^xpr^ss^d in the following v^^s^^.

Verse. 4. And t^o^ sh^lt (...) loop^ of ^l^w ^p^^ the ^dg^ of on^ curtain,
etc.] The meaning of this clause is, That there should be loops of blew set
upon the ^dg^^ of the two g^^^^ curtain^ that lay n^xt together, when the
^urtains w^^^ spread over the tab^^nacle, to wit upon the farthest edg^
W^stw^rd of the ^^rst gr^^t cur^^in wh^^^ it was to be coupled to the other
great curtain, and upon that edg^ of the second cu^^^in w^^re i^ was to (...)
coupled to the (...) and so with thos^ t^^h^^ o^^gold* mentioned verse. 6. these
loops on the edg^^ of the two curt^in^ w^r^ (...) together. Now this, I
co^^^iv^* was th^^ ord^r^d, both ^ha^ th^s^ loop^ and taches on the outside
might show the division of the holy place from the most holy* (for jus^ under
that place the vail divid^d them, verse. 33. Thou sh^l^ ha^g up the vail un^^r
the tac^es) and also that being so ^ast^ned they might b^ taken asu^der, and
that with the more conv^^i^nci^* and l^ss^ troubl^ they might (...) t^^m down,
and fold them up when they removed the tabernacle. But besides, the fastening
(...) curtains together signified the spirits (...) o^ coupli^g* o^ the Sain^^
tog^^her by faith and love in Christ, of which the Apostle speaks, Ep^^s* 4* 3*
4. wh^r^ he exhorts us to endeavor to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond
of peace, telling us that they that are Christians are one body and spirit,
even as they are called in one hope of their calling, etc. And the coupling of
the two great curtains together to m^^e o^^ (...) mig^^ also (...) ^^at the
Sain^s both in heaven (...) earth, ^owever ^eve^ed ^n place one from anot^er,
do make but one Church, all things (...) in heaven and earth being gathered
together in one, even in Christ, Ephesians. 1. 10.

Verse. 6. And it shall be one taber^acle.] This is add^d as a reason why the
two great curtains, made up each of them of five le^^er curtains, should be
thus coupled together with loops and taches, to wit, that they mig^t make one
tabernacle; which had not been, if (as some conceive it was) each ^^ve had been
coupled together, and n^^ the five to the five. See ver. 11.

Verse. 7. And thou shall make curtains of goats hair, etc.] To wit, goats hair
spunne by women (Exodus 35. 26. And all the women, whose heart stirred them up
in wisdom, spunne goats hair) and woven into stuff, not much unlike our
chamlet.

Eleven curtains thou shall make.] Whereas the embroydered curtains were but
ten: the reason see in ver. 9.

Verse. 8. The length of one c^rt^in shall be thirty c^bits.] Two cubits, that
is, a yard longer then the embroydered o^es: and so these reached on both sides
to the ground, whereas the other came ^hort of the ground half a yard on both
sides. S^^ ver. 13.

Verse. 9. And s^alt do^^le the s^xt^ curt^i^ in the forefro^t of the
taber^acle.] It was doubled or folded back in the forefront, that it might
serve as a pent^ce to de^end the vail which did hang there.

Verse. 12. The half c^^^ain that remains, etc.] There being of this curtain
one covering more then of the embroydered curtains, it was the breadth of a
curtain, that is four cubits or two yards, of larger extent then the other;
which overplus was thus used, a yard of it was doubled back in the forefront,
as in ver. 9. And the other yard hung over on the backside, and so fell down
lower then the other curtain by half a yard, folded or doubled.

Verse. 13. And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit o^ the other side, etc.]
Se^ above, ver. 8.

Verse. 14. And thou shall make a covering for the tent of rams skins died
red, etc.] Of the measure and fashion of these two coverings there is no
mention, and happily because in all things they agreed with that of the goats
hair. These served for the service of the tabernacle and things in the same,
from the injury of the weather; and withal signified, 1. the safety of the
Church covered and hi^ from the injuries of the world, whence is that of the
Prophet, Isai. 4. 6. And there shall be a tabernacl^ for a shadow in the day
time for the heat, and for a place of r^fuge, and for a covert from storm and
from rain; and that of David, Psalm. 27. 5. In the time of trouble he shall hide
me in his pavilion; in the secret of his tabernacle he shall hide me, etc. And
2. the state of the Church then, which had the mysteries of Christ under
shadows and coverings, now taken away.

Verse. 15. And tho^ s^alt mak^ boards for the tabernacle of sh^^tim-wood,
standing up.] These boards of the tabernacle (which were fastened in silver
socl^^^, ver. 19.) signi^^ed the several members of the Church, w^o are built
upon the foundation of the Pr^ph^ts and Apostles, ^^s^^ Christ himself b^ing
the ^^i^f corner stone; In whom all the building fitly fram^d together grows
unto ^n holy temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. See Rev. 3. 12. Him that
overcom^th will I make a pillar in the temple of my God.

Verse. 16. Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, etc.] Which was the
height of the tabernacle, ten cubit^ or five yards.

Verse. 17. Two tenons shall there be in one board, etc.] That is, pieces of
board cut out of the same breadth and depth in the bottom of each board, to
put into the sockets for their fastening.

Verse. 18. And thou shall make boards for the tab^rnacle, twenty boards, etc.]
Twenty boards, each of them being a cubit and an half broad ver. 16. make
thir^^ cubits, that is fifteen yards; which was the length of the tabernacle.

Verse. 19. And thou shall make forty sockets of silver, etc.] Or footstalls,
having hollow mortaises for the tenons of the boards to be fastened in.

Verse. 22. And for the sides of the tabernacle Westward.] That is, for the
whole West end, from one side or corner of it to the other.

Verse. 23. And two boards shall thou make for the corners, etc.] These are
called the corner boards, either because they stood sloping, and so joined the
boards of the side and end together; or because they were made purposely of
another fashion, that standing in the corners they might strengthen the whole
frame of the tabernacle.

Verse. 24. And they shall be coupled together b^neath, etc.] That is, they
shall be cut or slit in the midst, and then doubled (the Hebrew word signifies
twined) they were to be cut just of the same proportion every way, and then
clapped together, one to line the other: and by this means though there were
eight boards in the end, yet the tabernacle was not twelve but ten cubits, that
is five yard^, broad.

And they shall be coupled together above the head of it into one ring.] This I
understand of a plate of gold, which was put about the ends of these
corner-doubled boards for better binding or fast closing them together.

Verse. 26. And tho^ shall make bars of shittim-wood; five for the boards of
the one side of the tabernacle, etc.] Four of these were rows ofbarres; for
it seems only the middle bar did reach from end to end, ver. 28. the other
were shorter bars, laid in four rows, two beneath and two above, and some
way joined together* where they met, for the strengthening of them.

Verse. 28. And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from
end to end.] There were two rows of bars went acrosse in the upper part of
the boards, and two in the nether part of the boards; but this bar, that went
athwart in the midst of the length of the boards, was all of one piece, one
entire bar, reaching from end to end. Now the fastening together of these
boards thus with bars s^gnified the uniting of all the members together by
one and the same spirit in Christ, from whom the whole body fi^ly joined
together, and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the
effectual working in the measure of every part, makes increase of the body,
unto the edifying of it self in love, Ephesians. 4. 16.

Verse. 31. And thou shall make a vail of blew, etc.] This vail, which closed in
the most holy place, signified, 1. the body of Christ, shadowing his divinity,
by which he has opened for us a way into the holiest, that is, into heaven:
Heb. 10. 19, 20. Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the
holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has
consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say, his flesh, etc. See also
Heb. 9. 8, 24. And 2. it signified that as yet the spiritual worship of God
was in a manner hidden under the vail of legal ceremonies, which should be
clearly revealed at the coming of Christ; 3. It might also signify the
separation betwixt the Church of the Jews and of the Gentiles, which is now
reconciled by Christ, Ephesians. 2. 14. For he is our peace, which hat^ made of
both one, and has broken down that partition wall; and therefore at the death
of Christ the vail rent asunder, Luke 23. 45.

Verse. 32. Their hooks shall be of gold, etc.] Which did hold up the cords upon
which the vail did ride, and were fastened to the heads of the pillars.

Verse. 33. And thou shall hang up the vail under the taches, etc.] Under those
taches mentioned ver. 6. so that this is added to show in what place this vail
was to be hung up.

Verse. 36. And thou shall make an hanging for the door, etc.] This hanging at
the very entrance into the Tabernacle signified with what fear and reverence we
should approach into Gods presence, and partake of his sacred mysteries, not
rushing in boldly upon them without any awe; as also the restraint of the
Jewish Church from such blessings as are now opened unto us in Christ: for
within this hanging the people might not come, Hebr. 9. 6.

Verse. 37. And thou shall make for the hangings five pillars of shittim-wood.
etc.] Because this lay open to the wind and weather, it had the more pillars to
strengthen it; the other had but four.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. ANd thou shall make an altar of shittim-wood.] Though the altar was
made of wood, yet it was covered over with brass to defend it from the heat
ofthe fire, which lay ever burning upon it; and besides the wideness and
length of it was such that the fire needed not come near the sides, but might
be kept within the compass of the grate, which was all of brass. Neither is
this Law contrary to that, Exodus 20. 24. An altar of earth thou shall make,
etc. For that is meant of altars to be made upon the sudden upon some
extraordinary occasion, which were only for a time, and so to be dissolved
again, such as Samuel and Elias made; but this was for the perpetual use of
the tabernacle, and was a type of Christ, who is now the only altar of his
Church, Heb. 13. 10. We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which
serve the tabernacle.

Verse. 2. And thou shall make the horns of it, etc.] To these they bound their
sacrifices, Psalm. 118. 27. Bind the sacrifice with cords, even to the horns of
the altar: And besides, horns usually signifying power and might (Habb. 3. 4.
He had horns coming out of his hand, and there was the hiding of his power)
these four horns signified the power of Christ for the salvation of his
people, gathered from the four corners of the world.

Verse. 3. And his flesh-hooks, etc.] The word in the original may comprehend
fire-tongs, forks, and other instruments, used as occasion was to remove and
lay in order the wood, coals, and flesh of the sacrifices: But our Translatours
have rendered it flesh-hooks, that is, those instruments with teeth, used to
take flesh out of pots, 1. Sam. 2. 14. All that the flesh-hook brought up, the
priest took for himself. See also 2. Chron. 4. 16.

Verse. 4. And upon the net thou shall make four brazen rings, etc.] Wherewith
it hung upon ledges or hooks within the altar, happily upon the ends or hooks
in the inside of those rings which were on the outside for the carrying of the
altar: And thus hanging down midway the hollow of the altar, the boards on each
side would fence the flames in part from the wind and weather.

Verse. 9. And thou shall make the court of the tabernacle, etc.] This was
called the court of the tabernacle, because it was reared up round about the
tabernacle, chap. 40. 33. Here the sacrifices were killed, and other services
of the Levites performed; and it was a type of the visible Church here in this
world, where both true believers and hypocrites do join together in the outward
duties of Gods worship and service: for which cause also it was so spacious and
large, an hundred cubits, that is, fifty yards long, and fifty cubits, that is,
five and twenty yards wide, to signify how greatly the Church should be
enlarged in process of time, especially when the Gentiles should also become
Gods people.

Verse. 10. The hooks of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver.]
These fillets were certain hoops or wreaths of silver, which compassed the
pillars and served for ornament, and happily for the better fastening of the
hangings in some places to the pillars: where the making of these is related,
it is said that their heads also (or chapiters) were over-laid with silver,
chap. 38. 17. though that be not her^ expressed.

Verse. 12. Their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.] The hangings on the West
side must have ten pillars, standing upon as many brazen sockets. And here we
must also note that doubtless there stood two pillars joined together in each
corner, for otherwise we cannot say whether the corner pillar was to be numbered
amongst the twenty pillars, appointed on each side for the length of the court,
or the ^^n appointed for the breadth.

Verse. 16. And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty cubits,
etc.] See the note, chap. 26. 36.

Verse. 18. And the height five cubits, etc.] This court therefore of the
tabernacle was but half so high as the tabernacle, and therefore the tabernacle
might be easily seen; yet these hangings were so high that men could not
overlook them.

Verse. 19. All the vessels of the tabernacle, etc. shall be of brass.] That
is, such as were only for the taking down and setti^g up of the tabernacle, as
the pinnes or stakes which were driven into the ground to fasten it.

Verse. 20. And thou shall command the children of Israel, that they bring pure
oil olive beaten, etc.] It seems that oil which was first gotten out of the
olives by beating or stamping of them, was far purer and clearer from
dregs, then that which was afterward crushed out with a press. This
therefore th e children of Israel were appointed to provide for the lamp in the
golden candlestick, even pure oil olive beaten, wherewith the priests were to
maintain the lamps, to cause the lamp to burn always, that is every night, by
renewing them still at the appointed times: As the daily sacrifice is called a
continual burnt-offering, Exodus 29. 42. and yet it was offered but twice every
day, at morning and evening. And so this word, always, is explained in the
following verse, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening to morning
before the Lord. At the East end of the ta bernacle, either abov^ the vail, or
at the opening of it, there might come in light sufficient in the day time; and
therefore I conceive then the lamps burnt not, but in the night only, and were
put out in the morning; which some infer also from that, 1. Sam. 3. 3. where
it is said that the Lord appeared to Samuel ere the lamp of God went out in the
temple of God, to wit, before the break of day. Now by this pure oil was
signified the gifts and graces of the Spirit, whereby the ministers of God are
fitted to be as lights among the people.

Verse. 21. In the tabernacle of the congregation, etc.] The ^abernacle is here
called the tabernacle of the congregation, because though the people did not
enter into this place; yet to the door of this tabernacle they brought their
offerings, and there did the Lord meet with the people, and make known his will
to them.

Aaron and his sons shall order it, etc.] Signifying that the priests lips
should preserve knowledge.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. ANd take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, etc.] Because Aaron was
the brother of Moses, to prevent any envy amongst the people, this is in the
first place expressed, that it was by the Lords appointment and command that he
and his sons were set apart to the office of the priesthood.

Verse. 2. And thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory
and for beauty.] That is, glorious and beautiful. And hereby was signified, 1.
the insufficiency of Aarons priesthood, that there was not in him (if you look
on him in his own person) sufficient worth that he should mediate between God
and man; for therefore was this holiness in his garments to cover the
pollution of his own person* 2. the more then angelical purity and holiness
of Christ, whose type Aaron thus attired was, Heb. 9. 14. Christ through the
eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God. By whom also his Church is
clothed with garments of beautiful glory, Isai. 52. 1. Put on thy beautiful
garments, oh Jerusalem, the holy city. Rev. 19. 8. To her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the
righteousness of the Sain^s: 3. to show the extraordinary degrees of holiness
required in those that serve at the altar*

Verse. 3. And thou shall speak unto all that are wise-hearted, etc. that they
may make Aarons garments to consecrate him, etc.] That is, to be a sign of his
consecration and sanctification from God; therefore it was death to minister
without these garments.

Verse. 6. And they shall make the ephod of gold, etc.] It was called the ephod
of an hebrew word, which signifies to close, compass, or gird about, because
it compassed fitly the body, and was tied thereto: it was the outmost of all
Aarons garments, and covered his whole body, both back and breast, from the
shoulders down to the loins, excepting only the breast, where the breast plate
was fastened.

Verse. 7. It shall have the two shoulder-pieces thereof joined at the edges
thereof; and so it shall be joined together.] These shoulder-pieces were either
the pieces which went up both before and behind from the body of the ephod, and
so met together on the top of each shoulder, and were joined together in the
edge thereof, a hole being left in the midst through which the priests head
went when he put on the ephod; or else it is meant of certain wings (as we call
them) which were joined to the ephod in the edge round about each shoulder.

Verse. 8. And the curious girdle of the ephod which is upon it shall be of the
same, etc.] By this is meant two pieces or slaps which came from the back part
of the ephod under the arm-holes, and are called the curious guard, or girdle,
because the nether lappets served as a girdle to fasten it below: and it is
said that it should be upon it, that is, is joined as a part of it, which is
added to distinguish it from the girdle mentioned ver. 39. Thou shall make the
girdle of needlework, which was not a part of the ephod, as this, which is
therefore called often the golden girdle.

Verse. 9. And thou shall take two onyx-stones, and grave on them the names of
the children of Israel.] These two onyx-stones, whereon were graven the names
of the twelve sons of Jacob, signified the firm and perpetual love of Christ
toward his Church; and also how precious they be to him, and how continually
mindful he is of them, Cant. 8. 6. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal
upon thy arm; for love is strong as death. See also Hag. 2. 23. In that day,
says the Lord of hosts, will I take thee O Zorobbabel my servant, etc. and
will make thee as a signet.

Verse. 10. Six of their names on one stone, and the other six names of the rest
on the other stone, according to their birth.] That is, first Reuben, then
Simeon, and so the rest according to their age: And this signified the like
precious faith and dignity which all have obtained before God in Christ, 2.
Pet. 1. 1. To them that have obtained the like precious faith: So Gal. 3. 28,
29. Ye are all one in Christ Jesus: And if ye be in Christ, then are ye
Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise.

Verse. 12. And thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulders of the ephod,
etc.] Hereby was signified the power and principality of the Mediator, laid
upon Christ's shoulders, Isai. 9. 6. And the government shall be upon his
shoulders, etc. See 22. chap. ver. 22. And the key of the house of David will I
lay upon his shoulders. In regard whereof he does, 1. bear our iniquities,
Isai. 53. 4. Surely he has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows, etc. 2.
by his mediation and intercession he presents us as pure and holy unto God,
Ephesians. 5. 27. That he might present it to himself a glorious church, etc. so also
John 17. 19, 20, 21. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also
might be sanctified through the truth, etc. 3. he does support and defend us
from all evil, Deuteronomy. 32. 11, 12. As an eagle stirs up her nest, fluttereth
over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, bears them on her
wings, so the Lord alone did lead him, etc. And fourthly he carried those,
whose names are written in the book of life, as it were upon his shoulders into
heaven, who were plunged in the gulf of sin and death, and were utterly
unable to raise themselves thither. And thus was all the occasion of envy taken
away, the people being hereby taught that they were none of them excluded, but
in the person of one were all presented as a royal priesthood unto God.

For stones of memorial unto the children of Israel.] That is, they shall be a
visible sign to put them in remembrance of their interest in God through
Christ, and to assure them that God seeing their names upon the shoulders of
the priest, would remember the covenant he had made with their fathers, and
accordingly would do them good: for so the like phrase is used concerning God,
Genesis 9. 16. The bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may
remember the everlasting covenant betwixt God and every living creature.

Verse. 13. And thou shall make o^ches of gold.] To wit for the two onyx stones
to be set in, whereon were engraven the names of the twelve sons of Jacob,
and which were to be fastened upon the two shoulderpeices of the ephod.

Verse. 15. And thou shall make the breastplate of judgment, etc.] So called,
because the priest did use to put it on when he consulted with the Lord about
the cause of the people to give right judgment* Numb. 27. 21. And he shall
stand before Eleasar the priest, who shall ask counsel for him after the
judgment of Urim before the Lord, etc. Or it noted the care that the priest
should have of answering judgment and equity to them that enquired of God by
him. See verse. 30. And hereby was signified the righteousness of Christ, Isa.
59. 17. For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and an helmet of
salvation upon his head.

Verse. 17. And thou shall set in it settings of stones, etc.] See verse. 9.

Verse. 21. And the stones shall be with the names of the children of Israel,
etc.] By this was signified both that the Israel of God are united to Christ
and joined so, that what he did we may be said to have done in him; (in him we
are presented unto God as pure and holy) and also the love of Christ that he
always bears us in his heart, being ever mindful of us, and solicitous for
our salvation.

Verse. 22. And thou shall make upon the breastplate chains at the ends, etc.]
These I take to be the same mentioned verse. 14. And two chains of pure gold at
the ends: only there they were spoken of in regard of their fastening to the
ouches, here in regard of their fastening to the breastplate.

Verse. 25. And put them on the shoulderpeices of the ephod before it.] That is,
toward the forepart of the ephod. And thus was the breastplate fastened to the
ephod by these two chains, which were fastened at one end to the two rings that
were in the upper corners of the breastplate, and at the other end to the two
ouches that were on the shoulderpi^ces of the ephod.

Verse. 26. And thou shall put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, etc.]
That is, in the two ends of the nether part of the breastplate below, toward
the imbrodered girdle of the ephod.

In the border thereof which is in the side of the ephod inward.] That is, not
only on the undermost edge of the breastplate, but also on the inside of that
edge, that the joining together of these rings with those of the ephod might be
hidden under the edge of the breastplate.

Verse. 27. And two other rings of gold thou shall make, and shall put them on
the two sides of the ephod, etc.] The rings here mentioned were those to which
the rings on the lower part of the breastplate were to be fastened, and
direction is given where they should be set, to wit, first on the sides of the
ephod, the right side and the left; secondly underneath, that is, in the lower
part of each side of the ephod, not in the upper part or middle of it; thirdly,
toward the forepart thereof, that is, though on the sides of the ephod, yet
not so backward as to be under the arms, but toward the forepart of the sides
nearer the breast; fourthly, over against the coupling thereof, that is,
directly against the ouches on the shoulderpieces, where the upper part of the
breastplate was coupled to the ephod; and fifthly, above the curious girdle of
the ephod, that is, above those lappets wherewith the ephod was girt close
about the loins of the high priest, which were therefore called the curious
girdle of the ephod.

Verse. 30. And thou shall put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
Thummim, etc.] Urim and Thummim are by interpretation lights and perfections,
and signified that the gifts of the holy Ghost should be in Christ without
measure, even all the treasure of wisdom and knowledge, and all perfection of
purity that man's nature is capable of. What these Urim and Thummim were, we
cannot say* Amongst the diverse conjectures of Interpreters the^e are two that
have most probability in them: the one is, that the Urim and Thummim are no
other but those very rows of precious stones, before mentioned, that were in
the breastplate, and are here called Urim and Thummim, not only because of
their brightness and perfection, but especially also with respect unto their
use, which was, that by them the high priest did inquire of God for the people,
and was by the special inspiration of the Spirit enabled to return them an
answer, which did accordingly come to pass: and hence it is, they say, that in
the thirty ninth chapter, where Moses does exactly relate how all things were
made according to Gods appointment, there is no mention made of the Urim and
Thummim, but only of the twelve precious stones set in the breastplate,
because these stones, set in two rows, were usually called among the people
the Urim and Thummim in regard of their use, the high priests enquiring of God
by them and returning a perfect answer to those demands that were made to him.
And indeed this I should readily embrace for truth, but that one thing only
makes it doubtful, to wit, that it is said the workmen did set the stones in
the breastplate, chap. 39. 10. whereas Moses put in the Urim and Thummim,
Levit. 8. 8. The other opinion is, that these very words, Urim and Thummim,
were written in some precious matter, not made by humane art, but by the
almighty power of God, and so were given by God to Moses, and by him put within
the fold of the pectorall, Levit. 8. 8. Also he put in the breastplate the Urim
and Thummim. And therefore this is not mentioned amongst those things that were
made by the artificers, because this was, as the tables of the Law, the work of
God and not of man: This also is very probable, but yet a conjecture only;
neither can we (the Scripture being silent) certainly determine what they were.
When the Jews returned out of Babylon they were lost, and therefore some
businesses hung in suspense, Ezra 2. 63. Till there stood up a priest with Urim
and Thummim; neither do we find in any of the Jewish Rabbis that they
themselves did certainly know what they were.

And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart,
etc.] That is, the breastplate of judgment, wherein were the Urim and Thummim,
so called, both because it was the type of that light and perfection in Christ
which he communicates to his people; as also because hereby answers of
judgment were given to the Israelites. See Numb. 27. 21.

Verse. 31. And thou shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue.] So called,
because it was worn next under the ephod, and, being of it self a loose robe,
was girded to the body by the curious girdle of the ephod: It signified the
heavenly robe of Christ's righteousness.

Verse. 33. And beneath upon the hemme of it thou shall make pomegranates of
blue, etc.] These as they hung upon the garment, signified that only the
fragrant smell of the garment of Christ's righteousness makes us a sweet favor
unto God; as they hung intermixed with bells, they signified the sweet and
comfortable effects of Christ's doctrine, by which we come to be clothed with
the fragrant robe of Christ's righteousness, and from his fullness to receive
even grace for grace.

And bells of gold between them round about.] Signifying the pure and precious
voice of Christ, heard of God in his prayer and mediation; of the people, in
his teaching and instruction.

Verse. 35. And his sound shall be heard when he goes unto the holy place,
etc.] Of which (besides the mysteries signified, whereof above) this was also a
reason, that notonely the priest but the people also might by the sound of
those bells be put in mind to lift up their hearts to God, etc.

Verse. 36. And thou shall make a plate of pure gold, etc.] This was made like
the forepart of a coronet, and therefore called, chap. 29. 30. The plate of the
holy crown, which being joined to the miter, signified that Christ should be
not only priest but king.

And grave upon it like the engravings of a signet, Holiness to the Lord.]
Signifying the intercession of Christ, that by his holiness we are presented
as holy, yea perfectly holy, in the sight of God. John 17. 19. And for their
sakes I sanctify my self that they also might be sanctified through the truth.

Verse. 38. And it shall be upon Aarons forehead, etc.] To wit that it might be
an eminent visible token of Gods gracious acceptance of his people to be seen
and read of all men to their comfort, even that God accepts both them and
their imperfect services in the face of Jesus Christ, who by his sufferings and
mediation has taken away the sins of his people which they commit in their
most holy and religious actions, 1. John 2. 1, 2. If any man sin, we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins, etc.

Verse. 39. And thou shall imbroider the coat of fine linen, etc.] A garment
with sleeves, covering the whole body down to the feet, and being loose was
girded to the body with a girdle. Levit. 8. 7. And he put upon him the coat,
and girded him with the girdle, etc. It was under the robe of the ephod; and
did also signify the garments of justice wherewith Christ and his children are
arrayed.

And thou shall make the girdle of needlework, etc.] This was made of fine
linen, blew, and purple, and scarlet, Exodus 39. 29. It served to gird the coat
with, which was under the robe, Levit. 8. 7. And he put upon him the coat, and
girded him with the girdle, etc. and signified the trust, constancy, and
expedition of Christ in his ministration, Isay 11. 5. And his righteousness
shall be the girdle of his loins, etc. for these are things usually signified
in the Scripture by girding, Luke 12. 35. Let your loins be girded about, and
your lights burning.

Verse. 40. And for Aarons sons thou shall make coats, etc.] Called elsewhere
ephods (1. Sam. 22. 18. And slew on that day fourscore and five persons that
did wear a linen ephod,) because it was their uppermost garment: the high
priests was imbroidered, this only of linen, chap. 39. 27. And they made coats
of fine linen, of woven work* for Aaron and for his sons; and signified the
purity and sanctification of Gods Saints, who are all priests evangelicall. See
Levit. 16. 4.

And thou shall make for them girdles, etc.] Aarons was of diverse colors,
Exodus 39. 29. these not.

Verse. 41. And thou shall put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons with
him.] Now cannot the people think that Aaron had injuriously seized upon the
priesthood for his posterity, since the same hand invested both father and
sons.

Verse. 42. And thou shall make them linen breeches, etc.] See Exodus 20. 26.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. ANd this is the thing that thou shall do unto them, to hallow them,
etc.] That is, to sanctify them for the work of the priesthood: and all the
following ceremonies, sacrifices, purifyings, were to this end, to teach men to
look off from these men, who had need themselves of purifying, and sacrifices
of atonement, and to look only upon Christ, or upon them only as types of
Christ.

Take one young bullock and two rams without blemish.] This young bullock was
for a sinne-offering, and the two rams were the one for a burnt-offering the
other for a peace offering.

Verse. 2. And unleavened bread, and cakes, etc.] This meat offering of bread
and cakes was to be unleavened, to signify the sincerity and incorruption of
Christ, of whom all sacrifices were types, and who is indeed the true bread of
life, John 6. 55. and secondly, of all the sacrifices evangelicall, which
through him Christians do offer unto God: and likewise the oil wherewith they
were mingled, signified the precious anointing of Gods spirit both in Christ
and the faithful. 1. John 2. 27. But the anointing which ye have received of
him abides in you; and ye need not that any man teach you: but as the same
anointing teach^th you all things, and is truth, and is no lie, etc.

Verse. 2. Of wheaten flower shall thou make them.] The best of the principle
grain, signifying the purity of Christ and all Evangelicall sacrifices.

Verse. 4. And Aaron and his sons shall thou bring, and shall wash them with
water.] To wit, out of the sanctified laver, Exodus 30. 18. And this signified
the holiness that was required in these legal priests that were to be types
of Christ.

Verse. 7. Then thou shall take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head.]
Here Moses is expressly commanded to pour the anointing oil (for the making
whereof there is afterward direction given, Chap. 30. 23. etc. upon the head
of Aaron; but in the two following verses, where there is order given for the
consecration of his sons, there is no mention made of anointing them; whence
many Expositours conclude, that only the high priest Aaron was anointed with
this oil, and not his sons: yet because it is said, Exodus 30. 30. Thou shall
anoint Aaron and his sons, and Chap. 40. 14, 15. Thou shall bring his sons, and
cloth^ them with coats; and thou shall anoint them, as thou did anoint their
father, that they may minister unto me in the priests office: it is more then
probable, that at their first consecration both Aaron and his sons were
anointed. Indeed in succeeding times it is evident that only the high priests
were anointed, and therefore Levit. 21. 10. he is distinguished from the
inferior priests hereby, He that is the high priest among his brethren, upon
whose head the anointing oil was poured. But at this present consecration of
the priests, doubtless both Aaron and his sons were anointed. And though
we cannot say that they were anointed by the pouring out of the oil upon
their heads, as Aaron was; yet it is hard on the other side to restrain their
anointing to the sprinkling of the holy oil upon them and their garments,
whereof mention is made, Levit. 8. 30. And Moses took the anointing oil, and
the blo^d which was upon the Altar, and sprinkled it upon Aarons and upon his
sons garments with him, etc.

Verse. 10. And thou shall cause a bullock to be brought, etc.] Which was to be
a sinne-offering for the priest, verse. 14. But the flesh of the bullock, and
his skin, and his dung, thou shall burn with fire without the camp; it is a
sinne-offering.

And Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the bullock.]
In which rite by the hand of faith they disburthened themselves of their
sins, and laid them upon the head of the sacrifice, that is, upon Christ,
Isa. 53. 6. God has laid upon him the iniquity of us all.

Verse. 11. And thou shall kill the bullock before the Lord, etc.] Thus till
Aaron and his sons were fully consecrated for the service of the priesthood,
Moses himself did by extraordinary warrant from god do the work of the priest
in offering these sacrifices; whence is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 99. 6.
Moses and Aaron among his priests.

Verse. 12. And thou shall take of the blood and put it upon the horns of the
altar, etc.] That is, the brazen altar of the burnt-offerings which stood in
the court yard. This first sinne-offering differed from others that were
offered for the sins of the priests: In others, the blood was carried into
the tabernacle, and put upon the horns of the golden altar of incense, Levit.
4. 7. And the priest shall put some of the blood upon the horns of the altar of
sweet incense, etc. here it was not so, First, because this was also to
sanctify the altar it self, that it might be fit afterward to sanctify the
sacrifices of the people (whereby also was employed the worthlesnesse of these
things in themselves if they be not looked upon with reference to Christ)
Secondly, because Aaron and his sons being not yet full priests, it was done
as was usual at the sinne-offerings of the common ruler and private person.
See Levit. 4. 25, 30. As for the doing of this with the finger, this was used
in all sinne-offerings, Levit. 4. and only in them, teaching us the efficacy
of Christ's blood for the purging away of sin, when it is so particularly
presented unto God and applied by his Spirit, Heb. 9. 12, 13, 14. Neither by
the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered once into the
holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. For if the blood of
bulls and of goats, and the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much more shall the blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge our conscience from dead works to serve the living God? And indeed the
finger of God, Luk 11. 20. is expounded to be the Spirit of God, Matthew. 12. 28.

And pour all the blood beside the bottom of the altar.] It is likely that it
was poured out at the bottom of the altar on the inside; and so it might be
much consumed with the continual heat of the fire: and this signified the full
price that should be paid for our redemption.

Verse. 13. And thou shall take of the fat that covers the inwards, etc.] By
the ^at may be meant the grossness of our nature in all the faculties and
powers of the soul, the understanding in the heart, the angry motion in the
liver, the concupiscence in the kidneyes or reins, which being all corrupted
are therefore to be purged by the fire of the Spirit, and so to be offered unto
God. But the plainer reason of this ceremony I conceive to be, that the people
might be taught highly to esteem the worship of God, by this direction of
giving him the best of the sacrifices.

Verse. 14. But the flesh of the bullock* and his skin, and his dung, thou
shall burn without the camp, etc.] Thus it was done wherever bullocks were
offered for a sinne-offering, Levit. 4. and when the blood was carried into the
tabernacle, Levit. 6. 30. No sinne-offering, whereof any of the blood is
brought into the tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the
holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt in the fire. It was to imply how
detestable the sin was, which was as it were laid upon this bullock, and that
the true sacrifice for our sins should suffer without the gates of Jerusalem,
Heb. 13. 11, 12, 13. For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into
the Sanctuary, by the high priest for sin, are burnt without the camp:
wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood,
suffered without the gate, etc.

It is a sinne-offering.] And therefore thus to be ordered, as is above
appointed.

Verse. 15. And thou shall take one ram, etc.] That is, one of those two
rams before mentioned verse 1. The sacrifice for sin being first offered
(without which no other offering could have been accepted, for God hears not
sinners) now follows the burnt-offering; which was first a shadow of Christ,
who after that he had offered himself to God as a sacrifice for sin, did then
ascend up into heaven, there to prepare a place for his ^edeemed ones;
secondly, a sign of our regeneration, as the other was of the expiation of our
sins by Christ, signifying that through him we shall and must be cleansed from
sin, crucified to the world, and present our whole man, bodies and souls, a
living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto God, Romans 12. 1. And thirdly, to
teach the priests, for whose consecration it was offered, that being purified
by the Spirit of God, they must deny themselves, and consecrate themselves
wholly to God, to serve him in their office holily and faithfully all the days
of their life.

Verse. 16. And thou shall take his blood, and sprinkle it round about, etc.] It
figured the sprinkling of Christ's blood, as for our reconciliation so also our
sanctification, 1. Pet. 1. 2. Through sanctification of the Spirit unto
obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Christ.

Verse. 19. And thou shall take the other ram, etc.] This was for a
congratulatory or peace offering: Now these were offered usually either to
obtain some blessing, or to give thanks for something already received: in both
respects was this offered at the priests consecration, both by way of
thankfulness for the honor done him in his calling, and to beg of God that he
would prosper him in the execution of it.

And Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram,
etc.] Signifying that from God in Christ (figured in that ram) they expected
not only justification and sanctification (as in the two former sacrifices)
but also consecration to their office, and ability to perform the same.

Verse. 20. And take of his blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of
Aaron, etc.] The ear hand and foot are anointed with blood, to intimate the
sanctifying of all their parts by Christ's blood to make them fit for the
priesthood: And these are put for all, because the ear is the sign of
obedience, Psalm. 40. 6. Sacrifice and offering, thou did not desire, mine
ears have thou opened; especially in hearing the word from Gods mouth, which
they should teach unto the people: And again, the hands and feet are the
instruments of action, not only in their ministry, but in their whole
conversation.

And sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about, etc.] See the notes upon
verse. 10. for this tended to the same end.

Verse. 21. And thou shall take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the
anointing oil, etc.] Though this blood and oil mingled together was sprinkled
upon the holy garments of Aaron and his sons, yet we may well think it was
done so, that it might not mar the beauty and glory of their garments; and
then some little drops of blood sprinkled here and there would rather be for
the honor, then the defiling of their garments. Now this was done to signify
that by the blood of Christ, and the oil of his graces, they were sanctified
for the work of their ministry.

Verse. 22. For it is a ram of consecration.] That is, offered as a
peace offering in liew of his consecration.

Verse. 24. And thou shall put all in the hands of Aaron, etc.] To wit, all
those things mentioned in the two former verses, amongst which the right
shoulder is also named. In other peace offerings, the breast and the right
shoulder were set apart from the rest of the sacrifice, and given to the
priests for their portion, Levit. 7. 31, 32. The breast shall be Aarons and his
sons; and the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest for an
heave offering of the sacrifice of your peace offerings. But here the breast
only was given to Moses, as he that extraordinarily did now the priests work;
the shoulder was together with the fat and other things waved by the priests,
and then by Moses burnt upon the altar: and the reason was doubtless, because
there were many priests among whom the breast and shoulder were in future times
divided, whereas here only Moses executed now the work of the priest, and
therefore the breast alone was given unto him for his portion, and the shoulder
was burnt upon the altar, and offered to the Lord.

And shall wave them for a wave-offering before the Lord.] By shaking it thus
to and fro they did as it were disclaim all their interest in that offering,
and resign it as a thing wholly consecrated to God; and besides, this waving
it to the East West North and South might imply that all Nations should in
Christ have cause to praise God.

Verse. 26. And it shall be thy part.] Because he was now in the stead of the
priest; yet he has not all (viz. not the shoulder) which was afterward the
priests portion, because this breast was enough to imply that he had done the
priests work.

Verse. 27. And thou shall sanctify the breast of the wave-offering, etc.] This
is not spoken of the present, but is an ordinance for the future, what shall be
then the priests; because Moses had now the breast only, therefore this is now
Inserted that the priests were to have both breast and shoulder.

Verse. 29. And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons after him, etc.]
And thus though the man was changed yet the high priest seemed in a manner the
same, appearing before God in the same garments: a sweet type of that one high
priest after the order of Melchisedec.

Verse. 30. And that son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven
days.] So many days were the solemnities of Aaron and his sons consecration
at the present to continue, ver. 35. Seven days shall thou consecrate them:
during which time they were to abide at the door of the tabernacle day and
night, to keep the watch of the Lord, Levit. ^. 33, 35. And ye shall not go out
of the door of the tabernacle of the congregation in seven days, until the
days of your consecration be at an end: for seven days shall he consecrate
you. Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night, seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord, that
ye die not, and were every day to be consecrated with the same sacrifices and
ceremonies as they had been the first day, as methinks it is evident, Levit. 8.
34. As he has done this day, so the Lord has commanded to do, etc. And the
continuance of these solemnities seven days signified, 1. that perfect
holiness which should be in Christ; and 2. that the whole course of the
priests lives should be consecrated to Gods service. See Exodus 12. 15.

Verse. 31. And seethe his flesh in the holy place.] That is, in the courtyard
of the Sanctuary at the door of the tabernacle; for there it was both boiled
and eaten, Levit. 8. 31. And Moses said unto Aaron and his sons, Boil the
flesh at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, and eat it with the
bread, etc. See Exodus 28. 43.

Verse. 33. But a stranger shall not eat thereof, etc.] That is, none but
themselves: in other peace offerings the offerer did eat of it; here was no
offerer but the priest.

Verse. 34. Then thou shall burn the remainder with fire.] Which was done, 1. to
maintain the peoples reverence toward them, by letting them see that they were
not to be usedbut in holy uses* 2. to prevent the superstitious abuses of them.
Some peace offerings might be eaten the next day, Levit. 7. 16. But if the
sacrifice of his offering be a vow or a voluntary offering, it shall be eaten
the same day that he offers his sacrifice; and on the morrow also the
remainder of it shall be eaten. Only those which were offered for a
thanksgiving were to be eaten the same day; whereby it may seem that these of
the priests were principally for that end. See Exodus 12. 10.

Verse. 35. Seven days shall thou consecrate them.] See the note above upon
ver. 30.

Verse. 36. And thou shall offer every day a bullock for a sinne-offering, for
atonement, etc.] This is meant of the same bullock mentioned before, ver. 10.
which was offered for a sinne-offering for the priests. Nor does it follow that
there were not two rams also offered on each of the seven days of the
priests consecration because it is here only expressed that there should be a
bullock offered on each of these seven days. For this concerning the
sinne-offering is only repeated, to show that this sinne-offering was not
only for the priests but also to purify the altar, to make an atonement for
the altar, and to sanctify it, as it is expressed in the following verse. Now
an atonement is said to be made for the altar, not because there was any sin
in the altar, but because it was hereby now so perfectly purified and
sanctified according to Gods institution, that men might without sin offer
sacrifices thereon.

Verse. 37. Whatsoever touches the altar shall be holy.] Some understand this
clause thus, that none but holy persons might touch the altar: but rather it is
meant of the sacrifices that were to be offered on this altar, that whatsoever
should according to Gods institution be offered thereon should be accepted as
holy to the Lord, the altar sanctifying the sacrifice that was laid thereon,
according to that which our Savior says, Matthew. 23. 19. Ye fools and blind,
whether is greater, the gift, or the altar that sanctifies the gift?

Verse. 38. Two lambs of the first year, day by day continually.] This was the
daily ordinary sacrifice: and it was 1. to signify that the death of Christ
the true lamb was available to the Church from the first morning of time to
the evening of the same; 2. to show what continual need they had of
reconciliation through Christ's blood applied by faith; 3. to sanctify the
morning and evening prayers of the Church by the interceding sacrifices of the
Mediator.

Verse. 40. And with the one lamb a tenth deal of flower mingled with the
fourth part of an hin of beaten oil, etc.] By a tenth deal of flower is meant
the tenth part of an ephah or bushel, as is expressed, Number. 28. 5. which is
called an Omer, Exodus 16. 36. and by the fourth part of an hin of oil,
wherewith the flower was mingled, and the fourth part of an hin of wine, which
was for a drink offering, a pint and an half of each is meant; for the hin
contained six pints, and so the fourth part of an hin was a pint and half: Now
this meat offering and drink offering added to the daily sacrifice, was to show
that Christ by his oblation of himself for us becomes not only redemption, but
also food, gladness, and chearing comfort to us, yea all in all: And the
sweetness of these things, flower and oil and wine, signified both how
pleasing to God the sacrifice of Christ should be; and also what care was
required of Gods people to make their sacrifices by true faith and repentance
(wherein God delights) a sweet savor unto God, without which their external
sacrifices must needs be unsavory, and such things as could not be likely to
please him.

Verse. 42. Where I will meet you to speak there unto thee.] That is, in the
tabernacle, from the mercy-seat, Exodus 30. 6. Before the mercy-seat that is
over the testimony where I will meet with thee. Wherein we have the reason
given why it was called the tabernacle of the congregation, namely, because
there the Lord did by glorious signs witness his presence, and make known by
Moses his will unto them, meeting them and making a covenant with them. See
Exodus 40. 34. Levit. 9. 13, 24.

Verse. 43. And the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory. That is, the
glorious signs of his glorious presence.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd thou shall make an altar to burn incense upon, etc.] Besides that
the Lord did hereby adorn the service of the tabernacle, to work the greater
reverence in the hearts of the people, and did teach them how careful they
should be of defiling their service with any unclean thing; it did also
signify that by Christ not only the whole legal service, but particularly
also the Saints prayers, are wondrous sweet and pleasing to God, Revel. 8. 3.
And another Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all Saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. Psalm. 141. 2.
Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense. Rev. 5. 8. And golden vials
full of odours, which are the prayers of the Saints.

Verse. 2. The horns thereof shall be of the same.] See the notes upon Exodus 27.
2.

Verse. 3. And thou shall overlay it with pure gold, etc.] Shadowing Christ in
both his natures, his deity yielding glory to his humanity: hence it is called
the golden altar, Numb. 4. 11. as the other is called the brazen altar, Exodus
38. 30.

And thou shall make unto it a crown of gold round about.] Which served as an
edge to keep the coals and incense from slipping off, and was withal a type of
Christ's regal dignity.

Verse. 4. And two golden rings shall thou make to it, etc. by the two corners
thereof, upon the two sides of it shall thou make it, etc.] That is, two rings
on each side, at each corner one.

Verse. 6. And thou shall put it before the vail, etc.] That is, in the holy
place, not in the most holy: for so it is expressly said, Exodus 40. 26. And he
put the golden altar in the tent of the congregation before the vail. And
besides into the most holy place the high priest entered but once a year; but
upon this altar the inferior priests burnt incense daily, Luke 1. 8, 9. And it
came to pass, that while he executed the priests office before God in the
order of his course, according to the custom of the priests office, his lot
was to burn incense, etc. But though it were in the most holy place, yet it was
close before the mercy-seat; so that there was nothing between them but only
the vail, that so the perfume might presently pass as it were into the
presence of God: whereby was signified how near God is to them that call upon
him in truth, Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him;
to all that call upon him in truth.

Verse. 7. When he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense upon it.] That is,
morning and evening. Some conceive that the lamp did burn both day and night in
the tabernacle, because it had no windows to let in the light of the sun, and
so accordingly by dressing the lamps, here they understand the taking away any
thing that did annoy them, and refreshing of them with new oil, that they might
continue burning all the day after; and by lighting the lamps at even, the
putting in of new lamps into the candlesticks, which accordingly were fresh and
newly lighted. But the more general and probable opinion of Expositours is,
that the lamps burnt only in the night time (the light of the sun shining in
by day at the East end of the tabernacle) and that therefore it is said, Exodus,
27. 21. that they should be ordered by the priests from evening to morning; and
accordingly they understand this place, to wit, that the lamps were cleansed,
and dressed, and made ready to be lighted in the morning, and then that they
were lighted at even. However, it is evident that both morning and evening the
priests were appointed to burn incense upon the golden altar; and hereby was
signified how Gods people should daily and constantly pray unto the Lord, and
persevere in praying, according to that of the Apostle, Pray without ceasing,
1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. and especially the never-failing constancy of Christ's
intercession, Heb. 6. 18. He is able also to save them to the uttermost that
come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Yea
to this may be added, that the offering of incense, when the lamps were
lighted, signified also that we must pray as we are taught and instructed by
the word, if we desire to have our prayers accepted of God.

Verse. 9. Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon, etc.] That is, no incense
received of other persons, or made of any other matter, or differing from that
prescribed, verse. 34, 35, etc. figuring that our prayers must be such as God
prescribes, or else he will not accept them: 1. John 5. 14. And this is the
confidence that we have in him, that if we ask any thing according to his will,
he hears us.

Verse. 10. And Aaron shall make an atonement on the horns of it once in a
year, etc.] Which was on the tenth day of the seventh month, the day of
reconciliation. See Levit. 16. 18.

With the blood of the sinne-offering of atonement, etc.] Signifying that the
sins and imperfections that cleave to the best prayers of the Saints have need
of a sacrifice of atonement, and that the incense of our prayers does yield no
sweet savor unto God but by virtue of the sacrifice of Christ once offered
unto God.

Verse. 12. When thou take the sum of the children of Israel, etc.] Many
Expositours hold that this is here enjoined not only for the present but for
future times also; to wit, that whenever they numbered the people upon any
occasion, every man should pay his tribute of half a shekel to the Lord, which
was to be expended, as now toward the making of the tabernacle, so afterward
for the repair thereof, and other necessaries that were to b^ provided for the
public service of the sanctuary: Yea from Josephus and others they gather,
that they were every year numbered, and so paid every year this tribute-money
for the use of the tabernacle and temple, which when the Romans had conquered
them, they were compelled to pay to them, and so that this was the
tribute-money which was required of our Savior, Matthew. 17. 24. But now others
again conceive it to be the more probable opinion, that this was required to be
done by Moses only for the present, First, because there is no mention made of
the perpetuity of this ordinance, as there is of other things that were to be
for ever observed: Secondly, because the Lord says not here, Whenever the
children of Israel are numbered, but, When thou take the sum of the children
of Israel after their number, as speaking of a thing that was immediately to be
done by Moses: Thirdly, because the end of this collection mentioned was
extraordinary not perpetual, namely for the building of the tabernacle, as is
evident, Exodus 38. 25, 26, 27, 28. in regard whereof it is said here verse. 16.
that it should be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the Lord:
Fourthly, because where there is mention made of Moses numbering the Israelites
at other times, as Numb. 1. 26. there is no mention made of the payment of this
half shekel by every one that was numbered: Fifthly, because there was another
rate set by Nehemiah to be paid yearly by every one for the service of the
house of God, to wit, the third part of a shekel, Nehemiah 10. 33. The truth
is, that neither of these can be demonstratively proved: But yet evident it is
that though they did not constantly pay this tribute-money in future times when
they were numbered, yet at least upon the like occasion this poll-money was at
other times raised, because we read, 2. King. 12. 4. that Jehoash king of
Judah commanded the priests to gather of the people for the repair of the
Temple, the money of every one that passes the account, which is called in 2.
Chron. 24. 6. the collection of Moses the servant of the Lord, and of the
congregation of Israel for the tabernacle of witness.

Then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, etc.]
When they are numbered each pays a ransom for his soul: First, by way of
homage: Princes use to take tribute-money by poll, and to that end are wont to
number their people; Israel therefore being numbered must pay this as a
tribute-money, acknowledging thereby Gods dominion over them, and that by right
of redemption, because he had redeemed them out of the house of bondage, and so
had bound them to be his servants: Secondly, by way of thankful
acknowledgement that it was of him that they were multiplied so exceedingly,
according to his promise made to their fathers, that their seed should be as
the stars for number; as likewise, that he did by his good providence keep an
account as it were of every particular person amongst them, and watch over them
for their good and safety: thirdly, by way of expiation, because when they came
to be thus particularly visited and looked into of God, they could not escape
destruction by reason of their sins, should he deal with them according to
justice; and therefore there must a ransom be paid, the rather because pride
and presumption and many other infirmities do usually accompany the numbering of
a people, as we see in the example of David, 2. Sam. 24. Yet we must not think
that so small a price as here was paid by every man for his ransom was any
meet satisfaction to Gods justice; but only hereby they were taught to judge
themselves, and to acknowledge a greater ransom that was to be paid, whereof
this was a kind of type, even the Lord Christ Jesus, who was himself a ransom
for all to be testified in due time, 1. Tim. 2. 6.

Verse. 13. Half a shekel, after the shekel of the Sanctuary; a shekel is twenty
gerahs.] This was that which every Israelite paid for his ransom when they
were numbered. The gerah is held to have been about a penny half penny, and by
that estimate the shekel was two shillings and six pence, and half the shekel
fifteen pence; and it is expressed that they should give half a shekel after
the shekel of the Sanctuary, either because the shekel of the Sanctuary was
twice as much as the common shekel, the common shekel being but ten gerahs, but
the shekel of the Sanctuary twenty, as is here expressed* which is indeed the
common opinion; or rather because the standard of all weights and measures was
kept in the Sanctuary, and so the injoyning of them to give half a shekel after
the shekel of the Sanctuary, was nothing else but that they should give a true
half shekel, of the full weight and value, after the standard of the Sanctuary.
And indeed Ezekiel. 45. 10, 11, 12. where the Prophet exhorts the Princes of
Israel to use none but just weights and measures, speaking of those that were
commonly used among the people, he gives direction as here, that the shekel
should contain twenty gerahs.

Verse. 17. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.] By these transitions it
seems very probable that the Lord did not deliver to Moses all these directions
at one time, or in one day but at several times, in the space of forty days.

Verse. 18. Thou shall make a laver of brass, and his foot of brass, etc.]
Which was made of the women's brazen looking-glasses, Exodus 38. 8. And he made
the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the looking-glasses of
the women, etc. Now the laver being lifted up upon his foot or base, the
priests could not put their feet in it; whence it is inferred that it had
spouts for the water to issue forth, and at the bottom some vessel or other to
receive the water.

Verse. 26. And thou shall anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith,
etc.] All these things were anointed, first to consecrate them to Gods service,
and to separate them from all profane and common uses; secondly, to signify
both that all excercises of piety used in the legal service would not be at
all profitable without the secret operation of the spirit (whereof the oil was
a type) as also that there comes no good to us by those things, but only by
the working and application of the spirit. See Heb. 9. 14. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Romans
8. 15. Isa. 61. 1. This was done, Levit. 8.

Verse. 30. And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons, etc.] See the note upon
chap. 29. 7.

Verse. 32. Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, etc.] That is, not in any
civil or profane use, whether for delight or otherwise: upon strangers it
might not be poured at all; but the priests might not use it in a civil way.
And hereby the people were taught to look to the holy spirit, whereof it was a
type, that nothing was to be done in Gods service without authority from God,
and that none of Gods holy things ought to be diverted to any profane use.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 2. SEe I have called by name Bezaleel, etc.] Moses might doubt how
amongst a people inured in Egypt only to base and servile employments, he
should find workmen fit to undertake such curious and cunning work, especially
because it must be needs a very difficult task to make every thing exactly
according to the pattern shown in the mount, though Moses gave them the best
directions he could; the Lord therefore prevents this fear, by letting him know
that he had furnished men with an extraordinary spirit and skill for the
performance of these things, and by name Bezaleel and Aholiab as the master
workmen and directers of others not named.

Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, etc.] It is probable that this
Hur, the grandfather of Bezaleel, was the same mentioned Exodus 17. 10. And
Moses and Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill; the same also whose
Genealogy is set down 1. Chron. 2. 19. who was the son of Caleb: so then
Caleb was great grandfather to Bezaleel, but not that Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, 1. Chron. 4. 15. who was but forty years old when he searched
Canaan, but Caleb the son of Hezron. 1. Chron. 2. 18.

Verse. 10. And the clothes of service, etc.] Veils, clothes, coverings, which
served to wrap up the holy things in, when the host was removed. See Numb. 4.
5, 9, 11, 12.

Verse. 13. Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep* etc.] This precept of the Sabbath
is here repeated, first, to let them know that though the work of the
tabernacle were studiously and speedily to be done, yet God would not have any
of it done on the Sabbath; secondly, to teach them the right use of the
tabernacle, which was in their coming together there especially on the Sabbaths
to serve the Lord.

For it is a sign between me and you, etc.] Namely, that God had taken them to
be a peculiar people to himself, and that they had taken him to be their God,
their Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier.

Verse. 14. For whosoever does any work therein, that soul shall be cut off from
among his people.] This includes not only death inflicted by the Magistrate,
whereof see Numb. 15. but also the immediate stroke of God when that was
neglected, and especially Gods casting him off from being one of his people
both here and hereafter.

Verse. 17. And on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed.] This is spoken
of God after the manner of men.

Verse. 18. And he gave to Moses, when he had made an end, two tables of
testimony, etc.] That is, when the forty days were expired.

Tables of stone written with the finger of God.] Whereby was signified, first
the stability of the Law; secondly the stoninesse of man's heart for the
receiving of spiritual things; thirdly the difference betwixt the Law and the
Gospel, which is written by the finger of Gods spirit, not in tables of stone
but in the sleshy tables of men's hearts, 2. Cor. 3. 2.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1. ANd when the people saw that Moses delayed, etc.] It is evident in
that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 7. Neither be ye idolaters, as were some of
them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play, that some of the people (not all) joined in this wicked act; yet withal
doubtless we may conclude that the greatest number conspired together herein,
as therefore it is said, verse. 3. That all the people brake off their golden
eare-rings, etc. because the multitude were all in a manner combined together,
and but a few to speak of there were that kept themselves clear in this
general desertion.

And they said unto Aaron, Up, make us Gods, etc.] This word does imply both
how violently they pressed him, and with what importunity they hastened him to
do what they required; as if they had said, We have waited long enough for
Moses, and therefore dispatch quickly, and with all speed do what we require:
make us Gods to go before us, that is, images as representations of God, or
visible signs of Gods going before them, and presence amongst them. It cannot
be reasonably thought that the people were so stupid as to think that any thing
made by man's hand could be the God that brought them out of Egypt, but only
that they desired some image as a sign of Gods presence, according to the
manner of their idolatry in Egypt. Yea happily conceiving the cloud not to
move, they took themselves to be forsaken or betrayed by Moses, and so in their
rage fall into this idolatry, as it were in despite of Moses and Aaron. And
therefore we see also in what a discontented manner, and how contemptuously
they speak of Moses in the following words, As for this Moses, the man that
brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him.

Verse. 2. And Aaron said unto them, Break off the golden eare-rings etc.] We
may well think that Aaron did at first endeavor to dissuade the people from
this they desired of him: only because he yielded at last, therefore it is in
the next place related. Yea, it is probable enough that Aaron made this demand
of their eare-rings, not gold in general, with some secret hope that the
women's unwillingnesse to part with these ornaments, wherein they were wont so
much to delight, might be a rub in the way.

Verse. 3. And all the people brake off the golden eare-rings etc.] That is, the
generality of the people: and thus they dishonor God with the spoils of the
Egyptians which God had given them, Exodus 12. 35.

Verse. 4. And fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten
calf.] Aaron is said to have done this, not because he did it with his own
hands, but because he appointed workmen to do it, and by his authority and
command it was done. First they melted the gold, and cast it into a molten
calf; and then they polished it, and finished it with a graving tool. And thus
they changed their glory into the similitude of an ox that eats grass,, as
the Psalmist says, Psalm. 106. 20. Now in this form it seems the Israelites
desired their idol should be made, happily in imitation of the idol Apis, a
pyed bullock which the Egyptians used to worship.

And they said, These be thy Gods, oh Israel, etc.] So encouraging on^ another,
and especially upon this pretense, that this was only intended for a
representation of the true God.

Verse. 5. And when Aaron saw it, he built an altar, etc.] That is, when he saw
how violently the people pursued their purpose, and that in this idol they
still intended to worship the true God, he yields further upon the peoples
motion, to wit, to build an altar, and proclaim an holy day, saying, To morrow
is a feast to the Lord Jehovah: wherein still he seeks to stop the mouth of his
conscience with this pretense, that all was still intended for the worship of
the true God.

Verse. 6. And the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.]
That is, they sat down to eat and to drink of their peace offerings, and other
feasts that did accompany their sacrifices; wherein it may seem they were
excessive eno^gh by their shouting, mentioned ver. 17. and then rose up to
play, that is, sing dance and play about the idol, according to the custom of
idolatrous festivals.

Verse. 7. And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, etc.] That is, get
thee away quickly, and so it is expressed, Deuteronomy. 9. 12. Arise, get thee down
quickly from hencc.

Thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have corrupted
themselves.] The Lord here calls the Israelites not his people but the people
of Moses, thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, etc.
whereby he does not only testify his great indignation against them,
disclaiming as it were any interest which they had in him, and refusing to own
them as his people any more; but withal likewise he s^eks to affect Moses the
more with their sin, by putting him in mind that they were his people,
committed to his charge, that so he might be more solicitous to reduce them
again into the right way.

Verse. 8. They have turned aside quickly out of the ^ay which I commanded
them.] Viz. after their entering into covenant with me: it is but a few days
since they promised, that they would keep all that I commanded them, and now
they have already transgressed the Law of my worship which I gave them in
charge.

Verse. 10. Now therefore let me alone, etc.] As a father, being angry and
making as though he would smite his son, should say to one standing by, hold
me not* meaning that he would have him interpose himself, and mediate for his
son.

And I will make of thee a great nation.] See Deuteronomy. 9. 14.

Verse. 11. Why does thy wrath wax hot against thy people which thou broughtest
forth, etc.] That is, let not thy wrath wax hot against thy people, etc. for it
is usual in the Scripture to express that which is desired by way of
interrogation: Thus, Art thou come hither to torment us before the time? Matthew.
8. 29. is expressed by saint Luke, I beseech thee torment me not, Luke 8. 28.
Moses had no purpose to expostulate with God, but humbly to desire him to be
pacified toward them, to which end he presses him here with this argument,
that he had brought them forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and a
mighty hand, intimating that all this would be lost if he should now destroy
his people.

Verse. 15. The two tables were written on both their sides, etc.] On the two
inward or foresides, not within and without.

Verse. 16. And the tables were the work of God, etc.] Implying how heinous the
peoples sin was, which deprived them of such a jewel.

Verse. 17. There is a noise of war in the camp.] This speech of Joshuas
pr^veth that he had neither been in the cloud with Moses, when the Lord told
him of the peoples sin, nor in the camp with the Israelites, but had waited
on the upper part of the hill till Moses came down, in which time it is like
that he was fed with Manna.

Verse. 19. And Moses anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out of his hands,
etc.] In an holy anger, yet not unadvisedly, but by the motion of Gods spirit,
as may seem by his relation of it again, Deuteronomy. 9. 16, 17. And I took the two
tables and cast them out of my hands, and brake them before your eyes. For this
was intended as a sign that the covenant was broken betwixt God and them by
this their sin.

Verse. 20. And burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, etc.] That is, he
not only melted it, but by burning it in the fire, made it brittle or ^it to
be beaten or ground to powder, yea to powder even as small as dust* Deuteronomy. 9.
21. And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire,
and stamped it, and ground it very small, even until it was as small as dust,
etc. that it might be utterly abolished.

And made the children of Israel drink of it.] How this was done we may read
Deuteronomy. 9. 21. where it is said that he cast the dust of their idol into the
brook that descended out of the mount, which was the only water they had in
that place: for we must not think that Moses gave to every one of the people a
draught of water wherein he had first put some of the powder or dust of their
idol; but therefore only is it said that he made the children of Israel drink
of it, because he cast it into the water whereof they drank daily. Now this was
done, 1. to make them ashamed of their golden God, which must come to be their
food first, and excrements afterward; 2. to terrify them by causing them to
drink as it were the matter of their damnation.

Verse. 24. Then I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.] As one
that would have said, if he durst, that the calf came out beside his intention.
I do not think Aaron hoped or meant to persuade Moses to this; but fain he
would have said something in his excuse, if he knew what; and therefore being
inexcusable, by a poor dry and slender narration he seeks however to color
and extenuate the fact.

Verse. 25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked, etc.] By this sin
they were become naked, both in regard of the dishonor and shame it was to
them, and also because it had provoked God to cast them off, and so they were
bereaved of his grace and protection, and as naked unarmed men exposed to be
devoured by their enemies; which when Moses saw and considered, he labors by
punishing the ringleaders, and so by bringing the rest to repentance, to
appease Gods wrath, etc.

Verse. 26. Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, etc.] A place of entrance
into the camp where he stood, 1. because it was (as afterward in cities) the
place of judgment; 2. because the avengers were to pass from gate to gate; 3.
as withdrawing himself from a cursed people; as for the same cause he did the
like, Exodus 33. 7.

Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me.] When Moses used these words,
in summoning those to come in that should be employed in punishing the people,
his meaning doubtless was that those that had not consented to this wicked
fact of the people (though even they also had sinned, because for fear they did
not oppose themselves) but did sincerely and seriously detest what was done,
and grieve for it, and would now therefore take Gods part against the
offenders, to do in this cause what God should require, should assemble
themselves together and come unto him.

And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him.] The Levites
only came, or at least they together with the rest that were innocent came,
and that by special instinct of Gods spirit, who had appointed them to the
priesthood. And they came all, that is, in a manner all; for some of them were
punished with the rest, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Who said unto his father and his mother, I
have not seen him: neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children.

Verse. 27. And slay every man his brother, etc.] That is, Moses commanded the
Levites that as they went through the camp, from one gate to the other, they
should slay all they met with, or rather all the ringleaders and principal
offenders in this great transgression (who were well known, and would be busy
abroad whilst the penitent for shame kept within) not sparing for favor
either brother, companion or neighbor, or any other that were dearest unto
them. Now whereas it may be objected* that if they were appointed to slay all
they met with, there would be danger of killing some that were guiltless: To
this is answered, 1. that happily when Moses proclaimed, Who is on the Lords
side? let him come unto me, all that were clean of this sin gathered
themselves unto Moses though the coming of the Levites unto him be only
expressed in the text, because they were the men that were afterward employed
in punishing the offenders; and if this were so there could be no danger in
slaying the innocent: 2. that God, who enjoined this, did by his providence so
order it that none but the guilty should come in their way to be slain by them.

Verse. 29. For Moses had said, Consecrate your selves to the Lord, etc.] One
reason is here given why the Levites did so readily undertake this dangerous
service, and so impartially execute Gods command upon those that were tied to
them by the nearest bonds, to wit, because Moses had told them that hereby they
should so ^onsecrate themselves to the Lord, and offer a sacrifice as it were
so pleasing to him, that the Lord would immediately set them apart as his
peculiar portion to be his Ministers, in the sacred service of the tabernacle.

Verse. 30. Ye have sinned a great sin, and now I will go up to the Lord.]
Though Moses had already before so far prevailed with the Lord by his
prayers, that he would not presently destroy all the people, as at first he
threatened; and therefore it is said v. 14. That the Lord repented of the evil
which he thought to do unto his people; yet considering that the Lords anger
might still be great against the^, and that he might still proceed further in
punishing those that had sinned against him, he resolves yet further to
intercede for them, with which he first acquaints the people, remembering them
withal of the greatness of their sin, that so they might repent seriously of
their sin, and thereby be made more capable of Gods favou^.

Peradventure I shall make an atonement for your sin.] Words that imply a
difficulty though good hopes to obtain: Amos 5. 15. It may be the Lord of hosts
will be gracious unto the remnant of Joseph. See also Josh. 14. 12. and 1. Sam.
14. 16. And indeed he knew not whether God would proceed any further in
punishing them, or whether he would be satisfied with what was done.

Verse. 31. And Moses returned unto the Lord, etc.] It seems that this was
another going up unto God, then when he stayed there forty days and forty
nights the second time: for this was the morrow after the Levites had slain
three thousand of the people, and many things came between his second solemn
going up unto God, which is rehearsed in the next chapter.

Verse. 32. And if not, blot me I pray thee, out of (...) book which thou have
written.] When Gods decree of election unto life everlas^^n^ is call^^ the book
of life, as Phil. 4. 3. and in many other places, it is a metaphorical
expression, wherein the Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men. Now
when Moses here says that if God would not forgive the sins of this people,
he desired that himself might be rather blotted out of the book of life, we
cannot hence infer that Gods decree can be changed, or that those that are
elected unto life may notwithstanding perish everlastingly, or that Gods
justice will admit of the punishing of a righteous person together with the
wicked: for in this speech Moses seeks only to express, not what he thought
might be, but what he could wish might be, if thereby the saving of Gods people
might be procured: to wit, that out of his sorrow for the rejection of this
people, his zeal for Gods glory, and his great affection to his brethren, he
could wish himself deprived of heavenly glory, that they might be again
received into favor. This is all that Moses intended in these words; only
being carried away with the strength of his affections and vehemence of his
desires, he expresses this by a way of request, If not, blot me, I pray thee,
out of the book which thou have written. And thus generally is this speech of
Moses understood. But yet it may also be understood of the catalogue and
register that is kept as it were in the divine omniscience of all the living
here in this world, out of which Moses desires to be blotted, that is, to be
cut off by the hand of God rather then the people should be cast off, which he
had so miraculously delivered out of their bondage in Egypt. And herein Moses
then dealt as a figure of our Mediator who laid down his life for his sheep,
John 10. 15. And redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us, Gal. 3. 13.

Verse. 33. Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.]
This also is spoken of God after the manner of men: the meaning is only that
such and only such should not be numbered among the elect, Psalm. 69. 28. Let
them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the
righteous: Or that such only should be cut off by Gods revenging hand.

Verse. 34. Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have
spoken unto thee; behold mine angel shall go before thee, etc.] Here God yields
not to destroy for the present those that had sinned, having before only
yielded not to destroy all the people; yet withal h^ adds that he will not
yield to go amongst them as formerly he had promised, but he would only send
his angel to go before them, concerning which angel see before the notes upon
Exodus 23. 20.

Nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.] I
will spare them at this time, but when I begin to punish I shall reckon with
them for this sin also.

Verse. 35. And the Lord plagued the people, etc,] That is, as he threatened in
the former verse, in future times he punished them for this sin also, or else
it may be meant of the punishment the Levites inflicted on them.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 2. ANd I will send an angel before thee, etc.] God here promises Moses
that he would send an angel before them, but withal adds, that he would not
go up himself in the midst of them, as before he had promised. Some hold that
the angel here meant is a created angel, not that angel of the covenant, of
whom he had spoken before, chap. 23. 20. But seeing it is the same angel that
had hitherto gone before them in the pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of
fire by night, by whom God promises that they should be led on their way till
they were possessed of the land of Canaan, I see not how we can understand it
of a created angel, but that it must be meant of the Son of God, as before.
However that which God here refuses to do for them, I conceive is the dwelling
amongst them in his tabernacle with those signs of his gracious presence,
concerning which he had formerly given direction to Moses: His angel he would
send, as he had promised, to conduct them to Canaan, and to drive out the
inhabitants before them; this he might do for any people, and this (because he
had promised it to Abraham) he would do for them; but to acknowledge them again
for his people, and to testify that by his dwelling in the midst of them, to
wit in his tabernacle, that he would not grant.

Verse. 3. Lest I consume thee in the way.] This is also spoken of God after the
manner of men, who are most provoked when they are present to see the wrong
done them; and indeed the nearer a people are unto God, the less will he
endure their rebellion against him.

Verse. 5. I will come up in the midst of thee in a moment, and will consume
thee.] To wit, if thou do not truly repent of the wickedness wherewith thou
have provoked me. Though God had granted to Moses upon his intercession that he
would not presently destroy this rebellious people; chap. 32. 34. yet withal
he gave him order to make known to the people that he had threatened, in case he
found them not truly penitent, utterly to destroy them, that so by the terror
hereof they might be indeed the more humbled for their sin, and turn unto the
Lord with a broken heart, as true penitents ought to do: And indeed we read in
the former chapter, verse 34. In the day when I visit I will visit their sin
upon them.

Verse. 7. And Moses took the tabernacle, etc.] Or a tabernacle or tent: It was
not that which after was the place of public worship, for that was not yet
made, but some peculiar tabernacle which Moses had formerly ^rected either for
the service of God, or for matters of civil judgment amongst the people,
which being now removed afar off from the camp signified Gods departure from
them as a polluted people. See Prove. 15. 29.

And called it the tabernacle of the congregation.] It seems that Moses
proclaimed that whosoever would seek the Lord, there was now the place of his
presence whither they must come; whereupon he called it the tabernacle of the
congregation.

And it came to pass, that every one which sought the Lord went out unto the
tabernacle, etc.] When Moses their mediator appeared before God in their
behalf, the cloud coming down upon the tent, they stood afar off, as ver. 8.
At other times they that sought the Lord went out of the camp (the place of
their sin) toward the place where the tent was.

Verse. 8. And it came to pass, when Moses went out of the tabernacle all the
people rose up, etc.] That is, when Moses went to this tabernacle to desire the
Lord to pardon the people, now repenting them of their sin, all the people
rose up, both reverencing him as he passed by, and that they might look after
him and accompany his intercession with their prayers: And stood every man at
his tent door, acknowledging themselves unworthy to approach nearer; and looked
after Moses, showing by their eyes that followed him, that all their hope was
in him, and how earnestly they longed for a gracious answer by him.

Verse. 11. And the Lord spoke unto Moses face to face.] In a wondrous familiar
manner, so as never to any Prophet. See Deuteronomy. 34. 10. Numb. 12. 8.

But Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, departed not, etc.] Joshua is called
here a young man only in respect of his service, for he was now about fifty
years old; and he stayed behind in the tabernacle (when Moses went back into
the camp) to look to it, and to keep it. And thus God honored him, making him
as it were his housekeeper.

Verse. 12. And thou have not let me know whom thou will send with me.] That is,
thou have said that thou will not go up in the midst of us, and withal have
not expressly and by name satisfied me who it is thou will send along with me;
and so I am enjoined to carry this people into Canaan, and yet know not what
course shall be taken, nor what help shall be afforded me for the leading of
them thither. It is true that God had told him that he would send an Angel
before them, ver. 2. but yet because he had not told him who that Angel was,
and withal he sawthe cloudy pillar that formerly went before them, and led
them in their way, was now removed far from the camp, and God had expressly
said he would not go up in the midst of them, therefore he thus bemoans the
hard province imposed on him, Thou say unto me, Bring up this people, and
thou have not let me know whom thou will send with me.

Verse. 13. Show me now thy way, etc.] That is, show what course thou meanst to
take with us, or be thou our guide as before; notwithstanding that threatening,
ver. 3. Moses by faith resting on the promises of God was persuaded that he
would not thus cast off his people; therefore he says, verse. 12. that God had
not let him know whom he would send with him, because he had not yet promised
his presence as he was confident he would do: so here he desires to know what
way God would take with them, not doubting but that way would be that God would
be reconciled and lead them again as formerly with the visible signs of his
presence.

That I may know thee, etc.] That is, that by proof and experience I may know
how good thou art to them that seek thee, and be assured that I have found
grace in thy sight.

Verse. 14. And he said, My presence shall go with thee.] That is, the visible
sign of my presence, the pillar of cloud, and the tabernacle, as before I
promised: So that this is a revocation of the sentence, verse 3. For I will not
go up in the midst of thee.

Verse. 14. And I will give thee rest.] If this be taken as spoken of Moses in
particular, then the meaning must be, that God would satisfy his desire, and
so settle and quiet his mind in this, concerning which he had been so anxiously
solicitous and full of care. But if it be spoken of Moses in the name of and
together with all the people, then the meaning rather is, that God would not
now leave them, but that they should be still under his patronage and
protection; or that they should have rest from their enemies, and should be
brought safe to the promised rest in the land of Canaan: By which rest was also
figured our rest in Christ and in the kingdom of heaven.

Verse. 15. If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence.] Embracing
Gods promise, he shows the reason why nothing else could satisfy him but that,
because they had even as good never move a foot farther as go on without Gods
favor, yea though they were sure to get the possession of the land of Canaan.

Verse. 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, I will do this thing also that thou
have spoken, etc.] That is, I will not only conduct you by mine Angel, as I
promised before, verse 2. but I will also go among you as my people by the
visible signs of my presence. Thus God does only again confirm what he had
said, verse. 14. Neither did Moses ask in the words before, nor the Lord here
make any promise of any other blessing.

For thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name.] In a special
manner, as Princes those whom they above others favor and respect.

Verse. 18. And he said, I beseech thee show me thy glory.] Moses, having now
found the Lord ready to grant all his desires, proceeds further, and makes one
request more, to wit, that God would show him his glory. Whereby I cannot think
that Moses meant the very essence of God: for is it probable that Moses was so
far ignorant of the nature and essence of God, that he did not know him to be
a spirit infinite, and invisible, every where present, but no where to be seen
with bodily eyes, whom no man has seen or can see, as the Apostle says, 1.
Tim. 6. 16? Surely no. Rather I think that Moses conceiving that God when he
spoke to him had put on as it were some corporal and visible shape, full of
great majesty and glory, and therefore overshadowed with a cloud, he desired to
see the lightsome brightness of Gods presence, the cloud being taken away, and
that doubtless especially (though happily not without some mixture of vain
curiosity) that he might by this special sign of Gods favor be confirmed
concerning the gracious promise made to him and his people.

Verse. 19. And I will make all my goodness pass before thee, etc.] That is,
my self, namely in a transitory vision; my glory, ver. 22. or glorious
goodness: thus God yields to his request, yet not every way as he had intended
it; and in what manner he would do it he shows him afterward, ver. 22, 23.

And I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, etc.] If bold man should
dare to question in his mind, why God should pardon the foregoing sin of
Israel, whilst he punishes less sins in others, or why Moses should be
honored with such a glorious vision above all other men; his mouth is stopped
with this which God says of his freedom in communicating grace where he
pleases without wrong to any.

Verse. 20. Thou can not see my face; for there shall no man see me and live,
etc.] My face, that is, my essence, my being simply as I am in my self (and
indeed it is most true in that sense that no man can see Gods face. Even where
Moses and Christ are compared together by the Evangelist S. John, this seeing
of God is made the peculiar prerogative of Christ the son God, John 1. 17,
18.) Or rather by the face of God here is meant the majesty and glory attending
that external shape which God had now assumed, which Moses could not behold,
and therefore it was covered with a cloud; and this the Lord gives as a reason
why God denied this part of his request, because he had desired that which
being granted him would have been his ruin, man's weakness being such that he
is not able to behold such a glorious brightness as this was, and as is that
light inaccessible, which no man can approach unto, wherein God dwells, says the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 6. 16. And indeed, if by the face of God here were meant Gods
essence, thou can not see my face, that is, my essence, thou can not see me
as I am in my self, then by that following reason, for there shall no man see
me and live, we might infer that it is possible for men to see the essence of
God though not without peril to their lives: which is not so; for God is in
his essence altogether invisible. Jacob saw God face to face, Genesis 32. 30. but
it was in that shape wherein God was pleased to represent himself, and if Moses
saw more then Jacob, yet he saw only some more glorious representation of the
deity, not the divine essence it self.

Verse. 22. I will put thee in a clift of the rock, etc.] He was put in the
clift of a rock, 1. to hide him as it were that he might not be swallowed up of
the exceeding glory of God as he passed by; 2. that being thus placed he might
not only see God going and passing away, and that only for a short time; but
withal this rock might signify Christ, by whom we attain the true knowledge
of God; and looking through a clift might signify the small measure of
knowledge of God we have in this life comparatively.

Verse. 23. And thou shall see my back-parts.] It is most probable that God
passed by in an humane visible shape, but in such brightness and glory as was
never shown to mortal creature; so that these passages both of Gods hand and
back-parts must be understood literally. But by this representation of the
back-parts and not the face to be seen by Moses, the Lord intended to teach
him, that as we know men very imperfectly when we see only their
back-parts, even so is the knowledge which the best can have of God in this
life little and imperfect.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord said unto Moses, Hew thee two tables of stone, etc.]
Though hereby God testified that he had received the people into his favor
again, and was minded that all things should return to their former state; yet
in that he prepares not these tables as the first, this was a kind of
memorial of their sin, as when the scar remains after the healing of the
wound. At the same time also God gave him order to make an ark also to keep
them, until the ark of the covenant was made, De^t. 10. 1.

Verse. 6. And the Lord passed by before him, etc.] To wit, in the manner
promised, chap. 33, 22, 23.

And proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, etc.] By this redoubling of the word
Jehovah, Jehovah, the Lord, the Lord, Moses is prepared presently to compose
himself with all humility and reverence to behold his glory, and to attend on
God proclaiming his goodness.

Ver. 9. And he said, If now I have found grace in thy sight, etc.] Thus Moses
still prays for the people, and in this suit spent forty days and forty
nights, Deuteronomy. 9. 25. for faith, the more assured it makes us of Gods favor,
the more fervent it makes us in prayer.

For it is a stiff-necked people.] And therefore have need of thy mercy and
government.

Verse. 10. For it is a terrible thing that I will do with thee.] The wonders
which I shall work, to wit in the passage of the Israelites through the
wilderness, and afterward in the land of Canaan, shall strike terror into the
hearts of the wicked, and teach all to fear before God.

Verse. 12. Take heed to thy self lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants
of the land, etc.] First, because God has determined to destroy them for their
sins: Secondly, because the land must not be polluted with idolatry, which God
had chosen to be his dwelling place: Thirdly, because by this means the people
might be ensnared*

Verse. 17. Thou shall make thee no molten gods.] One kind of idols (by occasion
of the molten calf) is put for all.

Verse. 20. But the firstling of an ass thou shall redeem with a lamb.] See
Exodus 13. 13.

Verse. 22. And thou shall observe the feast of weeks, etc.] See the notes
concerning these feasts, Exodus 23. 16.

Verse. 25. Thou shall not offer the blood of thy sacrifice with leaven, etc.]
See the notes upon Exodus 23. 18, 19.

Verse. 28. And he was there with the Lord forty days and forty nights, etc.]
This second stay of Moses in the mount was, first, to try the peoples
repentance, to see whether they would not again revolt from God; and secondly,
to procure the more authority to Moses, that they might look upon him when he
brought the law as an angel sent to them from heaven.

And he wrote upon the tables, etc.] That is, the Lord. See ver. 1.

Verse. 30. Behold the skin of his face shone.] No such thing befell him
before* when he was the first time upon the mount with the Lord forty days
and forty nights, because then the Lord had not shown him his glory in so
great a degree as now he had. Nor need we wonder that Moses wist not that the
skin of his face shone, as it is said in the former verse: for coming from
the exceeding glory and brightness of Gods presence, that spark of shining
brightness that was in his own face was not discernable by him, though
terrible to the Israelites. Now for the shining of Moses face, it was
doubtless to signify the glory of the law which he preached to them, whence
is that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 3. 7* 8. But if the ministration of death
written and engraven in stones was glorious, so that the children of Israel
could not steadfastly behold the face of Moses for the glory of his countenance,
which glory was to be done away; how shall not the ministration of the spirit
be rather glorious? But withal the people by this were taught to reverence
him, even as an angel come from heaven, to look upon him as one that stood in
Gods stead when he spoke to them, and to assure themselves that God had
enlightened him also inwardly that he might teach and instruct them.

And they were afraid to come nigh him.] Moses came down with vengeance before,
and what might they think of this glory put upon him now, being still conscious
to themselves of the haynousnesse of their former rebellion? Besides, this was
to show that Moses his ministration was condemnation* 1. Cor. 3. 7, 9. because
it gives knowledge of sin, and causes wrath, Romans 4. 15. The law works
wrath* for where there is no law there is no transgression.

Verse. 33. And till Moses had done speaking with them he put a vail on his
face.] Hereby it is evident how long the brightness of Moses face continued,
not all the time of his life, but only the time of his going to and fro
between the Lord and his people, that he might deliver to the people the laws
and commandments he gave them in charge. All this time the shining of his face
continued, and so when he came to speak with the people he p^t on a vail, which
signified, First the vail of the obscurity of the law, whereby Christ and the
end of the law was hardly discerned: and secondly that vail of ignorance and
infidelity which was spread upon our hearts by nature, until it be removed by
Christ.

Verse. 34. But when Moses went in before the Lord to speak with him, ^e took
the vail off, etc.] Signifying that when we come to see God in Christ, the vail
is taken away. See 2. Cor. 3. 15. 16. Even unto this day when Moses is read the
vail is upon their heart, nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord the
vail shall be taken away.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 3. YE shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the Sabbath
day.] This clause of the law concerning the Sabbath must be explained by that,
chap. 16, 23. To morrow is the holy rest of the Sabbath unto the Lord, bake
that which ye will bake to day, and seethe that which ye will seethe, etc.
Namely, that they must not kindle any fire therewith to dress any meat for
themselves, or except in case of absolute necessity: for that they might not
kindle fire either to light a candle, or to warm themselves in the extreme cold
of winter, is altogether improbable.

Verse. 22. And they came both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted,
and brought brac^lets and eare-rings, etc.] That is, not only gold and silver,
but also their very ornaments, contributing these things as willingly now after
repentance for the service of the tabernacle, as before for the making of their
golden calf

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 2. ANd Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, etc.] Though gifted, yet they
must have a calling.

Verse. 8. And every wise-hearted man among them that wrought the work of the
tab^rnacle made ten curtains, etc.] This is first made (though in the
directions given, the ark, table, and candlestick were first mentioned) because
it was to rec^ive and contain these holy things, which might not stand without
their tent.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
Verse. 8. ANd he made the laver of brass, and the foot of it of brass, of the
looking-glasses of the women assembling, etc.] For it is evident by several
Writers that in ancient times they used looking-glasses made wholly of pure
bright brass.

Verse. 18. And the height in the breadth was five cubits, etc.] That which is
the breadth of the hanging lying is the height of it standing or hanging; and
therefore it is said that the height in the breadth of it was five cubits.

Verse. 21. This is the sum of the tabernacle, etc.] Or counted things: that
is, this is the sum and particulars of the tabernacle and holy things
belonging to it, which were thus taken as it were in an inventory by Ithamar at
the commandment of Moses, and so delivered into the custody of the Levites,
that nothing might be lost. This clause I conceive therefore may have respect
both to the rehearsal of particulars which went before; and vvithall likewise
to the sum of the gold and silver spent in making these things whereof Moses
speaks in the words following.

Verse. 24. Even the gold of the offering was twenty and nine talents, etc.]
Twenty nine talents and seven hundred and thirty shekels (counting the talent
at an hundred and twenty pound, and five and twenty shekels to a pound) will
make three thousand five hundred and nine pound weight of gold, and five
shekels, which in sterling money (if we account a pound weight of gold to be
worth but thirty pound of sterling money) comes to above an hundred and five
thousand pound, viz. one hundred five thousand two hundred and seventy pound.

Verse. 25. And the silver of them that were numbered of the congregation was an
hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred ^hreescore and fifteen shekels,
etc.] There were numbered six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty
men (and the very same number we find Numb. 1. 46. of which see the notes
there) who all paying half a shekel, Exodus 30. 13. the sum of the silver
amounts to three hundred and one thousand seven hundred seventy and five
shekels of silver, which is as here (allowing three thousand shekels to a
talent) an hundred talents and a thousand seven hundred seventy five shekels
over; and this counting twenty five shekels to a pound weight amounts to twelve
thousand seventy one pound weight of silver, which at five shillings the ounce
comes to thirty six thousand two hundred and thirteen pounds in sterling money.

Verse. 29. And the brass of the ^ffering was seventy talents, and two thousand
and four hundred shekels.] That is, (allowing three thousand shekels to a
talent) two hundred and twelve thousand and four hundre^ shekels of brass,
and this (counting twenty five shekels to a pound weight) amounts to eight
thousand four hundred ninety six pound weight of brass, whereby it is
evident that there was not so much brass as silver, and therefore surely the
pillars were made of wood, and only covered over with brass. See chap. 27.
ver. 9.

CHAP. XXXIX.
Verse. 1. ANd of the blew and purple and scarlet they made clothes of service,
etc.] See chap. 31. 10.

Verse. 43. And Moses blessed them.] That is, he not only commended both the
people and workmen, and prayed God to bless them, but also as Gods public
minister he pronounced a blessing on them from the Lord.

CHAP. XL*
Verse. 9. ANd thou shall take the anointing ^yl, and anoint the tabernacle,
etc.] The performance of this see in Levit. 8. 10.

Verse. 10. And thou shall anoint the altar, etc.] And sprinkle thereof upon the
altar seven times. See Levit. 8. 11.

Verse. 15. For their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood, etc.]
So that their children after them shall not need to be anointed, but shall
execut^ the office by reason of this unction of their fathers; only the high
priests were anointed in the generations following.

Verse. 17. And it came to pass in the first month, etc.] They went out of
Egypt the fifteenth of the first month, and now the next year upon the first
day of the month the tabernacle is erected, so that there wanted now but
fifteen days of a full year since they left Egypt.

Verse. 27. And he burnt sweet incense thereon, etc.] As supplying at present
the priests office.

ANNOTATIONS On the third book of MOSES called LEVITICUS.
CHAP. I.
ANd the Lord called unto Moses, etc.] This word, and, shows the immediate
connection of this book of this story, upon that wherewith the foregoing book of
Exodus was concluded, namely that after the tabernacle was reared, Aaron and
his sons consecrated to the office of the priesthood, and the cloud descended
upon the tabernacle, immediately God spoke to Moses from the mercy-seat out of
the tabernacle (for into it Moses was not able to enter, because the glory of
the Lord filled it) and so informed him how Aaron and his sons should carry
themselv^s ^n the priesthood, etc.

Verse. If any man of you bring an offering unto the Lord, etc.] That is, any
sacrifice whatsoever: This is a general rule concerning all sacrifices, to
wit, that none must be offered, but of the herd, or flock, that is, if they
were cattle they intended to offer; for if they intended an offering of birds,
what they must be is expressed afterward, verse. 14.

Verse. 3. If his offering be a burnt-sacrifice of the herd, let him offer a
male without blemish.] Here the Lord first gives directions for
burnt-offerings, which were indeed the chief of all their sacrifices, and so
called because they were all wholly burnt upon the altars; whereas of other
sacrifices some part only was burnt upon the altar, and the other parts were
otherwise disposed of. And the direction that is here first given concerning
these is, that if a burnt-offering were to be offered of the herd, it must be a
male without blemish, that it might be the fitter to figure forth Christ's
perfection in himself, and ours in him, who being perfectly holy, and free from
the least blemish of sin, He did no sin: neither was guile found in his
mouth, 1. Pet. 2. 22. did yet notwithstanding by suffering death for us
perfectly satisfy the justice of God on our behalf, that so he might present
the Church to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing, but that it should be holy, and without blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27. for
(says the same Apostle, Heb. 9. 13, 14.) If the blood of bulls, and of goats,
and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience
from dead works to serve the living God? And so again Saint Peter says, Ye
know that ye were redeemed with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb
without blemish and without spot, 1. Pet. 1. 18, 19. Yet withal hereby the
Lord taught both them and us to give God the best in all our services.

Verse. 3. He shall offer it of his own voluntary will at the door of the
tabernacle.] That is, he that will offer a burnt sacrifice, he must do it
voluntarily of his own mind, and not be forced to it; and when he brings it he
must present it to the priest at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; that is, at the door of the court, close within which the brazen
altar for burnt-offerings stood. The first of these might signify the freedom
of Gods grace in giving his son, and the willingness of Christ in giving
himself to be a sacrifice of propitiation for our souls; but principally
doubtless it was to teach them, that in all service done to God, it must be
done freely and willingly, or God will not accept of it: The second was
appointed to signify that their sacrifices (and so consequently any service
that we perform) were only in and through Christ sanctified and made
acceptable to God: The tabernacle was a type of Christ* that greater and more
perfect tabernacle not made with hands, Heb. 9. 11. and he is the only door
by whom we have access unto the father.

Verse. 4. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the burnt-offering.] This
was to testify, First, that he acknowledged himself guilty of death: Secondly,
that he desired and believed that that sacrifice should be accepted of God as a
ransom for his soul, that all his sins should be laid upon it, and so it
should suffer death as it were in his stead; in all which notwithstanding they
that did this had not respect so much to the beast slain, in the death whereof
there could not be an equal compensation given to the justice of God for the
death of sinners, as to Christ, of whom these sacrifices were types, who took
upon him our sins, and the curse due to our sins, when he died for us:
Thirdly, that he desired, and would endeavor to consecrate himself wholly to
Gods service, as now he gave this sacrifice wholly to be offered upon the altar
to the Lord, crucifying all his sinful lusts and affections, and yielding up
his whole man to the obedience of Gods will in all things whatsoever.

And it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.] Though
burnt-offerings were usually given in sign of thankfulness to God, and so
betokened a new creature, and holy life, Psalm. 51. 18, 19. Do good in thy good
pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Then shall thou be
pleased with sacrifices of righteousness, with burnt-offering and whole
burnt-offering, and Genesis 8. 20. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord, and
took of every clean beast, and of every fowl, and offered burnt-offerings on
the altar* yet they were also for atonement and remission of sins, to wit
general sins, Job 1. 5. And it was so when the days of their feasting were
gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the
morning, and offered burnt-offerings according to the number of them all: for
Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, etc. whereas for special
sins there was a special sacrifice and sinne-offering, Levit. 4.

Verse. 5. And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord.] That is, the priest
in the name of the offerer: for this was usually the work of the priests, and
therefore Moses did it when he supplied the priests office, Exodus 29. 10, 11.
though sometimes the Levites also helped herein when there were not priests
enough to do it, 2. Chron. 25. 10, 11. The priests stood in their places, and
the Levites in their courses, and they killed the Passover (that is, the
Passeover-offerings) and the priests sprinkled the blood from their hands, as
being given of God to be assistant to the priests in such services, Numb. 8.
19. I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons, to do the
service of the children of Israel in the tabernacle of the congregation, and to
make an atonement for the children of Israel. Now the sacrifice was killed to
signify the death of Christ, Who was slain that he might redeem us to God by
his blood, Revel. 5. 9. and the mortifying of Gods people by the word and
spirit: and it was killed by the priest, to signify that Christ should offer
up himself unto God, as being both our priest and sacrifice, and that there is
no possibility for men to please God by any service they do him, but only in
and through the mediation of Christ, of whose priesthood the Leviticall priest
was a type and figure. As for the place where it was killed, that may be
gathered, by the rule of Analogy, from that which is expressed verse the 11.
concerning the second sort of burnt-offerings, namely, that it was killed at
the north-side of the altar.

And the priests Aarons sons shall bring the blood, and sprinkle the blood,
etc.] And this was done in a large measure, so that the corners of the altar
were filled with blood, Zach. 9. 15. to teach the people that this blood of
their sacrifice should not be lost as spilt upon the ground, but should be
accepted of God as a propitiation for their sins, as being a figure of the
blood of Christ, which should be offered up to God and accepted by him in our
behalf, as for our reconciliation, so also for our sanctification, who are
elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, through sanctification
of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ, 1.
Pet. 1. 2.

Verse. 6. And he shall flay the burnt-offering.] That is, the priest: for the
flaying of the sacrifice was also ordinarily the work of the priest, who had
therefore the skin for himself, Levit. 7. 8. though upon extraordinary
occasions (as is before noted concerning killing the burnt-offerings) even in
this also the Levites sometime helped them, 2. Chron. 29. 34. The priests were
too few, so that they could not flay all the burnt-offerings; wherefore their
brethren the Levites did help them. Because the sacrifices were offered (as I
may say) as a holy feast unto the Lord, whence the altar is called the table of
the Lord, and the sacrifice offered thereon, his meat, Mal. 1. 12. therefore
nothing but what was usually eaten by men was burnt upon the altar; and hence
it was that the skin was always flayed off. Yet withal it is commonly held
by Expositours that this flaying of the sacrifice did also signify, First, the
sufferings of Christ, who being first stripped of his garments, Matthew. 27. 28*
they did afterward most shamefully entreat, so that there was no beauty in him
why men should desire him: Secondly, the afflictions of Gods people under the
rage of cruel oppressors and persecutours, Who, as the Prophet speaks, Micha.
3. 3. eat their flesh, and flay their skin from off them: And thirdly, the
mortification which God requires in those that give up their names to him, even
that They put off concerning the former conversation the old man, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, Ephesians. 5. 22.

Verse. 7. And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire on the altar, etc.]
Here the Lord gives direction for the burning of these sacrifices by the
inseriour priests, enjoining them, first, to put fire upon the altar. Now
because they were to use no strange fire in burning the sacrifices, but only
that fire which was continually nourished upon the altar, Levit. 6. 12, 13. and
which at first came down from heaven, Levit. 9. 24. therefore by putting fire
upon the altar, is meant only the laying of the fire together, or laying it on
again when they had laid it by for the clearing of the altar: Secondly, to lay
the wood in order, and then all the pieces of the sacrifices in order upon the
wood; which was so appointed, because the discreet laying of the wood does much
conduce to the well burning of the fire: And then lastly, thus to burn all upon
the altar. The mystery of this might be twofold: First, to signify the
consecrating of Christ and his members by afflictions and sufferings; for as he
the Captain of our salvation was made perfect by sufferings, Heb. 2. 10. so
must his members also be ready always through these fiery trials to enter into
glory, for every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be
salted with salt, Mark 9. 49. Secondly, to signify that holy zeal whereby we
should wholly give up our selves to God through the operation of Gods holy
spirit, which is often in the Scriptures compared to fire, as Matthew. 3. 11. He
that comes after me is mightier then I, he shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost and with fire: for as Christ through the eternal spirit offered himself
without spot unto God, Heb. 9. 14. so likewise it is the spirit whereby we must
be enabled to consecrate our selves to Gods service, Ye have purified your
souls in obeying the truth (says the Apostle Peter) through the spirit, 1.
Pet. 1. 22. to which end we must not only be careful not to quench the
spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19. but also by prayer, holy meditation, and all other
things conducing thereto, we must do what we can to further this work of the
spirit in us, as they did in burning the sacrifices, by laying in order the
wood and the pieces of the sacrifice upon the wood.

Verse. 9. But the inwards and his legs shall thou wash in water.] Some conceive
that by the inwards are not meant the guts, but only the heart and liver, and
such inward parts, and that because only that which was usually eaten by men
was offered on the altar, Gods table, as it is called Mal. 1. 2. as was before
noted upon verse 6. But however the washing of the inwards and feet did
doubtless signify the perfect purity of Christ, and withal our
through-purification both in the outward and inward man by the spirit of
Christ; ^gree^ble whereunto are those expressions of the holy Scripture, Ezekiel.
36. 25. Then will I sprink^e clean water upon you, and you shall be clean; from
all your filthiness and from all your idols will I cleanse you; and again,
Heb. 10. 22. Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,
having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with
pure water.

Verse. 10. He shall bring it a male without blemish.] See the note upon verse. 3.

Verse. 11. And he shall kill it on the side of the altar Northward.] There also
the sinne-offering was killed, Levit. 6. 25. and the trespasse-offering, Levit.
7. 2. which might signify the obscurity of the legal ceremonies, the North
being farthest from the light of the sun; or that Christ was to dye at
Jerusalem, of which the Prophet says, Psalm. 48. 2. On the sides of the North
is the city of the great King. But I rather content my self with this literal
reason: The altar being placed by the door of the tabernacle of the tent of
the congregation (which seems was in the Southside) there was more scope on the
Northside, and therefore they are there appointed to make ready the sacrifices.
Only the peace offerings were slain at the very door of the tabernacle, which
was more Eastwards in regard of the altar, as is evident, chap. 32.

Verse. 12. And the priest shall lay them in order.] See the note above upon
ver. 8.

Verse. 13. But he shall wash the inwards, etc.) See the former note upon verse.
9.

And the priest shall bring it all, and burn it upon the altar.] This signified
that all Christ, and whatsoever he had done is ours by faith, Gal. 2. 20. I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself
for me: And that we also should give our selves wholly unto God by him, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23. And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly; and I pray God
your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless, unto the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse. 14. And if the burnt-sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls,
then he shall bring his offering of turtle doves, or of young pigeons.] Which
signified the innocence and meekness both of Christ and his members: And
again, old turtles and young pigeons are best, and so the best must be given to
God.

Verse. 15. And wring off his head, and burn it on the altar.] The manner how
the priests should kill the burnt-offering of turtle doves, or young pigeons,
is here set down* which was by wringing off the head of them (according to our
translation) or pinching of the head with the priests nail, as it is in the
margin of our bibles. The most common opinion of Expositours is, that the heads
of these birds were not quite wrung off from their bodies, but only broken in
sunder, and so left hanging still by the skin unto their bodies: and their
chief reason is, because elsewhere it is said, where direction is given for the
killing of such turtle doves, or young pigeons, that were brought for a
sinne-offering, that the priests should wring off his head from his neck, but
not divide it asunder, Levit. 5. 8. But some other reasons may make it seem
more probable that the heads of these birds that were brought for a
burnt-offering were quite wrung off from their bodies: as First, because we
cannot well else conceive how the blood of these sacrifices should be wrung
out at the side of the altar, as it is enjoined in the follovving words; and
we know that the Jews did of all things abhor things that were strangled,
and that the effusion of the blood of the sacrifices was the chief thing
whereby was signified the atonement made for us by the blood of Christ, and
how by the pinching of the priests nail a wound should be made for the letting
out the blood as some hold, it is hard to conceive: and secondly, because the
following words, and burn it on the altar, seem plainly to be meant of burning
the head particularly, being thus wrung off; for of the burning of the body of
these birds, direction is afterward given, verse. 17. As for that place in the
fifth of Leviticus, I see not but it may be meant, not of not dividing the head
from the body, but of not dividing the body asunder, for which also there is
here direction given, verse. 17. He shall cleave it, but not divide it asunder.

Verse. 16. And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers, etc.] And so it
figured the holiness that was in Christ our sacrifice, who without all sin
or uncleanness offered himself unto God for us; by which also he cleansed and
purified his people and their service of God, Heb. 9. 14.

And cast it besides the altar on the East part by the place of the ashes.]
That is, where the priest, when he cleansed the altar, did first pour forth
the ashes, which afterward were carried ^orth without the camp, Levit. 6. 10*
11. This place of the ashes was on the Eastside of the altar, both because it
was nearest to the door of the tabernacle, and so the ashes might the more
conveniently be thence carried forth at the times appointed; and because it was
farthest off from the Sanctuary, and so the casting away of the crop and the
feathers in this place might teach them that all uncleanness was to be removed
out of Gods sight, Holiness becomes thy house, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93. 5.

Verse. 17. And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof, but shall not divide
it asunder, etc.] That is, he shall cleave it, the wings being still left,
only the feathers plucked off: and though it must be cloven, that so the inward
part might be laid upon the fire, signifying that God requires chiefly the
offering of the inner man unto him; yet it must not be divided asunder, whereby
may be meant that we should give up our selves wholly to God, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 23.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd when any will offer a meat offering unto the Lord, his offering
shall be of fine flower.] There was a meat offering that was always to be
joined with their burnt-offerings, for which direction is given elsewhere: but
here direction is given only for voluntary meat offerings; and therefore it is
said, When any will offer a meat offering, etc. neither is there any set
quantity here appointed* but it is left free to the offerer to bring what he
pleased, whereas for the meat offering that was brought together with their
burnt-offerings of the herd, or of the flock, there is an express law how much
there should be of it, to wit, a tenth deal of flower mingled with the fourth
part of an hin of oil, Numb. 15. 4. Now these voluntary meat offerings were for
the same end that the burnt-offerings were, both to make atonement for them,
and also to testi^ie their consecrating of themselves to God; but withal
particularly they were by way of acknowledgement that all their provision they
had of his bounty. So then the meat offering signified, First* Christ his
oblation of himself, of which the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5. 2. Christ has
loved us, and given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a
sweet smelling savor; and again, Heb. 10. 8, 9, 10. When he said, Sacrifice
and offering, and burnt-offerings, and offering for sin thou would not,
neither had pleasure therein, which are offered by the law: Then said he,
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God! He takes away the first that he may
establish the second: By the which will we are sanctified through the offering
of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. Secondly, Christians won to God by
the Gospel, and then consecrated to his service, Esaias 66. 20. They shall bring
all your brethren for an offering to the Lord, out of all nations, to my holy
mountain Jerusalem, says the Lord, as the children of Israel bring an offering
in a clean vessel into the house of the Lord. Thirdly, all our Evangelicall
sacrifices of prayer and praising God, with other services done to the Lord,
and to his saints for his sake, Mal. 1. 11. In every place incense shall be
offered unto my name, and a pure offering: And last of all, more particularly
their acknowledgement of Gods bounty in all the food they enjoyed, and
therefore it was that in all these meat offerings they are appointed to bring
fine slowre, without any mixture of branne, to signify the purity of all
Evangelicall sacrifices.

He shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense thereon.] The oil poured upon
the flower figured the graces and comfort of the holy Ghost, whereby we serve
God with a willing mind and a cheerful spirit, Ye have an unction from the
holy one, says the Apostle, speaking of this oil of Gods spirit, 1. John 2.
20. and the sweetness both of the oil and frankincense signified how sweet and
acceptable their services were unto God in and through the mediation of Christ,
who has given himself for us an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet
smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. whence it was that the Prophet told the Jews that
their incense was in vain when God regarded not their sacrifices, Jer. 6. 20.
To what purpose comes there to me ^ncense from Sheba, and sweet calamus from a
far country? your burnt-offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices
sweet unto me.

Verse. 2. And the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar.] That
is, the handf^ll which he had taken out of the meat offering, which should in
stead of all put God in mind (which is spoken of God after the manner of men)
of all this offering which the offerer had given to the Lord, and of the
covenant which he had made to accept it, and withal be a memorial to the
offerer that he acknowledged all the store he had to be from God, and therefore
to be consecrated wholly to his service, and that God would take in good part
the offering he had now brought him.

Verse. 3. And the remnant of the meat offering shall be Aarons and his sons.]
To eat the same in the Sanctuary, Levit. 6. 16. And the remainer thereof shall
Aaron and his sons eat; with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy
place, in the court of the tabernacle, etc.

It is a thing most holy of the offerings of the Lord made by fire.] And
therefore only to be eaten by the priests that offer it. Of other offerings
others might eat, but of the most holy things, whereof part was burnt on the
altar, only the priests.

Verse. 4. And if thou bring an oblation of a meat offering baken in the oven.]
These were prepared and baked within the Sanctuary, as it seems by Ezekiel 46.
20. This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespasse-offering, and
the sinne-offering, where they shall bake the meat offering, and 1. Chron. 23.
28, 29. Their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron, etc. both for the
shewbread and for the fine flower for meat offerings, and for the unleavened
cakes, and for that which is baked in the pan, and for that which is fried.

It shall be an unleavened cake of fine flower mingled with oil, or unleavened
wafers anointed with oil.] See the notes upon Exodus 29. 2. and upon the 11.
verse of this chapter.

Verse. 11. No meat offering, which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made
with leaven.] This must be understood only of these voluntary oblations, part
whereof was to be burnt upon the altar; for with some eucharisticall or
thankofferings they might bring leavened cakes, Levit. 7. 13. as also in the
first fruits, Levit. 23. 17. but these were not burnt upon the altar. And where
leaven was not to be used in the oblation, the part remaining the priests might
not eat with leaven, Levit. 6. 16. because part of the offering was burnt upon
the altar. Now leaven was thus generally forbidden: First, to put them still in
mind of their deliverance out of Egypt, a type of their redemption by Christ:
Secondly, to teach them to worship God as he had appointed, and to know that
all humane devices therein are an abomination to God: Thirdly, to show the
perfect purity of Christ, in whom there was not the least leaven of sin, and
the sincerity that must be in our evangelicall sacrifices; for leaven
signifies sin of all sorts, in doctrine and manners, distasteful to God, and
infectious to men, Luke 12. 1. Beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which
is hypocrisy. 1. Cor. 5. 8. Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven,
neither with t he leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened
bread of sincerity and truth.

For ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, in any offering of the Lord made by
fire.] Not only leaven but honey also is forbidden: First, because it has a
kind of leavening nature: Secondly, the more fully to exclude all humane
devices in Gods worship: the sweetness of honey might be a pretense of mixing
it with their sacrifices: when neither sour nor sweet ple^seth him but only
what is appointed, what place is left for humane inventions? Thirdly, if any
mystery be thought employed, it may be the abandoning of all carnal pleasures
and delights by those that will consecrate themselves to Gods service.

Verse. 12. As for the oblation of the first fruits ye shall offer them unto the
Lord.] To wit, though with leaven, Levit. 23. 17. They shall be baken with
leaven, they are the first fruits unto the Lord; though honey 2. Chron. 31. 5.
The children of Israel brought in abundance the first-f^uits of corn, wine, and
oil, and honey.

Verse. 13. And every oblation of thy meat-o^^^ri^g ^^alt thou season with
salt.] By this salting was signified the covenant o^ grace in Christ, which we
by faith apprehend unto incorruption: wherefore o^r un^^genera^e estate is
likened to a child new born and not salted, Ezekiel. 16. 4.

Neither shall thou suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking
from thy meat offering.] To wit, the salt which is a sign of the covenant of
thy God: that is, be sure that salt be not wanting, which you are bound as by a
covenant to use in all sacrifices; and be sure that faith in the covenant be
not wanting, which is signified by that salt, for then all your sacrifices will
be of no value with the Lord.

With all thine offerings thou shall offer salt.] Not only meat offerings, but
also burnt-offerings, and all other sacrifices, Ezekiel. 43. 24. The priest shall
cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt-offering unto the
Lord. Mark 9. 49. Every sacrifice shall be salted with salt.

Verse. 14. And if thou offer a meat offering of thy first fruits unto the Lord,
etc.] That is, a freewill-offering of the first fruits, besides enjoined by the
law.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. ANd if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering, if he offer it
of the herd, whether it be male or female, etc.] Peace Offerings were either to
obtain from God some blessing which they wanted, or by way of gratulation or
thanksgiving for some blessing received. The chief and most ordinary use of
them was doubtless in a way of thanksgiving for their peace and prosperity,
the several sorts whereof are set down in the seventh chapter. But yet
sometimes they were also used when men in their troubles prayed unto God for
peace and salvation: so Judges 20. 26. when the Israelites fasted and sought
unto the Lord for his aid and favor, because the men of Benjamin had twice
beaten them in battle, they offered burnt-offerings and peace offerings before
the Lord; and when David sought to appease Gods anger, when the pestilence
raged in the land because of his numbering the people, He built an altar to the
Lord, and offered burnt-offerings and peace-of-ferings, 1. Chron. 21. 26. the
Lord hereby teaching us that with supplications for what we want we must also
join thanksgiving for what we already enjoy. So then the peace offerings
signified 1. Christ's oblation of himself, whereby he became our peace, Ephesians.
2. 14. and 2. the sacrifice of praise which in and through him we offer unto
God. The sacrifices appointed here for the peace offerings are a male or female
of the herd or of the flock: turtle doves and young pigeons are not here
allowed for the poorer sort, as in burnt-offerings they were, and that because
the peace offerings were to be divided into three parts; one for the altar,
another for the priest, and a third for the offerer, and such a division could
not be conveniently made in so small sacrifices. But yet because this sacrifice
was by way of thankfulness for temporal blessings external, peace and
prosperity, therefore a female, a less perfect sacrifice was here accepted of
God. Why it must be without blemish, see in the notes upon chap. 1. ver. 3.

Verse. 2. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering.] See the
notes upon Levit. verse. 4.

And kill it at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, etc.] Why this
sacrifice was to be killed by the priests, and the blood to be sprinkled upon
the altar, you may see by that which is said before upon chapter 1. verse. 5.
That which is particularly observable here is, that these sacrifices of
peace offerings were not killed at the same place where the other sacrifices
were killed; for the burnt-offerings were killed on the one side of the altar
Northward before the Lord, and so were also the sinne-offering and the
trespasse-offering in the very place where the burnt-offering was killed, chap.
6. 25. and chap. 7. 2. But now the peace offerings were to be killed in another
place, to wit, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, that is, the
very entrance of the court, where stood the brazen altar, which was more
Eastward then the place where the other sacrifices were killed. And the reason
of this we may well conceive was, 1. Because the fat and the breast of these
peace offerings were to be waved before the altar in the hands of the offerer,
who might not go into the court, but stand at the door, chap. 7. 30. and 2.
Because these peace offerings, whereof the offerer did eat a part, were not
reckoned amongst the most holy things, which were only eaten by the priest.
And hence this is given as a reason why the trespasse-offering was to be killed
in the same place where the burnt-offerings were killed, because it was most
holy, and to be eaten by the priests only, chap. 14. 13.

Verse. 3. And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering, a n
offering made by fire unto the Lord.] Namely, that which is afterward
expressed: the rest of the offering was thus disposed of* the breast and right
shoulder were waved and heaved before the Lord, and given the priests to eat.
See Levit. 7. 30. the remainer was eaten by him that brought it, his family and
friends, Levit. 7. 15, 16.

The fat that covers the inwards, etc.] The fat as the best of the sacrifice
is offered up unto the Lord, and so teaches that the best is to be still given
unto him; and it might withal signify, that all our carnal desires are to be
mortified with the fire of the spirit.

Verse. 5. And Aarons sons shall burn it.] To wit, being first salted, Levit.
2. 13.

On the altar upon the burnt sacrifice, etc.] That is, upon the remainer of the
daily burnt-offering, which always had the first place.

Verse. 9. The fat thereof and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the
backbone* etc.] Because the rump of those country sheep was large and
exceeding fat, as Writers report, and the fat was to be burnt, and withal
because the rumps of sheep are sweeter and better then those of bullocks,
therefore the rump of the sheep is also set apart for the sacrifice, though not
of the bullocks.

Verse. 11. It is the food of the offering made by fire unto the Lord.] So
called, to show Gods acceptance of it, that it should be as meat to him, and
withal to express his love, who reckons himself as a guest at their feasts.

Verse. 16. All the fat is the Lords.] That is, it must be burnt upon the altar,
neither may the priest nor owner eat of it.

Verse. 17. It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations, throughout
all your dwellings, etc.] Upon the Lords setting apart the fat of all
sacrifices to be his peculiar portion, and to be burnt upon the altar, there is
here a more general statute given them in charge, towit, that the people
should never eat any of this fat of these beasts fit for sacrifices, no not in
their o^n private dwellings, when they killed them for their ordinary food, and
not sor sacrifices; which was doubtless to keep in them a reverend remembrance
of these holy rites, and the spiritual mysteries signified thereby. Indeed
there is great difference of judgment amongst Expositours concerning this law,
to wit, whether the eating of all fat was here forbidden the Israelites* or
only the eating of the fat of their sacrifices. But for this we must know 1.
that it is meant only of the fat of beasts that were appointed for sacrifices,
for so much is expressed chap. 7. 23. Y^ shall eat no manner of fat of ox, of
sheep, or of goats: 2. that it was not meant of such fat as is mixed with the
flesh of such beasts, as in the shoulder, breast, etc. (for such fat they were
doubtless allowed to eat, whence Deuteronomy. 32. 14. The fat of rams and lambs of
the breed of Bashan, and goats, is r^ckoned amongst the dainties which God had
given the Israelites in the land of Canaan) but it is meant only of the fat
which we call suet or tallow, the fat before mentioned, which when these beasts
were sacrificed was always burnt upon the altar: and 3. for this fat, it is
far more probable that the Israelites were by this law forbidden to eat of
it, at all times, and in all places, whenever they killed either sheep, or ox,
or goat, for their ordinary food, not only because it is said that this should
be a law for them throughout all their dwellings, that is, even when they
killed these cattle at home in their own private dwellings; but also especially
because fat and blood are here jointly alike forbidden: Now the blood even of
those cattle which they killed at home for their private use they might not eat
(the reason whereof see in the note upon Genesis 9. 5.) and therefore not the fat
neither.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 2. IF a soul shall sin through ignorance, etc.] Hitherto in this book
direction has been given for burnt-offerings, meat offerings, and
peace offerings: Now the Lord here begins his directions for those offerings
whereby expiation was made for some particular sin which the offerer found
himself guilty of, which in some cases were called sinne-offerings, and in some
cases trespasse-offerings. The first general command concerning these is in
these words, to wit, that if a soul, that is, any person whatsoever, should
sin through ignorance against any of the commandments of the Lord, then that
person should bring a sinne-offering by way of expiation for that sin: where
by sins committed through ignorance, or error (for so the word in the
original may also be rendered) are not only meant such sins as men commit
and yet know not that they sinned, as being ignorant of the fact done, or of
the unlawfulness of the fact, thinking they did well when indeed they
transgressed some law and commandment of God; but also such sins as men
commit through infirmity and weakness, when they are suddenly overtaken in a
fault, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. 6. 1. overborn by the strength of their
lusts and corrupt affections, which do for the present as it were blind their
judgment and reason, and so they do not for the time mind the law of God, or
not lay it to heart as they ought to do. Yet withal we must consider that it
is no way probable that all sins of this nature are here intended, but only
such greater external sins for which the conscience is more likely to be
stricken then for every ordinary aberration: for who can think that there was a
several sinne-offering to be brought for every transgression of Gods law,
though but in thought or word, which in the best are every day so many? No,
other sins were expiated by the daily burnt-offerings which were offered for
the whole Church, or by the sacrifice offered on the day of atonement,
concerning which it is said, Levit. 16. 30. On that day shall the priest make
an atonement for you, to cleanse you, that you may be clean from all your
sins before the Lord. These sinne-offerings were only for such particular
sins, for which their consciences were in a more special manner smitten: and
they were all types of Christ; for For God made him to be sin for us who knew
no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2. Cor. 5. 21.

Verse. 3. If the priest that is anointed do sin, etc.] That is, the high
priest, who only was anointed in the ages following, as is before noted upon
Exodus 29. 7. and 40. 15. now in that the Leviticall high priest had himself
need of an offering for sin, they were taught that he was not the Mediator
that could stand between God and them, and make a perfect atonement for them;
but that they were to look for another, in whom there was no sin, of whom the
Leviticall high priest in his holy garments was a shadow and type. See Heb. 7.
26, 27, 28. For such an high priest became us who is holy, harmless,
^ndefiled, and separate from sinners; who needs not daily as those high
priests to offer ^p sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the
peoples, etc.

Then let him bring for his sin which he has sinned a young bullock, etc.] A
greater sacrifice then the common persons, verse. 28. or the rulers, verse. 22.
and equal to the congregations, verse. 14. because his sin was greatest and
most pernicious to the people.

Verse. 4. And shall lay his hand upon the bullocks head, etc.] So testifying
his faith and resting on Christ, whom that sacrifice figured. See the note upon
chapter 1. 4.

Verse. 5. And the priest that is anointed shall take of the bullocks blood.]
This anointed priest is the sinner himself, Heb. 7. 27. who is here enjoined to
take of the bullocks blood, and bring it to the tabernacle of the congregation,
that is, into the tabernacle, which was not yet prescribed to be done in any
other sacrifice: and this showed that by the blood of Christ we have a way
opened into heaven, Heb. 10. 19. 20. Having boldness to enter into the holiest
by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us
through the vail, that is to say, his flesh.

Verse. 6. And sprinkle of the blood seven times before the Lord, etc.] A
mystical number, signifying the full satisfaction that was given to God, and
the full and perfect cleansing of sin by the sprinkling of the blood of
Jesus, Heb. 9. 13, 14. For if the blo^d of bulls and of goats and the ashes of
an heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctisieth to the purifying of the flesh; How
much more shall the blood of Christ etc. purge your conscience from dead works
to serve the living God? and that our sins need much purgation, Psalm. 51. 2.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities and cleanse me from my sin.

Verse. 11. And the skin of the bullock, and all his flesh, etc.] In other
sinne-offerings after the fat was offered upon the altar, the remainer of the
sacrifice was eaten by the priests, chap. 6. 26. The priest that offers it for
sin shall eat it; in the holy place shall it be eaten: but in the
sinne-offering for the priest here another order is given, and so likewise in
the sinne-offering for the whole congregation, verse. 21. (because there the
pries^s were included with the rest) to wit, that it should be wholly carried
forth without the camp, and burnt there, whence is that law, chap. 6. 30. that
no sin-offering should be eaten, whereof any of the blood was brought into the
tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place (which
was only done in the sinne-offering for the priest and for the congregation)
but that they should be burnt with fire. The literal reason of this doubtless
was, because the offerer himself might not eat of the sinne-offering, and in
these sinne-offerings the priest himself was the offerer, either solely by
himself, as here; or jointly with the rest of the people, as in the
sinne-offering for the whole congregation: but withal assuredly there was a
mystery in it: for first, hereby they we^e taught how detestable a thing sin
is, especially the sins of sacred persons, and common sins of a whole
Church and people, which here were laid as it were upon the bullock that was
carried forth out of the camp: 2. It signified that Christ, the true
sinne-offering, should be carried out of Jerusalem to suffer, as the Apostle
himself says, to show the meaning of this ceremony, Heb. 13. 11, 12. The
bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into the Sanctuary by the high
priest for sin are burnt without the camp; Wherefore Jesus also, that he might
sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate: 3. To teach
us that by Christ's sufferings our sins are perfectly forgiven, cast as it
were out of doors, and removed far away from us. As for the person that was
to carry forth this bullock for a sinne-osfering without the camp, and to burn
him there, though the words in the 12. verse. may seem to have reference to the
priest that offered the sinne-offering, The whole bullock shall he carry forth
without the camp, etc. yet the meaning only is that he should see it were
done, not that he should do it himself, and so become unclean thereby, as may
appear by what is said in another place that is parallel with this, chap. 16.
27, 28.

Verse. 13. And if the whole congregation of Israel sin through ignorance,
etc.] That is, if the whole congregation shall of mere ignorance or infirmity,
which is a kind of ignorance, or error, because such as sin thus are for
the time as men blinded carried away with the strength of their corruptions,
shall do any thing that is evil, and either not take any notice of it, or not
lay to heart the evil they have done, after they come to know it, or to be
touched in conscience for it, they shall offer a sinne-offering for their
atonement: where by the way it is vvorth the noting that the whole assembly
of particular Churches may err.

Verse. 14. When the sin, which they have sinned against it, is known, then the
congregation shall offer a young bullock, etc.] In Numb. 15. 24. the Israelites
are enjoined to bring a kid of the goats for a sinne-offering for the sin of
the whole congregation: but that was only for the sin of omitting any of
those ceremonial duties there enjoined them, but this is more general for all
sin whatsoever, which you may see more fully explained in the note upon that
place.

Verse. 20. And he shall do with the bullock as he did with the bullock for a
sinne-offering, etc.] That is, the bullock for the priests sinne-offering,
whereof before the first bullock, as it is called, verse. 21.

Verse. 22. When a ruler has sinned, etc. and is guilty, or if his sin
wherein he has sinned come to his knowledge, etc.] That is, when any civil
magistrate has sinned, whether he be presently struck with an
acknowledgement of his guilt, or whether his sin be afterward by any
means discovered to him, so soon as he comes to the knowledge of it he shall
bring his sinne-offering.

Verse. 24. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in
the place, etc.] That is, on the Northside of the altar. See Levit. 1. 11.

Verse. 25. And the priests shall take of the blood of the sinne-offering with
his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar, etc.] The blood of this
sinne-offering for the ruler (as likewise that for the common people) why was
it not as in the former carried into the tabernacle, sprinkled before the vail,
and upon the altar of incense? surely because the sin of the priest and
congregation was more heinous then that of the ruler, therefore was there a
more solemn manner of atonement appointed for their sin then for the rulers or
the private persons.

Verse. 26. And he shall burn all his fat upon the altar, etc.] The remainer was
eaten by the priests. See Levit. 6. 26. whereas the remainer of the
sin offerings for the priest and congregation were burnt without the camp for
the reason above shown in the note upon verse. 11.

Verse. 27. And if any one of the common people sin through ignorance, etc.)
That is, either Israelite or stranger that is joined unto them. See Numb. 15.
15.

Verse. 30. And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and
put it upon the horns of the altar, etc.] See the note verse. 25.

Verse. 32. And if he bring a lamb for a sinne-offering, etc.] This sacrifice
is spoken of apart from the former of the goat, because of the difference in
the fat that was burned, which was not wholly the same in a lamb as it was in
a goat. See the note upon chap. 3. 9.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd if a soul sin, and hear the voice of swearing, and is a
witness, whether he has seen or known of it, etc.] In this chapter some
instances are given of sins committed by private persons, for which they were
to bring a sinne-offering to the Lord; and that especially as I conceive, to
show in what cases the offerings which they brought for their sins were to be
of that sort which were more particularly called and esteemed
trespasse-offerings: for of such it is evident that Moses speaks, at least
principally in this chapter. Much arguing there is amongst Expositours to show
the difference between sinne-offerings and trespasse-offerings: some hold that
the sinne-offerings mentioned in the former chapter were for sins of
commission, the trespasse-offerings spoken of in this chapter were for sins
of omission: some again hold that the sinne-offerings were for greater
transgressions, and others quite contrary, that the trespasse-offerings were
for greater transgressions, and the sinne-offerings for smaller offenses. But
the truth is that these opinions on both sides are no other then groundless
conjectures: Evi^ent it is that these trespasse-offerings are also called
sinne-offerings, as we may see in the 6. verse. of this chapter, He shall bring
his trespasse-offering unto the Lord for his sin which he has sinned, a
female from the slock a lamb, or a kid of the goats, for a sinne-offering. All
trespasse-offerings were therefore sinne-offerings though all sinne-offerings
were not called trespasse-offerings. Herein only I conceive the difference
lay, that for some particular sins a sinne-offering was appointed, different
from the ordinary sinne-offerings enjoined particular persons in the former
chapter, which because it was for such sins wherein some trespass was
committed upon the goods of their neighbor, or upon the holy things of the
Lord, which belonged unto the priests, therefore they were more particularly
called trespasse-offerings. The first particular instance given in the first
verse of the chapter is concerning him that sins in concealing his
knowledge, when he might have witnessed the truth, If a soul sin (says the
text) and hear the voice of swearing, and is a witness, etc. for the meaning
of this place, so diversely expounded, I con^^ive to be this, that when an oath
is given for the clearing of any controversy, for any wrong done by one man to
another, and those to whom the oath is given do either forswear themselves, or
cannot discover the truth, if one that knows the truth, and might be or is
called to be a witness, stands by, conceals his knowledge, and does not reveal
the truth, he is guilty and must offer a trespasse-offering, because his
neighbor suffers damage in his estate through his silence; whether he has
see^ or known of it, that is, whether he was an eyewitness of that which is
in question, or came any other way to the knowledge of it, he must reveal all
he knows, or be guilty, and so o^fer a trespasse-offering.

Verse. 2. Or if a soul touch any unclean thing, etc.] The second instance of
sins for which they were to bring a trespasse-offering is concerning those
legal pollutions which are afterward^ fully expressed, chap. 11. and 12. etc.
The law is this; The man or woman that had touched any such unclean thing, he
was unclean and guilt^e of a sin, verse 2. so soon as he had touched it,
though for the time it was ^id from him, his doing it unwittingly should not
quit him of the guilt of it; but yet when he should come to the knowledge of
it, verse. 3. then he should ^e guilty in his own apprehension, and so must
offer a trespasse-offering, not so much to cleanse him from this legal
uncleanness (for in this case there was another way of legal purifying
appointed, Numb. 19. 11. etc.) as to expiate his sin, because for want of due
consideration he had so defiled himself; and through ignorance or
unadvisednesse had neglected those legal purifyings, or had come into the
sanctuary and intermeddled with Gods holy things whilst his uncleanness was
upon him. And indeed this was as I conceive the reason why a trespasse-offering
was in this case imposed, because the unclean person did by this sin
trespass upon Gods holy things, and as it were impair the worth of them. Now
these things also figured that we are to be cleansed by the sacrifice and death
of Christ, even from that pollution which is contracted by partaking with other
men's sins, of which the Apostle speaks, 1. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands suddenly on
no man, neither be partaker of other men's sins: keep thy self pure; and again,
2. Cor. 6. 17. Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord,
and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you.

Verse. 4. Or if a soul swear, pronouncing with his lips to do evil or to d^
good, etc.] In this third instance of sins for which they were to bring a
trespasse-offering, it is not easily discerned what the sin here intended is:
some conceive it to be the careless neglect of doing that which a man had
sworn to do, to clear himself of the guilt whereof he was to bring a
trespasse-offering to the Lord; and because there is express mention of
swearing to do evil, and it cannot be a sin to omit the doing of that which
he had sworn he would do, if he had sworn to do any evil to his neighbor, or
generally any thing evil, that is, sinful and against Gods law, but rather it
would be commendable to break such an oath, therefore by doing ^vil they
understand the doing of something which is hurtf^ll or irksome to himself, as
if a man has sworn to do what may bring some damage to his estate, or deprive
him of something that is pleasing and delightful to him: Again others conceive
that the sin here intended is rash and unadvised swearing to do either good
or evil to others, to wit, when it is sinful so confidently to undertake it,
as when he undertakes to do that which is not in his power to do, or which he
knows not whether he shall be able to do or no; or to do some evil to his
neighbor, which is against the rule of charity, and cannot be done without
sinning against God, as when David swear tha^ he would utterly destroy Naball
and all his family, 1. Sam. 5. 22. And this Exposition I conceive is the more
probable, first, because the sin of not doing what a man has sworn he would
do is not so clearly intimated in these words, as is the sin of rash and
unadvised swearing: for these words, pronouncing with his lips to do evil or to
do good, do indeed manifestly imply an ove^bold undertaking to do that which
happily he may not or cannot do: and secondly, because they that expound this
place of the sin of not doing what a man has sworn to do, are constraind to
understand that clause concerning swearing to do evil of doing that which is
evil or hurtful to himself, whereas I conceive it must necessarily be
understood of doing evil to his neighbor, because for it he was to bring a
trespasse-offering,* which implies at least an intention of trespassing upon
his neighbor: so that I say the sin here intended is, I conceive, rash and
unadvised swearing; and because if a man swore to do good to his neighbor when
it was not in his power, he did thereby engage himself for some good to his
neighbor which afterward his neighbor could not enjoy; and if he swore to do
evil to his neighbor, there was at least a purpose of trespassing upon him,
which was in Gods eye as if he had done it, therefore he is enjoined for this
sin to bring a trespasse-offering: though at first it be hid from him, that
is, when at first he bound himself by this oath through passion or
unadvisedness^ he did not know or consider that he sinned in so swearing, yet
when he knows of it, says the ^ext, that is, when he i^ once convinced that he
has sinned herein, then he shall be guilty in one of these, then the guilt
shall lie upon his conscience, whether he has sworn to do good or evil, and
for his atonement he must bring a trespasse-offering unto the Lord, as is added
in the following verses.

Verse. 5. And it shall be when he shall be guilty in one of these things.] That
is, when he shall be guilty in one of these three cases before named, he shall
confess his sin, laying his hand upon the sacrifices head, and so shall make
an atonement for himself.

Verse. 6. And he shall bring his trespasse-offering, etc.] This also no less
then the sinne-offering was a type of Christ, whose soul was made an offering
for sin, Isa. 53. 10. The word in the original is the same that is here
translated a trespasse-offering. Now how the trespasse-offering differed from
the sinne-offering, is noted before upon the first verse of this chapter.

Verse. 7. And if he be not able to bring a lamb, etc.] This exception was not
only for these particular offenses before named, but for all where a
sinne-offering was to be brought by the common people, that in no case poverty
should disable a man to make his peace with God. Now concerning these turtle
doves and young pigeons, see the note upon Levit. 1. 14.

One for a sinne-offering and the other for a burnt-offering.] Which were also
or atonement, Levit. 1. 4.

Verse. 8. And wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it
asunder.] This direction concerning the turtle dove* or young pigeon, that was
to be offered for a sinne-offering, may be understood two several ways:
either that the priest was to wring off the head but not to divide the body of
it asunder; or else, which is the commonest exposition, that he was to break
the neck of it asunder, but yet not to p^ll the head quite off from the body,
of which see the note upon Levit. 1. 15.

Verse. 11. But if he be not able, etc. then he that sinned shall bring for his
offering the tenth part of an Ephah, etc.] That is, the tenth part of a
bushel, the tenth part whereof was called an Over, Exodus 16. 36. near about
our pottle.

He shall put no oil upon it, etc.] To distinguish this sinne-offering from
those other meat offerings, whereof see Lev. 2. 1. Besides this happily might
signify that neither by any grace in us (whereof the oil was a sign) nor by
any prayersof ours (whereof the frankincense might be a sign) but only by
Christ we are reconciled unto God, whereof this meat offering was a type; or
else because the oil and frankin^^nse might signify the joy and gladness of
him that brought the offering, the Lord might appoint these to be left out in
the sinne-offering because of the sorrow and humiliation of spirit required in
him that brought this offering, as we may see in a like case, Number. 5. 15.

Verse. 15. If a s^ul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance.] The
Hebrew word translated here, comm^t a trespass, though it be generally used
for all transgression and disloyalty that the inferior commits against the
superior, yet for the most part it is applied to evils committed against the
Lord in his holy things, and so ^^gnifieth sacrilegiously to trespass upon the
Lord and his prie^ts by any wrong done to God in his holy things, when by any
man's ignorance, unadvisednesse, or error (for it must not be understood of the
presumptuous defrauding God of those things which belonged to him) God was
damaged in his offerings, as when any man paid not the full tithe due, or did
work with his firstborn bullock, or shear his firstborn sheep, or keep back
ought of the price of things dedicated to holy use, or take any of the priests
portion in the sacrifices, etc.

Then ^e shall bring for his trespass^ unto the Lora a ram, etc.] A greater
sacrifice then was brought for other trespasse-offerings, to show the
greatness of the sin of sacrilege.

With thy estimation by shekels of silver, etc.] That is, with as much money as
thou the priest shall value the damage at, according to the shekels of the
Sanctuary: for so it is explained ver. 16, 18.

Verse. 16. And shall add the fifth part thereto, etc.] For so much was also
added to holy things redeemed, Levit. 27. 13, 15, 19. But if he will at all
re^eem it, then he shall add a fifth part thereof unto thy estimation. And if
he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part
of the money of thy estimation unto it, etc.

Verse. 17. And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things, etc.] The ram
enjoined for a sinne-offering makes it clear that Moses here speaks concerning
the same sin of sacrilege, whereof before, only this particular is again
more clearly urged, that though he wist it not, though he was utterly ignorant,
yet he must as guilty bring this sacrifice for his atonement.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. IF a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord, etc.] This
Law is concerning sins done wittingly, where an injury is done to a
neighbor, and God also is particularly offended by a li^ and false oath.

Verse. 5. He shall even restore it in the principal.] That is, the very thing
it self, or the full worth of it.

And shall add the fifth part more thereto, etc.] If he were judicially
convicted of it, he was to be proceeded against according to those judicial
Laws, Exodus 22. which enjoin double payment: but this Law is for those, who
touched in conscience confess that whereof they could not be convinced by the
Law; in which case they were only to add a fifth part, and to give it unto
him to whom it appertains, whether the first owner, or the heir, etc.

Verse. 9. Command Aaron and his sonn^s, etc.] Hitherto the substance of the
sacrifices have been prescribed, now the several rites of each are described
more particularly. And first for burnt-offerings, though the daily
burnt-offering which was offered every morning, and the last every evening is
here chiefly intended.

Because of the burning upon the altar all night unto the morning, etc.] Not
only all day, but all night also; for as the morning burnt-offering burnt till
the evening, so the evening burnt-offering burnt all night until the morning.

And the fire of the altar shall be burning in it.] That is, shall be nourisht
continually.

Verse. 10. And the priest shall put on his linen garment, etc.] That is, not
only the linen breeches, but also the linen coat.

And take up the ashes which the fire has consumed with the burnt-offering,
etc.] Ashes are said to be consumed, when the wood and sacrifices are consumed
and turned to ashes: as meal is said to be ground, when the corn by grinding is
turned to meal, Esai. 47. 2. Take the milst^ne, and grind meal.

And he shall put them besides the altar.] See the Notes upon Levit. 1. 16.

Verse. 11. And carry forth the ashes without the camp unto a clean place.] The
contrary is said to^ching the stones and dust of a leprous house, Levit. 14.
40, 41. Then the priest shall command that they ^ake the stones in which the
plague is, and they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city,
etc. Because these came from the Lords holy house, therefore they were to be
laid in a clean place, where no dead carkases, dung, or other filth was laid.

Verse. 12. And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it, etc.] That so
the ^ire which first came from heaven, might in a m^nner by the continual
supply of wood be still preserved upon the altar: which might signify, 1. the
excluding of all humane devices in Gods worship, wherein nothing is allowed but
is given by direction from heaven: And secondly, that no sacrifice is accepted
with God, but what is offered by the spirit, that fire from heaven, Matthew. 3.
11. He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost and with fire: And withal the
continuing of this fire, which at first came from heaven to testify Gods
favorable acceptance of that sacrifice, was to teach them that as at first so
still he did continually accept of their sacrifices and service, as long as
they did it according to the direction of his law.

And the priest shall burn the wood on it every morning.] Questionless they
laid on wood upon the altar to maintain the fire thereon, not only in the
morning, but all the day long, especially at even, when the evening
burnt-offering was to be burnt upon the altar; only there is a particular
direction here for laying on wood in the morning, because then having cleansed
the altar, and taken away the ashes, they made the fire anew.

Verse. 16. And the remainer thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat.] The males
only, because these things being most holy might not be touched but by
consecrated persons.

With unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place.] That is, in the
co^rt of the Sanctuary: for so it is explained concerning the sinne-offering,
verse 26. In the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle
of the congregation. Other holy things, as the tithes and first-fr^its, and the
shoulder and breast of the peoples peace offerings, etc. might be eaten
elsewhere, and the priests daughters were to have a share therein, Numb. 18.
11. The heave offering of their gift with all the wave-offerings of the
children of Israel, I have given them unto thee, and to thy sons, and to thy
daughters with thee by a statute for ever: every one that is clean in thy house
shall eat of it. But those things that were most holy, to wit, the priests
portion of all sacrifices, whereof part was burnt upon the altar, were only to
be eaten by Aaron and his sons, and that in the holy place, 1. That by their
eating in Gods presence they might be put in mind to use these holy things with
all sobriety; 2. To put them in mind of that singular purity and holiness
which God required in them that were honored above the people; and 3. To
signify perhaps that none but those within Gods holy Church shall have any
benefit by Christ. As for this charge not to eat it with leavened bread, see
the note upon chap. 2. 11.

Verse. 20. This is the offering of Aaron and his ^onnes, etc.] That is, this is
the offering that Aaron shall offer unto God in the d^y (...) he is an^inted,
and which his sons successively that shall come to be high prie^^s shall
offer unto the Lord in the day that they are anointed: for it is evident that
this meat offering i^ appointed for the high priest only (for he only was
anointed in succeeding (...) as is shown before upon Exodus 29. 7.) to wit,
Aaron for the present, and that son of his successively that should be anointed
high priest in his stead, as it is expressed ve^se 22.

The tenth part of an Ephah of fine flower for a meat offering perpetual,
etc.* That is, ever to be offered when any of them came to be high priests.

Verse. 23. For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt.] The
priests eating of the sinne-offering sigured the bearing of the sinners
iniquity* Levit. 10. 17. but because no priest being a sinner could make
atonement for himself; therefore his meat offering might not be eaten, but is
all burnt on the altar, to teach him to expect salvation not by himself but
only by Christ.

Verse. 26. The priest that offers it for sin shall eat it.] Except in the
case mentioned verse 30. when the blood thereof was carried into the tabernacle.

Verse. 27. And when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment,
thou shall wash, etc.] viz. casually. Now these ordinances peculiar only to
the sinne-offering (because that in special sort figured Christ who was made
sin for us) shadowed the contagion of sin, and our care to cleanse our
selves by repentance and faith.

Verse. 28. But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken: and if
it be sodden in a brazen pot, etc.] Because the liquour wherein the
sin-offering was sodden might soak into an earthen pot, therefore that must be
broken, the rather, because the loss of breaking it was not great; but if it
were sod in an iron or brass pot, that was only to be scoured and rinsed; all
which was still to shadow forth the contagion of sin.

Verse. 30. And no sin-offering whereof any of the blood is brought into the
tabernacle, etc.] Namely the sin-offering for the priest and the congregation.
See Levit. 4. and 16. which were burnt without the camp: and this might
signify that men cleaving to the legal priesthood, and not seeking for the
better priesthood of Christ, could not be saved.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. LIkewise this is the law of the trespasse-offering, etc.] For what
transgressions the sinne-offering was appointed, and for what the
trespasse-offering, it is hard to determine. Some think the trespasse-offering
was for smaller sins; but I rather conceive, that where either God in the
external duties of his worship, or their brethren in civil affairs, was any
way damaged by the offender, there a trespasse-offering was due; for other
transgressions the sinne-offering. See the notes upon chap. 5. 10.

Verse. 2. In the place where they kill the burnt-offering.] See the note upon
chap. 1. 11.

Verse. 7. As the sinne-offering is, so is the trespasse-offering.] Namely, as
in most other things, so in this that follows, that the priest was to have the
remainer of this as he had of the other.

Verse. 8. And the priest that offers any man's burnt-offering, etc.] All the
remainder of the sin and trespasse-offering the priest had, skin and all;
but even of the burnt-offering also he must have the skin.

Verse. 9. And all the meat offering that is baken in the oven, etc.] That is,
these meat offerings that were baken or fried, etc. and so were to be eaten
hot, were therefore the priests portion that offered them, who might eat them
presently; but if the meat offerings were mingled with oil, or dry, that is,
flower dry, not mingled with oil or any other liquour, such as was the
meat offering for sin, chap. 5. 11. Because these might be reserved to be
dressed afterward at their leisure, therefore these were equally to be divided
amongst all the priests, as is expressed verse. 10.

Verse. 13. Besides the cakes, he shall offer for his offering leavened bread,
etc.] How this may be reconciled with that, Levit. 2. 11. see the notes there:
Because this meat offering was only for food to be eaten, no part of it to be
burnt upon the altar, leaven is here allowed. And besides it was a sign that
this oblation was before thought upon and prepared, not suddenly offered.

Verse. 14. And he shall offer one out of the whole oblation, etc.] The rest
were for the owner and his family, etc. as was the remainder of the flesh. See
Deuteronomy. 27. 7. Thou shall offer peace offerings, and eat there, and rejoice there
before the Lord thy God. See also Deuteronomy. 12. 6, 7.

Verse. 15. And the flesh of his sacrifice of his peace offerings for
thanksgiving shall be eaten the same day, etc.] How the fat of the
peace offerings was to be burnt upon the altar, was shown before, chap. 3. 3,
4, 5. Here now is prescribed how the remainder of the sacrifice was to be
eaten. And for the understanding hereof, we must note that there are here three
several sorts of peace offerings mentioned, or three several occasions of
offering peace offerings: the first were these that were offered for
thanksgiving, verse. 15. that is, by way of testifying their thankfulness for
some mercies received: the second were those that were offered in liew of a
vow, and this the most Expositours conceive to be meant of such peace offerings
which men vowed they would give unto God if such or such a mercy God should
grant them, and which accordingly when God had satisfied their desires they did
then pay unto God; which though paid by way of thanksgiving they make to be
different from the former, because those were brought only upon the general
bond of thankfulness, and that for general mercies, these were brought upon a
special bond of a vow made upon their obtaining some special blessing, which
they had desired of God. But others again understand it of peace offerings
vowed and paid accordingly, the vow not being conditional in case any such
blessing were obtained but absolute; and so they make this to differ from the
first which was for thanksgiving: yea and some understand it of such
peace offerings as were offered not in performance of a vow formerly made, but
at the time when a vow was made by way of seeking Gods favor for the obtaining
of some blessing which they sought of God. The third were those that were
brought as a voluntary offering, which were such as were not brought upon any
particular obligation either of mercies received, or of the want of any
blessing, but of devotion in general, by way of acknowledging Gods goodness
to them in general, and testifying their desire of the continuance of his love
and favor. Ag^in, 2. we must note, that for the first of these one law is
given, and for the other two, another: for those peace offerings that were for
thanksgiving, they were commanded to eat the same day they were offered, both
the priest and the people; but those that were for a vow or voluntary offering,
they had two days allowed them for the eating of them, and then what was left
on the third day was to be burnt with fire. And why was this difference? Surely
because God would hereby teach them that he must be worshipped as himself
appoints, and not as they in their reason should think ^it; and withal the
appointing of that to be presently eaten which was for thanksgiving might teach
them not to be remiss in returning thanks for the blessings they enjoyed.

Verse. 18. And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings be
eaten at all on the third day, etc. it shall be an abomination, etc.] The
Hebrew word signifies a thing which by being kept too long begins to be
corrupt and stink, to show how God would abhor them.

Verse. 19. And the flesh that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten, i^
shall be burnt with fire.] The flesh of the peace offerings was not to be eaten
doubtless in the holy place, but was carried thence (after it was killed at
the tabernacle and the fat burnt upon the altar) and eaten elsewhere: for so
it is said of the right shoulder and breast which were the priests portion,
Levit. 10. 14. The wave-breast and the heave-shoulder shall ye eat in a clean
place, thou and thy sons and thy daughters with thee. And well we may
conclude that if the priests did not eat their portion in the holy place, much
less did the people eat their portion there. Now because being carried out of
the holy place it might casually ^e touched by some unclean person, or some
unclean thing, order is here given that it should not then be eaten as a holy
sacrifice, but burnt with fire, because being so defiled it was not fit to
represent Christ, who was perfectly holy, and pure from the least pollution of
sin.

And a^ for the flesh, all that be clean shall eat thereof.] That is, that
which abides clean and fit to be eaten, all that be clean, both priests and
owners, shall eat thereof.

Verse. 20. But the soul that eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of
peace offerings that p^rtain unto the Lord, etc.] Here order is given for the
punishment of those that should wittingly eat of the peace offerings when they
were unclean, whether it were by reason of any natural personal uncleanness
that was then upon them, which is that uncleanness spoken of in this twentieth
verse; or by touch of any unclean thing, which is afterward added in the
follovving verse, to wit, that they should be cut off from their people, that
is, put to death: if they did it unvvittingly, a sacrifice of atonement was
appointed for them, chap. 5. 2. but if they did vvilfully and presumptuously
thus profane Gods holy things, they were to be cut off by the civil
Magistrate. And hereby also was shaddovved forth that those that bear the name
of Christ, and profess themselves Christians, and yet continue in their
sins, and hate to be reformed, destruction shall be their end, neither will
God reckon them amongst his people; and more particularly whoever partake of
the signs and seals of grace unvvorthily do eat and drink judgment to
themselves, 1. Cor. 11. 27, 28, 29.

Verse. 23. Ye shall eat no manner fat, of ox, of sheep, or of goat.] See the
note upon Levit. 3. 17.

Verse. 24. And the fat of the beast that dies of it self, etc. may be used in
any other use.] Herein I conceive is employed that such fat of beasts fit for
sacrifices (when killed at home for their private uses) might also be employed
in other uses, though i^ might not be eaten: for else what did they do with it?
It were absurd to think it was cast away and lost: so that I understand these
words as if it had been said, even the fat of such beasts when they die of
themselves, etc. may be used in any other use; not only when they are killed
for meat, but when they die of themselves. And hence some conclude that though
the touch of such carcases did render a man unclean; yet the touch of the fat
of those dead beasts that died of themselves did not defile them.

Verse. 29. He that offe^eth the sacrifice of his peace offerings unto the Lord
shall bring his oblation, etc.] That is, he that shall offer a sacrifice of
peace offerings unto the Lord, he shall himself with his own hands present that
part which is to be un oblation unto the Lord, to wit, the fat with the breast
and the right shoulder, as is expressed in the following verse. Because their
peace offerings they might eat i^ the camp, and afterward in any part of
Jerusalem, so the place were cl^an, there might be some danger lest the people
should think that their peace offerings might be killed in any place, and
therefore for prevention hereof this law is here added, that they must bring
their peace offerings unto the Lord, and there the Lords and the priests
portion must be gi^en them before they themselves eat of them.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 6. ANd Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.]
Namely at the brazen laver which was made for that purpose.

Verse. 7. And he put upon them the coat, etc.] That is, the undermost garment,
which was made of fine linen, and girded to him with a girdle of needle work,
concerning which and the rest of the holy garments of Aaron here mentioned,
there is already noted what is requisite to be known in the notes upon the 28.
chapter of Exodus. There was also linen breeches made for the priests, Exodus
28. 42. b^t those were not appointed to be put on at their consecration, Exodus
29. but the priest was to put them on himself when he was to execute his
office, and therefore they are not ^ere mentioned.

Verse. 10. And Moses too^ the anointing oil, and an^^nted the ^aber^^cle, etc.]
See the notes upon Exodus 30. 26.

Verse. 11. And he sprinkled thereof upon the alt^r seven times, etc.] He did
not only anoint the altar as he did other things, but also sprinkle it seven
times with the oil of consecration, because it was consecrated to more special
use then other parts of the taberhacle, namely for the holy sacrifices.

Verse. 14. And he brought the bullock for the sinne-offering, etc.] Concerning
those rites of consecrating the prie^^s, see the several notes upon the 29.
chapter of Exodus.

Verse. 15. And poured the blood at the bottom of the altar, and sanctified it,
etc.] See the notes upon Exodus 29. 12. After this the altar sanctified the
gifts and oblations upon it, Mat. 23. 19. Here is no^mention made of sprinkling
blood seven times before the Lord, nor of the altar of incense, as in other
sinne-offerings for the priest, Levit. 4. 7. The reason is, because there the
sacrifice was intended for some special sin of the priest being then
consecrated, but here for sins in general of priests not yet consecrated,
and indeed not so much for the expiation of their sins, as the consecration
of their persons.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass on the eighth day that Moses called Aaron and
his sons, etc.] That is, on the very next day after the seven days of the
priests consecration were ended, whereof mention was made in the 33. verse of
the foregoing chapter, as is evident also by that which the Prophet Ezeklel
says in his allusion to this, Ezekiel. 43. 26, 27. Seven days shall they purge
the altar, and consecrate themselves, and when these days are expired, it
shall be that upon the eighth day and so forward the priests shall make your
burnt-offerings upon the altar, etc. What day of the month this was done, is
not expressed. Evident it is that the tabernacle was erected on the first day
of the first month in the second year after their coming out of Egypt, Exodus
40. 17. and immediately the Lord spoke unto Moses out of the tabernacle and
gave him the several Laws concerning the sacrifices set down in the first
chapter of this Book, as is noted, Lev. 1. 1. After this Moses performed all
that was enjoined him for the consecrating of Aaron and his sons, and for the
anointing and sanctifying of the tabernacle and all that was therein, wherein
seven days were spent, and then the next day after Aaron and his sons entered
upon the executing of the priests office, as is here related. Indeed some hold
that the seven days of the consecration of Aaron and his sons were before
the first day of the first month when the tabernacle was reared up by Moses,
and that because the Princes offered on that very day when the altar was
anointed by Moses, Numb. 7. 1, 10. (which they conceive was done at the same
time when the tabernacle was erected) and the priests could not have offered
the Princes sacrifices if they had not been before that time consecrated and
settled in their priesthood. But this opinion is grounded upon a double
mistake, to wit, that the altar was anointed by Moses the same day the
tabernacle was erected, and that the Princes sacrifices were offered on the
same day whereon the altar was anointed, which indeed cannot be truly inferred
from that forecited place in the 7. of Numbers, as shall be shown in the notes
there. All that can be said concerning the day when Aaron and his sons entered
upon the execution of their priesthood is, that it was the very next day after
the seven days of their consecration were ended.

Verse. 2. And he said unto Aaron, Take thee a young calf for a sinne-offering.]
Before Aaron might be suffered to offer up any sacrifice, he is commanded by
Moses to offer up a young calf as a sinne-offering for himself: And hence the
Apostle proves the weakness and insufficiency of the Leviticall priesthood, to
wit, that those priests were not fit in themselves to stand as Mediators
betwixt God and the people, being sinners themselves, but were types and
shadows of another to come, to wit, Christ, who was holy, harmless, undefiled
and separate from sinners, etc. Heb. 7. 26, 27. But since a young bullock is
appointed for the high priests sinne-offering. Levit. 4. 3. Why is Aaron here
commanded to offer a young calf for a sinne-offering? I answer, between a young
calf and a young bullock there was no great difference (the one happily was, as
the Hebrews say, of the first year, the other of the second) but yet of that
difference the reason we may conceive to be this, because in the fourth chapter
a sinne-offering is appointed only by way of atonement for some particular
sin of ignorance committed by the high priest; but this sinne-offering here
enjoined was for the sins of the priests in general, and that also in a
particular case, for their first entrance upon the execution of their office,
and therefore here not a young bullock, as there was enjoined* but a young calf
was offered for their sinne-offering, and that by the Lords special direction.

Verse. 3. Take ye a kid of the goats for a sinne-offering, etc.] Here also (as
in a special particular case) the very same sacrifices are not enjoined either
for the sinne-offerings, burnt-offerings, or peace offerings of the people,
that are enjoined by the general Laws in the former chapters; only respect is
had that some of every kind should be now offered by the priests at their first
entrance upon their office.

Verse. 4. For to day the Lord will appear unto you.] See ver. 24.

Verse. 9. And put it upon the horns of the altar, etc.] That is, the brazen
altar; herein also this sinne-offering for the high priest seems to differ
from others that followed after, whose blood was to be carried into the
Sanctuary, Levit. 4. 5, 6, 7. and it was because Aaron as yet had not access
into the holy place, till he had prepared away by this first sacrifice into the
court; the like is to be observed in the peoples sinne-offering, ver. 15.
compared with Levit. 4. 13, 17, 18.

Verse. 10. But the fat and the kidneys and the caul above the liver of the
sinne-offering he burnt upon the altar.] That is, he offered them upon the
altar, and so they were afterward burnt by that fire which came down from
heaven, ver. 24.

Verse. 15. And he brought the peoples offering and took the goat, etc. and
offered it for sin as the first.] That is, in the same manner as that for the
priest, ver. 8. and so he burnt it also without the camp as the other was, ver.
11. for which he is reproved by Moses, Lev. 10. 17. Wherefore have ye not eaten
the sinne-offering in the holy place, seeing it is most holy, and God has
given it you, etc.

Verse. 17. Beside the burnt sacrifice of the morning.] That is, this was not
the burnt-offering and meat offering which was every morning to be offered, as
God appointed Exodus 24. 38, 39, 40. but an extraordinary offering besides,
which by special direction was offered at this time.

Verse. 22. And Aaron lift up his hand toward the people, and blessed them.]
This was a kind of applying the sacrifice to them, and to make known that God
did graciously accept of those sacrifices from them; and it was done according
to the manner set down, Numb. 6. 23, etc. Speak unto Aaron and his sons,
saying, On this wise shall bless the children of Israel, saying unto them, The
Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee
peace. So also it is said of our Savior that a little before his Ascension he
lift up his head and blessed his disciples; and indeed Aaron was in this a type
of Christ, in whom all the Nations of the world are blessed, Genesis 18. 18.

Verse. 22. And came down from offering of the sinne-offering, etc.] That is,
from the bank or hilly-place of the altar which was higher then the other
ground.

Verse. 23. And Moses and Aaron went into the tabernacle, etc.] Hitherto the
priests had only made entrance upon their office in the court of the priests.
Now Moses went with Aaron into the tabernacle that he might there instruct him
concerning the service he was there to perform, both about the lights, the
table of shewbread, and the altar of incense.

And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the people.] That is sum visible
sign of Gods glory and favor, as by the cloud, Exodus 16. 10.

Verse. 24. And there came a ^ire out from the Lord, and consumed upon the altar
the burnt-offering and the fat.] That is, either from heaven, as 2. Chron. 7.
1. or else out of the tabernacle.

Which when all the people saw, they shouted and fell on their faces.] With
astonishment and joy, giving thanks for this sign of Gods favor, and of his
accepting their sacrifices.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. ANd Nadab and Abihu the sons of Aaron took either of them his
c^nser, etc.] No doubt Moses had taught them and enjoined them that after they
had offered the sacrifices on the altar of burnt-offerings then they should go
into the tabern^cle, and there should light the lamps, and burn incense on the
altar of incense, as God had commanded, Exodus 30. 7. Aaron shall burn thereon
sweet incense every morning; when he dresseth the lamps he shall burn incense
on it, that is, on the altar of incense: but withal doubtless he had given
them direction to use in this service only the fire of the altar of
burnt-offerings, which was kindled by fire from heaven: for though this be
only employed covertly, Levit. 6. 13. The fire shall ever be burning upon the
altar, it shall never go out, yet I make no question but that it was more fully
given them in charge, as afterward again, Levit. 16. 10. where direction is
given for Aarons going into the most holy place, He shall take a censer of
burning coals of fire from off the altar before the Lord, and his hands full of
sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the vail. But now Nadab and
Abihu, rashly and inconsiderately forgetting or neglecting their duty in this
particular, took some other ^ire in their censers, that perhaps wherewith they
had sod and dressed the ^lesh of their sacrifices, and putting incense thereon
to carry it and lay it upon the altar of incense, and so offered strange fire
before the Lord, that is, the fire which he commanded them not, and so were
severely punished for it, as is afterward expressed. Now that this happened
that very eighth day whereof mention is made, Chap. 9. 1. immediately after
those first sacrifices were consumed by fire from the Lord, may be gathered by
that which follows from verse. 12. to the end of the chapter, which plainly
concerns those sacrifices whereof we read in the former chapter. And thus
God taught them betimes the weakness of the Leviticall priesthood, and withal
with what fear and exact care it was fit they should carry themselves in the
service of God.

Verse. 2. And there went out fire from the Lord and devoured them.] That is,
killed them, as the sword is said to devour, 2. Sam. 2. 26. Then Abner called
to Joab and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? For that neither their
bodies nor clothes were burnt to ashes, appears verse 5. So they went near and
carried them in their coats out of the camp.

Verse. 3. Then Moses said un^o Aaron, This is it that the Lord spoke, saying, I
will be sanctified, etc.] The substance of these following words is in many
places to be found, as Exodus 19. 22. And let the priests also that come near to
the Lord sanctify themselves lest the Lord break forth upon them: again,
Levit. 8. 35. Therefore shall ye abide at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord, that
ye dye not; and this is sufficient. Yet happily these very words also at some
other time were spoken by God, though not written. As for the words themselves,
I will be sanctified by them that come nigh me, and before all the people I
will be glorified, the meaning of them is, that God will have those that come
nigh him carry themselves as become those that serve so holy a God, with all
possible care and reverence and fear, and that God will else manifest his
holiness in punishing them, Ezekiel. 28. 22. Behold, I am against ^hee O Zidon,
and I will be glorified in the midst of thee: Two arguments are therefore
herein couched to keep Aaron from murmuring: 1. because the punishment was
just: 2. because God should be glorified hereby, and both the people and his
posterity receive good by it.

And Aaron held his peace.] That is, though happily at first he began to take
on pitifully, and to give too much liberty to his passions, yet hearing those
words of Moses, he presently checked himself, laid his hand upon hi^ mouth, and
not a word more would he speak. And doubtless this is noted as a notable
instance of his piety and quiet submission to Gods good will and pleasure: and
that his carriage was herein most singalarly remarkable we shall see, if we
note these particulars: First, that he had now lost two of his sons, yea his
two eldest sons together at a clap. We know what Rebeckah in great angaish of
soul said to Jacob when his brother Esau had resolved to kill him, Genesis 27. 45.
Go, ^lie to Paran; why should I be deprived of you both in one day? Secondly,
that they were cut off suddenly, by an untinely death, as we use to say, when
neither themselves not their poor father did ever dream of any such danger:
Thirdly, that they were cut off by a way which might seem to testify Gods hot
displeasure against them; for they were devoured by fire from God, the Lord by
the manner of their death pointing out the sin for which they were stricken:
and what father had not rather lose all his stock of children in an ordinary
way, then have execution done upon any one of them by Gods immediate hand in
such a terrible manner? Fourthly, that it was at a time when their hearts no
doubt were as full of joy as ever they could hold, it being the first day of
their entering upon that high honor of their priestly function; and in such a
sunshine of Gods favor to be so suddenly thunderstruck must needs add to
their calamity: And last of all, that they were cut off with such severity for
so small an offense as reason might judge of it, only for taking fire to burn
the incense from one place when they should have taken it from another, and
that not purposely done, but only through mistake, an error into which, when
they had so much to do, and were yet unacquainted with the service, they might
easily fall.

Verse. 4. And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan the two sons of Vzziel, the
uncle of Aaron, etc.] The nearest kindred it seems used to perform this office
of carrying the dead to be buried, and their brethren the priests might not
leave their ministry, therefore Aarons cousin germans are appointed to do it.

Verse. 6. Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes, etc.] The several
laws that concern the priests mourning for their dead friends we have largely
set down in the one and twentieth chapter of this book, where the inferior
priefts are allowed to be mourners at the burial of a brother, though the high
priest is forbidden it. But this is a special charge for this present occasion
only and so here not only Aaron but also his sons that remained still alive
are forbidden all the usual solemnities of mourning for Nadab and Abihu, not
to uncover t^eir heads, nor to rend their clothes, nor to go out from the door
of the tabernacl^ (...) the congr^gation: and that first, because it was an
extraordinary judgemen^ of God that was fallen upon their brethren, and they
were to testify their ^^bmissi^^ thereu^^^ by not lamenting their death;
Secondly, because the solemnity and service of the d^y might not be
interrupted; being newly anointed, and now at this time prepared for their
first entering upon the execution of their priestly office, they might not break
off this service to attend the burial of their brethren. But why are they
enjoined not to uncover their heads? since it may seem by other places that it
was not the custom of mourners amongst the Jews to uncover their heads, but
rather to cover them? as we may see, 2. Sam. 15. 30. David went up the ascent
of mount Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had his head covered, and he went
barefoot, and all the people that was with him covered every man his head, and
they went up weeping as they went up: and so again, chap. 19. 4. But the king
covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, Oh my son Absalom, O
Absalom my son, my son: See also Jer. 14. 3, 4. The answer is, that the
priests are here enjoined not to uncover their heads, that is, not to take off
their miters and bonnets which they wore on their heads, to the end they might
not address themselves in the way of mourners to attend the burial of Nadab
and Abihu, to wit, by covering their heads with the usual vail or covering of
mourners. The chief aim of this command was to intimate why they might not go
out as mourners to the burial of their brethren, to wit, because they might
not put off their priestly attire, and so give over the service they had in
hand, the rather because they were newly consecrated, and there were so few of
them to attend the service.

Verse. 9. Do not drink wine or strong drink. etc.] Nadab and Abihu, though not
through wine, had erred not in putting a difference betwixt holy and profane:
upon this occasion God gives charge that other things which might occasion the
like error may be avoided.

Verse. 12. Take the meat offering that remains, etc.] Namely the remainder of
the meat offering that is mentioned chap. 9. ver. 17. Which Moses calls upon
them to eat according to the directions formerly given them; 1. Thereby to
encourage Aaron and his sons to go on in their service, lest they should have
doubted because of the late judgment upon Nadab and Abihu whether God would
ever be pleased that they should any more meddle with his sacrifices: 2.
Because this sudden destruction of their brethren had let them see how exactly
careful they had need to be that all things were done according to Gods
appointment; and thirdly, Because there was great danger lest being disturbed
by this heavy and unexpected accident they should forget or neglect their duty
herein, especially in this particular of eating the meat offering, it being
usual with men in sorrow to refuse their meat.

Verse. 13. And ye shall eat it in the holy place, etc.] That is, the court of
the Sanctuary, as Levit. 6. 16. And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his
sons eat with unleavened bread; it shall be eaten in the holy place, in the
court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it.

Verse. 14. And the wave-breast and heave-shoulder shall be eaten in a clean
place, etc.] Moses here also puts them in mind to eat the shoulder and breast,
to wit, of the peoples peace offerings, Levit. 9* 21. And the breast and right
shoulder Aaron waved for a wave-offering before the Lord; and that in a clean
place, meaning the camp of Israel, and in ages following the city of
Jerusalem, where the like holy things were eaten.

Thou and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee.] Namely such as were only
maids, widows, and divorced returned to their fathers house, see Levit. 22. 11,
12. where others are also mentioned that might eat of them.

Verse. 16. And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sinne-offering, etc.]
Amongst other things wherein Moses feared lest Aaron and his sons should
offend by reason of the sorrow which God had brought upon them, this was one
thing, he doubted lest they should omit the eating of the sinne-offering, and
therefore he sought diligently to see what was done with it, to wit, that goat
of the sin-offering spoken of Levit. 9. 15. And he took the goat which was the
sinne-offering, etc. as appears verse. 10. of this chapter, where Moses says
it was given them to bear the iniquity of the congregation. Indeed it is clear
that the sinne-offering for the congregation was to be carried without the
camp, and burnt by that law, Levit. 4. 21. And he shall carry forth the bullock
without the camp, and burn him as he burned the first bullock. But then the
blood of that sinne-offering was carried within the tabernacle, Levit 4. 16,
17. Now because Aaron had not yet access into the holy place, till he had
prepared a way by these first sacrifices in the court, therefore the blood of
this sinne-offering was not brought into the tabernacle as in an extraordinary
case, and consequently it was not to be burnt without the camp, but to be eaten
by the priests, by that other law, Levit. 6. 26, 30. The priest that offers
it for sin shall eat it, in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of
the tabernacle of the congregation, etc. This Aaron and his sons in their
grief either forgetting or not duly considering did burn it without the camp,
which was not according to the law. See the note upon Levit. 9. 15.

And he was angry with Eleazar and Ithamar, etc.] Though Aaron was also in
fault, and Moses in reproving Eleazar and Ithamar his sons in his presence
did also reprove him; yet he bends his anger chiefly against his sons (as
sparing what he could the father in reg^rd of his late heavy loss of his two
other sons) his sons, faith the text, that were left alive, which is added to
intimate one chief cause of his anger, namely, that they notwithstanding they
had seen what was done to their brethren had exposed themselves to like danger
but that God in mercy spared them.

Verse. 18. Behold the blood of it was not brought in, etc.] Therefore it should
have been eaten and not burnt. See the former note upon verse. 16.

Verse. 19. And Aaron said unto Moses, Behold this day they have offered their
sinne-offering, etc.] This apology of Aarons consists of three parts: 1. That
though they had failed in this particular, yet the main had not been neglected,
the sacrifices had been duly offered: 2. That their failing in the rites and
ceremonies requisite was by reason of grief, occasioned by those doleful
accidents which had so lately befallen them: 3. That this might now extenuate
his fault (though happily he did not omit it upon that reason) that if they had
eaten the sinne-offering it would not have been acceptable to the Lord; because
of that heaviness and sorrow that was upon them, which made them unfit and
unworthy to eat those holy things, for the law requires them that eat before
the Lord to rejoice. See Deuteronomy. 12. 7. and 26. 14. Hose. 9. 4.

Verse. 20. And when Moses heard that, he was content.] Either as approving his
fact, and allowing his excuse to be sufficient; or else rather as finding it a
less fault then he supposed it had been, to wit, that he did it not willingly
but of humane frailty and perplexed with grief: whereupon he passes it by with
pity, as loath to add affliction to affliction, and perhaps deferred his
further admonition till another time.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, saying unto them, etc.]
The former laws concerned the sanctification of the priests, and the rites and
ceremonies of the sacrifices, now general laws are given concerning the
sanctification of the people, and first for avoiding that uncleanness which
comes from things without the man: and in giving these laws the Lord spoke
both to Moses and to Aaron, because it belonged both to the magistrate and
priest to see these laws executed, the priest being to teach the difference
between clean and unclean, Ezekiel. 44. 23. And they shall teach my people the
difference between the holy and profane, and cause men to discern between the
unclean and clean, and the Magistrate to take care that this difference was
observed: and hence is that, Numb. 9. 6. And there were certain men who were
defiled by the dead body of a man, that they could not keep the passover on
that day, and they came before Moses, etc.

Verse. 2. These are the beasts which ye shall eat among all the beasts that are
on the earth.] No doubt this distinction of clean and unclean beasts was by
revelation made known to the Fathers from the very first, whence is that
direction given to Noah immediately before the flood, Genesis 7. 2. Of every clean
beast thou shall take to thee by sevens, the male and his female* and of the
beasts that are not clean by two, the male and his female. But this was then
only in respect of sacrifices; for eating or not eating it seems they had then
no distinction of clean or unclean beasts, Genesis 9. 3. Every moving thing that
lives shall be meat for you, even as the green herb have I given you all
things. But now by this law the Israelites are forbidden the eating of diverse
meats, both flesh and fowl and fish as unclean: And that, first, to move this
stubborn people to absolute obedience, and to depend upon Gods word and will in
all things whatsoever, yea even in their very meat; and secondly by restraining
them from that which was usually eaten amongst the Gentiles, to put them in
mind of the difference which God had put betwixt them and all other nations,
reputing them of his mercy as clean, and all other nations to be unclean, and
to teach them what special purity God required in them above other nations as
his own peculiar people. And therefore we see that the Apostle reckons this
amongst the legal shadows, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no man judge you in meat or in
drink, etc. which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.
And after the death of Christ, when the partition wall was broken down, and
believers of all nations were taken in to be Gods people no less then the
Jews, the Lord by forbidding the Apostle Peter to put any difference betwixt
clean and unclean meats, Act. 10. 15. did also as in a figure cov^rtly signify
unto him not to count the Gentiles unclean, but to go unto them, and to preach
the Gospel to them as well as to the Jews.

Verse. 3. What soever parts the hoof* etc.] Why these are allowed as clean,
others forbidden as unclean, I think no sound reason can be given, but Gods
good will and pleasure, and his power to give what laws he pleases unto his
people. The most probable mystical reasons given are these: First, that the
parting of the hoof in twain signified the right discerning of the word and
will of God when we are able to judge of it, not carually but spiritually, 1.
Cor. 2. 14, 15. But the carnal man receives not the things of the spirit, for
they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned: But he that is spiritual indgeth all things, etc.
Secondly, that the chewing of the cud signified the serious meditation of the
law of God day and night, Psalm. 1. 2. But his delight is in the law of the
Lord, and in his law does he meditate day and night. For that is the food of
our souls, Amos 8. 11. Behold the day is come, says the Lord God, that I will
send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of
hearing the words of the Lord. And therefore having received this our food, we
should repeat and recall it to mind, Mal. 4. 3. Remember ye the law, of Moses
my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Isra^l with the
statutes and judgments. 1. Cor. 11. 2. Now I pray you brethren that you
remember me in all things, and keep the ordinances as I delivered them to you.
For which the men of Berea are commanded, Acts 17. 11. These were more noble
then those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word with all readiness
of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those things were so. Yea as
much as in us lies we should have the word of God ^ver in our mouths, Deuteronomy. 6.
7. Thou shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou
walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up: And
thirdly, that the requiring of both these jointly did signify that God is not
content with them that cleanse themselves by halves, but will have us clean
throughout both within and without. See 2. Cor. 7. 1. Having therefore these
promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selve's from all filthiness of
the fles^ and spirit, etc.

Verse. 8. And their carcass shall ye not touch, etc.] Not only eating* but
touching also is forbidden, to teach us to refrain from all fellowship in evil,
Esa. 52. 11. Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean, etc.

Verse. 9. Whatsoever has sins and scales in the waters, etc.] See the note
above upon verse. 3. Those fish that have ^innes and scales being a brighter and
more cleanly sort of fish, not so much delighting in the mud as others, were
the fitter to signify the purity that God required in his people.

Verse. 10. And of any living thing that is in the waters, etc.] This is added
to exclude shelfish and sea monsters, that do not swim like fish, etc.

Verse. 13. The Eagle, the Ossifrage, and the Ospray, etc.] These and the most
of the fouls here reputed unclean are ravenous, such as live by rapine, and
unclean food, and were the fitter to signify how far Gods people should be
from oppression, rapine, and all uncleanness of sin whatsoever. Both the
Ossifrage and the Ospray here mentioned are several sorts of Eagles: the
Ossifrage by interpretation is bone-breaker, somewhat bigger then the ordinary
Eagle, and much of the same kind; the Ospray has her name in the Original
from her strong eyes and limbs, for she is able to look upon the sun, and by
that tries her young, as Writers report: it seems to be the Sea-eagle, that
from on high espieth fishes in the sea and lakes, and falling violently upon
the water takes them.

Verse. 15. Every Raven after his kind.] As the Crows, Choughes, Rooks, Caddaws,
Pyes, etc,

Verse. 16. And the Owl, and the night-Hawk and the Cuckoo, etc.] Amongst other
birds forbidden them as unclean all the several sorts of Owls are here
mentioned, as the Howlet mentioned in the first place under that common name,
the Owl; and the night-Hawk, or night-Raven, and the little Owl verse. 17. that
is, the Scrichowl; and the great Owl, which is a kind of Owl that dwells in
deserts and solitary places: whence is that of the Prophet, Psalm. 102. 6. I am
like an Owl (or the great Owl) in the desert. Now these being all night-birds,
that cannot endure the light of the day, might signify to them that God
abhorres those that hate the light of the word, and requires that his people
should be children of the light and of the day, and should abhor the works of
darkness, and the workers of them, according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.
11. Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them. The first word here translated the Owl, is in the Hebrew the
daughter of the Owl, concerning which some Interpreters have noted, that
because many fowls are desired for meat while^^ young, which are refused being
old, as y^ung Daws and Rooks, therefore the young ones of this kind are
forbidden, and much more then the old ones also.

Verse. 18. And the Geir-eagle, and the Stork.] These two fowls are little known
in our parts: the Geir-eagle in the Hebrew has its name from dear love, which
these kind of birds bear to their young ones; and the Hebrew word translated
here the Stork signif^eth kindness, such as young Storks (whereto also agrees
the Greek word (...)) are said to show to their dammes, whom they nourish in
their age. It is a bird much like a Crane, comes in Summer, and goes away in
Winter, and in cities builds her nest on tops of houses and chimneys, as the
Swallow also does, though elsewhere upon the tops of fur trees. Psalm. 104.
17. Where the birds make their nests; as for the Stork the fur trees are her
house. It feeds much on fishes, snakes, frogs, etc. and so it is forbidden
as unclean.

Verse. 20. All fowls that creep, etc.] That is, not only the Bat, last
mentioned in the foregoing verse, but all of that sort are unclean; both
because being of a mungrell kind they do well resemble men of a mungrell
religion, as also because in their crawling with all four they set forth men
given wholly to cares and delights of the world.

Verse. 22. And the Bald-locust after his kind, etc.] These are undoubtedly
flying creeping things though with us unknown.

Verse. 24. Whosoever touches the carcass of them shall be unclean until the
even.] That is, till the end of that day and beginning of a new. And this might
signifi^ man's pollution by sin, till he come to the new day of salvation by
Christ; or that those legal pollutions were to continue only till the new day
of the Gospel, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or drink
or in respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days,
which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ.

Verse. 25. And whosoever bears ought of the carcass, etc.] That is, though he
do not touch them with his flesh: here the clothes must be washed, because by
carrying it both the man and his clothes also are defiled; and this legal
washing was a type of our cleansing by repentance and faith in the blood of
Christ.

Verse. 31. Whosoever does touch them when they be dead, etc.] And so by the
rule of proportion grounded upon verse. 25. if he did bear them he was to wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the even.

Verse. 34. That on which such water comes shall be unclean.] That is, water
out of any such defiled vessel.

Verse. 35. Whether it be oven or ranges for pots, etc.] This is added to show
the full extent of this law; and by this strictness of the law were they
taught how strict they were to be in avoiding the least pollution of sin.

Verse. 37. And if any part of their carcass fall upon any sowing seed that is
to be sown it shall be clean.] To wit, because of necessity; since there might
be too great inconvenience in being deprived by such accidents of seed to be
immediately sown, as for the like reason fountains and wells of water, were to
be excepted, verse. 36.

Verse. 38. But if any water be put upon the seed, etc.] Not because then being
wet with water it was more apt to take poll^tion, as most Expositours; but
because being wet with water it was not in case to be presently sown and
scattered abroad, and therefore was not by the foregoing rule grounded upon
necessity excepted from being polluted.

Verse. 39. And if any beast of which ye may eat die, etc.] That is, as he that
touches the carcass of an unclean beast whereof ye may not eat shall be
polluted thereby, so also he that touches the dead body of any clean beast of
which you may eat, to wit, if it dies of it self, or be strangled, or torn by
a wild beast; for in those cases indeed they might not eat of the dead bodies
of clean beasts, and so consequently not touch them neither without pollution.
Yet by the law, Levit. 7. 24. And the fat of the beast that dies of it self,
and the fat of that which is torn with beasts* may be used in any other use;
but ye shall in no wise eat of it, it is evident that they were allowed to make
use of the fat of such beasts, and therefore by the touch of the fat perhaps
they were not defiled.

Verse. 40. And he that eats of the carcass of it, etc.] To wit, unwittingly
or of urgent necessity; for if he did it presumptuously and in contempt of Gods
law he was to die for it, Number. 15. 30. But the soul that does ought
presumptuously, whether he be born in the land or a stranger, the same
reprocheth the Lord, and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.

Verse. 42. What soever goes upon the belly, etc.] That is, no manner of
creeping thing may ye eat, whether it goes upon the belly, as snakes or
worms, etc. or crawls upon all four, as toads and scorpions, etc. or ^ath any
feet to creep withal, as caterpillars, etc.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel, saying unto them, If a woman have
conceived seed, etc.] As former laws concerned uncleanness which came from
without, so those which next follow in this and the following chapters concern
uncleanness which came from within: and the first which we have in this
chapter is concerning the uncleanness of women in childbirth, to wit, that if
a woman had conce^ved seed, and born a man-child, then she should be unclean
seven days, according to the days of her separation for her infirmity, that
is, for those first seven days she should be unclean with as contagious a
pollution as in the seven days of her separation for the infirmity of her
monthly fluors, wherein as we may read in the law, Levit. 15. 19. 24. she was
not only debarred from going to the Sanctuary, but was also separated from all
communion with others, and defiled whatsoever she did sit or lie upon or touch,
etc. and was therefore restrained to her chamber though not shut out of the
camp, as lepers and others were. Now this law was delivered as others were to
the children of Israel in general, though it principally concerned women, even
because the men were to take care that their wives did duly observe this course
according to the commandment: And the end and drift of it doubtless was to
show how exceedingly corrupt man is from the very conception, who renders his
mother unclean that conceives and bears him. But why then did the Virgin Mary
accomplish the days of her purifi^ation according to this law of Moses, Luke
2. 22. seeing the child she bare had no unclean^^sse nor corruption in him,
being neither conceived nor born in sin, no nor*conceived of the seed of man
as other children are? I answer, first, Because Christ was made after the
similitude of sinful flesh, and taking upon him the person of all mankind he
so became sin for us; and secondly, Because even the Virgin Mary by reason of
the blood of her purifying (whatsoever Papists without warrant from the
Scripture say to the contrary) was legally unclean, and so became obedient to
the Law.

Verse. 3. And in the eighth day the flesh, etc.] Wherein one reason seems
employed why God set a part the eighth day for circumcision, because till then
the mother because of her separation, and the child because of the mother were
unclean.

Verse. 4. And she shall continue in the blood of her p^rifying three and thirty
days.] That is, the blood whereby her body is cleansed and purified: in which
time she might converse with others, though not communicate in holy things,
because her greatest uncleanness had an end at seven days.

Verse. 5. But if she bear a maid-child, etc.] Both the time of her uncleanness
and the days of her cleansing are doubled for a female child, either because
the woman's infirmity is then in greater measure upon her by the ordinary course
of Nature, and so longer time of purgation is required; or because thereby the
Lord would signify that the woman had the first and great hand in bringing
sin into the world, 1. Tim. 2. 14. Adam was not deceived, but the woman being
deceived was in the transgression; or 3. because the man-child being
circumcised on the eighth day, then the uncleanness of the mother ceased, but
the female-child not being circumcised, the uncleanness of the mother
continued the longer.

Verse. 6. When the days of her purifying are fulfilled, etc. she shall bring a
lamb, etc.] This sinne-offering was doubtless for the sin of the mother, to
wit, the pollution she had contracted by the original pollution of her child;
and therefore it is added in the following verse, that by the offering thereof
the prie^t should make an at onement for her, and so hereby the faith of the
mother was confirmed that by Christ her sin was forgiven her, and that the
curse of her pains and sorrow in childbearing was taken away, so that, if she
made a good use of them, they might now be a blessing and means of good to her,
rather then a curse, accordiug to that of the Apostle, 1. Tim. 2. 15.
Nothwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith
and charity and holiness with sobriety.

Verse. 8. And if she be not able to bring a lamb* th^n she shall bring two
t^^tle dov^s, or two young pigeons, etc.] This was the offering which the
Virgin Mary brought, Luke 2. 24. for her purifying, which was an evident proof
that Joseph and Mary lived in a poor and mean condition.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord sp^ke unto Moses and Aar^^ say^^g.] S^e the note ^^on
Exodus 11. 1.

Verse. 2. When a man shall have in the ^kinne of ^is flesh, a ^ising, a so^b,
^r bright spot, etc.] These three particulars here mentioned, a rising, a scab,
and bright spot, are named as dangerous signs of a leprosy beginning to grow
upon a man, for which it was fit that men should be tried, and concerning which
there are given afterward several directions, whereby it might be discerned
whether they were leprosies or no. For which such care was taken, because the
leprosy was a disease usual in those hot countries, especially in Egypt,
whence arose that malicious slander which Josephus speaks of, that Moses and
the I^raelites were expelled out of Egypt because they were leprous persons.

Then shall he be brought unto Aaron the priest, etc.] The priests are chosen
to judge of it, 1. because the main thing questioned concerning them was,
whether they might come into the Sanctuary, etc. 2. because there were ^^rtain
rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices appointed for their cleansing if they were
found leprous, which the priest was to see done, and therefore the judgment
also of the disease was proper unto him.

Verse. 3. And the priest shall l^ok on the plague in the skin of the flesh,
etc.] Three signs are mentioned in the former verse which might justly render
men suspected of a leprosy growing upon them, to wit, a rising, a scab, and a
bright spot* Here now the priest is informed in the first place concerning the
bright spot, which is the la^t there mentioned, and called here the plag^e in
the skin of the flesh, to wit, how he should know whether it were a leprosy
or no. Because one kind of leprosy made the skin very white, Exodus 4. 6.
Moses put his hand in his bosom, and when he took it out, behold his hand was
leprous as snow; and Numb. 12. 10. Miriam became leprous white as snow,
therefore the white bright spot rising in the skin of the flesh was esteem^d
a dangerous sign of that kind of leprosy: yet withal because there were some
white bright spots that did arise in men's skins which were not leprosies, as
is ^vident in the 4. and 38. verses of this chapter, therefore certain
directions are here given whereby the priest might be able to judge of such
white bright spots, whether they were leprosies or no, to wit, 1. by observing
the color of the hair that grew in the skin where the bright spot was, for
if the hair being of some other color before were turned white, then it was a
leprosy; and 2. by observing whether the plague were in sight deeper then the
skin of the flesh, for that wa^ also another sure sign of a leprosy, the
nature of the leprosy being to eat away and consume the flesh, Let her not be
as one dead, says Moses of Miriam, Numb. 12. 12. of whom the flesh is half
consumed when he c^meth out of his mothers ^ombe: and therefore when Naaman was
cured of his leprosy, it is said, that his flesh came again like unto the
flesh of a little child, 2. King. 5. 14.

Verse. 4. Th^n the prie^t shall shut him up that has the pl^g^^ seven days.]
To wit* for further trial, the case being yet doubtful: whereby we are taught
to be well advised ere we pass censurt upon any man concerning his spiritual
leprosy.

Verse. 6. And he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.] Though it proved no
leprosy, y^^ he was to wash* teaching that the righteous man is not wholly
clean, Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Prove.
20. 9. but ^till ne^deth repentance* ^raving mercy for Christ's sake and
amendment of his life. ^. John 1. 8, 9. If we ^ay that we have (...) sin we
deceive ^ur selv^s* and there is no truth in us. If we confess our sins he
is faithful and just to forgive, etc.

Verse. 7. But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after it has been
seen of the priest, etc.] Direction was given in the former verse that when the
party, in whose skin there was a bright spot, had been twice shut up for
seven days, and still after those foureteen days expired, the plague stood at
a stay, and did not spread in the skin, then the priest should pronounce him
clean, because it was but a scab, it was not a leprosy. But here now direction
is given what the priest should do in case the bright spot did spread, to wit,
that if the scab did spread much abroad in the skin after he had been seen of
the priest, to wit, after the first seven days of his being shut up, then he
should be seen of the priest again, to wit, after he had been shut up the
second time seven days, and then if still the scab did spread in the skin,
the priest was then to pronounce him unclean.

Verse. 9. When the plague of leprosy is in a man, etc.] Here directions were
given for judging of another probable sign of a leprosy, to wit, a rifing or
swelling, first mentioned ver. 2. but handled here in the second place, namely
that if 1. it were a white rising; and 2. had turned the hair in it white; and
3. there was a quick raw flesh in the rising, then it was a leprosy.

Verse. 13. If the leprosy have covered all his flesh he shall pronounce him
clean that has the plague.] Because in such strength of nature in the party
expelling the inward corruption all over his body, it proves not the infectious
leprosy, which makes the flesh raw, but is indeed a kind of scurf or scab,
though termed here a leprosy, because it was ordinarily so esteemed by the
people.

Verse. 14. But when raw flesh appears in him, he shall be unclean.] This is
an exception given to the direction in the two former verses, to wit, that
though a man should be covered all over from head to foot with such a white
leprosy or scurf as is before spoken of, yet if there were here and there any
raw flesh appearing, he should be pronounced unclean, and that because his raw
flesh was a sign that the poison of the disease was not wholly driven out, but
did still lurk within the flesh, and so rendered the disease more perilous to
him that had it, and more infectious to others.

Verse. 16. Or if the raw slesh turn again, and be changed into white, etc.]
That is, when the party, in whom there was found such places of raw flesh, was
by the priest pronounced unclean, if afterward this raw ^lesh turned to white
like the rest of his body, then he should again be pronounced clean, to wit,
because this did manifest that the venom of the plague was wholly come forth.

Verse. 18. The flesh also, in which, ^ven in the skin thereof, was a bil^ and
is healed.] Here begins the description of a third sort of leprosy arising of
a scab, mentioned verse the 2. in the second place, but here handled in the
third. And first he begins with the scab that comes of a bile healed, then ver.
24. he proceeds to that which comes of a burning. In both which it is
observable that out of the scab of an healed sore there springs a leprosy,
which may we^l show how sins, after we are healed of them, when they return
do make us worse then before.

Verse. 24. Or if there be any flesh in the skin wherein there is an h^t
burning, etc.] This is not a new kind of leprosy (for still the Law speaks
of a leprosy that grows from the scab of an ulcer) but another ca^e is
propounded of another kind of ulcer which arises from a burning of fire,
coals, hot iron, etc. as is before noted.

Verse. 29. If any man or woman has a plague upon the head, or beard.] Hitherto
of the leprosy in the body in general, now of that in the head or beard.

Verse. 31. And that there is no black hair in it, etc.] For if there had been
black hair in it, he had been undoubtedly clean, black hair being a sign of
^oundnesse and strength of nature. S^e ver. 37.

Verse. 34. And he shall wash his clothes and be clean.] See the note above upon
verse 6.

Verse. 45. And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent,
etc.] Both to testify their sorrow for sin, which had provoked God to punish
them thus; as also that by this mark they might be known from others, who used
to wear long robes or garments close before, etc.

And he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, etc.] This was also both to
express sorrow and shame: for this was one thing that was used by mourners,
and those that were dejected. See Ezekiel. 24. 17. Make no mourning for the dead,
bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon thy feet, and
cover not thy lips. and Mich. 3. 7. Then shall the seers be ashamed, etc. yea,
they shall all cover their lips: also it might distinguish the unclean from the
clean, and withal secure the parties whom he met, that they might not be
infected with his breath.

And shall cry, unclean, unclean.] As bewailing his condition, and giving
warning to those he met to keep aloof from him, Lam. 4. 15. They cried unto
them, Depart ye, it is unclean; depart, depart, touch not, etc.

Verse. 46. He shall dwell alone, without the camp shall his habitation be.] And
so afterward without the towns and cities where the Israelites inhabited: for
so we read that as Christ entered into a certain village there met him ten men
that were lepers, and stood a far off, Luke 17. 12. And that when Samaria was
straightly shut up and besieged by the Syrians, there were four leprous men
without the city at the entering in of the gate, 2. King. 7. 3. Even Asariah
king of Judah, being stricken with a leprosy, dwelt in a several house apart
by himself unto the day of his death, 2. King. 5. 5. Now hereby they were
taught how hateful to God the spiritual lepro^ie of ^inne is, and how
perilous and infectious to men the company of unclean and wicked persons is.

Verse. 50. And shut up it that has the plague seven days.] To see whether it
will spread: for then it is a fretting leprosy, verse 51. and the garment must
be burnt.

Verse. 54. And he shall shut it up seven days more.] To see whether upon
washing it will change color or no: for if the color were not changed by
washing, the garment must be burnt, though it did not spread, verse 55. Because
that was a sig^e that it did fret inward.

Verse. 56. Whether it be bare inward or without.] That is, whether the plague
be on the inside of the garment, or on the out side.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 2. THis shall be the law of the leper in the day of his cleansing, etc.]
The solemn rites for cleansing the leper were for two ends so ordained of God:
1. To show how the Lord abhorred the spiritual uncleanness of sin, since
the leper might not after his pollution be received again into the camp, though
healed, without a sacrifice of reconciliation were first offered up for him: 2.
That the leper might testify his thankfulness to God who had removed so
heavy a judgment from him; whence is that of Christ to the leper he healed,
Matthew. 8. 4. And Jesus said unto him, See thou tell no man, but go thy way,
show thy self to the priest* and offer the gift that Moses commanded for a
testimony to them.

Verse. 3. And behold, if the plague of the leprosy be healed in the leper.]
When God had healed the leprosy, then the priest was to pronounce him clean:
and so it is God only that forgives sins; the minister is only to pronounce
according to that which God has done, nor can absolve any whom God has not
absolved.

Verse. 4. Then shall thepriest command to take, etc. two birds alive, and,
clean, and cedar-wood, and scarlet, and hysop.] The birds must be clean birds,
to wit, either doves or turtles commonly used in sacrifices, or sparrows (as
some translate the word here) or any other clean fowls, such as all are save
those excepted Levit. 11. 13. etc. Only they must not be of a tame kind* but
such as used to fly in the open field, verse. 7. The cedar which the priest here
was enjoined to take, was a cedar-stick, which was to be a handle for the
sprinkle: and it was to be of cedar-wood (as most conceive) because the nature
of this wood is, that it corrupts not, but preserves other things from
putrefaction; and so hereby was signified the perfect healing of the leprosy,
which before corrupted and putrified the body. Yet I rather think there was a
respect had (as in the scarlet) to the reddish color of it, which made it the
more suitable for this work, the chief drift whereof was to signify the
cleansing of the sinner by the blood of Christ: The scarlet was a scarlet thread
or lace, used to bind the sprinkle to the cedar-stick: And the hysop was
appointed for the sprinkle, being fit for that use; and withal the fragrant
smell of this herb might signify that the evil savor of the leprosy was gone
away.

Verse. 5. And the priest shall command that one of the birds be killed in an
earthen vessel over running water.] That is, over an earthen vessel that has
running water in it. And as the blood of the killed bird signified the blood of
Christ, so the earthen vessel the baseness and infirmity of the ministers, by
whom this blood is presented unto men in the preaching of the Gospel, 2. Cor.
4. 7. But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the
power might be of God, and not of us. Now because the blood of the bird of it
self would not have sufficed to dip the living bird and the sprinkle in,
therefore it was mixed with water; but it must be the purest and most cleansing
water, running water, that is, spring water, because it signified the cleansing
of the sinner by Christ's blood, who came not by water only, but by water and
blood, 1. Joh. 5. 6.

Verse. 7. And he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed, etc.] The
sprinkling of this blood signified the applying of Christ's blood to the
cleansing of the sinner, which is therefore called the blood of sprinkling that
speaks better things then that of Abel, Hebr. 12. 24. Why it was done seven
times, see the note upon Levit. 4. 6.

And shall let the living bird loose into the open field.] The letting of the
living bird loose figured the deliverance of Christ from death, Who though he
was crucified through weakness, yet he lives by the power of God, 2. Cor. 13.
4. being put to death in the flesh, but quickened in the spirit, 1. Pet. 3. 18.
and of all such as are cleansed from their sins by his blood: and therefore
particularly it represented the condition of the leper now cleansed, who being
civilly dead and buried, was now as the bird let loose to live amongst his
fellows, and restored again to the communion of Saints. And why was this? by
virtue of the blood of Christ, wherein figuratively he was dipped.

Verse. 8. And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, etc.] That no
part of the filth issuing from his leprosy might remain upon him he was to
wash both his garments and his flesh; and because washing could not
sufficiently cleanse the hair of his body, therefore all the hair of his body
must be clean shaved off: and this was done the first day of his cleansing;
which signified how exactly every one that has hope of being cleansed by
Christ must labor to purify himself even as he is pure, 1, John 3. 3.

And after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his
tent seven days.] That is, after he has the first time washed himself and
shaved off his hair, he shall be admitted into the camp, town or city, but yet
he shall not go into his tent or dwelling house, but shall tarry abroad, to
wit, in some place or house appointed for that purpose, where he was to
continue for seven days apart by himself; which was, I conceive, because as
yet he was not perfectly cleansed, and therefore was not familiarly to converse
with others as formerly, no not with them of his own family.

Verse. 9. And it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all the hair
off his head.] The reiteration of these ceremonies the second time on the
seventh day may imply how exactly careful we should be to cleanse our selves
from all filthiness of sin, and withal how hardly we are brought either to
hate sin, or acknowledge Gods mercy as we should do.

Verse. 10. And on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish,
and one ew-lamb, etc.] The two he-lambs were the one for a trespasse-offering,
verse 12. the other for a burnt-offering, as is evident, verse 19, 20. See also
Levit. 1. 10. The ew-lamb was for a sinne-offering, Levit. 4. 32.

And three tenth deals of fine flower for a meat offering mingled with oil, and
one log of oil.] These three tenth deals were three homers or pottles, three
tenth parts of an ephah or bushel, as is before noted upon Exodus 29. 40. and
the log of oil is commonly thought to be half a pint: the three tenth deals of
fine flower were for accessory meat offerings for the three sacrifices before
mentioned. Indeed in the fifteenth of Numbers meat offerings are appointed
only for burnt-offerings and peace offerings, nor do we any where read of a
meat offering that was to be joined either with sinne-offering or
trespasse-offering. And besides, where an offering of fine flower is enjoined
for a sinne-offering, Levit. 5. 11. to wit, to be offered apart by it self, not
as accessory to any other sacrifice, they were forbidden to put any oil upon
it, whereas these are appointed to be mingled with oil: And therefore it seems
these sacrifices for the cleansing of the leper had peculiar rites, and were
not in all things performed according to the ordinary way of other sacrifices.

Verse. 12. And wave them for a wave-offering] See the notes upon Exodus 29. 24.

Verse. 1^. And he shall slay the lamb in the place, etc.] See the note upon
Levit. 1. 11. and upon Levit. 7. 7.

Verse. 14. And the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear, etc.]
Hereby was signified that by virtue of Christ's blood the leper was now restored
to his former freedom of intercourse and commerce with others; as also that
the whole man was to be renewed and consecrated to Gods service. See the note
upon Exodus 29. 20.

Verse. 15. And the pr^est shall take some of the log of oil.] The oil in the
hand of the priest fignified the spirit by Christ conveyed unto us.

Verse. 16. And sprinkle of the oil with his finger, etc.] Figuring our
consecra^ion to Gods service by the same spirit.

Verse. 17. And the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put
upon the tip of the right ear, etc.] This signified the sanctification of the
whole man by the same spirit.

Upon the blood of the trespasse-offering.] That is, upon the very same place
where the blood was sprinkled.

Verse. 20. And the priest shall offer the burnt-offering.] To wit, that other
helamb mentioned, verse. 10. Now by these rites the lepers were to profess
their thankfulness to God in and through Christ, as for the cure of their
leprosy, so also for the remission of their sins (which had brought that
judgment upon them) and for their sanctification by his spirit.

Verse. 31. And the other for a burnt-offering with the meat offering.] That is,
the meat offering that was to accompany the turtle dove or young pigeon offered
for the burnt-offering: whereby it appears that even the smaller
burnt-offerings of turtle doves had also their meat-o^ferings as well as the
greater of lambs, etc.

Verse. 36. Then the priest shall command that they all empty the house, etc.]
The priest must before he goes into the house, to view the place in the house
suspected of leprosy, command all that are in the house to come forth; and the
reason is given, that all that are in the house be not made unclean. Whereby it
is evident that though the house had indeed the plague of leprosy, yet the
inhabitants that were in the house were not rendered unclean thereby, till the
priest had pronounced it to be a leprosy: but then all that came i^to the
house were thereby unclean. And so it seems therefore it was with men too that
were infected with leprosy. No man was unclean by being in the company of a
leprous person till the priest had pronounced him to be a leper.

Verse. 40. And they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city.]
That by the uncleanness of the place they may be known to be unclean things,
that so ^o^emay be defiled thereby.

Verse. 41. And he shall cause the house to be scraped, etc.] To wit, lest the
plague of leprosy should be in any other part of the walls of the house, and
being hidden under the plaster should not be discovered.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 3. WHether his flesh run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from
his issue, it is his uncleanness.] That is, he shall for it be counted
unclean. The issue here spoken of which rendered men unclean is that which we
call the running of the reins. Now because this disease men have in a different
manner (for sometime their seed being of a thin substance runs continually
from them, and sometimes again being of a thicker substance it slows not so
freely forth, bu^ stops in the passage, and so putrifies the place through
which it should pass) in both these cases they are declared to be unclean. Now
though by this legal pollution they were taught the filthiness of all sin
whatsoever, yet more especially I conceive it was to signify that original
corruption and filthiness of our nature, which is conveyed unto us in our
first conception, by that very seed and substance whereof we are made.

Verse. 4. Every bed whereon he lies that has the issue is unclean.] These
laws following show the contagion of si^ne, which defiles not only men
themselves, but every thing besides which a wicked man has to do with: for
unto them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, Tit. 1. 15.

Verse. 12. And every vess^ll of wood shall be rinsed in water.] That is, of
wood, or any other such strong matter, as silver, copper, brass, etc.

Verse. 16. And if any man's seed of copulation go out, etc.] This is not meant
of the issue forespoken of, nor when a man lies with a woman, whereof verse.
18. but of the seed of the healthful, issuing by reason of nightly dreams, or
any such accident, whereof see Deuteronomy. 23. 10.

Verse. 19. And wh^soever touches her shall be unclean, etc.] To wit, every one
that is of years of discretion, and so fit to be ordered by this law. For it is
not likely that infants that lay in the arms and sucked on the breasts of their
mothers, when they were in this condition, were rendered unclean thereby.

Verse. 24. And if any man lie with her at all, etc.] To wit, ignorantly: for if
he did it presumptuously, not pollution but cutting off was his punishment,
Levit. 20. 18. And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and
shall uncover her nakedness, he has discovered her fountain, and he has
uncovered the fountain of her blood, and both of them shall b^ cut off from
among the people. Yet some conceive that this place is only meant of lying in
the same bed with a woman, and not of carnal copulation.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses after the death of the two sons of
Aaron, etc.] That is, upon that occasion, lest they should again endanger
themselves, by entering into the most holy place, as before by offering strange
fire; and so also within a short time after that happened: for it does not
follow that because the Lord upon that occasion gave this ensuing charge,
therefore the laws set down in the former chapters are transposed, and were not
given in any interim of time before this.

Verse. 2. Speak unto Aaron thy brother, that he come not at all times into the
holy place, etc.] That is, not whenever he pleases, but only once a year,
as I have appointed, Exodus 30. 10. namely to minister: at other times both he
and his sons might and did enter at the taking down of the tabernacle, but
not to minister. And this was thus appointed, first, to teach them to have a
most reverend respect of Gods presence; and secondly, that hereby more
evidently might be represented that one particular sacrifice of the son of
God once offered, as the Apostle has noted, Heb. 9. 7, 8. But into the second
went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, etc. The holy
Ghost this signifying that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made
manifest, while as the first tabernacle was yet standing; and again, verse. ^1,
12. Christ being come an high priest of good things to come by a greater and
more perfect tabernacle, etc. by his own blood he entered in once into the holy
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.

For I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.] This is added as a reason
why the high priest might not enter into the most holy place whenever he
pleased, but only once a year, which was on the tenth day of the seventh
month, and that in the manner as is here appointed, to wit, because the Lord
would there appear in the cloud upon the mercie-seat. The conceit of the
Papists, That God appeared there in an humane shape upon the mercie-seat, has
no ground for it in the text: Nor do we any where read that God did ever so
appear in the tabernacle either to the high priest or to Moses himself. All
that is he^e said is, that God would by a cloud upon the mercie-seat testify
his presence; which whether it were the cloud raised by the smoke of the
incense, which the high priest was now to bring with him, or any other cloud
always abiding upon the mercy-seat, we need not inquire. Sufficient it is that
we know hereby that God did testify his presence, and doubtless in some
glorious manner, upon the mercy-seat, and therefore the high priest might not
when he would go in thither, but only once a year, and then with the smoke of
incense ascending from his censer that might darken the glory of that
forementioned sight of Gods presence for the safety of the high priest.

Verse. 3. With a young bullock for a sinne-offering, etc.] Namely for himself,
verse. 6. But withal we may observe that besides the fire-sacrifices here
expressed, he offered also on this day two lambs for the daily burnt-offering,
Numb. 28. 3. and one bullock, one ram, and seven lambs for a burnt-offering,
and one he-goat for a sinne-offering (besides the goat mentioned verse. 5.) as
is particularly expressed, Numb. 29. 7, 8, 11. Here these only are expressed
which concerned the solemnity of his going into the most holy place: the other
were sacrifices appointed for the day, and offered in the remainder of the day,
when the solemnities which ^ad respect to his entering into the most holy place
were wholly finished.

Verse. 4. He shall put on the holy linen coat, etc.] Some Expositours conceive
that these holy linen garments here spoken of were those mentioned Exodus 28.
39. which the high priest wore under his other rich attire, and that together
with these here mentioned all his other garments are to be understood also. But
because it is expressly said, verse. 23. that when Aaron returned out of the most
holy place into the tabernacle of the congregation, he should put off the linen
garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and should leave
them there; therefore I rather conceive with others that these were other plain
linen garments, like those that were made for the inferior priests, Exodus 39.
27, 28. And that the high priest did wear these only when he went into the
most holy place, as being reserved for this peculiar service, and did therefore
put them off again, when he came out from thence, as it is said verse 23. Yet
was not this thus ordered, because this day of expiation, when the priest went
into the holy of holies, was a fasting day, verse 29, 30. and therefore it was
not fit that he should wear now his glorious garments: for after he was come
back out of the most holy place, and had put off these linen garments, verse
23. he put on his other glorious attire, and wore them in the remaining service
of the day. But other reasons are given for this by Expositours more probably:
as 1. that it was to teach the people thereby that his rich attire was only
for their sakes, that in them they might behold him as representing the person
of the Messiah, richly adorned with all righteousness and grace, and not that
God was delighted with such rich garments; and so he left them off when he went
into the place of Gods special presence; and 2. that in this plain attire he
might be a figure of the base estate of Christ upon earth, and how he should
without worldly glory perform the work of our redemption.

Verse. 6. And Aaron shall offer his bullock of the sinne-offering.] In what
time and manner this was done, see verse. 11.

Verse. 8. And Aaron shall cast lots on the two goats.] Which signified, that
God would accept no sacrifice but what was of his own choosing; and that in the
work of our redemption by Christ nothing should be done but what Gods hand and
his counsel had determined, Act. 4. 28.

Verse. 12. And he shall take a censer-full of burning coals of fire, etc.] Here
we see what the high priest was to carry along with him when he went within the
vail; to wit, 1. a censer-full of burning coals of fire from off the altar
before the Lord, that is, from the altar of incense; and 2. his hands full,
that is, two handful of sweet incense beaten small to burn upon the coals as
soon as ever he entered within the vail; and 3. the blood of the
sinne-offerings: for though that be not mentioned here, yet that he carried the
blood along with him is evident, verse 14, and 15. both of the bullock his own
sinne-offering, and the goat the peoples sinne-offering.

Verse. 13. And he shall put the incense upon the fire, etc.] As the way was
prepared into the most holy place by the cloud before the blood was sprinkled*
so Christ before he entered with his own blood into the most holy place of
heaven prepared his way by prayer* John 17. And this also signified that the
incense of Christ's prayers and mediation should ascend into heaven before God
for his Church, Heb. 9. 24. For Christ is not entered into the holy places made
with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven it self, now to
appear in the presence of God for us. So also Revel. 8. 3, 4. And another ang^l
came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto
him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints upon
the golden altar which was before the throne: And the smoke of the incense,
which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God out of the
angels hand.

Verse. 13. That the cloud of incense may cover the mercy-seat, etc.] Whereby
they were taught how formidable the majesty of God was, and with what reverence
we ought to present our selves before him.

Verse. 15. Then shall he kill the goat of the sinne-offering, etc.] We must not
conceive that he came forth out of the most holy place to kill this goat of the
sin-offering for the people, for the blood of this goat (as it is said here)
was also sprinkled before the mercy-seat, and had he gone in once with the
blood of his own sinne-offering, and then came out and killed this goat for a
sinne-offering for the people, and gone in again to sprinkle the blood of that
before the mercy-seat, then had he gone in twice on this day within the vail,
which is expressly against that of the Apostle, Heb. 9. 7. But into the second
went the high priest alone once every year, not without blood, which he offered
for himself and for the errors of the people. These words therefore, then
shall he kill the goat of the sinne-offering, do only intend that he killed
the bullock first for himself, verse. 11. and then this goat for the people; for
both of them were killed before he entered into the most holy place.

Verse. 16. And he shall make an atonement for the holy place.] As being
defiled, though not in it self, yet in regard of the peoples guilt, partly by
reason of any unwitting approaching to the sanctuary, when they were not legally
clean; and partly by reason of all other their sins: whereby appears the
horror of sin: for though the people never went into the holy place, much
less into the most holy, yet were the altar, ark, and Sanctuary defiled in the
sight of God by their sins, and could not be cleansed without blood. So our
sins do defile Gods Church and most holy ordinances, and do, ascend into
heaven it self, whereinto we can have no entrance but by blood. See Heb. 9. 7,
11, 12.

Verse. 17. And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation,
etc.] That is, neither of the priests nor people; neither in the holy place nor
in the court of the tabernacle: for else why is it said, no man, since the
people at no time used to come into the holy place. The reasons of this were
two: 1. As by way of chastisement* and for their humiliation, they were all
excluded from the places and holy things till they were purged from the
uncleanness which they had contracted by their sins; 2. Hereby was signified
that our high priest Christ should without help of any other perfect the work
of our reconciliation with God.

Verse. 18. And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the Lord.] That
is, the altar of incense. See Exodus 30. 10.

Verse. 21. And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat.]
This is the only unbloudy sacrifice which was appointed in the Law; yet was it
not, if it be well considered, wholly without blood: For this and the goat
which was killed was indeed but one sacrifice, the one representing Christ
dying for our sins, the other Christ rising again for our justification, Romans
4. 25. the one the price paid for our redemption, the other the effect thereof,
that God laying our sins upon Christ had removed our sins far away from
us. See Psalm. 103. 12. As far as the East is from the West, so far has he
removed our transgressions from us.

Verse. 21. And shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the
wilderness.] That is, a man who for ability of body, knowledge of the way, and
sufficiency for this service was chosen and in readiness as appointed hereunto.

Verse. 22. And the goat shall bear upon him their uniquities unto a land not
inhabited.] That so the place might signify, that by Christ sin is removed
far away even from all mankind that will believe in him. Besides, it might
signify that Christ was not only put to death for our sakes, but also
forsaken in a manner of God, cast off and left in a forlorn and comfortless
condition.

Verse. 24. And he shall wash his flesh with water in the holy place.] To wit,
because he had touched the goat upon which the sins of the people were laid.
The Hebrews say that this washing was not (as at other times) in the laver of
brass, but in some vessel which stood in the Sanctuary, which seems probable,
because after this done he is said to come forth that he might offer the
burnt-offerings in the court.

And put on his garments, etc.] The garments which he was now to put on were
his ordinary high priests garments. See the note above upon ver. 4. And the
burnt-offerings here appointed to be offered by him were the rams mentioned
ver. 3. and ver. 5.

Verse. 26. And he that let go the goat, etc. shall wash his clothes, and bathe
his flesh in water, and afterward come into the camp.] Being unclean till the
evening is not here mentioned, as I conceive, because it was usually evening
ere they returned from these services; or else in these cases they might
presently come into the camp to bring back word that* they had done what was
enjoined.

Verse. 29. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall
afflict your souls, etc.] To wit, by fasting and abstinence from all fleshly
delights, as also by the duties of inward humiliation and contrition, and
therefore was this day called their fast, Sailing was now dangerous because the
fast was now already past, Act. 27. 9. And this we must know was the very same
day wherein all those things before mentioned in this chapter were done by the
high priest for the expiation of the sins of the people, and was therefore
called the day of atonement, Levit. 23. 27. Indeed the solemnity of the day
began the evening foregoing the tenth day, and therefore it is said Levit. 23.
32. Ye shall afflict your souls on the ninth day of the month at even: but the
tenth day it was that was allotted for this service. On this day the Jubilee was
also proclaimed, of which see chap. 20. 8, 9. As likewise for the extraordinary
sacrifices of this day, see Numb. 29. 7, 11.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 3. WHat man soever there be of the house of Israel that kill^th ano^,
etc.] Namely with an intent of offering it as a sacrifice to the Lord: It is
not meant of oxen, lambs, or goats killed for their own private uses, but
only of killing these beasts for an offering to the Lord, as is expressed in
the following words, ver. 4. And brings it not unto the door of the
tabernacle, etc. For herein lay the sin, that they should dare to kill a
sacrifice, and not bring it to the priest to be killed by him at the door of
the tabernacle; by forbidding whereof Israel was taught, 1. to serve God in
Christ only, who is the true tabernacle, Heb. 9. 11. in whom God dwells
among men, and through whom all our services are made acceptable to God: John
14. 6. I am the way the truth and the life; no man comes unto the Father but
by me; and 2. that no service is acceptable to him but what is performed in his
Church and amongst his people.

Verse. 4. Blood shall be imputed to that man, etc.] That is, his sacrifice
shall be no more accepted of God then if he slew a man (according to that of
the Prophet, Isai. 66. 3. He that kills an ox is as if he slew a man) or
rather, he shall be reputed and proceeded against as a murderer, he shall be
esteemed as one that has shed blood, and so shall be cut off from among his
people. And this happily was the rather ordained, because the blood of their
sacrifices was, as I may say, the ransom of their persons that had sinned, and
so shedding of such blood otherwise then God had appointed should be accounted
as if they had shed the blood of a man; so strictly were they tied in those
times to one place for the killing and offering of all their sacrifices. Indeed
we read of many of the Worthies of God that did after this offer up sacrifices
in other places, as Samuel in Mispeh, 1. Sam. 7. 9. and in Gilgal, 1. Sam. 11.
15. and in Bethlem, 1. Sam. 11. 2. And David in the floor of Ornan, 2. Sam.
24. 18. and Elias in mount Carmel, 1. King. 18. 22. but that was by
extraordinary dispensation from God; ordinarily they were tied to bring their
sacrifices to the tabernacle, whereas now again under the Gospel we have
liberty every where to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God. John, 4. 21, 24.
The hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain nor yet in Jerusalem
worship the Father. God is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and truth. So also Mal. 1. 11. From the rising of the sun, even
unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and
in every place incense shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering, etc.

Verse. 5. To the end the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices which
they offer in the open field, etc.] That is, which they have been accustomed to
offer any where in the open fields. This is added to show why the Lord had
appointed the man to be so severely punished that should kill or offer any
sacrifice any where but in the tabernacle, namely that by the severitie of this
law they might the better be restrained from the liberty of offering sacrifices
in all places, whereto they had heretofore been accustomed, and that without
sin, and might be strictly tied to bring all their sacrifices, where ever
they dwelt, to the door of the tabernacle unto the priest; yea even their
peace offerings, which are particularly mentioned in the last clause of this
verse: 1. because these were most usual, and were a kind of feast to the
offerer, whence there was most danger lest they should take liberty to kill and
make feasts of these sacrifices in their private dwellings; and 2. because
naming of the less does the more strongly imply the greater: if they might not
offer peace offerings (which are only said to be holy) where ever they
pleas^^, much less burnt-offerings which are every where said to be most holy,
and therefore are set in the first place, Josh. 22. 26, 27. Therefore we said,
Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt-offering, nor for
sacrifice, but that it may be a witness between us and you, etc.

Verse. 6. And the priest shall sprinkle the blood, etc.] This which follows is
added also to imply why the Lord tied them so strictly to one place for their
offering up of sacrifices, namely, that by this means they might be kept in
that one uniform way of Gods worship which he had appointed, and not bring in
every one their own superstitious devices, which is the next step to idolatry:
for that is the meaning of these words, that by being bound to one place the
priest would now order all things according to Gods direction; and so they
should be a sweet ^avour acceptable to the Lord, whereas otherwise being
adulterated with men's inventions they would be an abomination unto him.

Verse. 7. And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils.] That is,
by the means above named this evil shall be prevented, They shall no more offer
to devils. The Hebrew word signifies rough and rugged as hairy goats, because
in such shapes the devils sometimes appeared like Satyrs, Esaias 34. 14. And
indeed to devils did all those Jews and Gentiles sacrifice that sacrificed not
by faith in Christ, and in such sort and place as God approved of, Deuteronomy. 32*
17. They sacrificed to devils not to God, to gods whom they knew not, new gods,
etc. 1. Cor. 10. 20. But I say that the things which the Gentiles sacrifice,
they sacrifice to devils, not to God, etc. Now so the Israelites had done both
in Egypt, Ezekiel. 23. 8. Neither left she her whoredoms brought from Egypt, etc.
and also now lately in the wilderness, Exodus 32. when they sacrificed to that
idol the golden calf, and in other their secret idolatries, Act. 7. 41. And
they made a calf in those day^s and offered sacrifice unto the idol, and
rejoiced in the work of their own hands: Then God turned and gave them up to
worship the host of heaven, as it is written in the book of the Prophets; O ye
house of Israel, have ye offered to me slain beasts and sacrifices by the space
of forty years in the wilderness? and therefore are they said to sacrifice to
devils, as Jeroboams idols are also called devils, 2. (...) 11. 15. And he
appointed him priests for the high places, and for the devils, etc. and
Antichrists likewise, Revel. 9. 20. And the rest of the men which were not
killed by those plagues, yet repented not of the works of their hands, that
they should not worship devils, etc.

Verse. 8. And thou shall say unto them, Whatsoever man there be of the house of
Israel or of the strangers, etc.] Here the former law is extended to stranger^s
also, namely, such as were turned to the religion and church of the Israelites;
and withal this also is expressed, that as the sacrifice might not be killed,
ver. 3. so neither might it be offered without the Sanctuary though it were
killed therein.

Verse. 10. I will set my face againct that soul that eats blood, and will cut
him off from among his people,] To wit, though by partiality or other means he
escape the hand of the magistrate. See the notes upon Genesis 9. 4.

Verse. 11. For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to
you upon the altar, etc.] That is, I have set it apart for a better employment
then for food, and therefore in reference to that spiritual employment it must
not be eaten at all.

Verse. 13. Whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the
stranger that sojourneth among you which hunteth and catches, etc. It is
particularly pressed in this place, that even when by hunting or otherwise they
did catch any beast or fowl that might be eaten, that is, that might lawfully
be eaten, though at such times men used to be in great haste and to take great
liberty to themselves, they must let out the blood thereof, and cover it with
dust, before they eat the flesh thereof, and much more when at more leisure
they killed any beast at home for their own particular use. Now this covering
of the blood with dust was enjoined, not only to make sure that it might not
be eaten, but also happily, first, to show a reverent regard of the life of the
beast, by burying the blood, which was the seat of the life, with a kind of
honor (for bu^iall is honorable, Eccles. 6. 3. An untimely birth is better
then he that lives many years, and wen he dies has no burial) and secondly,
to imply the lawfulness of killing the creatures in this manner for the
covering of t^eir blood might signify that it should not be imputed unto them,
as appears by those places where the not covering of the blood implies the
contrary, as Job 16. 18. O earth cover thou not my blood! and Ezekiel. 24. 7. 8.
For her blood is in the midst of her, she set it upon the top of a rock, she
pour^d it not upon the gr^und to cover it with dust, that it might cause fury
to come up to take vengeance, etc.

Verse. 15. And every soul that eats that which dyed of it self, etc.] This
must be understood of him that did eat any such thing ignorantly, in which case
he was also to bring those sacrifices appointed Levit. 5. For he that willingly
offended herein was liable to a greater punishment, etc. And the strangers here
mentioned are such as were converted to the faith, and joined to the Church of
Israel, for other strangers in Israel might eat these things. See that place
Deuteronomy. 14. 21. Ye shall not eat of any thing that dies of it self; thou shall
give it unto the stranger, etc.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 3. AFter the doings of the land of Egypt, wherein ye dwelt, ye shall not
do, etc.] That is, you must not think their doings a warrant for you whom I
have chosen as a peculiar people to my self: the rule is general, but the
intent is thence to infer the necessity of their obeying these particular
laws concerning unlawful marriages that do immediately follow. And withal a
reason is employed of the giving these laws, to wit, le^t the Isralites should
be corrupted by that they had seen in Egypt, and should see in Canaan.

Verse. 5. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, which if a man
do he shall live in them.] This is in it self the voice of the law, and
propounded to them a way of righteousness and life, which man by reason of his
frailty and co^ruption was never able to attain, as S. Paul says alluding to
this place, Romans 10. 5. Moses describes the righteousness which is of the
law, that the man that does th^se things shall live by them. But therefore we
must know that God did not propound this to the Israelites, as intending that
they should thereby be justified and saved or not at all, but much as Christ
propounded it to that rich man, Matthew. 19. 17. If thou will enter into life
keep the commandments: namely, first, to discover unto them how weak and unable
they were to obtain life in this way, and so to beat them off from all
confidence in their own works; secondly, to make them know that this obedience
which God required of them was a due debt, and must be paid either by them or
by their surety; thirdly, to bring them hereupon to look out after a Mediator,
and so the law was a schoolmaster to bring them unto Christ that they might be
justified by faith; and fourthly, as including a promise of life even to the
evangelicall desire and endeavor of believers to keep all the laws and
commandments of God.

Verse. 6. None of you shall approach to any that is near of kin to him to
uncover their nakedness.] That is, to lie with them carnally, yea though it be
under pretense of marriage; yet withal whatever immodest carriage is contrary
to the respect we ought to bear to such as are thus nearly allied to us is also
by consequence forbidden too. But by near kin is only meant such near kindred
as are afterward particularly expressed: for else how should we know how far
this prohibition were to reach?

Verse. 7. The nakedness of thy father or the nakedness of thy mother thou
shall not uncover.] Some by discovering the nakedness of the father here
understand that the daughter should not lie with the father: but I find the act
of uncovering still ascribed to the male; and indeed it were a very improper
speech to use the phrase concerning the woman. The words therefore are rather
to be understood thus: In the beginning of this verse the law is given that man
should not lie neither with his fathers wife (for that is meant here by the
fathers nakedness) nor with his own mother; in the next clause of this verse
the reason of the last is given, because it was a thing odious in nature to
uncover the nakedness of a man's own mother, she is thy mother, etc. In the
next verse the first is confirmed, he must not lie with his fathers wife,
because it is his fathers nakedness, which does evidently explain this. The
husband and the wife are both one flesh, and therefore whoever uncovereth the
nakedness of his fathers wife does all one as if he did uncover his fathers
nakedness.

Verse. 9. The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, etc.] That
is, thou shall not marry not lie with thy sister, whether she be the daughter
of thy father and mother both, or the daughter of thy mother only (for here
the Lord speaks only of sisters by the same venture, of sisters by a mother in
law he speak^ verse. 11.) Whether she be born at home or abroad, that is,
whether the sister be lawfully born at home in marriage, or unlawfully abroad
by fornication: for his fathers and mothers bastard that is begotten out of
marriage is his sister, and therefore he might not uncover her nakedness.

Verse. 10. The nakedness of thy sons daughter, etc.] And so other of further
descent: how much more then his next daughter, though she be not named?

Verse. 11. The nakedness of thy fathers wives daughter, etc.] That is, the
daughter of thy father, not the daughter of thy mother. See above verse. 9.

Verse. 16. Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brothers wife.] To wit,
except in that special case, when a man deceasing without children his nex^
broth^r by an express exception of the law, Deuteronomy. 25. was to marry the wife of
the deceased, and to raise up ^ee^ unto his brother, as Onan the son of Judah
did, Genesis 38. 8.

Verse. 18. Neither shall thou take a wife to her sister to vex her, etc.] This
is all one with one wife to another, as it is translated in the margin of our
Bibles, as Ezekiel. 1. 9. the wings of the beast are said to touch a woman to her
sister (as it is directly in the Hebrew words) that is, one another. Though the
ordinary exposition be that this is meant of sisters, that man having married
any woman must not afterward marry her sister to vex her, etc. yet these
reasons so far sway me, that I cannot but understand it of any two women:
First, because incest with sisters is above forbidden, verse. 9. 11. Secondly,
because polygamie is no where else forbidden if not here, unless to the King,
Deuteronomy. 17. 16. Thirdly, because the following words cannot, unless extremely
forced, be brought to agree with that exposition of sisters; for would not the
marriage of her husband with another woman vex her as much as with her sister?
happily more. And why is it added in her life? as if it were lawful for a man
to marry his wives sister after his wives decease: those things win me to
think that it is meant of any two women.

Verse. 19. Also thou shall not approach unto a woman to uncover her nakedness
as long as she is put apart, etc.] To wit, though she be thy lawful wife.

Verse. 21. And thou shall not let any of thy seed pass through the fire to
Molech.] Molech was an idol worshipped by the Ammonites and other heathen,
called also Moloch, Amos 5. 26. But ye have born the tabernacle of your Moloch:
and is thought of some to be the star Saturn, the highest; or the Sun, the
chief of the Planets, thence called the star of your God, Amos 5. 26. And it
is derived of Melech, which signifies a Prince or King. It is thought by many
to b^ the same idol that is ordinarily in Scripture called Baal, which they
gather by comparing together 2. Kings 23. 10. And he defiled Topheth which is
in the valley of the children of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or
his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech. Jer. 19. 5. They built also
the high places of Baal, to burn their sons with fire for burnt-offerings
unto Baal, etc. chap. 7. 31. And they have built the high places of Tophet,
which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their
daughters in the fire, etc. and chap. 32. 35. Now to this idol they caused
their children to pass through the fire two ways: for some burned them to
death, or at least killed them, and then burnt them on their altars: for so it
is said of Ahaz, 2. Chron. 28. 3. He burnt incense in the valley of Hinnom, and
burnt his children in the fire. etc. and of the Israelites in general, Psalm.
106. 37, 38. They sacrificed their sons and their daughters unto devils, and
shed innocent blood. But some only made them to go through between two fires,
as a sign of their consecration. This sin is here forbidden amongst
whoredoms and incests, because as all idolatry is spiritual fornication, so
this especially, because their seed was here given away unlawfully, which i^
therefore called a going a whoring after Molech, Levit. 20. 3, 5. But though
this idol be here named, yet under this the like wicked service to any idol is
forbidden.

N^ith^r shall thou profane the name of thy God.] This is added as a reason why
in the foregoing law they were forbidden to let their seed pass through the
fire to Molech, to wit, because it would be a vild profanation of Gods holy
name, and that first, in regard it would be an horrible vilifying of the Lord
God to forsake him, and yield such honor to such a base idol-god; and
secondly, because horrible wickedness in a people called by his name, that is,
called the people and servants of God, would be a dishonor to God, and would
cause the name of God to be blasphemed even among the Gentiles.

Verse. 24. For in all these the Nations are defiled which I cast out before
you.] That is, with all these incestuous mixtures the Canaanites defiled
themselves, and so provoked me to cast them out of the land; and therefore take
you heed that you do not provoke me by the same sins. Now hereby it is
manifest that all the several sorts of incest before mentioned are sins
against the law and light of nature* because the Lord abhorred the heathen that
had no other law, and punished them so severely for these very sins.

Verse. 26. Ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments.] The mention
of Gods statutes here does intimate what a shame it would be for them that had
the light of the word, to walk in these evil courses, whereinto the heathen
fell because they lived in darkness.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 3. YE shall fear every man his mother and his father.] Because the
mother is usually most despised, the Lord injoyns the fear of the mother in the
first place.

And keep my Sabbaths.] Because the commandment for sanctifying Gods Sabbaths
is directed to the fathers and mothers of the family, who are to take care that
children and servants profane not Gods holy day, therefore the charge for
fearing mother and father is here prefixed bfore this of sanctifying the
Sabbath: The meaning is, that children and servants must have such an awful
fear of their superiors as willingly to be guided by them according to Gods
word in the matter of sanctifying Gods Sabbaths, and not to resist them in it.

Verse. 6. It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow.] That
is, if it were a peace offering for a vow or a freewill-offering; otherwise if
it were for a thanksgiving, it was to be eaten the same day, Levit. 7. 15. And
the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace-offering^ for thanksgiving shall be
eaten the same day that it is offered, he shall not leave any of it until the
morning. And so that which was left of the one was to be burnt the second day,
and that which was left of the other upon the third; which must needs make them
more willing to call the poor to eat with them of their peace offerings,
because the remainders might not be reserved for themselves but were to be
burnt.

Verse. 11. Ye shall not steal, neither deal falsely, neither lie one to
another.] Though all lying be here forbidden, yet principally all lying whereby
men are defrauded of their right, either in buying or selling, or otherwise.

Verse. 12. And ye shall not swear by my name falsely.] Next after the Law
against all false dealing in defrauding this is here inserted, because by
perj^ry men use to help forward their false dealing.

Nether shall thou profane the name of thy God.] To wit, nether by perjury nor
vain swearing.

Verse. 14. Thou shall not ^urse the deaf, etc.] Under these particulars of
cursing the deaf, and laying a stumbling block before the blind, there is also
forbidden all other injuries done to men in confidence that the parties injured
shall not be able to know who wronged them, and so not have power to defend or
right themselves; yea even the putting of stumbling blocks before the
consciences of men, and that because the Lord will plead the cause of those
that are thus wronged, which is employed in the last words, but shall fear the
Lord thy God: as if he had said, Let the fear of God in these cases restrain
thee, though the deaf and blind need not be feared.

Verse. 16. Neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor.] Though
the doing of any thing against the life of our neighbor is here forbidden, yet
the evil principally here forbidden is the standing up in courts of Justice to
take away a man's life, either as a false accuser, or a false witness: and the
rather is this subjoyned to the foregoing Law, Thou shall not go up and down as
a tale-b^arer among thy people, because tale-bearing does usually tend, as in
Doegs example we may see, to derprive men of their lives, according to that of
the Prophet, Ezekiel. 22. 9. In thee are men that carry tales to shed blood.

Verse. 17. Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart; thou shall in any wise
rebuke, etc.] That is, when any man has wronged you in any thing, you shall
not go away and closely nourish hatred in your hearts against them, or secretly
carry tales of them to others, and in the mean season never open your mouths to
them that did the wrong; but quite contrary, you shall in a brotherly manner
rebuke them for the evil they have done, that so you may reclaim them from
those evil ways. This I conceive is the drift of this precept: yet withal it
may imply that he that does not rebuke his brother when he sees him do amiss,
does indeed hate him and not love him, and that because he suffers him to run
on in his sin, and seeks not his amendment.

Verse. 18. But thou shall love thy brother as thy self.] This clause, as thy
self, does not denote an exact and perfect equality of love, but a certain
proportion of likeness: it does not bind men to love their neighbor with the
same degree of love, but 1. that they should no more desire or seek the hurt of
their neighbor then of themselves; 2. that they should endeavor to do all
good to their neighbor as to themselves; and 3. that they should love their
neighbor in the same manner, heartily, sincerely, constantly as they love
themselves. This expression therefore is not unlike that, Joh. 17. 21. where
our Savior prayed that all true believers might be one with him and his
father, as thou father art in me, and I in thee, which does not impart the same
union, but only a likeness of union.

Verse. 19. Ye shall keep my statutes.] This is repeated and prefixed here, to
show that the ordinances following must not be neglected though seeming slight,
because even these also were Gods statutes.

Thou shall not let thy cattle gender with a diverse kind.] Of this Law there
may be two reasons: one natural, to teach his people not in vanity or
curiosity of mind to alter the shape or nature of the creatures, or seem to
make more then God created; another mystical, to teach them how God did hate
both mixture of persons, I mean the children of God with infidels, as also all
mixtures of religions, and of man's devices with Gods ordinances, and whatsoever
hypocrisy or corruption of manners is contrary to that sincerity and
simplicity which God requires in his children; and this also was intended in
the following prohibitions, against sowing their fields with mingled seed.

Verse. 20. Whosoever lies carnally with a woman that is a bondmaid bet rothed,
etc. she shall be scourged.] And so consequently the man also, as being both
equally guilty: And indeed, in the Hebrew, there shall be a whipping, which may
have reference to both: because she was a bondwoman a lighter punishment is
inflicted; for had she been either born or been made free, both should have
been put to death, Deuteronomy. 22. 23* 34. Thus still the Lord debaseth
bond-servants, to teach his children to hate the bondage of sin.

Verse. 21. And he shall bring his trespasse-offering* etc.] Both for himself
and the servant with whom he committed uncleanness, if she were an Israelite.
But because the man only is appointed to bring a trespasse-offering, this
seems to imply the former Law was meant of heathen bondwomen, which might not
bring an offering.

Verse. 23. And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all
manner of trees for food, then ye shall count, etc.] The first-fruit that grew
upon young trees newly planted was for the first three years to be accounted as
uncircumcised, and not to be eaten, that is, they were to be cut or plucked off
betimes, and cast away as an unclean thing* even as the fore-skinnes of men in
circumcision were cut off and cast away as unclean. And though herein they were
taught to benefit themselves in way of husbandry, because if a young tree be
suffered to bear fruit too soon, neither will the fruit ever be good, nor will
the tree endure so long, this overearly fruit drawing away the nourishment
which should make the root and tree strong; yet chiefly I conceive it was thus
ordained for religious respects, as 1. because the first-fr^it was to be
consecrate to God, to whom it was fit the best should be given; and at the best
they use not to be till after three or four years bearing: and 2. to show that
through the contagion of sin all things are rendered unclean to us, Tit. 1.
15. To them that are defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, so that we have
no right to eat of them till by Christ, the seed promised in the circumcision,
they be r^stored as pure to us again, and until they be sanctified by the word
of God and prayer, 1. Tim. 4. 5.

Verse. 24. But in the fourth year all the fruit thereof shall be holy, etc.]
That is, they shall be given the priests as first fruits. See Numb. 18. 12, 13.

Verse. 25. And in the fifth year shall ye eat of the fruit thereof, that it may
yield you the increase thereof.] That is, abundantly. For this last clause has
reference to the whole foregoing Law concerning the first fruit of trees, to
wit, that if they did pluck off and cast away the fruit for three years as
uncircumcised and unclean, and give the fruit of the fourth year to the Lord,
and then on the fifth year and not till then gather fruit and eat it
themselves, the Lord would cause the land to yield the fruit thereof in such
abundance, as in other things, so also in the fruit of their trees, that they
should have no cause to repent themselves that in obedience to Gods command
they had deprived themselves of the fruit of the first four years.

Verse. 27. Ye shall not round the ^orners of your heads, neither shall thou
mar the corners of thy beard.] It is not easy t^ determine what is meant by
rounding the corners of their heads and marring the corners of their beards.
Some conceive that by rounding the corners of their heads, was meant the
polling of their heads with round curled locks, after a nice and effeminate
manner: and by marring the corners of their beards, the shaving away their
beards, as if they affected to be like women: and so they conceive the drift of
this Law in both particulars is to forbid all effeminate delicacie and
quaintness in the trimming of their heads, and shaving of their beards, after
the manner and custom of the heathen. Again others hold that by rounding the
corners of their heads, and marring the corners of their beards, is meant the
cutting off the locks of their heads, and the hair of their beards, that they
might offer them to Idol-Gods, as most certain it is the heathen used to do.
But last of all others determine that hereby is meant the shaving off the hair
of their heads and beards when they were in mourning and extreme heaviness:
And inde^d this was a custom amongst the heathen: whence is that, Isai. 15. 2.
Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba: on their heads shall be baldness,
and every beard cut off; and that Jerem. 48. 37. Every head shall be bald, and
every beard clipped. And the more probable this opinion seems, because the
heathenish customs here forbidden are joined together with those in the
following verse of cutting their flesh, etc. when they mourned for the dead,
chap 21. 5. They shall not make baldness upon their head, nether shall they
shave off the corners of their beard, nor make any cutting in their flesh.

Verse. 28. Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead.] As the
heathen used to disfigure themselves both by cutting and shaving their hair,
espe^ially in their mourning; so also they used to cut and lance themselves,
Jer. 16 6. 2. Reg. 18. 28. and to imprint marks upon their flesh, cutting
themselves and then filling up the place with ink or some other colou^, that
the marks thereof might remain: all which customs God here forbids his people
to take up, both because they were the desperate effects of immoderate
mourning, as also because they were the customs of idolaters, le^t conforming
themselves to idolaters in these things, they should also grow to a con^ormity
with them in their idolatrous worshipping of false Gods.

Verse. 30. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths and reverence my Sanctuary.] That is, ye
shall esteem of it as of the house which I have chosen to be my dewlling place,
that accordingly you may be car^full to come thither with an inward aw and fear
of my presence; and not to approach to it in your uncleanness, or any other way
to pollute it. To the commandment of sanctifying Gods Sabbaths this of
reverencing his Sanctuary is joined, because the Sabbaths were the chief times
whereon they re^orted to the Sanctuary.

Verse. 32. Thou shall rise up before the hoary head.] Under this all honor d^e
to them is included.

Verse. 36. Just balances, just weights, a just epha^, etc.] Concerning the
Ephah, see chap. 5. 11. and concerning the Hin, see Exodus 29. 40. And know we
must that under these the most usual measures all other measures are
comprehended.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 2. AGain thou shall say to the children of Israel, Whosoever he be of
the children of Israel, etc.] Here the punishments are appointed for the
transgression of those Laws delivered ^n the former chapter.

Verse. 3. And I will set my face against that man, etc.] That is, if any man
shall sacrifice his children to that idol Molech, and his sin be not known,
or cannot be sufficiently proved against him in a judicial way, or that you
neglect to punish him, and through con^ivence forbear to proceed against him
according to the former Law, then will I set my self against that man to
destroy him and cut him off. And the reason is added, Because he has given of
his seed unto Molech to defile my Sanctuary, and to profane my holy name. Now
these that sacrificed their children to Molech are said to defile Gods
Sanctuary. 1. Because generally the Land was defiled, and so the Sanctuary
being in the midst of them was polluted by this, as by other their ^innes, from
which it was therefore purged upon the day of expiation, chap 16. 16. 2.
Because it was a horrible profanation of Gods Sanctuary, that men defiled with
such abominable ^innes* as idolatry and bloodshed, and that too of their own
children, should yet come into Gods Sanctuary: 3. Because it was a vild
debasing and contempt of Gods Sanctuary, that they should forsake that to go
and sacrifice in the valley of Tophet to that idol Molech. Why they are said
also to profane Gods holy name, is noted before, chap. 18. 21.

Verse. 5. Then will I set my face against that man, and against his family,
etc.] That is, his po^terity or kindred. The word in the original is sometime
translated kindred, Genesis 24. 38. But thou shall go unto my fathers house, and
to my kindred, and take a wife unto my son: Sometimes it is meant of the
whole people of Israel, because they came all from one stock, as Jer. 8. 3. And
death shall be chosen rather then life by all the residue of them that remain
of this evil family; and Micah 2. 3. Therefor thus says the Lord, Be^old
against this family do I devise an evil, from which ye shall not remove your
necks. It is here used, because they of his own family and kindr^d were most
likely to be partial and to follow his example; but all are here threatened,
that either by solicitation, or defending and excusing them, or by not accusing
them, that is winking at their sin, shall further their escaping deserved
punishment, as likewise all that should tread in his steps, and go awhoring
after Molech as he had done.

Verse. 6. I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from
among his people.] That is, if you do not punish him according to that Law
before given, Exodus 22. 18. Tho^ shall not suffer a witch to live.

Ver^. 9. For every one that curses his father or his mother shall surely be
put to death.] This word, for, has reference to the foregoing exhortation,
sancti^ie your selves and be ye holy, etc. and it must be extended also to all
the par^icular penal statutes, that follow in this chapter: as if it had been
said, For if you do not sanctify your selves, and keep my statutes, behold
thus and thus, as you shall now hear, have I in all those following particulars
appointed you to be punished. The Law that is first here delivered is for the
putting of him to death that curses his father or his mother, which is not
meant of every wayward word, but of such reviling speeches as they might
plainly perceive proceeded from a manifest contempt of their parents, of which
see Exodus 21. 17. By what manner of death they were to die, it is not
expressed: Some conceive that because stoning is appointed both in the
beginning and end of the chapter, as may be seen ver. 2. and ver. 27. therefore
in all other places of this chapter where no other kind of death is expressed
this of stoning is intended. But however in this particular of children that
cursed their parents, we may the rather think it was so, because elsewhere this
kind of death is appointed for rebellious children, Deuteronomy. 21. 20, 21.

His blood shall be upon him.] That is, he is the cause of his own death: which
is added to show that however men may think this Law too severe, yet he has
deserved this punishment, and must therefore undergo it.

Ver^. 10. He that committet^ adultery with his neighbors wife, the adulterer
and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.] Namely by stoning, as it may
probably be gathered from these places, Deuteronomy. 22. 22, 23, 24. If a damsel that
is a virgin be betrothed unto an husband, and a man find her in the city, and
lie with her: Then ye shall bring them both unto the gate of the city, and ye
shall stone them with stones that they die: and so also Deuteronomy. 16. 38, 40. and
John 8. 4, 5. The words of this Law are only express for the adultery of the
wife, and so they are also, Deuteronomy. 22. 23, 24. Nor do we any where read, that
the husband breaking the covenant of marriage, by lying with a single woman,
was punished with death: and that because the adultery of the wife in some
degrees is more injurious to the hus^and, by causing him to father a bastard
brood.

Verse. 14. And if a man take a wife and her mother, ^t is wickedness; they
shall be burnt with fire, both he and they.] That is, the man, and both mother
and daughter married to him, if both consented to this wickedness; or either
of them indifferently, whether mother or daughter, that is taken to the other.
And the severity of the punishment was to show the ^ainousnesse of the sin.

Verse. 15. And if a man lie with a beast* he shall surely be p^t to death: and
ye shall s^ay the beast.] Both to show how horrible and detestable that fact
was, as likewise that the ^ight of such a beast (being unfit for other
employments also, for no man would willingly keep such an one) might not bring
to remembrance so filthy a sin.

Verse. 16. They shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them.]
That is, both the woman and the man before spoken of that are found guilty of
this unnatural sin of beastiality.

Verse. 17. And if a man shall take his sister, etc.] In this law concerning the
punishment of incest between the brother and the sister, there is mention made
of their seeing one*anothers nakedness, whereby either nothing else is
intended but what in other Laws is called uncovering their nakedness; or else
because this might happen, this is added to show the heinousness of the sin,
and how justly it is appointed to be punished with death. The manner of their
death is not expressed (and therefore happily that was left to the Magistrate,
or else it was stoning, as is noted before upon ver. 9.) only it is said, they
shall be cut off in the sight of their people, whereby is intended that they
were immediately to be put to death, and that openly, for a warning to others;
and that if the Magistrate should forbear to cut them off, then the Lord
himself would do it.

Verse. 18. And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, etc.] That
is, if he does it wittingly: for if he did it unwittingly he was only rendered
unclean thereby, and was to be purified, and to make an atonement for himself
according to the direction of other Laws.

Verse. 19. They shall bear their iniquities.] That is, they shall be cut off:
for the puni^hment of incest being expressed in other places, here it suffices
to express their guiltiness.

Verse. 20. They shall bear their ^inne, they shall die childlesse.] That is,
they shall presently be put to death. Here the phrase is thus carried, to show
that one reason why the Lord appointed such to be cut off was, that the Land
might not be filled with the issue of such unclean mixture.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. THere shall none be defiled for the dead among his people.] That is,
none of the inferior priests shall by reason of mourning for the dead defile
themselves, to wit, by touching their dead bodies, or being in the house where
their dead bodies were, or coming nigh them, and so consequently being present
at their funerals, etc. And several reasons may be given why this was
forbidden: 1. that they might not too frequently be thereby disabled from
attending the work of their prie^^ly office; 2. that hereby it might be seen,
that there was a higher degree o^ holiness required in the priests then in the
rest of the people; 3. that they might be the clearer types of the Messiah, who
should be so exactly holy; 4. that their ref^aining to mourn might be a real
in^^ruction to the people of the hope of the resurrection; and 5. to teach us
what purity is required in those that are by Christ made priests unto God, Rev.
1. 6.

Verse. 2. But for his kin that is near to him, that is, for his mother, and
for his father, etc.] Amongst others here expressed for whom the priests might
defile themselves, the brother is one. But why then were Eleazar and Ithamar
the sons of Aaron forbidden to bewail the death of Nadab and Abihu their
brethren, Lev. 10. 6. Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes le^t
you die, etc. I answer, that charge was extraordinary and peculiar: 1. Because
hereby they were required to testify their submission to that severe
proceeding of the Lord against their brethren; and 2. Because they were newly
that day entered upon the execution of their priestly office, for which it was
not therefore fit they should disable themselves by defiling themselves with
the dead, there being no other priests at that time to do the work in their
stead.

Verse. 3. And for his sister a virgin that is nigh unto him, etc.] That i^, his
own sister by father or mother, if unmarried; but if she were married, he might
not be a mourner at her burial to defile himself thereby, because she was then
transplanted into another family.

Verse. 4. But he shall not defile himself, being a chief man among his people,
to profane himself.] Some read this place as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, But being a husband among his people he shall not defile himself for
his wife, etc. and then the sense must be, that though the priests might defile
themselves for those their nearest kindred, mentioned in the former verses, yet
they might not defile themselves for their wives. But the wife being nearer to
the husband then the nearest of his kindred can be, it is hard to say why the
priests should be allowed to defile themselves for their near kindred and not
for their wives: and far more probably we may conceive that by allowing them
to mourn for their near kindred, their defiling themselves for their wives is
employed as far more necessary; which also we may the rather think, because to
Ezekiel, being a priest, this is given in charge as a strange and unusual
thing, that he should not mourn for his wife when she dyed, Ezekiel. 24. 16, etc.
and hence it is that few approve of this translation. But reading it then, as
it is in the text of our Bibles, But he shall not defile himself, being a chief
man among his people, to profane himself, all the difficulty lies in knowing
what is meant here by being a chief man among his people: concerning which I
find three several opinions of Expositours. For first, some understand it of
the high priest, that being a chief man, that is, the high priest, he might not
defile himself, no not for his nearest kindred; which they say is afterward
more fully expressed verse. 10. But because the laws against the high priests
mourning are afterward set down by themselves, I think it very improbable that
this should be meant of the high priest. Secondly, some understand by a chief
man here the master or chief man of the house or family, where there is a dead
corpse to be buried; and so take the meaning of the words to be this, That no
priest should defile himself for any but for his near kindred before mentioned,
no though he were the chief man or master of the family where they dyed. And
thirdly, some by a chief man understand any of the priests, and conceive the
meaning of this place to be, that though none of the people were allowed to
defile themselves for the dead so as to profane themselves, that is, after the
profane manner of the heathen, according to that Law, chap. 19. 18. yet the
priest especially might not do it, being a chief man among his people. So that
according to this interpretation, the emphasis of this prohibition lies in
these words, to profane himself. The inferior priests might defile themselves
for their nearest kindred, but yet not so as to profane themselves, to wit,
after the manner of the heathen, by making baldness upon their heads, etc. as
it is expressed in the following verse: though none of the people might do
this, yet not the priest especially, being a chief man among his people.

Verse. 5. They shall not make baldness upon their heads, etc.] That is, when
they did mourn for their kindred. See chap 19. 28.

Verse. 6. For the offering of the Lord made by fire, and the bread of their God
they do offer. See the note upon chap 13. 11. The word and here is not in the
original: so that by the bread of their God is meant both the sacrifices burnt
upon the altar, and the heave-offerings, which were the priests portion: and
they are so called, partly because they were offered upon the altar, the table
of the Lord, Mal. 11. 12. and partly because they were eaten by the priests of
the Lord.

Verse. 7. They shall not take a wife that is a whore or profane.] That is,
neither a common whore, nor a woman whose chastity had been violated, though
she did not as a common whore prostitute her self. Some also conceive that
under this word, profane, all those were forbidden to be taken in marriage by
the priests, that were for any other cause of ill name and basely esteemed, as
a bastard, or one that was of light behavior; yea it seems that they might not
marry a widow, unless she were a priests widow: For so it is expressly said,
Ezekiel. 44. 22. They shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a
widow that had a priest before. Now all this was to maintain in the people an
high opinion of the dignity of the priesthood, and that they might be the
fitter to be types of Christ.

Neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband.] That is, divorced,
and not for the cause of adultery, which to the Israelites was permitted under
Moses Law, Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2. but it was for the hardness of their hearts, as our
Savior says, Matthew. 19. 8.

Verse. 8. Thou shall sanctify him therefore, etc.] That is, thou Moses, thou
shall command him thus to be sanctified, Ex^d. 19. 10. And the Lord said unto
Moses, Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day and to morrow, etc. or
else it is an Apostrophe to the people, that they should, as much as in them
lay, take care that the priests did thus carry themselves as holy persons.

Verse. 9. She shall be burnt with fire.] Other persons were not put to death
for simple fornication, neither the man nor woman, Exodus 22. 16, 17. And if a
man entice a maid that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall surely
endow her to be his wife. If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he
shall pay money according to the dowry of Virgins: only the priests daughter,
because of the dishonor done to her fathers house, is appointed here to be
burnt; and it may well be thought by the rule of Analogy the same punishment
was to be inflicted on the priests wife, if not his sons, when guilty of the
same sin.

Verse. 10. And he that is the high priest among his brethren, upon whose head
the anointing oil was poured, and that is consecrated to put on the garments,
shall not uncover his head, etc.] Either therefore the uncovering of the head
was it seems then an expression of mourning, though afterward a contrary
custom was used, to wit, when they mourned to cover their heads; or else that
which is forbidden the high priest here is, that he should not take off his
miter to the end he might put on a covering on his head after the fashion of
mourners, as it is noted before, chap. 10. 6.

Verse. 12. Neither shall he go out of the Sanctuary, nor profane the Sanctuary
of his God.] That is, he shall not go out of the Sanctuary to mourn for his
nearest dead friends, because this forsaking of the Sanctuary and the service
thereof would be a kind of vilifying of Gods Sanctuary and service; and if he
should return again from his dead friends into the Sanctuary, this would be a
manifest defiling and profaning of the Sanctuary.

For the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him.] That is, because
being the anointed high priest, and so advanced above the rest of the priests,
he may not do that which the other priests may do. The oil of anointing
poured upon the high priests head is here called the crown of the anointing
oil, both because by that anointing he was separated to a place of special
dignity above his brethren, and also because therein he was a type of Christ's
royal priesthood; yet withal happily this phrase may be used with respect had
to the plate of pure gold, fastened to the miter, which was upon the high
priests head when he was anointed, and is called the holy crown, Exodus 29. 6,
7. Thou shall put the miter upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the
miter: then shall thou take the anointing oil and pour it upon his head, and
anoint him.

Verse. 13. And he shall take a wife in her virginity.] And so the high priests
wife was a figure of the church, which is to be chaste, pure, holy, 2. Cor 11.
2. I have espo^sed you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin
to Christ. Rev. 14. 4. These are they which were not defiled with women: for
they are virgins: These are they which follow the lamb whithersoever he goes.

Verse. 14. But he shall take a virgin of his own people to wife.] That is, of
the Israelites, not of any other nation, though a virgin, Ezekiel. 44. 22. They
shall take maidens of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow that had a
priest before. Some would have a virgin of his own people to be a virgin of his
own tribe; but it is evident that the high priest was not bound to marry to
none but to the tribe of Levi, for Jehoshubeath the daughter of King Jehoram
was the wife of J^hoi^da, 2. Chron. 22. 1.

Verse. 15. Neither shall he profane his seed among his people.] That is, he
shall not by marrying any of these here forbidden render his sons unfit for
the priestly office. So that this is added to imply one reason why the priests
might not marry any of these before mentioned, to wit, because any blemish in
his wife would tend to the reproach and dishonor of his children born of her,
and so make them unfit to succeed their father, or to execute the priests
office.

Verse. 17. Whosoever be of thy seed in their generations that has any blemish,
etc.] This law, whereby all Aarons posterity that had any blemish in their
bodies were excluded from the priests office, was first, to signify the
perfection of Christ, of whom the priests were types, who had not indeed the
least blemish of sin in him; and secondly, to signify how perfectly pure all
the Saints should be through Christ, of whom it is said, Rev. 14. 5. that they
are without fault before the throne of God; and thirdly, how pure all those
should be that are employed in sacred functions from any thing that might be a
blemish to their profession and ministry.

Verse. 22. He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy and of the
holy.] Herein the blemished priests had a privilege above the unclean, who
might not eat of the holy things, Levit. 22. 3. What man soever of the seed of
Aaron is a leper, or has a running issue, he shall not eat of the holy things,
until he be clean.

Verse. 23. Only he shall not go in unto the vail, etc.] That is, into that
part of the Sanctuary wherein the vail was that hanged before the ark, to wit,
to dress the lamps, or to order the shewbread, etc.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 2. SPeak unto Aaron and to his sons that they separate themselves from
the holy things, etc.] That is, that they wholly abstain from meddling with
them, or eating of them, to wit, whilst any legal uncleanness is upon them,
as is expressed verse. 3. And by the holy things of the children of Israel are
meant all their oblations, whereof the priests were to eat, yea even their
first fruits, Numb. 18. 13. only of the tithes it seems they might eat, even
whilst they were unclean. In the former c^apter the Lord showed what natural
and personal blemishes made the priests unfit for his service; here he shows
now what accidental pollutions should make them for the time unfit for the
same service: for however it might seem needless to enjoin the priests to
separate themselves in the time of their uncleanness, since it was before
forbidden the people not to pollute Gods holy things by intermeddling with them
at such times, Levit. 7. 20. But the soul that eats of the flesh of the
sacrifice of peace offerings that pertain unto the Lord, having his
uncleanness upon him, even the soul shall be cut off from his people; yet
because men honored above others use to abuse their advancements, as if they
had ^ privilege to sin, lest the priests should pretend such a privilege,
this is also particularly forbidden them.

Verse. 4. What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper, or has a running
issue, etc.] This concerns women also, Aarons daughters, who might eat of
some of the holy things, yet not when they were unclean.

Verse. 9. They shall therefore keep mine ordinance, etc.] That is, they shall
abstain from eating of the things before spoken of.

Verse. 10. There shall no stranger eat of the holy things, etc.] That is, none
but those of Aarons posterity, though Israelites or Levites: yet an exception
is added in the next verse, to wit, that any servants the priests had bought
with their money, might eat of these things, whether Israelite (who was yet to
go out after seven years service) or servants bought for ever from other
nations.

Verse. 14. And if a man eat of the holy things unwittingly then he shall put
the fifth part thereof unto it, etc.] And withal offer a ram for his sin
against God, chap. 5. 15. If a soul commit a trespass and sin through
ignorance in the holy things of the Lord, then he shall bring for his trespass
unto the Lord a ram without blemish, etc. But here only satisfaction is made
to the priests.

Verse. 15. And they shall not pr^fane the holy things of the children of
Israel, etc.] That is, the priests; to wit, by eating them when they are
unclean.

Verse. 16. Or suffer them to bear the iniquity of trespass, when they eat
their holy things, etc.] That is, the priests shall not, by suffering the
people to eat of the holy things, expose them to the guilt of such a sin, and
the punishment that will follow thereon.

Verse. 18. Whatsoever he be of the house of Israel, or of the stranger in
Israel, etc.] In this precept three things are required in all burnt-offerings,
whether they were brought by Israelites born, or proselytes (who though they
were strangers born, yet embracing the religion of the Israelites were admitted
to offer sacrifices, as being ingrafted, as it were, into Gods Israel) and
whether they were brought for a vow or a freewill-offering: to wit, first, that
they must be of the beeves, or sheep, or goats; secondly, that they must
always be males: in other sacrifices a female was sometimes accepted, but
never in burnt-offerings; and thirdly, that they must be without blemish, of
all which see the notes upon the first chapter of this book.

Verse. 21. And whosoever offers a sacrifice of peace offerings, etc.] Here
direction is given for their peace-off^rings, to wit, that whether they were
brought for a vow or for a freewill-offering* they must be first of the flocks
or herds, beeves or sheep or goats; and secondly, that they must be perfect and
without blemish, that is, as some distinguish them, perfect in regard of the
inwards, and outwardly without blemish. Yet in peace offerings that were not
for a vow, but for a freewill-offering, though no blemish was allowed, yet
something was allowed that was after a sort a blemish, as appears in the
exception that follows, verse. 23. to wit, a bullock or a lamb or kid, that had
any thing superfluous or lacking in his parts; for this is not meant of such
cattle as were any way monstrous, that had of any part too many or too few, as
five legs, or three ears, or but one eye; but it is meant of such as had any
part too long or too short, over big or over little, not according to the
ordinary proportion of nature, as is usually in other catel of that kind: and
this though it were some kind of defect, yet it was not accounted a blemish,
and so it was allowed in peace offerings that were brought for a
freewill-offering, not in peace offerings that were brought for a vow.

Verse. 2^. Ye shall not offer unto the Lord that which i^ bruis^d, etc.] No not
in freewill-offerings.

Verse. 25. Neither from a strangers hand shall ye off^r the br^ad of your God,
etc.] Some understand this of strangers that were proselytes; le^^ (say they)
any man should think that such blemished sacrifices, as are before spoken of
might serve for proselytes, express mention is made, that from their hands
they should not be excepted. Some again by strangers will have such meant, as
were neither of the seed, nor the religion of the Israelites, uncircumcised
strangers; and these expound this law three several ways: to wit, first, that
though such blemished sacrifices were bought from the hand of strangers
uncircumcised with their money, yet they might not offer them to God, because
they were blemished, and so their corruption was in them, that is, they were
corrupted and polluted, and so were not fit for sacrifices; or secondly, that
if a stranger, that is, any of the h^athen uncircumcised would bring any
sacrifice to be offered for them, and brought any of those fore-mentio^ed
blemished sacrifices, it should not be accepted; or thirdly, that from the hand
of any pagan they should not offer the bread of their God, that is, his
sacri^^ces of any of these, that is, of any of the cattle before mentioned
whether blemished or without blemish, and that because they are blemished and
polluted, even because they are brought by the uncircumcised. But neither of
these two last Expositions seem to me probable. Not the first of them, because
I no where find that the heathen were allowed to bring any sacrifices at all,
and therefore it was needless to forbid the taking of a blemished sacrifice
from them: Nor the last, because thi^ law does only speak of sacrifices that
should be accepted from the Israelites (and not for heathens) as the last
clause does evidently show, they shall not be accepted for you.

Verse. 27. When a bullock or a sheep or a goat is brought forth, then it shall
be seven days under the damme, etc.] The same is enjoined concerning their
firstborn cattle, Exodus 22. 30. Because till they were eight days old they
were not fit to be eaten by men; therefore till then the Lord would not allow
them to be brought for sacrifices.

Verse. 28. And whether it be cow or ew, ye shall not kill it and her young both
in one day.] To wit, that being taught mercy in killing of beasts for
sacrifices, they might learn much more to show mercy to men, and also how they
should labor after perfect purity when they came to offer sacrifices to God.

Verse. 30. On the same day it shall be eaten up, etc.] See chap. 17. 15.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 2. COncerning the feasts of the Lord, which y^ shall proclaim to be holy
convocations, even these are my feasts, etc.] That is, these are the feasts
which you my people shall cause to be proclaimed as holy convocations, to wit,
by the priests; for it is generally held that the priests did by sounding of
the trumpets proclaim these festivals. The Lord having before given direction
for sacrifices, now gives order for festival times whereon many sacrifices
were usually offered.

Verse. 3. The seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an holy convocation; ye shall
do no work therein.] That is, no work appertaining to their earthly businesses
or employments: upon other festival days, they were not tied so strictly,
except only the day of Expiation; for upon other festival days the restraint
is, ye shall do no servile work therein, as we may see verse. 7, 8, 21, etc. but
upon the Sabbath and the day of Expiation, verse. 28. the Law runs, ye shall
do no work therein: and the difference betwixt these is commonly held to be
this, that on the other festivals they were forbidden all servile work, that
is, all work appertaining to their worldly callings, wherein usually on other
days their servants were employed, but were allowed any work in providing food
for the day; and so indeed that which was forbidden on the first day of
unleavened bread in the seventh verse of this chapter under the name of servile
work, In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation, ye shall do no
servile work therein, is expressed thus, Exodus 12. 16. And in the first day
there shall be an holy conv^^ation: no manner of work shall be done in them,
save that which every man must eat, and that only may be done of you. But on
the Sabbath day, and day of atonement, they were restrained from all bodily
labor, yea even that of providing or dressing their food, as is evident Exodus
16. 23. and Exodus 35. 3. where they were forbidden to kindle a fire, or to
dress that which they should eat on the Sabbath day: yet did not the Jews
understand this law so, as to restrain them from those works which were
necessarily to be done, and therefore they used to water their catel, as our
Savior faith, Luke 13. 15. on the Sabbath day, and if need were would pull out
of a pit either ox or ass that were fallen into it, Luke 14. 5.

It is the Sabbath of the Lord in all your dwellings.] That is, to be observed
in all your dwellings. The other feasts were especially to be kept before the
Sanctuary, whither all the men of Israel were to assemble, Exodus 23. 14. Three
times thou shall keep a feast unto me in the year; and verse. 17. Three times in
the year all thy males are to appear before the Lord God. Deuteronomy. 16. 5, 6. Thou
may not sacrifice the Passover within any of the gates which the Lord thy
God has given thee. But at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to
place his name in, there shall thou sacrifice the Passover; and verse. 16.
Three times in a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God in the
place which he shall choose: But the Sabbaths were to be sanctified in all
places where they dwelt, to which purpose their Synagogues were built, Acts 15.
21. Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being read in
the Synagogues every Sabbath day.

Verse. 7. In the first day ye shall have an holy convocation, ye shall do no
servile work therein.] See the first note upon verse. 3.

Verse. 8. But ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord seven
days.] What the sacrifices were that were to be offered on each of these seven
days of unleavened bread, we may see Numb. 28. 18, 24.

Verse. 10. When ye be come into the land which I give unto you, and shall reap
the harvest thereof, etc.] That is, and shall address thy self to reap the
harvest thereof: for the sheaf of the first fruits of this harvest, which they
were here enjoined to bring unto the priest, was to be the first corn they cut
down when they began to put the sicle to the corn, as it is expressed Deuteronomy. 16.
9. Nor might they reap their harvest, till this sheaf of first fruits was
brought unto the Lord.

Verse. 11. On the morrow after the priest shall wave it.] That is, on the
sixteenth day of the first month called Nisan, the second of the seven days
of unleavened bread: Upon the fourteenth day of that month the Passover was
kept; the fifteenth day was the first day of the feast of unleavened bread,
which day was a Sabbath of rest, verse. 7. and is called, the feast, Numb. 28.
17. and this is the Sabbath here meant: for on the morrow after, being the
sixteenth day of that month, the sheaf of the first fruits was by the care of
the Magistrate, in the name of all the people, brought unto the priest, and
this sheaf was of barley, for that was first ripe in the land of Canaan, Ruth.
2. 23. She kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of
barley-harvest and of wheat-harvest; and Exodus 9. 31, 32. The barley was in the
ear, and the flax was bolled; but the wheat and the rye were not smitten, for
they were not grown up, to wit, at the feast of the Passover, but
wheat-harvest was after, at Pentecost or the feast of weeks, as we may see
Exodus 34. 22. where the feast of Pentecost, or the feast of weeks is also
called the feast of the first fruits of wheat-harvest.

Verse. 12. And ye shall offer, the day when ye wave the sheaf, an he lamb
without blemish, etc.] To wit, besides the daily morning and evening sacrifice,
which upon no occasion were intermitted, and besides the sacrifices appointed
for every of the seven days of this solemn feast of unleavened bread, Numb.
28. 23, 24. For this was appointed peculiarly to accompany this sheaf of the
first fruits, and it figured Christ by whom those first fruits were sanctified.

Verse. 13. And the meat offering thereof shall be two tenth deals of fine
flower* etc.] To wit, two tenth deals of an Ephah, that is, two Omers, and this
was double to the usual proportion in all other sacrifices of lambs, which was
but one tenth deal, Numb. 15. 4. He that offers his offering unto the Lord,
shall bring a meat offering of a tenth deal of flower; the reason whereof may
be, because this was a gratulatory sacrifice for the fruits of the earth.

Verse. 15. And ye shall count unto you from the morrow after the Sabbath, etc.]
Here direction is given how they should know on what day they were to keep the
next great feast after that of unleavened bread, to wit the feast of weeks, or
Pentecost, namely, that they were to number from the morrow after the Sabbath,
that is, from the sixteenth day of the month Nisan (as is before said in the
note upon verse. 11.) which was the very day that they brought the sheaf of the
wave-offering, seven complete Sabbaths, that is seven complete weeks, which was
nine and forty days, and that then on the morrow after the seventh Sabbath,
that is, after the seventh week, which was the fiftieth day, they were to keep
the feast of weeks or Pentecost, and to offer a new meat offering unto the
Lord: which shows the reason why this feast was called the feast of weeks,
namely, because it was seven weeks after the Passover, or the beginning of the
feast of unleavened bread; as also why it was afterward called in the New
Testament, Pentecost, Acts 2. 1. to wit, from the Greek word (...), which
signifies fifty, because it was fifty days after the first and great day of
unleavened bread: for they began to number these fifty days from the morrow
after that Sabbath inclusively, which was the second day of unleavened bread,
the day whereon the sheaf of first fruits was offered.

Verse. 17. Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave-loaves, of two tenth
deals, etc.] That is, on the feast of Pentecost you shall bring this offering,
which was to be offered as the first fruits of their wheat-harvest, as the
sheaf offered at the Passover, mentioned verse. 10. was brought as the
first fruits of their barley-harvest: now it is expressed, that these two
wave-loaves were to be brought out of their habitations, either to signify
that these two loaves were to be made of the new wheat of their own land, not
of foreign corn or bought of strangers; or else to signify that though there
were but one sheaf of first fruits offered at the Passover in the name of all
the people, yet now every family was to bring two wave-loaves of first fruits
out of their several habitations. But indeed because the sacrifices mentioned
in the following verse, that were offered together with these loaves, were not
brought severally by every family, but provided at the common charge, and
offered in the name of the whole Church; and because that it is said expressly
verse. 20. that these two loaves of the first-fuits were waved by the priest
together with the peace offerings* which could not be if every family in
Israel brought two loaves, therefore I only think that the only reason why it
is said, Ye shall bring two wave-loaves out of your habitations, was to
signify that the loaves were to be made of the wheat of their own land.

They shall be of fine flower, they shall be baken with leaven, they are the
first fruits unto the Lord.] Thusthere is a difference made betwixt the
meat offerings which were in part burnt upon the altar, and were therefore ever
without leaven, Levit. 2. 11. and these of the first fruits, which where wholly
for the priests food, and therefore allowed to be leavened.

Verse. 18. And ye shall offer with the bread, seven lambs, without blemish, of
the first year, and one young bullock, etc.] In Numb. 28. 27. there is
appointed two bullocks and one ram, here one bullock and two rams; the
reason of this difference we may conceive was this: Those were as the peculiar
sacrifices of that feast day, these are a further addition in respect of the
two loaves, as a particular testimony of their thankfulness for the fruits of
the earth, and of their faith in Christ, by whom they were restored to the use
of the creatures, and their sacrifices of praise made acceptable to God.

Verse. 19. Then ye shall sacrifice one kid of the goats for a sinne-offering,
etc.] Lev. 4. 14. a bullock is prescribed for a sinne-offering of the people,
and nothing was to be eaten thereof, it was to be burnt without the camp: But
this was for some special sin of the congregation, whereas the sacrifice
here appointed was in general for all their sins, and was therefore in the
kind of a common sacrifice, whence a goat is appointed, and the priest to have
the remainder.

Verse. 20. They shall be holy to the Lord for the priest.] Whereas ordinarily
the priest had but the breast and the right shoulder of the peace offerings,
Lev. 7. 32, 33. etc. The breast shall be Aarons and his sons: And the right
shoulder shall ye give unto the priest of the sacrifices of your
peace offerings, etc. Here he had all, because this was offered in general for
all the congregation, and so no particular man had right to eat thereof,
therefore it belonged to the priest wholly.

Verse. 21. And ye shall proclaim on the self same day, that it may be an holy
convocation unto you, etc.] This was the feast day of Pentecost, or of Weeks,
whereon the two loaves and the sacrifices before mentioned were offered unto
the Lord; and it was instituted partly as a memorial of their coming out of
Egypt, Deuteronomy. 16. 10, 12. Thou shall keep the feast of Weeks unto the Lord thy
God, according as he has blessed thee. And thou shall remember thou wast a
bondsman in Egypt, and shall observe and do these sta^utes; and of the giving of
the Law at this time of the year at mount Sinai, Exodus 19. 11. and partly by
way of thankfulness for the fruitfulness of the Land. One thing prefigured
might be the giving of the Law of Christ by the Apostles, when the holy Ghost
came down upon them, the first fruits of the Spirit, in the likeness of cloven
tongues, Act 2. 1, 2, 3. whereupon they went forth to reap that which the
Prophets had sown, John 4.

Verse. 22. And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not make clean
riddance, etc.] Speaking of the feasts in the harvest, he repeateth this Law
concerning the poor* whose relief he joins with his own service.

Verse. 24. In the seventh month, in the first day of the month shall ye have
a Sabbath.] For Ecclesiastical businesses God has appointed the month Nisan
or Abib to be the first mone^h of the year to the Is^^elites, which answere^^
to part of our March and April, and that in remembrance of their coming then
out of Egypt, Exodus 12. 2. and so the seventh month from that was this here
spoken of, which they called Tisri, and agrees in part with our September, and
had been formerly the first month of their year; yea and so still con^inued
for civil affairs, and therefore the year of Jubilee begun still at this month,
and so was on this month proclaimed, chap. 25. 9. Then shall thou cause the
trumpet of the Jubilee to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month, etc. Now
the first day of this month God here appoints them to keep a Sabbath, that is,
a solemn feast day; and it was called the feast of trumpets, because it was
^olemnized with blowing of trumpets. Indeed the first day of every month,
which was their new Moon, they kept as an holy day, a day of special
solemnity, and thereon the priests did blow with their silver trumpets over
their sacrifices, Numb. 10. 10. In the beginnings of your months ye shall blow
with your trumpets over your burnt-offerings, etc. But the first day of this
seventh month was kept as a far more solemn festival, and that with blowing
of trumpets in way of rejoicing, as it may probably be thought, throughout all
the cities of Israel. And the end of this festival was, 1. to be a memorial
that this was the first day, the beginning of their New year for civil afairs,
whereon it was therefore fitting that they should with rejoicing acknowledge
the blessings enjoyed in the foregoing year; 2. to be a memorial to them when
they were come into Canaan of the several victories which God had given them
over their enemies, where the priests with the holy trumpets did sound an
alarm. See Numb. 31. 6. 3. That it might be a preparation for the following day
of atonement, their solemn fast day on the tenth day of this month, that so by
the sounding of the trumpets they might be put in mind to wake out of the sleep
of sin, and with trembling fasting and prayer to turn unto the Lord: and 4.
to put them in mind of the special holiness of this month; for as the
seventh day of every week was a Sabbath, and every seventh year was kept holy
as a Sabbaticall year; so the Lord would have the seventh month of every year
to be holy in some singular manner above the rest of the months: and therefore
though it was not wholly spent in sacred festivities, yet there were more
holy days in this month then in all the year besides, to wit, the feast of
trumpets, the feast of expiation, and the feast of tabernacles.

Verse. 25. Ye shall do no servile work therein; but ye shall offer an offering
made by fire unto the Lord.] What the sacrifices appointed for this feast of
trumpets were, see Numb. 29. 2* 6.

Verse. 27. And ye shall afflict your souls, and offer an offering made by fire
before the Lord.] See that note upon Lev. 16. 29. and Numb. 29. 7. where the
several sacrifices of this day are also described.

Verse. 34. The fifteenth day of this seventh month shall be the feast of
tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord.] It was called the feast of
tabernacles, or, of booths, because when the Israelites came up to Jerusalem to
keep this feast, during the feast they dwelt not in houses, but only in
booths, or arbours made of boughs, it is afterward more fully expressed, ver.
40. and it was kept, 1. in remembranc^ of Gods shadowing protection over them
for forty years together, both summer and winter, in their traveling through
the wilderness, whilst they dwelt in tents and booths, and were not yet come
to their place of rest, as is expressed ver. 43. (and hereby it is evident that
they never kept this feast till they were settled in the land of Canaan,
because they kept it in remembrance of their dwelling in booths whilst they
wandered through the wilderness) 2. to testify there thankfulness to God for
the fruits of the earth* which this month they gathered in, Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 14.
Thou shall observe the feast of tabernacles, seven days after that thou have
gathered in thy corn and thy wine; and thou shall rejoice in thy feast, etc.
and 3. as a figure both of Christ's incarnation, who coming into the world about
this time of the year to dwell in the tabernacle of our flesh, was made flesh,
and dwelt (or pitched his tent) amongst us, John 1. 14. and also of our
condition, who are strangers and pilgrims here on earth, Heb. 11. 13. dwelling
in earthly tabernacles which must be di^solved, until our labors being ended
we come at length to a place of rest, that dwelling of God eternal in the
heavens, 2. Cor. 5. 1. and should therefore with thankfulness remember how
Gods hand is continually over us to protect us in our pilgrimage; of which
spiritual keeping the feast of tabernacles Zachary speaks, Zach. 14. 16, 19.
As for the time allotted to the keeping of this feast, to wit, seven days,
this complete number signified that all the days of our pilgrimage in this
frail tabernacle of our bodies should be consecrated as holy to the Lord.

Verse. 36. Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire unto the Lord.]
What sacrifices were appointed for this feast, and in what manner they were to
be offered, see Numb. 29. 13, 38.

On the eighth day shall be an holy convocation unto you, etc.] Though this
eighth day was a part of the feast of tabernacles, or at least belonged
thereto, and therefore is called the last and great day of the feast, John 7.
37. yet most properly the first seven days were only counted as the days of
the feast of tabernacles, as is before said, ver. 34. The fifteenth day shall
be the feast of tabernacles for seven days unto the Lord, and that because
they dwell in tabernacles or booths only during those first seven days, but
on the eighth day they met together in the Temple to keep there an holy
assembly, as it were in remembrance of their being settled in peace, in the
land of Canaan, after their long travels through the wilderness: and so this
eighth day was rather an appendix to the feast of tabernacles, then any part
properly of the feast it self.

Verse. 37. A sacrifice, and drink offerings, every thing upon his day, etc.]
Amongst the several sacrifices appointed for these feasts, one is called
peculiarly a sacrifice, which comprehend both sinne-offerings and
peace offerings.

Verse. 38. Beside the Sabbath of the Lord.] That is, beside the weekly Sabbaths
and the sacrifices thereto belonging. Two things are employed in these words: 1.
that as God required the keeping of these solemn ^easts, so also especially the
sanctifying of the Sabbath; 2. that when any of these feast-dayes lighted on a
Sabbath, they must not think to make the Sabbath sacrifices serve for these
festivals.

Beside the gif^s, and beside all your vows, etc.] By gifts are meant the
firstborn cattle and first fruits, and all other contributions and gifts which
of their own free will they were wont to give to the priests; by vows are meant
vowed sacrifices; the drift of this is to prevent any covetous thoughts which
might arise in their minds of thinking with such gifts or vowed sacrifices to
supply the extraordinary sacrifices of these festivals: for these God requires
over and above their gifts and vows and freewill-offerings; if they offered
ever a whit the less because of the sacrifices of these feasts, they should be
judged as men that dealt fraudul^ntly with God.

Verse. 39. Also in the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have
gathered in the fruit of the land, etc.] Now he proceeds to set down more
particularly how that feast of tabernacles was to be solemnized, whereof he had
begun to speak ver. 34. and first by mentioning that this feast was to be kept
when they had gathered in the fruit of the land, he puts them in mind that they
might be the better at leisure to keep this extraordinary Sabbath, and withal
implies that one main end of it was to return thanks for the fruit of the land
which they had now gathered: where also by the fruit of the land, is meant not
their corn, which was gathered long before, in the time of Pent^cost; but the
latter fruit of their vines and olives, etc. whereupon this feast is called the
feast of ingathering, Exodus 23. 16.

Verse. 40. And ye shall take you on the first day the boughs of goodly trees,
etc.] That is, upon the first day of the feast of tabernacles, which was the
fifteenth day of the seventh month, ver. 34. This day it seems they made their
booths, or tabernacles, some upon the roofs of their houses, some in the
streets and courts of Jerusalem, etc. as is largely ^xpressed, Neh. 8. 15, 16.
Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive-branches, and pine-branches, etc. to
make booths as it is written; so that the boughs they are here appointed to
take were it seems to make or at least to adorn the booths they were to dwell
in: yet withal that is not unlikely which the Jews say, that they carried
boughs and branches also in their hands in sign of joy. And to make their
booths the more beautiful, and that all things might represent a glad and
joyful time, they are appointed to choose the boughs of the goodliest trees,
such as are the olive, pine, myrtle, mentioned, Neh. 8. 15. and the boughs of
thick trees (for the thicker they were the more glorious show they made, and
the fitter they were to make booths or arbours for a shadow and shelter) and
willows of the brook, to intimate a land well watered, which might be of use to
bind the other boughs, etc. and also to be either in the hand or on the booths,
ornaments and signs of joy, and that especially for the fruitfulness of the
land wherein God had planted them, whereof these several boughs of goodly
trees were a^ evident sign.

Verse. 43. That your generations may know that I made the children of Israel to
dwell in booths, etc.] S^e Exodus 12. 37.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 2. Command the children of Israel, that they bring unto thee pure
oylolive, etc.] This which is given here in charge to the Israelites, is for
the continual supply both of lamp oil and shewbread, to wit, that as they
brought them at first, so they must still be supplied by them: either therefore
these things were provided by the civil magistrate out of the common s^ock, or
else rather ^hey were provided, as were also the daily sacrifices, and
whatsoever else was offered in the name of the whole people, out of the
treasury of the temple; into which therefore toward the supply of these things
both the Princes and people did ordinarily cast in what they were willing to
give. So it is noted of Hezekiah, 2. Chron. 31. 3. He appointed also the Kings
portion of his substance for the burnt-offerings, to wit, for the morning and
evening burnt-offerings, and the burnt-offerings for the Sabbaths, for the new
Moons, and for the set feasts; and of the people, Luke 21. 1. He saw the rich
men casting their gifts into the treasury, and a certain poor widow casting in
thither t^o mites.

Verse. 3. In the tabernacle of the congregation shall Aaron order it from the
evening unto the morning, etc.] Or his sons by his appointment. See the note
upon Exodus 25. 37.

Verse. 5. And thou shall take fine flower, and bake twelve cakes thereof.]
These were the cakes of shewbread, concerning which see the note upon Exodus 25.
23. The flower was provided at the common charge (as is before said upon ver.
1.) and brought to the priests, but the cakes were made and baked by the
Levites of the family of Kohath, as is evident 1. Chron. 9. 32. where it is
said that some of the sons of the Kohathites were over the shewbread, to
prepare it every Sabbath.

Verse. 6. And shall set them in two rows, six on a row, etc.] The common
opinion is, that those twelve cakes of shewbread, representing the twelve
tribes of Israel, were not set one by another, but six one upon another, and
six one upon another. But because this way it cannot so properly be said that
they were set in two orders or rows, and because in the following verse there
is order given for the putting of frankincense upon each row, I rather think
that they were set in order along the table, six in one row and six in another.

Verse. 7. And you shall put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on
the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire unto the Lord.] For
the incense was burned upon the altar, when they took away the bread, and was
beforehand laid upon the bread, as a sign that God would through Christ
remember his people with thoughts of favor and gracious acceptance.

Verse. 9. And it shall be Aarons and his sons, and they shall eat it in the
holy place.] That is, after it had stood a week upon the table before the Lord.

For it is most holy unto him of the offerings of the Lord, etc.] Because of
the incense which was burnt, the bread was reputed most holy, as if it had been
of the offerings made by fire.

Verse. 10. And the son of an Israelitish woman, whose father was an Egyptian,
etc.] Thus by the providence of God in the party thus blaspheming, and thus
punished for it, as is here related, they were taught, 1. How the curse of God
does usually follow the issue of such unlawful mixtures, as was this of an
Egyptian with a^ Israelite; 2. How severe God must needs be against this sin
in his own genuine people, who would not suffer it unpunished in one that was
the son of a stranger by the fathers side. The inserting of this story in
this place makes it more then probable, that it was done whilst they were yet
in the desert of Sinai, even whilst the Lord was giving these Laws to Moses
which are before mentioned, as is expressed in the next chapter, ver. 1.
Whether the Egyptian had this son by Shelomith in marriage, or by
fornication, we cannot say: but that this their son the blasphemer had
embraced the religion of the Israelites, it is very likely, both because he
came away with them out of Egypt, and also because he is here said to have gone
out amongst the children of Israel, which implies more then his going in their
company, namely, that he went out amongst them as one of them.

And this son of the Israelitish woman and a man of Israel strove together in
the camp.] This of his striving is expressed, to let us know that a blasphemer,
though provoked, is not therefore to be excused.

Verse. 11. And the Israelitish woman's son blasphemed the name of the Lord,
and cursed.] His sin I conceive was not rash, vain, and unadvised mentioning
Gods name either in swearing, cursing the man with whom he was to contend, or
otherwise; but of an higher nature (though even these are blasphemy) even some
execration or reproachful speeches uttered in his fury directly against God: as
if for instance we should suppose this, that in the heat of contention the
Israelite upbraiding him with his idolatrous father, and denying him to be a
true member of the Church of God he should thereupon speak scornfully and
opprobriously of the God of Israel, slighting the privilege of being one of
his people. Some such blasphemy I conceive this was, and that because the Law
which God gave them upon this occasion speaks of cursing God, ver. 15.
Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sin; not cursing in Gods name, but
directly and expressly of cursing God.

And they brought him unto Moses, etc.] According to the order mentioned Exodus
18. 26. The hard causes they brought unto Moses.

Verse. 14. Let all that heard him lay their hands upon his head.] That is,
those that heard him were to come forth, and laying their hands upon his head
to give in evidence against him, and so thereupon he was to be condemned, and
the congregation was to stone him. Now this ceremony of the witnesses laying
their hands upon his head was 1. to signify, that they did charge this sin
upon him, and approve of the punishment that was to be inflicted for it; 2.
that having witnessed nothing but the truth, they were free from his death, but
his blood must be upon his own head; 3. to imply that he was to be sacrificed
as it were to the justice of God: for as those that brought any sacrifice to
the tabernacle, were to lay their hand upon the head of the sacrifice, thereby
signifying their desire and faith, that the death of that sacrifice might and
should satisfy the justice of God in their behalf; so here the laying of the
witnesses hands upon the head of the blasphemer did signify their desire that
God would accept of his punishment as a sacrifice offered to the satisfying of
his justice, and not punish the land and people for it.

Verse. 15. Whosoever curses his God shall bear his sin, and he that
blasphemeth the name of the Lord, etc.] These Laws were given to the
Israelites, upon the occasion of the foregoing story of the blasphemer that was
stoned. Evident it is that these are two distinct Laws, Whosoever shall curse
his God shall bear his sin, and, He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, he
shall surely be put to death; and yet hard it is to say wherein the difference
lies between cursing and blaspheming the name of the Lord. But the best
resolution of this doubt, I conceive, is this, that by cursing God is meant
when a man shall directly and purposely speak reprochfully of God, and by
blaspheming the name of the Lord, is meant when men do so profanely mention the
name of God, either in cursing or otherwise, that what they say of God tends
much to the reproach and dishonor of God, though they do not directly speak
against God.

Verse. 16. All the congregation shall certainly stone him.] The people must all
have their hands in the execution, 1. to prove their zeal in revenging the
dishonor done to God, and his Laws; 2. that themselves might learn to fear
those sins which with their own hands they had punished in others.

Verse. 17. And he that kills any man shall surely be put to death.] This Law
is here inserted upon the occasion of the blasphemers striving with the
Israelite, ver. 10. and to show that God was tender, as of his own honor, so
of the safety of his people.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 2. WHen ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep
a Sabbath unto the Lord, etc.] That is, every seventh year the land shall lie
at rest, ye shall neither plow it nor sow it, etc. Concerning this Sabbaticall
year, and the grounds thereof, see the notes upon Exodus 23. 11. This year also
they did forbear exacting their debts of those that were indebted to them,
because that year there was no tillage nor harvest to make money of: of which
see also the notes upon Deuteronomy. 15. 1. It is also commonly held by Expositours
that this year all Hebrew servants were set free, of which see Exodus 21. 2. for
of this I find no clear ground in the Scriptures, but rather the contrary. When
the first Sabbaticall year was kept by the Israelites it is hard to determine,
and yet sure we are that it was not till they came into the land of Canaan. The
most probable opinion is, that it was the fourteenth year of Joshua's
government: for if the land was first divided among the Israelites in the
seventh year of Joshua, as may be gathered from Calebs age, Josh. 14. 10. then
the seventh year after that, when they had tilled the land, and reaped the crop
of it six years, was doubtless their first Sabbaticall year.

Verse. 5. That which grows of it own accord of thy harvest thou shall not
r^ap, etc.] That is, as in other years, by a peculiar right and interest, but
in common as others did, only taking what might serve for food.

Verse. 8. And thou shall number seven Sabbaths of years unto thee, etc.] Here
direction is given for the year of Jubilee, so called, as it is most generally
held, from an Hebrew word Jovel, which signifies a ram, because it was
proclaimed with trumpets or cornets made of rams horns. A great question
there is amongst Expositours, nor is it easily to be resolved, concerning the
numbering of this year of Jubilee, as likewise at what time of the year it did
begin. Some conceive that the fourtyninth year, which was the last of the seven
times seven years, was the year of Jubilee: and whereas it is said, ver 10. Ye
shall hallow the fifti^th year, they say it is called the fiftieth year by
reckoning from the year before inclusively, and so conceive that the year of
Jubilee did always concur with the seventh Sabbaticall year. But against this
manner of accounting the year Jubilee, there may be serall strong objections
made, which cannot well be answered: as 1. that the Jews do constantly reckon
otherwise, making the Jubilee every fiftieth year, not concurring with the
Sabbaticall year: 2. that according to this manner of accounting every year of
Jubilee was then to be counted twice, as the last of one fifty years, and the
first of another; and besides, in the computation for the first fifty years,
there was no Jubilee before to be included: and 3. that it had been superfluous
to forbid, as ver 11. all sowing and reaping in the year of Jubilee, if it had
always concurred with the seventh Sabbaticall year, since all such works had
then been unlawful, even in regard that it was a seventh year. And therefore I
conceive that the more probable opinion is that, which is commonly held by
Expositours, namely, that they did reckon seven times seven years, which was
nine and forty years, and then the next year after, to wit, the fiftieth year,
was the year of Jubilee: and this year was not reckoned in the Sabbath of years
following, but the one and fiftieth year was the first of the next seven years;
for else they should not have sowed and reaped six years in this week of years.

Verse. 9. Then shall thou ^ause the trumpet of the Jubilee to sound on the tenth
day of the seventh month, etc.] That is, on the tenth day of the seventh
month in the year following the seventh Sabbath of years thou shall throughout
all the land with the sound of a trumpet or cornet proclaim that to be the year
of Jubilee. It was proclaimed on the seventh month, because it was the first
month of the civil year, and so then the year of Jubilee began: and it was
proclaimed on the tenth day of that month, which was the day of atonement, and
a public fast day for all the people, 1. to show that our freedom from the
spiritual bondage, wherein we lie by nature, is through the atonement made by
Christ's death, according to that of the Apostle, Heb. 2. 12, 15. For as much
then as the children ar^ partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise
took part of the same, that through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver them who through fear of death
were all their lifetime subject to bondage: and 2. to teach us that the way to
attain spiritual joy and comfort (whereof the Jubilee was a sign) is to humble
and afflict our souls, as the Jews on this day did: and 3. to teach us that if
we expect mercy from God in the pardon of our sins (which was assured to them
on this day of expiation) we ought to show mercy to our brethren, as they did
this day by releasing their servants, and restoring to every man their
possessions again. A great dispute there is amongst Expositours, when the year
of Jubilee began: Some hold that though it were proclaimed on the seventh
month, the month Tisri, yet it began not till the spring following, in the
month Nisan: but this is no way probable; for the time of sowing was about the
seventh month, and it is not likely they sowed that which because of the
following Jubilee they might not reap. I make no question therefore but the year
of Jubilee began on this seventh month, but whether it began on the first day
of this month, as the Jews generally hold, or not till the tenth day, is
somewhat questionable; yet the last seems to me most probable, because it may
seem strange, that it should begin ten days before it was proclaimed.

Verse. 10. And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty
throughout all the land, etc.] That is, ye shall set it apart to be an holy
year, and shall proclaim liberty throughout all the land, to wit, to your
brethren that had been sold to you for servants, who shall hereupon be set at
liberty. Now the year of Jubilee was called an holy year, because it was
separated from the ordinary employments of other years in tilling and sowing
their land, etc. that they might be at more leisure to spend it in holy
employments, and that it might be to them a year of holy rejoicing before the
Lord; and withal because it was to be a type of that evangelicall Jubilee at
the coming of Christ, when by the trumpet of the Gospel, first sounded by the
Baptist, and after by Christ and his Apostles, there should be great joy
proclaimed unto all nations; whence it is that the time of the Gospel is called
the year of Gods redeemed, Esa. 63. 4. and the acceptable year of the Lord,
Esa. 61. 2. the accepted time, and the day of salvation, 2. Cor. 6. 2. One of
the main privileges of this year was that which is here mentioned, that all
their servants were set at liberty. Ordinarily when their brethren were sold to
them for servants, they were to serve them six years; but if the year of Jubilee
came after the first or second year, they were presently set free: yea even
those that at other ordinary times did refuse to be set free, and so had their
ears bored through, and were by the Law thereupon to serve for ever, Exodus 21.
16. were yet set free at the year of Jubilee. And herein was the year of Jubilee,
a notable type of the evangelicall Jubilee at the coming of Christ, when all
Gods redeemed ones were set free from the bondage of the Law, Satan, sin, and
death, Joh. 8. 36. If the son shall make you free, you shall be free indeed.

It shall be a Jubilee unto you, and ye shall return every man to his
possession.] This was another privilege of the year of Jubilee, That when that
year came all the land that had been sold returned to the owners that had sold
it, or to their heirs: for no man might sell his land for ever, ver. 23. but
only for so many years as were behind from the sale to the year of Jubilee, and
then the owners entered upon the land again. And this was the reason why Naboth
would not sell his vineyard to Ahab, to wit, for ever. 1. King. 21. 3. The Lord
forbid it me, says he, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers unto
thee. Now the reasons of this Law were, 1. that it might prevent the confusion
of the tribes by the alienation of their several portions in the land of
Canaan from one to another; 2. that it might be a bar in the way of the rich,
that they might not hope to swallow up the inheritance of their poor brethren,
and so to enlarge their own; 3. that it might be a perpetual memorial to them
that God had planted them in the land, because they might not sell it, the Lord
challenging the land to be still his by a peculiar right, and willing them
only to esteem themselves as sojourners therein with him, whence it is called
the Lords land, Hos. 9. 3. They shall not dwell in the Lords land; and Esai. 8.
8. The stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O
Immanuel. And fourthly, That it might be a figure of our recovering by Christ,
at the evangelicall Jubilee, that heavenly inheritance which we had lost by
sin; and that the heavenly Canaan which God had prepared for his in Christ
c^nnot be utterly alienated from them but is surely confirmed in his blood, and
reserved in heaven for them, so that though by their sins they may for a time
deprive themselves of the comfortable use of this their inheritance in the
Church, yet they shall return thereto at the great Jubilee of Christ's second
appearing, when the trumpet of God shall sound, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 16, 17. The Lord
himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the
Archangell, and with the trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first;
Then we which are alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the
clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be for ever with the Lord.

Verse. 12. Ye shall eat the increase thereof out of the field.] And not out of
the barn. The meaning is, that they might not gather and lay up the increase
that grew of the land in the year of Jubilee, but what they did eat hereof in
common together with others, they must take it immediately out of the field.

Verse. 14. And if thou sell ought unto thy neighbor, or buyest ought of thy
neighbors hand, ye shall not oppress one another.] That is, the seller shall
not exact more of him that buys then the use of the land is truly worth from
the time of the sale to the year of Jubilee, nor shall the buyer seek to get the
land for less then it is truly worth, taking advantage of the necessity of him
that is forced to sell.

Verse. 20. And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year, etc.] An
objection is here made and answered, concerning the rest of the Sabbaticall
year enjoined verse. 4. The objection is, how they should live the seventh year
if they should therein neither sow nor reap: And the answer is, verse. 21, 22.
That God would command such a blessing upon the sixth year, that it should
bring forth fruit for three years, that is, from the sixth to the ninth, not
for three years complete, but for part of three years, (as Christ is said to
have been three days in the grave, because he was in the grave part of three
days (for the increase of the sixth year served them, first, for part of the
sixth year; to wit, from barly-harvest that year, which was about the
Passover, till the seventh month, when the Sabbaticall year began; secondly,
for all the Sabbaticall year; thirdly, for the eighth year, till both barley and
wheat harvest of that they had sown that year was fully gathered and made ready
for use, which was not till the ninth year was wellnigh come: and thus the
increase of the sixth year served for three years. Now for the year of Jubilee
(concerning which they had more reason to doubt, because then they did neither
sow nor reap for two years together, to wit the fourtyninth year, which was the
seventh Sabbaticall year, and the fiftieth, which was the year of Jubilee) by
what is said concerning the seventh year, ^^e like must be conceived concerning
that too, namely that then God would give such a blessing to the sixth year,
that the increase thereof should serve for four years, that is, for part of
four years.

Verse. 23. The land shall not ^e s^^d for ever, etc.] See the note upon verse.
10.

Verse. 25. If any of hi^ kin come to redeem it, then shall he redeem that which
his brother sold.] This kinsman that was allowed to redeem the possession which
his poor brother had sold was a figure of Christ, who being near to us, and
allied in the flesh, is called our God, that is, our redeemer or deliverer,
Esai. 59. 20. and our brother, Heb. 2. 11. He is not ashamed to call them
brethrew: and he it is that has redeemed us, and our heavenly inheritance unto
us, in our low depressed and poor estate, Hos. 13. 14. I will ransom them
from the power of the gr^ve, and will redeem them from death. 2. Cor. 8. 9.
Though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his
poverty might be rich.

Verse. 29. And if a man sell a dwelling house in a walled city, etc.] In two
particulars the Law here given for the sale of houses in walled towns differs
from that before given for the sale of their land: first, whereas they might
redeem their land at all times, their houses in walled towns they might not
redeem unless they did it within a year; secondly, whereas their lands did
always return to the first owners at the year of Jubilee, their houses in
walled towns did not return to those that sold them at the year of Jubilee, but
if the owners redeemed them not within a year they were alie^ated from them for
ever. Of which differences these reasons are probably given: First, because
upon these houses, if not redeemed within so short a time, much cost might be
bestowed by him that had bought them, for the altering, repairing or enlarging
of them; and therefore it was not fit they should be redeemed as lands were:
and on the otherside in many years they might be much decayed, and so not be
restored in the same condition they were in, when they were sold, as lands
might: Secondly, because the perpetual alienating of these houses in walled
cities did not make such confusion in the tribes, as the alienating of their
lands, since it cannot be thought that in populous cities, only men of one and
the same tribe inhabited: Thirdly, because men might better part with their
houses then their ground, that should yield them food and sustenance, yea these
houses might be burdensome to the owners becoming poor, rather then useful.

Verse. 31. They may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the Jubilee.] That is,
the houses in villages, to wit, because the lands could not be without
farmhouses, stables, etc.

Verse. 33. For the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession,
etc.] Therefore as the Israelites had liberty to redeem their possessions of
lands, and enjoyed the privilege of receiving them back again at the year of
Jubilee; so it was fit the Levites should have the same privileges concerning
their houses in the cities allotted them, because they had no other possession
in the land.

Verse. 34. But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold, etc.]
The field of the suburbs (of which see Numb. 35. 4, 5.) appointed for the
keeping of their cattle might not be sold at all, left wanting that necessary
help, they should be forced to leave their dwellings, to the great damage of
the whole people, God having thus dispersed them in several cities in every
tribe, that they might watch over the souls of the people. This continued
during the polity of the Jews, what was after done see Acts 4. 36, 37. Joses a
Levite, having land sold it, and brought the money and laid it at the Apostles
feet.

Verse. 36. Take thou no usury of him nor increase.] That is, of thy poor
decayed brother, whether he be an Israelite born, or a stranger that is become
a proselyte; for to both these they are commanded to lend in the foregoing
verse, and therefore from both these they are here forbidden to take usury or
increase.

Verse. 39. Thou shall not compel him to serve as a bond-servant.] That is,
thou shall not compel him to serve for ever, nor use him basely and hardly,
but as a brother.

Verse. 40. And shall serve thee unto the year of Jubilee.] The ordinary time of
their service was but for six years, Exodus 21. 2. but in some cases their ears
were bored, and they were to serve for ever, Exodus 21. 6. But in the first, if
not in both these cases, the Jubilee was to put an end unto their service, and
they were to be set free. And as their serving for ever had an end at the year
of Jubilee, so also all their other legal ordinances, which were ordained to
continue for ever, had their period at the evangelicall Jubilee, of which this
was a type.

Verse. 41. And then shall he depart from thee, both he and his children with
him, etc.] And so also his wife, Exodus 21. 3. If he came in by himself, he
shall go out by himself: if he were married then his wife shall go out with him.

Verse. 46. They shall be your bondmen for ever.] That is, those servants which
you buy, that are of other nations; for these, yea though they were proselytes,
were not set at liberty at the year of Jubilee.

But over your brethren the children of Israel, ye shall not rule one over
another with rigor.] Namely first, they must not be put to such vile works and
base employments as their bondmen of the Gentiles: secondly, they must not be
held in perpetual bondage, but must go out free,, they, their wives, and
children, at the year of Jubilee; thirdly, they must not be sold to others for
bondmen as the Gentiles were: these things are meant here by ruling over them
with rigor; for cruelly they might not deal with their bondmen that were of
the Gentiles.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 5. ANd your threshing shall reach unto the vintage, etc.] That is, you
shall have such plentiful harvests, that before you can have threshed out your
corn, the vintage shall come; and such rich vintages, that before they be
ended, it shall be time to sow your seed, etc.

Verse. 6. Neither shall the sword go through your land.] That is, ye shall live
in peace, and shall not be destroyed by the sword of your enemies. But yet some
Expositours hold that this phrase is here used of the sword going through the
land, because armies of soldiers are wont to destroy countries, not only by
fighting against them, but also by going through them.

Verse. 10. And ye shall eat old store and bring forth the old because of the
new.] That is, you shall have such store of old corn, even when your new corn
is gathered in, that you shall not need presently to be spending the new, but
may still live upon the old store; and yet withal your new harvests shall be
so plentiful, that of necessity you must empty your barns of old corn that you
may have room to lay up the new.

Verse. 16. I will even appoint ^ver you terror, consumption, and the burning
ague, etc.] These words, I will appoint over you, imply the unresistablenesse
of the judgment, because those diseases should come with power and authority
from God upon them, and so should consume their eyes, etc. as indeed such
diseases being in extremity do often weaken and darken the sight.

Verse. 19. And I will break the pride of your power.] That is, I will break
your exceeding great strength wherein you are wont to pride your selves.

Verse. 20. And your strength shall be spent in vain, etc.] That is, though you
spend your strength with excessive toyling and moyling in plowing and manuring
your ground, all will be to no purpose, for still your land shall not yield her
increase.

Verse. 26. And when I have broken the staff of your bread, ten women shall bake
your bread in one oven.] This is mentioned as a sign or effect of the great
scarcity of bread that should be in the land, that one oven should contain the
bread of many families. Bread is here called the staff of bread, because it
strengthens man's heart, Psalm. 104. 15. because it is the chief prop and
support of man's life: So that by breaking the staff of bread is meant the
depriving them of this stay of their life by bringing famine and penury upon
them, as it is evident in other places, Moreover he called for a famine upon
the land, he brake the whole staff of bread, Psalm. 105. 16. and Ezekiel. 4. 16.
Son of man, behold I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem that they may
want bread and water* and of this judgment this is mentioned as a notable
effect, that ten women, that is, many families, should bake their bread in one
oven; for ten in the Scripture does often signify many, as is formerly shown
upon Genesis 31. 7.

And they shall deliver your bread again by weight.] This is reckoned as
another great sign of scarcity and want, that the baker should deliver them
their bread by weight. So it is said, Ezekiel. 4. 16. I will break the staff of
bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight and with care, and they
shall drink water by measure; and therefore of him, whom S. John saw riding
upon a black horse, which was famine, Rev. 5. 6. it is said that he had a pair
of balances in his hand, to wit, to measure out bread to men, because it
should be so scarce.

And ye shall eat and not be satisfied.] To wit, either because of the small
quantity, or for want of Gods blessing upon the little which they have: for so
some expound the staff of bread, the strength which by the command of God it
has to nourish our bodies.

Verse. 30. And cast your carcases upon the carcases of your idols.] That is,
upon your idols now mangled and broken to pieces; for their broken images are
here called the carcases of their idols, not because they had life before they
were broken to pieces, but by way of derision, to let them see, first, what
goodly gods they had worshipped* that should in that day lie tumbled in a heap
together with their dead carcases; and secondly, to intimate that these their
idols were as abominable to God as dead stinking carcases are unto men.

Verse. 31. And I will make your city waste, and bring your Sanctuaries unt^
d^solation.] The tabernacle is called a Sanctuary, Exodus 25. 8. and so is the
temple also 1. Chron* 22. 19. and each of them, for the several distinct
places in them* the outward court, the holy and most holy place, was called
plurally Sanctua^ies, Jer. 51. 51. For strangers are come into the Sanctuaries
of the Lords house. And besides the Synagogues may be in this word Sanctuaries
comprehended als^.

Verse. 34. Then shall the land enjoy her Sabbaths, etc.] As resting from
^^llage, from which she should have rested on the Sabbaths, but could not be
permitted because of their covetousness; as also from bearing such wicked
wretches, under the burden of whom whilst the earth lay groaning, it could not
enjoy her Sabbaths as she ought: for where there is not a resting from sin
the Sabbaths are not truly kept.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, etc.] The Lord
having given them laws hitherto concerning the necessary duties of his service,
concludes now with this concerning vows and voluntary services, When a man
shall make a singular vow, the persons shall be for the Lord by thy estimation.
That is, when any man shall after a singular manner separate any thing by vow
from common use for the Lords service, the persons (supposing it be some
person* whether man or woman that is vowed) shall be for the Lord according to
thy estimation, that is, they shall be thenceforth the Lords, and accordingly
either they shall be set apart to the Lords service, or else they shall be
redeemed according to thy estimation, to wit, according to that value which the
priests, by the direction which thou Moses shall now give, shall set upon them:
for it was Moses to whom the Lord now spoke, but it was the priest that did
value that which was vowed, as is evident ver. 12. though according to that
direction which Moses by Gods command did now prescribe them. Now for these
vows of persons, we must know that they were usually made in time of some
affliction or distress; as when married persons had no child* they did
sometimes vow that if the Lord would give them a child, they would give
themselves or that their child unto the Lord, which was Hannahs vow, 1. ^^m. 1.
11. and so in times of sickness, or any other distress, they were wont to vow
unto the Lord delivering them, that they would give such and such persons,
themselves or their children, over whom they had power, unto the Lord. And if
it be questioned, after what manner and to what use they were vowed unto the
Lord: To this some Expositours answer, That in case it was a Levite that was
vowed, he was then bound by that vow to serve ^lwayes in the tabernacle or
temple (whereas otherwise he should have served there only in his course) and
such an one they say could not be redeemed. But if the person vowed were of any
other tribe, they were only vowed to such service of the tabernacle, as they
not being of the tribe of Levi were capable of, as for drawing of water, or
hewing of wood, which the Gibeonites afterward did, Josh. 9. 27. or if they
were women, for spinning for making the priests garments, and providing those
things that were necessary for the repair of the tabernacle, and other such
like services, which accordingly they did perform, or else paid the price of
their redemption here prescribed. But others again hold that the aim and
intention of these personal vows, was only that they should pay the price of
their redemption to the priests, which was employed either for the maintenance
of the priests, Numb. 18. 14. or else for the reparations of the Sanctuary, 2.
Kings 12. 4, 5.

Verse. 3. And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even
unto sixty years old.] He begins with this age, because it comprehends the
chief of man's time for ability of body and mind.

Verse. 4. And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.]
As here, so again also verse. 5, 6, 7. still a smaller sum is appointed for
the redemption of a female vowed unto the Lord, then for the redemption of a
male, and that not so much because of the dignity of the man above the woman,
as because the labor and service of a man is counted usually of much more
value then the ministry and service of a woman.

Verse. 5. And if it be from five years old even unto twenty years old, etc.]
These that were vowed to God so young, could not be vowed by themselves, but by
their parents, who might as well vow them to God, as sell them to be servants
to others, and therefore they were bound by their parents vow, and were to be
redeemed. Now though the service of those that were vowed to God in their
childhood may seem to be more worth, by reason the time of their service was
likely to be longer, then those that were vowed at thirty and forty years old;
yet is there here a lesser ransom appointed for the redemption of children
then for those of far more years, and that because they were valued not
according to the years they might live, which were uncertain, but according to
their present estate and condition.

Verse. 6. And if it be from a month old, even unto five years old, etc.] Under
this age there was no valuation at all, see Numb. 13. 40, 47. and 18. 16. yet
some conceive that by those of a month old, are meant all that were in their
first month, even from the first month birth unto a month fully complete.

Verse. 8. But if he be poorer then thy estimation, then he shall present
himself before the priest, and the priest shall value him, etc,] The party
vowed unto the Lord together with the party vovving, as when the father
vowed his son or daughter: and it is left to the discreet charity of the
priest to s^^^ reasonable rate upon him according to his ability.

Verse. 9. And if it be a beast whereof men bring an offering unto the Lord,
etc.] That is, a clean beast without blemish.

Verse. 10. And if he shall at all change beast for beast, then it and the
exchange thereof shall be holy.] To wit, by way of penalty, and because both
were in a manner consecrated to God; and such things as are once consecrated
to God must not return to the owner again.

Verse. 11. And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer a
sacrifice unto the Lord, etc.] This which is said of unclean beasts, to wit,
that if any such be vowed, they must be redeemed at such a price as the priest
shall value them, etc. may be meant of blemished beasts, otherwise fit for
sacrifice; or rather generally of unclean beasts, that might not be offered in
sacrifice: only some will have the dog excepted, because of that place, Deuteronomy.
23. 18. yea, according to this law, Expositours conceive they were bound to do
in all other moveable goods that were vowed, to wit, that the priests having
set a price upon them, the party that vowed them might redeem them; and that
otherwise the priests might sell them, or dispose of them as they thought fit.

Verse. 13. But if he will at all redeem it, then he shall add a fifth part,
etc.] As is enjoined in the case of purloyning holy things, chap. 5. 16. And he
shall ma^e amends for the harm that he has done in the holy things, and shall
add the fifth part thereto. So in this case of vows, when he that voweth will
not stand to his promise, the Lord lays on him this penalty for his
inconstancy and lightness of mind, that men might learn to be stable-minded,
even in such voluntary vows, and not think to have any interest in that which
is once by a vow given to God.

Verse. 14. And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy unto the Lord,
etc.] That is, by a vow, which men were wont to do, as desiring to obtain from
God a safe healthful and prosperous habitation in them.

Verse. 15. And if he that sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall
add the fifth part, etc.] Why this was enjoined, see the note before upon
verse. 13. The priests did usually value those things that were vowed at a
reasonable rate, and therefore they might the better pay a fifth part more then
the price set upon them. But if they did not redeem their houses at the year of
Jubilee, the priests had the perpetual possession of them, and this made them
the more careful and willing to redeem them.

Verse. 16. And if a man shall sanc^ ^fie unto the Lord some part of a field of
his possession, etc.] That is, if a man shall vow unto the Lord some part of a
field that came by inheritance (for direction is afterward given, verse. 22.
for fields purchased of others, wherein only they should have right unto the
year of Jubilee) the priest then was to set an estimation upon it according to
the quantity of seed that would sow the land so vowed, and that price the owner
of the land was to pay to the priest if he would redeem it, and a fifth part
over and above. This vowing of some part of their land unto the Lord was
usually done, in expectation of having their fields yield the greater increase*
and the price here set for the redemption of such land was, that they were to
pay according to the rate of fifty shekels for so much land as required an
homer of barley seed to sow it, as for instance, if an homer would sow it, then
they were to pay fifty shekels of silver for the redemption of it; if it
required two homers to sow it, then they were to pay a hundred shekels; if
three homers, then a hundred and fifty shekels, etc. and again, if half an
homer would sow it, then they were to pay twenty five shekels, and so ratably
they paid for all land they had vowed according to the quantity of seed that
would sow it. Indeed it is questioned amongst Expositours whether this sum
set for the redemption of such land was but once paid, or whether so much was
paid yearly till the year of Jubilee came. This last many do hold, and that
because they judge that fifty shekels was not a valuable consideration (unless
it were paid yearly till the Jubilee came) for so much land as required an homer
of seed to sow it. But doubtless in rating the land that was vowed there was a
favorable respect had to the owner, neither did the Lord intend i^ should be
rated according to the exact worth of the land; and therefore also the same
price is here set down upon all land, whereas we know that an acre of some land
may be worth four times as much of other land. So that to me it seems most
probable that the sum here set was not paid yearly, but only once, when the
land was redeemed.

Verse. 17. If he sanctify his ^ield from the year of Jubilee, etc.] That is, if
a man do vow a fi^ld unto God immediately after the year of Jubilee is past, in
the first of the fifty years that must run to another Jubilee, according to
thy estimation it shall stand* that is, that estimation of his land shall stand
before mentioned, to wit, he shall pay for the redeeming of ^t fifty shekels
for every omer it will take in barleyseed answerable to the fifty years from
Jubilee to Jubilee. But if he sanctify his field after the Jubilee, then the
priest shall reckon unto him the money according to the years that remain, that
is, the priest shall then demand of him for the redemption of his land
proportionably according to the years that are behind unto the year of Jubilee;
as for instance, if there remain but thirty years unto the year of Jubilee, the
land that requires an omer of seed to sow it shall then be valued but at thirty
shekels, and if there remain but twenty five years to Jubilee, it shall then be
valued but at twenty five shekels, and so proportionably still according as the
land is more or less.

Verse. 19. And i^ he that sanctified the field, will in any wise redeem it,
then he ^^all add the fif^h part, etc.] See the notes upon verse. 19. and verse.
15.

Verse. 20. And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold the field to
another man, etc.] The meaning of the first clause is clear, namely, that if
the party that had vowed some part of his land unto the Lord, refuse to redeem
it, to wit, when the priest had set a price upon it, it should be taken as if
he had voluntarily given the possession thereof wholly unto God, and then
afterward he might not recall it, but it was wholly separated from him. But the
meaning of the second clause, or if he have sold the field to another man, is
more questionable: for many Expositours understand the party selling to be the
priest, or the treasurer of the priests at least: if it be meant of the owner
that vowed the land, that then by his selling the land is meant only his
permitting it to be sold by the priests, and therefore many Interpreters
translate this second clause thus, or if the field be sold to another man, and
so they conceive the meaning of this second clause to be, that if the field
were once sold to another man, because the owner refused to redeem it, the
owner might not afterward redeem it, and so it should be for ever alienated
from him. But considering that these two ^lauses are joined together by that
copulative particle Or, And if he will not redeem the field, or if he have sold
the field to another man, it is hard to understand the s^^st clause of him that
vowed the land, and the second of the priests; and therefore other Expositours
do better understand this second clause, as well as the first, of the party
that had vowed the land to the Lord, to wit, that if he refused to redeem the
land, or if after he had vowed it to God, he never sought to perform his vow,
but sacrilegiously robbed God by selling his land to some other man, in either
of these cases he should not ever after that have power to redeem his land;
though when he had sold it, the man that had bought it should enjoy it to the
year of Jubilee, yet then it should return not to the seller, but to the priest,
who should enjoy it as the Lords by a former vow, It shall not be redeemed any
more, says the text, and verse. 21. The possesion thereof shall be the priests.
But yet first, because it is expressly said, that the priests should have no
inheritance in the land* Numb. 18. 20. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron, Thou
shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall thou have any part
amongst them; secondly, because there was such care taken by the law of God
that the land belonging to one tribe should not for ever be alienated and
passed over to another tribe, therefore many Expositours hold* that though the
possession of such lands as were vowed to God, came to the prie^ts in the year
of Jubilee, because they were not redeemed, yet the priests were bound a^ every
Jubilee, when they returned to them, to sell them again to some of the tribe to
which the land belonged, yea to the next kinsman of the first owner if he would
buy them, and that the priests might not keep them in their own hands.

Verse. 21. But the field when it goes o^t in the Jubilee shall be holy unto the
Lord, as a field devoted, etc.] See the note upon verse. 28.

Verse. 23. And he shall give thy estimation in that day, as a holy thing unto
the Lord.] Here in the redemption of lands, which were not of a man's
inheritance, but purchased of another, there is no addition of the fifth part
required, as before, verse. 19. because the party vowing it was himself but a
termer in it or a leassee unto the year of Jubilee, and so had no more advantage
by repossessing it then another should have by buying it, if he refused it.

Verse. 26. Only the firstlings of the beasts which should be the Lords
firstlings, no man shall sanctify it whether it be ox or sheep.] That is, no
man shall vow to give unto the Lord the male firstling of an ox, sheep or goat,
and that because their male firstlings were already the Lords in that regard as
they were firstlings. But might they then vow any other male firstlings?
Doubtless no: for all such firstborn whatsoever were the Lords, Numb. 8. 17.
All the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine says the Lord, both man
and beast: But because the firstborn of sheep and such other catel, as used to
be sacrificed, could not be redeemed, Numb. 18. 17. and so could never be vowed
unto the Lord, whereas all other firstborn might be redeemed, and after that
might again be consecrated to the Lord by a vow, yea before they were redeemed
they might be vowed with respect to the time after redemption, as Samuel
Hannahs firstborn son was vowed, 1. Sam. 1. 11. therefore the firstlings of
oxen and sheep are here particularly mentioned, because they were never capable
of being vowed unto the Lord.

Verse. 27. And if it be an unclean beast then he shall redeem it according to
thy estimation, etc.] That is, if any shall vow an unclean beast, then he may
redeem it; and if he will redeem it, it shall be redeemed according to thy
estimation, etc. for this is not spoken of redeeming the firstborn of unclean
beasts, but of unclean beasts that were vowed, as before verse. 11. which is
evident in that here is enjoined the adding of a fifth part over and above the
price of the cattle redeemed, which is no where enjoined for the redeeming of
the firstborn.

Verse. 28. Notwithstanding no devoted thing that a man shall devote unto the
Lord, etc.] That is, nothing that is anathematized, so it is in the Greek:
nothing destroyed or wholly cut off, as the Hebrew word signifies. Things
devoted, I conceive, were such things as were consecrated and set apart
absolutely unto God without power of redemption, and that not by an ordinary
vow, but with a curse of destruction denounced and desired upon any whosoever
it be, that shall divert that to any private use. Hence the offerings of the
temple, mentioned Luke 21. 5. are there called anathemata.

Verse. 29. None devoted which shall be devoted of men shall be redeemed, but
shall surely be put do death.] Three several ways this clause of the law
concerning devoted things is understood by Expositours: first, some understand
it only of beasts, yea principally of unclean beasts, devoted of men, that is,
devoted by men, conceiving that this is added to satisfy a doubt, namely, that
if things devoted might not be sold, what then shall be done with those devoted
unclean beasts which were not fit for the Lords use? to which they say an
answer is here given, namely, that however they might not be sold, but must be
put to death. Again secondly, some understand it generally of all devoted
things, whether men or beasts or lands, etc. and these by the last clause,
wherein it is said, that such things shall surely be put to death, understand a
final separating such things from all civil use unto the Lord, either by
death or otherwise, to wit, that such things were either to be put to death, or
else that they were to be irrecoverably cut off from all civil use, which in a
metaphorical phrase is a kind of death, such things being civilly dead (as we
use to say) in regard of the former owner. But thirdly, some understand it
only of men that are devoted: for men, they say, are here mentioned, not as
the persons devoting, but as the persons devoted; and therefore it is not
translated, None devoted, which shall be devoted by men, but, None devoted,
which shall be devoted of men, or from amongst men, shall be redeemed, that is,
no men that are devoted shall be redeemed, but shall surely be put to death.
And this seems the most probable Exposition, and most agreeable with our
translation. Only then it must be understood of such as were devoted unto
destruction, which was done sometimes by a special and extraordinary vow, and
so the Canaanites were devoted, Numb. 21. 2. Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord,
and said, If thou will indeed deliver this people into my hand, then will I
utterly destroy their cities; or else by Gods special command, and so the
inhabitants of Jericho were devoted, Josh. 6. 17. and the Amalekites, 1. Sam.
15. 3. for if we extend it to the devoting of men to Gods service, then that
last clause, they shall surely be put to death, cannot be meant otherwise then
in that metaphorical sense before spoken of, namely that such were to be
wholly given up for ever to the Lord, as men dead unto the world, and so
Samuel, they say, was devoted to the Lord.

Verse. 30. And all the tithe of land, whether of the seed of the la^d, or of
the fruit of the tree, is the Lords.] There are two sorts of tithes in the Law,
the first which was given to the Levites, Numb. 18. 21. the second which (after
the payment of the former tithe) was separated and carried up to Jerusalem, and
there eaten by the owners, Deuteronomy. 12. 6, 7, 11. this may be meant of both,
though principally of the first, as is methinks evident by that general
expression, all the tithe of the land, etc.

Verse. 31. And if a man will at all redeem ought of ^i^ tithes, he shall add
thereto the fifth part thereof, etc.] Which was to make su^^ that the Levites
should lose nothing by the cunning of the owners buying: the second tithe might
be turned into money, Deuteronomy. 14. 23. but for the Lords use, not their own
private commodity.

Verse. 32. And concerning tithe of the herd or of the flock, even whatsoever
passes under the rod, etc.] This phrase has respect unto the manner of
tithing, which was thus; as they went out of the fold or barn one by one, the
tithing man with his rod numbered them, and the tenth, as it casually passed by,
whether good or bad, male or female, was marked out for the tithe.

ANNOTATIONS On the third book of MOSES called NUMBERS.
CHAP. I.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, etc.] This third
book of Moses is called Numbers, because therein are related two several
numbrings of the people, the one here in the first entrance of this book, the
other afterward, chap. 26. besides many other numbrings, as of the offerings
of the Princes, and of the several stages of the Israelites in their
journeyings toward the land of Canaan, etc. In these first words he tells us
the place and time when they were numbered, to wit, in the wilderness of Sinai,
and that on the first day of the second month in the second year after their
return out of Egypt: In the beginning of the third month of the first year
they came first into the wilderness of Sinai, Exodus 19. 1. upon the very first
day of the first month of the second year the tabernacle was erected, Exodus
40. 17. and now on the first day of the second month of this year this command
was given for the numbering of the people: whereby it is evident that all those
things, which are related in the foregoing book of Leviticus, were done within
the compass of one month, to wit, the first month of this second year. And
if we consider also that the Israelites went not out of the wilderness of
Sinai till the twentieth day of this month, into which they enterd the first
day of the third month of the first year, it is manifest that they were in
this wilderness a full year within a few days. Now whereas it is said also
here that God gave Moses this command for the numbering of the people in the
tabernacle of the congregation, hence some Expositours infer that God did not
speak now to him, out of the door of the tabernacle, as many times he did, but
within the tabernacle from off the mercy seat, as it is expressly said he did,
chap. 7. 8, 9.

Verse. 2. Take ye the sum of all the congrega^ion of the children of Israel,
etc.] In Exodus and Leviticus Laws were given for Gods worship and service; and
here now the Lord settles the church and commonwealth in order. They had been
once numbered the year before, the first year after their coming out of Egypt,
when every man paid a ransom for his soul, whereby their redemption by Christ
was figured, Exodus 30. 11, 12. Now another muster is enjoined: 1. that they
might be still put in mind both of Gods faithfulness in performing his
promise, that especially of multiplying them so exceedingly, as also of his
power and providence in maintaining such a huge multitude of people in such a
desert place: 2. that the distinct knowledge of their numbers might be an
encouragement to the people, being now to go forward against their enemies: 3.
that as they numbered them they might withal rank them in order according to
their tribes and families, to the end they might travel along in good array
without tumult and confusion: 4. to intimate how tenderly careful God was over
them, and what precious account he made of them: for those things men highly
es^eem, and for which they are solicitously careful, they are often numbering,
as we see in the shepherds often numbering their sheep, and the rich man's
telling over his coin: yea 5. some add another reason, to wit, that they might
gather of every man that was numbered that poll-money enjoined to be paid at
their numbering for the service of the tabernacle, Exodus 30. 12. When thou
take the sum of the children of Israel after their numbers, then shall they
give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord. But, as there it is noted,
it is questionable whether that were commanded as a perpetual Law that was
always to be observed.

Every male by their poll: from twenty years old and upward.] So that it is
ma^^fest, that neither women nor children were numbered, nor any that were not
full twenty years old; the reason whereof was, because only those were
numbered that were fit for the war: yet others would have another reason added
besides, to wit, that none might presume to take the full number of those of
whom God had said that they should be innumerable, according to that, 1. Chron.
27. 23. But David ^ook not the number of them from ^wenty years old and under,
because the Lord had said he would increase Israel like to the stars of the
heaven.

Verse. 3. All that are able to go forth to war in Israel.] Those therefore
that were by age, sickness, or any other infirmity disabled for the war,
were not numbered amongst the rest of the people.

Verse. 4. And with you there shall be a man of every tribe, etc.] To wit, to
see that the work was carried fairly without any wrong done to any of the
tribes. We cannot say whether these hereafter named were the heads and princes
of the tribes before, and only here by name appointed to this work, both to
avoid contention about it, and withal that their names might be honored in
the memorial of the work; or whether they were now chosen of God to have the
pre-eminence, and ^o be the heads of each tribe. Indeed some Expositours do
conclude for certain that ^hey were the heads of each tribe before, and that
because they take it for granted that that which is related concerning these
men by name, chap. 7. to wit, that as princes of ^ach tribe they brought their
^everall offering^ for the service of the tabernacle, was done a month before
this numbering of the people, to wit, in the first month of the second year, on
the day the altar was anointed, which they gather from the 1. verse of the 7.
chapter of this book. But whether this may be thence so certainly concluded,
see the note upon the place.

Verse. 10. Elishama the son Ammihud.] Numbers 7. 48. it is written Ammiud.

Verse. 14. Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of D^uel^.] Who is called, chap. 2. 14*
Revel, because the Hebrew letters are like one another, and often changed.

Verse. 21. Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ruben, were
forty six thousand and five hundred.] Reubens number was l^ss^ then any of
the sons of Jacob (except Gad, Asher, and Benjamin) which may be esteemed as
an effect of that curse denounced by Jacob, G^n. 49. 3* 4. that he should lose
the privilege of his birthright, the excellency of dignity and the excellenc^^
of power* because he went up to his fathers bed.

Verse. 24. Of the children of Gad, by their generations, etc.] Gad is here
reckoned in the third place, because this tribe was joined with Reubens and
Simeons on the South quarter of the host, Numbers 2. 10, 14. and so it is in
the rest.

Verse. 27. Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred.] Judahs number was almost
twelve thousand more then the greatest tribe, which may well be esteemed a part
of the dignity which together with a part of the birthright was conferred upon
him, out of whose tribe the Messiah was to come, Genesis 49. 8, 9, 10.

Verse. 33. Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were
forty thousand and five hundred.] Ephraims number is above eight thousand
more then Manassehs (and yet the Philistines slew many of this tribe in Egypt,
for which their father Ephraim mourned many days, 1. Chron. 7. 20, 21, 22.)
Thus Jacobs prophecy is in part fulfilled, his younger brother Ephraim shall be
greater then he, Genesis 47. 19.

Verse. 37. Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were
thirty five thousand and four hundred.] Benjamins number is of all the sons
of Jacob the least (though at the first his children were more then any of his
brethren, Genesis 46. 21.) and after his tribe was almost rooted out, Judge. 20. no
marvel therefore though it be called, Psalm. 68. 28. Benjamin the little.

Verse. 46. All that were numbered were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifti^.] When all the tribes were first numbered the year
before, there were also found just as here, six hundred thousand and three
thousand and five hundred and fifty; at least, if there were some small
difference, it was under fifty (such small numbers being indeed usually not set
down in the Scriptures) yet then it is most probable that the tribe of Levi was
numbered, which are here lest out. And if so, thence it must needs follow that
there were then at their first numbering so many young men of nine^een years of
age that now were twenty years old, as made up the number of the Levites, that
they might see they should lose nothing by whatsoever was employed in Gods
service.

Verse. 48. For the Lord had spoken unto Moses, saying, etc.] His numbering of
the tribe of Levi by themselves, not amongst the rest, some might think did
proceed from an ambitious desire to exalt ^^s own tribe; and therefore he makes
express mention that it was done by Gods special command, and that to show
that God had exempted them both from wars and all other secular employments,
and separated them only to attend upon the service of the tabernacle; and
besides because consequently their number was to be taken after another manner,
to wit, from a month old and upward, chap. 3. 15.

Verse. 51. And the stranger that comes nigh shall be put to death.] That is,
whosoever is not of the tribe of Levi* and this the Lord enjoined, both to
bring them to the more reverend esteem of Gods holy things, and withal to make
them ever mindful of this, that there was no drawing nigh unto God without a
Mediator.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke to Moses and Aaron, saying.] The people being all
numbered as God had appointed in the former chapter, in this chapter the Lord
gives direction for the ordering of every tribe when they pitched their tents,
and when they marched forward; for to prevent confusion in their marching some
order was necessary, and to cut off all matters of contention, the Lord himself
appoints unto every tribe their several place.

Verse. 2. Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard
with the ensign, etc.] For the understanding of this we must know 1. that
every tribe was to have a particular ensign, or banner, called here the
ensign of their fathers house, and so where that was displayed all of that
tribe were to pitch their tents together, as in one body: 2. that the camp
being divided into four quarters, in each quarter there was to be three
tribes, who besides their several ensigns had one standard in common for them
all, which the chief of the three tribes carried, and so every man of the
children of Israel was ordered to pitch by his own standard: 3. that being thus
divided orderly into four quarters, they were appointed to pitch their tents
about the tabernacle of the congregation, to wit, three tribes in one quarter
in the East, and three tribes in another quarter in the West, and so three
likewise on the South, and three on the North, and then the tabernacle was in
the midst of them. So hereby they were taught that God would dwell amongst
them as his people, to provide for them* to protect and defend them, etc. and
withal they were taught to have God still in their mind, and so to fear him
always and worship him as they ought to do: and 4. that though the tribes did
thus pitch their tents round about the tabernacle, yet it was, as the text
says, a far off, that is, there was a good distance betwixt them and the
tabernacle: how far off it was we cannot say, yet it may be probably ghessed,
that it was two thousand cubits, which is an English mile, because we find that
such a distance was between the ark and the people when they passed over
Jordan, Josh. 3. 4. And thus we may conceive what a glorious sight it was to
behold the tribes thus orderly ranked in their several places, and that it was
no wonder though Balaam was stricken with admiration to behold it, Numb. 24. 5,
6. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob' and thy tabernacl^s, O Israel! as the
valleys are they spread forth by the rivers side, etc.

Verse. 3. And on the East Side toward the rising of the sun shall the
standard of Judah pitch, etc.] Thus the tribe of Judah, out of which Christ was
to come, has the pre-eminence and goes foremost as Captain of the rest; and is
therein a type of Christ, the lion of the tribe of Judah, who also is Michael,
that with his Angels fights against the Dragon and goes before his heavenly
armies, Rev. 12. 7. Thus Judah has the dignity of the firstborn, which was
taken from Reuben; neither can Reuben wi^hstand it, because God has so ordered
it.

Verse. 5. And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
Issachar.] And with him Zebulun, ver. 7. both younger brothers to Judah, that
they might the more willingly be under his regiment.

Verse. 9. And all that were numbered in the camp of Judah were a hundred, etc.]
Thus the greatest number were in the first quarter, for the more safety of the
Sanctuary, and all Israel, almost thirty thousand mo^ then in any other quarter.

These shall first set forth.] That is, when the camp removes, these tribes
before mentioned, to wit, Judah and Issachar and Zebulun, which went together
in one regiment under Judahs standard, were to advance forward in the first
place: whereby it is evident that when they journeyed from one place to another
they did not march in that order as their tents were pitched about the
tabernacle when they stayed in any place; but first those of Judahs standard
advanced forward in the forefront, then immediately behind followed those of
Reubens standard, ver. 16. then next behind them came the regiment under the
standard of Ephraim, ver. 24. and then in the last place came those that
belonged to the standard of Dan, ver. 31. only the Levites went some of them
betwixt the regiment of Judah and the regiment of Reuben, as is expressed,
chap. 10. 17. and other next after Reubens regiment just in the midst of their
armies, having six tribes before them and six behind them.

Verse. 10. On the South Side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben.] The
South was to them that were ranked now with their faces Eastward on their right
hand, and so the right wing is given unto Reuben, because he was the firstborn
though he lost his birthright, Gen 49. which Judah and Joseph had shared
between them.

Verse. 12. And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon, etc.] Who
was his next brother, and that by Leah his mother. Now his other brother by
Leah being already disposed of, who was fitter to be joined with him then Gad,
the firstborn of Zilpah Leahs handmaid?

Verse. 14. Then the tribe of Gad, etc.] See chap. 1. 14.

Verse. 17. Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the
camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp, etc.] It is expressly said,
chap. 10. 17. that in their journeyings, when the camp removed from one place
to another, the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari set forward, bearing
the tabernacle, that is, the boards and coverings of the tabernacle, next after
Judahs regiment, between Judahs and Reubens regiment, and then afterward the
Kohathites, only bearing the Sanctuary, went just in the midst of the camp,
having six tribes before them, and six behind them. This therefore that is said
here, that the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with the camp
of the Levites in the midst of the camp, must either be understood only of the
Kohathites, who carried the Sanctuary, even all the holy things, just in the
midst of the camp; or else by the midst of the camp, must not be meant
precisely the just midst of the camp, but only that they went between the
regiments of the other tribes, some immediately after the regiment of Judah,
and the rest next after the regiment of Reuben, and so these last only were
precisely in the midst of the camp.

Verse. 18. On the West Side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim, etc.]
Unto Joseph's sons a double privilege is here given, because he was to have a
part of Reubens birthright, as it is expressly said 1. Chron. 5. 1, 2. for
first the posterity of his two sons are made two several tribes, which might
have been an occasion of much contention, had not God thus expressly ordered
it; and 2. unto them the West quarter is given for their pitching of their
tents, and that I conceiv^ as the second place of honor in the camp: for in
the same regard is the West quarter amongst the Levites given to the posterity
of Gershon the eldest son of Levi, chap. 3. 23. and so as amongst them Moses
and Aaron and the priests pitched immediately before the tabernacle, and then
the Gershonites, that were of Levies eldest son, just behind the tabernacle,
so in the ordering of the other tribes, Judahs regiment pitched before the
tabernacle, and the sons of Joseph behind it. And besides, when they
journeyed, they went in the forefront of those tribes that followed the
tabernacle, and so both when they marched, and when they pitched their tents,
they had the tabernacle still in their faces, as if appointed to take special
care of it; whereto some Expositours conceive the Psalmist alludes in that
expression, Psalm. 80. 2. Before Ephraim and Benjamin and Man^sseh stir up thy
strength and come and save us. For with the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh in
this regigiment and quarter Benjamin is here joined, ver. 22. and so all
Rachels posterity encamped together. But yet Ephraim, Joseph's younger son, is
appointed to be standard bearer in the camp before his elder brother Manasseh,
according to Jacobs prophecy of Ephraims superiority, Genesis 48. 19, 20. where he
set Ephraim before Manasseh.

Verse. 24. All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim, etc.] This was the
smallest number of all the armies.

Verse. 25. The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the North-side by their
armies.] He was the firstborn of the handmaids children, and Jacobs fifth
son, Genesis 30. 6. and by prophecy he was to judg^ his people as one of the
tribes of Israel, Genesis 49. 16. So God appointed him the standard in the left
wing: with him are joined the other two remaining sons of the handmaids, to
wit, Asher, ver. 27. and Naphtaly, ver. 29.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 1. THese also are the generations of Aaron and Moses, etc.] That is,
these mentioned and numbered in the sequel of this chapter are of the stock
whence Aaron and Moses d^scended, to wit, of the tribe of Levi: for by the
generations of such and such persons, in the Scripture, is meant sometimes
their ancestors, sometimes their children and posterity, and sometimes their
whole kindred and family, as here it is taken. Yet even the children of Aaron
and Moses are numbered amongst the rest: for though there be no mention made of
Moses sons, as there is of Aarons, ver. 2. yet even Moses sons are included
amongst the Kohathites, of which family Moses was, ver. 28. And therefore is
A^ron in this place prefixed before Moses, because in this regard Aarons sons,
as being priests, had the pre-eminence of Moses posterity, who were but
ordinary Levites. As for that clause, in the day that the Lord spoke with Moses
in mount Sinai, that I conceive is purposely added, because some of these here
mentioned, though they were living when the Lord spoke with Moses in mount
Sinai, yet they were now dead, in the second month of the second year, when
this command was given for the numbering of the people, namely Nadab and Abihu,
mentioned ver. 2.

Verse. 6. Bring the tribe of Levi near, and present them before Aaron, etc.]
Aaron and his sons entered upon the office of the priesthood in the first
month of the second year after their going out of Egypt, as it is evident,
Levit. 10. but it seems the Levites were not set apart to enter upon their
office till they were now numbered, and appointed how they should pitch their
tents about the tabernacle, and what the several charge should be of each
family of them, which was in the second month of the second year, chap. 1. 1.
But yet that they should be set apart to this employment in stead of the
firstborn was promised them before, when they were appointed to slay those
that had worshipped the golden calf, as is before noted upon Ex^d. 32. 29. How
this may be reconciled with that in Deuteronomy. 10. 8. see in the notes upon that
place.

Verse. 7. And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation, etc.] That is, they shall pitch their tents round about the
tabernacle, that they may be near at hand to be subservient and helpful unto
Aaron in the several duties of Gods worship, and the service of the
tabernacle, which God has given in charge to Aaron, and which God has given
in charge to the whole congregation.

Verse. 8. And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, etc.] That is, that
wherewith the children of Israel must have stood charged, but that the Levites
are separated to take it upon them in Isreal's behalf.

Verse. 10. And thou shall appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priests office, etc.] That is, though the Levites are given unto Aaron
and his sons for his help, that they may minister unto him and be assistants
in those things which are fit for them* yet with those things that belong
peculia^ly to the priests office even the Levites themselves must not upon pain
of death intermeddle, nor must the priests turn over the work of the Sanctuary
to the Levites, so to ease themselves; they must wait themselves upon their
office, and have the chief hand in those holy employments, the Levites are
only appointed to be subservient and helpful unto them.

Verse. 15. Number the children of Levi, after the house of their fathers, by
their families.] See the note upon chap. 1. 48.

Every male, from a month old and upward shall thou number them.]
Male-children were not reputed wholly purified from their uncleanness till
they were a month old, Levit. 12. 4. and then were the firstborn brought and
presented before the Lord, Luke 2. 22. and then were they redeemed, chap. 8.
16. Now therefore from that age were the Levites numbered, who were given unto
God in stead of the firstborn. And besides, there would not have been any
thing near so many of the Levites as there were of the firstborn, if the
Levites had not been numbered from a month old.

Verse. 23. The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle,
Westward.] Thus the rereward (the second place of honor to that in the
forefront, where Moses and Aaron with the priests encamped) is given to the
Gershonites, as descended of Levies eldest son; but the most holy things were
not committed to their charge, the reason whereof, see ver. 31.

Verse. 25. And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle, etc.]
Thus the Gershonites had under their charge 1. the tabernacle; not the boards
of the tabernacle (for they were under Meraries charge, ver. 36.) but the
tabernacle mentioned Exodus 26. 1. made of ten curtains of fine twined linen
and blue and purple and scarlet, etc. 2. the tenth which was that made of
eleven curtains of goats hair, Exodus 26. 11. 3. the covering* that is the
coverings, both that of rams skins and that of badgers skins; for both
were the Gershonites charge, Numb. 4. 25. and 4. the hangings for the door of
the tabernacle.

Verse. 28. In the number of all the males from a month old and upward were
^ight thousand and six hundred.] There were therefore of these Kohathites
eleven thousand more then were of the Gershonites, ver. 22.

Verse. 31. And their charge shall be the ark and the table, etc.] Thus God of
his free grace honored the house from which Moses was descended, to wit, that
of the Kohathites, with the charge of all the most holy things, the rather also
because the priests, who were to make use of these holy things in the service
of God, were of the same house. But withal to clear Moses from an ambitious
and partial preferring those of his own stock, the Lord gave no dignity to his
sons above their brethren, but they were ranged amongst the ordinary Levites,
as we may see 1. Chron. 23. 14. As for the hanging here mentioned amongst the
most holy things under the Kohathites charge, it was the vail which hung
between the holy and the most holy place, wherein the Ark was wrapped up when
the Kohathites carried it, chap. 4. 5.

Verse. 32. And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the Levites, etc.] Hence he is called that has this charge the second
priest, 2. Kings 25. 18. Thus Eleazar being high priest in Aarons room,
Phinehas Eleazars son was governor over the Levites, 1. Chron. 9. 20.

Verse. 36. And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, etc.] And because these things were heavy, there
were twice as many wagons and oxen allowed to them as to the Gershonites'
Numb. 7. 8.

Verse. 38. Keeping the charge of the Sanctuary for the charge of the children
of Israel.] See the foregoing note upon ver. 8.

Verse. 39. All the males from a month old and upward were twenty and two
thousand.] To wit, the firstborn of the Levites being deducted. If we sum up
together the particular numbers before mentioned, to wit, seven thousand and
five hundred of the Gershonites, ver. 22. eight thousand and six hundred of the
Kohathites, ver. 28. and six thousand and two hundred of the Merarites, ver.
34. we shall find that all the males from a month old and upward were not
twenty and two thousand, as is here said, but twenty and two thousand and three
hundred: and therefore it seems the three hundred here left out in the general
sum were the firstborn amongst the Levites, who being the Lords in that regard
as they were the firstborn, were not therefore to be reckoned amongst those
that were to be given to the Lord in stead of the firstborn of the other
tribes: and the main reason why the number of the Levites was now taken, was to
show how they were taken in exchange for the Israelites firstborn. Indeed it
may seem strange that there should be but three hundred firstborn males
amongst so many thousand Levites: But for that we must know, that in all
probability only those were reckoned for firstborn, that were firstborn
males since their coming out of Egypt, when God did first challenge the
firstborn to be his in remembrance of his slaying all the firstborn amongst
the Egyptians. And whereas it may also seem strange that there should be of the
whole tribe of Levi numbered from a month old and upward but two and twenty
thousand and thre^ hundred, whereas the least of the other tribes being numbered
but from twenty years old and upward had two and thirty thousand and two
hundred, to wit, the tribe of Manasseh, chap. 2. 21. we must consider that this
was doubtless by the special providence of God, that he might have the whole
tribe of Levi in stead of the firstborn: for if the tribe of Levi had been as
numerous as the other tribes, there would have been far more of them then the
firstborn were, and so they could not have been taken in stead of the
firstborn. But what became, may some say, of the Levites male-children that
were under a month, and so not now numbered amongst those that were to be taken
for the firstborn? I answer doubtless the whole tribe was consecrated to the
Lord, and therefore we may probably conceive that either by the special
providence of God there was none at present under that age, or else those few
that were under that age were taken in exchange for so many of the firstborn
of the Israelites that were afterward born, who should otherwise have paid for
their redemption.

Verse. 41. And thou shall take the Levites for me (I am the Lord) in stead of
all the firstborn among the children of Israel.] That is, in stead of the
firstborn males that were now at present amongst them: for all the firstborn
that came after this both of man and beast were to be redeemed* or given to the
priest, chap. 18* 15* Every thing that opens the matrice in all ^lesh which
they bring unto the (...) ^^^ther it be of men or beasts, shall be thine, etc.

And cattle of the Levites in stead of all the firstlings, etc.] As the Levites
are taken for the firstborn of the Israelites; so the Levites cattle were
taken in exchange for the firstborn of the Israelites cattle: yet we must not
think therefore that the Levites cattle were offered in sacrifice as the
firstborn of the cattle afterward were, but it sufficed that the Levites had
them, who were Gods peculiar portion, and appointed to receive in his name what
was to be given to him.

Verse. 43. And all the firstborn males by the number of names etc.] All the
Levites being numbered were twenty and two thousand, and now the firstborn
being numbered were twenty and two thousand two hundred seventy and three;
wherein Gods special providence appears, that the number of the firstborn
should be so near the number of the Levites taken in their stead, to wit, but
two hundred seventy and three more then the Levites were.

Verse. 46. And as for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen, etc.] There being two hundred seventy and three of the
firstborn more then there were of the Levites, it is ordered that these should
pay for their redemption five shekels a piece by the poll, which was the price
they afterward paid for the redemption of the firstborn, Numb. 18. 15. Now
whereas it may seem unequal that some of the firstborn should pay
redemption-money and others should pay none, because the Levites were taken in
their stead; to this it is answered by Expositours, that either this was
decided by lot, who should pay and who should not pay, and then there was no
wrong done; or else that the money that was to be raised for the redemption of
these two hundred seventy and three was paid in common by them all.

Verse. 48. And thou shall give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is
to be redeemed, unto Aaron and to his sons.] Because the Levites were given
to him, verse. 9. and when the Levites failed, this money was in their stead.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 3. FRom thirty years old and upwards, even until fifty years old, all
that enter into the host, etc.] In the former chapter all the Levites of a
month old and upward were numbered, because all were numbered that were to be
taken in stead of the firstborn, and so to be accounted as those that were set
apart as holy to the Lord; but here only those that were thirty years old and
upward are numbered, to wit, those that were to be employed in carrying the
tabernacle and the holy things thereof. Indeed in the eighth chapter of this
book, verse. 24. it is said that the Levites should enter upon their service at
five and twenty years old: to which some answer out of the Hebrew traditions,
that at five and twenty years they were admitted to be instructed and trained
up to the service of the tabernacle, but did not actually enter upon the
service till they were thirty years old. But I conceive the truer answer is,
either that they entered upon the service of the tabernacle at five and twenty
years, but not upon this of removing and carrying the tabernacle and the holy
things therein (of which at present Moses only speaks) until they were thirty
years old, because a good settled strength of body was required to that
service; or else that the chief charge and care of the service of the
tabernacle l^y upon those only that were thirty years old, only when they
were but five and twenty years they were admitted to assist and help their
brethren upon whom the ch^rg^ lay, in those things that they should set them to
do. And therefore we find that this numbering of the Levites for the service of
the tabernacle from thirty years old continued even in David's time, 1. Chron.
23. 3. Now the Levites were numbered from the age of thirty years end upward;
the Lord teaching us by this maturity of years at first required in the
Levites, that the ministers of God, attending upon holy things, the chari^t of
Israel and the horsemen thereof, 2. Kings 2. 12. should be no novices or young
scholars, but ripe in knowledge and of solid jugement; and therefore we see
that both the Baptist and Christ were full thirty years old ere they entered
upon their office and ministry, Luke ^. ^2, 23. And for the same cause it was
that none were now numbered that were above fifty years: for because at that age
strength uses to decay, and natural infirmities to grow upon men, therefore
they were then exempted from the harder service of the tabernacle (and so were
not now numbered amongst those that were to carry the tabernacle) yet still they
were to minister with their brethren in the tabernacle of the congregation, to
keep the charge, chap. 8. 26. that is, they were still to be assistant as
overseers, to see that the work was done: that charge lay upon them still
though they were exempted from all laborious service in their own persons; and
besides they were still to be employed in teaching and instructing the people.
As for the description which we have here of those that were to be numbered, all
that enter into the host to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation,
we must know first, that the meaning is not, that those that were now numbered
from thirty years old and upward* etc. were all that were at any time employed
in the service of the tabernacle (for I say it is evident chap. 8. 24. that
from twenty and five years old and upward they went in to wai^ upon the service
of the tabernacle, though happily as subservient only to those of thirty years
old and upward, upon whom the charge of the work chiefly lay) but the meaning
is, that those that were now numbered were all such as did enter into the host
to do the work of the tab^rnacle of the congregation; and s^condly, that the
company of the Levites that did the service of the tabernacle are here called
an host, because they had their several orders, and offices, and places under
the command of their heads and governors, and were not admitted into the
service if they were crasie or lame, or any way unfit for these holy
imploym^nts.

Verse. 4. This shall be the service of the sons of Kobath, etc.] To preven^
confusion and ambition ^very family has their service seve^ally appointed.

Verse. 5. And they shall take down the covering-vail, etc.] That is, the v^il
which hung between the holy and the most holy place, called by the Apostle the
second vail, Heb. 9. 3. Herewith the ark was covered whilst the tabernacle
stood, Exodus 40. 3. Thou shall put therein the ark of the testimony, and cover
the ark with the vail; and herein it was wrapped up and covered now when the
tabernacle was to be taken down and removed, and that by t^^ priests, the
^^un^s of A^ron: so that hereby it is also evident, that though the high
priests alone w^nt into the most holy place where the ark was, and that too but
once (...) year, Heb. 9. 7. to wit whilst the tabernacle was standing to do
service there; yet when the tabernacle was to be taken down* the in^eriour
priests might freely go in thither, to wit, having first taken away the vail,
because then there was no difference betwixt the holy and the most holy place;
and the Lord, no doubt, at those times withdrew the cloud upon the mercy-^eat,
Levit. 16. 2. which was the sign of Gods presence there; yea and the Levites
too afterward, when the holy things were covered, to remove the ark from
thence, as seems to be employed verse. 16.

Verse. 6. And shall put thereon the covering of badgers skins, and shall spread
over it a cloth wholly of blue.] This covering of badger skins was not that
wherewith the tabernacle was on the outside cove^^d (for that was amongst the
carriage of the Gershonites, verse. 25.) but it was a smaller case or covering
of these skins laid over the ark to keep it dry when the Levites carried it:
and therefore we see there was such a covering fitted for the table, verse. 8.
and so also for the rest of the holy things, verse. 10, 11, etc. and these with
the clothes of blue and scarlet, used in the covering of these things, were
those ^lothes of service mentioned Exodus 31. 10.

And shall put in the staves thereof.] It is said of the staves belonging to
the ark, Exodus 25. 15. The staves shall be in the rings of the ark, they shall
not be taken from it; and hereupon it becomes questionable how it can be said
here, that the priests should put in the staves thereof, if the staves were to
remain always in the rings, and were upon no occasion to be taken out. Some
Expositours to remove this seeming contradiction hold that the staves here
spoken of were not the staves of the ark, mentioned Exodus 25. but certain other
staves that were put through the covering of the ark* and wherewith they
carried the ark being thus covered. But because they are called here ^he staves
thereof, and where afterward Moses speaks of the candlestick which had no
staves belonging to it, there another expr^ssion is used for the carrying of
it, verse. 10. And shall put it upon a bar; therefore I conceive this place is
meant of the very staves that were made together with the ark* and covered over
with gold as the ark was; and that two other ways this doubt may be more
probably resolved: to wit first, that though the staves of the ark were never
to be taken out of the rings while^t the tabernacle was standing* of which that
law is meant. Exodus 25. 15. yet when the tabernacle was taken down, and the
holy things to be removed, then they might and must necessarily take o^t the
staves till the coverings were put upon it, and then were to put them in again,
as here is enjoined, for the carrying of it; or secondly, that this which is
here said of putting in the staves thereof, is meant of putting in the end of
the staves under the covering, to wit, that because the staves were a part of
the ark* and covered over with gold as the ark was, therefore not so much as
the ends of the staves that stuck out were to be le^t bare to the injury of the
weather, nor might be seen or touched by the Levites when they came to carry
it, but were therefore to be carefully put in under the covering; and to that
end happily the cases or covering of the ark were so made that there were
places to put in the ends of the slaves, and so the Levites did not touch so
much as the staves uncovered.

Verse. 7. And the continual bread shall be thereon.] That is, the shewbread*
here called the continual bread, because it was to be continually upon the
table before the Lord, Exodus 25. ^0.) shall not be taken off from the table*
when it is thus covered and wrapped up* but shall be left still upon the table,
even when the Levites remove it from one place to another. And hereby it is
evident that they had loaves of shewbread standing upon the table all the time
of their traveling through the wilderness: for though they were chi^fly fed
with manna all the time* Exodus 16. 35. The chil^ren of Israel did eat manna
forty years, till they came to a land inhabited; yet it may be probably enough
conceived that they had too some small supply of corn to make bread from the
neighboring countries, whereof however they would be sure to provide every
week the loaves of shewbread that were to stand upon the holy table.

Verse. 13. And they shall take away the ashes from the altar.] In giving
direction how the altar of burnt-offerings was to be wrapped up and covered
every time they took down the tabernacle, and were to go forward to some other
place, here is order taken that first they should take away the ashes, whereby
to me it seems not so probable, which most Expositours hold, that the
Israelites never offered any sacrifices in the time of their traveling through
the wilderness after they were once gone from mount Sinai: for why then should
they be here enjoined to take the ashes from off the altar when ever they
removed the tabernacle? happily they did not indeed for want of store of cattle
so constantly observe all the sacrifices enjoined as they did afterward when
they came into the land of Canaan: But that God should c^use them at mount
Sinai to build such a goodly tabernacle, and then set apart a whole tribe to
the service of the tabernacle, and destroy Nadab and Abihu for not being exact
in that service, to render the priests thereby more careful and wary, and yet
that after this for above eight and thirty years together they should never
offer any sacrifices, s^ems to me very improbable. And as for that place. Amos
5. 25. Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and offerings in the wilderness
forty years, O house of Israel? the meaning is not that all those forty years
they never offered sacrifices nor offerings (for at Sinai it is evident they
did) but that they did even in those times adulterate the worship that he had
enjoined them: so that it cannot be concluded, I conceive, that they did never
sacrifice in their passing through the wilderness. But what became of the fire
when they cleared the altar of the ashes, and put the coverings upon it? I
answer* though it be not expressed how it was done, yet that it was put into
some pot or other v^ssel* and ^o preserved still with supply of wood, cannot
well be questioned; because they were not to use any strange fire in their
sacrifices, but only that which was kindled from heaven, Levit. 9. 24. which
therefore they were appointed continually to keep burning, Levit. 6. 12. The
fire in the altar shall be burning in it, it shall not be put out.

Verse. 15. And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
Sanctuary, etc.] Here direction is given for the carriage of all the holy
things of the Sanctuary before mentioned, to wit, that being so covered, so
soon as the camp b^gan to remove, the Levites that were the posterity of Kohath
should come and take them up, and carry them in their place, only with this
caution added* but they shall not touch any holy thing lest they die. And thus
the charge of the Kohathite^, a^ it was more honorable then that of the other
Levites, because they had the change of the most holy things; so it was more
burdensome, because they b^re it not in carts as the other Levites did theirs,
but on their shoulders; and withal more perillou^, which must needs much take
away the envy of this honor. The a^k ind^^d was oft^n car^yed by the priests
themselves, as it is evident, Deuteronomy. ^1. 9. Mo^^s wro^e this Law, and delivered
it to the priests the sons of Lev* which bare the Ark of the covenant of the
Lord; for though this service was imposed upon the Levites as subservient to
the priests, yet the prie^^s were no^ excluded, who did therefore upon special
occasions carry it themselves, as when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3. 6. and
when they compassed the walls of Jericho, Josh. 6. 6. But ordinarily this
service was performed by the Levites, especi^lly till the number of the priests
was increased, they carried it as they did all other the holy things of the
Sanctuary. The bra^en laver, I know, is not here mentioned amongst the holy
things which they were to carry; but the reason of this may be, because only
those things are named which were covered by the priests, but this laver could
receive no hu^t by the were, and therefore was not covered.

Verse. 16. And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
pertain^th the oil for the light.] Two things are here affirmed concerning the
charge or office of Eleazar, the eldest son of Aaron, to wit, in this service
of removing the ^abernacle: namely 1. that to him pertained the oil for the
light, and the sw^et ^n^^nse, and the daily meat offering, and the anointing
oil, that is, that he himself was to carry these things; for if his charge had
been only to oversee the carrying o^ these things by the Kohathites, why
should these things be particularly mentioned, since the overseeing of them in
all their carriages belonged to him: and then 2. that to him appertained the
oversight of all the tabernacle* etc, that is, he was to oversee the Kohathit^s
concerning the carrying of these things, and to appoint every one to their
several burdens. And thus as the Kohathites had the honor of carrying the
most holy things, so Eleazar, the eldest son of Aaron* was appointed to have
the over^^ght of them, as Ithamar his younger brother had the over^ight of the
Gershonites, ver. 28. and the Merarites, ver. 33.

Verse. 25. And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, etc.] To wit,
the four several coverings wherewith the tabernacle was covered, that is, 1.
the ten curious curtains, mentioned here in the second place, though they were
the first coverings, and were called as here the tabernacle of the
congregation, Exodus 26. 1* and 2. the eleven curt^ins of goats hair, which were
laid over that, named here in the first place* and called the cur^ains of the
tabernacle: 3. the covering which was of rams skinn^s died red: and then 4.
the covering of badgers skins, which lay uppermost of all.

Verse. 32. And by name ye shall reckon the ins^ruments of the charge of their
burden.] Whereas the sockets, pillars, pi^^^s* cords, and other instrument^
co^^itted to their charge were many, and ^ight some of them at least seem of
le^^^ importan^e, therefore the Lord ^ppointed that of these there should be a
note kept, and so ^ccordingly they should be delivered by name* lest any should
be to seek when the tabernacle was to be ^et up again. Her^by also was
signi^ied how careful God is of the least member of his church, and so also of
all his or^inance^* John 10. 3.

Verse. 44. Even those that were numbered of them after their ^amili^s were three
thousand and two hundred.] Usually in all families the younger and aged ^ort,
if reckoned togeth^r, are more then the middle aged: and so it was in the other
families of the Levites: of the G^r^honites there was little more then a third
part fit to serve in the tabernacl^, and of the Kohathites there was not a
third part* and yet the Merarites are more then half able men for Gods service;
a most remarkable proof of the wisdom and providence of God. Because the
greatest burden was impos^d upon the Merarites, therefore God gives them more
able men then any of the other families, and yet the general number of these
were less then any of the other two.

Verse. 48. Even those that were numbered of them ^ere eight thousand and five
hundred and fourscore.] Note how few there were of the Levites in comparison of
the other tribes: O^ Judah there were seventy and four thousand and ^ix
hundred able men for the outward wa^fare in the host of Israel, Numb. 1. 27.
but of the Levites there were but eight thousand five hundred and fourscore men
fit for their service.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 2. COmmand the children of Israel that they put out of the camp every
leper, etc.] To wit, the lepers and those that had running issues, till they
were cured and cleansed, and those that were unclean by the dead, till after
certain days they were purified according to the Law. More concerning this ^e^
in the note upon Levit. 13. 46.

Verse. 6. When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, etc.]
That is, when they shall commit any sin ^^ereinto by reason of humane frailty
men are subject to fall, to wit, in regard of any wrong done to their
neighbor, which is a ^inne highly displeasing to God, they shall then confess
and make satisfaction as is here appointed. Because the purloyning of the goods
of our brethren, and all other such acts of injustice, are ^innes that do more
especially ^ind^r the well ordering of camps, therefore does the Lord in this
place urge this (...) Law against these kind of offenses* that the camp of
Israel now set in ord^r might neither be defiled nor disordered thereby.

Verse. 7. And he shall recompense his trespass with the principa^l ^hereo^,
and add unto it the fifth part thereof.] That is, he shall, by way of
rec^mp^ncing the wrong he has done to his neighbor, not only restore fully
the whole principal he has defrauded him of, but also give him more ^ver and
above the fifth part of so much as he had detained from him, which was ^njoyned
both by way of satisfying the party wronged as concerning the want of his goods
whilst they were detained, and also by way of a penalty on the party off^n^ing.
Neither does this contradict thos^ Laws, Exodus 22. where the thief that had
^t^llen from his neighbor is appointed to restore double what he had taken
away, yea in some ca^e^ fourfold and fivefold: for those Laws were for such
against whom the crime was proved by witnesses in a legal way, but this is for
those that did voluntarily confess the wrong they had done, in which case the
Lord impo^eth a lighter penalty, to wit, only a fifth part over and above the
principal.

Verse. 8. But if the man have ^o kinsman to recompense the trespass unto,
etc.] In these words one direction is only employed, to wit, that if the party
were dead to whom the wrong was done, then the recompense must be made to his
heir or next kinsman; and then another is expressed, to wit, that if there be
no such kinsman to be found, then must the trespass be recompensed unto the
Lord, even to the priest, because in all trespasses done to our neighbors God
is also injured, and the priests the Lord had appointed to be his receivers.
But now this the Hebrews understand only of trespasses done to strangers: for
there is no man in Isra^l, they say, without an heir or kinsman, either child,
or brother, or other of his blood.

Verse. 9. And every offering of all the holy things of the children of Israel,
which they bring unto the priest, shall be his.] This is here added by way of
amplification, to show why in the verse before he had said, that the trespass
shall be recompensed to the Lord, even to the priest; for, ^aith he, it is no
otherwise ordered in this then in other things, my priests I have appointed to
receive in my name whatever is due to me; every offering, or every
heave offering, etc. shall be his, that is whatever is of all the holy things
only heaved or offered unto the Lord, and not burnt in my service upon mine
altar, the priest shall have it.

Verse. 10. And every man's hallowed things shall be his.] That is, not only
those meat offerings, and those parts of the peace offerings which were waved
and heaved before the Lord, but generally all the hallowed things* such as were
the first fruits and things vowed, etc. were appointed for the priest: as if he
should have said, in a word, whatsoever any man gives the priest as due to
God, it shall be the priests; for to him God has given it. See this more fully
expressed, Ezekiel. 44. 30.

Verse. 12. If any man's wife go aside and commit a trespass against him, etc.]
This is the order which God took for the try^ll of ^ wife, whether guilty or
not guilty, of whom her husband was jealous: and prescribed it was at this time
happily, when God was now setting all things in order concerning the camp, both
to prevent the defiling of the camp by such filthiness, by keeping wives in aw
with the fear of this trial; and likewise to prevent the inconveniences that
might arise by the jealousies of men, where the dwellings of f^milies were not
so several as in towns and cities. For though it be a sin in a husband
unjustly to suspect his wi^e, yet God allowed the husband to bring his wife to
this trial, because of the hardness of their hearts, lest the wife should be
subject to a greater mischief for want of this trial, to wit, of being cast
off, or ^lain, or otherwise oppressed by her husband in the rage of his
jealousy. But why was there not the ^ame Law for the trial of the husband, if
his wi^e were jealous of him? I answer, there are several reasons given for
this by Expositours: as 1. because women are naturally more prone to be jealous
and suspicious then men, and therefore not so fit to enjoy this liberty; 2.
because women by reason of their subjection to their husbands were n^^ so fit
to call their husbands to such a trial; 3. because the adultery of the wife is
more mischievous then the adultery of the husband, in regard that thereby the
husband is made often to father another man's issue, and to leave his estate and
inheritance to children that are not his; and lastly, because wives in their
jealousy had not so much power to oppress and wrong their husbands as the
husbands had to wrong their wives.

Verse. 15. Then shall the man bring his wife unto the priest.] The priest was
in his office a figure of Christ, by whom God will judge the s^^rets of men,
Romans 2. 16. and the tabernacle was the ^igne of Gods pre^ence amongst them. The
jealous husband was therefore to bring his wife unto the priest, and the
priest, ver. 16. was to bring her near, to set her before the Lord, to wit, at
the door of the tabernacle, that so perceiving her self set as it were before
Gods tribunal, the very fear of Gods all-se^eing ey^, and the shame that would
fall upon her in the ^ight of all the congregation now gazing upon her, might
s^are her from submitting her self to this trial if indeed she were guilty.

And he shall bring her offering for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley
meal.] The general drift of this offering no doubt was, that it might be a
testimony that she willingly proffered her self to b^ tried by the Lord, to
whom she presented this offering, whether she were guilty or no: yet because
the ^ame quantity is pres^ribed here that is prescribed for the
trespasse-offering, Levit. 5. 11. namely the tenth part of an ephah, I conceive
it was also brought by way of atonement for her other sins, as desiring that
the Lord in his mercy, for his Christ's sake, passing by her other trespasses,
would in this particular deal with her according to her deserts: And indeed he
that will in regard of his innocence in any one particular appeal to Gods
judgment with David, Psalm. 7. 8. Judgeme, O Lord, according to my
righteousness, etc. must yet for the general course of his life ^ay with
David, Psalm. 143. 2. Enter not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy
^ight shall no man living be justified. Other meat offerings were of fine wheat
flower, this of barley meal; others had oil and frankincense, Levit. 2. this
no^e; no doubt both the course offering and the forbidding of oil and ^ncense
(^ignes of joy and gladness of heart) were to express the poor ^ad and
doleful condition of this suspected woman.

And he shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense thereon; for it is an
offering of jealousy, etc.] That is, it is an offering whereby she yiel^ed her
self to be judged by the Lord, if guilty of that iniquity whereof her husband
was jealous, and did desire the Lord to show that he did remember it; and
therefore nothing implying sweetness or joy was to be put to this offering.

Verse. 17. And the priest shall take holy water in an ^arthen vessel.] This
holy water was either that water of separation, which was used for purifying,
chap. 19. or rather water taken out of the holy laver, con^ecrated to holy
u^es. No doubt the holiness of these things thus used was to strike the
greater terror into her, that if guilty ^he might not dar^ to add perjury to
her other ^inne: for the abuse of holy things by the light of nature we know is
a foul ^inne, and perilous. As for the earthen vessel, the baseness of the
vessel tended also to express the h^miliation of the woman, and the ^adnesse
of the business now in hand. Besides, because it was employed in bringing
uncleanness to light, if any were, it may be probably thought that God would
have no monument to remain of it, but appointed it to be broken after this work
was ended, as in other cases, Levit. 6. 28. and 11. 33. and 15. 12.

Verse. 17. And of the dust that is in the floor of the tabernacle the priest
shall take, and put it into the wa^er.] It was fit the drink should be
distasteful, to put her in mind of the bitter curse that would follow upon her
drinking if ^he were guilty: and to this end dust is put into it. But be^ides,
it was also first, because dust in all uses was a ^igne of baseness, sorrow
and afflictions, as Job 2. 12. Psalm. 1. 7, 5. Psalm. 22. 15. Lam. 3. 29. and so
was fit to imply both the foul and unclean ^inne which was in question, the
a^fliction of the woman suspected, and the sorrow she would bring upon her self
if guilty: and secondly, because dust was the food of the cursed serpent, Genesis
3. 14. and so might signify, that if she had harkened to his temptations ^he
should be partaker of his curse. Withal it was holy dust*dust of the ^loore of
the tabernacle (as the ground whereon Moses ^tood, Exodus 3. 5. was holy g^ound)
that it might be the more terrible, and teach her to fear judgment from the
Lord.

Verse. 18. And the priest shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the
woman's head. The uncovering of the head was a sign of sorrow, Levit. 21. 10.
And he that is the high priest among his brethr^n, upon whose head the
anointing oil was poured, shall not uncover his head nor rend his clothes; and
to have her head bare in such an assembly was a shame, 1. Cor. 11. 6. For if
the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn; but if it be a shame for a
woman to be shorn or shaven, let her be covered. The covering of this woman's
head was therefore pulled off by the priest, first, to show the sad and woeful
condition this woman was now in; secondly, by the shame hereof to make other
women careful so to carry themselves that they might not give any occasion of
suspicion to their husbands; thirdly, and chi^fly, to signify, that it was in
vain any longer to hide her sin, if she were guilty, because God would now
lay ^er open, and discover to the eyes of all Israel whether or no she were
faul^y.

And the pri^st shall have in his hand the bitter water tha^ causes the
curse.] It is called the bitter water, from the effe^t, because it caused the
curse: to express^ which the better it was no doubt made unpleasing to the
taste by the dust put unto it.

Verse. 21. The Lord make thee a curse and an oath among thy people, etc.] That
^s, the Lord make thee such a fearful example of his wrath and indignation by
causing thy thigh to rot, and thy belly to swell, that in time to come when any
of thy people would use a fearful curse or imprecation upon any, they may
therein make mention of thee, desiring that such plagues and mis^ries might
fall upon them ^s fell upon such a woman, that being guilty of adultery did yet
drink the water of jealousy. The like ^xpression we have, Jer. 29. 22.

Verse. 22. And this water that causes the curse shall go into thy bowels* ^o
^ake thy be^ly to swell, and thy thigh to rot.] And so God should punish her in
^^ose very parts which had been abused in the service of ^inne.

And the ^oman shall say, Amen, Amen.] This word of consent is doubled, to show
the fervency of her zeal, the innocence of her cause, the uprightness of her
conscience, and the purity of her heart.

Verse. 23. And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot
them out with the bitter water.] That is, he shall write them in a scroll of
parchment, and then wash and scrape them off into the water. And this, I
conceive, was done, to assure the woman that the curse threat^ed should surely
fall upon her, if she were guilty; and that because though there were no nat^r
ll cause why this water thus ^ingled with dust should have such a ^^range
operation, yet the word written should cause the water to work this effect. And
therefore as sure as she saw the writing of that scroll washed off into the cup,
so sure she mig^t be that the ^urse from the word should, as I may say, pass
into the water, and in that water should pass into her bowels.

Verse. 24. And he shall cause the woman to drink the bitter water, etc.] To
wi^, after she had offered the jealous-offering; for it is evident in the
following verse, that first the priest did take out of her hand and offer her
meat offering for her, verse. 25, 26. and then afterward he made her to drink
the bitter water, verse. 27.

Verse. 26. And the priest shall tak^ an handful of the offering, etc.] See ^he
note upon Levit. 22.

Verse. 28. And if the woman be not defiled, but be clean, then ^^e shall be
free, and shall canceive seed.] That is, the drinking this water shall no wi^e
hurt her, insomuch that she shall be as capable of bringing forth children as
ever she was before; whereas the guilty woman should by drinking the water be
utterly disabled for ever conceiving with child by reason of those ^ad effects
it should work in he^ body, the innocent woman should be free from all such
inconveniences, and should conceive and bring forth children as formerly. This
may well be taken to be most probably the full meaning of the words; yet the
most of Expositours judge that there is far more intended thereby, to wit,
that there is a promise here made to the innocent wi^e as by way of recompense
from the Lord for the shame she should undergo by being so unjustly suspected,
to wit, that upon the drinking of this water she should not fail to conceive
and bring forth children to her husband that was then bound to receive her to
favor again, yea though before she had been barren.

V^rs. 31. The^ shall the man be guiltless, etc.] That is, whereas if the
husband should nouri^h jealous thoughts in his mind concerning his wife, and
thereupon either cast her off, or any way oppress her, this would be sin to
him; if on the other side he should take this legal way to find out whether
his wife were faulty or no, he should be guiltless whatever the event should
be: if upon the drinking the water, her belly should swell and her thighs rot,
her miseries should no way be impu^ed to him, but must lie upon his wife, who
by her uncleanness and impudent denial of it had drawn this judgment upon
her self; and on the other side, if the woman upon ^^is trial should be found
innocent, the husband must not be liable to any censure ^or it, because he
only used the liberty given him of God for the discovery ofthe tr^th, the
blame, if any, must lie upon the wife who had given occasion of suspicion to
her h^sband, and so still ^aith the text, the woman shall bear her iniquity.
And indeed i^is most probable that husbands were not admitted to bring their
wives to this trial unless they could show that their wives had given some
cause of jealousy, though they could not prove them guilty of adultery, in
which case no wonder at all it is though the husband were judged guiltless in
bringing his wife to this trial, and all the fault laid upon the wife, what
ever the event of the trial was.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 2. WHen either man or woman shall separate themselves, etc.] Having
ordered those things that concerned his people in general the Lord now takes
order for those who desired to be more nearly and closely bound to God by a
special vow, to wit, what they should do who desired by vow to separate
themselves from the ordinary course of men, that they might the more freely and
wholly dedicate themselves to God, that is, to a more strict and pure course of
serving of God then other men used, and were therefore called Nazarites, that
js, men or women separate from others and bound to a peculiar profession or
course of life. These God here allows, first, that their example might allure
others to strict holiness, these being the miroirs of their times, and admired
amongst the people, Lam. 4. 7. Her Nazarites were purer then snow, they were
whiter then milk; and secondly, that they might be types and shadows of Christ,
who was indeed the true Nazarite, even holy, harmless, undefiled and separate
from sinners, Heb. 7. 26. and was therefore by the providence of God (though
upon another ground, namely his dwelling in Nazareth) called a Nazaren or a
Nazarite, Matthew. 2. 23. But withal God prescribes laws to these men and women
to prevent the excess of superstition.

Verse. 3. He shall separate himself from wine and strong drink, etc.] Because
the Nazarites were to give themselves wholly to the service of God during the
time of their separation, therefore as the priests were forbidden the drinking
of wine or strong drink when they were to go into the tabernacle of the
congregation, Levit. 10. 9, so were the Nazarites also; yea the drinking or
eating of any thing that came of the vine, vinegar, or raisons, etc. thereby
also to signify their full and pe^fect renouncing of all worldly pleasures, or
any thing tending thereto, and how exactly careful we ought to be not only to
avoid all evil, but also to abstain from all appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
22. But yet still we must note that both this and the other laws following
these Nazarites were bound to observe only during the days of their
separation, as is expressed verse. 4. 5, 6. There were indeed some Nazarites
perpetual during their whole life, such as were Samuel, 1. Sam. 1. 28. and
Samson, Judge. 13. 7. and these were Nazarites by commandment, not vow. But
these Nazarites, concerning whom these laws are given, were such as did of
their own accord take upon them the vow of a Nazarite for some certain days,
some for a longer time, some for a shorter, as they pleased themselves.

Verse. 5. All the days of the vow of his separation there shall no rasour come
upon his head, etc.] To wit, that his hair being kept thus uncut might be a
memorial to him of his separation and consecration unto the Lord, and
therefore in the next words it follows, Until the days be fulfilled in the
which he separateth himself unto the Lord, he shall be holy: for indeed the
chief thing that God required of these Nazarites was inward and spiritual
holiness, these outward ceremonies being but only signs and remembrances of
that, and without that nothing but mere vanity. That this law is to be
understood only of men, and not of women Nazarites (of whom mention was also
made in the beginning of the chapter) we may easily conceive, because their
hair was always kept uncut, and so could not be to them a memorial of their
consecration. But for men Nazarites this was enjoined as a memorial of their
consecration, and that for these reasons, as may be probably conceived: First,
that it might be a sign of their cleanness from pollutions: for when the
Nazarites casually defiled, verse. 9. or the Leper, Levit. 14. 8. 9. were
cleansed from theirimpurity, their hair was shaven off; and therefore the
Nazarites keeping his hair from shaving was a sign that he had kept himself
from being defiled: Secondly, that it might be a sign of their special
subjection to God, as the woman's long hair is a sign of her subjection to her
husband, 1. Cor. 11. 5, 10. Thirdly, that the neglect of trimming their hair
might be a sign of the neglect of the outward adorning of the^r bodies, and
how wholly they were intent upon the service of God and the adorning of their
souls, that they were mortified to all worldly delights, and only taken up
with spiritual and heavenly things.

Verse. 7. He shall not make himself unclean for his father, etc.] Namely by
touching, mourning for, or burying them: wherein as much exactness was
required of the Nazarite as was required of the high priest, Levit. 21. 11. and
thus by avoiding these legal impurities they were taught what exactness of
spirit^all purity and holiness God required of them: for this refraining from
the dead (in whom the image as it were of Gods curse for sin was to be seen,
for the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23.) figured our abstaining from
sinful and dead works, that we may keep our selves unspotted of the world,
pure and undefiled before God, Jam. 1. 27. Besides, this taught them to
moderate their affections and sorrow for their earthly friends, that they might
be holy to their father in heaven.

Because the consecration of his God is upon his head.] That is, because the
sign of his consecration is upon his head, to wit, his long hair.

Verse. 9. Then shall he shave his head in the day of his cleansing, on the
seventh day shall he shave it.] The hair of the Nazarites was as it were a holy
thing consecrate to God, as being the sign sanctified or set apart to be a
memorial of that strict vow of singular holiness, whereby he had bound
himself: this being therefore defiled, it was to be shaven off, that new hair
might come in the room; whereby was signified how strict God is in exacting
purity in those that consecrate themselves to his service. And this must be
done on the day of his cleansing, on the seventh day: for this last clause, on
the seventh day shall he shave it, is added by way of explaining the clause
before, in the day of his cleansing; for the seventh day was the usual day of
cleansing for those that were defiled by the dead, as we may see, chap. 10. 11,
12.

Verse. 11. And the priest shall offer the one for a sinne-offering, etc.]
Though it were no fault in the Nazarite that a man should die very suddenly by
him, yet because it was contrary to the Law that enjoined the Nazarite not to
come nigh any dead body, therefore he was to bring a sinne-offering for his
cleansing.

Verse. 12. And he shall cons^crate unto the Lord the days of his s^paration.]
That is, he shall begin anew to consecrate unto God the very same number of
days which before his defiling he had vowed unto God.

And he shall bring a lamb of the first year for a trespasse-offering.] By
this trespasse-offering (which also figured Christ) he was prepared for the
observations of his renewed vow; because all grace and ability to do good is of
God obtained by Christ Jesus our Lord.

Verse. 13. And this is the Law of the Nazarite.] That is, this that follows is
the Law that must be observed by the Nazarite, when he has fulfilled his vow,
and is to be discharged thereof in an orderly manner. Which Law, it is
conceived, the Apostle Paul was persuaded to observe, to decline the offense of
the Jews, Acts 21. 26.

Verse. 14. And he shall offer his offering unto the Lord, one he-lambe, etc.]
Those offerings the Nazarite was to offer when he had fulfilled the days of
his separation, and was now to be freed from his vow, 1. by way of
thankfulness to God, as acknowledging that it was through his grace that he
had been enabled to fulfill his Nazarites vow; and 2. to make atonement thereby
for his sins committed under his vow, thereby also confessing that,
notwithstanding his strictest endeavors after holiness, he had failed many
ways if God in Christ should not be merciful to him.

Verse. 15. And their meat offering and their drink offerings.] That is, beside^
the cakes and wafers before mentioned, enjoined as an extraordinary
meat offering, he was also to bring the ordinary meat offerings and
drink offerings appointed for appendances to all sacrifices, whereof see Numb.
28.

Verse. 18. And the Nazarite shall shave the head of his separation, etc.] All
the time of his separation he was to keep his hair uncut, but now he was to
shave his head (called here the head of his separation, because the hair on his
head was the sign of his separation) and that at the door of the tabernacle,
to show that his vow was now at an end, whereby he had consecrated himself to
the Lord; and then afterward he was to put it in the fire, which is under the
sacrifice of the peace offerings, that is, not the fire on the altar of
burnt-offerings (for there only the fat of the peace offerings was burnt) but
the fire under the ca^drons or pots wherein the peace offerings were boiled:
and all this was done as by way of thankfulness to God, to signify that he
had the perfection of his Nazariteship from him.

Verse. 19. And the priest shall take the sodden shoulder of the ram, etc.] That
is, the left shoulder, the right shoulder was due unto him raw of all
peace offerings, Levit. 7. 32. And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the
priest for an heave offering of the sacrifices of your p^ace-offerings; this
gift of the sodden shoulder was peculiarly given from the Nazarites ram only,
and taught them that as they had received more special grace of God, so they
should give him more special thanks then other men.

Verse. 21. This is the Law of the Nazarite who has vowed, and of his offering
unto the Lord for his separation, besides that that his hand shall get.] That
is, besides that which of his own free will he shall vow to give according to
the estate wherewith God has blessed him: That which is formerly prescribed
was necessarily to be done both by rich and poor, when they took upon them
this vow of Nazariteship; if being able they vowed more offerings, they must
perform their vow, but this before prescribed must by all be brought; the
poorest are not allowed less.

Verse. 23. On this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel, etc.] This
blessing thus pronounced by the priest did include a promise of Gods blessing
them, delivered as it were out of Gods own mouth, and that by and through
Christ, of whom they were types, Acts 3. 26. Unto you first God having raised
up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you
from his iniquities; and so again, Luke 24. 50. And he led them out as far as
Bethany, and he lift up his hands, and blessed them. Therefore when Christ was
to come the priest of Aarons seed was speechles, Luke 1. 22. to teach them to
look for another priest in whom all nations were to be blessed, Gal. 3. 8.

Verse. 24. The Lord bless thee and keep thee, etc.] Some conceive that the
repeating of this word the Lord, or Jehovah, three several times in this
blessing did imply the mystery of the Trinity: But whether so or no, sure w^
are it was pronounced in the name of God who is one in essence, but three in
persons, the Father Son and holy Ghost; and evangelically we have this very
blessing explained by the Apostle, 2. Cor. 13. 14. The grace of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the love of God, and the communion of the holy Ghost be with you
all: Amen.

Verse. 25. The Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee.]
That is, the Lord be favorable kind and loving to thee, and let him so
manifest his love and grace to thy heart and conscience, that thou may
plainly perceive it. A cheerful loving countenance we call lightsome, as on
the other side we call an angry countenance cloudy: In the sight of the kings
countenance is life, says Solomon, Prove. 16. 15. So that by the Lords making
his face to shine upon his people, nothing else is meant but his love, and the
manifestation of his love and favor to them, according to that, Psalm. 44. 3.
They got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them, but thy right hand and thy right arm and the light of thy
countenance, because thou had a favor unto them.

Verse. 26. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace.] By
this clause of the Lords lifting up his countenance upon them two things may be
employed: 1. the Lords love and favor, as in the former clause: for as the
hiding and casting down and turning away of the face testifies the displeasure
and wrath of a man (the light of my countenance they cast not down, says Job,
chap. 29. 24. that is, they did not anger or grieve me and so turn the smiles
of my countenance into frowns) so the lifting up the face readily upon a man is
an argument of his good liking and favor toward him: and 2. the Lords
provident care over them, to protect and bless them, and so is the same with
that, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon
them that hope in his mercy.

Verse. 27. And they shall put my name upon the children of Israel, and I will
bless them.] That is, they shall pronounce them blessed in my name and by my
favor which shall be upon them, as if now given by the priests: and this it
seems was signified by the lifting up and spreading forth their hands toward
the people, as Aaron did, Levit 9. 22. and thus the name of the Lord is
elsewhere taken, as Prove. 18. 10. The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the
righteous runs into it and is safe.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. ANd it came to pass on the day that Moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, etc.] In this chapter Moses relates the offerings that were brought
by the Princes of the tribes for the carriage of the tabernacle, and for
dedicating of the altar. Now because it is said here, that these twelve princes
brought six wagons and twelve oxen for the carriage of the tabernacle, on the
day that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle and had anointed it, etc. it is
much questioned amongst Expositours, when this was done: Some conceive that
they offered these things precisely on the day that Moses had fully set up the
tabernacle, etc. which was on the first day of the first month in the second
year after their coming out of Egypt. Exodus 40. 17. a full month before the
numbering of the people, whereof Moses spoke in the beginning of this book (for
the charge for that was given on the first day of the second month, chap. 1.
1.) and so they conceive that this is here inserted, though done a month
before, only because these things formerly offered by the Princes were now
given to the Levites. But then others conceive that these wagons and oxen were
now offered by the Princes in the order as it is here set down, after the
tribes were numbered and placed in their several stations round about the
tabernacle; and that therefore by these words, And it came to pass on the day
that Moses had fully set up the tabernacle and had anointed it, etc. only thus
much is intended, that these things were brought and offered by the Princes
after that Moses had fully finished the erection of the tabernacle, etc. and
the ordering of all things belonging thereto, amongst which we may well reckon
the placing of the tribes in their several stations, and the Levites also in
their places round about the tabernacle. And indeed this exposition seems most
probable, 1. because it is said here that the Princes that offered these things
were those that were set over the numbering of the people, ver. 2. to wit, those
mentioned by name, chap. 1. 5. etc. 2. because it is not likely that these oxen
and wagons were offered for the service of the tabernacle a month before the
Levites were set apart to their service, and had their several charge assigned
them for the carrying of the tabernacle and those things that belonged thereto:
and 3. because it is said in the end of this chapter, verse. 88. This was the
dedication of the altar after it was anointed, which shows that these things
were not done just on the day that Moses set up the tabernacle, etc.

Verse. 5. And thou shall give them unto the Levites, to every man according t^
his service.] That is, according as the weight is more or less of those things
which ^re committed to their charge.

Verse. 8. And four waggon^ and ^ight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari.]
See the note upon chap. 3. ver. 36.

Verse. 10. And the Princes offered for dedicating the altar in the day that ^t
was anointed, etc.] That is, for the first employing thereof in those holy
services for which it was ordained. Indeed Moses first offered burnt-offerings
and other sacrifices thereon seven days together for the consecrating of the
priests, Levit. 8. (which was in the first month of the second year) and the
next day after Aaron and his sons offered sacrifices thereon for himself and
the people in general, Levit. 9. 7. on which day it was that Nadab and Abihu
perished. But now in the second month of the second year, when the tribes were
all placed about the tabernacle, the Princes brought their offerings, and
because these were the first offerings that were offered for any particular
persons or tribes, therefore they are said to be offered for the dedicating of
the altar, and so those following words, in the day that it was anointed, must
not be taken strictly of the very day whereon it was first anointed, but more
generally, as before, ver. 1.

Verse. 12. And he that offered his offering the first day was Nahshon, etc.]
Here the Captains of the tribes offer every one in his day, according to the
order wherein God had set them round about the Sanctuary, beginning at the
East-quarter, proceeding to the South, and then to the West, and so ending at
the North.

Verse. 13. And his offering was one silver charger, etc.] To wit, for the use
of the altar of burnt-offerings, which stood in the court whereon these
sacrifices which they brought were to be offered: for all that were used in the
tabernacle were of pure gold.

Verse. 17. And for a sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, etc.] Of these the
Princes with the priests, etc. did eat, and so keep a feast with joy before the
Lord for his mercy toward his people.

Verse. 88. This was the dedication of the altar after it was anointed.] See the
note upon ver. 1.

Verse. 89. And when Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation,
etc.] This may seem to be here added, because after that all things were thus
ordered concerning the tabernacle, and that Aaron and his sons were thus
far entered upon their priestly office, Moses went into the tabernacle to
receive further direction from the Lord, and so the Lord spoke unto Moses from
the mercy-seat, as is here expressed; and he spoke unto him, that is, Mo^e^
spoke unto the Lord, propounding such things to the Lord as he desired to be
satisfied in.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. WHen thou lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over
against the candlestick.] Hitherto I conceive the priests had only entered upon
their service on the altar of burnt-offerings; now the dedication of the altar
being finished, and Moses being now to ent^r the priests into the service of
the Sanctuary, the Lord does again give direction about the lamps, When thou
lightest the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light over against the
candlestick. In the original it is, over against the face of the candlestick;
the common exposition of this is, that the seven lamps should give light round
about wherever the candlestick was to be seen. But this cannot be the meaning:
for here is some particular direction given for ordering the lamps; now however
they were ordered or lighted, they would have given light round about. The
meaning of these words I thus conceive: That place is said to be over against
the candlestick, where the candlestick stood in full view: Now it was not to be
seen on the Southside (for on that side close to the walls or boards of the
Sanctuary it was placed, Exodus 26. 35. And thou shall set the table without the
vail, and the candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle
toward the South: and thou shall put the table on the Northside: nor did it
stand full in the eye either Eastward or Westward (for so the seven lamps stood
all in a row one behind another) but to one that stood on the Northside the
seven lamps were in full view; that way therefore Aaron was to light the lamps,
that is, he was to place the loose bowls on the top of the branches, wherein
the lamps were, in such manner that the wick or flame of the lamp might issue
out on the Northside, toward that side of the tabernacle which was over against
the face of the candlestick, and that, no doubt, because the table of
shewbread stood on that side.

Verse. 6. Take the Levites from among the children of Israel, and cleanse
them.] The priests being fully entered upon their service, now the Levites are
consecrated to their employments as assistants to them: but lest they should
think themselves equally admitted to the work of the priesthood, they are
neither consecrated at the same time with the priests, nor with the same
ceremonies.

Verse. 7. Sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave all their
flesh, etc.] This water of purifying, wherewith the Levites were now to be
sprinkled at their consecration, was doubtless that made with the ashes of a
red heifer: and therefore it is evident, that directions for ma^ing this water
were given before this time, though they are not set down by Moses till (...)
19. chapter of this book. As for the shaving of their flesh, that was done to
the end they might be the more perfectly cleansed from all pollution
whatsoever: and both the one and the other signified the exact purity and
holiness that God requires in those that are employed in the sacred ministry.

Verse. 8. And another young bullock shall thou take for a sinne-offering.] This
second bullock, the second here named, was first offered, verse. 12. And no
bullock was offered for sin, save for the sin of the high priest or of the
congregation, Lev. 4. yet the Levites now taken for all the firstborn of
Israel offered such a sinne-offering as the whole congregation should.

Verse. 10. And the children of Israel shall put their hand upon the Levites.]
That is, some of the chief (as the firstborn) in stead of the re^^, by this
sign transferring the charge and service of the Church from themselves ^^on
them, whom they did now freely offer to the Lord to be wholly set apar^ for
that service.

Verse. 12. And thou shall offer the one for a sinne-offering, and the other for
a burnt-offering, etc.] That is, thou shall cause them to be offered, to wit,
by Aaron and his sons. See also the notes upon the sacrifices that were
offered at the consecrating of the priests, Exodus 29. 10, etc.

Verse. 15. And after that the Levites shall go in, etc.] That is, into the
court of the priests, for within the tabernacle it self the Levites might not
enter, nor was there any service there for them to do.

Verse. 19. And to make an atonement for the children of Israel, etc.] The
Levites are said ^here to make an atonement for the children of Israel, not
because they offered sacrifices for the people (for that the priests only did)
but either because they were subservient to the priests when they were offering
those sacrifices, whereby atonement was made for the sins of the people; or
else because by their other service in the tent, which for or in stead of the
people they performed according to the will of God, he was pleased with the
people, and sent no plague upon them, as otherwise there would have been, if
they themselves had intermeddled with those holy services.

Verse. 24. From twenty five years old and upwards, etc.] See the notes on Numb.
4. 3.

Verse. 25. From the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting, etc.] That is,
in the hard labors of bearing the Sanctuary. See again Numb. 4. 3.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, etc.]
Being here to relate according to the order of the story how the Passcover was
kept by some few particular persons on the fourteenth day of the second month,
he first begins with the rela^ion of Gods command for the keeping of it by the
whole congregation at the appointed season, which was omitted before, that so
he might show upon what occasion the Passover was kept by these particular
persons in this second month.

Verse. 2. Let the children of Israel also keep the Passover at his appointed
season.] This commandment concerning the Passover is again enjoined the second
year, because by the first institution they seem bound only to keep it in the
land of Canaan, Exodus 12. 25. And it shall come to pass when ye be come to the
land which the Lord will give you according as he has promised, that ye shall
keep this servic^. And indeed after this we find not that they kept any till
they came into the land, Josh. 5. and that because they knew not how long they
should stay in a place, and when they should remove. So that it seems they
would not have kept this without special warrant.

Verse. 3. According to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies
thereof shall ye keep it.] Here are to be excepted the special rites which
belonged only to the first Passover in Egypt, as the sprinkling of their
posts with blood, the ^ating of it standing, etc. whereof see Exodus, 12.

Verse. 6. And there were certain men who were defiled by the dead body of a
man, that they could not keep the Passover that day, etc.] If they meddled
with holy things being legally unclean, by that law given since the first
Passover, Levit. 22. 3. they were to be cut off; if they did not keep the
Passover, they were also to be cut off, Exodus 12. 15. hence the straits they
were in.

Verse. 7. Wherefore are we kept-back that we may not offer an offering of the
Lord, etc.] The Passover is so called, as being commanded by the Lord, and
kept unto his honor. See Exodus 12. 27.

Verse. 10. If any man of you or of your posterity shall be unclean by reason of
a dead body, etc.] Upon the occasion of these men that complained for being
debarred from keeping the Passover, because at the usual time when they
should have kept it, on the fourteenth day of the first month, they were
defiled by the dead body of a man, the Lord here established this for a
perpetual law, that in case any person should in time to come be defiled by a
dead body at the ordinary time in the first month, when the rest of the people
kept the Passover; or should be then in a journey about necessary business,
so far off that he could not come home against the fourteenth day of the
first month, but was forced to be absent a while longer, that in this case
such a person or persons should keep the Passover on the fourteenth day of the
second month. And under these two particular cases here expressed I conceive
that all other necessary hindrances, whereby men were kept from celebrating
the Passover, are comprehended, as in case they were unclean by any other
legal pollution besides that of being defiled by a dead body, or were detained
by sickness, etc. and that the rather because in Hezekiahs time there was a
Passover kept on the fourteenth day of the second month (by warrant it seems
of this law) when yet they were other occasions then these here mentioned that
disabled them for keeping it at the usual time.

Verse. 17. And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle, then after that
the children of Israel journeyed.] That is, when the cloud was taken up from
the tabernacle it removed before the camp, and so whithersoever that led them
they followed it: for so it is expressly said, Exodus 13. 21. And the Lord went
before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them the way, and by night
in a pillar of fire, to give them light to go by day and night.

Verse. 19. And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days, then
the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord.] That is, they kept the
charge of serving the Lord, whilst the tabernacle was erected and the cloud
tarried still upon it; or they kept the charge of the Lord, to wit, the charge
he had given them of staying so long as the cloud rested upon the tabernacle;
and therefore the last clause is added by way of explaining the former, and
journeyed not.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 2. MAke thee two trumpets of silver, etc.] Here at first were but two
trumpets for Aarons two sons Eleazar and Ithamar; but the number of the
priests increasing in Solomon's time, there were an hundred and twenty priests
sounding with trumpets, 2. Chron. 5. 12. And these trumpets were signs of the
ministry of the word, and the office of teaching, discharged by men called and
fitted thereto: for as the use of these trumpets was first to assemble the
congregation before the Lord in his Sanctuary; secondly, to give warning and
direction for their marching toward the land of Canaan; thirdly, to encourage
the people when they went forth to war; fourthly, to be a sign of rejoicing
at all their festivals and days of rejoicing: so the work of Gods ministry is,
first, to persuade the people to assemble themselves before God, there to
perform with fear and reverence the public duties of his worship and service,
Joel 2. 15, 16. Blow the trumpet in Zion, sanctify a fast, call a solemn
assembly. Gather the people, sanctify the Congregation, assemble the Elders,
gather the children and those that suck the breasts, etc. secondly to give them
warning and direction for all the duties of Christianity, which being performed
in faith and obedience to God are as so many several motions toward the
heavenly Canaan; thirdly, to give them warning of danger approaching, and to
stir them up to fight the Lords battles against Satan, Sin, Antichrist,
etc. See Esa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, spare not, lif^ up thy voice like a trumpet,
and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins;
and fourthly, to encourage and comfort sinners with the promises of the ^ospel,
to quicken them with faith and readiness of mind to perform the duties of Gods
worship, and with thankful and glad hearts to praise God for all his mercies,
and especially for Christ. See Esa. 27. 13. And it shall come to pass in that
day that the great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready
to perish in the land of Assyria, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and
shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem. Besides, as the trumpets
were not to give an uncertain sound, but such as the people might distinctly
perceive what they were to do: so the ministers must both pray and preach so
that the people may understand them, 1. Cor. 14. 8, 9. For if the trumpet give
an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself to the battle? So likewise you
except you utter by the tongue words easy to be understood, how shall it be
known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the air* Secondly, of silver
these trumpe^^ must be made, which was the purest metal and fittest for sound,
to signify also the purity and zeal required in Gods ministers, The tongue of
the just is as choice silver, says Solomon, Prove. 10. 20.

That thou may use them for the calling of the assembly, and for the
journeying of the Camps.] Thus they were taught to depend upon God for all
their attempts both in peace and war.

Verse. 3. And when they shall blow with them, all the assembly shall assemble
themselves to thee, etc.] That is, when they shall blow with both of them, as
appears by the next verse, And if they blow but with one trumpet, then the
princes, which are heads of the thousands of Israel shall gather themselves
unto thee.

Verse. 6. They shall blow an alarm for their journeys.] That is, not for these
two quarters only before mentioned, but for the other also*

Verse. 8. And the sons of Aaron the priest s^all blow with the trumpets.] The
priests are appointed to be the trumpeters, that so the people might entertain
the sound thereof as coming from God, and so assemble themselves as into Go^^
presence, and go forth both in their journeys and battles, as in obedience to
Gods command, and in faith believing and expecting his direction and assistance.

Verse. 9. And if ye go to war in your land against the enemy that oppresses
you, then ye shall blow an alarm with the trumpets.] So it is said Numb. 31. 6.
And Moses sent them to the war a thousand of every tribe, them and Phinehas
the son of Eleazar the priest to war, with the holy instruments and
trumpets to blow, in his hand; and 2. Chron. 13. 12. And behold God himself is
with us for our Captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to cry alarm
against yo^.

And ye shall be remembered before the Lord your God, and ye shall be saved from
your enemies.] The sounding of an alarm with these trumpets, when they were to
go forth to war against their enemies, was to the people a sacred sign that
God would assuredly take notice of their danger, and help them against their
enemies; and in these words now there is a promise of grace annexed to these
signs, to wit, that when they did rightly use these trumpets in faith and
obedience to Gods commandments, the Lord would remember them, and give them
victory over their enemies.

Verse. 10. Also in the day of your gladness, and in your solemn days, etc.]
Here is prescribed the last use they were to make of these trumpets, to wit,
that they were to blow with them over their burnt-offerings and over the
sacrifices of their peace offerings, upon all solemn festival days: as first,
when they kept any extraordinary day of rejoicing for any public extraordinary
mercy, which is called here the day of their gladness, such as was the day
when the ark was carried into the temple, 2. Chron. 5. 12, 13. and when the
builders laid the foundation of the temple of the Lord in the days of Ezra,
Ezra 3. 10. and secondly, upon all their set festivalls appointed by the law,
as the feast of unleavened bread, the feast of tabernacles, etc. called here
their solemn days; and thirdly, on their new moons, in the beginning of every
month, whence is that of the Psalmist, Blow the trumpet in the new moon, in
the time appointed on our solemn feast day, Psalm. 81. 4. Now hereby was
signified both their earnest desire that God would hear their prayers and
accept of their sacrifices and also the inward joy and gladness of their
hearts from their assurance that God in Christ would accept of them and their
service: for which cause also afterward the Lord by David and other prophets
ordained other instruments also whereon the Levites played, as psalteries,
harps, cymbals, etc. 1. Chron. 16. 5. David also and other holy men made
psalms and songs, which some of the Levites sung whilst others played on the
instruments, 1. Chron. 25. 6, etc. whence is that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 89.
15. Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound; they shall walk O Lord
in the light of thy countenance; and therefore also it is said in the close of
this verse, that this blowing of these trumpets over their sacrifices should be
to them for a memorial before their God: for hereby is signified bot^ th^^ if
they performed this service in faith of Gods mercy with joyful and glad
hearts, the Lord would then remember them and accept of their service, and also
that it should be to them a sacred sign to mind them and assure them that God
would hear their prayers, and accept of their sacrifices.

Verse. 11. And it came to pass on the twentieth day of the second month,
etc.] The Israelites came into the wilderness of Sinai in the beginning of the
third month of the first year, Exodus 19. 1. and now the cloud being taken up
from off the tabernacle, and going into the forefront of their camp, they went
out of the wilderness on the twentieth day of the second month in the second
year, about six days after those men had kept the Passover that being defiled
by the dead could not keep it at the appointed season, whereof Moses spoke
before, chap. 9. 6, etc. So that hereby it is evident that they stayed in this
wilderness of Sinai a full year wanting nine or ten days: and though there be
here only mention made of the taking up of the cloud, which was the sign that
they were to be gone thence; yet withal God spoke unto them to remove, Deuteronomy.
1. 6, 7, 8. The Lord our God spoke unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long
enough in this mount; turn you and take your journey and go into the land of
the Amorites, etc. and thus both by word and sign God called them from Sinai,
the place of bondage, by reason of the law there given, Gal. 4. 24, 25. unto
the land of promise, which figured the state of grace and freedom by Jesus
Christ.

Verse. 12. And the children of Israel took their journeys out of the
wilderness of Sinai; and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran.] To
wit, in a place of this wilderness which by occasion of the following story
was called Kibrothhattaavah; and in this wilderness they journeyed along time,
and in several places of it pitched their tents; and therefore it is said
again, Numb. 12. 10. that they pitched in the wilderness of Paran.

Verse. 14. In the first place went the standard of the c^mp of the children of
Judah according to their armies.] When they rested any where they pitched their
tents in four quarters about the tabernacle, but removing they march in order
one after another as is here expressed.

Verse. 17. And the tabernacle was taken down.] To wit, the priests having first
with vails and clothes covered the ark, and other holy things, as was enjoined,
Numb. 4. 5. And when the camp sets forward, Aaron shall come and his sonn^s,
and they shall take down the covering vail and cover the ark of the testimony
with it. This taking down and setting up and removal of the tabernacle
signified the instability of that legal figurative worship which Christ at his
coming was to abolish, Heb. 12. 27, 28. And this word, yet once more,
signifies the removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are
made, that those things which cannot be shaken may remain: Wherefore we
receiving a kingdom which cannot b^ moved, let us have grace, etc. and also
the unsettled estate of the Church and all the members thereof in the
wilderness of this world. See 2. Cor. 5. 1, 4. For we know that if our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens: for we that are in this
tabernacle do groan being burdened, not for that we would be unclothed, but
clothed upon, that mortality might be swallowed up of life. See also 2. Pet 1.
14.

Verse. 21. And the Kohathites set forward bearing the Sanctuary.] That is, the
holy things of the tabernacle, but the ark went foremost, verse. 37.

Verse. 22. And the standard of the camp of the children of Ephraim set forward
according to their armies.] So that the Sanctuary went immediately before them,
unto which the Psalmist seems to have reference, Psalm. 86. 3. Turn again, O
God, and cause thy face to shine and we shall be saved.

Verse. 25. And the camp of the children of Dan set forward, which was the
rereward of all the camps, throughout their hosts.] Who had most soldiers next
Judah, as we may see chap. 2. 31. Thus the Sanctuary had the midst, the most
safe and honorable place: the greatest camp went foremost, the next in
greatness went hindmost, to defend it against enemies before and behind. But
the Lord himself was he that went before, and was the rereward behind, as the
Prophet speaks, Esai. 52. 12. For the Lord will go before you, and the God of
Israel will be your rereward.

Verse. 29. And Moses said unto Hobab the son of Raguel, the Midianite, Moses
father in law, etc.] Some conceive that it is Raguel the Medianite, and not
Hobab that is here called Moses father in law, even the same that is elsewhere
called Revel Exodus 2. 18. and Jethro, Exodus 3. 1. and that Hobab, to whom Moses
now spoke, being the son of this Raguel or Jethro was the brother in law of
Moses, who stayed still with Moses at mount Sinai after their father Reguel or
Jethro was returned home to his own country, Exodus 28. 27. But because Hobab
is elsewhere expressly called, according to our translation, the father in law
of Moses, Judge 4. 11. it must needs be he also that is here also called Moses
father in law, even the same that is in Exodus called Jethro and Revel, and
that Raguel the Midianite was his father, as is noted before upon Exodus 3. 1.
And if it be objected that Jethro the father in law of Moses departed from him
before, Exodus 18. 27. to this I answer, as before in the note upon that place,
that though his going from Moses be mentioned there, yet it was not till now
that he left him, when both Moses and the Israelites were to depart mount Sinai.

Verse. 31. Leave us not, I pray thee, etc.] That is, go not away from us, or if
thou go away return again, Though Moses had lived forty years about these
parts, yet knowing the difficulties they were likely to meet with in their
passage through the wilderness, he much desired the stay of Hobab with them,
who knew the country far better then himself, and might be a great help unto
them, and therefore he presses him again to stay with them, that he might be
to them in stead of eyes, that is, that he might show them how they might best
advantage themselves in disposing their camp. And indeed though the^e was no
need of his help to lead them and show them which way they should go, because
the pillar of the cloud and the ark went before them to lead them their way,
yet many other ways Hobab might be helpful to them, as by telling them when
they were to stay in any place, where they might have water for their camp,
where there was most danger of being assailed by the neighboring nations, and
in many other particulars: whether Hobab yielded hereupon to stay with Moses,
it is not expressed; yet because there is no mention made here of a second
denial, it is generally conceived that he did stay. But because it is
expressly said, Exodus 18. 27. that this Hobab or Jethro the father in law of
Moses was dismissed by Moses and returned again into his own land, it seems
more probable that he did now return home to his country, as is there said.
But yet that he returned again, or at least that some of his posterity were
deputed in his room to go along with the Israelites, is most manifest and
clear, because his posterity dwelt afterward amongst the Israelites in the and
of Canaan, as we may see, Judge. 1. 16. And the children of the Kenite Moses
father in law, went up out of the cit^e of palmtrees, etc. and again, Judges 4.
11. Heber the Kenite was of the children of Hobab the father in law of Moses.

Verse. 33. And they departed from the mount of the Lord three days journey.]
They traveled three days together without resting (for because the cloud
stayed not they might not stay) which seems to have been the cause of their
complaining, chap. 11. ver. 1.

And the ark af the covenant of the Lord went before them in three days
journey, to search out a resting place for them.] The Hebrew word signifies
went in their faces or sight, which it might do, and yet be in the midst of
the armies, carried amongst the other holy things by the sons of Kohath, ver.
21. and so the most expound it, it went before them, that is, in their sight as
their guide; for when the cloud stayed, then the priests stayed with the ark,
and upon the stay of the ark all the armies stayed. But I see no reason why we
may not think the ark went before in the forefront of their armies, though the
other holy things went in the midst, as ver. 21. to wit, together with the
cloud, and that to search out a resting place for them, a place convenient to
pitch their tents where they might have water and pasture for their flocks, etc.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 1. ANd when the people complained, it displeased the Lord.] The word in
the original (here translated complained) may also be rendered as it is in the
margin, were as it were complainers, and so may intimate that they did only
secretly begin to murmur and mutter, and not break forth into such an open
complaint as afterward they did at Kibroth Hattaavah, when they lusted for
meat. Indeed many Expositours understand this and that afterward mentioned,
ver. 4. of one and the same murmuring, which they say is first summarily set
down here, and afterward more particularly related in the sequel of the
chapter, and especially because, Psalm. 78. 19, 20, 21. the fire that now
devoured the people is mentioned, as the punishment of their lusting for flesh,
They said, Can God furnish a table in the wilderness? Therefore the Lord heard
this and was wroth; so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also came up
against Israel. But in that Psalm it is evident that the several passages of
their murmuring are not related historically in order, but many things are
promiscuously inserted here and there. However evident it is that the murmuring
for flesh, mentioned ver. 4. was another from this, because it is said here
that they wept again, and besides that was done at Kibroth Hattaavah, this at
Taberah. The cause of their present complaining indeed is not expressed, but in
all likelihood we may conceive it was because they were weary of following the
ark three days journey through the wilderness together without intermission,
whereof there was mention made in the latter end of the former chapter ver. 33.

And the fire of the Lord burnt among them.] That is, a fire sent from God: but
whether it brake out of the earth, or from the pillar of fire, or were poured
down upon them from heaven, it is not expressed. And thus their fiery tongues
were punished with fire.

And consumed them that were in the uttermost parts of the camp.] This is aded,
to let us see how the whole army escaped when God sent a fire amongst them, it
was because the fire brake out only upon the uttermost parts of the camp; and
withal it may imply the cause of the punishment, because by these words it
seems probable that in the uttermost parts of the camp the sin began, amongst
those that were faint and wea^y with travel, as in Deuteronomy. 25. 18. How he met
thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee even all that were feeble
behind thee, when thou wast faint and weary: and he feared not God; and upon
them therefore the judgment did principally fall.

Verse. 2. And the people cried unto Moses.] The reasons why they ran to Moses
for his intercession may be these: 1. the sudden terror of the plague; 2. the
guilt of their own consciences stopping their mouths; 3. the opinion they had
of his holiness and special interest in God; 4. because their repining
against him, who was Gods instrument in leading them along, they might think
was now punished, and therefore they come and desire him to forgive them, and
pray for them.

Verse. 3. And he called the name of the place Taberah.] This name imposed upon
the place where the fire brake out, shows that it was not the same where they
pitched their tents after their three days travel, which by occasion of the
following story was called Kibroth Hattaavah, but rather some other place in
the ways they traveled thither when they were faint and weary, a little
before they came to Kibroth Hattaavah.

Verse. 4. And the mixed multitude that was among them fell a lusting, etc.] What
this mixed multitude was, see in the note upon Exodus 12. 38. Amongst them it
seems the murmuring began, though the Israelites soon joined with them in the
sin. Once before they murmured for want of meat, Exodus 16. 2. when upon their
murmuring the Lord gave them both manna and quails; but that was in the
wilderness of Sin, immediately after they were come out of Egypt, this was in
the wilderness of Paran, above a twelvemoneth after that, when not having any
other food but manna from ^eaven, which now they began to loath, they murmured,
and who, say they, shall give us flesh to eat? where by flesh is meant fish as
well as that which we more peculiarly call flesh, as is evident in the
following words, We remember the fish which we did eat in Egypt freely; and
ver. 22. where Moses objects to the Lo^d, Shall all the fish of the sea be
gathered for them to suffice them; and so the Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 15. 39.
There is one kind of flesh of men, another flesh of beasts, another of fi^hes.
Many indeed are of opinion that the Egyptians, at l^ast some of them, were
strictly superstitious therein, used not to eat the flesh of ^heep, no nor
leeks, onions and garlic, which they worshipped as Gods, according to the Poet*

Porrum and cepe nefas violar^ a^ frangere morsu.
O sanctas gentes quibus ha^ nascuntur in hortis
Numina! lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis
Mensa, nefas illic foetum jugulare capellae.
But however the Israelites did use to eat of them freely, and wanting them
now, therefore they murmured against Moses and against the Lord.

Verse. 6. But now our soul is dried away.] That is, we languish and pine away,
having nothing to cat that will either nourish us or satisfy our appetite: for
the soul is often put for the body, or the whole man, or for the appetite or
desire after meat drink and other things.

Verse. 7. And the manna was as coriander-seed, etc.] See the note upon Exodus
16. 31. it was therefore pleasant to the eye, delightful to the taste, and was
fit to be dressed several ways, and therefore not to be thus loathed and
despised.

Verse. 10. Then Moses heard the people weep throughout their families, every
man in the door of his tent.] That is, openly, as desiring to make known their
discontent, and to stir up discontent in others also that should hear their
complaints.

Verse. 15. And let me not see my wretchedness.] That is, let me not see my
self slain by the people in a shameful and disgraceful manner, or rather let
me not live to see my self thus miserable: for it is all one as if he had said
that it were better for him to be killed out of hand, then living to see so
many heartbreaking miseries continually befalling him day after day.

Verse. 16. And the Lord said unto Moses, Gather unto me seventy men, etc.]
Though the speech of Moses to the Lord in the foregoing verses were so full of
distemper and passion, yet the Lord commiserating his condition commands him
here to choose and gather together seventy choice men of the elders of Israel,
whom he knew to be elders of the people, and officers over them, that is, whom
he knew to be not only elders in regard of their years, but also men of
singular gravitie and wisdom, and for that chosen to be governors over the
people; and these were by Gods appointment (which the better to testify they
were to be presented before the tabernacle) to undertake the government as
helpers to Moses, that so his burden might be the less. Indeed once before
upon Jethroes counsel there were certain men chosen to be rulers and judges
over the people, for the case of Moses, Exodus 18. 25, 26. But those were only
chosen to determine of small matters, but these now were to be judges in the
greatest and most difficult causes, both of religion and civil affairs, which
were formerly wholly referred to Moses, and were therefore chosen amongst those
that were already in those inferior places of government, because by reason of
their experience therein they were the fitter to be employed in the weightier
works. And this many conceive was the original of that great council of the
Jews, which they called their Sanhedrin, and was continued amongst them till
Herod's days.

Verse. 17. And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it
upon them.] That is, I will give of the same spirit to them, which I have given
to thee. It is not to be thought, that there was now any impairing of Moses
gifts, as some conceive; for how could the joining of these with him be then
any advantage to him, or where do we find any thing in the following story that
argues the least abatement in the gifts of Moses? but because the Lord intended
to give the same gifts to them, which he had given to Moses, as if some part of
Moses spirit dwelt now in them, therefore is this expression here used, I will
take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them.

Verse. 18. Sanctify your selves against to morrow, and ye shall eat flesh,
etc.] The original word does sometimes signify to prepare, and so might
intend that they should prepare themselves for the receiving of the flesh which
God would give them the next day in abundance. But being rendered sanctified, it
must needs be meant of a religious preparing themselves, but may be spoken
either ironically, only thereby to glance at the sordid baseness of their
spirits, and their indisposition to receive any such provision from God, as if
he should have said, God will make you a feast to morrow, and you are in a
goodly temper for such a business; or else as a serious exhortation* that they
should address themselves to receive with pure and good hearts this mercy of
God, being also legally prepared according to those times by washing their
garments. For because the working of such miracles was a sign of Gods special
presence, therefore before such miraculous works they were called upon thus to
sanctify themselves.

Verse. 21. And Moses said, The people amongst whom I am are six hundred
thousand footmen, etc.] See chap. 2. 32.

Verse. 23. And the Lord said unto Moses, Is the Lords hand waxed short, etc.]
God here winks at Moses his distrust* and bears with his weakness; but when he
was not instructed and bettered by Gods patience, and the experience he had
day^y of Gods al-sufficiencie, he is afterward punished. See Numb. 20. 12. And
the Lord spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, because ye believe me not to sancti^ie
me in the eyes of the children of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this
congregation into the land which I have given them, and that esp^cially because
then too he showed his distrust before the people.

Verse. 24. And gathered the seventy men of the elders of the people and set
them round about the tabernacle.] That is, he appointed them to come before the
Lord at the door of the tabernacle, though two of them, ver. 20. did not come
as they were appointed. Now this presenting them before the tabernacle was both
to put them in mind that God had set them apart to this work of government, and
therefore they should be careful to carry themselves uprightly and well, as
they would answer it before his tribunal who had put them in their places, and
bestowed his spirit upon them to make them fit for their employments; as also,
to teach the people to acknowledge them in their places, as set over them by
God.

Verse. 25. They prophesied and did not cease.] They were not now created
prophets, but had only at this time a gift of prophecy wrought in them by the
spirit, that it might be a seal both to them and to the people that God had
called them to this office, and would furnish them with such gifts as were
requisite for their places, as it was with Saul being newly anointed King, ^.
Sam. 10. 10* And the spirit of God came upon him, and he prophe^ied among them.
And by prophesying here is meant, either that they foretold things to come, or
rather that they spoke unto the people concerning the wonderful works and
secret mysteries of Gods truth, and that in such a manner that they might be
easily discerned to speak as men inspired with the spirit of God: for thus this
word prophesying is sometime used for declaring the word of God unto the
people* 1. Cor. 14. 3. Exodus 7. 1. And Aaron thy brother shall be thy Prophet.
Genesis 20. 7. Now therefore restore the man his wife, for he is a Prophet; and
for setting forth the praises of God in songs and psa ms, as 1. Chron. 25. 13.
Thus these men prophesied and did not cease, that is, they continued all the
day prophesying without intermission, as is also expressly mentioned of Saul, 1.
Sam. 19. 24. And prophesied before Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked
all that day, and all that night: and this is added because their continuing so
long in this supernatural work did much add to the confirmation of their
calling.

Verse. 26. But there remained two of the men in the camp, etc.] Several
reasons may be conceived why these two men came not with the rest being
enrolled by Moses amongst the seventy that were now to be joined in commission,
as assistants to him; for either they might not be found when warning was
given, or rather, as Sa^l afterward did, 1. Sam. 10. 22. they might hide
themselves* or forbear to go, not as contemning Gods command (for then it is
not likely that they should have had the same gift of the spirit with the
others) but as distrusting their own sufficiency. However Gods secret
providence was the chief cause of it, who had determined by this means to make
the miracle the more remarkable, that all the people might plainly see they
were called of God.

Verse. 28. My lord Moses forbid them.] This Joshua spoke of envious zeal for
his Master Moses, as appears by Moses answer, verse. 29. enviest thou for my
sake? yet not so much, as I conceive, because the eminency of these through
their gifts of proph^cie would obscure the eminency of his master Moses (for
then he had as much reason to have spoken against the other as against these
two) as because they did it as it were of their private authority without any
dependency upon Moses, which was manifest in the other, because by Moses
appointment they came and received this gift and authority from God, whereas
these two by staying away seemed to refuse to have any dependency upon him.

Verse. 31. And there went forth a wind from the Lord and brought quails from
the sea, etc.] That is, God by his almighty power did cause a strong wind to
blow from the seaward, and therewith brought a multitude of quails amongst thm,
and round about the camp. What sea it is that is here meant is not of any great
consequence to know; yet most probable it is that they came from the red sea,
because that lay Southward of the Israelites camp at present, and the Psalmist
says that these quails were brought in with a Southeast wind, Psalm. 78. 26. He
caused an East wind to blow in the heaven, and by his power he brought in the
Southwind. He rained flesh also upon them as dust, and feathered fowls like the
sand of the sea. Once before the Lord did thus miraculously f^ed them with
quails, Exodus 16. 13. But that was in the wilderness of Sin, in the second
month after their departure out of Egypt; but this was in the wilderness of
Paran, about a year after that.

Verse. 31. And as it were two cubits high upon the face of the earth.] Most
Expositours understand this of their flying but two cubits above the ground,
whereby it came to pass that they were easily taken. But I think it
unquestionable that the quails lay upon the ground two cubits thick: first,
because of the clause before, where there is mention of letting them fall by
the camp; secondly, because of that phrase. Psalm. 78. 27. He rained flesh upon
them as dust, etc. thirdly, because the Israelites are said to gather them, not
to catch them; fourthly, because otherwise this should not set forth the
miraculous abundance of them, which is plainly the drift of this description of
the miracle. And yet I think not that the ground was all over covered two
cubits thick, as far as a days journey reached round about the camp (for
where then did they spread them abroad, when they had gathered them) but that
they lay here and there scattered, the heaps being in many places two cubits
thick.

Verse. 32. He that gathered least gathered ten homers.] That is, a hundred
bushels: for an ephah was near the same with our bushel, and an homer contained
ten ephahs, Ezekiel. 45. 11, 14. The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure,
that the bath may contain the tenth part of an homer, and the ephah the tenth
part of an homer: and indeed hereby we may see how miraculously abundant this
flight of quails was, which makes the Psalmist say that God rained flesh upon
them as dust, and feathered fouls as the sand of the sea, Psalm. 78. 27.

And they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.] To
preserve them from putrefying: to which end it is likely that they used art
also in salting and drying them, or else they were as miraculously preserved as
sent, for they eat of them a month together.

Verse. 33. And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, etc.] It is evident
in the twentieth verse of this chapter that the people did eat of these quails
a month together ere the wrath of the Lord brake out against them; and
therefore we may well conceive that it is thus expressly noted that the wrath of
the Lord was kindled against the people, and that he smote them with a very
great plague, while the flesh was yet between their teeth, ere it was chewed,
to imply, first, the insatiable greediness of the people, who after a months
feeding on these quails were still so eager upon them; secondly, how
opportunely the Lord punished them, that they might see the Lord punished them
for lusting after flesh, and for their murmuring against Moses because they had
it not, he made the very flesh they had desired to be the cause of their
destruction, and while they were glutting themselves with these dainties they
lusted after, his wrath brake forth upon them; and thirdly, how fully he made
good what he had before threatened, verse. 20. that they should eat flesh till it
came out of their nostrils, and it became loathsome unto them. What this great
plague was wherewith God smote them, it is not expressed; but it may seem
probable by the expressions here used that the Lord caused them to surfeit of
this their feeding without fear, and so hereof many of them dyed.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 1. ANd Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Ethiopian
woman, etc.] Miriam is here named first, and that, as it may be probably
conceived, because she it was that began the quarrel, and Aaron was stirred up
by her; and therefore also afterward we see that she only, not Aaron, was
^tricken with leprosy. However by the providence of God doubtless it was (the
better to clear it that Moses was exalted by Gods special favor, not by any
compa^t amongst themselves) that his own brother and sister did thus rise up
against him. What the ground or occasion of that quarrel was may seem
questionable: only thus much is more then probable, first, that one main
ground of their quarrel was their envy at the pre-eminence of Moses above
them, as appears by that their expostulation, verse. 2. Has the Lord indeed
spoken only by Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? Because Miriam was a
prophetess, Exodus 15. 20. and Aaron the high priest, and employed by God
together with Moses in fetching the Israelites out of Egypt, therefore they
grudged that the supreme power of government should be solely in Moses. And
perhaps this envy was newly stirred in Miriam, because she being a prophetess
was not one of those seventy, of whom mention is made in the foregoing chapter,
that were chosen to be assistants to Moses in the government of the people. And
secondly, that whatever was the cause of this their quarrel against Moses, yet
the only cause they alleged was that he had married an Ethiopian woman or a
Cushite (as it is in the margin) not one of Abraham's holy stock: and this was
doubtless no other but Zipporah the Midianitesse; for of her death we read
not, and ordinarily in the Scriptu^es the Midianites and other neighboring
nations that inhabited Arabia, Cush his land, are called Cushites or
Ethiopians, as Hab. 3. 7. I saw the tents of Cushan (or Ethiopia) in
affliction, and the curtains of the land of Midian did tremble.

Verse. 2. Has the Lord indeed spoken only by Moses? has he not spoken also
by us?] That is, have not we the gift of prophecy as well as he, and what
reason then that he should be all in all who has matched himself to one that
is a stranger to the holy seed of Israel?

Verse. 3. Now the man Moses was very meek, etc.] Implying that first, he had
given them no cause thus to quarrel with him; and secondly, that he was now
content to swallow these affronts patiently, and made no complaint, but the
Lord took his cause in hand. Nor is it strange that Moses should thus commend
himself, if we consider that he did it by the immediate inspiration of the holy
Ghost, that his meekness might be a pattern for the Church in all ages (and
therefore elsewhere we see also that he relates his sins and weaknesses) and
thus also does S. Paul speak of himself, as 1. Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of
me, even as I also am of Christ, and 2. Cor. 11. and 12. But withal it may be
held without wronging the authority of Moses writings, that here and there by
Joshua, or some other of the prophets after him, some passages were inserted,
which Moses himself wrote not, such as that, Deuteronomy. 34. concerning the death and
burial of Moses.

Verse. 5. And the Lord came down in the pillar of the cloud, and s^ood in the
door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron and Miriam.) Before God had commanded
Moses and Aaron and Miriam, verse. 4. to come all three together to the
tabernacle of the congregation, where being all three together, and the cloud
being withal descended to the door of the tabernacle, the Lord now from
thence calls to Aaron and Miriam to stand forth, both because he was now
particularly to speak to them, and not to Moses, as also that this separating
them from Moses might intimate their folly in going about to make themselves
equal with him.

Verse. 7. My servant Moses is not so, etc.] That is, I do not make known my
will to him so as to other prophets, in dreams and visions, but with him will I
speak mouth to mouth, even apparently and not in dark speeches, and the
similitude of the Lord shall he behold. But what is the meaning of this?
doubtless God is invisible. Col. 1. 15. No man has seen God at any time, John
1. 18. nor can see him, 1. Tim. 6. 16. It is not possible for any mortal
creature to behold the very essence of God, as he is in himself: even Moses
himself could not so see the face of God, Exodus 33. 20. Thou can not see my
face (says the Lord to Mo^es) for there shall no man see me and live: and
secondly, neither could there be at any time presented to Moses any similitude
or likeness of Gods essence and being; for no material visible thing can be a
representation of the spiritall and invisible essence of God, To whom willye
liken God, or what likeness will ye compare unto him? says the prophet. Esa.
40. 18. that therefore which is said here concerning the privilege of Moses
above all present and succeeding prophets, consists in two things: first, that
God manifested not his will to Moses in d^eams and visions, as to other
prophets, in both which they had only imaginary representations set before the
eye of their minds, but that he spoke to him with an audible voice out of the
cloud and out of the tabernacle, and that he did oftentimes appear to him in a
visible shape, and spoke to him in a familiar manner, mouth to mouth, as one
friend should speak to another, and had at times discovered to him more of his
glory then ever he did to the eye of mortal man, as we see in that story of
his seeing Gods back-parts, Exodus 33. 20. And then secondly, that when he spoke
to him, he did not make known his mind to him in obscure figurative
expressions, as he did to the prophets, as when he told Ezekiel of a great
eagle with great wings, etc. Ezekiel. 17. 3. but plainly and clearly, apparently
and not in dark speeches, as it is here expressed.

Verse. 9. And the anger of the Lord was kindled against them, and he departed.]
Not abiding their answer, which was a sign of great displeasure. Now this
departing of the Lord was by removing the sign of his presence, the cloud, out
of which he had spoken to them, as it is explained in the following words,
verse. 10. And the cloud departed from off the tabernacle. Nor yet did the cloud
remove away from the tabernacle (for when it did so, that was a sign that the
people were to remove) but it removed from the door of the tabernacle whither
it did usually descend when God meant to speak unto them, and so rising up did
hang over the tabernacle as at other times.

Verse. 10. And behold Miriam became leprous white as snow.] Though Aa^on joined
with Miriam in speaking against Moses, yet only Miriam was punished, 1.
because she began the quarrel; and 2. because he was the high priest, and so
the Lord would not strike him with leprosy, lest in his dishonor the
priesthood should suffer, but chose rather to punish him in his sister. As for
the leprosy wherewith Miriam was stricken, it did well answer her sin, a
virulent, envious, murmuring tongue being like a fretting leprosy that spreads
where it comes, if it be not prevented to the infe^tion of many. And indeed how
memorable a thing this was, we may see by the Lords putting them in mind
afterward of it, Deuteronomy. 24. 9. Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam
by the way, after that ye were come forth out of Egypt.

Verse. 12. Let her not be as one dead, etc.] Miriam stricken with this white
leprosy was like a child* that has been sometime dead in the womb, when it
comes into the world; the flesh of such a child will be white, putrified as if
it were sodden, and half consumed, and so was Miriams. And though she were
still alive, yet as one dead she was to be carried out from the communion of
the Church, as one that must needs defile all that touched her, Numb. 5. 2.
Command the children of Israel that they put out of the camp every leper; and
besides, this fretting plague would in the end have utterly consumed and killed
her, if God had not healed her.

Verse. 14. And the Lord said unto Moses, If her father had but spit in her
face, should s^e not be ashamed seven days? etc.] God having immediately heard
the prayer of Moses, and healed her, gives order notwithstanding that she
should be shut out seven days from the camp. Indeed other lepers being
cleansed were yet shut up by themselves seven days, but it was in the camp,
Lev. 14. 8. And he that is to be cleansed, shall wash his clothes, and shave
off all his hair, and wash himself in water that he may be clean: and after
that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of his tent seven
days. But, says the Lord, if her earthly father had in great displeasure spit
in her face, she would have been ashamed to show her face for a time; and
therefore much more is it fit in this cause, both as an expression of her shame
and sorrow for that she had done; and that his secluding her from others may be
a real instruction to all the people* that he would have them take heed of
being corrupted with the same sin: now this expression of spitting in her
face God uses, because spitting is a sign of anger, shame, and contempt. Job
30. 10. They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in my
face. Isa. 50. 6. I hid not my face from shame and spitting; and God by this
punishment had shown his anger against her, and had poured shame and contempt
upon her.

Verse. 15. And the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.] But
stayed mourning for her, which was a special honor unto Miriam above other
lepers, for whom the people stayed not, Numb. 5. 2, 4. Command the children of
Israel that they put out of the camp every leper, etc. And the children of
Israel did so, and put them out without the camp.

Verse. 16. And afterward the people removed from Haxeroth, and pitched in the
wilderness of Paran.] Which I conceive to be all one as if he had said, and
pitched again in another place* but still in the wilderness of Paran (for that
they came not now first into that wilderness is evident, because it is said
before, chap. 10. 12. And the children of Israel took their ioxrneys out of the
wilderness of Sinai, and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran) and the
place where they pitched in this wilderness is called Rithmah, chap. 33. 18.
and Kadesh-Barnea, chap. 13. 26. Deuteronomy. 1. 19. which was close upon the borders
of the land of Canaan.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, etc.] In Deuteronomie it is
said that the people desired that some might be sent to search the land. Thus
therefore it was: When God had led his people from mount Horeb to
Kadesh-Barnea, through the great and terrible wilderness, and they were come
to the mountain of the Amorites, Moses assembled the people, and encouraged
them now to go up and take possession of the land which God had promised them,
Deuteronomy. 1. 20, 21. And I said unto you, Ye are come unto the mountain of the
Amorites, which the Lord our God does give unto us. Behold, the Lord thy God
has set the land before thee, go up and possess it, the people already, no
doubt, through i^fidelity beginning to fear the event, desire that first they
might send some certain men not only to search out the fertility and strength
of the land, but also to take knowledge of the ways and passages, rivers,
fords and mountains, by which they were to go, ver. 22. Moses, not knowing
their distrustful hearts, likes well the motion, verse. 23. and consulted with
God, who thereupon returned this answer here set down, yielding or giving way
to their motion, but in displeasure, for their greater hurt, and that no
question because of their present infidelity; and appointing them to send men
that might search the land of Canaan, even the land which God before had spied
for them, Ezekiel. 20. 6. and searched out, Deuteronomy. 1. 33.

Verse. 2. Of every tribe of their fathers shall ye send a man, every one a
ruler among them.] There was one sent of every tribe, that every tribe might be
satisfied by a witness of their own; and all Princes in their tribe, as most
likely to be courageous, and that their testimony might be of more credit; not
of the baser sort, because the business was weighty.

Verse. 6. Caleb the son of Jephunneh.] His name signifies hearty, and he
brought Moses word again as it was in his heart, Josh. 14. 7.

Verse. 11. Of the tribe of Joseph, namely of the tribe of Manasseh.] Why is
this clause prefixed before the tribe of Manasseh rather then Ephraim? either
because Manasseh was Joseph's firstborn, or rather only as a hint of that
privilege which Joseph had: and so it is no more then if he had said, of that
tribe which came of Joseph's other son, namely of Manasseh, you shall send
Gaddi the son of Susi.

Verse. 16. And Moses called Oshea the son of Nun, Jehoshua.] This name
Jehoshua is elsewhere ordinarily written Joshua, and sometimes Jeshua, as Neh.
8. 17. and in Greek Jesus, as Acts 7. 45. where Stephen says that the
tabernacle of witness, made in the wilderness, their fathers that came after
brought in with Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles; and Heb. 4. 8. If
Jesus, that is, Joshua, had given them rest, then would he not afterward have
spoken of another day; and Jesus we know signifies a Savior Matthew. 1. 21.
Thou shall call his name Jesus (says the Angel to Joseph concerning Christ,
the son of the virgin Mary) for he shall save his people from their sins:
so that evident it is that this faithful servant of God, who afterward
succeeded Moses in the government of Israel, and was now one of the spies sent
to search the land of Canaan, was called Jehoshua or Joshua by Moses, to
signify that he should save his people from their enemies, the Canaanites, and
bring them into the promised land, and should therein be a notable type of
Christ, the only Savior of the world. But, may some say, Oshea, which was his
former name, does also signify a Savior; and why then was his name changed? I
answer many reasons are given for this by Expositours, but the most probable is
this, that by adding Jah, which is the proper name of God, Psalm. 68. 4.
contracted of Jehova; or as some think by adding the first letter of Jehova, to
Oshea, so to make his name Jehoshua, thereby was signified that he should not
only be a Savior, but also the Lords Savior, implying that he should by
authority from God, and by the help and assistance of God, be the Savior of
his people, and therein also the more manifestly a type of Christ, who is the
Lords anointed, and the Lord our righteousness, Jer. 23. 6. When his name was
thus changed, it is not expressed: only we see that he is called Joshua in the
story of Moses before this, to wit, at the ^ight which he had with the
Amalekites, Exodus 17. 9.

Verse. 17. Get you up this way Southward, etc.] Or by the South, meaning the
South part of the land of Canaan, which was nearest to them.

Verse. 21. So they went up, and searched the land, etc.] It may be probably
thought that they went not all together, but divided themselves; for going all
together, they would have been suspected, neither could they have viewed the
whole country in so short a time: and so they went quite through the land from
one end to the other, that is, from the South to the North; for so much is
employed in these words, so they went up and searched the land from the
wilderness of Zin, etc. for the wilderness of Zin here spoken of, is not the
wilderness of Sin, that bordered upon Egypt, Exodus 16. 1. but a wilderness
called by a name much like, the wilderness of Zin, which lay on the South of
the land of Canaan, Numb. 34. 3. Joshua 15. 3. and Rehob and Hamath are cities
that were on the utmost North part of the land, only Rehob lay more toward
the West Side of the land, and Hamath toward the Ea^^-side; and therefore it
is said that they searched the land unto Rehob, as men come to Hamath, because
being come to Rehob they struck over Eastward from Rehob to Hamath, or because
they searched all that Northern tract as men usually go from Rehob to Hamath.

Verse. 22. And they ascended by the South and came unto Hebron, where Ahiman,
etc.] Having in the former verse generally related how the spies searched the
land quite through from the South to the North, and from the West to the East,
here Moses undertakes to relate ^ome particular passages that were most
memorable either in their going out or coming back again, and so showing how
they went up by the South (for there they entered the land) he tells us how they
came to Hebron, a city in the South parts of Canaan, where Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob with their wives were buried, and there they saw certain huge giants,
Ahiman, Shesui, and Talmai, who were afterward expelled thence, and slain by
Caleb, Josh. 15. 14. and are here called the children of Anak, either because
they were indeed his son^es (which seems most probable, because it is said,
Josh. 15. 13. that Arbah, from whom Hebron was called Kiriath-arbah, or, the
city of Arbah, was the father of Anak; or else because all giants were in
those times called the children of Ana^.

Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.] This declares not
only the antiquity of Hebron, but also by consequence the goodness of the
land.

Verse. 23. And they came unto the brook of Eshc^l, and cut down thence a branch
with one cluster of grapes, etc.] Of admirable bigness, which therefore they
brought upon a staff betwixt two, that it might not be marred in the bringing.

Verse. 26. And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the
congregation of the children of Israel unto the wilderness of Paran, to
Kadesh.] There was a city of the Edomites called Kadesh, chap. 20. 16. from
whence the wilderness by it was called the wilderness of Kadesh, Psalm. 29. 8.
But this was another Kadesh, called usually Kadesh-Barnea, Deuteronomy. 1. 29. and
Rithma, Numb. 33. 18. That Kadesh upon the borders of Edom was in the desert of
Zin, chap. 10. 1. this was in the wilderness of Paran: The next station after
they went from that Kadesh was mount Hor, where Aaron dyed, and that was in the
fourtieth year after the Israelites came out of Egypt, chap. 33. 37, 38. but
from this Kadesh they were appointed to turn back toward the red sea, chap.
14. 25. because they refused to enter the land of Canaan, and thereupon as God
had threatened did wander eight and thirty years in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 2.
14. So that it is evident that this Kadesh, whither the spies returned, was not
that Kadesh upon the borders of Edom, but another that was close upon the South
parts of Canaan, where Moses and the congregation had stayed for them all the
while they were search^ng the land.

Verse. 29. The Amalekites dwell in the land of the South, etc.] This their
reckoning up of so many mighty nations with whom they must look to grappel, was
purposely added to discourage the people from entering the land. As for the
Amalekites, though they were not of the nations that inhabited the land of
Canaan, yet the spies first mention them, because they border^d in the South
parts close upon the land of Canaan, where the Israelites were to enter, and so
were likely to come forth against them, and to withstand them with all their
power: which they might the rather think because the year before, at their
first coming out of Egypt, this nation had drawn out some forces against them
to withstand them in their passage through the wilderness, and had there
fought with them.

And the Canaanites dwell by the sea, and by the coast of Jordan.] The sea here
intended was not the mid-land sea, which was on the West of Canaan; but the
dead sea, which lay on the East of Canaan, where the river Jordan ran into it,
as we may well conceive by that which seems most probable to be the drift of
these words, to wit, that as they had told the people* in the former words, of
the Amalekites dwelling upon the South of Canaan, and the Hittites and
Jebusites and Amor^tes dwelling in the mountains, that is, those mountains in
the South of the land nigh unto the wilderness where the Israelites now lay,
thereby intending to let the people see that there would be no entering the land
on the South, because of those mighty nations that would be there ready to
oppose them (as indeed it is said, Deuteronomy. 1. 44. that when afte^wards the
Israelites would needs go up against Gods express command, The Amorites which
dwelt in the mou^^ains ^ame out against them, and chased them as bees do) so in
these words, the Canaanites dwell by the sea and by the coast of Jordan, they
intended further to show the people that in case they should think to fetch a
compass about, and to enter into the East Side of the land, there they would
be kept out by the river of Jordan, and the dead sea, which ran along on that
side, and by the Canaanites (one of the nations of the land so particularly
called) who dwelt by the sea and by the coast of Jordan, and so being a valiant
and strong people would improve those advantages for the best defense of their
country, and not suffer the Israelites to enter there.

Verse. 30. And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, etc.] And Joshua with
him, chap. 14. 6, 7. And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, which were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes. And
they spoke unto all the company of the children of Israel, saying, The land
which we passed through to search it is an exceeding good land: yet now at
first it may be Joshua advisedly held his peace, because he was Moses minister.
However, for this it was that Moses made promise to Caleb concerning Hebron and
the country adjoining, Josh. 14. 9. And Moses swear on that day, saying, Surely
the land whereon thy feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy
childrens for ever, because thou have wholly followed the Lord my God.

Verse. 32. The land through which we have gone to search it is a land that
eats up the inhabitants thereof.] That is, a land wherein the people of the
land are continually devoured, by reason of their bloody wars, wherein they
are ever involved either with their neighbors, or amongst themselves; implying
how little hope there was for them to prevail against such a fierce untamed
people, and how little comfort they could expect, if they should drive out some
of the inhabitants and plant themselves in their room, they should be sure to
be eaten out with continual wars. Look as formerly the Amorites had
conquered the Moabites, Numb. 21. 28* 29. the Caphterims or Philistines had
destroyed the Anims* Deuteronomy. 2. 23. so it would be with them: and indced this
very phrase was after used against this land, when the heathen had destroyed
the Israelites in it, Ezekiel. 36. 13* 14. Thus says the Lord God, Because they
say unto you, Thou land devourest up men, and have bereaved thy nations;
therefore thou shall devour m^n no more*

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 3. ANd wherefore has the Lord brought us into this land, etc.] Deuteronomy, 1.
27. this is more fully expressed, to wit, that they said, Because the Lord
hated us he has brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into
the hand of the Amorite to destroy us.

Verse. 4. And they said one to another, Let ^s make a captain, and return into
Egypt.] This above all discovered their wonderf^ll rage and madness, if we
consider, 1. the difficulties they must needs meet with in their return to
Egypt (for they could not expect to be fed with manna from heaven, nor the red
sea to be divided before them again) and 2. the scorn and ^ruell bondage they
might well expe^t when they came thither: for if the Egyptians oppressed them
so sorely before, how much more hardly were they like to deal with them now,
even in remembrance of the death of their firstborn, and the drowning of
Pharaoh and his army in the red sea? How far they proceeded in this their
wicked intention may not happily be expressed: but if they did no more but
consult about it, observable then it is that these thesr evil purposes are
counted to them as if they had been done by them, Neh. 16. 17. But they and our
fathers dealt proudly, -- And in their rebellion appointed a captain to return
to their bondage.

Verse. 5. And Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly,
etc.] Either to pray unto God for them, as in Numb. 6. 22. or to testify their
great sorrow and astonishment of mind, or to entreat the people not to proceed
in their rebellion: for now happily Moses spoke that, Deuteronomy. 1. 29, 30, 31. Then
I said unto you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them: the Lord your God which
goes before you, he shall fight for you, etc.

Verse. 6. And Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, which
were of them that searched the land, rent their clothes.] In sign of sorrow
and detestation of those blasphemous speeches which the people had uttered
against God.

Verse. 8. If the Lord delight in us, then he will bring us into this land,
etc.] That i^, unless by this rebellion we provoke God so far that he take
no more delight in us.

Verse. 9. For they are bread for us.] That is, we shall easily consume and
devour them, to wit, with the sword, according to that expression, Deuteronomy. 32.
42. I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh;
and this I conceive is opposed to that speech of the other incredulous
searchers of the land, chap. 13. ver. 32. The land, through which we have gone
to search it, is ^ land that eats up the inhabitants thereof.

Their defense is departed from them, etc.] In the Hebrew it is, their shadow
is departed from them, but thereby is meant their desence, covert and
protection, that whereby men are preserved from dangers, as the shadow g^ards a
man from the scorching heat of the sun, as Psalm. 91. 1. He that dwells in
the secret place of the most high shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty;
and Psalm. 121. 5. 6. The Lord is thy keeper, the Lord is thy shade upon thy
right hand. The s^nne shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night: and
the meaning is, that God had now forsaken them, as appears by the following
clause which is opposed against this, and the Lord is with us; so that the aim
of Joshua and Caleb in these words was to assure the people that however God
had hitherto preserved them from being destroyed, because their iniquity was
not then full; yet now he had withdrawn his help from them, and would certainly
give them up to destruction, and that they had no cause therefore to fear them,
but might go boldly against them as against a naked people, left destitute of
^ll means to preserve and shelter them: for what are strong cities and high
walls to defend a people whom God has forsaken?

Verse. 10. And the glory of the Lord appeared in the tabernacle, etc.] The
Lord, seeing the danger his faithful witnesses were in, did suddenly cause the
cloud (the usual sign when God meant to speak to Moses concerning his people)
to descend upon the tabernacle, and that no doubt in a more glorious appearance
then ordinarily, thereby to astonish the people, and to stop them in that
furious attempt they were going about.

Verse. 17. And now, I beseech thee, let the power of my Lord be great,
according as thou have spoken, saying, etc.] Two several ways these words may
be understood: first, of the power of God in carrying the Israelites into
Canaan: and because this would be an act of wonderful mercy in God, to do this
for a people that had now so horribly rebelled against him, therefore the next
words are added, according as thou have spoken, saying, The Lord is
long-suffering, etc. or secondly, of the power of God in pardoning their sin,
let the power of my Lord be great, that is, by pardoning this people now let it
be seen how great thy power is in this regard, how able thou art to forgive a
people that by so many sins and so exceeding great do still provoke thee. Nor
need it seem strange that Moses, speaking of God after the manner of men,
should make it an act of power to forgive, since the power of man is in nothing
more seen then in overcoming his anger, and pardoning those whom he may
destroy, according to that of Solomon* Prove. 16. 32. He that is slow to anger,
is better then the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, then he that takes a
city.

Verse. 18. The Lord is long-suffering and of great mercy* forgiving iniquity
and transgression, and by no means clearing the guilty, etc.] The drift of
Moses prayer, and so also of his alleging these words, which the Lord had
spoken concerning himself, being to procure of God that he would show mercy to
the Israelites, and not to pour out his wrath upon them as their sin had
deserved, it may seem strange that he should add the last clause, that God
would by no means clear the guilty, but would visit the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children, etc. But for the resolving of this doubt, we must know, that
these words being taken jointly with those which went before do no way cross
the aim of Moses prayer, and that because he did not sue to God that he should
not punish the sin of this people, but only that he would not utterly
destroy them, as he had before threatened, verse. 12. and accordingly the drift
of Moses plea in these words is this, That since God had said of himself that
he was a long-suffering God, and that though he would by no means clear the
guilty, etc. yet withal he was a God of great mercy, and ready to forgive the
iniquities of his people, that he would now, according to this which he had
said, deal with this people, namely, that he would in wrath remember mercy, and
not sweep them quite away as dung from the face of the earth.

Verse. 20. And the Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy word.] That is,
I will not destroy them all as one man, I will not cut off the whole nation as
at first I threatened, but will only punish these rebels, and leave their
posterity to inherit the land,

Verse. 21. But as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with the glory
of the Lord.] This some understand of the glory which the Lord would get to
himself by the just punishment that he would inflict upon this unbelieving and
rebellious people, for their refusing to enter into that good land whereunto he
had brought them; others ag^in understand it of the glory he would get by the
miraculous and glorious things that he would do for his people in carrying them
into the land of Canaan: but I conceive that both may be best included: Moses
had pleaded with God, that if he utterly destroyed this people, the nations
would say that he was not able to bring them into the lan^. To this therefore
the Lord answers, that he would not destroy them* but would carry their
posterity into the land which he had promised them, and that with working so
many strange wonders, that all the nations of the earth that should hear of
them should in every place, to the great glory of God, talk with admiration of
the mighty power of God manifested in his doing such things, and of the great
love that he bears to that people; and yet withal he would magnify his
justice and severity against their sin too, in cutting off all those that had
now murmured against him before ever their posterity came to inherit the land:
yea this last according to our translation seems chiefly intended, because this
particle But, seems to oppose this sentence to that which went before,
concerning his pardoning them, The Lord said, I have pardoned according to thy
word. But as truly as I live all the earth shall be filled with the glory of
the Lord.

Verse. 22. And have tempted me now these ten times.] That is, not once nor
twice, but many times, as Genesis 31. 7. And changed my wages ten times: and Job
19. 3. These ten times have ye reproched me. It may also be taken properly, for
now they had rebelled ten times: First at the red sea, Exodus 14. 11, 12.
Secondly, in Marah, Exodus 15. 23, 24. Thirdly, in the wilderness of Sin,
where manna and quails were given when they murmured for want of bread, Exodus
16. 2. Fourthly, when at the same time they kept of the manna till the morning,
Exodus 16. 20. Fifthly, when they went out to gather manna on the Sabbath, Exodus
16. 27, 28. Sixthly, at Rephidim, Exodus 17. 1. Seventhly, by the calf at Horeb*
Exodus 32. Eighthly, at Taberah, Numb. 11. 1. Ninthly, at Kibroth H^ttaavah,
chap. 11. 4. And now the tenth time upon the searching the land.

Verse. 24. But my ser vant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him. etc.]
The Lord having threatened in the former verses that none of the Israelites that
had ^een his wonders in Egypt, etc. should ever see the land of Canaan, he now
excepts Caleb, and promises that he should go into the land* whereinto he went
to search it, and that his seed should possess it, to wit, Hebron and the land
adjoining. Josh. 14. 9. and that because he had another spirit with him, that
is, he was courageous and bold, and was not of such a base cowardly spirit as
the others were of, and followed the Lord fully to do that which God required.
But why is not Joshua also named, seeing he also followed the Lord fully? I
answer* the former judgment was pronounced only against the people that were
in their tents, amongst whom Caleb was, and therefore he was excepted: but
there was no need to except Joshua, because he was not amongst the people* but
attended on Moses.

Ve^s. 25. Now the Amalekites and the Canaanites dwelt in the valley.] That is
added, both to show the mischief their sin^e had done them, for which they must
now return when they were come to the very borders of the land, ready to enter
into it; as also to show how necessary it was that they should presently be
gone, now God had resolved not to carry them in, because they lay so near to
the enemy: for the Amalekites and Can^anites dwelt, or, sat, i^ the valley,
that is, the valley beyond the mountain, at the foot whereof the Israelites now
lay, see verse. 40, etc. where by this word dwelt may be meant* either that they
had their continual abode there, or rather that there they had gathered
forces, and lay in wait for them: for so sometimes this word is used, for lying
in wait, Josh. 8. 9.

To morrow turn you, and get you into the wilderness by the way of the red
sea.] In this they obeyed not neither, and being thereupon discomfited, stayed
after this at Kadesh many days, Deuteronomy. 1. 46. and that as it is likely for the
gathering up of their broken troops.

Verse. 18. As ye have spoken in mine ears so will I do to you.] That is, that
which you wished to your selves shall now betide you: wherein he alludes to
that which they had spoken, verse. 3. Would God we had dyed in this wilderness.

Verse. 33. And your children shall wander in the wilderness forty years, and
bear your whoredoms, etc.] That is, till they have made up the years of their
wandering in the wilderness from their coming out of Egypt full forty years,
so that in these forty years the time past already since they came out of
Egypt is included; for one whole year and part of the second were past already,
Deuteronomy. 2. 14. And the space in which we came from Kadesh-Barnea, until we were
come over the brook Sered, was thirty and eight years. Now in this the Lord
says their children should bear their whoredoms, because it was their fathers
whoredoms, that is, their forsaking of God, that did bring this punishment
upon their children.

Verse. 34. And ye shall know my breach of promise.] That is, you shall know to
your cost what it is to charge me with breach of promise, as you have done by
suspecting that I would not give you the land whither I had brought you, but
meant to give you as a prey into the hand of your enemies; you shall find to
your cost that it was your infidelity, your not keeping covenant with me, and
no^ my breach of promise with you, that has hindered you from the present
enjoying of this land whither I had brought you.

Verse. 37. Even those men, that did bring up an evil report upon the land, dyed
by the plague before the Lord.] That is, dyed by an extraordinary plague from
the hand of God, either the pestilence threatened, verse. 12. or some other
judgment, and that immediately, the cloud, the testimony of Gods presence,
still remaining upon the tabernacle. And thus by the present judgment
inflicted on them the people must needs be stricken with the more fearful
apprehension of the judgment that did abide them also, and therefore it is
said, verse. 39. the people mourned greatly, having now indeed just cause to
weep, whereas before, verse. 1. they wept causelessely.

Verse. 41. And Moses said, Wherefore now do yo^ transgress the commandment of
the Lord, etc.] To wit, being first commanded of the Lord so to say. See Deuteronomy.
1. 42. And the Lord said unto me, Say unto them, Go not up, neither fight, for
I am not among you, lest ye be smitten before your enemies.

Verse. 43. For the Amalekites and the Canaanites are there before you.] That
is, on the top of the hill lying in readiness to set upon you, and therefore
are said to come down, verse. 45.

Verse. 44. Nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord, and Moses
depart^d not out of the camp.] The ark removed not but at the removal of the
cloud, Numb. 9. 15. which God not taking up now he showed thereby his dislike
of their enterprise. Moses therefore obeying the Lord would notgo with them; so
they went without the Lord, without the signs ofhis grace, and company of his
ministers.

Verse. 45. Th^n the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites which dwelt in
that hill, and smote them, and discomfited them even unto Hormah.] That is, the
Amorites, the posterity of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 1. 44. And the Amorites which dwelt in
that mountain came out against you, and chased you as bees do. After this
discomfiture the Israelites returned and wept before the Lord, but he would not
hear their voice, nor give ear unto them. So they abode in Kadesh many days,
Deuteronomy 1. 45. Now for Hormah, whither the Israelites were chased, it was a place
afterward so called upon occasion of the Israelites destroying the Canaanites
there, chap. 21. 3.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak unto the children of
Israel, etc.] In this chapter the Lord enlarges and explaineth some laws
formerly delivered. And it is most likely that this was delivered in the order
as here it is set down, within some short time after their departure back from
Kadesh toward the red sea, and that purpo^ely to cheer up the people with hope
of Gods reconciliation, that he had not utterly cast them off, but would again
smell the sweet savor of a sacrifice from them, and perform the promises made
to them: to which end also there is a particul^r mention made that they should
observe these directions given them when they come into the land of Canaan.

Verse. 2. When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto
you, etc.] This law is to show what meat offerings and drink offerings were
always to be offered together with their sacrifices, whereof part was burnt
upon the altar, as accessories and appurtenances thereto belonging; for the
understanding whereof we must note, that whereas there are two sorts of these
offerings by fire, mentioned verse. 3. that were to have these accessory
meat offerings and drink offerings, to wit, a burnt-offering or a sacrifice, by
sacrifice there is meant only the sacrifice of peace offerings, as in many
other places besides. And indeed unless it be i^ the sinn^-offering that was
offered at the cleansing of the Leper, Levit. 14. 10. we do not any where read
that there was any meat offerings appointed for sinne-offerings, b^t only for
burnt-offerings and peace offerings (whence we see that these two only are
mentioned i^ this place) the reason whereof, I conceive, was this, because the
end of the sinne-offering* which was to make atonement for the humbled sinner,
and the end of the meat offering, which was to testify the joy and gladness
of their thankful hearts, did not so well agree; and it would not therefore be
so proper to join them together: and secondly, that there are several
quantities of meat and drink offerings here appointed: as first, for a lamb or
kid, verse. 4, 5. or secondly, for a ram, ver. 6, 7. or for a bullock, ver. 8,
9, 10. for according as the sacrifice was greater o^ less so must also the
meat and drink offering be more or less, so there might be a proportion
betwixt them. Now concerning the measure of an hin, and other things observable
concerning these meat offerings, see what is noted before upon Exodus ^9. 41,
etc.

Verse. 15. As ye are so shall the stranger be before the Lord.] That is, God
will make no difference betwixt you and the strangers that have embraced the
same religion with you: his sacrifices and yours shall be alike acceptable to
God; and therefore as there is no difference in the Lords acceptance, so
neither in the manner of their offering them. In civil things there was not one
Law both for Israelite and stranger, but before the Lord* that is, when they
came into Gods presence to perform the duties of Gods worship, as the
Israelites were, so were the strangers, that is, there was one Law for them
both.

Verse. 20. As ye do the heave offering of the threshing-floore, so shall ye
heave it.] That is, about the same quantity that ye offer of your first corn,
shall ye offer of you^ dough, and both shall be offered with the same
ceremonies.

Verse. 21. Of the first of your dough ye shall give unto the Lord an
heave offering in your generations.] That is, to the priests, as the Lords
receivers: for the first fruits were their portion, Ezekiel. 44. 30. And the first
of all the fruits of all things, and ev^ry oblation of all of every sort of
your oblations, shall be the priests, etc.

Verse. 22. And if ye have erred, and not observed all th^se commandments, etc.]
There is a Law given concerning the expiation of a sin ignorantly committed
by the whole congregation, Levit. 4. 13. But there is a manifest difference
betwixt this and that: There the Law speaks of doing that which should not be
done, here, of not doing all which should be done; there the sacrifice which
the congregation should bring is only a bullock for a sinne-offering, here
they are willed to bring a bullock for a burnt-offering, and a kid of the goats
for a sinne-offering* And the ground of this difference I conceive is this,
because that Law concerned sins of doing evil forbidden, this only concerns
the sin of neglecting those ceremonial duties commanded by the Law, which
may be the more readily yielded if we consider the occasion of inserting this
Law in this place. Having spoken of the first fruits, of the first of their
dough, he immediately added this Law, to show what should be done in case any
of those things concerning the external worship of God, either first fruits or
any other thing that ought to be brought to the priests and to the tabernacle,
were om^tted either by the congregation or particular persons.

Verse. 25. And the priests shall make an atonement for all the congregation of
the children of Israel, etc.] Or, for every congregation; whereby may be
employed the several tribes, cities, towns and synagogues.

Verse. 30. But the soul that does ought presumptuously, etc.] This Law for the
cutting off, that is, the putting to death, of those that do ought
presumptuously, must be understood only of the same offenses for which the
foregoing sacrifi^cs were appointed when they were ignorantly committed, to
wit, of offenses committed against the worship enjoined by the ceremonial Law,
as it is noted before upon verse. 22. In these things the soul, that is, the
man, that did ought presumptuously, that is, not of ignorance, inadvertencie or
infirmity, but wilfully and boldly, purposely and openly, as in an advised
contempt of Gods Law, and of those duties of his public worship in the Law of
God enjoined, he was to be cut off, and that because he did thereby reproach the
Lord, this being all one as if he should fay that God was not to be regarded,
or that his judgments were not worthy his fear.

Verse. 32. And while the children of Israel were in the wilderness, they found
a man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath day, etc.] At what time in their
wandering through the wilderness this happened, which is here related, it is
not expressed. But I conceive it is inserted as an instance or example how the
foregoing Law was put in execution, concerning those that did presumptuously
transgress and refuse to conform themselves to the Law in the outward duties
of Gods worship and service, so that his punishment was for the wilful
contempt of that Law.

Verse. 34. And they put him in ward, because it was not declared what should be
done to him.] That the Sabbath-breaker was to die, they knew, see Exodus 31. 14.
and 35. 2. but by what death he should die, or whether this gathering of sticks
made him obnoxious to that sentence, that they were not fully resolved in:
Evident it seems it was that he had done it presumptuously, yet it was
doubtful whether this fact were within the compass of that Law or no. And
therefore Moses inquires, not willing to take away his life without certain
direction from the mouth of God.

Verse. 38. Speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that they make them
fringes, etc.] The main end of these fringes was to put them in mind of the
commandments of God, as it is afterward expressed, ver. 29. that every time
they looked upon their garments, and saw those fringes, they might by the help
of this memorial remember that they were Gods peculiar people, consecrated to
his service, and bound to his Laws, and therefore might not walk, as others,
after their own ways: and therefore it was that the Pharisees, to the end they
might seem religious above others, did make the fringes on their garments so
very broad, Mat. 23. 5. They enlarge, says our Savior, the border of their
garments, or, the fringes of their garments, for so the original word may well
be translated. Yea, and our Savior himself did conform himself to this Law, as
appears, Luke 8. 44. where it is said, that the woman that had the issue of
blood touched the border, or, the fringe, of his garment.

And that they put upon the fringe of the borders a ribband of blue.] This
heavencoloured ribband taught them the heavenly affection they should have to
all the Law, and how holy their conversation should be.

Verse. 39. And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may look upon it,
etc.] That is, this is the end of making these fringes, that ye may look upon
them and remember all the commandments of the Lord, and do them, that is, that
the sight of this fringe may put you in mind to keep them, and that ye seek not
after your own heart, and your own eyes, after which you use to go a whoring,
that is, that ye may not find out any superstitious in ventions of your own
devising in my worship (which who so does goes a whoring from God) but may
content your selves with that which is prescribed by the Law. So that this was
more particularly the end of these fringes, that they might be restrained from
their own devices in the worship of God, and kept to the direction of his Law.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 1. NOw Korah the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi,
etc.] Moses here names the ringleaders in a dangerous insurrection that was
made against him and Aaron his brother. Korah is set in the first place, as the
first mover of this sedition, which is therefore called the gainsaying of Core,
Jude 11. and ver. 23. because it was all occasioned by him* shall one man
sin, said Moses to the Lord, and will thou be wroth with all the
congregation? A Levite he was, and cosen-german to Moses and Aaron: for Amram
the father of Moses and Aaron, and Izhar the father of this Korah, were
brothers, the sons of Kohath, as it is evident Exodus 6. 18. And probable
enough it may seem to be which the Hebrews say, that this Korah had long since
taken offense that Elizaphan was by Moses preferred to be Prince of the
families of the Kohathites chap. 3. 30. whereas he was of the youngest brother
Uzziel, and Korah was of Izhar ^lder then he; which grudge, however it lay
buried for a time, yet now it brake forth, and nothing less then priesthood
will content him and his abetters. With Korah are joined here Dathan and
Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On the son of Peleth, all sons of Reuben,
who were ringleaders of this rebellion amongst the people, as Korah was
amongst the Levites: and indeed because the Reubenites encamped next to the
Kohathites, both on the South Side of the tabernacl^, hereby Korah had the
better opportunity to persuade the Reubenites to join with them; and besides
under a pretense of Reubens birthright they were happe'y the more easily drawn
to oppose Moses, as intending to challenge that the government belonged to them
also.

Verse. 2. Two hundred and fifty princes of the assembly, famous in the
congregation, men of renown.] That is, they were magistrates, statesmen, famous
and renowned, whereby the conspiracy was the more dangerous.

Verse. 3. Ye take too much upon you seeing all the congregation are holy, etc.]
And therefore may approach to God, and offer their sacrifices themselves. Hereby
therefore they challenge Moses of partiality, in tying the priesthood to his
brother Aarons posterity. It is most probable, which is generally held by
Interpreters, that the Reubenites did intend under the pretense of Reubens
birthright to wrest the supreme magistracy from Moses to themselves, and
therefore might here charge not Aaron only but Moses also with taking too much
upon them. But doubtless for the present they made the quarrel only about the
priesthood: nor was it so much to make all the Levites equal with Aaron and
his sons (though that happily the Levites did hope would prove the issue of
it, seek ye the priesthood also? said Moses, ver. 10.) as that all the people
might as priests offer their own sacrifices; and therefore all the two hundred
and fifty conspiratours, who were of several tribes, were appointed to come
with their censers to burn incense before the Lord; and concerning Dathan and
Abiram, who were Reubenites, it is said ver. 15. when Moses sent for them, and
they refused to come to him, that Moses was very wroth with them, and said unto
the Lord, Respect not thou their offerings, which must needs be meant of the
incense they were to offer; yea and in the following chapter, the laying up of
the rods of all the tribes before the Lord, that the Lord might show that none
but Aaron and his family might meddle with the work of the priesthood, makes it
most evident that the plea of these men was, that all the tribes might offer
their sacrifices unto the Lord.

Wherefore then lift you up your selves above the congregation of the Lord?]
Though at first they pretend nothing but an equal right to the priesthood, yet
these general words of expostulation do in a manner intimate that they meant
to wrest the government from Moses also.

Verse. 4. And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.] See chap. 14. 5.

Verse. 5. Even to morrow the Lord will show who are his, etc.] All this that
here follows, which is appointed for deciding of the controversy who might
meddle with the work of the priesthood, and who might not, Moses no doubt spoke
by special instinct of the spirit of God, who upon Moses prayer when he fell
upon his face, ver. 4. had now revealed to him what he should do. Neither yet
does he presently call them to the trial, but appoints the next day for it,
both that they might have time to bethink themselves, and repent of what they
had done; and also that the people might ^e the better prepared to observe and
note the judgment of God.

Verse. 8. And Moses said unto Korah, He^re I pray you ye sons of Levi, etc.]
Because Korah Dathan and Abiram, with the rest of the conspiratours, were all
together when they first began to quarrel with Moses and Aaron, as it is
evident, ver. 1. 2. and yet the same day Dathan and Abiram were gone, and Moses
therefore sent for them, ver. 12. therefore it may be probably thought that
after the first assembly was broken up, Moses did again send for Korah and the
Levites, that he might talk with them by themselves, and that then he spoke
that which is here set down; and so afterward for Dathan and Abiram by
themselves, as is expressed ver. 12.

Verse. 11. And what is Aaron, that ye murmur against him?] That is, he is but
Gods minister, he did not thrust in himself, but was called of God. So Moses
had spoken formerly, Exodus 16. 7, 8. And what are we that ye murmur against us?
-- your murmurings are not against us, but against the Lord; and so the Apostle
speaks, 1. Cor. ^. 5. Who then is Paul? and who is Apollo? but ministers by
whom ye believe, even as the Lord gave to every man.

Verse. 12. And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, etc.] Dathan and Abiram
were with Korah when they were first gathered together against Moses and Aaron,
ver. 1, 2. Either therefore after that assembly was broken up Moses did the
same day send first for Korah and the Levites, and expostulate the matter with
them, as is before noted upon ver. 8. and afterward for Dathan and Abiram (as
here is said) that he might also advise them better; or else, if all hitherto
related were done at the first assembly, then had Dathan and Abiram withdrawn
themselves when Moses began to speak, as disdaining to hear any thing he should
say. In the beginning of this chapter there is mention made of On the son of
Peleth, who was also one of the tribe of Reuben, and a ringleader in this
rebellion. But because he is not here named, nor any where else in the sequel
of the story, therefore it may be thought that he gave over upon the reproof of
Moses; or else it must be held, that he also is employed amongst the rest,
though not particularly named.

Verse. 13 Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land that
flows with milk and honey, etc.] These men having as it seems heard what had
passed betwixt Moses and the Levites, when he counseled them to desist from
this wicked attempt (of which we heard before, verse. 8.) do not only refuse to
come to him, but return him a bitter and scornful scoffing answer: for first,
as by way of deriding those words of Moses, verse. 9. Seems it but a small
thing unto you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation
of Israel to bring you near to himself, etc. they retort the same words upon
him, Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land that
flows with milk and honey, etc. and secondly, they scoff at his promise of
bringing them into a land flowing with milk and honey; in stead thereof, they
say, he had brought them from a land that was such indeed, into a dry
wilderness.

Verse. 14. Will thou put out the eyes of these men?] That is, can thou hope
to gull and deceive this people so, that they should not perceive the wrongs
and injury thou have done them, which is so clear and evident that unless
thou can put out their eyes they cannot but see it?

Verse. 18. And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid
incense thereon, etc.] The censers here spoken of they had either provided
before, when they first combined together to thrust themselves upon the
priestly office; or else they were some slight things made suddenly since.
Moses the day before had appointed this for the deciding of the controversy
betwixt them: The place where they burnt their incense was in the door of the
tabernacle of the congreation, as is here expressed, that is, in the door of
the priests court, whither the people used to bring their sacrifices. Indeed
the place for the priests burning of incense was within the tabernacle, at the
altar of incense: but this was an extraordinary thing, enjoined for the
discovery of the Lords will, whether these men or only Aaron and his sons
(as formerly) should enter into the tabernacle to execute the priests office,
and therefore this was done at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.
That Korah was amongst the rest with his censer, seems evident by the foregoing
verse, where he is particularly appointed to be one amongst the rest, thou also
and Aaron each of you his censer, etc. how therefore he came to be swallowed up
afterward with Dathan, see in the note upon verse. 32.

Verse. 19. And Korah gathered all the congregation against them unto the door
of the tabernacle of the congregation.] Not only the two hundred and fifty
forementioned, but the people in general; not as professed abetters of their
attempt, but as spectatours of the business in hand, Korah no doubt having
persuaded them that they should see that God would favor their attempt, and
give judgment on their side.

And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregation.] To wit, in the
cloud, which usually hovered over the tabernacle, but now came down lower to
the door of the tabernacle as at other times. See chap. 14. 10.

Verse. 22. O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, etc.] By all flesh is
meant all mankind, as Genesis 6. 12. All flesh had corrupted his way upon the
earth; and God is called the God of the spirits of all men, both because the
souls of all men are immediately in their first conception created by God,
whence he is also called the father of spirits, Hebr* 12. 9. The Lord forms
the spirit of man within him, Zach. 12. 1. and also because he sees and
knows the spirits and souls of men, and has the power of ordering and
governing the^ (which men can never have) In whose hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the breath of all mankind, Job 12. 10. Now this title here
Moses gives the Lord, either first by way of acknowledgement that it was in his
power to save or to destroy this people; or secondly, as a forcible argument to
move the Lord to have mercy on them, because they were the work of his hand,
and he gave them at first their life and being, as the prophet pleads for mercy
upon the same ground, Esa. 64. 8. O Lord, thou art our father, we are the clay
and thou our potter, and we all are the work of thine hand; or thirdly, to
intimate why the Lord should not destroy all the congregation, namely, because
he knew the hearts and spirits of them, and was able therefore to distinguish
betwixt those that were obstinately rebellious against the ^o^d, an^ those that
we^e only seduced by the rebels, and drawn together only to see wha^ would be
done.

Verse. 25. And Moses rose up* and went unto Dath^n and Abiram, etc.* Here is no
mention of Korah, because he was appointed verse. 16. to be with his censer
amongst the other two hundred and fifty of his con^piracy before the
tabernacle of the Lord. But Dathan and Abiram (when Moses sent to call them
unto him verse. 12) refused to come, and therefore now Moses, accompanied with
the elders of Israel who were not of the conspiracy, goes to them, both to
expostulate with them for this their rebellion, and to denounce the judgment
threa^ned.

Verse. 26. Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch
nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.] That is, remove
your tents, and get far away from them, and touch nothing of theirs, and so
show your faith and repentance, how certainly you believe that the^ lie under
the wrath of God, how thoroughly you desire to clear your selves from having any
hand in their wickedness, by refusing to touch any thing of theirs, as judging
all they have unclean, execrable, and therefore to perish with them.

Verse. 27. So they gat up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on
every side.] The tabernacle of Korah, who was of the Levites, was not in the
same place with Dathan and Abirams: whereby it seems probable that the earth
opened in several places, which indeed must needs make the judgment of God
the more evident*

And Dathan and Abiram came out, etc.] This is added as an expression of their
impudent madness, when they saw the people ^lie from their tabernacles, they
come forth boldly, and stand in the doors of their tabernacles, as out-facing
Moses, and scorning the judgment which he had seemed to threaten.

Verse. 28. And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to
do all these works.] That is, both the former, in undertaking the government of
the people, in conferring the priesthood upon Aaron and his sons, etc. and
the latter, appointing Korah and his company to bring censers with incense, etc.

Verse. 3^. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up.] That is*
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, the ringleaders of the rebellion. Many Expositours
do rather think that Korah was consumed with those two hundred and fifty men
by fire that came out from the Lord. verse. 35. But because the people fled from
Korahs tabernacle* verse. ^7. and because it is here evident that Korahs
tabernacle with all that appertai^^d ^o him was swallowed up in the earth, but
especially because chap. 26. 10. it i^ s^id expressly that the earth swallowed
up Dathan and Abiram together with Korah* I make no question but he was
swallowed up in the earth. It is true that Mo^es had ^^^^inted him, verse. 26.
to be with his censer amongst the two hundred and fifty. But having assembled
them before the tabernacle, and perceiving Moses and the Elders to go to Dathan
and Abiram, it seems he left the two hundred and fifty before the tabernacle,
and went also to his consederates to encourage and assist them in their
confronting of Moses, and so either with them, or in his own tent, was
swallowed up.

And all the men that appertained unto Korah* and their goods.] That is, all
that were of his family who were at that ti^e in his ta^e nacle; for some of
his sons died not in this destruction, chap. 26. 11. Notwithstanding the
children of Korah died not, either because they joined not i^ their fathers
sin, or because they repented and gave over, or because they were not present
in Korahs tabernacle.

Verse. 37. Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up
the censers out of the burning, etc.] These mutiners had sought to wrest the
priesthood from the posterity of Aaron: Eleazar therefore, whose cause God had
pleaded, is employed in making the censers a memorial of Gods judgment on
them.

And scatter thou the fire yonder.] That is, without the court of the
tabernacle, both because happily it was strange fire, and that this casting
away of the fire might be an expression of Gods rejecting their service, and
abhorring their sacrifice.

For they are hallowed.] To wit, because they had been offered before the Lord,
as is expressed in the following verse. Things consecrated to God might not be
turned to any other use in the time of the law, God therein magnifying the
holiness of that place wherein were the visible signs of his presence; yet it
follows not hence, that where things are given to superstitious use^, but
intentionally to God, it shall be unlawful for any authority to divert th^se
things to civil uses, no more then it follows that because under the law if any
man did change the tithe of the heard or of the flock, both it and the change
thereof were holy to the Lord, Levit. 27. 32. therefore now where tithes,
either by custom or law are made due to the minister, if any man should
fraudulently change the true tenth, therefore both it and the change should be
the ministers.

Verse. 38. The censers of these sinners against their own s^uls, let them make
them broad plates for a covering of the altar.] This altar must needs be the
altar of burnt-offerings, and yet this was covered with plates of brass
before, Exodus 27. 2. so that it is very questionable how the censers beaten
into broad plates were a covering for this altar. Some hold that it was before
made with a frame like a table, and boarded now about like a chest, which
boards were now covered with these plates: others hold that it was only
overlayed with brass before half way, down from the top even to the grate
within where the fire lay, and now that the other parts were also plated with
brass: others hold that these plates were fastened upon the other, and that
the less necessity there was of them, the fitter they were to be memorials of
their sin. But withal it is like they were so ordered, that they were both a
further ornament and defense to the wood against the fire; yea why may not this
also be meant of a covering for the top of the altar when it was removed? But
the text resolves us not.

Verse. 41. But on the morrow all the congregation of the children of Israel
murmured against Moses, etc.] The very men, whose lives Moses had saved the day
before by praying to the Lord for them, do now murmur against him; and it is
expressly noted that this they did on the morrow after they had seen that
fearful judgment that fell upon Korah, Dathan and Abiram, with all the men of
their conspiracy, thereby to intimate their horrible wickedness, that after
the sight of so strange and fearful a judgment they durst so immediately
again make an insurrection against Moses, charging him with the death of those
rebels, and that under the name of the people of the Lord (ye have killed, say
they, the people of the Lord) when it was so evident that they were destroyed
by the immediate hand of God, as wretches not worthy to be numbered amongst Gods
people.

Verse. 42. And* it came to pass, when the congregation was gathered against
Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tabernacle of the
congregation.] That is, Moses and Aaron looked to God, as having now no other
refuge or shelter to fly to.

And behold the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared.] This
sign of Gods having somewhat to say to them (for at such times the cloud
descended) stayed the rage of the people, and saved Moses and Aaron.

Verse. 46. Take a censer and put fire therein from off the altar, etc.] No
doubt the same spirit of God that informed him the plague was begun, directed
him to this course of offering incense, which otherwise might only be offered
in the tabernacle, for the staying of it; yea and happily that Aarons offering
incense might put the people in mind to pray unto the Lord, whereof the incense
was a sign.

Verse. 48. And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was
stared.] That is, as a mediator be interposed himself by his intercession to
stay the plague from passing any further, and to save those from death that
were not yet struck with this judgment of God: yet it may be probably thought,
that this plague did not scatter it self through the whole congregation, but
beginning in one place did like a fire run along upon those still that were
next adjoining; and if it were thus, even literally we may understand this
place, that Aaron set himself in that place, where he was betwixt the dead and
those that were not yet smitten, as it were exposing himself to the wrath of
God in the peoples behalf: whereby it must needs be the more evident, that
those who were preserved were preserved by virtue of that atonement which he
now made for them. And herein was Aaron a type of Christ our Mediator, who
made intercession for transgressors: See Esa. 53. 12. And he bare the sins
of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Luke 23. 34. Father
forgive them, for they know not what they do.

Verse. 49. Now they that dyed in the plague were fourteen thousand and seven
hundred, etc.] What the plague was is not expressed; but to this some apply
that of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 10. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also
murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer.

Verse. 50. And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation.] Both to acquaint Moses how he had sped, and to return thanks
unto the Lord who had so graciously accepted the work of his hands.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 2. Speak unto the children of Israel, and take of every one of them a
rod, etc.] No doubt the Lord saw that notwithstanding his severe proceeding
against those that mutined against Aaron, yet the hearts of many amongst them
were not sufficiently wrought upon, but were still rising against this dignity
of Aaron; and therefore the Lord in wonderful mercy by this ensuing miracle
labors to overcome their rebellious hearts. Now to this end he enjoins Moses
to take of each Prince of the tribes a rod or staff, such as men did use
ordinarily to carry in their hands (as we read of such a rod that Moses used
to go with, Exodus 4. 2. And the Lord said unto him, What is that in thine hand?
And he said, A rod) or rather such as the Princes did use to carry in their
hands as the sign of their dignity, Numb. 21. 18. The Princes dug the well,
the nobles of the people dug ^t, by the direction of the lawgiver, with
their staves; for a rod or staff in the hand of governors was a sign of their
power and authority from God. See Psalm. 110. 2. The Lord shall send the rod of
thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in the midst of thine enemies; and Jer. 48.
16, 17. The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hastes fast.
All ye that are about him bemoan him, and all ye that know his name say, How is
the strong staff broken and the beautiful rod? and thus the very sign of
their authority becomes a sign and witness against them that the priesthood
belo^ged not to them, but to Aaron only.

Verse. 2. Of all their Princes, according to the house of their fathers, twelve
rods.] There were twelve several tribes, and twelve Princes, of each tribe a
Prince, and every Prince brought a rod with his name upon it: whence to me it
seems evident that there were twelve rods besides Aarons, as is more fully
expressed, verse. 6.

Write thou every man's name upon his rod.] Not the name of the Patriar^hs,
Reuben, Simeon, etc. (for we see that not Levies but Aarons name was written on
his rod) but the name of every Prince, who was at present head of the tribe,
upon his own staff: whence also it appears that there were twelve rods besides
Aarons; else if there were but one rod for the two tribes of Ephraim and
Manasseh, which of those two Princes names were written on their rod?

Verse. 3. For one rod shall be for the head of the house of their fathers.]
That is, though I have distinguished the tribe of Levi into two parts, that of
the priests, the posterity of Aaron, and that of the other Levites; yet as in
the other tribes there is but one rod for a tribe, so must it be for the tribe
of Levi: and as the head or chief of every tribe has his name written upon the
rod of that tribe, so shall Aarons name be written upon the rod of Levi, whom I
have set in the chief place, that hereby my choice of him to serve in the
priesthood may be fully made known.

Verse. 4. And thou shall lay them up in the tabernacle of the congregation
before the testimony, etc.] That is, before the ark, which is called the
testimony, because therein were kept the tables of the law, called the
testimony Exodus 25. 26. Either therefore they were to lay these rods in the
holy place before the vail where the ark stood within behind the vail, or else
in the most holy place before the ark: for upon such extraordinary occasions we
need not doubt but Moses used to go into the most holy place; and evident it
is, that after they were bro^ght forth again, and Aarons rod was found to
flourish, the rest continuing dry sticks or staves as they were before, that
was carried into the most holy place (and therefore the Apostle Heb. 9. 4.
mentions Aarons rod that budded amongst those things that were within the vail)
and yet it is said to be returned to the place where they were all laid before,
verse. 10. Bring Aarons rod again before the testimony. However this laying of
these rods up before the Lord was to signify, that it was referred to him to
determine this controversy concerning the priesthood.

Verse. 5. And I will make to cease from me the murmuring of the children of
Israel.] That is, in this particular concerning Aarons priesthood.

Verse. 6. And the rod of Aaron was among their rods.] That is* there being
twelve rods brought for the twelve Princes of the twelve tribes (which were it
seems according to the custom of those times, made of the almond tree, for
such Aarons was, verse. 8. that bloomed blossoms and yielded almonds) they were
all laid together, and Aarons was put also amongst the other twelve.

Verse. 8. And behold the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi budded etc.] Hereby
the Lord did discover miraculously that he had chosen Aarons and his posterity
to be the only priests that should serve at his altar: and withal the
flourishing of this rod signified, first, the budding of Aarons posterity*
together with the flourishing glory and fruitfulness of the priesthood which
continued in his posterity; secondly, the miraculous flourishing glory of
Christ's priesthood (of which Aarons was a type) to wit, how he, that rod out of
the stem of Jesse, and branch that grew out of his root, Esa. 11. 1. though
at first he was as a dry and withered s^ick, so that there was no beauty nor
comeliness in him, Esa. 53. 2. and especially in his death and bur^all, when he
was indeed withered in the eye of reason without hope of recovery and dried up
like a potsheard, Psalm. 22. 15. should yet suddenly sprout forth again, to wit,
in his resurrection, and so his priesthood should become an eternal
priesthood, and l^^e Aarons budding and fruitbearing rod should bring forth
fruit to man believing on him remission of sins, righteousness and eternal
li^e, and by the preaching of the Gospel, that flourishing rod or scepter of
righteousness, should become glorious all the world over, to the great joy of
all those that have interest in him; and thirdly, that all those, that in the
days of the Gospel were truly set apart to teach the people as Aaron was,
though in themselves but dry and withered sticks, yet by the special grace of
God should bear and bring forth buds and fruit, and that their fruit should
remain, John 15. 16.

Verse. 12. And the children of Israel spoke unto Moses, saying, Behold we die,
we perish, we all perish.] Being by this miracle fully convinced of their
sin, and then calling to mind how severely God had punished this their
murmuring against Moses and Aaron, how some had been burnt with fire, some
swallowed up into the earth alive, some consumed with the plague, they are
stricken with an apprehension of the like danger (the first step to repentance)
and therefore cry out as men that might justly expect to be every one of them
destroyed, as they were indeed in danger to be presently taken away by some
judgment, had not the Lord been the more merciful to them.

Verse. 13. Whosoever comes any thing near unto the tabernacle of the Lord
shall die.] This is an amplification of their woeful condition, to wit, that
though God should spare them now, yet they should always be in danger, if they
did never so little press beyond the limits allowed them, whosoever (say they)
comes any thing near, that is, nearer then they should, and keep not off at
their full distance (wherein we may easily transgress) we see God will not
spare them; yea happily (as men terrified are indeed wont to conceive their
danger greater then it is) they complain as if it would be perilous to come
near the tabernacle at all.

Shall we be consumed with dying?] This may be a deprecation, Shall we be
consumed, that is, of thy mercy let us not be consumed: for so questions are
often used in earnest deprecations, as Psalm. 85. 6. Will thou not revive us
again, that thy people may rejoice in thee? and Esa. 64. 12. Will thou refrain
thy self from these things, O Lord? will thou hold thy peace and afflict us
very sore? But I rather take it as a bemoaning of their condition.

CHAP* XVIII.
Verse. 1. THou and thy sons and thy fathers house with thee shall bear the
iniquity of the Sanctuary.] Because of the peoples astonishment, chap. 17.
verse. 12. Behold we die, we perish, we all perish, the Lord here tells Aaron,
that he, the priests and Levites, must bear the iniquity of the Sanctuary, that
is, that if any pollution came to it by the people they should answer for it,
and therefore it must be their charge to watch over it. Thus the Lord shows
himself reconciled, and makes the priests watch a ground of appeasing the
peoples both fear and envy.

And thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.]
That is, shall be punished if the priesthood be polluted either by your selves
or the Levites intruding upon it, which your watch should prevent.

Verse. 3. Only they shall not come nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary and the
altar, that neither they, nor you also die.] To wit, for not preventing the
error of your brethren the Levites by your care.

Verse. 7. Therefore thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priests
office for every thing of the altar and within the vail.] That is, for all
things that concern the altar of burnt-offerings, and for all things that are
to be done within the vail, that is, within the outer vail, either in the holy
or most holy place.

Verse. 8. Unto thee have I given them, by reason of the anointing, etc.] That
is, for the office sake whereunto thou art anointed; because I have separated
thee from worldly employments to attend upon mine holy things, therefore thou
shall have mine holy things to live upon.

Verse. 9. Every oblation of theirs, every meat offering of theirs, etc.] The
particulars are here mentioned of the most holy things reserved from the fire,
that is, the sacrifices whereof part was burnt upon the altar, which were
allotted to be the priests portion for their maintenance, to wit, oblations
meat offerings sin offerings and trespasse-offerings; and this last is
expressed thus, every trespasse-offering of theirs which they shall render unto
me, because trespasse-offerings were brought as by way of recompense for some
trespass committed against the Lord. The greatest difficulty in thesewords is,
what is meant by the first clause, every oblation of theirs. But the most of
Expositours agree, that this is mentioned as a general comprehending all those
particulars after mentioned, as if it had been thus expressed, every oblation
of theirs shall be thine, that is, every meat offering, every sinne-offering,
and every trespasseoffering of theirs; and indeed I see not of what particular
sort of sacrifice it can be meant, because they are all besides expressed by
name.

Verse. 10. In the most holy place thou shall eat it.] That is, in the court of
the tabernacle (or the tents or houses round about it) which is called here the
most holy place, to wit, in respect to the camp of Israel, and afterward the
city Jerusalem, which were holy places for the like holy things (as they were
called) to be eaten in the Passover, peace offerings, etc. yea and in respect
to the great court for the people, which was without the priests court,
mentioned 2. Chron. 4. 9. and called therefore the outer court, Ezekiel. 42. 14.

Verse. 11. And this is thine, the heave offering of their gift, with all the
wave-offerings, etc.] That is, the right shoulder and the wave-breast of their
peace offerings, with all other gifts that they were heaved and waved, no part
thereof being burnt upon the altar.

Verse. 12. All the best of the oil, and all the best of the wine, and of the
wheat, the first fruits of them, etc.] These things here mentioned were
allotted for the priests sustenance. Some of the first fruits of their land
were brought to the Lord at their three great feasts, as a sheaf of their
barley, at the feast of Passover or unleavened bread, chap. 23. 10. and two
loaves of their new wheat, at the feast of Pentecost, ver. 17. and the first of
their wine and oil at the feast of tabernacles. But these were brought in the
name of all the inhabitants of the land in general. Besides these therefor,
particular men were of their own corn and fruits to bring the first fruits unto
the Lord, as is enjoined in several places, Exodus 22. 29. and 23. 19. etc.
concerning which there is no other direction given but that they should be of
the first, and of the best (as is here expressed) the quantity being left to
the free bounty of the owner, according as he had found the blessing of God
upon his grounds, and of these first fruits is this place to be understood.
Some indeed make a difference betwixt the first fruits mentioned here, ver. 12.
and the first ripe mentioned in the following verse, What soever is first ripe
in the land, which they shall bring unto the Lord, shall be thine, which they
say is meant only of those first ripe fruits, which the people were to bring
to the priests, concerning which the Law speaks, Deuteronomy. 26. 2. But whether there
can be any such difference gathered from the Scripture, is very questionable.

Verse. 16. And those that are to be rede^med from a maneth old shall thou
redeem, etc.] That is, the firstborn of men: for though in the foregoing verse
there is mention made of the redemption of the firstborn, both of man and
beast, Nevertheless, the firstborn of man shall thou surely redeem, and the
firstling of unclean beasts shall thou redeem; yet this has reference only to
the firstborn of men, as is evident, 1. because it is said here they were to
redeem them at a month old, which was indeed the time for the redemption of
the firstborn of men, but the firstlings of beasts were to be given to the
Lord at eight days old, Levit. 22. 27. and therefore it seems were at that age
to be redeemed; and secondly, because the estimation or price with the priest
is here appointed to set upon the firstborn that were to be redeemed, is five
shekels, which was indeed the price for the redemption of the firstborn of
men, Numb. 3. 46, 47. and Levit. 27. 6. But it is no way probable that the same
price of redemption was set upon the firstborn of men and the firstlings of
unclean beasts: of the firstling of an (...) we read expressly that it was to
be redeemed with a lamb, Exodus 13. 13. and therefore the like may be conceived
of the firstling of other beasts, or else that they were reasonably rated by
the pri^st acco^ding to their value.

Verse. 17. But the firstling of a cow, or the firstling of a sheep, or the
firstling of a goat, thou shall not redeem, they are holy.] See Deuteronomy. 15. 19.

Verse. 19. It is a cov^nant of salt for ever, etc.] That is, in liew of your
service in the tabernacle I have allotted you this for your maintenance by a
perpetual and unchangeable covenant. Now this covenant in regard of its
perpetuity is here called a covenant of salt, and so also Gods covenant with
David, 2. Chron. 13. 5. either in reference to that Law, Lev. 2. 13. Every
oblation of thy meat offering shall thou season with salt; neither shall thou
suffer the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy
meat offering: as if it had been said, that this covenant made with the priest
for their maintenance in the particulars before mentioned should continue for
ever, even as that which he had made with the Israelites, that every sacrifice
should be salted with salt; or else because salt having a virtue to preserve
any thing from corruption, therefore by a cov^nant of salt is meant only a
stable firm and incorruptible covenant.

Verse. 20. Thou shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall thou
have any part among them.] That is, when the land shall be divided by lot,
there sha ll be no lot for the Levites. Indeed they had cities to dwell in, and
suburbs; but tho se also were given them from the other tribes, Numb. 35.

Verse. 22. Neither must the children of Israel henceforth come nigh the
tabernacle, etc.] To wit, as they offered to do in the rebellion of Korah.

Verse. 23. But the Levites shall do the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and they shall bear their iniquity.] That is, the Levites shall
bear the punishment of their own iniquity if they transgress, yea, and of the
peoples, if by their not watching over the holy things they be suffered to
transgress.

Verse. 27. And this your heave offering shall be reckoned unto you as though it
were the corn of the threshing floor.] That is, this tenth of your tithes,
which you shall give to the priest, the Lord will accept at your hands no less
then if having lands you should pay tithe of the increase thereof, as the rest
of the people do unto you.

Verse. 32. Neither shall ye pollute the holy things of the children of Israel,
lest ye die.] Which might be done by the uncleanness of the priests, and many
other ways.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. SPeak unto the children of Israel that they bring thee a red hoifer,
etc.] This is the Law for making the water of separation, as it is called ver.
9. that is, the water that was to be kept for the cleansing of those that were
legally unclean, and for that cause were separated from the holy things of the
tabernacle. When this Law was given we cannot say; but very fitly it is added
here to that which went before: for as in the foregoing chapter to appease the
peoples excessive fear, chap. 17. 12. the priests and Levites were appointed to
do the service of the tabernacle, and to watch over the people that they might
not transgress about any of the holy things; so here also the Lord appoints a
water of separation to be made, that so if any of the people had contracted any
legal uncleanness, by the sprinkling of this water upon them they might be
cleansed, and so might come freely again to the service of God in the
tabernacle without fear of those plagues, which otherwise their pollutions
might have brought upon them. The legal pollutions were to affect them with
the filthiness of their sins; and this water of separation was to teach
them, that if they desired to be cleansed from their filthiness, they must go
out of themselves, and obtain it from God, from his Sanctuary and sacrifice.
For the making of this water a red heifer was to be provided, and that by the
common care and charge of all the children of Israel, because it was to be for
the common good of them all* even for the cleansing of any one amongst them
that was by any accident legally unclean: And indeed as all other sacrifices,
so this in special was a notable type and figure of Christ: for first, it must
be a heifer, that the imbecility of the sex might shadow forth the mean and
humble and despised condition wherein Christ should live in the world;
secondly, a red heifer, either to denote the truth of his humane nature, that
he was indeed the son of man, who was at first called Adam, which in the
Hebrew signifies red, because of the red earth of which he was made; or rather
to betoken the bloudinesse of his passion, (whereto the Prophet seems also, as
some conceive, to allude, Esa. 63. 1, 2. Who is this that comes from Edom with
dyed garments from Bozrah? -- Wherefore art thou red in thine apparel, and thy
garments like him that treads in the wine press?) and that by his blood it
is that we shall be cleansed from all our sins, even those sins that are
red as crimson or scarlet, Esa. 1. 18. He has loved us, and washed us from our
sins in his own blood, says S. John, Rev. 1. 5. thirdly, it must be a heifer
without spot, wherein is no blemish, to signify the purity of his nature
without any blemish of sin, and the perfection both of his righteousness and
suffering; and fourthly, a heifer upon which never came yoke (for they used in
those times to plow and to draw their carts with heifers and cows as well as
with oxen, Judge. 14. 18. and 6. 7.) and that to signify his fr^edome from the
bondage of sin, as also his voluntary doing of those things that were to be
done for our redemption, John 10. 17, 18. I lay down my life that I might take
it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; and Heb. 9.
13, 14. If the ashes of an heifer sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the
purifying of the flesh; How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through
the eternal spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your consciences
from dead works to serve the living God?

Verse. 3. And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest, etc.] This heifer must
be given to the priest, to signify that our redemption and purification was
the work of Christ's priesthood, who was both priest and sacrifice; yet not to
the high priest, but to Eleazar, because by doing this service that was now to
be done he was to be unclean, ver. 7. and it was fitter that he should be
defiled then Aaron; and secondly, it must be carried without the camp, as an
accursed thing, figuring Christ's being made a curse, and suffering without the
city, Heb. 13. 12. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people
with his own blood, suffered without the gate.

Verse. 4. And sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacl^ of the
congregation seven times.] Signifying that though it bore the curse, yet it was
accepted of God for the cleansing of the unclean, and that by Christ's blood we
are made clean in Gods sight, and have an entrance into heaven thereby.

Verse. 5. And one shall burn the heifer in his sight, her skin and her flesh,
etc.] This was done to signify the grievous suffering of Christ in the whole
man, both soul and body, as also, say some, the ardent love which he bore unto
his people, in that he did offer up himself as a sacrifice to God in their
behalf.

Verse. 6. And the priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssope, and scarlet, etc.]
To signify that these things should be used for a sprinkle in sprinkling the
unclean with the water of separation, Lev. 14. 4. and that was by the virtue of
the sacrifice that these things should be sanctified to this end, that to them
might be applied the cleansing virtue of Christ's death and spirit for the
purging of our sins.

Verse. 7. The priest shall w^sh his clothes etc.] The like is said of him that
burnt this heifer, ver. 8. and of him that gathered up the ashes, ver. 10. and
of him that sprinkled an unclean person with the water of separation made of
these ashes, ver. 21. They that were employed in preparing this water were
defiled by that which was for the cleansing of others that were defiled. And
this was first to discover thereby the abominablenesse of sin, in that the
sins of the people being, as it were, imputed to this heifer, that she might
die for them, every one that touched her was thereby polluted; secondly, to
signify that Christ, of whom this heifer was a type, by the imputation of our
sins should be made a curse for us, and should be numbered amongst
transgressors; thirdly, to teach them that it was not so much the sign, as
the thing signified thereby, that had virtue in it to purify those that were
spiritually unclean, and consequently to show the imperfection of the legal
priesthood, because by preparing the means of the Churches sanctification
themselves were polluted.

Verse. 9. And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes, etc.] This branch
of the Law, that the ashes of the heifer must be gathered up by a man that is
clean, and laid up without the camp in a clean place, was because they were now
consecrated to a holy use, however the man that gathered them was thereby made
unclean (as is expressed in the following verse) because they were the
remainder of a heifer slain, as I may say, for the sins of the people: and
hereby was signified that Christ our sacrifice was pure in himself, though made
sin for us; yea and some Expositours add that this laying up of these ashes
in a clean place signified that Christ should be buried in a new tomb, wherein
never man before was laid, Luke 23. 53.

And it shall be kept for the congregation of the children of Israel for a
water of separation.] Why it is called a water of separation, see before in the
note upon ver. 2. As for the place where these ashes were kept when they came
into the land of Canaan, it is not expressed; yet many hold that it was
dispersed into all the cities, that those that were unclean might have
wherewith to purify themselves.

Verse. 10. And it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger
that sojourneth among them for a statute for ever.] To wit, the making and
reserving these ashes for a water of separation. Whether there was a new heifer
burnt at every station, where the Israelites tarried any time; or whether every
tribe or Israelite (which I should rather think) fetched of the ashes from the
place where they were laid without the camp, and so kept them for their own use
when occasion served, because it is not expressed we need not curiously
enquire: Only this we must know that as the burning, so also the ashes of this
heifer, was a sign of Christ's most ignominious and accursed death (for to be
brought to ashes upon the earth, is noted for the extremity of Gods fiery
judgments, Ezekiel. 28. 18.) and that the memorial of Christ's ignominious death
is to be kept by us in the Sacrament of the Lords supper as a most glorious
monument of our life, justification and sanctification through faith in his
name. See 1. Cor. 11. 24, 25, 26. and Gal. 6. 14.

Verse. 11. He that touches the dead body of any man, shall be unclean seven
days.] He that touched a dead beast was unclean but one day only, Lev. 11.
24. etc. Whosoever touches the carcass of them shall be unclean until the
even, etc. neither was he to be sprinkled with those ashes. By these legal
pollutions therefore, contracted by the touch of a dead man the Lord did
undoubtedly teach his people, first, to observe Gods curse in death; secondly,
to take heed of being defiled by the society of dead men, that is, wicked men,
men dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. and of polluting our souls by any
sin or communion with dead works. See 2. Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from
among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean
thing, and I will receive you; and 1. Tim. 5. 22. Lay hands, suddenly on no
man, neither be partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure: and thirdly,
that if they had defiled themselves they should seek presently to be cleansed
of their uncleanness, namely by repentance from dead works, and says toward
God, which purifieth the heart, Acts 15. 9.

Verse. 12. He shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the
s^venth day he shall be clean.] The third day was mystical, having reference
to the resurrection of Christ; so was also the seventh, being a perfect number
and signifying how full and perfectly we are cleansed from our sins by the
sprinkling of the blood and spirit of Christ.

Verse. 13. And that soul shall be cut off from Israel.] That is, if he do it
presumptuously; but if he have done it ignorantly he was to bring a sacrifice,
Leviticus 5. 3, 6.

Verse. 16. And whosoever touches one that is slain with a sword, etc.] That
is, whosoever touches any slain man (for though the text speaks only of such
as are slain with a sword, yet hereby all other are employed also) or a dead
body, that is, any other dead body of a man, though not slain, but dying his
natural death, yea or the bone of a man, or a grave, he shall be unclean seven
days: and therefore it was that to avoid these pollutions they used to have
their places of burial without their cities, Luke 7. 12. Now when he came nigh
to the gate of the city, behold there was a dead man carried out. See also
John 9. 41.

Verse. 17. And running water shall be put theret^ in a vessel.] Because such
water is purest. See Lev. 14. 5. This figured the spirit of God, which they
that believe in Christ do receive, John 7. 38, 39.

Verse. 18. And a clean person shall take hyssope, and dip it in the water, and
sprinkle it about the tent, and upon all the vessels.] For though a vessel were
melted, yet it was not clean till it was sprinkled with this water, Numb. 31.
23. Every thing that may abide the fire ye shall make it go through the fire,
and it shall be clean; nevertheless it shall be purified with the water of
separation.

Verse. 22. And what soever the unclean person touches shall be unclean, etc.]
The unclean person here spoken of must needs be meant of the unclean person
mentioned in the foregoing verse (as by the immediate inference of this upon
that is evident) to wit, the person that was made unclean by touching the water
of separation; yet withal it may be extended to all the unclean persons
mentioned before in this chapter, as those that were made unclean by the
burning or touching of the red heifer, or her ashes, or by the touching of the
dead body of a man, etc. and the Law here given concerning those is, that every
thing should be unclean that such unclean persons touched, and that every
person should be unclean that touched any thing that was defiled by the touch
of an unclean man: and thus hereby was figured the contagion of sin,
spreading from one to another, to the infection of many.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 1. THen came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, into
the desert of Zin, etc.] Not the wilderness of Sin, mentioned Exodus 16. 1.
whither they came on the fifteenth day of the second month after their
departing out of the land of Egypt; but the wilderness of Zin, which was near
to the land of Edom. The last station of the Israelites mentioned in this story
was Kadesh in the wilderness of Paran, Numb. 12. 16. and 13. 26. which is also
called Kadesh-Barnea, Deuteronomy. 1. 19. and Rithmah, Numb. 33. 18. close upon the
borders of Canaan (for thence they sent twelve men to search the land) But
because here they murmured against God for fear of the inhabitants, hence the
Lord appoints them to return to the red sea: from Rithmah therefore or
Kadesh-Barnea they returned (as we find it Numb. 33. 19.) to Rimmon-parez,
thence to Libnah, thence to Rissah, thence to Kehelathah (where some think it
was that the Israelite was stoned for gathering broken wood on the Sabbath day,
Exodus 15. 32.) thence they went to mount Shapher, thence to Haradah, thence to
Makheloth, thence to Tahath, thence to Tarah (where it is thought that insolent
mutiny began of Korah, Dathan and Abiram) thence they removed to Mithcah,
thence to Hashmonah, thence to Moseroth, thence to Bene-jaakan, thence to
Horha-gidgad, thence to Jotbathah, thence to Ebronah, thence to Ezion-gaber,
which was close by the red sea (for this was a place for shipping in Edoms
land, 1. King. 9. 26. And King Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-Geber,
which is besides Eloth, on the shore on the red sea, in the land of Edom) then
they turned to the North again, and pitched (as here Moses tells us) in another
Kadesh which was in the desert of Zin, of which Jephthah spoke, Judge. 11. 16.
and this was in the first month, to wit, of the fourtieth year after they were
come out of Egypt; for at their next station in mount Hor, whither they removed
from this Kadesh, Aaron dyed, and that is noted to have been in the first day
of the fifth month of the fourtieth year, Numb. 33. 38. So that in their
travels from Kadesh-Barnea, where the spy came to Moses, to this Kadesh in the
desert of Zin, there were about eight and thirty years spent, the most of their
fathers that were numbered at their coming out of Egypt being in that time
destroyed.

And Miriam dyed there, and was buried there.] To wit, in Kadesh* She was the
sister of Moses, a prophetess, and by her also God guided the Israelites in
their travels; I sent before thee Moses and Aaron and Miriam, says the Lord to
the Israelites, Mich. 6. 4. and therefore is the place and time of her death
and burial noted. This year Aaron dyed also, chap. 33. 38. and Moses, Deuteronomy 34.
7. and if this was the sister of Moses, as it is generally held, that was set
to watch what would become of Moses when he was laid out in an ark of
bulrushes, Exodus 2. 4. she could be little less then ten years old, when Moses
was born, and consequently she was about a hundred and thirty years now when
she dyed: for Moses (who dyed toward the end of this year) was a hundred and
twenty years old when he dyed, De^t. 34. 7.

Verse. 2. And there was no water for the congregation, etc.] With the same want
God tried their fathers in the first year after their going out of Egypt, Exodus
17. 4. who thereupon murmured then also, and had water out of a rock (for in
many particulars these two different stories were alike, though not in all) but
in this these their children were worse then their fathers, because the
experience their fathers had of Gods succor in the very same extremity did no
good upon them, nor could prevent these their murmurings against Moses and
Aaron.

Verse. 3. Would God that we had dyed when our brethren dyed before the Lord.]
That is, with those whom God did suddenly destroy in the insurrection of Korah,
Dathan and Abiram, chap. 16. and so also at other times. This they wished,
intimating that it had been easier to have been cut off so, then to pine away
now for want of water; but the whilst in a desperate manner they most
impudently fl^ght that fearful judgment of being cut off in Gods fiery
indignation, as a matter of nothing.

Verse. 6. And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly, etc.]
Namely, for fear of the people, because of their outrage, and that they might
go to the tabernacle to intercede as formerly, chap. 14. 5. for this rebellious
people.

And the glory of the Lord appeared unto them.] See chap. 16. 19.

Verse. 8. Take the rod, and gather thou the assembly together, etc.] It is very
questionable what rod it was that God here appoints Moses to take for the
working of this miracle of fetching water out of the rock. Evident it is that
Moses took the rod from before the Lord, verse. 9. that is out of the
tabernacle; and therefore some Expositours hold, that it was Aarons rod which
was budded, and was laid up before the testimony, chap. 17. 10. But more
generally it is held, that it was that rod of Moses, wherewith he had wrought
so many miracles in Egypt, which seems indeed the more probable, first, because
it is afterward called his rod, verse. 11. With his rod he smote the rock; and
secondly, because this was fittest for this employment, the very sight of this
rod wherewith God had manifested his almighty power in so many miracles, and
particularly in fetching water for them out of the rock at Rephidim, being
enough to make them ashamed of their present murmuring against God. And what
though he took this rod from before the Lord? verse. 9. even Moses rod in memory
of the great things that had been done by it (for which it is sometimes called
the rod of God, as Exodus 4. 20.) might be laid up in the tabernacle as well as
Aarons; yea and some conceive that Aarons rod, which budded and was laid up in
the tabernacle, was the very same wherewith those miracles were wrought in the
land of Egypt, the rather, because even the rod of Moses is sometimes also
called Aarons rod, as Exodus 7. 12. They cast down every man his rod, and they
became serpents; but Aarons rod swallowed up their rods.

And speak unto the rock before their eyes, etc.] Here was no command given to
Moses that he should smite the rock, but only that he should take the rod in
his hand, to wit, as a sign of Gods working by him, and speak to the rock
before their eyes; and therefore many hold that herein lay a part of Moses
sin, that he smote the rock, when he should only have spoken to it. But
withal in this command of the Lord to Moses to speak to the rock, there was
couched a sharp exprobration of Isreal's hard heartedness and infidelity: for
it intimates, that the dead creatures would sooner hear and obey God, then his
own people; and therefore also he was appointed to do this before the eyes of
all the people, whereas the former miracle, of the like nature, at the rock of
Rephidem, was only wrought before the elders of Israel, Exodus 17. 5.

Verse. 10. And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the
rock, etc.] Their return to the enraged people from whom erewhile for fear they
withdrew themselves, and ready undertaking what God had enjoined, shows plainly
that they did not question Gods power to fetch water out of the rock (how could
they, having had experience that he had done it before, Exodus 17. 6?) nor did
absolutely conclude that God would not work this miracle at this time. But why
then does the Lord tell Moses and Aaron that they believed him not, verse. 12?
undoubtedly because there was some secret distrust and unbelief in their
hearts, though it prevailed not so far against their faith as to make them
wholly refuse to do what God had enjoined them. God that sees the heart
charge them with infidelity, and therefore we may be sure they were herein
guilty, and that happily upon this ground: Heretofore when the people murmured
the Lord for the most part showed great indignation against them, and was ready
to destroy them, but that Moses by his prayer prevailed with God to spare them;
Moses therefore and Aaron wondering that now the Lord should show no such
displeasure, but should presently send them to fetch water for them out of the
rock they doubted whether God did seriously intend this supply, or did only
command it by way of upbraiding the people for forgetting what he had formerly
done for them when they wanted water: and so though they came to the rock ready
to do what God had commanded, yet they were perplexed and in suspense, betwixt
hope and doubtings, questioning still within themselves what God would do, and
that, it seems, not so much out of any doubt of Gods power, as out of a
distrust that such a rebellious people were not capable of such a mercy from
God: and that it was this which Moses stuck at, his words seem to testify,
verse. 10. Hear now* ye rebels, must we fetch you water out of this rock? But if
the infidelity of their hearts were all their sin, why is it said also, verse.
12. that they did not sanctifi^ him in the eyes of the children of Israel? I
answer, that they showed their distrust outwardly also: first, by Moses his
stricking the rock, to which he should only have spoken, verse. 11. and this
tended to the obscuring of Gods glory, since his almighty power would have been
more manifest if by mere speaking to the rock the water had gushed forth;
s^condly, by striking it twice, which might well proceed from heat of anger and
distrust; thirdly by the doubtfulnesse of his words, must we fetch you water
out of this rock? and fourthly, by the bitterness of his rage against the
people. Hear now, ye rebels (which happily he expressed also in many other
words of discontent and anger which are not here set down; for the psalmist
says that they angered him at the waters of strife, and provoked his spirit,
so that he spoke unadvisedly with his lips, Psalm. 10^* 32. 33.) which as in
part no doubt it proceeded from infidelity, so it must needs much obscure the
riches of Gods mercy, who was ready to show such wonderful favor to such a
rebellious people, and argued a kind of unwillingnesse that God should be
honored by this miracle, which he had determined to work in the eyes of all
the people.

Verse. 11. And the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank.] This
was also spiritual drink, flowing from the rock Christ (1. Cor. 10. 4. And did
all drink the same spiritual drink; for they drank of that spiritual rock
that followed them, and that rock was Christ) being smitten for our
transgressions, Esa 5. 3, 4. by the rod of the law; from him proceeds that
living water wherewith Gods Israel may quench their thirst for ever, But
whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst: but
the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, springing up
into everlasting life, John 4. 14. Ho, every one that thirsts come ye to the
waters, and he that has no money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, and buy wine
and milk without money, and without price.

And their beasts also.] Thus those elements, which are signs and seals of
Gods grace unto those to whom they are sanctified of God for that purpose, out
of that use are no other but common, and have no inherent holiness in them.

Verse. 12. Because ye believed me not to sanctify me in the eyes of the
children of Israel.] That is, to glorify me, by discovering that you did not
question mine almighty power, my faithfulness and free grace even to those
that do not deserve it: for as the believer does greatly honor God by resting
upon his mercy and power and faithfulness, so he that questions the
accomplishment of any mercy, which God has promised his people, does
exceedingly dishonor him: and therefore it is said, chap. 27. 14. that Moses
and Aaron did herein ^ebell against Gods commandments. See the former note upon
verse. 10.

Therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I have
given them.] How grievous this chastisement was unto Moses, we see, Deuteronomy. 3.
23, 24* 25, 26. But withal herein a mystery was employed. Neither Moses, the
minister of the law, nor Aaron, the priest, could bring them into Canaan, but
this must be the work of Jesus or Joshua his successor; so neither the law,
nor the legal priesthood, can bring us into heaven, but only faith in Jesus
Christ, Gal. 2. 16.

Verse. 13. This is the water of Meribah, etc.] So was the former place also
called in Rephidim, Exodus 17. 7. To distinguish them the Scripture calls this
Meribah of Kadesh, Deuteronomy. 2. 1, 2, 3.

And he was sanctified in them.] That is, amongst the Israelites by giving them
water, and thereby manifesting his power truth and compassion; or in them, that
is, Moses and Aaron, by punishing their rebellion: for hereby God is
sanctified, Ezekiel. 38. 16. I will bring thee against my land, that the heathen
may know me when I shall be sanctified in thee, O God, before their eyes.

Verse. 14. And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the King of Edom, etc.]
To wit, by Gods direction, Deuteronomy. 2. 1, 2, 3.

Thou know all the travel that has befallen us.] That is, our grievous and
wearisome afflictions and troubles have been so famous, that they cannot be
unknown to thee.

Verse. 16. And when we cried unto the Lord, he heard our voice, and sent an
angel, etc.] This was Christ, who appeared to Moses in the burning bush, and
sent Moses to fetch the Israelites out of Egypt, and afterward led them in
their way in a pillar of cloud by day, and a pillar of fire by night. See the
note upon Exodus 3. 2.

And behold we are in Kadesh a city in the uttermost of thy border.] Or, by
Kadesh, to wit, in the wilderness lying near, and having the name of Kadesh
the citi^, Numb. 33. 36.

Verse. 17. Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country.] That being now
their nearest way, and most convenient for their passage in to Canaan.

We will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards, neither will
we drink of the water of the wels.] Meaning that they would not turn aside into
their fields or vineyards to do them any damage, and that either they would not
drink without paying for it, as verse. 19. or else that they would only drink
of the rivers which were common, not meddling with their wells, dug for
their private uses, which were very precious in those hot and dry countries.

Verse. 18. And Edom said unto him, Thou shall not pass by me, etc.] Fearing
questionless that an army of six hundred thousand would not be so easily
gotten out of his country again, if they were once suffered to come in.

Verse. 19. And the children of Israel said unto him, We will go by the high
way.] This is either the reply of the first messengers, or a second embassy
upon the answer brought back by the first messengers.

Verse. 21. Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border.]
Notwithstanding, as they went along their coasts, the Edomites suffered them to
buy victuals of them. See Deuteronomy. 2. 28, 29.

Wherefore Israel turned away from him.] Fetching a compass through the
wilderness about the land of Edom. The Lord had charged them that they should
not meddle with the sons of Esau or their possession, Deuteronomy. 2. 4, 5. Ye are
to pass through the coasts of your brethren, the children of Esau -- Medd^c
not with them, for I will not give you of their land, no not so much as a
footbreadth, so they went about, though the way through the wilderness was
very troublesome, Numb. 21. 4. The soul of the people was much discouraged
because of the way.

Verse. 22. And came unto mount Hor.] From which some think the people that were
driven out of this country by Esau were called Horims, Dent. 2. 12. The Horims
also dwelt in Seir beforetime, but the children of Esau succeeded them when
they had destroyed them, etc. and Esau is called the Horite, Genesis 36. 20.

Verse. 24. Aaron shall be gathered unt^ his people, etc.] See the note upon
Genesis 25. 8. This prediction of Aarons death was to make it manifest to the
people, that he was by death kept from entering Canaan for his sin, else the
death of so aged a man would have been little regarded.

Verse. 25. Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up into mount Hor.]
These reasons may be probably given why this is appointed to be done in the
mount: 1. That it might be a sign that this was done by Gods appointment,
their going up into the mount being as it were a presenting of themselves
before Gods tribunal, that by his will they might be ordered in this great
business. 2. That it might raise up the peoples expectation to observe what
was done, whence it is said, verse. 27. that they went up in the sight of all
the congregation. 3. That it might be a sign of Aarons ascending by death to
heaven.

Verse. 28. And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar
his son.] The priests used not to wear their holy garments out of the
tabernacle: But this was done by special command of God. Aaron therefore going
up to mount Hor in all the high priests attire that he might die there, Moses
stripped him there of all those holy garments, not so much that they might not
be defiled by Aarons dead body, as that they might be put upon Eleazar his
son, to signify that God had appointed him to suce^ed in his fathers office.
And indeed this done thus (once for all) was sufficient to show that God had
established this order, that the high priests eldest son, or the next heir of
the family (unless he were incapable of it, because of some blemish) was still
to succeed in that place and office: and withal it must needs be a great
comfort to Aaron, that before he died he saw his son settled in his room, and
might in his son, so clothed, behold as in a type his Mediator, the
salvation of God, Luke 2. 29. But yet in the days of the Judges we find that
the high priesthood was removed from Eleazars to Ithamars posterity, for Eli
was of the stock of Ithamar.

And Aaron died there in the top of the mount.] This was in the first day of
the fifth month in the fourtieth year after their coming out of Egypt, Aaron
then being an hundred and twenty three years old, chap. 33. 38, 39. and an
evident demonstration this was of the insufficiency of the legal priesthood,
Hebr. 7. 23* 24. And they truly were many priests because they were not
suffered to continue by reason of death: But this man, because he continues
ever, has an unchangeable priesthood.

Verse. 29. They mourned for Aaron thirty days.] This was it seems the usual
time of mourning for great men, for so long also they mourned for Moses, Deuteronomy.
34. 8. In Deuteronomy. 10. 6. it is said that Aaron died, and was buried at Mosera;
but concerning that difficulty, see the note upon that place.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. ANd when king Arad, the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south, heard
tell that Israel came by the way of the spies, etc.] That is, when he
understood by the spies he had sent forth to observe the course of the
Isra^lites* that they were turned back again from the red sea, and marched
directly upon the south of Canaan, where his country lay, by the way of the
spies, that is, by the way where he had sent his spies to watch them, not
knowing of Moses purpose to compass the land of Moab he resolved that they
meant to enter upon the south of Canaan; and therefore judging it safer to find
his eneme in his neighbors country then to be found by them in his own, he
immediately went forth with a great army even as far as mount Hor in the edge
of the desert, where the Israelites now lay, and there fought with them, and
took some of them prisoners. Many Expositours do far otherwise conceive of
that which is here said of the Israelites coming by the way of the spies;
namely, that king Arad heard they came by the way where the spies which Moses
did long since send to search the land, chap. 13. 17. entered that country; and
indeed they entered upon the south of Canaan, as is there expressly noted. But
first, because the Israelites were now far from Kadesh-Barnea, whence those
spies were sent to search the land of Canaan: and secondly, because it seems
apparent by the text, that those that told this king Arad of the Israelites
coming, used the exp^ession here mentioned, that they came by the way of the
spies, and we no way find that either this king, or any other of the
Canaanites, did ever know any thing of the Israelites spies that were sent to
search the land, therefore I conceive that this is meant rather, as is
abovesaid, of the way where king Arad had sent spies to observe which way the
Israelites would take, of whose return from the red sea he had before been
informed, as is noted, chap. 33. 40. As for the battle which was here fought
betwixt the Israelites and the army of this king Arad, very observable it is,
first, that the Lord so disposed of it by his providence, that this one king
should only come forth against them, and that all the Canaanites in those
parts did not join their forces together against them (for by this means the
Israelites were not so daunted, but that they were willing to fight with them;)
and secondly, that notwithstanding the Lord suffered them to be foiled, so that
some of them were taken prisoners in this battle: for hereby he taught them at
first how unable they were in themselves to conquer those nations, that so they
might learn to trust in God, and not in themselves. If one king thus prevailed
over them, how should they be able to destroy all the inhabitans of the land,
combining themselves together, if the Lord should not assist them?

Verse. 2. And Israel vowed a vow unto the Lord, etc.] That is, the Israelites
intending to renew the battle, and again once more to set upon Arad and his
army, called upon God for help, and vowed to devote unto him their enemies and
all their cities, that is, utterly to destroy them, If thou will indeed deliver
this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities: for when
things were thus devoted, the persons were killed, the cities burnt, and the
goods confiscate to the Lord, so that nothing was reserved for their own
private use, as is noted upon Levit. 27. 28. and this was a vow agreeable to
Gods law, Exodus 23. 32. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their
gods.

Verse. 3. And the Lord hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the
Canaanites.] That is, this army of Arad, whom, in a second battle, after this
vow they vanquished and destroyed.

And they utterly destroyed them and their cities: and he called the name of
that place Hormah.] But how could they, being so far off in the wilderness,
destroy their cities lying within Canaan? surely had Moses at this time entered
Canaan in the pursuit of Arad, he would not have fallen back again into the
deserts. It seems therefore that the accomplishment of this vow was performed
long after, to wit, by the men of Judah and Simeon, when they were come into
the land of Canaan, as is expressed, Judge. 1. 17. And Judah went with Simeon
his brother, and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly
destroyed it: and the name of the city was called Hormah; so that this clause
was here inserted either by Mosesprophetically, or by some other holy man
afterward.

Verse. 4. And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way of the red sea, etc.]
That is, they went from Hor Eastward, a way that led to the red sea, which lay
North and South, the common rode from Gilead and Moab to Eziongaber, etc. and
so crossing that way, they passed on to Zalmonah, and so (turning then
Northward) to Punon, as is expressed, Numb. 33. 41, 42. and here it seems it
was that the Israelites were punished with fiery serpents.

And the soul of the people was much discourag^d because of the way.] That is,
because they were led a great way about through a desert, full of wants and
difficulties; and that the rather, because now they began to think, puffed up
with their late victory, that it had been easy for them to have forced a
passage the nearest way.

Verse. 5. And the people spoke against God, and against Moses, etc.] And so
tempted Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 9. Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of serpents.

Verse. 6. And the Lord sent fiery ser^ents among the people, etc.] So called,
because their venomous biting did cause a grievous burning in the bodies of the
Israelites. It may seem that they were a kind of serpents with wings, that so
flying amongst them did here and there seize upon them, and bite them, such as
the prophet speaks of, Esa. 14. 29. Out of the serpents root shall come forth a
cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. The word in the
original is, Seraphin, that is, Burners, the very same name whereby the Angels
are called, Esa. 6. 2. because of their burning zeal for Gods glory. The
wilderness, through which the Israelites now went, did abound with many sorts
of these serpents, and therefore it is called that great and terrible
wilderness wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions, Deuteronomy. 8. 15. only God
had hitherto kept them from hurting his people, till now for their sin he
gave them power to bite and kill them: and indeed the punishment was just
according to their sin; for now God gave them just cause to complain of
thirst, and with the venomous biting of fiery serpents he punished their
virulent tongues, to whom that might well be applied which the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 140. 3. They have sharpened their tongues as a serpent, adders poison is
under their lips.

Verse. 8. Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole, etc.] This was the
way which the Lord prescribed for the curing of the Israelites, that were
bitten with fiery serpents, namely, that Moses should make a fiery serpent,
that is, a figure or representation of those fiery serpents wherewith they were
stung, and that of brass, as we may see in the following verse, the better to
represent their fiery quality, because brass is of a fiery color (and
therefore it is said of the Cherubims that Ezekiel saw in a vision, Ezekiel. 1. 7.
that they sparkled like the color of burnished brass, and then set it upon a
pole, to the end that it might be seen from every quarter of the camp, so that
every man that was stung with the fiery serpents might look upon this brazen
serpent, and thereby might be healed. Now this way of cure the Lord prescribed
for two reasons: first, because this, being no natural way of cure, did the
better discover that it was of Gods mercy; and secondly, that it might be a
type of Christ and our redemption by him, John 3. 14* 15. As Moses lifted up
the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of man be lifted up;
That whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have eternal life. For
first, as the Israelites were bitten with fiery serpents, and that biting was
mortal and deadly; so was all mankind in our parents mortally stung and bitten
by Satan, that old serpent, Rev. 12. 9. so that their whole nature is envenomed
with sin, as a deadly poison, and as it were set on fire of hell, as S. James
speaks of the tongue in particular* James ^. 6, 8. and that so, that without
some way of recovery they must needs perish everlastingly, By one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5. 12. and, the sting of death
is sin, says the same Apostle, 1. Cor. 15. 56. Secondly, as the brazen
serpent, which Moses made for the cure of the Israelites, had the outward form
of those fiery serpents, yet had not the poison of those serpents in it; so
Christ came in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. and yet was without
sin: Thirdly, as the brazen serpent was lifted upon a pole, that when any man
was stung with the fiery serpents he might lift up his eyes, and look upon it;
so Christ was lifted upon the cross, to the end he might save death-stung
sinners; or rather, so was Christ lifted up and held forth unto men in the
preaching of the Gospel, that so all poor sinners might look upon him as the
only author of eternal salvation, according to that of S. Paul to the
Galatians, Who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the truth, before
whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth crucified among you? Gal.
3. 1. And fifthly, as the Israelites, that were mortally bitten by those fiery
serpents, were perfectly cured only by looking on the brazen serpent, whereof
there could be no natural reason; so are sinners perfectly saved from that
death whereto they were liable because of sin, only by casting an eye of
faith upon Christ, whereof no reason can be given but the will of God; and
therefore is the preaching of this way of salvation called the foolishness of
preaching, 1. Cor. 1. 21. And indeed partly because it was such a notable type
of the promised Messiah, and partly that it might be a memorial of this
singular me^cy which God thereby had afforded them, the Israelites carefully
kept this brazen serpent unto the days of Hezekiah; but then because the
people burnt incense to it, that good King brake it in pieces, 2. Kings 18. 4.

Verse. 10. And the children of Israel set forward, and pitched in Oboth.] They
removed not from mount Hor to Oboth, but (as is before noted upon verse. 14.)
from mount Hor they removed to Zalmonah, and then to Punon, and then to Oboth,
as we read, chap. 33. 41, 42, 43. whence we may most probably conclude, that
about Punon it was that the brazen serpent was made, because it is said here
that they set sorward from the place where that was done, and then pitched in
Oboth.

Verse. 11. And they journ^yed from Oboth, and pitched at Ije-abarim, in the
wilderness, which is before Moab, etc.] And so were come from Edoms borders to
Moabs, with whom also they might not meddle, Deuteronomy. 2. 9. And the Lord said unto
me, Distress not the Moabites, neither contend with them in battle.

Verse. 12. From thence they removed and pitched in the valley of Zared.] Zared
was the name both of the valley and river that ran through that valley, Deuteronomy.
2. 13. where was it seems Dibon-gad; for chap. 33. 45. it is said that they
departed from lim, and pitched in Dibon-gad.

Verse. 13. From thence they removed and pitched on the other side of Arnon,
etc.] From Dibon-gad they went to Almon-diblathaim, thence to the mountains of
Abarim, Number. 33. 46, 47. which it* seems were in this place on the other side
of Arnon.

For Arnon is the border of Moab between Moab and the Amorites.] Arnon was a
river that did at this time divide the country of the Amorites from the land
of the Moabites. Indeed the country beyond Arnon toward Jordan had been in
the possession of Moab, but Sihon had taken it from them, ver. 16. so that now
Arnon was the border between the Moabites and the Amorites; which Moses notes,
to let us see how God by this means had provided this country for the
Israelites, who might not have meddled with it, if it had been still in the
Moabites possession, but were now commanded to take it from the Amorites, Deuteronomy.
2. 24. Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon; behold I
have given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, King of Heshbon, and his land, etc.
and hence it was that the King of the Amorites and Moabites challenged this
land in the days of Jephthah, Israel took away my land when they came up out
of Egypt, from Arnon even unto Jabbok and unto Jordan; now therefore restore
thoselands again peaceably.

Verse. 14. Wherefore it is said in the book of the wars of the Lord, what he
did in the red sea, etc.] This place is diversely translated, and therefore also
diversely expounded by Interpreters. According to our translation the meaning
and drift of the words seems to be this, There was a book extant in Moses time,
but now lost, called the book of the wars of the Lord, wherein it seems the
victories which the Lord gave the Israelites over their enemies were more
largely described, which are here but briefly touched: out of this book Moses
cit^s these following words* What he did in the red sea, and in the brooks of
Arnon, and at the stream of the brooks that goes down to the dwelling of Ar,
and lies upon the border of Moab; and that partly to prove what he had said
before, ver. 13. that Arnon was at present the border between the land of Moab,
and the land of the Amorites, though formerly the land beyond Arnon belonged
also to the Moabites; and partly also to give a touch, that here at their
entrance into the Amorites land the Lord wrought wonders for them, not
inferior to his dealing with them when he drowned the Egyptians in the red
sea. Our Translatours have noted in the margin of our Bibles, that this place
cited out of that book of the wars of the Lord may be read thus, Vaheb in
Saphah, and in the brooks of Arnon, etc. but if it be so read it is hard to
conjecture what was meant thereby, only some Expositours hold that Vaheb was
the name of that King of the Moabites, mentioned verse. 26. whom Sihon
conquered; and others that it was the name of a city in Saphah: but the words
cited being but an imperfect clause, taken out of a book not now extant, no
wonder it is though the meaning of them cannot be found out; sufficient it is
for us that they plainly enough prove that for which Moses cites them, namely
that the river Arnon did divide the land of the Amorites and the land of Moab.

Verse. 16. And from thence they went to Beer.] Neither this place called Beer,
nor those mentioned verse. 18, 19, 20. to wit, Mattanah, Nahaliel, and Bamoth,
are named Numb. 33. and therefore it seems they were not several stations, but
only the names of such places as they passed by when they went forward from
the mountains of Abarim, which were about Arnon, to the plains of Moab, Numbers
33. 48.

That is the well whereof the Lord spoke unto Moses, Gather the people
together, and I will give them water, etc.] The meaning of these words is, that
at this place, called thence Beer, which signifies a well, the Lord did
miraculously again supply them with water, and that in the sight of all the
people, having appointed Moses to gather them together for this very purpose.
The manner how this was done is not expressed in the story, but from the
ensuing song we may probably infer thus much, to wit, that the people being
in some distress for water in that wilderness, mentioned ver. 13. through
which they were now going, God stayed not now till they murmured again, but of
his own accord did appoint Moses to gather the people together, and to set the
princes of the tribes to dig with their staves, promising that a well should
thereupon miraculously spring up in that dry and barren place; which was
accordingly done, and so thereupon the people sung that ensuing gratulatory
song, ver. 17, 18. wher^in with much joy and praise to God they acknowledged
the miraculous manner of that wells springing up, Spring up, O well; Sing ye
unto it. The Princes dug the well, the nobles of the people dug it, by
the direction of the Lawgiver, with their staves. And this, it seems, was that
renowned well called Beer-elim, Esa. 15. 8. that is, the well of the mighty
ones, and might have a like spiritual signification as had before those waters
that came out of the rock: for as that rock was Christ, 1. Cor. 10. 4. so this
well might be a figure of him, who is the fountain of the gardens, a well of
living waters, Cant. 4. 15. secondly, the waters springing from thence might
signify that saving doctrine and graces of Gods spirit which from Christ are
derived unto the faithful, and are in them always as a well of water
springing up unto life everlasting, John 4. 14. thirdly, the Princes digging of
this well with their staves might be a figure of the labor of governors to
open and bring forth to the people the ordinances of God, the word, and the
ministry thereof: and fourthly, the Israelites singing about this well might he
a sign of that Christian joy whereof the Prophet speaks, Esa. 12. 3, 4. With
joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation, and in that day shall ye
say, Praise the Lord, etc.

Verse. 21. And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, etc.] When
they were to pass over the river Arnon, mentioned verse. 13. God had told them
that they should destroy Sihon, and possess his country, Deuteronomy. 2. 24* Rise ye
up, and pass over the river Arnon: Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon
the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land, etc. yet now out of the wilderness
of Kedemo^h, Deuteronomy. 2. 26. they sent messengers to him, doubtless not without
Gods allowance, to desire a peaceable passage through his country, thereby to
render him afterward the more inexcusable when he was destroyed, both in his
own conscience, and in the judgment of others that should hear of it.

Verse. 22. We will not drink of the waters of the well.] See the note upon
^hap. 20. 17.

Verse. 24. For the border of the children of Ammon was strong.] And therefore
Sihon had not encroched upon their country, as he had upon the Moabites, at
least not beyond the river Jabbok, see Josh. 13. 25. for this is not added as a
reason why the Israelites made not war upon them, Gods command was a
restraint sufficient for them, Deuteronomy. 2. 19. And when thou come nigh over
against the children of Ammon, distress them not, nor meddle with them, etc.

Verse. 25. And Israel took all these cities, etc.] Destroying all the
inhabitants, Deuteronomy. 2. 34. And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly
destroyed all the men and the women, and the little ones, etc.

Verse. 26. For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, etc.]
Because Heshbon and the country adjoining had been the possession of the
Moabites, and God had charged the Israelites not to meddle with their country,
Deuteronomy. 2. 9. therefore Moses does largely prove from this place to the end of
the 30. verse, that both Heshbon and the country adjoining was the possession
of Sihon when the Israelites took it, Sihon having taken it from the former
king of the Moabites, that is, from him that was king before Balak, that was at
present their king, chap. 22. 4. Concerning which see also what is noted before
upon verse. 13.

Verse. 27. Wherefore they that speak in proverbs, say, etc.] By proverbs in the
Scripture are generally meant all wise and pithie sayings, especially when they
are grown to be in common use amongst men, 1. Sam. 24. 13. As says the proverb
of the ancients, Wickedness proceeds from the wicked; and secondly, more
particularly those are called proverbs, first, that are expressed with
figurative words, or by way of similitude, as Ezekiel. 18. 2. What mean ye that ye
use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, The fathers have ^aten sour
grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge? secondly, that are taken up as
by-words, by way of scorning and d^riding men, as Deuteronomy. 28. 17. Thou shall
become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword among all nations, and Hab. 2.
6. Shall not all these take up a parable and a taunting proverb against him?:
and so consequently by those that speak in proverbs are meant here, such as did
compose or utter songs or ballads made by way of triumphing over some
vanquished enemy, and that because in such songs they used to scoff at those
that were so vanquished, and the several passages of such songs were usually
taken up afterward as a proverb and byword. Now Moses (to prove that Heshbon
and the country adjoining now taken by the Israelites had formerly been taken
from the Moabites by Sihon) alleges this proverbiall song (which no doubt was
first made and used by the Amorites by way of triumphing over the vanquished
Moabltes) and that the rather because the Israelites now might more justly, and
so happily did, insult over the Amorites with the same proverbiall taunt
wherewith they had before derided the Moabites.

Let the city of Sihon be built and prepared.] Implying that though Heshbon
perished, verse. 30. being in Moabs hand, yet now it should be more fairly and
more strongly fort^fied being in Sihons hand; and so also being applied to the
Israelites victory, that though it were much defaced in Sihons hands, yet now
the Israelites would build it more fairly.

Verse. 28. For there is a fire gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of
Sihon, etc.] That is, the fury of war, which was kindled and began in the
subversion and laying waste of Heshbon, brake out from thence and consumed the
country of the Moabites as far as Ar, a chief city of theirs, and the Lords
of the high places of Arnon, that is the princes, priests, and gods of the
Moabites (for all these may be comprehended under this word Lords) even as
far as Arnon. And hence it is that the prophet, speaking of the vain
confidence of the Moabites in the strength of Heshbon (for the Moabites had
then recovered this country again, the Israelites being carried captives into
Assyria) he threatens that those cities wherein they trusted should by the
Chaldeans be first destroyed, and in the words he uses does manifestly allude
to this taunting song of the Amorites when they conquered the Moabites, here
cited by Moses, Jer. 48. 45. A fire shall come forth out of Heshbon, and a
flame from the midst of Sihon, and shall devour the corner of Moab, and the
crown of the head of the tumultuous ones, etc.

Verse. 29. Woe unto thee, O Moab; thou art undone, O people of Shemosh, etc.] In
this clause of their song the Amorites scoff at Shemosh, who was the god of the
Moabites, 1. King. 11. 7. the Amorites had another god, to wit, Milcom, 1.
King. 11. 5. and they therefore now derided the Moabites, because their God,
though they had been so long his people, and had served him so carefully, was
not able to help them, but had delivered them into captivity to Sihon, as it
follows in the next words, He, that is, their God Shemosh, has given his
sons that escaped and his daughters into captivity, unto Sihonking of the
Amorites. But how much more properly might the Israelites take up this proverb
now against the Amorites?

Verse. 30. We have shot at them.] To wit, first the Amorites, then the
Israelites.

Verse. 32. And Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, etc.] A city also that ha^ been
Moabs, Jer. 48. 31, 32. but now was the Amorites; a fruitful pasture-countrey
it stood in, and was given to Gad, Numb. 32. 1.

Verse. 33. And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan, etc.] A rich
country this Bashan was, famous for its huge oaks, Ezekiel. 27. 6. Of the oaks of
Bashan have they made thine oars; also the pastures nourished strong and fat
cattle, whereto the Scripture often alludeth, Deuteronomy. 32. 14. Butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs and rams of the breed of Bashan, and Amos 4.
1. Hear this word ye kine of Bashan: and there were in it threescore cities
with high walled gates and bars, Deuteronomy. 3. 4, 5. and indeed this which is said
of their high walled cities makes it manifest, that the Israelites spies were
here amongst other places, when they searched the land of Canaan.

Verse. 34. And the Lord said unto Moses, Fear him not, etc.] Og the king of
Bashan was a huge giant, Deuteronomy. 3. 11. his bedsted was a bedsted of iron, nine
cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it; and the
rather doubtless did the Lord encourage Moses not to fear him, because they
were like enough to be scared with the very sight of him, to which end also he
assures him that he should do to him as he did unto Sihon King of the Amorites,
making the experience he had of Gods help against Sihon a ground of
encouragement for the present against Og, and his army too.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. ANd the children of Israel set f^rward, and pitched in the plains of
Moab, on this side Jordan, by Jericho.] In the third chapter verse. 48. it is
said that they d^parted from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in the plains
of Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho, and that is the last removal of the camp of
Israel there mentioned. Now they came to the mountains of Abarim at their first
passing over the river Arnon, as is noted before upon verse. 13. And therefore
it seems, that all those things related from the 13. verse of the former
chapter to the end of the chapter, as concerning their going to Beer, verse. 16.
where a well sprung up so miraculously, and concerning the conquests of Sihon
and Og, were done, the camp and the tabernacle still abiding at the mountains
of Abarim; and then after that the camp of Israel set forward from thence, and
pitched in the plains of Moab, so called, because they had been sometime Moabs,
and did border upon the land of Moab, though they were afterward the Amorites,
and now the Israelites by conquest. These plains reached unto Jordan right over
against Jericho. And here the Israelites remained till after Moses death they
passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan: in which time many notable things
fell out, even all recorded from this place to the end of Deuteronomy and in
the beginning of Joshua, till their entrance into Canaan.

Verse. 3. And Moab was sore afraid of the people, because they were many, etc.]
The Moabites had no cause at all to be afraid of the Israelites, though they
were many; for the Israelites had made known to them their resolution not to
meddle with them, and accordingly had peaceably passed by their country, yea
they had, to their own trouble, fetched a great compass about, purposely that
they might not annoy them by passing through their land; and besides, in
destroying the Amorites they had done them a pleasure, having thereby freed
them from ill neighbors who had lately by the sword taken away a great part of
their country from them, chap. 21. 26. But yet, being stricken with terrors
from God, all this could not qui^t their minds: They saw they were a numerous
mighty people, and that they had now already vanquished two great kings, and
that they were still upon the borders of their country, and hereupon they were
ready to conclude, that as the Amorites had lately taken away part of their
country, so this people, that had now destroyed the Amorites, would take away
the rest, and so were mightily perplexed and distressed. The Lord herein making
good his promise to his people, Exodus 15. 15. The mighty men of Moab trembling
shall take hold upon them; all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away; and
again Deuteronomy. 2. 25. This day will I begin to put the dread of thee, and the fear
of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven, who shall hear report
of thee, and shall tremble and be in anguish because of thee.

Verse. 4. And Moab said unto the Elders of Midian, etc.] That is, the Moabites
being in this distress, and considering that the only way to secure
themselves against the evil fea^ed was so strengthen themselves against the
Israelites, and that hereby also they might happily regain what the Amorites
had formerly taken from them, they sent to the elders of Midian to desire them
to join with them against the Israelites, and that because the Midianites were
subject to the same king* or at least were neighbors confederate wi^h them:
and so it is evident they did, though they had no cause for it: for first, they
were in a manner allied to the Israelites, being the posterity of Midian, who
was the son of Abraham by his wife Keturah, Genesis 25. 1, 2. and secondly, the
Israelites had not meddled with them; and thirdly, the Israelites conquest of
the Amorites was an advantage to the Midianites, who were by this means freed
from Sihons tyrannous yoke: for that they were before in bondage to him
appears, because the five kings of Midian that combined with Moab, and perished
for the same, chap. 31. 8. are called the Dukes of Sihon, Josh. 13. 21. Some
conceive that the Ammonites did also join with the Moabites and Midianites at
this time, which they ground upon that place, Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4. An Ammonite or a
Moabite^shall not* enter into the congregation of the Lord; Because they met
you not with bread and with water, in the way when you came forth out of Egypt,
and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor, of Pethor, of
Mesopotamia, to curse thee. But that last clause happily is meant only of the
Moabites; which indeed we may the rather think, because there is not in this
story the least mention of the Ammonites.

Now shall this company lick up all that are round about us, as the ox licketh
up the grass of the field.] This is the argument whereby the Moabites sought
to persuade the Midianites to join with them against the Israelites, namely,
because if they were let alone, they would doubtless devour both them and all
the neighbo^ring nations. It is all one as if they had said, By what this
people have already done in the two kingdoms of Sihon and Og, you may see that
they do not content themselves to subdue a people, and make them tributaries,
but where they conquer they ^tterly destroy all the inhabitants; and this
therefore they will do to us, because of their multitudes, if we join not our
forces together, as easily as a company of oxen will lick up the grass of a
field they are put into, leaving the ground bare where they go, so that it is
high time for us to look about us, and to bandy our selves to fight with them.
And indeed however their fear were causeless now, because the Lord had charged
the Israelites not to meddle with the Moabites, as is before noted, yet in
future times even this people of Moab were subdued by the Israelites, though
not utterly destroy^d, to wit, in the days of David, 1. Chron. 18. 2.

Verse. 5. He sent messengers therefore unto Balaam the s^nne of Beor, etc.]
This Balaam was a Southsayer, famous for his enchantments and divinations in
those times, as is evident, Josh 1^. 22. Balaam also the son of Beor, the
Southsar^r, and Numb. 24. 1. And when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to
bless Israel, he went not, as at other times* to seek for inchantm^nts; he is
called a prop^et, 2. Pet. 2. 16. The dumb a^s^ speaking with man's voice forbad
the madness of the prophet, not only because he used by his divinations to
foretell things to come, but also because God did at present in the passage of
this story guide him to prophecy of things that were long after to come to
pass; and we know the gift of prophecy is a common gift, which may be
conferred upon a wicked man: and it is like Balack sent to him, as to a
prophet, that had from God this gift of divining, and that by his curses and
enchantments the Israelites might be weakened, and the more easily overcome. He
is here described by his parentage, that he was the son of Beor, who is also
called Bosor, 2. Pet. 2. 15. Following the way of Balaam the son of Bosor;
secondly, by his country, whither Balak sent to him, to wit, Pethor, which was
a city in Mesopotamia or Aram, Deuteronomy 23. 4. Because they hired against thee
Balaam the son of Beor, of Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee; in the East
country, Numb. 23. 7. Balak the king of Moab has brought me from Aram, out of
the mountains of the East (and the Eastern land was infamous for divinations
and such like arts, Esa. 2. 6. Therefore thou have forsaken thy people, the
house of Jacob: because they be replenished from the East, and are southsayers
like the Philistines) and was seated nigh to the river of that land, which was
Euphrates* for that was the great river of Mesopotamia.

Behold, there is a people come out of Egypt.] That is, injuriously invading
countries they have no right; unto this he seeks to persuade Balaam, by showing
him the justness of his cause.

Behold, they cover the face of the earth, they abide over against me.] That
is, in a country bordering upon mine.

Verse. 6. Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse me this people, etc.] This he
speaks, as supposing his presence necessary for the accomplishment of that
great work for which he sent to him: whence is that also. ver. 41. Balak took
Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, that thence he might
see the utmost part of the people. Amongst other grounds of this conceit, one
might be, that beholding the Israelites, his speech might have more vehemence
of spirit and better effect, as he supposed; and indeed it is said concerning
Elisha, when he cursed the children that mocked him, 2. Kings 2. 24. that he
turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in the name of the Lord: how
effectual curses duly pronounced by the Prophets of God were, we may see in
that, 2. Kings 2. 24. And he turned back and looked on them, and cursed them in
the name of the Lord: and there came forth two she-bears out of the wood and
tare forty and two children of them. Balak had the like conceit of this
famous false prophet, and therefore desires that he would curse Israel, that
is, that he would first by his enchantments procure them to be accursed of God,
and then pronounce this curse against them.

Verse. 8. Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again as the Lord
shall speak unto me.] It is evident that Balaam was a sorcerer, as is noted
from Josh. 13. 22. and he was likewise an idolater, for we see afterward,
chap. 23. 12. that he offered sacrifices upon Baals high places; and how then
does he speak here of the Lord Jehovah, as it is in the text, I will bring you
word again as the Lord, or Jehovah, shall speak unto me? I answer first, that
it is most probable that some small remainders of the knowledge of the true God
were still left amongst these idolatrous nations, that were the posterity of
Abraham and Lot, yea and that they did make profession of worshipping the true
God, though withal they worshipped other false gods too: and so I conceive it
was with Balaam, and therefore, verse. 18. he calls God the Lord his God, and so
though he were an idolater and a southsayer, yet he might pretend himself to be
a Prophet of the Lord Jehovah too: and secondly, this amongst other things was
a part of the magic skill of their southsayers in former times, that when they
were by enchantments to seek the ruin of any people, they used to deal with
that God who was the defender of that people, whom they called their t^telary
God: for this is clear in profane Writers, that when the Romans intended to
besiege any city, their priests were wont first to call out that God under
whose tutelage or protection that city was, and to promise him more ample place
and honor among them: and thus some conceive that Balaam undertook to enquire
of the Lord Jehovah, whom he knew to be the God of the Hebrews, to see whether
he might be taken off from defending them. But the first, I conceive, is the
truest answer. However, the reason why he desired these men to stay all night
was, because in the night he used to have his revelations and to practice his
enchantments.

Verse. 9. And God came unto Balaam, etc.] Not by the force of Balaams
enchantments, but of his own will does God here come unto Balaam, as of old he
has often for his peoples sake revealed his will to wicked men, as to Pharaoh,
Genesis 41. 25. and to Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 2. 45.

Verse. 13. Get you into your land: for the Lord refuses to give me leave to go
with you.] Thus he speaks like a mercenary prophet, loath to displease, and
desiring the proffered gain: he only makes known one part of Gods speech, that
he was forbidden to go with them (thereby intimating that the fault was not in
him, and that if God would yield him liberty to gratify the King, he should be
glad of it) whereas had he truly added the other part of Gods speech, thou
shall not curse the people, for they are blessed, this might have cut off all
occasions of farther sending.

Verse. 15. Balaam refuses to come with us.] Balaam told the Elders less then
God spoke to him, and now they tell Balak less then Balaam told them: it was
only Balaam refuses to come, as if God had not forbidden him; and thus
occasion is given for further mischief.

Verse. 18. I cannot go beyond the word of the Lord my God, to do less^ or
more.] My God, that is, the God with whom I have to do in this business, or
rather the God whom I serve: for hereby it seems very probable that Balaam the
Syrian (and so happily the people amongst whom he lived) had some knowledge of
the true God, and pretended he worshipped him, though withal he worshipped
otheridol-gods. And indeed that other nations had some knowledge of Jehovah is
manifest in Jobs history.

Verse. 19. Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, etc.] This
desire of Balaam, that these messengers would stay also one night, to see what
God would yet say unto him, when God had already before peremptorily charged
him that he should not go to Balak, discovered plainly that he still lingered
after Balaams gifts and preferments, and was sorry that he was restrained from
cursing Israel; and accordingly therefore God gave him an answer, as it
follows, in the next verse* giving him liberty to go, but intending it should
be to the confusion and ruin both of him and the King that had sent for him.

Verse. 20. If the men come to call thee, arise up and go with them, etc.] As if
the Lord had said, they importune thee, and thou me, since thou will needs go,
^o: as God sometimes in wrath gives wicked men their desires* so the Lord now
bad Balaam go (Psalm. 81. 11, 12. My people would not hearken to my voice, and
Israel would none of me; So I gave them up unto their ow^ hearts lust, and they
walked in their own counsels) withal also intending to gloryfie himself by
forcing him to bless the Israelites.

Verse. 22. And Gods anger was kindled because he went, etc.] For the Lords
bidding him go in such a manner, verse. 20. was not an approbation of his
journey: besides, he went no doubt with a purpose to curse them, wherewith he
must needs provoke God. See Deuteronomy. 23. 5. The Lord thy God would not h^arken
unto Balaam, but the Lord thy God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee.

Now he was riding upon his ass, and his two servants with him.] The rest of
the company going before, his two servants attended upon him: and this, I
conceive, is added, as an amplification of the following miracl^, that the ass
saw the Angel, when neither Balaam nor his servants perceived any thing.

Verse. 23. And the ass saw the Angel of the Lord standing in the way, etc.]
The Angel no doubt appeared in a visible shape, and the dull asses eyes were
opened to see him, and his sword drawn in his hand, a sign of Gods wrath
against Balaam, and the vengeance that at last befell him: and thus this
wizzard, who was accustomed to visions and revelations, yet saw not now what
the ass saw (God restraining his eyes and the eyes of those that were with
him, as we read the like, Dan. 10. 7. I Daniel alone saw the vision: for the
men that were with me saw not the vision) and so was confounded in his wisdom
by a base and contemptible creature, according to that of the Apostle, 1. Cor.
1. 19. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and will bring to nothing the
understanding of the prudent.

And the ass turned aside out of the way, and went into the field.] By this
and the following passages the Lord by this dumb beast reproved the
foolishness or madness of the Prophet, 2. Pet. 2. 16.

Verse. 24. But the Angel of the Lord stood in a path of the vineyards, etc.]
Thus God proceeding by degrees makes the sottishness of the Prophet the more
evident and inexcusable.

Verse. 28. And the Lord opened the mouth of the ass, etc.] That is, by his
almighty and supernatural power God caused the dumb and unreasonable beast to
speak understandingly: the devil, when he would tempt to sin, chose the
serpent for his instrument, the most subtle beast of the field; but God to
rebuke the wizzard uses the ass, the most silly of all beasts: Gods infinite
power is best magnified by weak instruments, 1. Cor. 1. 27. But God has chosen
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise.

Verse. 29. And Balaam said unto the ass, Because thou have mocked me, etc.]
The wroth and fury of Balaam, the blindness, sottishness, and hardness of
heart, whereto he was given over of God, may be thought probably the cause that
Balaam was not terrified with this mon^^rous accident, but replies to the ass
as to a reasonable creature. But withal I conceive his being inured (as
sorcerers and witches are) to hear evil spirits speak in such bruit beasts was
a great reason that he was not astonished with it, as other me^ would have
been, and as happily his servants were, though it be not here expressed.

Verse. 32. Behold, I went out to withstand thee because thy way is perv^rse
before me.] That is, in desiring so earnestly to go to Balak, notwithstanding I
did so absolutely charge thee to the contrary, and in going now with a purpose
of cursing my people, though I have told thee again and again that thou
should not ^urse them.

Verse. 34. And Balaam said unto the angel of the Lord, I have sinned, etc.]
That is, in smiting of the ass, as the following words seem to imply, I have
sinned; for I knew not that thou stoodest in the way against me. But his
covetousness and desire to earn the wages of unrighteousness by cursing Gods
Israel he still cherishes in his heart, as his faint proffering to turn back
does evidently show. He could not but know that what he went about was evil and
displeasing to God, wherefore else did the Angel of God oppose him in the way
with a drawn sword? yet how faintly he speaks? If it please thee, I will get me
back again, that is, fain he would go, but if necessity constrain him he will
turn back.

Verse. 35. And the Angel of the Lord said unto Balaam, Go with the m^n.] That
is, since nothing will restrain thee, go. See the note upon verse. 20.

Verse. 36. And when Balak heard tha^ Balaam was come, he went out to me^t him.]
This going forth to welcome him and entertain him with honor, as likewise his
feasting of him, ver. 40. proceeded, first, from joy, because he made full
account now that he should vanquish the Israelites; s^condly, from his respect
of Balaam, as false prophets are still respected of wicked rulers, because they
serve their lusts; thirdly, from a desire hereby to engage Balaam to him that
he might not refuse to gratify him in that about which he was sent for.

Verse. 38. And Balaam said unto Balak, Lo, I am come unto thee: have I now any
power at all to say any thing, etc.] This he says to excuse himself, and
prevent the Kings displeasure, if it should fall out otherwise the^ he d^sired.

Verse. 40. And Balak offered oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam.] For thus in
those times they used to feast with part of their sacrifices.

Verse. 41. And brought him up into the high pl^ces of Baal.] As no doubt hoping
in this place, consecrated to the worship of Baal, they should find their God
the more propitious to them; as also because the height of the place gave
advantage for the seeing of the Israelites, being it seems a good way off from
them in the plains of Moab, yet not so far but that from this high mountain
they might be discerned, yea for the seeing of them all, even to the utmost
part of the people; whereby it appears that the sight of them was judged
necessary that his curse might be the more powerful and effectual. See the
note above upon verse. 6.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. ANd Balaam said unto Balak, Build me here seven altars, etc.] In this
they prepared to sacrifice to Jehovah (though they were in Baals high places)
that they might obtain leave of him to curse his people; and therefore verse. 3.
Balaam goes to see what answer the Lord, that is, Jehovah, would upon these
sacrifices return him, and verse. 4. when God met him, he told him what he h^d
done. Nor need this seem strange: for thus idolaters, in hope to obtain their
purposes, have been usually drawn to communicate with all religions, true or
false, and to make a sinful mixture of them, 2. Kings 17. 28, 29. Then one
of the pri^sts, whom they had carri^d away from Samaria, came and dwelt in
Bethel, and taught them how they should fear the Lord. Howbeit every nation
made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places, which
the Samaritans had made. Acts 17. 23. As I passed by and beheld your devotions,
I found an altar with this inscription, To the unknown God. As for the number
of their altars and sacrifices, idolaters and sorcer^rs have still attributed
much to odd numbers, Numer^d^us impare ga^det, especially to this number,
seven; but yet I make no question, but as the choice of these clean beasts,
bullocks and rams, was a remainder of the worship of God, which even from
their ancestors, who were true worshippers of the true God, was derived to
them (viz. Lot, Abraham, etc.) and so still continued amongst these idolaters;
so also the appointing of seven altars and twice seven sacrifices might spring
at first from some tradition received from their fathers, that God was much
delighted with this number, which they might infer from such directions as
was that of the Sabbath; and indeed we see this number was sanctified of God
for many mysteries, yea particularly in sacrifices; Job 42. 8. Take unto you
seven bullocks, and seven rams, and go to my servant Job, and offer up for
your s^lves a burnt-offering. 1. Chron. 15. 26. And it came to pass when God
helped the Levites, that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, that they
offered seven bullocks and seven rams. 2. Chron. 29. 21. And they brought
seven bullocks and seven rams and seven he-goats for a sinne-offering; yet
herein they became vain in their imaginations, Romans 1. 21. for holy men used
still but one altar, Genesis 8. 20. And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and
multiplying altars is a sin, Hos. 8. 11. Because Ephraim has made many
altars to sin, altars shall be unto him to sin.

Verse. 3. And Balaam said unto Balak, Stand by the burnt-offering.] This Balaam
enjoined Balak, not so much that the birds should not come at the sacrifices,
as that standing so he might present himself before God, in hope and
expectation that by the virtue of that sacrifice God would accept of him, and
perform his desire against his enemies; and under this ^appely was employed
also, that standing so he should pray for good success.

And I will go, etc.] That is, into some solitary place in the top of that
hill, there to seek for enchantments and signs of good luck, chap. 24. 1. (as
sorcerers are wont to choose solitary places, wherein to exercise their feats
of divination and witchcraft) and to see if the Lord would appear to him, as
knowing that God did usually appear to men when they are alone.

Verse. 4. And God met Balaam.] Not by the force of his enchantments, but
voluntarily, for the hardening of Balaam and the good of his people.

And he said unto him, I have prepared seven altars, etc.] He boasts of his
sacrifices, that God might be pleased upon this service done him to hearken to
Balak.

Verse. 5. And the Lord put a word in Balaams mouth, etc.] That is, he appointed
him what he should say: not regarding his sacrifices, the Lord forced him to
bless the Israelites, and yet all this while his heart was the same that it
was before, he could not say as David did, Psalm. 116. 10. I believed, therefore
have I spoken: he did not eat Gods words, as Jeremy did, Jer. 15. 16. Thy words
were found and I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of mine heart; only there was a word put into his mouth.

Verse. 7. And he took up his parable, etc.] By a parable is usually meant a
grave speech, containing excellent matter of doctrine and instruction, Job 27.
1. especially when it is delivered in a high strain of language, figurative
expressions, and a certain splendor of words more then usual, which though
they carry a kind of majesty in them, and make the hearers the more attentive,
even as to the oracles of God, yet they are withal dark and obscure, Ezekiel. 20.
49. Then said I, Ah Lord God, they say of me, Does he not speak parables? John
16. 25. These things have I spoken unto you in prov^rbs, or, Parables, etc.

Balak the king of Moab has brought me from Aram, etc.] To wit, Aram
Naharaiim, which was Mesopotamia, Deuteronomy. 23. 4. They hired against thee Balaam
the son of Beor, of Pethor of M^sopotamia: and thus God by Balaams own mouth
taxes Balak for sending twice so far off for him, who now must bless in
stead of cursing.

Verse. 8. How shall I curse when God has not cursed, etc.] That is, I cannot
curse: for when God restrains not men, they may curs^ whom God has not cursed.

Verse. 9. For from the top of the rock^ I see him, and from the hills I behold
him.] Which is all one as if he had said, And indeed the very sight of them is
full of majesty and terror, as of a people blessed of God: for though I be
far off from them, which might make them seem little in mine eyes, yet the
spirit of God has lifted me up, that even hence I behold them, and oh how full
of terror and majesty is the sight of them! such as makes it evident that God
has blessed them, and that it is in vain for man to think of cursing them.

Lo, the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the
nations.] This I conceive is a prediction, first, that God would cast out the
inhabitants of Can^an, and plant them in their stead, and so they should dwell
alone, and have the land to themselves, not living now, as formerly in Egypt,
as sojourners and mixed with other nations, but as a nation and people of
themselves, living in a land of their own, under the government of their own
laws and Princes; and secondly, that they should live in plenty and safety,
having neither need nor fear of other people: for so dwelling alone implies a
security from evil, as in Jer. 49. 31. Arise, get you up unto the wealthy
nation, that dwells without care, says the Lord, which have neither gates
nor bars, which dwell alone; and thirdly, that no nation should be worthy to
be compared with them, and that chiefly because they should be Gods peculiar
people, Exodus 19. 5. and separated from other people, Levit. 20. 24. I am the
Lord your God which have separated you from other nations.

Verse. 10. Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part
of Israel?] That is, it is not possible to count the number of this people, who
are ^s the dust that covers the face of the earth, no not of one fourth part of
them. Indeed this is meant principally of the uncountable number of Gods Isra^l
he^eaf^er, that spiritual seed of Abraham and Israel, that was to be gathered
throughout the world by the preaching of the Gospel, of whom that promise made
to Abraham, whereto this prophecy seems to have reference, was chiefly
intended, Genesis 13. 16. I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth, so that
if any man can number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be
numbered. But yet it is spoken too of the wonderful number of this people at
present: for in that expression, and the number of the fourth part of Israel,
there seems to be a manifest allusion to the number of the Israelites pitching
their tents, who lay about the tabernacle in four camps or squadrons.

Let me die the death of the righteous, etc.] Thus he prophecyeth their
happiness also in the world to come.

Verse. 13. And Balak said unto him, Come, I pray thee, with me unto another
place, etc.] The reason why Balak desired Balaam to remove to another place
was, first, because he conceited that another place might prove more lucky and
successful then the first had done, where they had offered their sacrifices:
for idolat^rs were always wont to ascribe much to the luckinesse of times and
places, and we see that therefore when he could not prevail there neither, for
the cursing of the Israelites, he removed yet to a third place, verse. 27. and
secondly, because he hoped to place him more conveniently in regard of his
seeing the Israelites, as it is evident in the following words, thou shall see
but the utmost part of them, and shall not se^ them all: for either Balak
suspected, that when before he saw all the army of Israel, there might be some
amongst them that might not be cursed, and therefore now resolved to carry him
where he should only see a part of them; or else he might think that the sight
of their multitudes might so dismay and damp his spirit that he was not able to
curse them, which happily those former words of Balaam, verse. 10. did occasion
him to think, Who can count the dust of Jacob, etc. and therefore, whereas
before he was careful to place him where he might see them all, even to the
utmost part of the people, chap. 22. 41. now he carried him where he might see
them, as still judging that necessary for the work in hand, but yet where he
might see but the utmost part only and not see them all.

Verse. 14. And he brought him into the fi^ld of Zophim.] That is, the field of
the spies or scoutwatches, a place it seems so called, because there they kept
the watch of the country.

And built seven altars, etc.] So prosecuting their wickedness still under
color of religion. See the note upon verse. 1.

Verse. 15. Stand here by thy burnt-offering, etc See the note upon verse. 3.

Verse. 16. And the Lord met Balaam and put a word in his mouth.] See the note
upon verse. 4.

Verse. 18. Rise up, Balak, and hear, etc.] Hearken with reverence to the
message brought thee from God, as Judge. 3. 20. when Ehud told Eg^on that he
brought him a message from God, it is said that he arose out of his seat.

Verse. 21. He has not beheld iniqurry in Jacob, neither has he seen
perverseness in Israel.] This is added as a reason why there was no hope that
God should be brought to give way that the Israelites should be cursed, to wit,
because the Lord imputes not iniquity to them, but covers and pardons
their sins, so that they are still lovely and amiable in his sight.

The Lord his God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them.] That is,
God reigns as a king amongst them. Hereby also I conceive is meant the faith,
joy, boldness and confidence of Gods people in him their king and governor,
as when a king comes amongst the armies of his people, he is received with
joyful shoutings and acclamations, and when he goes forth to battle with them,
he goes accompanied with the sound of trumpets and shouts of the people, fignes
of their joy and courage; so it fared with the Israelites, because of Gods
presence amongst them to protect and defend them, 1. Sam. 4. 5. And when the
ark of the covenant of the Lord came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a
great shout, so that the earth rang again. 2. Chron. 13. 12. And b^hold, God
himself is with us for our Captain, and his priests with sounding trumpets to
cry alarm against you, O children of Israel; and indeed the expression here
used may also have reference to their silver trumpets, chap. 10. 9.

Verse. 22. God brought them out of Egypt.] He tells Balak this in answer to
that complaint of his, chap. 22. 5. Behold, there is a people come out from
Egypt, to wit, that they came not out of Egypt themselves, but God brought them
up; and withal implies from that former deliverance both Gods constant purpose
of doing good to them, and how unable their strongest enemies should be to
resist them.

He has as it were the strength of an unicorn.] That is, his strength is
unresistable, as is that of the unicorn, Job 39. 9, 10, 12. Besides, it may
have reference to that special virtue in the uni^orns horn against poison,
because even so the virtue of Gods grace in Israel was a preservation against
all enchantments and divinations, verse. 23. Surely there is no enchantment
against Jacob, neither is there any divination against Israel.

Verse. 23. According to this time it shall be said of Jacob, etc.] That is,
from this time forward.

Verse. 24. B^hold, the people shall rise up as a great lion, etc.] This must be
understood of their vanquishing both temporal and spiritual enemies. See the
note upon Genesis 49. 9.

Verse. 28. And Balak brought Balaam to the top of Peor, etc.] One of the high
places of Baal the god of Moab, called Baal-Peor, chap. 25. 3. where he had a
place called Beth-Peor, Deuteronomy. 3. 29.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd when Balaam saw that it pleased the Lord to bless Israel, etc.]
That is, when he saw that there was no likelihood of getting leave of God to
curse this people, he resolved not any more to seek for enchantments, but set
his face toward the wilderness, that is, toward the place where Israel lay
encamped, with a full purpose that he would now curse them, without asking God
leave to do it. Hereby it is evident that formerly when Balaam left Balak
standing by his altars, and went aside to see what God would say to him, he
used by ^nchantments (that is, some of those magical arts, which sorcerers
use) to seek liberty to curse the Israelites, yea happily he did by these
diabolical ways seek to obtain leave of God to do it (for it is no more
strange that men should inquire of God by ways abominable in Gods eyes, then
that they should worship the true God with a super^titious and idolatrous
worship) well, but now having by experience found that it pleased the Lord to
bless Israel, and that there was no hope to get leave to curse them, he went
not as at other times to seek for enchantments, says the text: and why so? not
because his wicked heart was now changed, or that he did now give over his
desire or purpose of cursing the Israelites; for why then was he now come with
Balak to mount-Peor to see if from thence he might curse them, as it is said in
the latter end of the foregoing chapter; and why had he there erected altars,
and provided sacrifices, as before? No, but perceiving that neither by his
enchantments, nor by any other way, he could win the Lord to let him curse
them, he resolved now to give over that course, and would no more go aside to
see what answer God would put into his mouth, but was fully determined to
prevent God, and suddenly to curse the people, before he had any charge to the
contrary. And indeed there might be a special aim of providence in this, that
he was restrained from practicing his enchantments at this time, when he was to
deliver those glorious prophecies concerning the Messiah, and concerning Gods
people, which are afterward related in the sequel of the chapter, to wit,
lest those enchantments foregoing these prophecies might seem to stain or
weaken the credit of them.

Verse. 2. And Balaam lift up his eyes, and he saw Israel abiding in his tents
according to their tribes.] And so was even by that goodly and glorious sight
of their multitude and order appalled and astonished; for this is mentioned as
the outward means whereby God did beforehand, as it were, prepare him that he
might be the fitter to bless in stead of cursing.

And the spirit of God came upon him.] That is, suddenly the spirit of God came
upon him, and so by his almighty overruling power constrained him to bless
those whom he resolved to curse, but first it seems cast him into a trance, as
we see ver. 4. and 16.

Verse. 3. And he took up his parable, and said, Balaam the son of Beor bath
said.] God was herein much magnified, that he should bless his people even by
Balaam a sorcerer, a false prophet, who desired to curse them. And this
circumstance therefore tending so much to the glory of God, Balaam him^el^ is
here forced to publish: as if he had said, He whose power to curse was so much
relied on, and who bent himself herein to satisfy Balaks request, even he both
must and will affirm it, and stand to it, that Israel shall be blessed.

The man whose eyes are open has said, etc.] If we should read these words as
most Expositours understand them in the Hebrew, and as they are therefore
^^ndred in the margin of our Bibles, And the man who had his eyes shut has
said, either they must be meant of the closing up of his bodily eyes, to wit,
in his sleep, or in the trance he fell into, when these things were revealed to
him of God, which he meant now to utter; or secondly, of the blindness and
ignorance of the eyes of h^s mind, to wit, that before God revealed these
things to him, he was utterly ignorant of them, and whilst he pretended
himself a Prophet, yet he was indeed a blindwretch, and knew nothing to speak
of; or thirdly, of his prophetical visions, to wit* that he was a man of a
shut or hidden eye, one that had another manner of eye to see withal then
other men bad, a man that could see the secret and hidden things of God. But
now if we read the words as they are in our Bibles, And the man whose eyes are
open has said, then it is plain that they are meant of that extraordinary
knowledge of things which by the spirit of prophecy was revealed to him, and in
r^gard whereof the Prophets were of old called Seers, 1. Sam. 9. 9. Thus says
the man whose eyes are open, that is, the man whose eyes God has in a
supernatural manner opened to see things to come: and his aim in these words
must needs be, to stir them to receive what he spoke as that which did
certainly come from God. And so much indeed the following words in the text do,
as it were by way of explanation, more clearly deliver, He has said which
heard the words of God, which saw the vision of the Almighty, falling into a
trance, but having his eyes open, where also it seems evident that when at
first the spirit of God came upon him, ver. 2. it cast him into a trance
(though it were not the^e expressed, because it was to be expressed here) and
that this was usual with the Prophets, we may see in many places, as Gen 15.
12. Dan. 8. 17, etc.

Verse. 5. How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel,
etc.] This and that which follows in the next verse, is not meant of the
goodly sight which their tabernacles at present yielded, in regard of that
admirable order wherein they were severally ranked under their several
ensigne^ and standards, but ^lso that herein as in a lively figure the Lord did
show the great felicity of his Church and people, not only in regard of that
goodly and pleasant land which the Lord had provided for their habitation but
also in regard of the variety of all other good blessings, which God should
confer upon them, wherein they should be a wonder and admiration to all that
took notice of it.

Verse. 6. As the valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river side,
etc.] The Israelites, and so consequently also the Church of the Gentiles, the
spiritual seed of Abraham, are here compared to valleys spread forth, to
signify the large extent of the Church; and secondly, they are compared to
fruitful valleys and gardens enclosed, set with pleasant and wholesome plants,
and kept always fresh and fruitful by the wa^ring of rivers, yea even in
times of scorching heat and drought, to signify both that God would abundantly
ble^^^ his people with temporal blessings, at least that they should still be
preserved and upheld in times of greatest trouble, according to that, Esa. 58.
11. The Lord shall guide thee continually, and sat is fie thy soul in drought,
and make fat thy bones; and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a
spring of water, whose waters fail not; as likewise that he would richly bless
them with spiritual gifts and graces, by means of the word and spirit, which
as a river refreshes and comfort his people, of which the Psalmist
speaks, Psalm. 46. 4. There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad
the city of God; and the prophet, Joel 3. 18. A fountain shall come forth out
of the house of the Lord, and shall water the valley of Shittim. Thirdly, they
are compa^ed to the trees of lign-aloes which the Lord has planted, both to
signify how wonderfully through Gods blessing they should grow and prosper
(^or those trees are said to be planted of the Lord which prosper above the
ordinary course of nature, above that which by the skill and industry of men
they were like to reach* Psalm. 104. 16. The trees of the Lord are full of
sap, the cedars of Lebanon which he has planted) as also what a good fame
and report the people of God should have far and near; for the tree
lign-aloes is a certain tree growing in Arabia and India, which gives a very
sweet odor, and may therefore be an emblem of the sweet fame and report which
the Church should have for her graces and holy righteous life, in regard
whereof the Church is also elsewhere compared to the rose and lilly, Cant. 2.
1, 2. and lastly, they are compared to cedar trees beside the water, which are
great, tall, and very durable, and hereby therefore is signified the great
growth of Gods people, together with the stable and flourishing glory of their
kingdom, according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 92. 12. 13. The righteous
shall flourish like the palm tree, he shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon, etc.
and that of the Prophet concerning the Assyrian, Ezekiel. 31. 3 Behold the
Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a shadowing
shroud, and of an high stature, -- The waters made him great, the deep set him
on high, etc. How this was accomplished we see partly in the flourishing estate
of the Israelites in Solomon's days, but especially in the exceeding glory of
Christ's kingdom.

Verse. 7. He shall pour the water out of his buckets and his seed shall be in
many waters.] This branch of Balaams prophecy is very difficult. Most
Expositours understand it of the wonderful increase of Isreal's poste^ity, and
that thus. By the water poured out of his buckets they understand his children
flowing out of his loins, and that as alluding to the way of natural
generation, whence it is, they say, that the Scripture does usually speak of
the propagation of children under the ^imilitude of waters flowing out of
fountains, cesterns, buckets, and the like, as Esa. 48. 1. Hear ye this, O
house of Jacob, which are called by the name of Israel, and are come forth out
of the waters, that is, out of the fountain, of Judah; and again, Psalm. 68. 26.
Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel,
and so also Prove. 5. 15, 16, 17. where Solomon speaking of wife and children in
the lawful state of marriage, says, Drink waters out of thine own cestern,
and running waters out of thine own well. Let thy fountains be dispersed
abroad, and rivers of water in the streets: Let them only be thine own, etc.
and so accordingly they understand the second clause, and his seed shall be in
many waters, to wit, that his pos^erity should increase unto many people: for
so they say that by many waters in the Scripture is frequently meant many
people, as Revel. 17, 15. and in many other places. But this exposition seems
to many somewhat hard; and indeed though that last clause be understood of the
great increase of Isreal's posterity yet I should rather think there is an
allusion therein to the great increase of seed ^own in well-watred grounds, to
wit, that his posterity should wondrously grow up and increase, as seed sown
thus in many waters. Others again understand the first clause of the streams of
the word of salvation, which from the Israelites should be poured forth amongst
other nations, according to that of the Prophet, Esa. 2. 3. Out of Zion shall
go forth the Law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem; and then the second
clause they understand not only of the civil increase of his posterity,
growing up as seed sown in moist grounds, but also of their flourishing in
grace and growing up unto life everlasting. But in the last place there is
another exposition, to wit, that this also is meant, as that which went before,
either particularly of the fruitfulness of the land of Canaan, to wit, that
they should have abundance of water, which they might as they had need pour
plentifully out of their buckets (and this was no small blessing in those
Eastern countries) so that their seed sown should flourish exceedingly* as corn
must needs do that is sown in such watery grounds; or else generally of their
flourishing es^ate in all regards, by reason of the blessing of God upon them
and their labors, which should make them as grounds that have daily buckets of
waters poured out upon them, and as corn that is sown in watery grounds, which
must needs flourish and grow mightily, whence is that, Esa. 32. 20. Blessed are
ye that sow beside all waters, that send forth thi^ her the feet of the ox and
the ass.

And his King shall be higher then Agag, etc.] That is, then all the Kings of
the earth: for though the Kings of the Amalekites be here only instanced in
(who were called by this name Agag, as the Egyptian Kings by the name Phara^h)
because they were now most po^ent, ver. 20. Amalek was the first of the
nations; yet under this all other Kings are comprehended. This was fulfilled in
Saul, 1. Sam. 15. 7, 8. And Saul sm^te the Amalekites from Havilah until thou
come to Shur, that is over against Egypt: And ^e took Agag the King of the
Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the
sword; and so also in the glory of Isreal's kingdom in David and Solomon's
days, but especially in Christ, Psalm. 89. 27. Also I will make him my
firstborn, higher then the Kings of the earth.

Verse. ^. God brought him forth out of Egypt, he has as it were the strength
of an unicorn.] See the note upon chap. 23. verse. 22.

Verse. 9. He couched, he lay down as a lion, etc.] Which is meant of their safe
and secure peace. See the note upon Genesis 49. 9.

Verse. 11. I thought to promote thee unto great honor, but lo, the Lord has
kept thee back from honor.] That is, blame not me therefore for giving thee no
reward for taking so long a journey, but blame thy God, etc.

Verse. 12. And Balaam said unto Balak Spoke I not also to thy messengers, etc.]
That is, you have no cause to blame me: I could not help it* I told you before
I durst not do it without Gods leave.

Verse. 14. I will advertise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the
lattor days.] That is, many years hereafter: for though by the latter days in
the old Test^ment are often meant the times of the Messiah, and much that
Balaam afterward says is concerning the kingdom of the Messiah; yet this
expression here must not be restrained to the times of the M^ssiah, because he
foretells many things that were to be partly accomplished in the days of
David, which was about four hundred years after this; but by the latter days
here is only meant that these things he now would tell him should be done
along time after this: and this happily he said the rather, because being to
tell him of the destruction of his people, the Moabites, by the Israelites,
hereby he would in part decline the anger of Balak, by telling him that this
should not happen in his days.

Verse. 17. I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh,
etc.] This is meant of that Star of whom he speaks in the next words, There
shall come a starr^ out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, which
is doubtless meant of a king of the seed and posterity of Jacob, who should
shine as a star in the firmament, in regard of the resplendent glory of his
person and kingdom, and this king was David or Solomon, as types of Christ;
for in their days the kingdom of Israel was raised to an exceeding height of
splendor and glory, and David it was that did vanquish the Moabites, 2. Sam.
8. 2. etc. as it is said in the following words, that this king should do: and
secondly, it was principally Christ himself, that king of glory, that
enlightner, guide and comforter of his people, who says of himself, Rev. 22.
16. I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning
star, and of whom S. John says, John 1. 9. That was the true light which
lightneth every man that comes into the world; who was therefore, as some
conceive, discovered to the Wise men by a star, Matthew. 2. 2. to show that he
was that star of whom Balaam had long since prophesied. Now therefore whereas
Balaam says here of this king* I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold
him, but not nigh, either the meaning of this is only, that what he says of
this king should not be accomplished now in his days, nor in the time that was
nigh approaching, but long after when he should see him, to wit, in his
po^terity after many generations, and then it may be meant either of David or
Christ; or if it be meant of a personal seeing this star out of Jacob, then
it can be understood only of Christ, and of the ^ight which such wicked
wretches, as Balaam was, shall have of him at the day of judgment: and it is
as if he had said, There shall a time come, though it be not nigh at hand, when
I shall see him, to wit, when every eye shall see him, Rev. 1. 7. but the
wicked afar off, as it is said, the rich man saw Abraham, Luke 16. 23.

And shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth.]
The meaning of th^s clause is, that the king that should arise out of Israel
(of whom he was now speaking) should vanquish and destroy the whole kingdom
and people of the Moabites: for by smiting the corners of Moab is meant, either
his destroying of their Princes, who were the chief strength of their kingdom,
as the corner-stones of a house are the chief strength of a building; or his
smiting of the whole country in every quarter and corner of it; and by the
second clause, and destroy all the children of Sheth, the same thing is
repeated in other words, as it is usual in these prophecies of Bala^m to join
two several expressions of one and the same thing. I know that many
Expositours hold that by the children of Sheth here are m^ant all the sons of
men, and that because from Noah, who came from the stock of Sheth, Adams son,
all nations had their original; and so they conceive this to be a prophecy of
Christ subduing the whole world unto him, and that he should destroy his
enemies of all nations that should rise up against him, according to that of
David, Psalm. 72. 11. All kings shall fall down before him, all nations shall
serve him; and Psalm. 2. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. But
this Exposition for two reasons seems very improbable: first, because it is
evident that all the several branches of this prophecy are literally meant of
David, though spiritually also of Christ, of whom David was a type. Now this
clause, that he should destroy all the children of Sheth, cannot be meant of
David, if by the children of Sheth be meant all the nations of the world: and
secondly, because whilst Balaam is here fore^elling what should befall the
several neighboring nations, as the Moabites, the Edomites, the Amalekites,
etc. ^t is no way likely that a clause should be here inserted concerning the
destruction of all mankind. So that I make no question, but as in the following
verse the subduing of the Edomites is foretold under two several expressions,
Edom shall be a possession, and, Seir also shall be a possession for his
enemies; so here also the conquest of the Moabites is likewise expressed, first
by smiting the corners of Moab, and then by destroying all the children of
Sheth, the Moabites being called the children of Sheth, either because some one
of their progenitors, the sons of Moab, famous in his time, was called
Sheth, and thence they were called the children of Sheth; or else because this
people did mightily boast of the antiquity of their nation, and so did vainly
style themselves the children of Sheth, and so are called by Balaam ironically,
by way of deriding them for that their vain boasting, that ancient people the
children of Sheth. How this prophecy was literally accomplished in David, is
evident, 2. Sam. 8. 2. where it is said that he smote Moab and measured them
with a line, casting them down to the ground; even with two lines measured he
to put to death, and with one full line to keep alive; and so the Moabites
became David's servants. But withal it is spiritually meant of Christ's
vanquishing them and all other his enemies, either by his word converting them,
or by his power subduing them, and so agrees with that of the Prophet, Esa.
11. 4. He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath
of his lips shall he slay the wicked.

Verse. 18. And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession,
etc.] That is, the Edomites that inhabit mount Seir shall also be subdued by
the Israelites. This was likewise literally fulfilled in David, of whom it is
said* 1. Chron. 18. 13. that he put garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites
became David's servants: and thereupon he sung that triumphant song, Psalm. 60.
8. Moab is my washpot, over Edom will I cast out my shoe: but especially it
was fulfilled in Christ, whose conquest over these and other his enemies the
Prophet sets forth most gloriously, Esa. 6^. 1, 2. etc. Who is this that comes
from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah* etc.

Verse. 19. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, and shall
destroy him that remains of the city.] That is, of the cities of the
Edomites, of whom he had spoken in the foregoing verse. The meaning is, that he
should destroy them all, not suffering any to escape, that even those few, that
shall shut up themselves in the most fortified places* and remain a while safe,
when others are destroyed shall at length partake with the reft. But in Christ
shall this be most eminently fulfilled, who having destroyed his enemies here
with a great destruction, shall at his second coming destroy all that remain.

Verse. 20. Amalek was the first of the nations, but his latter end shall be
that he perish for ever.] That is, thou have been reputed the first and chief
of the nations, and were indeed the first that made war against Israel; but
as glorious as thou art now, thy end shall be utter destruction: as thou were
the first fruits of the nations vanquished by the Israelites, so art thou
appointed still to be destroyed, till thou be rooted from the face of the
earth. This was fulfilled in part by Sanl 1. Sam. 15. but principally by Christ.

Verse. 21. And he looked on the Kenites, and took up his parable, etc.] Not the
people of Canaan so called, G^n. 15. 19. for we read not that they continued
undestroyed till the Assyrians carried them away to Babylon, as it is said of
these Kenites, verse. 22. But by the Kenites are here meant the Midianites, one
principal family or people amongst them being put for the whole nation: for
such a people there was amongst the Midianites, whence Jethro Moses father in
law, priest of Midian, is called the Kenite, Judge. 1. 16. and his posterity
also, Judge. 4. 11. Now Heber the Kenite* which was of the children of H^bab the
father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites; and they are next
named, because they bordered upon Amalek, and dwelt many of them amongst the
Amalekites, 1. Sam. 15. 6. And Saul said unto the K^nites, Go, depart, get you
down from among the Amalekites, etc.

Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou put thy nest in a rock.] This he
speaks as alluding to their name, for Ken signifies a nest.

Verse. 22. Nevertheless the Kenite shall be wasted until Asher shall carry
thee away captive.] That is, they shall endure much at the hand of several
enemies (which was in part accomplished when the Midianites were vanquished by
Gedeon, Judge. 7. 2.) and shall at length be carried away captive by the
Assyrians, who together with the Jews carried all the nations away round about
them, Jer. 25. 9. and particularly we read of Kenites mentioned after the
return of the people out of Babylon, 1. Chron. 2. 55.

Verse. 23. And he took up his parable and said, Alas, who shall live when God
does this?] In these words are employed how grievous calamities would in a
manner befall all nations when the Assyrians should make that havoc, of which
he had made mention in the foregoing verse, and when those troubles should
happen whereof he prophecyeth in the following words.

Verse. 24. And ships shall come from the coast of Chittim, etc.] Kittim or
Chi^tim was one of Japhets posterity, who seated themselves in Macedonia,
Cilicia, Cyprus, and other the Grecian Islands. By Chittim here Expositours
therefore do commonly understand Macedonia and other parts of Greece, and
thereto agrees that in 1. Maccab. 1. 1. when it is said that Alexander son
of Philip the Macedonian came out of the land of Chittim. But yet because in
Dan. 11. 30. it is generally almost held that by the ships of Chittim are meant
ships that came out of Italy, therefore here also they hold that by Chittim is
meant Italy: and indeed it is pro^^ble enough that though the Greek Islands,
were ordinarily called Chittim, yet the Greeks passing over from thence into
Italy, and planting themselves there, even Italy was af^erwards also called
Chittim, and so both may be here comprehended under this word Chittim, to wit,
both the Greek Islands and Italy. Now concerning these ships that should come
from the coast of Chittim, Balaam pr^phecieth here, first, that he should
afflict Ashur; secondly, that he should afflict Eber; thirdly, that he also,
that is, the people of Chittim, should perish for ever: for the first, that
these ships that came from the coast of Chittim, should afflict Ashur* if we
understand by Chittim the Grecians, the accomplishment hereof is clear; for
Alexander the great Grecian Monarch did utterly vanquish the Persian Empire, to
whom the Assyrians, that came of Ashur, were in subjection, and so made great
havoc amongst that people; and afterward they could not but suffer much, when
the Seleucidae did continually waste and oppress them in the troublesome days
of Antigonus and Antiochus. And if we understand by Chittim Italy, even by the
Romans out of Italy were the Assyrians afflicted, when they began to ruin the
Grecian Empire, to whom that people were then subject; and Dio, that writes the
Roman history, reports that Trajan the Emperor did in his time subdue
Assyria, and make it a Province. As for the second branch of this prophecy,
that ^he ships which should come from the coast of Chittim should afflict Eber,
that is, the Hebrews or Jews, this also was partly fulfilled by the Greeks, if
you understand them to be the people of Chittim; for they could not but suffer
much when the Grecians came to get the dominion over them, and the story of the
Maccabees shows how cruelly Antiochus dealt with them; but especially by the
Romans, if we understand them to be the people of Chittim: for by the Romans
they were often sorely distressed, and at length Titus and Vespasian did
utterly ruin them. As for the third branch of the prophecy, that he also, that
is, the people of Chittim should perish for ever, this has been already in
part fulfilled, both in the utter overthrow of the Grecian Empire, and in the
low estate whereto the Roman Empire is fallen, but shall be more fully
accomplished when Rome, and her now head, that man of sin, shall be utterly
destroyed, as God has threatened that he will consume him with the breath of
his mouth. and destroy him with the brig^tnesse of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 8.

Verse. 25. And Balaam rose up, and went, and returned to his place, etc.] That
is, he went away homeward, though it seems he was afterward stayed amongst the
Midianites; for among them he was slain, chap. 31. 8. They slew the kings of
Midian; Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword. With what shame
and confusion of face they now parted asunder, we may easily conceive, being
both wholly disappointed of their aims, the false prophet going away without
those wages of unrighteousness which he had gaped after, and for which he had
taken all this pains, and the king having procured nothing by all that he had
done, but that the people was blessed whom he desired his prophet to curse;
which how great a mercy it was to the Israelites, we may see by the Lords
putting them so often in mind of it, as Deuteronomy. 23. 4, 5. They hired against thee
Balaam, the son of Beor, of Pethor, of Mesopotamia, to curse thee:
Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, but the Lord thy
God turned the curse into a blessing unto thee, because the Lord thy God loved
thee; and again, Mich. 6. 5. O my ^^ople, remember now what Balak King of Moab
consulted, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him. But though they
could not obtain to have Israel cursed, yet before Balaam parted now with
Balak, he gave him that pestilent counsel, to wit, to invite the Israelites to
their feasts, and so to ensnare them and draw them both to whoredom and
idolatry, that so the favor of their God, being turned away from them, they
might then be exposed to any mischief from their enemies; which how they
attempted to put in practice we read in the following chapter.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 1. ANd Israel abode in Shittim.] This was a place in the plains of Moab,
called also Abel-shittim, chap. 3^. 49. where they continued till after Moses
death; for from this Shittim they removed when they went to pass over Jordan
into the land of Canaan: and it is the rather noted here, as an aggravation of
their sin, which in this place they fell into with the daughters of Moab,
that when God had now brought them to the very borders of the promised land
they should there so shamefully sin against him.

And the people began to commit wheredome with the daughters of Moab.] This is
meant both of bodily and spiritual whoredom: and besides, we must note first,
that though it be said generally that the people began to commit whoredom, yet
the meaning is only that some or a great number of the people did so; for all
that were guilty of this wickedness were taken away, and only those remained
alive that did constantly cleave unto the Lord, Deuteronomy. 4. 3, 4. All the men that
followed Baal Peor, the Lord thy God has destroyed them from among you: But ye
that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive every one of you this day;
and secondly, that though the daughters of Moab be only here mentioned, yet
under these the daughters of Midian are also comprehended: for it is evident
that the Israelites did commit whoredom with the daughters of Midian, as we
may see ver. 6. where it is said that it was a Midianitish woman, with whom
Zimri committed filthiness, and ver. 16, 17. Vex the Mid^anites, says the
Lord to Moses, and smite them; for they vex you with their wiles, wherewith
they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, etc.

Verse. 2. And they called the people unto the sacrifices of their gods, etc.]
This is added as the effect of their whoredom with the daughters of Moab,
whereof he had spoken in the former verse, to wit, that they were then invited
by these daughters of Moab to their idolatrous feasts, and so at length were
drawn to open idolatry. Some indeed conceive that in these words Moses shows
how they were drawn to commit whoredom with these daughters of Moab, to wit,
that first under a show of friendship they were invited by the Moabites to
their idolatrous feasts, and then being there allured by the wanton
provocations of their young damsels, they committed filthiness with them, and
so were ensnared and drawn further afterward to fall down and worship their
gods. But the order of the words is rather this, that first they committed
bodily whoredom with the daughters of Moab (for that is principally intended,
verse. 1. and therefore S. Paul speaks of this as that which was the first
original cause of all the evil that now befell them, 1. Cor. 10. 8. Neither
let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in one day three
and twenty thousand) and then afterward they were drawn by d^grees to the
idolatry here mentioned. It seems therefore that the Moabites, under a pretense
of peace and amity* got some opportunity to have their fair damsels allure some
of the Israelites to uncleanness, and then having entangled them in this
sin, they called them unto the sacrifices of their gods, that is, to the
feasts they made with their sacrifices, and so they went and did eat with them,
which was of it self idolatry, they that eat of the sacrifices being partakers
of the altar, 1. Cor. 10. 8. and a sin which God had expressly given them
warning of, to wit, that they should take heed lest the people sacrificing unto
their god, any one should call them* and they should eat of his sacrifice,
Exodus 34. 15. and then being thus far fallen away, they were easily won to
open idolatry, even to bow down to their gods and worship them. And all this
the Moabites did by the counsel of Balaam, who knew there was no other way to
endanger the Israelites, as it is evident chap. 31. 16. Behold, says the Lord
of the Midianitish women, these caused the children of Israel, through the
counsel of Balaam, to commit a trespass against the Lord in the matter of
Peor; and Rev. 2. 14. where it is said that Balaam taught Balak to cast a
stumbling block before the children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to
idols and to commit fornication.

Verse. 3. And Israel joined himself unto Baal-peor.] This Baal-peor was an
idol-god of the Moabites, so called from the mountain Peor, chap. 23. 28. where
this idol was worshipped. And to this idol Israel is said to have joined
himself, in reference to that spiritual adultery they committed by worshipping
this idol; as for the same reason the Scripture uses a like expression, Hos.
9. 10. where it is said that the Israelites went to Baal-peor, and separated
them selves unto that shame.

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel.] Herein also is employed
the effect of Gods anger, to wit, that hereupon the plague brake in upon them,
Psalm. 106. 29. whereby there fell in one day three and twenty thousand.

Verse. 4. And the Lord said unto Moses, Take all the heads of the people, and
hang them up, etc.] Some Expositours understand this thus, That the Lord here
enjoyneth Moses to take all the heads of the people, that is, to gather
together all the Heads and Rulers of the several tribes, and take them as
assistants to him, and then to hang them up before the Lord, that is, them of
the people of whom he had spoken in the foregoing verse, that had joined
themselves to Baal-peor; and indeed that which follows in the next verse does
singularly well agree with this exposition, to wit, that hereupon Moses said
unto the Judges of Israel, whom he had thus assembled together, Slay you every
one his man, that is, the me^ that are under your several jurisdictions, that
were joined unto Baal-peor. But the most received exposition is, that the Lord
here commanded Moses that he should take, that is, apprehend, all the heads of
the people, to wit, that were guilty of this sin, and h^ng them up before the
Lord, that is, as a sacrifice to the Lord for the vindicating of his honor,
and the appeasing of his wrath (as those of Saul's issue are said like^ise to
have been hanged up before the Lord, 2. Sam. 21. 6. because it was done for
diverting of the Lords wrath when there was a famine in the land) and that
against the sun, that is, openly in the sight of all men, that as they had
sinned openly, so they might be punished openly, for the terror of others. Now
this exposition the words seem most plainly to intend, to wit, that first God
commanded Moses to take all the heads of the people, that were guilty of this
sin, and hang them up before the Lord against the sun, so appointing them
to be first punished, and that with a more shameful kind of death, because
their sin was greatest, and that then afterward Moses gave a charge (as it
follows in the next verse) to the rest of the Judges that had not defiled
themselves, that they should slay amongst those that were severally under their
command all those that were notoriously known to be guilty of these sins.

Verse. 6. And behold one of the children of Israel came and brought a
Mid^anitish woman, etc.] The greatest difficulty in this passage of the story
is concerning the time when this Israelite, Zimri the son of Salu, as is
afterward expressed, verse. 14. did thus impudently bring this Midianitish
woman to the camp of Israel to commit filthiness with her, and was there with
her slain by Phinehas. Some conceive that this was done before Moses and the
other Judges had put in execution that charge which was given them, mentioned
in the two foregoing verses, for the hanging up of the heads of the people, and
the slaying of those in each tribe that were found guilty of those horrible
s^^nes of fornication and idolatry with the daughters of Moab, which had
provoked God to send such a plague amongst the people; and the reason they give
for this is, because it is hardly credible that this wretch would have dared to
have done this after Moses and the Judges had already with such severity
punished those that were found guilty. But yet because the plague was stayed
immediately upon the killing of these wretches, verse. 8. it is most probable
that those that were s^ain by the magistrate were slain before the plague was
stayed: therefore others hold that this was done in the order as here it is
recorded by Moses, and that this was one of the great aggravations of his
desperate im pudency, that not only when the people were mourning because of
the wrath of God against them, but also when so many had been cut off for this
sin he was not yet afraid, trusting it seems in his greatness, because he
was a Prince of such renown in the tribe of Simeon, but did openly carry his
harlot into his tent with him, as if he desired thereby to proclaim that he
would not be afraid to satisfy his lust, though Moses and all Israel should
stand by and look on.

Verse. 8. And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, etc.] The
original word, here translated the tent, is not that ordinarily used for a
tent, but such as signifies a cave or hollow place; therefore some think that
hereby is meant such a tent as was made for fornication.

So the plague was stayed from the children of Israel.] This plague seems to
have been the pestilence, which God sent amongst the people, Psalm. 106. 29.
They provoked him to anger with their inventions: and the plague brake in upon
them. Howbeit the word here in the original is sometimes used for slaughter by
the sword, as 1. Sam. 4. 17.

Verse. 9. And those that died in the plague were twenty and four thousand.]
The Apostle says three and twenty thousand, 1. Cor. 10. 8. It seems that one
thousand were hanged up and slain by the command of the civil magistrate, to
appease Gods wrath, and that the other three and twenty thousand were taken
away by the immediate hand of God; or one thousand of the chief hanged, the
rest slain with the sword.

Verse. 12. Wherefore say Behold I give unto him my covenant of peace.] That is,
make this which I shall say unto thee publicly known* both for the
encouragement of Phinehas, that he may not fear because they were such great
ones whom he has slain; and for the satisfaction of the people, that they may
know he did it by the special motion of my spirit, because I the Lord have
thus both approved and rewarded the fact: say, that is, make it known, that
behold I give unto him my covenant of peace, where Gods covenant with Phinehas
for the settling of the priesthood in his posterity is called a covenant of
peace, first, because they should peaceably enjoy it; and secondly, because the
work of the priesthood was to make peace betwixt the Lord and his people.

Verse. 13. And he shall have it, and his seed after him, even the covenant of
an everlasting priesthood.] That is, a priesthood that shall be continued to
his seed as long as ever the Leviticall priesthood shall continue. But the
dignity of being high priest should have come to him and his by descent, may
some say, because he was the son of Eleazar Aarons eldest son: I answer,
though he was so, yet that it should not be removed to another family for want
of his issue, that was of Gods goodness, and is here promised as the reward of
his zeal. Indeed the greatest doubt concerning this promise is, whether it were
continued in his posterity or no. Concerning which all that we find in the
Scripture is this; first, that we find the posterity of this Phinehas recorded
unto the time of the Israelites captivity in Babylon, 1. Chron. 6. 4, 15.
secondly, that if it be true which some hold, that in the days of the Judges
the high priests office was wrested from the sons of Phinehas, the son of
Eleazar, and conferred upon Eli, who was of the stock of Ithamar; yet in the
days of Solomon it was again taken from Abiathar, who was of Elies house, and
settled upon Zadok, and so it came again into the line of Phinehas, and so
continued unto the Babylonian captivity, 1. Kings 2. 25. and thirdly, that
though it be no where expressly said of what stock the high priests were after
the Israelites return out of Babylon, yet we find that Esra that great priest
and scribe was of his line, Ezra 7. 1, etc. and it may be probably thought that
the high priests still continued in that line, unless it were in those times
when there was nothing amongst them but disorder and confusion. Neither indeed
is there any cause why we should understand this promise to be so absolute, but
in case of the sins of his posterity they might for a time be deprived of
this dignity.

Verse. 14. Zimri the son of Salu, a prince of a chief house among the
Simeonites.] It is particularly expressed how great a man he was whom Phinehas
slew, because herein the zeal of Phinehas was notably discovered.

Verse. 15. He was head over a people, and of a chief house in Midian.] He is
reckoned one of the five Kings of Midian, chap. 31. 8.

Verse. 17. Vex the Medianites, and smite them, etc.] These words, smite them,
imply a promise of victory. But why are they not to smite the Moabites as well
as the Midianites? first, because he had already forbidden Israel to distress
the Moabites, Deuteronomy. 2. 9. And the Lord said unto me, Distress not the
Moabites, neither contend with them in battle: secondly, because the Midianites
had the chief hand in the mischief, as seems probable, first, by Balaams stay
amongst them, when Balak had left him in displeasure; and secondly, by this
parti^ular fact of Cozbi, who was a Kings daughter amongst them, etc.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 2. TAke the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel,
etc.] Of the two first numbrings of the people, see Exodus 30. 11, 12. and Numb.
1. 1, 2. But now the reasons of this third numbering of the people, as we may
gather by some passages, were these: first, because this would make way to the
more equal dividing of the land (which they were presently to go about)
according as they found the tribes more or less in number; see verse. 53, 54.
Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance, according to the
number of names, etc. secondly, to manifest how fully that which God had
threatened, chap. 14. 29. was now accomplished, verse. 64, 65. But among these
there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered, when they
numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai. For the Lord had
said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness, etc. Happily all the
old company were not dead till this last plague, wherein four and twenty
thousand were cut off; and therefore it may seem expressly noted, ver. 1. that
it was after the plague, that God gave this charge to Moses and Eleazar for
numbering the people, because then God had exactly brought that to pass which
he had long since threatened, as they should now see in taking the number of the
people: thirdly, to manifest Gods power and goodness in preserving unto them
so many, notwithstanding they had wandered so many years through a wilderness
wherein they were encountered with so many difficulties, and had so often by
their sins provoked God to cut off many amongst them; as also his truth and
faithfulness, who had so wondrously increased them, as he promised their
forefathers, notwithstanding they had often by their rebellion provoked him to
destroy them: and the more seasonable it was to comfort them in this kind,
because it was immediately after four and twenty thousand had been taken away
by the foregoing plague, chap. 25. fourthly, it was because they should hereby
see Gods care over them, and love toward them; as Moses at their coming out of
Egypt received Gods flock by tale, so now before his death he must deliver them
up by tale again.

Verse. 4. Take the sum of the people from twenty years old and upward, as the
Lord commanded Moses, etc.] That is, after the same manner as he commanded
Moses to number the people, when they were newly come out of Egypt, so has he
now again commanded to number them before their entering Canaan.

Verse. 7. And they that were numbered of them* were forty and three thousand
and seven hundred and thirty.] At their last numbering the Reubenites were
forty six thousand and five hundred, chap. 1. ver. 21. so that this tribe was
decreased two thousand seven hundred and seventy, which may in part be ascribed
to the conspiracy wherein they joined with Korah.

Verse. 10. And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up together with
Korah, etc.] This place, according to our translation, clears it beyond all
exception, that Korah was swallowed up into the earth together with Dathan and
Abiram, chapter 16.

And they became a sign.] That is, for an example that others might take
warning by them, as sea-marks are set up to give us warning of danger, 1. Cor.
10. 6. Now these things were our examples* to the intent we should not lust
after evil things as they also lusted.

Verse. 11. Notwithstanding the children of Korah died not.] To wit, Assure, and
Elkanah, and Abiasaph, Exodus 6. 24. these and their posterity lived and kept
their office in Israel; for their genealogy is reckoned, 1. Chron. 6. 22* 28.
and frequent honorable mention is made of the sons of Korah, both in the
Psalms and elsewhere. Some think they were miraculously preserved, being
present among those that were swallowed up: I rather think they were not with
Korah in his tent, but were happily at that time employed in the tabernacle,
and so escaped; and it may be also they consented not to their fathers
rebellion, or at least repented upon the warning given by Moses, Numb. 16. 5.

Verse. 12. The sons of Simeon after their families, of Nemuel, the family of
the Nemuelites, etc.] These sons of Simeon are elsewhere otherwise named, as
Nemuel is called also Jemuel, Genesis 46. 10. Exodus 6. 15. and Jachin is called
Jarib, 1. Chron. 4. 24. and Zerah is called Zohar, Genesis 46. 10. Exodus 6. 15.
Besides these there was one son of Simeon more, to wit, Ohad, whose family it
seems was wholly extinct in the wilderness; for though he be mentioned, Genesis
46, 10. yet not here, nor 1. Chr. 4. 24.

Verse. 14. These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty and two thousand
and two hundred.] None of the tribes was so abated as this of Simeon: when they
went out of Egypt they were fifty nine thousand and three hundred, chap. 1. 22.
now but two and twenty thousand and two hundred; so they were abated in number
thirty seven thousand and one hundred, more then half of that they were when
they came out of Egypt. The impudency and punishment of Zimri, chap. 25. 14.
who was a Prince of this tribe, and may be probably thought to have been
accompanied and abetted by many of his brethren, is conceived to be one cause
of the low ebb of this tribe, because it is like many of them perished in the
last plague together with Zimri.

Verse. 15. The children of Gad after their families, of Zephon the family of
the Zephonites, etc.] Gad is next mustered, because he was joined with Reuben
and Simeon in the South-quarter, chap. 2. 10, 14. His son Zephon is elsewhere
called Zeph^on, Genesis 46. 16. and so is Ozni, verse. 16. called Ezbon, Genesis 46.
16. and Arod, verse. 17. Arodi, Genesis 46. 16.

Verse. 18. These are the families of the children of Gad, according to those
that were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.] At the former
mustering the Gadites were forty five thousand six hundred and fifty, chap. 1.
25. now forty thousand and five hundred; so they were fewer now by five
thousand one hundred and fifty: and thus all the tribes under Reubens standard
being greatly diminished, there were now forty five thousand and twenty less
then when they were first numbered.

Verse. 19. And Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.] This is added to set
forth the power and goodness of God in the increase of this tribe of Judah,
notwithstanding these two of his sons were cut off by the hand of God.

Verse. 21. And the sons of Pharez, of Hesron, the family of the Hesronites,
etc.] Judah had five sons* Genesis 38. which should have been all heads of
families: But two of them dying childlesse, two of his sons sons (and those
of Pharez, the younger brother, but the ancestour of Christ) are taken in in
their room.

Verse. 22. These are the families of Judah, according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and sixteen thousand and five hundred.] At the
former numbering, those of the tribe of Judah were but seventy four thousand
and six hundred, chap. 1. 27. now they are seventy six thousand and five
hundred, and so are increased nineteen hundred more; and as he, so all the
tribes under his standard were ^n^reased also, and thus Judah prevailed above
all his brethren, Genesis 49. 8.

Verse. 23. Of Pua, the family of the Punites, etc.] This Pua was also calle^
Phunah, Genesis 46. 13. and Jashub verse. 24. was also called Job, Genesis 46. 13.

Verse. 25. These are the families of Issachar, according to those that were
numbered of them, threescore and four thousand and three hundred.] Of this
tribe there were before but fifty four thousand and four hundred, chap. 1.
29. now there are sixty four thousand and three hundred, so that they were now
increased nine thousand and nine hundred men of war.

Verse. 27. These are the families of the Zebulunites, according to those that
were numbered of them, threescore thousand and five hundred.] Who were before
but fifty seven thousand and four hundred, chap. 1. 31. so they are increased
three thousand and a hundred men. Now adding together one thousand and nine
hundred, the increase of Judahs tribe, and nine thousand nine hundred, the
increase of Issachars tribe; and three thousand and a hundred, the increase of
Zebuluns tribe, we find that Judahs camp was increased foureteen thousand and
nine hundred.

Verse. 29. Of the sons of Manasseh, of Machir the family of the Machirites,
etc.] Many Expositours hold that Machir had no other son but ^ilead, and so
thereupon they say, that the same family was called promiscuously the family
of the Machirites, and, the family of the Gileadites. But by this place it is
evident that besides the posterity of Machir by his son Gilead, who are here
called the family of the Gileadites, he had also a posterity by other sons,
who were called by his own name, the family of the Machirites, as indeed we
read of children that Machir had brought up upon Joseph's knees Genesis 50. 23.
and 1. Chron. 7. 16. Peresh and Sheresh are said to be the sons of Machir by
Maachah his wife.

Verse. 30. Of Jeezer, the family of the Jeezerites.] Josh. 17. 2. he is called
Abiezer: even the sons sons sons here were heads of families.

Verse. 34. These are the families of Manasseh, and those that were numbered of
them, fifty and two thousand and seven hundred.] Before they were but thirty
two thousand and two hundred, chap. 1. 35. now fifty two thousand and seven
hundred, so they were increased twenty thousand and five hundred men of war*
none of the other tribes had half so much increase.

Verse. 35. Of Becher, the family of the B^^hrites* etc.] This, some think, is
the ^^me that is called Berod, 1. Chron. 7. 20. as he also that is called Eran,
verse. 36. in 1. Chron. 7. 20. is called Laadan, who was Ephraims sons son,
but yet was head of a family.

Verse. 37. These are the families of the sons of Ephraim, according to those
that were numbered of them, thirty and two thousand and five hundred.] He had
before, chap. 1. 33. forty thousand and five hundred; so eight thousand of
this tribe were ^iminished.

Verse. 38. Of Ashbel the father of the Ashbelites, etc.] This Ashbel is called
Jediael 1. Chron. 7. 6. and Ahiram, Ehi, Gen 46. 21. and Aharah 1. Chron. 8. 1.
and Shupham verse. 39. is called Shuppim, 1. Chron. 7. 12. and Muppim, Genesis 46.
21. and Hupham, Huppim, Gen 46. 21. and And verse. 40. is called Addar, 1.
Chron. 8. 3.

Verse. 41. These are the sons of Benjamin after their families, and they that
were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and six hundred.] Genesis 46.
21. we find ten sons of Benjamin; but here are reckoned but five families of
his sons, and two of his sons sons: he had before but thirty five
thousand and four hundred, so that now they were increased ten thousand and
two hundred, though their families were (it seems) diminished in the
wilderness: and thus though one of the tribes under Ephraims standard were
fewer then before, to wit, his own tribe, yet his whole camp, by reason of the
great increase of the other two tribes joined with him, was augmented two and
twenty thousand and seven hundred.

Verse. 42. Of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites.] This Shuham is called
Hushim, Genesis 46. 26.

These are the families of Dan after their families.] See Genesis 46. 23.

Verse. 43. All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those that were
numbered of them, were threescore and four thousand and four hundred.] At the
former muster the Danites were but sixty two thousand and seven hundred* chap.
1. 39. but are now increased seventeen hundred more; though there were but one
family in this tribe, yet none of all the tribes save Judah have the like
multitude.

Verse. 44. Of Jesui* the family of the Jesuits, etc.] This Jes^i is called
Isu^, Genesis 46. 17. Between him and Jimnah there was another called Ishuah, Genesis
46. 17. whose family, here omitted, seems to be perished.

Verse. 46. And the name of the daughter of Asher was Sarah.] This Sarah is
mentioned also Genesis 46. 17. and 1. Chron. 7. 30. as being famous it seems in
her time.

Verse. 47. These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those
that were numbered of them, who were fifty and three thousand and four
hundred.] Whereas before he had but forty one thousand and five hundred, chap.
1. 41. and so is increased eleven thousand and nine hundred.

Verse. 50. These are the families of Naphtali according to their families* and
they that were numbered of them were forty and five thousand and four
hundred.] At the former numbering these were fifty three thousand and four
hundred, chap. 1. 41. now but forty five thousand and four hundred, eight
thousand fewer then before; though this tribe under Dans standard were
diminished, yet was Dans whole camp increased five thousand and six hundred men
of war.

Verse. 51. These were the numbered of the children of Israel, six hundred
thousand and a thousand seven hundred and thirty.] The total some of the first
numbering was six hundred and th^ee thousand five hundred and fifty, chap. 1.
46. whereas now it is but six hundred and one thousand seven hundred and
thirty. So that though Judahs, Ephraims, and Dans camps were all more in number
then when first they came into the wilderness, yet by reason of the great
decrease of Reubens camp, which was forty five thousand and twenty fewer then
before, the total here is less then the total there by eighteen hundred and
twenty.

Verse. 53. Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance, etc.] Gods
enjoining them to divide the land before they had conquered it, was to assure
them that it should be theirs, to teach them to live by faith, and before they
had it to make as sure of it as if it were already in their possession. And may
not we then be sure of heaven before we have it?

Verse. 55. Notwithstanding the land shall be divided by lot.] That is, they
were to divide the land into so many several coasts or provinces, according to
the number of the tribes that were to inhabit it, yet so as the certain bounds
and limits of each portion were not appointed and resolved on till they knew
which tribe the Lord would choose to plant there (which was determined by lots)
and then they enlarged or lessened the portion according to the number of the
tribe that was there to be seated. Had they not been thus severally assigned by
lot to that which God would have to be the place of their habitation, every one
would have chosen the best, or safest, or healthfullest places of the land,
whereas now all dissension was prevented, and they were taught to acknowledge
God the chief Lord of the land, by whose immediate providence they were
disposed of to those dwellings: on the other side, had they had the exact
measure of their portions assigned them by lot, it had not been lawful for
them to alter that which God had done, as we see it was; for out of that which
was at first given to Judah alone, afterward two tribes had their lots, Josh.
19. 4. -- 40. to wit, Simeon and Dan.

According to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall inherit.]
That is, the lots shall go under the names of the Patriarchs, one for Reuben,
another for Simeon, another for Gad, etc.

Verse. 56. According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided between
many and few.] That is, having by lot determined where every tribe shall have
their possession, ye shall then assign unto every tribe, in that part of the
land where their lot fell, such a quantity of land as by the rules of equal
proportion shall be found due to them, according as they are in number more or
^ewer.

Verse. 57. And th^se are they that were numbered of the Levites, etc.] The
Levites are numbered by themselves, because they were to have no share in the
land, verse. 62. They were not numbered among the children of Israel, because
there was no inheritance given them amongst the children of Israel.

Verse. 58. These are the families of the Levites the family of the Libnites;
etc.] The family of the Libnites was of Libni the son of Gershon, Exodus 6.
17. and so Shimi the other son of Gershon is not here mentioned. Thus
likewise that of the Hebronites was of Hebron the son of Kohath, Exodus* 6. 18.
and his other brethren are not here mentioned as heads of families (though
Amram be named as the father of Moses) and those of the Mahlites and Mushites
were of Mahali and Mushi the sons of Merari, Exodus 6. 19. and that of the
Korathites of Korah, Number. 16. 1.

Verse. 59. And the name of Amrams wife was Jochebed, etc.] See the note upon
Exodus 2. 1.

Verse. 62. And those that were numbered of them were twenty and three thousand,
etc.] At the former numbering the Levites were but two and twenty thousand,
chap. 3. 39. now they were a thousand more.

Verse. 65. And there was not left a man of them save Caleb the son of
Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.] That is, as God had threatened* so it
was now found to be; of the people that were numbered at their coming out of
Egypt from twenty years old and upward, there was not a man left at this time
when they were numbered again* but only Caleb and Joshua. So that we must
observe that the Levites are not here included, for of them there were left
Moses, and Eleazar, and Ithamar, and perhaps many others.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. THen came the daughters of Zelophehad, etc.] Because the Lord had
said in the foregoing chapter, verse. 53. that the land should be divided
amongst those they had now numbered from twenty years old and upward, and so
Zelophehad being dead without sons, his children were like to have no
inheritance in the land, therefore his daughters came now to Moses and Eleazar,
desiring that that share of the land might be assigned to them which should
have been their fathers had he been then living.

Verse. 2. And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and
before the princes, and all the congregation by the door of the tabernacle,
etc.] Whither they were it seems for this very purpose come, that they might
enquire of the Lord concerning this difficult case: for I conceive they had
formerly demanded an inheritance of the Judges, and were by them appointed to
plead for themselves before the door of the tabernacle, where they should have
an answer from God himself.

Verse. 3. Our father died in the wilderness, etc.] This plea of the daughters
of Zelophehad is in effect as if they had thus said, Our father was one of
those whom the Lord carried out of Egypt, to go and take possession of the land
of Canaan, and though he died in the wilderness, yet he was not taken away by
any special judgment, because he had his hand in some insurrection and
rebellion, such as was that of those that gathered themselves together against
the Lord in the company of Korah (and this they allege to make their cause the
more favorable, because had he been cut off in any such insurrection, some
might judge that it was no matter though his posterity were excluded from
having any share in the land of Ca^aan) but died in his own sin, that is, he
died his natural death when his time was come, as being by sin liable to
death as all other men are. Thus Korahs conspiracy is mentioned here, either
by a Synecdoche, this one being put for all other the rebellions of the
Israelites* and so the meaning must be that their father died in no particular
rebellion against the Lord; or else because whereas all the other murmurings
and insurrections against Moses were especially the sin of the common sort of
people. Korahs was chiefly of the princes and great men of every tribe, chap.
16. 2. and so happily because their father was one of the chief of the tribe of
Manasseh, therefore they mention only the rebellion of the great ones. And as
for that phrase of their fathers dying in his own sin, though some
Expo^itours understand it thus, that he dyed not for any special insurrection
but only for that sin wherein the whole congregation was involved as well as
he; and for which the Lord threatened that they should all die in the
wilderness, to wit, for refusing to go into the land of Canaan when God had
brought them thither, yet I rather think it is meant of his own private sins,
which made him liable to death, as all other men are, for that all have ^inned,
Romans 5. 12.

Verse. 4. Why should the name of our father be done away from among his family
because he has no son?] That is, why should not he be named amongst others
in the division of the land, which if it be not, his name and family will be
quite extinguished as if he had never been; and hence some Expositours conclude
that as when a man dyed without issue, and his brother m^rried his widow to
raise up seed unto his brother, his first son was in their Genealogies
reckoned to be the son of him that dyed without issue; so it was in this
case, the first sons of those that married the daughters of Zelophehad were
accounted the sons of Zelophehad; and so under his name did inherit his land.

Verse. 4. Give unto us therefore a possession among the brethren of our
father.] This pleading for a portion in that land, which was not yet conquered,
was a true act of faith, and must needs encourage others, and help to
strengthen their faith. And besides, hereby was shown, as in a type, that even
women have an equal share with men in the heavenly Canaan; for all inherit
through Christ, in whom there is neither male nor female, but all are one, Gal.
3. 28.

Verse. 7. Thou shall surely give them a possession of an inheritance among
their fathers brethren, etc.] Thus the Lord granted these daughters of
Zelophehad their desire, which how it was performed by Joshua, we may read,
Josh. 17. 4. According to the commandment of the Lord he gave them an
inheritance among the brethren of their father; yet withal there was
afterward a caution added, to wit, that they might not marry out of their own
tribe, chap. 36. 6.

Verse. 12. Get thee up into this mount Abarim, etc.] There was a long tract of
mountains which were called the mountains of Abarim, chap. ^3. 47. and into one
of these was Moses now sent, to wit, that which is elsewhere called mount Nebo*
which was in the land of Moab over against Jericho, Deuteronomy 32. 49. and Pisgah,
Deuteronomy. 34. 1. Hence Moses might see the land afar off, though he might not
enter it; and so the Law did show the Israelites heaven afar off, but not as
it is now revealed to us in the Gospel.

Verse. 13. And when thou have seen it, thou shall be gathered unto thy people,
etc.] That they should not enter the land God had threatened before, Numb. 20.
12. Se^ the notes upon that place.

Verse. 14. That is the water of Meribah in Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.]
This is added to distinguish it from another Meribah, Exodus 17. 7. where water
was fetched out also from the rock, but there Moses and Aaron displeased not
the Lord.

Verse. 16. Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over
the congregation.] Moses at this time prayed also earnestly to the Lord, that
he might go over and see the land; but God would not grant him his desire
herein, Deuteronomy. 3. 23, 26. concerning this phrase* the God of the spirits of all
flesh, see the note upon Numb. 16. 22. This title is fitly in this prayer of
Moses given unto the Lord, both as implying that he was the searcher of men's
spirits, and therefore knew best who was fittest for the place; and likewise as
intimating that he was able to frame and fashion their spirits as he pleased,
and to give them any gifts or graces requisite for the employment.

Verse. 17. Which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, etc.]
That is, who may guide them and govern them, both at home and abroad, in times
of war and in times of peace, and undertake the charge of defending them
against their enemies: for under this phrase of going ou^ and coming in before
them, of leading them out and bringing them in, all the offices of the supreme
magistracy are comprehended; and hence Moses being ready to resign the
government uses ^he same expression concerning himself, Deuteronomy. 31. 2. I can no
more go out and come in. The similitude is taken from a Captain that marches
before his soldiers, and undertakes to lead them wherever they should go; or
rather from shepherds, whose custom it was to go out and in before his flocks,
to lead them out to their pastures, and to bring them home to their folds; and
therefore in the next words Moses adds, that the congregation of the Lord be
not as sheep which have no ^hepherd.

Verse. 18. Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the spirit.]
That is, a man of eminent gifts, and therefore fit for this place and
employment: and indeed herein was Joshua a type of Christ, concerning whom the
prophet foretold, that the spirit of the Lord should rest upon him, the spirit
of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord.

And lay thine hand upon him.] Or, thy hands, for so it is said, verse. 23. that
Moses laid his hands upon him: and by this ceremony of the imposition of Moses
hands was signified first and especially, that the supreme Magistracy should be
transferred from Moses to him, as being the man now consecrated and set apart
to this place and service; secondly, that the hand of God should be upon him to
defend him and prosper him in all his ways; and thirdly, that God would
confer upon him a great increase of the gifts of his spirit, answerable to
the dignity whereto he was advanced: and thus it seems upon the imposition of
Moses hands was accordingly performed, as we see Deuteronomy. 34. 9. Joshua the son
of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for Moses had laid his hands upon
him. The like ceremony was ^fterwards used in the days of the Gospel, when men
were separated and set apart to preach the Gospel, and in a manner for the same
reasons: whence is that of the Apostle S. Paul to Timothy, 1. Tim. 4. 14.
Neglect not the gift which is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with
the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.

Verse. 19. And set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the
congregation.] To wit, that he first as the chief, and the people with him,
might assent to that which God had dec^eed.

And give him a charge in their sight.] That is, openly before them all make
known to him what his office is, and charge him faithfully and carefully to
perform that which he undertakes; and it may well be that this was the very
charge which is afterward expressed by Moses, Deuteronomy. 31. 7, 8. at which time
God himself also gave him a charge, verse. 14, 15.

Verse. 20. And thou shall put some of thine honor upon him, etc.] This may be
meant of the gifts of Gods spirit, which made Moses to be so highly honored
amongst the people, as elsewhere it is said concerning the seventy Elders that
were chosen to assist Moses in the government, that God would take of the
spirit that was upon Moses and put it upon them, chap. 11. 17. concerning which
see the note upon that place. Now Moses is commanded to put of this his honor
upon Joshua, only because at the laying of Moses hands upon him, these gifts
of Gods spirit should be imparted to him: and it is not said, put thine honor
upon him, but, put of thine honor upon him, or, as it is in our Bibles, thou
shall put some of thine honor upon him, because though Joshua was to have the
same gifts imparted to him that Moses had, yet not in the same measure; whence
it is said, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. that there arose not a prophet since in Israel like
unto Moses. Or else rather by Moses honor here is meant his authority and
dignity; and then it is said that he should put some of his honor upon him in
relation to the present time before Moses death, to wit, that he should
presently admit him into some communion of authority with him, and so cause the
people to give him that honor which was due unto Moses successor, the elect
Judge of Israel.

Verse. 21. And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall ask counsel
for him, after the judgment of Urim. etc.] That is, upon all occasions he
shall present himself before Eleazar to ask counsel of him, who shall enquire
of the Lord for him after the judgment of Urim. What this Urim was, see Exodus
28. 30. what is meant by asking counsel after the judgment of Urim, is hard to
say. This I conceive is most probable, when any came to enquire of the Lord,
the priest put on the Ephod, whereto the pectorall was fastened, in the fold
whereof the Urim and Thummim was put by Moses, and so the priest in the name of
the parties propounded such questions, as they desired to be satisfied in from
the Lord, desiring the Lord to return them an answer (according as we find it
1. Sam. 23. 9, 10, 11, 12.) whereupon the Lord did either by the illumination
of his spirit (whereof the Urim was an emblem or outward sign) reveal unto
the priest what answer he should give the party enquiring* or else by an
immediate voice from heaven; and this was called the judgment of Urim, because
it pleased the Lord, upon the applying or putting on of the pectorall, to give
judgment in the cause enquired of by the priest.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 2. COmmand the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offerings,
etc.] Because they had in a great part omitted their sacrifices and solemn
feasts the most part of the eight and thirty years last past by reason of their
travels, wherein the Sanctuary, the altar, and other holy things were folded up
and removed from ^lace to place, and that withal the generation that had been
before mustered was now dead, chap. 26. 64. But among these there was not a man
of them, whom Moses and Aaron the priest numbered when they numbered the children
of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai; therefore the Lord causes the Law of
sacrificing to be here again repeated, thereby giving them to know that when
they came into the land they must not any longer neglect Gods ordinances, as
they had done in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. 12. 8. Ye shall not do after all the
things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes,
etc. and so first he gives them charge in general to be sure that they give
him all the sacrifices and offerings that he had at several times appointed
them to offer, My offerings and my bread for my sacrifices made by fire for a
sweet savor unto me shall ye observe to offer unto me in their due season: for
though all the sacrifices that were burnt upon the altar are elsewhere called
the Lords food, Lev. 3. 11. and his bread, Lev. 21. 6. (the reasons whereof see
in the notes upon those places) yet here it seems most probable that by
offerings are meant all the several sacrifices that were to be killed and
offered upon the altar, and by his bread for the sacrifices is meant the
meat offerings that were to be joined with their sacrifices; and then secondly,
he sets down particularly what they were to offer, first, for their daily
sacrifice, verse. 3. secondly, for their weekly sacrifice every Sabbath day,
verse. 9. thirdly, for their monthly sacrifice every new Moon, verse. 11. and
fourthly, for their yearly sacrifices at every several feast in the year,
verse. 16, etc.

Verse. 3. This is the offering made by fir^ which ye shall offer unto the Lord,
etc.] See the notes on Exodus 29, 28.

Verse. 9. And on the Sabbath day two lambs of the first year without spot,
etc.] The sacrifices here appointed for every Sabbath day are full double to
those appointed for every day, verse. 3. and yet the daily sacrifices, the
continual burnt-offering, verse. 10. was not omitted on the Sabbath day
neither. So that every Sabbath in the morning there was offered one lamb for
the daily sacrifice, and then two lambs more for the Sabbath: and this was thus
appointed, first, to show the holiness of that day, and that God required more
service from them on that day then other days; secondly, by way of
thankfulness for the worlds creation; and thirdly, because it was a sign of
our rest in heaven purchased for us by Christ.

Verse. 11. And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a
burnt-offering unto the Lord, etc.] That is, the new Moons, the first days of
every month: these were appointed to be kept as solemn festivals, then did
they blow with the silver trumpets in the Sanctuary, chap. 10. 10. Also in the
day of your gladness, and in your sol^mn days, and in the beginning of your
months, ye shall blow with the trumpets, etc. then did they repair to the
prophets or other ministers of God to hear his word, 2. Kings 4. 29. Wherefore
will thou go to him to day (says the Shunamites husband to her, when she would
go to the Prophet Elisha) It is neither new moon, nor Sabbath; then also they
kept religious feasts, 1. Sam. 5. 6. And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to
morrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the King at meat,
etc. neither was it lawful to buy or sell or do other worldly work on those
days, Amos 8. 5. When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell corn? and
the Sabbath, that we may set forth wheat* etc. Now these new moons were thus
ordained to be solemnized, first, that they might be put in mind to be
thankful for Gods mercy in that change of times and seasons, the mediate cause
of many blessings; and the remembrance of this mercy God would have kept at the
new of the moon rather then at her full, when she shined in her full
brightness, because then there was less danger of being taken so with the
glory of that creature as not to ascend higher to the admiration of God the
Creator; whence is that expression which Job uses, chap. 31. 26, 27. If I
beheld the sun when it shined, or the moon walking in her brightness, and my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand, etc. It was
the glory of the moon shining in her brightness that drew the heathens to
worship the moon; and to prevent this danger God would have the memorial of
his mercy in ordering the change of moons and seasons to be kept not at the
full but at the new of the moon: secondly* that the renewing of the moon (which
borrows her light of the sun) might be observed as a figure or shadow of
the Churches renovation by Christ, the sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2.
whereby every true Christian does put off the old man with his deeds, and put
on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that
created him, Col. 3. 9, 10. whence is that of the Apostle, Col. 2. 16, 17. Let
no man therefore judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of an holy day,
or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ: And thirdly, that as of every day, so of every
month they might consecrate the first unto the Lords service.

Verse. 17. And in the fifteenth day of this month is the feast.] To wit, of
unleavened bread, Levit. 23. 6. where see all the notes on the solemnities of
this feast.

Verse. 24. After this manner ye shall offer daily throughout the seven days,
etc.] That is, upon every one of the seven days of this feast. But besides
these sacrifices upon the sixteenth day of the month, which was the next day
after the first solemn day of the feast, there was also a lamb offered for a
burnt-offering, together with the wave-sheaf or omer. See Levit. 23. 12. and
the notes thereon.

Verse. 26. Also in the day of the first fruits, when ye bring a new
meat offering unto the Lord, after your weeks be out, etc.] Called the feast of
Pentecost, Acts 2. 1. when they offered two loaves of their new corn; and it
was seven weeks, or fifty days after the Passover, Levit. 23. 15, 16.

Verse. 27. Two young bullocks, one ram, seven lambs of the first year.] These
and the rest following are here added to the feast over and beside those seven
lambs, one bullock, and two rams which were offered with the first fruits,
Lev. 23. 28. concerning which see the notes there.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. ANd in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, etc.] This
seventh month was called the month Ethanim, 1. Kings 8. 2. it was in the end
of the year, Exodus 23. 16. and the revolution of the year, Exodus 34. 22. for so
the word is in the original, because then the old year went out, and the new
began, as touching Jubilees and other civil affairs, Lev. 25. 9, 10. But by
reason of Isreal's coming out of Egypt in Abib or March, that was made the first
of the months, Exodus 12. 2. And thus numbering the months (for after this
order the ecclesiastical feasts were reckoned) this which had been the first
month is here* as usually elsewhere, called the seventh month, and so became
as it were the Sabbath month, and was accordingly honored with as many feasts
as were celebrated in all the year besides; whereof one was this here spoken
of* which was called the feast of trumpets, and was in the first day of this
month, being their Newyears day for civil affairs, and so a fit day to praise
God for the blessings of the yea^ past, and to crave his blessing on the
following year. See what is noted concerning the solemnity of this feast, Lev.
23. 24.

Verse. 2. And ye shall offer a burnt-offering for a sweet savor unto the Lord,
one young bullock, etc.] To wit, beside the sacrifices of the day, as it was a
new Moon, chap. 28. 11. and besides the daily sacrifice, as is expressly
noted, verse. 6.

Verse. 7. And ye shall have on the tenth day of this seventh month an holy
convocation, etc.] See Levit. 16. 29. and the notes thereon.

Verse. 11. One kid of the goats for a sinne-offering, beside the sinne-offering
of ^^onement, etc.] That is, beside that goat-buck offered on the day of
atonement, whose blood was carried by the high priest within the vail into the
most holy place. See Levit 16. 9,. 29* 30.

Verse. 12. And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy
convocation, etc.] To wit, the seast of booths. See Levit. 23. 34, 35. and the
notes thereon.

Verse. 13. And ye shall offer a burnt-offering, a sacrifice made by fire, of a
sweet savor unto the Lord, thirteen young bullocks, etc.] There were more
sacrifices offered at this then at any other feast, both because it was
celebrated in remembrance of the mercies of many years, even all those ^ourty
years of their travel from Egypt to Canaan* as also because at this time they
had gathered in their corn and wine, and had seen the blessing of God on all
their increase, and in all the work of their hands, Deuteronomy. 16. 13, 15. Thou
shall observe the feast of tabernacles seven days after thou have gathered in
thy corn and thy wine: Seven days shall thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord
thy God, in the place which the Lord shall choose; because the Lord thy God
shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in all the works of thine hands,
therefore thou shall surely rejoice.

Verse. 17. And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, etc.] In
every one of the seven days of this feast one bullock is abated: for whereas
they offered thirteen bullocks the first day, they offered but twelve on the
second day, and el^ve^ on the third, etc, and herein happily was intended a
representation how the years of their pilgrimage, wherein God had appointed
that they should wander up and down in booths, did by degrees wear away and
grow fewer and fewer; or else by this abating of the sin^e-offerings (whereby
atonement was made for them) the holy Ghost might teach their duty to grow in
grace, that in the whole course of their pilgrimage through this world sin
should still decay and wear away; or it might signify a diminishing or wearing
away of the legal sacrifices and ceremonies.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses spoke unto the heads of the tribes concerning the children
of Israel, etc.] There being mention made in the latter end of the foregoing
chapter verse. 39. of sacrifices due upon a vow made, which were to be carefully
brought in (besides the set sacrifices which God had enjoined) upon this
occasion, it seems, these precepts are in this next chapter here added
concerning vows, to show who they were that must always necessarily perform
their vows, and who not; and these Laws it is said that Moses made known to the
heads of the tribes, because they were the men that were according to these
Laws to judge, either to bind them to their vows or free them, etc.

Verse. 2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath, etc.] That is, if
a man, to wit, a man of grown years, having power over himself, shall bind his
soul with a bond, whether it be only a promise or vow that he has solemnly
made unto the Lord, or whether it be a vow strengthened with an oath, or that
he has sworn that he will do such or such a thing, he shall not break his
word, but shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth, that is,
he must not fail to do exactly what he has vowed and sworn to do, and that
without delay (for it is also added, Deuteronomy. 23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow
unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it) to wit, if it were not
an unlawful thing he had vowed or sworn: for vows for the doing of that which
it is unlawful to do are not vows binding the conscience; for how can that vow
bind men to God, when they vow to do that which God forbids, and will not have
done? such as was that of those forty men, Acts 23. 21* that had bound
themselves with an oath that they would neither eat nor drink till they had
killed Paul.

Verse. 3. If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind her self by a bond
being in her fathers house, etc.] That is, under his power and command, whether
in his house or no; and by the rule of analogy the same exception is to be
allowed for sons and servants under their governors power. As for those last
words, in her youth, either they are only added, because it is for the most
part in their youth that maids continue in t^eir fathers house (for it is not
likely that they had power to vow without the consent of their fathers when
they had lived unmarried till riper years, and were still under their father
sjurisdiction) or else because though their fathers were dead, yet in their
youth maids had no power to vow without the consent of their governors*
whereas being of full years and at their own disposing they might vow, and were
then bound to do what they had vowed.

Verse. 5. And the Lord shall forgive her, because her father* disallowed her.]
Hereby is meant either that the Lord would forgive her rashness in vowing,
when she was not in her own power; or rather that the Lord would not impute
this as a sin to her, seeing her father refused to let her keep it.

Verse. 8. But if her husband disallowed her on the day that he heard it, etc.]
This last clause, on the day that he heard it, is added, first, to show that
whenever he shall come to hear it he may make her vow void, though it were long
after the vow were made; secondly, to show that if he dissembled for a time,
and afterward showed his dislike, though it were the next day after* it should
be to no purpose.

Verse. 9. But every vow of a widow, and of her that is divorced, wherewith they
have bound their souls, shall stand against her.] If it were made in her
widowhood, she must perform it, yea (say the Hebrews) though she be afterward
married, or be turned to her fathers house.

Verse. 10. And if she vowed in her husbands house, etc.] There being ^o
probable reason that can be given, why that which was said before concerning
the husbands ratifying or disannulling his wives vows, verse. 6, 7, 8. should
here be repeated again, it is rather to be thought that there is some
difference betwixt that which is said there, and that which is added here. Some
hold that the Law given verse. 6, 7, 8. is concerning the woman that is only
betrothed, and that this here is concerning the woman that is married. But
seeing in both places the words are concerning the woman that has a husband, I
see no warrant for this conceit. Either therefore the first is meant of a woman
married to a husband, but living still in her fathers house, and this of the
wife that is gone to her husbands house, which may seem to be employed in these
words, And if she vowed in her husbands house; or ^ather the first Law is
concerning the wives vows, that were to be performed in the time of her being
under the subjection of her husband, which might be established or made void by
her husband, as he pleased. But here the Law speaks concerning vows made by the
wives, their husbands yet living, but to be performed after the husbands death;
concerning which the Lord gives the same Law, to wit, that the husbands should
have power to ratify or disannull them. Women married might be very forward to
make large vows what they would do if ever they came to be fre^ women again,
and then being free might make light of performing their vows under a pretense
that those vows were made when they were under the power of their husbands: To
prevent this therefore this Law is here added, that in case a woman vowed in
her husbands house, if her husband held his peace (as it follows verse. 11.)
then all her vows should stand, to wit, even after her husbands death, or after
she is made free by divorce; and indeed the very dependence of these words upon
that which went before, verse. 9. concerning widows or wives divorced is a
strong argument for this exposition.

Verse. 13. Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband
may establish it; or her husband may make it void.] These words to afflict the
soul, seem to be added to show the full extent of the former Law, and not by
way of limitation or restraint, to wit, that it is in the husbands power to
establish or make void very vow of his wife; yea though it be a vow that
concerns not the goods of the husband, but only the affliction of her own
person by abstinence, fasting, etc.

Verse. 15. But if he shall any ways make them void after that he has heard
them, then he shall bear her iniquity.] That is, though the wife has full
libe^ty to perform her vow, if her husband heard it and did not that day
contradict it; yet if afterward the husband shall violently refuse to let her
perform it (which however by Gods Law he might not do) in this case the wife
must not strive against her husband: and why? he shall bear her iniquity, that
is* the sin shall be imputed to her husband, not to her, that would have kept
her promise if she might.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 2. AVenge the children of Isr^el of the Midianites: afterward s^alt
thou be gathered unto thy people.] Mo^es must not die till the Midianites be
spoiled: and that first, for Moses sake that he might be comforted before his
death by seeing the Israelites avenged upon their enemies the Midianites, who
had been the occasion of so much mischief to them, chap. 25. 1. 6. and so might
be the more willing to r^signe them up chearf^lly into the hands of God, who
had so lately given proof how tender he was over them, how severe against all
those that should seek to hurt them; and secondly, for the peoples sake,
because if Moses had be^n newly dead, they would not have gone forth happily
with such courage against the Midianites, as also because this late experience
they had of Gods helping t^em against the Midianites might make them the more
boldly to enter upon the conquest of Canaan after the death of Moses under the
conduct of Joshua.

Verse. 4. Of every tribe a thousand, thro^ghout all the tribes of Israel shall
ye send to the war.] Considering the multitude of the enemy, with whom they
were to encounter (which may be gathered from the riches of the prey, and the
death of five kings amongst others that were slain, verse. 8.) and withal how
man^ hundred thousand fighting men of Israel Moses might have sent forth, it
would have been a strange course in Moses of his own head only to send forth
twelve thousand against such a mighty enemy. And therefore I make no question
but Moses received particular dire^tions from God (though it be not expressed)
both that he should send out but twelve thousand* (thereby to try the faith of
the Israelites, and to make Gods hand in the victory the more evident) and that
they should be equally c^lled out of every tribe, that one tribe might not
exalt it self above another for this victo^y, but that all the glory might be
given to God.

Verse. 6. And Moses sent them to the war, a thousand of every tribe, them and
Phinehas, etc.] Who was sent out as their captain to lead them in this war
against the Midianites, it is not here expr^ssed: most probable it is that
Joshua, who was so lately appointed of God to succeed Moses in the government,
was employed in this service, that so the s^ccesse of this enterprise might,
whilst Moses yet lived, procure him the more respect and honor in the hearts
of the people. And indeed had not Joshua been amongst these forces that went
out to fight against the Midianites, why is he not mentioned amongst those that
went out to meet them at their return, as well as Moses and Eleazar, verse. 13.
I know that some hold that Phinehas was their captain, but for this they have
no just ground, nor do we any where read that the priests in those times used
to go out as captains in the war: Phinehas went out only as one of the
priests to encourage the people (as justly it might be expected that he would*
be zealous in this cause, because of the zeal he had already shown against that
Mid^anitish harlot, chap. 25. 6.) and withal to take care of the holy things
of the Sanctuary, which they carried with them to the war, as is employed in
the following words, where it is said that Phinehas went with them to the war
with the holy instruments and trumpets to blow in his hand, where by the holy
instruments are meant the ark, with the mercy-seat, and other things
appertaining thereto, which they used in those times to carry with them when
they went out to war, as a comfortable sign of Gods presence amongst them.

Verse. 8. And they slew the kings of Midian, etc.] These it seems were formerly
vassals to Sihon, and therefore called Dukes of Sihon, Josh. 13. 21. but Sihon
himself being now slain, they became it seems absolute kings, amongst whom was
Zur the father of Cozbi whom Phinehas slew, chap. 25. 15.

Balaam also the son of Beor they slew with the sword.] See the note upon
chap. 24. 25.

Verse. 10. And they burnt all their cities wherein they dwelt, etc.] To wit,
lest sloth or covetousness should draw any of the Israelites to hide
themselves in these nests, and to take up their rest in this country which God
had not allotted them, and neglect the land of Canaan which he had given them.

Verse. 13. And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the princes of the
congregation went forth to meet them without the camp.] To wit, to congratulate
their victory, and withal to put them in mind of cleansing themselves before
they came into the camp.

Verse. (...) And Moses was wroth with the offic^rs of the host, etc.] Phinehas
may be here comprehended, though not expressed; yet I rather think that Moses
directs his speech to the captains, because Phinehas did chiefly attend upon
the holy instruments, verse. 6. and meddled not with the ordering of the
soldiers as concerning the saving or not saving those they took captives.

Verse. 15. And Moses said unto them, Have ye saved all the women alive?] As if
he had said, Whereas ye ought to have saved none, have you saved them all?
these are they that ensnared the people, and therefore these above all should
have been slain.

Verse. 17. Now therefore kill every male among the little ones.] The general
rule and law given to the Israelites was, that they should spare all the little
ones, the Canaanites only excepted. See Deuteronomy. 20. 14. But here because they
were to execute Gods vengeance upon a people that had brought a great sin,
and so conse^uently a great plague, upon the Israel of God, Moses (no doubt by
the special di^ection of Gods spirit) gives charge that all the male-children
should be slain: and so, the more lively thereby to express how detestable
that fact of the Midianites was, by slaying the males h^* does as it were seek
to root out the very memory of them; not indeed of the whole nation of the
Midianites (for in the days of Gedeon we read again of this nation, Judge. 6.
1.) but of these neighboring Midianites that had done this mischief to the
Israel of God.

And kill every woman that has known man by lying with him.] The words in the
following verse (where only the women-children are appointed to be saved) show
the meaning of these words, namely that all who were of years fit for the
knowledge of men were slain, and only the women-children that were undoubtedly
pure virgins were saved alive.

Verse. 18. But all the women-children that have not known a man by lying with
him keep alive for your selves.] To wit, to make them servants, or to take them
for wives, as they should see cause; for being children they might bring them
up in the knowledge of the true God.

Verse. 19. And do ye abide without the camp seven days, etc.] See chap. 19.
11, 12. etc.

Purify both your selves and your captives, etc.] When the heathens were taken
captives in the wars by the Israelites, and so became their lawful
possession, even they also became unclean by touching the dead, and were to be
purified.

Verse. 20. And purify all your raiment, and all that is made of skins, etc.]
To wit, of the spoils which ye have taken. Because all the garments and other
spoils which they had taken had either touched dead bodies, or had been in the
houses of the slain, or at least had been touched by those that were unclean by
the dead therefore they were all to be esteemed legally unclean, and were to be
pu^ified according to the law. See chap. 19. 14, 16, and 22.

Verse. 21. This is the ordinanc^ of the Law which the Lord commanded Moses,
etc.] We do not find all the particulars formerly expressed in those laws that
were given, chap. 19. concerning the purifying of those that were unclean by
the dead; and therefore the meaning of these words of Eleazar I conceive to be
only this, that God had given Moses an express commandment concerning these
things, which he therefore, as the Lords high priest, was to make known to
them, and to see they were observed.

Verse. 27. And divide the prey in two parts, etc.] This law concerning the
dividing of the prey into two equal parts, the one for those that went out to
the war, and brought away the spoil, the other for the rest that stayed at
home, was most just and equal; first, because they that stayed at home were as
willing to have gone forth as those that went, and therefore it was not fit
that those which were culled out for that service should therefore carry away
all the prey: and secondly, because they that went forth to the war were but
twelve thousand, and so one half of the prey being divided among them, they had
far greater shares (as it was fit they should) then the other could have, who
were about six hundred thousand men, and had the other half divided amongst
them.

Verse. 30. And of the children of Isreal's half thou shall take one portion of
fifty, etc.] As there was respect had to the men that hazarded themselves in
the war in dividing the prey, their twelve thousand having full as much
allotted them as the six hundred thousand had that stayed at home; so also in
leavying a tribute for the Lord: for wh^reas those that went forth to war
paid but one in five hundred, as is noted before, verse. 28. the children of
Is^ael that stayed behind paid one in fifty, as is here expr^ssed; and so
accordingly the smaller leavy out of their hal^ that w^nt to the war was
given to Eleazar, verse. 29. that is, to him and the ^est of the priests (who
because they were so few had therein a liberal share) and the greatest leavy
out of the peoples half was given to the Levites, because they were many: the
Levites had one in fifty, the priests one in ^ive hundred, and so the same
proportion was observed here that was observed in their tithes, to wit, that
the priests had but the tenth of their tithes.

Verse. 32. And the booty, being the rest of the prey which the men of war had
caught, etc.] The booty which was now to be divided is here called the rest of
the prey which the men of war had caught, either because some of the persons
they had taken were slain since their coming home, to wit, all the
male-children and the women, verse. 17. or el^e because some of the cattle had
been slain for the soldiers to eat in their return home; or else in respect of
the gold and silver and other spoils, whereof there was no tribute leavied.

Verse. 47. Even of all the children of Isreal's half Moses took one portion of
fifty, etc.] To wit, six thousand seven hundred and fifty sheep, seven hundred
and ^wenty beeves, six hundred and ten asses, and three hundred and twenty
women-children.

V^rs. 49. Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war which are
under our charge, and there lacks not one man of us.] Hereby God showed, that
it was his work rather then theirs, that the enemy was now vanquished; and
withal the Israelites were encouraged to fight the residue of the Lords
battles, by this evidence of Gods power and care to protect them.

Verse. 50. We have therefore brought an oblation, -- to make an at onement for
our soul before the Lord.] That is, for our lives which God has spared, and
that there may ^e no plague amongst us (according to that, Exodus ^0. 12. When
thou take the sum of the children of Israel after their number, then shall
they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord) wherein also it is
likely they had respect unto their sin in sparing the women, verse. 14, 15, 16.

Verse. 53. For the men of war had taken spoil every man for himself.] That
is, besides the cattle above named, which was brought to the common stock, they
had gotten every man for himself very rich spoils of jewels, bracelets, chains,
etc. and of these they brought now an offering to the Lord.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1. WHen they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that behold
the place was a place for cattle, etc.] In these words we have the cause that
moved the Reubenites and Gadites to desire that they might dwell without
Jordan. Jazer was a city taken awhile before from the Amorites, chap. 21. 32.
and Gilead was also a mountain of the Amorites, which had many ^ities, half
whereof were given to the sons of Gad, and the other half to the sons of
Manasseh, see verse. 40. and Deuteronomy. 3. 12, 13. Both were full of rich
pasture-grounds, and so the fitter for feeding cattle (whence it is that God
promising to feed his people Israel* signifies the goodness of their pasture
by comparing it to Bashan and Gilead, Mich. 7. 14. Feed thy people with thy
rod, the stock of thine heritage* -- Let them seed in Bashan and Gilead as in
the days of old* and Jer. 50. 19. I will bring Israel again to his habitation,
and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon
mount Epraim and Gilead) and therefore these tribes desire this land for their
portion, because they had by far the most cattle.

Verse. 3. Ataroth* and D^bon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, etc.] There was an Ataroth
within the land of Canaan, Josh. 16. 2, 7. but this was without Jordan. Nimrah
here mentioned is called also Bethminrah, verse. 36. and Nimrim, Esa. 15. 6. and
it was afterward given to the sons of Gad, Josh. 13. 27. and so also Shebam
is verse. 28. of thy chapter called Shibmah, and Beon is called Baal-meon, and
Jer. 48. 23. Bethmcon, and Josh. 13. 17. Beth-Baalmeon.

Verse. 4. Even the country which the Lord smote before the congregation of
Israel, etc.] The chief drift of these words is to persuade Moses to allot
their habitation in this country, which they had already conquered, by
alleging how convenient it would be for them in regard that they had the
greatest store of cattle, and this was a country very fit for the keeping of
cattle. But withal another thing there seems to be employed in these words, the
country which the Lord smote before the congregation of Israel, namely, that
the Lord had destroyed the inhabitants of this country, that they might take
it for a possession, and that therefore it was to be esteemed a part of the
promised land, though it were not within Jordan; nor were they to be blamed for
desiring to have their portion there, the land being so fit and convenient for
them. And indeed even this country without Jordan was the possession of the
Amorites; for Sihon was King of the Amorites, verse* 33. and the land of the
Amorites was promised to Abraham, Genesis 15. 16, 21.

Verse. 5. If we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto thy
servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan.] It may be that their
first intention was, according as these words imply, and as Moses understood
them, to desire that they might stay there where they were, though afterward
upon Moses displeasure they offer more equal conditions: yet I rather think
that their meaning was never other, then as afterward they explained
themselves, to wit, that they desired to have the land without Jordan for their
inheritance, and that they might not be carried over Jordan to be seated there,
but that they never meant to forsake their brethren till they had also driven
out the inhabitants of Canaan; and that first, because this conceit of staying
behind was so unjust, that they could not but know that it would exceedingly
enrage all the other tribes against them; and secondly, because in their answer
to Moses, verse. 10. they discovered so presently how far they were from
desiring to leave their brethren, and to stay behind them.

Verse. 12. Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite* etc.] So called,
because he was of the posterity of one Kenaz, of the tribe of Judah, 1.
Chronicles 4. 13, 15.

Verse. 16. And they came near unto him, and said* (...) build sheepfolds here
for our catel, etc.] If in their first request made unto Moses their desire was
that they might not go any further, but might stay where they were, it is most
probable that, moved with that which Moses had said, and withal fearing le^t
the other tribes should be enraged against them, they withdrew themselves to
consult about it, and then returned to proponnd these more equal conditions to
him. But because there is no mention made here of any such advising together
amongst themselves, but rather the words seem to imply that they did presently
address themselves to make this reply, we may with better ground think (as is
noted before upon verse. 5.) that they never meant any such thing in their
former request to Moses; and therefore perceiving how far he had mistaken
their words, they now presently replied more fully to make known to him what it
was they desired: It is true, say they, we meant to leave our cattle and our
children behind us (and it will be no little ease to us in our marching forward
that we are rid of so great an encumbrance) and to that end we purpose to build
sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones, that is, to
repair and fortify those cities of the Amorites in this country which lie now
ruinated; but for our selves, we purpose to go along with them, and never had
any thought to stay behind.

Verse. 17. But we our selves will go ready armed before the children of Israel,
etc.] That is, though we desire to have this land assigned to us for our
portion, and intend to leave our wives, children, and cattle here behind us,
yet we our selves will go ready armed along with them, yea before the children
of Israel, that is, so far we are from shrinking away from our brethren, that
being rid of our cattle and carriages we shall be ready, if it be thought fit,
to go in the forefront, and to expose our selves to the greatest danger. This
is the full scope of this reply which the Reubenites and Gadites made to Moses.
Yet withal we must note, that though they tendered themselves to go along with
their brethren, yet their meaning was only, that so many of them should go as
should be thought requisite for their aid against the inhabitants of Canaan:
for we cannot think but that they meant to leave garrisons behind them for the
defense of their wives and children, and for the guarding of the country, in
case any of the neighboring nations should invade the land when they were
gone; and so we see they did, for Josh. 4. 13. it is expressly said, that
there went of these tribes along over Jordan with their brethren only about
forty thousand armed men, whereas in the tribe of Reuben alone there was above
forty thousand fighting men, chap. 26. 7.

Verse. 18. We will not return unto our houses until the children of Israel
have inherited every man his inheritance.] The performance whereof, see Josh.
22. 3, 4.

Verse. 19. For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, etc.] This
is another condition they propound, to wit, that if this may be granted them,
they will not look after any share in the land of Canaan, but rest satisfied
with the portion now allotted them here.

Verse. 20. If ye will go armed before the Lord to war, etc.] Here Moses, upon
the conditions they had propounded, as he now understood them, grants them
their desire; and to make sure that they did rightly understand one another, he
repeats the conditions, If, says he, ye will go armed before the Lord to war,
that is, if you will go armed before the ark, the sign of Gods presence, that
so you may aid your brethren in their wars against the Canaanites, and will
go all of you armed over Jordan before the Lord, until he has driven out his
enemies from before him, etc. that is, if all that go over Jordan will continue
with your brethren until they have subdued the land, and driven out the Lords
and their enemies, then afterward ye shall return, and this land shall be your
possession before the Lord, that is, ye may then safely come back again hither,
and shall have, as ye desire, this land for your lot and portion, and that with
the Lords good liking and approbation. And indeed that Moses made them not this
answer without direction from the Lord, we may gather from those words of his
to the Reubenites and Gadites, Deuteronomy. 3. 18. The Lord your God has given you
this land to possess it.

Verse. 29. Then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession, etc.]
Gilead here is put for the whole country on that side Jordan.

Verse. 33. And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to the
children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh, etc.] Some Expositours
hold that this half of the tribe of Manasseh did at first join with the
children of Reuben and Gad in suing for a portion in this land, though they
were not expressed, verse. 1. But because there is no mention hitherto made of
them, we may rather think that either the children of Reuben and Gad did not at
first desire all the land which they had conquered on that side Jordan to be
given to them, and so their request being granted them, the remainder of that
land was given to half the tribe of Manasseh, who are here therefore joined
with the other two tribes; or else if at first the Reubenites and Gadites did
desire the whole land, yet when Moses came to grant their request, he reserved
a part of the land on that side Jordan for certain of the sons of Manasseh, and
that because they by a particular expedition had vanquished that part of the
land, and had driven thence the Amorites, as is expressed verse. 39.

Verse. 34. And the children of Gad built Dibon, etc.] See the note upon verse.
16.

Verse. 38. And Nebo, and Baal-meon, their names being changed.] That is,
amongst other cities they built and repaired Nebo, and Baal-meon, and when they
had finished them they gave them new names; and it is not without probability
thought that the reason why they gave these cities new names was, because Baal
and Nebo were names of their idol-gods (Bell boweth down, Nebo stoupeth, says
the prophet, Isa. 46. 1.) and happily the rather, because of that branch of
Gods law, Exodus 23. 13. Make no mention of the names of other gods, neither let
it be heard out of thy mouth. It is true indeed that these cities are after
this in other places of Sc^ipture called still Nebo and Baal-meon; but we know
that this is usual to call cities, whose names are changed, sometimes by the
new and sometimes by their old names.

Verse. 39. And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead and
took it, etc.] This is here inserted, to show the reason why Moses gives part
of this land to the tribe of Manasseh, who made no suit for it, as the
Reubenites and Gadites did, to wit, because it did in a manner belong to them,
they having formerly won it with their swords.

Verse. 40. And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir, and he dwelt therein,] That is,
half mount Gilead; for the other half was given to the sons of Reuben and
Gad. Deuteronomy. 3. 12. 13. Half mount Gilead, and the cities thereof, gave I unto
the Reubenites and Gadites. And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the
kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of Manasseh.

Verse. 41. And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havoth-Jair.] That this Jair was of the tribe of
Judah, and only the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, by his mother
side, s^ems evident in 1. Chron. 2. 21. 22. And afterward Hezron went into the
daughter of Machir, the f^ther of Gilead whom he married when he was threescore
years old, and she bare him Segub. And Segub begat Jair, who had three and
twenty cities in the land of Gilead: but because he joined with those of
Manasseh in taking these villages, he is r^ckoned here the son of Manasseh,
as if he had been one of that tribe; yet there might be also a Jair of the
tribe of Manasseh.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. THese are the journeys of the children of Israel which went forth out
of the land of Egypt with their armies, etc.] Which were about six hundred
thousand men, beside women and children, and much mixed people with them, Exodus
12. 37, 38. and they journey^d in several troops and armies.

Verse. 2. And Moses wrote their goings out, according to their journeys, by the
commandment of the Lord.] That is, Moses by the commandment of the Lord wrote
this following journall of the Israelites travels from Egypt to the land of
Canaan, wherein are set down not all the several places the Israelites came
to, or all their several removes from one place to another, but all the
several stations of their journeys, that is, the several places where they
pitched their tents and abode for some time. And this was done, first, the
better thereby to assure posterity of this miraculous deliverance of their
fathers out of Egypt* and of the Lords leading them through the wilderness to
the land of promise* this express description of the names of their several
stations being a strong evidence of the certainty of this story: and s^condly,
that here in a short compass, as in a little map, by the mention of the
several places where such things were done, they might be put in mind of the
rebellion of their fathers, of Gods severity in chastising them for their
rebellion, but especially his goodness and faithfulness to the seed of
Abraham, notwithstanding the many provocations wherewith they had provoked him
to displeasure against them.

Verse. 3. And they departed from Rameses in the first month, etc.] Whither
they assembled by direction of Moses from all parts of the land of Go^hen.

Verse. 4. For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn which the Lord had
smitten amongst them.] This intimates the cause why the Egyptians did not at
present oppose their going thence, to wit, because God had pulled down their
pride by slaying their firstborn.

Upon their gods also the Lord executed judgment.] See the note upon Exodus 12.
12.

Verse. 6. And they departed from Succ^th, and pitched in Etham.] Here the Lord
began first to go before them by day in a pillar of cloud, and by night in a
pillar of fire.

Verse. 7. And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pi-hahiroth, etc.]
A narrow passage between two ledges of mountains, into which being entered,
Pharaoh overtook them with a mighty army, and thought they could not now have
escaped him; but God divided the red sea, which the Israelites passing, the
Egyptians assayed to follow them, and were drowned.

Verse. 8. And pitched in Marah.] Having traveled three days journey from the
red sea through the wilderness without any water, and finding the waters here
very bitter, they began to mutiny against Moses; but God sweetened the water
with a tree, Exodus 15. 23.

Verse. 11. And they removed from the red sea, and encamped in the wilderness
of Sin.] So called from Sin a city in Egypt, over against which this
wilderness lay. Hither they came a just month after their departure from
Rameses. In this wilderness they murmured grievously for want of food, and God
gave them quails, and rained manna from heaven, which was still continued till
they came into Canaan.

Verse. 14. And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, etc.] A place
famous, first, for the mutiny of the Israelites for want of water, wherein they
had almost stoned Moses; secondly, for the water fetched miraculously out of
the rock in Horeb; thirdly, for the victory they had over the Amalekites, who
there set upon them; fourthly, for Moses his meeting with Jethro, his wife and
sonues, and the counsel he had of Jethro for the government of the people.

Verse. 15. And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness of
Sinai.] Hither they came the beginning of the third month, Exodus 19. 1. and
stayed there till the twentieth day of the second month of the second year,
Numb. 10. 11, 12. Here was the Law given, and the tabernacle built, and the
people punished for making and worshipping a golden calf, and Nadab and Abihu
taken suddenly away for offering strange fire, and the people first numbered,
and then ordered in their several camps, both for their encamping about the
tabernacle, and their journeying with it to the land of Canaan.

Verse. 16. And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah.] Here the people fell a lusting for ^lesh; God again sent
them quails, yea for a month together, in great abundance, whereon they
surfeted and dyed miserably with the flesh between their teeth.

Verse. 17. And they departed from Kibroth-hattaavah, and encamped at Hazeroth.]
Here Miriam and Aaron murmured against Moses, and she was smitten with
leprosy, Numb. 12.

Verse. 18. And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah.] Which was
i^ the wilderness of Paran, Numb. 13. 1. near Kadesh-barnea, whence spies were
sent to search the land; upon whose report the people murmuring, God was wroth,
and appointed Moses to return again to the red sea, as having vowed that not
one of that generation should enter Canaan save Joshua and Caleb.

Verse. 20. And they departed from Rimmon-parez, and pitched in Libnah.] This
some think is the same which is called Laban, Deuteronomy. 1. 1.

Verse. 25. And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth.] It is
interpreted assemblies, so called as some think of the mutinous assemblies of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram there.

Verse. 31. And they departed from Moseroth and pitched in Bene-jaakan, etc.]
Their Moseroth is called Moserah, and Bene-jaakan, Beroth-bene-jaakan, as
likewise in the next verses Hor-hagidgad is called Gudgodah, and Jotbathah
Jotbath, Deuteronomy. 10. 6, 7. See the note there.

Verse. 35. And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Ezion-gaber.] A
place by the red sea, where was a hatbour for shipping in Edoms land, 1. Kings
9. 26. See also 1. Kings 22. 48.

Verse. 36. And they removed from Ezion-gaber and pitched in the wilderness of
Zin, which is Kadesh.] That is, at Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin. Here
Miriam dyed, the people again murmured for water, and had water out of a rock;
but God was displeased with Moses and Aaron for their unbelief. Hither they
came in the beginning of the fourtieth year, and hence they sent to crave a
passage through Edoms land, but it was denied them.

Verse. 41. And they departed from mount Her and pitched in Zalmonah.] Which may
be so called of Zelem, an image: it is thought to be the place where the
Israelites for their murmuring were ^tung with fiery serpents, and the brazen
serpent was by Gods appointment erected for their help.

Verse. 45. And they departed from Iim and pitched in Dibon-gad.] So called,
because it was repaired and possessed by the tribe of Gad, chap. 32. 34. and to
distinguish it from another Dibon, which was given to the Reubenites. See Josh.
13. 15, 17.

Verse. 52. Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land.] To wit, by
destroying them, Deuteronomy. 7. 12.

Verse. 54. And ye shall divide the land by lot, etc.] See the note upon chap.
26. 55.

Verse. 55. Those which ye let remain of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and
thorns in your sides, etc.] That is, they shall be continual snares, seducing
you out of the right way, and withal will be vexing and troubling you, and so
will mischief you both in soul and body.

Verse. 56. Moreover, it shall come to pass that I shall do unto you as I
thought to do unto them.] That is, destroy you, and root you out of the land.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 3. THen your South quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin, etc.]
God within Jordan* and shows the bounds of it on every side: first, that his
people might see his bounty and providence, who had given them so large (...)
good a land; secondly, that they might know punctually how far they were to
proceed in their conquests and where to stay; thirdly, to strengthen their
faith, and to assure them that God had marked out that their dwelling for them;
fourthly, that according to these bounds and limits they might now make a
division of the land. In these words of the third verse, the description of
Canaans bounds begins with the South quarter, and he draws along the South
border from the East to the West: for the wilderness of Zin lay at the very
East end of this South border, in the corner where it joined with the East
border, and so from thence it is said that though the South border went on by
the coast of Edom, yet the beginning of it Eastward was in the wilderness of
Zin, right against the South end of the salt sea, that is, the lake of Sodom,
called also the dead sea, because it had no fish or living thing in it (of
which see the note upon Genesis 14. 3.) and going by the coast of Edom it turned
from the South, verse. 4. that is, inward toward Canaan, to the ascent of
Akrabbim or Maalchakrabbim, Josh. 15. 3. and so passed on to Zin, that is,
toward the city Zin, whence the adjacent wilderness had its name, and there
turned inward again from the South to Kadesh-barnea, and so went forward again
to Hazaraddar (which Josh. 15. 3. is reckoned as two places Hezron and Addar)
and so it passed unto Azmon (yet Josh. 15. 13. there is added that it fetched a
compass to Karkaa and so passed on to Azmon) and from thence it fetched a
compass again, and went on to the river of Egypt, that is, the river called
Sihor, Josh. 13. 3. and so went out at the sea, that is, the Mediterranean or
Midland sea, called in the next verse, the great sea, to wit, with respect to
those lakes of Sodom and Genezareth in the land of Canaan, which were also
called seas. And this was the West end of the South border.

Verse. 6. And as for the Western border, you shall even have the great sea for
a border.] Thus the borders of the land are carried about from South to North,
this midland sea from the South to the North being the West border; and so
again it turns about afterward from the West to the East, which was the
North border.

Verse. 7. From the great sea you shall point out for you mount Hor.] That is,
it went along from the midland sea to mount Hor. Now this was not the mount Hor
where Aaron dyed, which was Southward in the edge of Edoms land, chap. 33. 37,
38. but another mountain on the North side of Canaan, and it is thought by some
to be the same that is elsewhere called Lebanus, and by others that which in by
Josh. 13. 5. is called mount Hermon.*

Verse. 8. From mount Hor ye shall point out your border unto the entrance of
Hamath.] That is, from Hor, this your North border of the land shall strike
right forward to the entrance of Hamath (a city called, A*mos 6. 2. Hemath the
great) and so forth on to Zedad, and thence to Ziphron, and so it shall end at
Hazarenan.

Verse. 10. And ye shall point out your East border from Hazarenan to Shepham,
etc.] That is, your East border (which turns again from the North to the South
where at first it began) shall go straight on from Hazar-enan to Shepham
(called 1. Sam 30. 28. Siphmoth) and so to Riblah on the East side of Ain, and
so thence it shall go along by that land that lies Eastward of the sea of
Chinnereth (which is called the lake of Gennesareth, Luke 5. 1. and the sea of
Galile^, or, Tiberias, John 6. 1.) and so thence to Jordan, and so shall end at
the salt or dead sea, verse. 12.

Verse. 17. These are the names of the men which shall d^v^de the land unto you,
Eleazar the priest, etc.] Eleazar amongst the rest is appointed to have a hand
in this work of dividing the land, first, as a type of Christ, to show that by
him they enjoyed that promised land, but especially that by him we come to have
entrance into the heavenly Canaan, he being therefore gone before that he might
prepare a place for us; secondly, that if any difficulty did arise he might ask
counsel for Joshua after the judgment of Urim according to that Numb. 27. 21.
thirdly, because the priests and the Levites, though they had no inheritance as
the other tribes, yet were they to have cities and suburbs; fourthly, because
that this whole business might be san^tified to them, it was to be begun with
prayer, and ended with thanksgiving, Col. 3. 17. Thus also was that prophecy
fulfilled concerning the Israelites coming to Canaan in the fourth generation,
Genesis 15. 16. Eleazar being indeed the fourth from Levi, who went with Jacob
into Egypt.

Verse. 19. Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh, etc.] The
tribes are no where else named in the order here observed, and therefore it is
most probable that God did purposely thus name them here, in the very same
order as they should inherit the land, their inheritance abutting one upon
another, as their names are here joined together, to make it the more evident
that they were allotted their portions by the wisdom and providence of God.

CHAP. XXXV.
Verse. 2. COmmand the children of Israel, that they give unto the Levites, of
the inheritance of their possession, cities to dwell in, etc.] Thus that which
Jacob did at first threaten as a curse against Levi, Genesis 49. 7. I will divide
them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, is turned into a blessing, and their
reproach changed into a matter of honor and dignity: for they are now dispersed
into several cities through the whole kingdom (where they dwelt, unl^sse it
were when they went in their courses to serve in the tabernacle) that they
might be as Gods watchmen, standing in so many watch-towers, to look to the
people, to instruct them continually in the law of God, and to keep them from
being corrupted either in doctrine or manners. But this and other places do
almost fully satisfy that the whole cities and their suburbs, afterward set
apart for their dwelling, were entirely the Levites possession, and divided
amongst them, and that no man else could challenge any propriety in them,
whence is that Levit. 25. 32, 33, 34. Notwithstanding the cities of the
Levites, and the houses of the cities of their possession, may the Levites
redeem at any time. And if a man purchase of the Levites, then the house that
was sold, and the city of his possession shall go out in the year of Jubilee:
for the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the
children of Israel; yet withal I think it most probable that others dwelt with
them in houses hired or bought of them (for how else could they live without
the help of men of other professions, at least such as were their servants?)
and that these might live, as the townsmen do in our Universities, under a
civil government amongst themselves, to which some apply that, Ezra. 2. 70. So
the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the
porters, and the Nethini^s, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their
cities. However clear it is that the fields and villages belonging to these
cities, which were without the suburbs, belonged to others, as is manifest in
Hebron, which was given to the priests, and yet the land without the suburbs,
to wit, the houses without the walls and the fields belonging thereto, were
given to Caleb, Josh. 21. 11, 12. And they gave them the city of Arbah, the
father of Anak, which city is Hebron in the hill country of Judah with the
suburbs thereof round about it. But the fields of the city and the villages
thereof gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh, for his possession.

Verse. 4. And the suburbs of the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites,
etc.] There seems to be a manifest contradiction betwixt that which is said in
t^is fourth verse, concerning the measure of the suburbs of the Levites cities,
and that which is said in the following verse: for here it is plainly said that
the suburbs of the cities should reach from the wall of the city, and outward
a thousand cubits round about, and then in the next verse it is said that they
should measure from without the city, on each side, two thousand cubits, the
city being in the midst, and that this should be to them the suburbs of the
cities. To reconcile this seeming contradiction there are several answers
given by Expositours, some holding that the suburbs were but a thousand cubits
on each side of the city, but then from the outermost part of the suburbs on
one side, as one the East side, to the outermost part of the suburbs on the
other side, to wit, on the West (the city in the midst not being measured)
there were two thousand cubits. Others again holding that the fourth verse
speaks of the length of the suburbs from the wall to the outmost part of them,
which was a thousand cubits, and that the fifth verse speaks of the
circumference of the suburbs in the four quarters on each side the citle,
which was in each quarter two thousand cubits. But first, because it is plainly
said, verse. 5. that they should measure two thousand cubi^s on each side, East,
West, North, and South; and secondly, because the fifth verse speaks of cubits
to be measured from without the city, and the fourth verse speaks of cubits to
be measured from the wall of the city, therefore I conceive the truest answer
is, that each city of the Levites had without the walls three thousand cubits,
the first thousand were for houses, barns, garners, stalls for cattle, gardens,
etc. which is that which we usually call the suburbs of a city, of which Moses
speaks in the fourth verse; and then the other two thousand cubits, which were
without these, were for pasture for their cattle, and these are meant in the
fifth verse, and are reckoned as a part of their suburbs.

Verse. 6. And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites, there
shall be six cities for refuge, etc.] These cities of refuge are assigned out
of the Levites cities rather then out of any other, first, because the
honorable esteem and respect of the Levites would cause the places to be the
more inviolably observed; secondly, because it was presumed that the priests
and Levites above others would be careful not to protect wilful offenders in
places appointed to be Sanctuaries only for the innocent; thirdly, that this
might be a figure of the sufficient shelter which Christ's priesthood should
yield unto poor sinners, that in faith should fly to him as their Sanctuary.
In Deuteronomy. 4. and Josh. 20. we may see what cities of the Levites were set apart
for this purpose, to wit, first, Bezer of the Reubenites, secondly, Ramoth in
Gilead of the Gadites, thirdly, Golan in Basan of the Manassites (the^e three
Moses separated, Deuteronomy. 4. 41, 43.) fourthly, Kadesh in Galilee in mount
Naphtali, fifthly, Shechem in mount Ephraim, and sixthly, Kiriath-arba (which
is in Hebron) in the mount of Judah; and these Joshua separated, Josh. 20. 7.
Before these cities of refuge were appointed, it seems the altar only was a
kind of Sanctuary to those that fled to it: whence is that, Exodus 21. 14. But if
a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to slay him with guile, thou shall
take him from mine altar, that he may die. But afterward these cities were the
chief Sanctuaries, and yet they were only to be Sanctuaries to those that
killed any man unwittingly, and therefore they were not to receive any man till
he professed his innocence in this regard, Josh. 20. 4. And when he that does
flee unto one of those cities, shall stand at the entering of the gate of the
city, and shall declare his cause in the ears of the Elders of that city;
they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a place that he may
dwell among them: and purposely they chose such cities as lay at an equal
distance in the several parts of the land, that no man driven to use them
might have too far to go, lest so happily he should be overtaken by the
revenger of blood before he could recover the Sanctuary.

Verse. 12. And they shall be unto you cities for refuge from the avenger, etc.]
That is, the next kinsman to the man flain, who was by the law allowed to put
the murderer to death, verse. 19. but not him that kills a man unawares; yet
lest he should in his rage kill such a one, let there be cities, says the
Lord, of refuge for such.

Verse. 14. Ye shall give three cities on this side Jordan, and three cities
shall ye give in the land of Canaan, etc.] There was no inequality in this,
because the portion of the two tribes and a half without Jordan reached as
far in length as theirs in the land of Canaan, though it were nothing so
broad. And besides, it is most probable that those in the land of Canaan near
Jordan might fly to the cities of refuge without Jordan, if they were nearer to
them then the others, yea and if the Lord enlarged their coasts, and gave them
all the land, they were to add three cities more, Deuteronomy. 19. 8, 9.

Verse. 16. And if he smite him with an instrument of iron so that he die, he is
a murderer, etc.] That is, purposely and presumptuously: for otherwise if he
killed a man with an instrument of iron unawares, not thinking to hit him, he
was not to be slain, verse. 22, 23. for this is only added, because a man may
strike his neighbor purposely with his fist, etc. of which he may die, and yet
not be a murderer, because he may not happily intend his death. But lest
therefore under this pretense wilful murderers should think to escape, the
Lord gives these following Laws, and this in the first place, that if it were
proved that he did it willingly he must not think to escape by saying that he
meant not to kill him: for if he struck him with an instrument of iron
(whatever it be) or with a stone, or hand-weapon, wherewith in any probability
a man may be killed, it shall be presumed that he intended hi^ death, etc.

Verse. 19. The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer, etc.] That
is, though the revenger of blood be but a private person, yet he shall slay the
murderer, that is, he may slay him, he shall have liberty to do it, and shall
not be accoun^ed guilty of murder if he does slay him (yea some think he was
bound to do it) when he meets him he shall slay him, that is, he shall not
need to bring him before a Magistrate, etc. but he may slay him himself. And
this is added to show how necessary cities of refuge were, to wit, because the
avenger of blood having this power from God might otherwise abuse it, and in
the heat of blood fall upon a man that killed unawares, unless this course
were taken to have the Magistrate a judge in the cause. Neither need it seem
strange (as to some it does) that private men should be allowed thus to meddle
with the sword of justice: for a man being otherwise a private man, no
Magistrate, being thus armed with power from God, is for the time to be
es^eemed as a Magistrate, more then a private man.

Verse. 20. But if he thrust him of hatred, etc.] Here is another case given
wherein the Magistrate should adjudge a man a murderer, yea though he struck
him only with his hand, or with some little stone, or some other thing which
was no way likely to kill him: for even in this case if it be proved that he
lay in wait for him, or that he did it in prepensed malice, or lived before in
open enmity or hostility with him, by whatever means he kill him he shall be
adjudged a wilful murderer; for there is a difference made here betwixt enmity
and sudden displeasure.

Verse. 21. The revenger of blood shall slay the murderer when he m^eteth him.]
See the note upon verse. 19.

Verse. 24. Then the congregation shall judge between the slayer, and the
r^venger of blood, etc.] That is, if a man that had killed another fly to the
city of refuge, the avenger must then go and desire justice against him, the
Levites must bring him to the congregation where the man was slain, and then if
he found a murderer, the congregation, that is, the Magistrates, shall give him
up into the hands of the avenger; but if they found it, as we call it,
chance-medly, then they sent him back to the city of refuge.

Verse. 25. And he shall abide in it unto the death of the high priest, etc.]
Even a man that killed another unwittingly was to live a while as a man
banished from his family and friends, both to show how hateful the shedding of
man's blood is to the Lord, and withal to prevent further mischief, that the
avenger be not urged nor provoked with the sight of him: and the period
appointed for his continuance in the city of refuge was till the death of the
high priest, and that doubtless that this releasing of men exiled by the death
of the high priest might be a shadow of our freedom and redemption by the
death of Christ.

Verse. 27. He shall not be guilty of blood, etc.] The Lord here freeth the
avenger from punishment, if he found the man out of the city of refuge, and
killed him, not as allowing his fact, but by this to make the slayer the more
careful to observe this law of keeping within his city of refuge.

CHAP. XXXVI.
Verse. 1. ANd the chief fathers of the families of the children of G^lead,
etc.] Because the Lord had formerly ordered that Zelophehads daughters should
have that portion of the land assigned to the tribe of Manasseh which their
father should have had for his share, had he lived, the children of Gilead (who
were of that tribe) con^idering that if they married into any other tribe, this
part of their land would be quite alienated from their tribe, they came now and
showed what inconvenience might follow upon this; and because it was their
tribe that was now likely to receive detriment by the alienation of Zelophehads
portion, therefore they made it their suit that some order might be taken to
prevent this mischief.

Verse. 2. The Lord commanded my lord to give the land for an inheritance by lot
to the children of Israel, etc.] As if they should have said, To what purpose
was this, if now our lot shall be diminished, and a part of it wholly alienated
to another tribe? yea by like accidents the portion of every tribe may in time
be changed and disturbed, and so all at length may come to confusion, and the
very end of Gods appointing every tribe to have their portion apart by
themselves may be quite made void.

Verse. 4. And when the Jubilee of the children of Israel shall be, then shall
their inheritance be put unto the inheritance of the tribe whereunto they are
received, etc.] The drift of these words is to put Moses and the Princes in
mind, that whereas by the law of God at the year of Jubilee (which was every
fiftieth year) whatever land was sold away out of the tribe should return to
the tribe, and that law of the Jubilee seemed purposely intended to prevent the
confusion of the inheritance of the tribes, the very end of this law by such
marriages as these would be quite disannulled.

Verse. 5. And Moses commanded the ^hildren of I^rael* according to the word of
the Lord, etc.] That is, having asked counsel of God, he an^wered them as God
had commanded him.

ANNOTATIONS On the fifth book of MOSES called DEUTERONOMIE.
CHAP. I.
THese be the words which Moses spoke unto all Israel, on this side Jordan,
etc.] Most Expositours hold that the chief drift of this first verse is to show
the places where Moses repeated and explained the law of God to the Israelites:
which is indeed the main subject of this last book of Moses, and therefore it
is called Deuteronomie, or the second declaration of the Law. The main
objection against this is, that it is here said that Moses spoke these words,
In the plain over against the red sea, between Paran, etc. for the plain over
against the red sea was far from the plains of Moab where Moses repeated the
law, and so also Paran and Hazeroth, which are both here mentioned, were places
far Southward from the place where Moses now was, through which the
Israelites had long since passed, Numb. 12. 16. And indeed they that thus
understand this place have no other way to avoid this objection, but by saying
either that the word Zuph, which our Translatours under^^and to be the red sea,
is not meant of the red sea, but of a flaggy place by the sides of Jordan
toward the wilderness, the Hebrew word Zuph signifying flagges, such as grew
by the sea or rivers sides, Exodus 2. 3. or else that the plains of Moab are
here called the plain over against the red sea, because they lay opposite to
the red sea, though a great way off from it. Others again, and methinks very
probablic, do otherwise conceive of the drift of these words, namely, that the
time when and place where Moses repeated the law is set down afterward, verse.
3, 4, 5* and that the drift of these two first verses is to show, that the
laws, which Moses did now repeat and explain to the Israelites in the plains of
Moab, were no other but the very same for substance which he had formerly given
them at Sinai, or in several places as they traveled through the wilderness
from the red sea to the land of Canaan, only now they were collected into one
body, and repeated together in the plains of Moab, because all that were of age
and judgment when the law was first given were now dead, and a new generation
that was now to enter Canaan was sprung up in their room: and so the plain over
against the red sea, Paran, and other places are here named, either as pointing
out the several places where in their peregrination these following Statutes
had been first given them; or at least as the bounds of that huge tract of
ground through which they had passed, wherein ^od had spoken to the Israelites
that came out of Egypt these things which are now repeated together to their
posterity.

Verse. 2. There are eleven days journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir
unto Kadesh-barnea.] If the aim of the foregoing verse were to show the place
where Moses repeated the Laws of God to the Israelites (which many Expositours
conceive, as is before noted) then we may well think that the aim of these
words may be to show that it was no wonder though the plains of Moab, where the
Law was repeated by Moses, be there called the plain over against the red sea,
to wit, because however the Israelites, through Gods judgment upon them, were
forty years in going from the red sea to those parts, yet the way of it self
was not so long, for it was but eleven days journey from Horeb to
Kadesh-barnea. But if the foregoing verse be meant of the places where the Laws
were first given that were now repeated by Moses, then I conceive this clause
is added as a topographicall description of the extent of that wilderness
where these Laws were at first given; and withal to imply that it was not the
length of the way, but their rebellion against God, that made them wander so
long in the wilderness, that there was now none left alive, but that younger
brood that had not heard these Laws when they were first given.

Verse. 3. And it came to pass in the fourtieth year, in the eleventh month,
on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke unto the children of Israel,
etc.] To wit, a little before his death; for he died in the twelveth month.

Verse. 4. And Og the King of Bashan which dwelt at Astaroth in Edrei.] That is,
after he had in Edrei slain Og, which dwelt at Astaroth; for in Edrei he was
slain, Numb. 21. 33. and they were both cities in Ogs land, Josh. 13. 31.

Verse. 6. Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount.] For there they had
continued well nigh a full year. See the note upon Numb. 10. 11, 12. Here the
Law was given, but now they were called thence, to journey towa^ds Canaan, the
figure of their heavenly inheritance by faith in Christ; which may put us in
mind that the Law is not for men to continue under but for a time, till they be
fitted for Christ, Gal. 3. 16, 17, 18. Now this readiness in God to have
presently given them the possession of the land Moses does tell them of, as a
motive to make them believe the more con^idently that God would now give it
them, and to make them the more careful to observe these Laws of God, which
now he meant to rehearse unto them.

Verse. 7. Turn you, and take your ^ourney, and go to the mount of the Amorites,
etc.] In these following words the Lord did then set forth the bounds of the
promised land which he persuaded them to enter, beginning with the mount of the
Amorites in the South side or border where they were then to enter the land,
and then adding the sea side, which was their West border, Numb. ^4. 6. and
then Lebanon was a mount on the North part of the land; and then last of all
the great river Euphrates, which was their Eastern bound in the utmost extent
without Jordan, and so ^arre Solomon reigned. See 1. Kings 4. 21.

Verse. 9. And I spoke unto you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you
my self alone, etc.] That is, about that time: for this motion he made by the
coun^el of Jethro, and commandment of the Lord, before they came to Horeb,
Exodus* 18* 14, etc* and here he repeats it, to let them see how tenderly
careful he always was of the welfare of this people, which must needs make
his present counsel and exhortations the more prevalent with them.

Verse. 11. The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many mo^
as ye are, etc.] Having professed that he was not able to bear the burden of
the government alone, because they were so many; lest they should suspect that
he envied their number or did in the least degree grudge as it, he interposeth
these words, The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many more
as ye are, etc.

Verse. 13. Take ye wise men and understanding, etc.] See Exodus 18. 25.

Verse. 15. And officers among your tribes.] That is, under-o^^icers of several
sorts, such as executed the magistrates Laws.

Verse. 17. For the judgment is Gods.] This is added as a reason why the Judges
ought not to be respecters of persons, nor fear the face of any man whatsoever,
because the judgment is Gods, that is, the judges represent Gods person, and
sit in his seat, and God speaks and judges by them, and therefore they should
judge no otherwise then God would do; and when they judge unj^stly they
dishonor God, and forget how able God is to defend them who^e work they do.

Verse. 18. And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.]
He gave them all the Laws delivered here in Horeb, and taught the Judges their
duty in more full manner then is here expr^ssed.

Verse. 19. We went through all that great and terrible wilderness, which you
saw by the way of the mountain of the Amorites.] That is, the way which leads
to the mount of the Amorites.

Verse. 23. And the saying pleased me well, etc.] That is, their desire that
spies might be sent before them: yet it seems he enquired whether God would
have it so, who approved, or at least permitted it, Numb. 13. 1. for prudent
policy (so it be not mixed with unbelief) does well beseem Gods people. Yet it
may be this request of theirs proceeded from distrustful fears; and if so,
then God gave way to them herein to harden and punish them for their unbelief.

Verse. 25. And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, etc.] As
grapes, pomegranates, figs, Numb. 13. 23.

And said, It is a good land which the Lord our God does give us.] Moses
expresses not here at first the discouraging words of the timorous spies, but
only that wherein they agreed with Caleb and Joshua concerning the goodness
of the land, because this which was confessed should have been more prevalent
with the people to have heartned them to go on, then their tales of the
strength of the people and their cities to beat them off.

Verse. 31. The Lord thy God bare thee as a man does bear his son, etc.] This
word implies, first, Gods assistance in carrying them through unpassable
difficulties, the way they could not in their own strength have overmastered,
but God by his almighty power bare them, as when a father takes up and carries
his child in his arms; secondly, it implies his bearing with their perverseness
and rebellions: and this concerning Gods fatherly love to them, and care over
them, he opposes to that desperate speech of ^heirs, verse. 27. Because the
Lord hated us he has brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, etc.

Verse. 35. Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see
that good land, etc.] Though Moses prayed for them, Number. 14. 13. -- 19. and the
Lord pardoned them that they were not then destroyed, Numb. 14. 20. yet he
swear that they should not come into the promised land.

Verse. 36. Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh, he shall see it, and to him will
I give the land that he has trodden upon, etc.] See Josh. 14. 9.

Verse. 37. Also the Lord was angry with me, for your sakes, etc.] For the
people provoked his spirit, whereupon he spoke unadvisedly with his lips,
Psalm. 106. 32, 33. So then these words are not added to justify himself, and
to cast all the blame upon them, but only to show how by their rebellion he
also was involved in sin, and brought to do that which was so displeasing to
God. Yet there is another exposition which may seem most probable, the Lord was
angry with me for your sakes, that is, because I did that in my unbelief and
impatience, which was likely to be prejudicial unto you, as those words which
God there used imply, Numb. 20. 12. because ye believed me not to sanctify me
in the eyes of the children of Israel. And so this passage seems here inserted
only by the way, having spoken how God had sworn that they should not set foot
in Canaan, he adds (as in a parenthesis) this sentence of the like nat^re
pronounced against himself for their sakes.

Verse. 39. Moreover your little ones, which ye said should be a prey, etc.] In
these words thus repeated there is couched an encouragement for the Israelites
to whom Moses at present spoke.

Verse. 44. And the Amorites which dwelt in that mountain came out against you,
and chased you as bees do.] Which being angered use to come out in great swarms,
and to pursue them with strange eagerness and fury; whence is that also of the
Psalmist, They compassed me about like bees, Psalm. 118. 12.

Verse. 46. So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according unto the days that ye
abode there*] To wit, a long time, as appears by the number of the days that
ye abode there. Thus many Expositours conceive that this clause is to be taken
as spoken indefinitely, that according to the number of the days they abode
there it is manifest they abode there many days. But others very probable
understand it thus, that as they stayed there a long time before the return of
the spies, so they stayed there again a long time after; yea some ^ake it more
particularly, that as they stayed there forty days whilst the spies
searched the land, so accordingly they stayed as many days more after the
return of the spies: and others again conceive it is meant of the whole time of
their wandering after this in the wilderness, to wit, that in the fourtieth
year they were gotten no farther then Kadesh, and so wandered up and down forty
years according to the number of forty days wherein they searched the land,
and so that this alludes to that, Numb. 14. 34.

CHAP. II.
Verse. 3. YE have compassed this mountain long enough, turn you Northward.]
Hitherto they had traveled Southward from Kadesh-barnea to the red sea; now
they were commanded to turn again Northward toward Canaan, not the way they
went before by Kadesh-barnea, but between the coasts of Edom on the one hand,
of Moab and Ammon on the other, so to enter into Canaan through Sihon the
Amorites land.

Verse. 4. Ye are to pass through the coast of your brethren the children of
Esau, which dwell in Seir, and they shall be afraid of you etc.] This clause,
and they shall be afraid of you, is prefixed before the following charge that
they should not meddle with the Edomites, as a hint to give them warning not to
encourage themselves by their fear to set upon them; and withal the charge
given them that they should not meddle with the children of Esau, is limited to
those children of Esau which dwell in Seir, purposely to exclude the
Amalekites, whom God had commanded them to destroy, Exodus 17. 14. and yet the
Amalekites were also the children of Esau, Genesis 36. 12.

Verse. 6. Ye shall buy meat of them for money, etc.] Hereby it is evident that
the Israelites did not eat manna only in the wilderness, but other meat
likewise when they were where other meat could be gotten.

Verse. 7. For the Lord thy God has blessed thee, etc.] Three arguments there
are couched in these words whereby Moses is to persuade the Israelites not to
wrong their brethren the Edomites in the least thing whatsoever; first, because
the Lord had blessed them, that is, he had prospered them so that they were
able to pay for that which they had occasion to desire of them: secondly,
because the Lords eye was upon them to take care of them in their travels
through the wilderness (for that is the meaning of those words, He knows thy
walking through this great wilderness) so that having God to watch over them,
they need not seek to supply themselves in an unlawful way: and thirdly,
because they had found this true already for forty years together, and
therefore might the more securely rest upon God, These forty years the Lord
thy God has been with thee, thou have lacked nothing.

Verse. 9. I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession.] Ar was a
chief mountain, and the city thereon the royal city in the Moabites land,
Numb. 21. 15, 28. and so it is put here for the whole country.

Verse. 10. The Emims dwelt therein in times past, a people great, and many, and
tall as the Anakims.] By interpretation, terrible ones. Gods hand must needs be
acknowledged in driving out such giants before the Moabites, which happily is
alleged here, first, as an evidence that God had given them that land, which
was not therefore to be taken from them by the Israelites; and secondly, as an
encouragement to the Israelites: for if God had done this for the Moabites,
much more might they expect that he would do it for them.

Verse. 20. The Ammonites call them Zamzummims.] That is, presumptuous wicked
ones. See the note on verse 10.

Verse. 23. And the Avims which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah, the
Caphtorims, etc.] The Caphtorims here mentioned are the Philistines, or else
some other people that joined with the Philistines, and drove out the Avims
which dwelt in Hazerim, that is, the land of the Philistines, and possessed
their country* See Amos 9. 7. and Jer. 47. 4. and Genesis 10. 13, 14.

Verse. 26. And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemo^h, and.]
There was a city of that name in Sihons country, Josh. 13. 18. and chap. 21.
37. near to which lay this wilderness where Israel now was when they sent this
embassage to Sihon with words of peace, which was according to the Law after
given, Deuteronomy. 20. 10. and was done now to make the destruction of the Amorites
the more just and inexcusable. See the note upon Numb. 21. 21, 22.

Verse. 28. Only I will pass through on my feet.] We will ask nothing of thee
gratis, but only this, that we may pass through thy country.

Verse. 29. As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which
dwell in Ar did unto me.] For though the children of Esau denied them a passage
through their country, which was the nearest way, Numb. 20. ^0, 21. yet when
they turned aside, and went along by their coast in the outskirts of their
country, they permitted this, and withal the people afforded them meat for
their money, as is evident by this place, so it seems it was too with the
Moabites. Indeed some couceive that they only allowed them a passage through
their country, but refused them provision, which they ground upon that place,
Deuteronomy. 23. 3, 4. But I rather think the meaning of that place is, that they did
not come forth to meet the Israelites with bread and water, as those use to do
that wish good success, and rejoice in the welfare of the people to whom they
bring it; for this they might fail in, and yet the people might sell them
provision as they went along: and therefore for any thing we read elsewhere it
may well be that the Moabites did also suffer the Israelites to pass through
the skirts of their country, and did sell them meat and water for their money;
though it is true indeed that afterward, when the Israelites had destroyed
Sihon and Og, and their people, fearing lest they should do the same to them,
because the land of the Moabites bordered upon these countries, they together
with the Midianites assayed both by open violence and secret treachery to do
them all the mischief they were able, Numb. 22. 1, etc.

Verse. 34. And utterly destroyed the men, and the women, etc.] This doubtless
they did by the special command of God; and it was much according to the Law
afterward given them, Deuteronomy. 20. 16.

Verse. 36. And from the city that is by the river.] To wit, Ar, Numb. 21. 15.

Verse. 37. Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou came not, nor to
any place of the river Jabbock, etc.] To wit, on the outside of Jabbok, which
was the border of the Ammonites, Josh. 12. 2. with whom God had charged them
not to meddle, verse 19. so likewise by the cities of the mountains here are
meant those cities of the Ammonites which were in that mountanous country
which lay beyond Jabbok, of which Moses had said before, that the bord^r of the
children of Ammon was strong* Numb. 21. 24. It is i^deed said, Josh. 13. 24,
25. that Moses gave unto the tribe of Gad half the land of the children of
Ammon; but that is meant of the land which was now in the possession of Sihon
King of the Amorites, though it had formerly belonged to the children of Ammon,
till Sihon took it from them; for with the land which was in the possession of
the Ammonites at this time, the Israelites did not meddle, as is here fully
expressed.

CHAP. III.
Verse. 2. ANd the Lord said unto me, Fear him not, etc.] Because this King was
a giant of such a formidable stature, verse. 11. therefore the Lord does
particularly encourage his people not to be afraid of him.

Verse. 4. Threescore cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in
Bashan.] As if it had been said, There were amongst others 60. cities which we
took in the region of Argob, a province or shire in Bashan, and therefore it is
called the region of Argob which is in Bashan, 1. Kings 4. 13.

Verse. 5. All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars,
etc.] The strength of this country is here thus described, both thereby the
better to set forth the mighty power of God, who had subdued so strong a
country before them; and withal to put them in mind how safely they might
rely upon God still for the time to come against their strongest enemies.

Verse. 9. Which Hermon the Sidomans call Sirion, etc.] Some Expositours
conceive that the mount here spoken of is the same that is elsewhere called
mount Gilead; and others, that which is elsewhere called L^banus; however
evident it is that in the Scripture it is called by five several names, to
wit, Hermon, Sirion, and Shenir here, and then Sion, Deuteronomy. 4. 48. and Hor,
Numb. 34. 7. and that partly, because by diverse people it was diversely named,
and partly, with respect to diverse parts of this mountain, which had several
names; and hence it is that, Cant. 4. 8. Shenir and Hermon are mentioned
together as distinct mountains.

Verse. 11. For only Og the King of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants.]
That is, there was none left of that gig^ntine race in the kingdom of Bashan
but Og only. That there were many other giants at this time in other places is
most evident: for immediately after the Israelites en^^ed Canaan Caleb drove
out of Hebron Sheshai and Ahiman and Tal^ai the children of Anak, Josh. 15. 14.
Yea in David's time there were many giants, as Goliath, whom David slew,
Ishbi-benob, and diverse others, 2. Sam. 21. 16. etc. But this is spoken only
of the country of Bashan.

Behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron: is it not in Rabbath of the
chilof Ammon?] How this bedstead (which was made of iron, that it might be
strong enough to bear his huge mass^e body) should come to be in Rabbath the
chief city of the Ammonites, being not expressed, we cannot say; sufficient it
is that thither it might be conveyed by many several means, as it might be
taken in some war between the Ammoni^es and this King, and so kept as a
glorious Trophic of their victory; or it might be given as a present to the
Ammonites, and so kept as a strange memorial of the huge stature of thi^ King
of Bashan.

Nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it, after
the cubit of a man.] That is, the common cubit of an ordinary man. Now the
cubit of a man being usually a foot and half, according to this measure his bed
was four yards and a half long and two yards broad.

Verse. 13. And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og,
gave I unto the half tribe of Manass^h, etc. See Numb. 32. 39, 40.

Verse. 14. Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob, etc.] See
Numb. 32. 41.

Verse. 17. Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea, under
Ashdoth Pisgah Eastward.] What the sea of Chinnereth was, which is mentioned
here as a part of the bound of that land which was given to the Reubenites and
Gadites, you may see in the note upon Numb. 34. 11, 12. As for Ashdoth Pisgah,
we see verse. 27. that Pisgah was a hill, and so Ashdoth Pisgah was after the
name of a city there adjoining in Reubens land, Josh. 13. 20. at the foot of
this hill.

Verse. 23. And I besought the Lord at that time, etc.] To wit, after all these
things before related, when the Lord bad him go up into a mountain and see the
land, Numb. 27. 12. then did Moses entreat the Lord earnestly that he might go
into the land of Canaan, as knowing that his threatenings are many times
conditional, and therefore it might be the Lord would be entreated by him.

Verse. 24. O Lord God, thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness,
etc.] There is here an argument drawn from former mercies to move God to go on,
and to perfect the mercy begun.

Verse. 25. I pray thee let me go over, and see the good land that is beyond
Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.] There is much arguing amongst
Expositours to find out what that goodly mountain is whereof Moses here speaks,
some understanding it of one mountain, some of another: but I conceive that it
is the land that lay next beyond Jordan, which they might see from the place
where the Israelites now were, that is here called that goodly mountain, that
is, that goodly mountanous country; and that then he adjoyns, and Lebanon,
(which was in the farther part of the land of Canaan) to imply that he desired
to see the land quite through.

Verse. 26. But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes.] See the note upon
chap. 1. 37.

Verse. 27. Get thee up into the top of Pisgah, etc.] See the note upon Numb.
27. 12.

CHAP. IV.
Verse. 1. NOw therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes, etc.] They that
will have a difference put betwixt the two words here used, statutes and
judgments, say that by statutes or ordinances are meant those laws which
taught the service of God, called by the Apostle ordinances of divine service;
and by judgments those laws that concerned their duties toward men, and the
punishment of transgressors. As for the promise of life made here to those
that kept these laws, see the note* upon Levit. 18. 5.

Verse. 6. Keep therefore, and do them; for this is your wisdom and your
understanding in the sight of the nations, etc.] Seeing other Nations did
always deride and despise the Jews way of worshipping God, and made a mock of
their whole religion, it may seem strange why Moses should here say that their
keeping of Gods laws should be counted their wisdom and understanding in the
sight of the nations. But for this we must theref ore know that the drift of
these words is only to show that the laws which God had given them were so
just and righteous, that all men, unless they should wilfully close their
eyes, must needs acknowledge them to be such; and that even the very heathen,
if ever they came to hear and know their laws, must needs in their consciences
think so of them, and would (if ever their eyes were truly opened to judge of
things) admire the wisdom and understanding of this people above that which
was in other nations.

Verse. 7. For what nation is there so great, who has God so nigh unto them,
etc.] That is, in that which only makes a nation truly great and honorable,
namely, the special interest they have in God, there is no nation under heaven
to be compared unto ours, who have God always dwelling amongst us, as is
evident by the miraculous signs of his presence with us; always ready at hand
to hear our prayers, and so to protect and defend us from all evils, as the
strange miracles and wonders he has wrought for us these many years do
evidently prove.

Verse. 11. And ye came near, and stood under the mountain, and the mountain
burnt with fire, etc.] All these things are here repeated, to convince and
assure the people that the laws he now speaks of were given of God, and not of
his devising, and therefore the more carefully to be regarded.

Verse. 12. And the Lord spoke unto you out of the midst of the fire, etc.]
Moses here addressing his exhortation to dissuade the people from idolatry, he
puts them in mind how that when the Lord at Sinai gave them his law they saw no
similitude, only they heard a voice, and that God spoke unto them out of the
midst of the fire, which was indeed purposely done thereby to signify unto the
people that the glory of God was incomprehensible, and that there was no
drawing nigh unto God to behold him with bodily eyes.

Verse. 14. And the Lord commanded me at that time, to tea^h you statutes and
judgments, etc.] That is, besides the ten commandments written by the Lord
himself, he at that time also gave me other statutes and judgments, which he
commanded me to teach you.

Verse. 15. Take ye therefore good heed unto your selves, etc.] Lest again
confidence of themselves should make the Israelites slight this warning of
avoiding all idolatry, in these words he implies how prone man's nature is to
this sin, charging them to be jealous of themselves in this regard, and to
watch diligently over themselves, lest they should be drawn away into this
gross and brutish finne.

Verse. 19. Which the Lord thy God has divided unto all nations under the whole
heaven.] Moses speaking here against worshipping the sun, moon, and stars,
and then adding this clause, which the Lord thy God has divided unto all
nations under the whole heaven, he does therein imply with what admirable
wisdom God has disposed these lights in several parts of the heaven, whereby
the sun, moon, and stars do according to their several stations give light
sometimes to one part of the earth, sometimes to another; and some stars do
only shine in some parts of the world, and others to other parts. B^^ withal
the chief drift of this clause is, to show what a baseness^ of mind it (...) be
in Gods people to worship such things as are given for servants unto all men,
even to infidels and heathens.

Verse. 20. But the Lord has taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron
furnace, etc.] This is added to imply in what a special tie they were bound to
be careful above other people not thus to dishonor God: first, because God
had redeemed them out of the iron furnace, that is, the furnace wherein iron is
melted; and so Egypt is called, to set forth the miserable and cruel
oppression which there they underwent, enough to dissolve the spirits of the
stoutest, and to have wasted and consumed any people: and secondly, because
having thus redeemed them out of Egypt, he had taken them to himself as a
people of inheritance, that is, his own people purchased for himself, upon
whom*this blessing should remain from generation to generation.

Verse. 21. Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes, etc.] This is
added, first, to set forth the wondrous care that God took of them, who was
angry with Moses for their sakes, because he did not sanctify the Lord in the
eyes of the children of Israel, Numb. 20. 12. secondly, to manifest Gods love
and mercy to them, granting them that favor which he denied his servant Moses,
to wit, of carrying them into that good land of Canaan; thirdly, to give them a
hint how careful they had need to be to walk uprightly with God, who was so
far displeased with him because of his infidelity.

Verse. 24. For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire, even a jealous God, etc.]
The Lord is here called a consuming fire, because of his ex^eeding great
indignation against his people when they provoke him by their rebellions, and
because when he resolves to take vengeance on them, he does many times consume
and destroy them, even as the fire burns up all that stands in its way; and
again, he is called a j^alous God, with respect unto the covenant which he made
with his people, wherein he had taken them to be his spouse, and had engaged
himself to be as a husband to them, and so was as jealous of having the worship
due only to him to be given to any creature, as husbands use to be of their
wives dealing falsely with them: and Solomon, we know, says of jealousy, that
the coals thereof are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame, Cant. 8.
6.

Verse. 25. When thou shall beget children, and childrens children, and shall
have remained long in the land, etc.] That is, be not secure and bold to sin,
because you are therein settled; for if you do, God will soon cast you out
again.

Verse. 26. I call heaven and earth to witness against you, etc.] This
obtestation of heaven and earth may be understood of God and the Angels in
heaven, and men on earth. But I rather conceive it to be meant of the dead and
unreasonable creatures, and that hereby is employed, first, that as surely as
there was a heaven and an earth, so surely should they perish from off the
land; secondly, that the bruit creatures were not so stupid as they, if
notwithstanding all these warnings given them they should nevertheless go
after strange gods.

Verse. 34. Or has God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of
another nation, by temptations, etc.] The miracles and wonders which God
wrought in Egypt are here called temptations, because he did thereby try both
the Egyptians, to see whether they would be won to yield to him, and let the
people of Israel go; and the Israelites, to see whether they would be won to
^ear the Lord, and to trust in him, who had done so great and wonderful things
for them.

Verse. 37. And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed
after them, etc.] Not for any thing which he saw in you, or in your fathers,
did he choose you to be his peculiar people, but of his own free grace and
love, and from that love of his it was merely that he brought thee out of Egypt
in his sight, that is, the eye of his providence being still fixed upon them,
even as a father causes his child to go before him, that he may keep his eye
upon him, and no^ suffer him to fall into any danger.

Verse. 44. And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel,
etc.] He meane^h that which hereafter follows: this therefore is a preface to
the next chapter, where the repetition of the laws begins.

Verse. 49. And all the plain on this side Jord^^ Eastward, even unto the sea of
the plain, etc.] See chap. 3. 17.

CHAP. V.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses called all Israel, and said unto them, etc.] That is, all
the elders and chief of the people. It was not possible that so many hundred
thousands as the Israelites now were should hear Moses speaking to them: But as
Exodus 12. 3. where Moses and Aaron were appoined to speak unto all the
congregation of Israel, verse. 21. it is said that they called for all the
elders of Israel, so it was here.

Verse. 3. The Lord made not this covenant with our fathers, etc.] That which
Moses here speaks of is that which he made with the Israelites at Horeb, when
he gave them the law, as is expressed in the former verse, The Lord, (says he)
made not this covenant with our fathers that is, with our fathers in Egypt* or
it may be meant of the Patriarchs Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob (even
including all from Adam unto Moses, yea and all their ancesters before the
giving of the law at Horeb) but with us, that is, us his people whom he brought
out of Egypt, even us who are all of us here alive this day, that is, not only
with those who then were living at the giving of the Law, but since dead in the
wilderness, but even with us their posterity who are all alive this day. Now
for the understanding of this we must know that though the covenant of grace,
which God made with the Israelites when he brought them out of Egypt, was one
and the same for substance with that which he had made before with their
fathers, and though it was much alike too in regard of the outward
dispensation, both being delivered in a way suitable to the days of the old
Te^tament (which was common to both) to wit, under dark promises, types and
ceremonies; yet first, because the Lord did more fully and more clearly make
known unto them at Horeb the tenor of the covenant then he h^d ever done unto
their fathers, partly by giving them many more signs and shadows of the
promised Messiah, and the good that was to be had in him, as the tabern^cle,
the ark, the mercy-seat, and the priesthood, etc. and partly by giving them a
written law containing a perfect summ^ of all that God required of them; and
secondly, because he then entered into covenant with them as a body politic, a
people whom he had separated from all other nations to be his peculiar people,
prescribing them an outward form of government, laws and statutes, to which
they consented to submit themselves therefore Moses tells them that the Lord
did not make this covenant with their fathers: and hence it is also that the
Apostle says the law was after the covenant in Christ, Gal. 3. 17. And of this
special mercy afforded them above their fathers Moses puts them here in mind,
to make them the more careful to keep Gods laws.

Verse. 4. The Lord talked with you face to face in the mount, etc.] To wit*
when he gave them the ten commandments following, verse. 6. then the Lord talked
with them face to face, that is immediately by himself and not by a messenger:
and indeed this was not without a special mystery: for the ten commandments
being a renewing and repeating of the covenant of works to be performed by
every man in his own person, therefore the Lord delivered these laws himself,
and there was no Mediator betwixt him and the people; whereas the other laws,
which were afterward given them, containing many shadows of Christ, in whom
God had made a covenant of grace, were therefore delivered to Moses, and by him
to the people, Moses standing as a Mediator betwixt God and them. But of this
phrase of Gods speaking to them face to face, see also the note upon Exodus 33.
11.

Verse. 5. I stood between the Lord and you at that time, etc.] That is, after
God had out of the fire spoken the ten commandments, I was glad to stand as a
Mediator betwixt the Lord and you.

Verse. 12. Keep the Sabbath Day to sanctify it, etc.] In Exodus 20. 8. it is
Remember the Sabbath Day to keep it holy; so likewise some other small
differences there are, which are not worthy the que^tioning, the substance
being exactly the same.

Verse. 15. And r^member that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, etc.] In
this fourth commandment, as it was delivered by the Lord from mount Sinai, the
worlds Creation and Gods resting on the seventh day was mentioned as a main
ground of it, Exodus 20. 11. but here Moses repeating this commandment omits
that, and presses their deliverance out of Egypt as a chief reason of Gods
enjoining them to sanctify this day, Remember that thou wast a servant in the
land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy God brought thee out thence, etc.
therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the Sabbath Day. And indeed
though the Lords resting on the seventh day at the worlds Creation was the main
gro^nd of the sabbaths first institution, yet their deliverance out of Egypt
might be the reason why the Lord did now insert this amongst other the
commandments which he gave in charge to the Israelites, and that in these
respe^ts: first, because by their redemption out of Egypt they were bound to
consecra^e themselves wholly to Gods service as his peculiar people, whereof
the holy employment of the Sabbath might be a notable memorial and sign; and
secondly* because of that particular charge of suffering their servants to rest
on the Sabbath Day, their former bondage in Egypt being a strong inducement to
move them to take pity of their s^rvants, and this enjoined rest of their
servants, being a good memorial to put them in mind of their bondage in Egypt.

Verse. 21. Neither shall thou desire thy neighbors wife, etc.] Exodus 20. 17.
God first forbids the coveting of our neighbors house, and then next the
coveting of his wife; here contrarily the coveting our neighbors wi^e is sirst
forbidden, and then afterward the coveting of his house, etc. so that they that
would divide this last commandment into two, as the Papists do, cannot justly
say which is the ninth commandment, and which is the tenth* because one branch
of it is first in Exodus, and another is first here in Deuteronomie; and we
cannot think that Moses would pervert the order of the ten commandments.

Verse. 22. And he added no more.] That is, he spoke no more unto the people but
these ten commandments immediately by himself, the rest he spoke unto Moses,
and then Moses told it them, and that because they desired it should be so;
which Moses relates largely in the remainder of the chapter, to convince them
that they had no cause to give less regard to the other statutes, which Moses
delivered them from Gods own mouth. But yet withal these words may imply the
perfection of the decalogue or ten commandments, to wit, that the Lord has
therein given us such a perfect sum of the moral Law, that there is nothing
farther to be added to it.

And he wrote them in two tables of stone, etc.] See the note upon Exodus ^1.
18.

Verse. 24. We have seen this day that God does talk with man, and he livet^,
etc.] In these words they confess that they had heard God talking with them*
and were for all that alive; and yet in the next words in the following verse
they add, Now therefore why should we die? for this great fire will consume
us; whereas rather one would think that from their present safety, after they
had heard God talking with them, they should have encouraged themselves against
all fear for the time to come. But for this I answer, that in these first words
they speak of their present safety as a matter of wonder, and thence infer,
that though they had escaped this danger for the present, yet the very terror
of it would kill them if God did thus still reveal his will to them, and
therefore desired that Moses might receive from God what was farther to be
said, and then he might deliver it to them. And indeed this is still the work
of the Law, to scare men, and drive them to seek for a Mediator betwixt God
and them.

Verse. 26. For who is there of all ^lesh that has heard the voice of the
living God?] That is, what man is there that ever heard God speaking out of the
midst of the fire (as we have done) and yet lived? Moses uses here the word
flesh, speaking of men, because that implies the frailty of man's condition,
which is the cause why men are not able to endure to hear God speaking to them
in such majesty and glory.

CHAP. VI.
Verse. 1. NOw these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,
etc.] Here Moses enters upon the explanation of the first commandment of the
ten before rehearsed, chap. 5.

Verse. 6. And these words which I command thee this day shall be in thine
heart.] That is, they shall be imprinted in thy mind, thou shall acquaint thy
self with them, and lay them up in thy memory and mind, as travelers do the
directions that are given them for the finding of their way, that so upon all
occasions thou may know what thou art to do, and may not be to seek.

Verse. 8. And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thine hand, etc.] See the
note upon Exodus 13. 16.

Verse. 13. Thou shall fear the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by
his name, etc.] That is, when thou have a calling to swear, thou shall swear by
the name of God, and not by any creature whatsoever it be.

Verse. 15. For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you.] There are two
arguments included in these words, whereby Moses disswades them from going
awhoring after other Gods: first, because their God was jealous of having this
honor given to any but himself, concerning which see the note upon chap. 4.
24. and secondly, because their God was ever amongst them (as being every where
present) observing all their ways, and therefore their idolatries could not be
hidden from him.

Verse. 16. Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God as ye tempted him in Massah.]
Men are said to tempt God, when they will not rest in that truth concerning God
revealed in his word, but will needlessely make experiments whether he be so
just, wise, faithful, etc. as in his word he is said to be: which may be done,
first, by wilful sinning, as it were trying whether he be omniscient, etc.
Act. 5. 3. secondly, by needless rushing upon any danger without a calling,
Mat. 4. 6, 7. thirdly, by requiring a sign needlessely, and out of a false
dissembling heart, only to see whether such a miracle can be wrought or no,
Mat. 16. 1. Luke 11. 16. fourthly, by prescribing God when and how he shall
perform his promises, which limiting of God proceeds from infidelity; and thus
they tempted God in Massah. See Psalm. 78. 41.

Verse. 25. And it shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all these
commandments, etc.] Thus the Law requires the righteousness which is by works,
but the Gospel speaks otherwise, Romans 10. 5, 6. Neither yet is it the purpose
of Moses that the Israelites should look to be exactly righteous by the exact
fulfilling of the Law; but the Law is only here used as a schoolmaster to
bring them unto Christ, Gal. 3. 24. Moses propounding to them this
righteousness of the Law, that they, finding how impossible it was for them to
attain this righteousness of the Law, might thereby be brought to seek after
that righteousness which is by faith; and withal to let them know that though
the Lord was pleased to make a covenant of grace with them, and to receive them
as justified in and through the righteousness of a Mediator, yet there was
also a personal inherent righteousness required of them as the necessary
effect of the righteousness of faith, which consisted in the sincere and
careful observation of all these Laws, which however it must needs be weak and
imperfect, yet in and through their Mediator God would ac^ept it.

CHAP. VII.
Verse. 1. WHen the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou
go to possess it, and has cast out many nations before thee, the Hittites,
etc.] In Genesis 15. 19. there are ten nations mentioned whose land God there
promised to Abraham's posterity; and here Moses speaks but of seven nations, and
one of these too, to wit, the Hivites, are not reckoned there: so that there
are four nations named there of whom there is no mention here, to wit, the
Kenites, the Kenizites, the Kadmonites, and the Rephaims. But at this
difference we need not stumble; for it was now many hundred years since that
promise made to Abraham, in which time there might be great alterations amongst
the nations that inhabited this land, and so happily those nations mentioned
there and not here were at this time united in one with some of these seven
nations, and besides happily the nations mentioned there and not here are those
which in David's and Solomon's time became tributaries to the crown of Israel,
and so included in that promise made to Abraham; which yet were never cast out
before the Israelites, and therefore not named here by Moses.

Verse. 3. Neither shall thou make marriages with them, etc.] Under this
prohibition by necessary consequence marrying with all other idolatrous nations
is likewise forbidden them; and therefore we see that Ezra bewailed the
marriages which the people of God had made with other idolatrous nations as
well as these here mentioned, to wit, the Ammonites, Moabites, and Egyptians,
Ezra. 9. 1, 2.

Verse. 5. Ye shall destroy their altars, and break down their images, and cut
down their groves, etc.] Chap. 12. 3. there is also express mention made of
b^rning their groves too.

Verse. 10. And repayeth them that hate him to their face, to destroy them,
etc.] This phrase implies that God would as openly, as manif^stly oppose and
fight against those that hate him for their destruction, as they did impudently
and openly oppose God: impudent sinners do as it were seek to outface God,
Psalm. 73. 9. and God is said to repay them to their face, when he sets himself
against them in this their impudency, and confounds them so that themselves
shall plainly see that the Lord has set himself to oppose and confound them.
Also hereby may be employed that God should confound them in this life, even
whilst they were opposing and outfacing the Lord, whence the second clause may
seem to be added by way of explaining the first, he will not be slack to him
that hates him, he will repay him to his face.

Verse. 15. And will put none of the evil diseases of Egypt (which thou know)
upon thee.] That is, the Lord will not lay upon you any of those dangerous and
noisome diseases wherewith it is well known to you that he punished the
Egyptians for your sakes, such as were those boyls mentioned Exodus 9. 10. and
the pestilence, verse. 15; or wherewith you know the inhabitants of that
country were usually troubled, such as that called the botch of Egypt, Deuteronomy.
28. 27. See also the note upon Exodus 15. 26.

Verse. 16. Neither shall thou serve their Gods, for that will be a snare unto
thee, etc.] That is, a cause of thy-ruine, it will bring judgments upon thee
from which thou will no way be able to free ^hy self.

Verse. 20. Moreover the Lord thy God will send the hornet among them, etc.]
Against whom the strength and multitude of these nations shall be no defense.
See the note upon Exodus 23. 28.

Verse. 24 There shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have
destroyed them.] All this is promised upon condition of their obedience to God;
for when they obeyed not Gods command, we read afterward of many of these
nations that were too strong for them. S^e Josh. 15. 63. and 17. 12. and Judge.
1. 34.

Verse. 25. Thou shall not desire the silver or gold that is on them, etc.] This
may be meant either of the plates of silver and gold wherewith their idols of
wood and brass were usually covered over; or else of the chains, bracelet^,
jewels, garments of silver or gold wherewith they were wont to deck and trim
up their idols, Esa. ^0. 32. yea and under this all other ornaments of their
idols, though not of gold and silver, are comprehended. Because the Israelites
might out of covetousness think that so they destroyed the idols themselves,
they might reserve the gold and silver that was about them, and yet be
blameless, the Lord, the better to show how he detests idolatry, forbids them
here the reserving of any of the gold and silver that was upon the idols of the
land, and to that end charge them not to meddle with it, no not to desire it,
but utterly to consume that together with the idols themselves* lest, says ^e,
thou be snared therein, that is, les^ by doing otherwise thou becomest guilty
before God, and so should draw down judgment upon thy self.

Verse. 26. Neither shall thou bring an abomination into thy house, lest thou be
a cursed thing like it, etc.] That is, devoted to destruction as that was* to
wit, for reserving a polluted and accursed thing which should have been
destroyed.

For it is a cursed thing.] That is, a thing separated from men's use, and
devoted either to destruction, as the idols and ornaments thereof here
mentioned; or at the Lords appointment to be carried into his treasury, as
some conceive the gods of Jericho were, because it is said, Josh. 6. 19, 24.
that the silver and gold which was in that city was brought into the Lords
treasury.

CHAP. VIII.
Verse. 2. ANd thou shall remember all the ^ay which the Lord thy God led thee,
etc.] To make the Israelites the more careful to obey the commandments of God,
Moses wills them here to remember all the way which the Lord their God had led
them these forty years in the wilderness, that is, all that befell them in
that way, to wit, both their affliction wants and troubles on the one side, and
their comforts blessings and deliverances on the other, adding withal that
thus the Lord had carried them through many troubles, though not intending to
cast them off, that he might thereby humble them, and prove them whether they
would keep his commandments or no; and so to know what was in their heart, that
is, by this trying of them to discover what was in their hearts, to wit, the
infidelity, and inco^stancy, and stubbornness of their hearts: for indeed as
the fire will try gold from brass, so will afflictions discover whose hearts
are upright toward God, and who are false-hearted* and not such as in
prosperity they seemed to be, and much vild corruption will show it self in
troubles which before did never appear.

Verse. 3. That he might make thee know that man does not live by bread only,
etc.] The meaning of this is, that God brought them to want bread, and then
supplied that want with manna from heaven, that he might thereby teach them,
that though God had appointed bread and such like food to be the ordinary means
of sustaining man's life, yet it was not that alone that did sustain men, but
the word, that is, the decree and command of God: in so much that as bread
cannot nourish us except God commands a blessing on it, so on the other side he
can command any thing else to nourish us as well as bread, as they had seen in
the manna wherewith God had sed them many years; yea he can keep men alive
without food a long time together, as he did Moses, Elijah, and our Savior
Christ, whereupon he retorted this place of Scripture upon the devil, when he
tempted him to turn stones into bread, Mat. 4. 4.

Verse. 4. Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell these
forty years.] These are two other miraculous effects of Gods provident care
over them, by the mention whereof Moses stirs them up to the obeying of Gods
Laws. The first is, that their garments were not the worse for wearing, at
least they grew not threadbare or torn in forty years wearing, concerning
which this is also particularly added, Deuteronomy. 29. 5. that their shoes (which
were most likely to wear out with their continual traveling) did not wax old
upon their feet. To make this good there are some Expositours do add
concerning those that were young when they came out of Egypt, that their
garments did miraculously grow as ^^^ir bodies grew. But there is no necessity
of forging thus more miracles then are expressed, and that because those that
out-grew their garments might be supplied with the garments of such as died in
the wilderness, and then the garments they left off might serve those that
grew to their stature. The second is, that their feet did not swell,
notwithstanding their continual travels, and that because their sho es waxt
not old* under which also some think is included the health of their bodies in
general (unless in case when they were extraordinarily stricken with
sickness because of some rebellion against God) to which they apply that of
the Psalmist, there was not one feeble person among their tribes, Psalm. 105. 37.

Verse. 5. Thou shall also consider in thine heart, that as a man chasteneth his
son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee.] That is, out of love, with a
gentle hand, and with a purpose to do thee good thereby; and this Moses
advises the Israelites to consider in their hearts, first, because unless
this be well thought upon, afflictions would overwhelm the heart with sorrow;
and secondly, because the serious consideration both of Gods severity in
correcting his own dear children, and his compassion in doing it in a fatherly
manner might well work in them a filial fear and endeavor to obey God in all
things whatsoever, whence it is that he adds those words in the next verse,
Therefore thou shall keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, etc.

Verse. 9. A land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou may dig
brass, etc.] That is, a land wherein their is abundance of mines, iron mingled
with the stones, or as plentiful as stones, and brass to be dug almost out
of every hill.

Verse. 14. Which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage.] This concerning their deliverance out of Egypt is here inserted,
first, that by putting them in mind of their poor original, when they were
bondslaves, he might prevent their pride, whereof he had given them warning in
the foregoing words; and secondly, that by the remembrance of so great a mercy
they might be rendered the more careful to observe his command^ents.

Verse. 15. Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness, wherein
were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought, where there was no water.]
Concerning these fiery serpents, see the note upon Numb. 21. 6. That which is
added here concerning the drought of those places through want of water, is
either added to set forth their exceeding ^traits and danger in those places
where there were fiery serpents and scorpions, because being bitten with those
venomous creatures they became thereby extremely thirsty, and yet had no water
to quench their thirst, and so consequently their miraculous preservation in
those dangers; or else rather to make way to that which follows concerning
Gods fetching water for them out of the rock of flint, for it was but only in
some places of the wilderness where they had no water.

Verse. 16. Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers knew
not, that he might humble thee, etc.] This last clause, that he might humble
thee, etc. has respect principally to the a^flictions mentioned before, verse
15. wherewith they had been exercised in the wilderness; yet I see not but
that Gods feeding them with manna, mentioned in the words immediately
foregoing, might also be said to have been done for the humbling of them,
because nothing is more effectual to humble the hearts of sinn^rs then the
great and extraordinary mercies of God, if duly considered.

And that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.] That is,
afterward, at last. God does humble and prove his children by afflictions,
that afterward he may both bestow those blessings which they wanted upon them,
to wit, when by their former want they have learnt how to prize them, and also,
that he may cause them to bring forth the quiet fruit of righteousness. See
Heb. 12. 11.

CHAP. IX.
Verse. 1. Hear, O Israel, thou art to pass over Jordan this day, etc.] Three
things must be noted for the understanding of these words: first, that by this
day here is not meant the very day of their passing over Jordan, but only that
the time was now come that ere long they were to pass over Jordan, and to
enter the land of Canaan; for in the Scripture day is often used for time, as
2. Cor. 6. 2. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation: secondly,
that by possessing nations greater and mightier then themselves is meant the
possessing of the land of those nations: and thirdly, Moses here puts them in
mind of the wonderful strength of the inhabitants, purposely to prevent all
thoughts of vanquishing them by their own strength, and that when they had
overcome them they might be sure to ascribe all the glory to God; as is evident
by the inference he makes upon this, verse. 3. Understand therefore this day
that the Lord thy God is he which goes before thee as a consuming fire, that
is, know therefore by this which has been said of the exceeding strength of
this people that it were not possible that you should so suddenly destroy so
many potent nations, if there were not a power above that of man's employed in
the work, and that Gods hand is as evident herein as if a consuming fire should
go before you to burn them up.

Verse. 3. So shall thou drive them out, and destroy them quickly.] The meaning
of this is, that the nations with whom they should fight they should suddenly
destroy, they should not do it with much toil and labor and many battles, but
they should soon make an end of them. Indeed it cannot be said that all the
inhabitants of the land were quickly destroyed, for they were not driven out
and consumed quickly, but by little and little, as Moses said before, Deuteronomy. 7.
22. But here he speaks only of those with whom they should have war
immediately upon their entrance into Canaan.

Verse. 6. For thou art a stiff-necked people.] That is, a stubborn and
rebellious people, that will not stoop to the obedience of Gods laws; the
Metaphor is taken from unruly heifers that will not yield their necks to the
yoke.

Verse. 9. I abode in the mount forty days and forty nights, I neither did
eat bread, nor drink water.] See the note upon Exodus 24. 18.

Verse. 10. And the Lord delivered unto me two tables of stone written with the
finger of God.] See the notes upon Exodus 31. 18.

And on them was written according to all the words which the Lord spoke with
you in the mount, out of the midst of fire, in the day of the assembly.] That
is, on those tables of stone were written the ten commandments, word for word,
as God spoke them from the mount out of the midst of the fire, in the day when
the people were called and assembled together at the foot of the mount to hear
God speak unto them.

Verse. 12. And the Lord said unto me, Arise, get thee down quickly, etc.] Some
Expositours from this word Arise would infer that Moses was kneeling before
God to receive from him what he should give him in charge when he told him of
the peoples, sin, and willed him therefore presently to go down amongst them.

They are quickly turned aside out of the way, etc.] See the note upon Exodus
32. 8.

Verse. 14. Let me alone, that I may destroy them, etc.] See the not^s upon
Exodus 32. 10.

Verse. 15. So I turned and came down from the mount.] To wit, after he had
first prayed unto God for the people that they might not be destroyed, and God
had granted his desire; for so much is expressed in the story, Exodus 32. 11,
14. though it be not repeated here.

Verse. 17. And I took the two tables, and cast them out of my two hands, etc.]
See the note upon Exodus 32. 19.

Verse. 18. And I fell down before the Lord, as at the first, forty days and
forty nights, etc.] To wit, when he went up again into the mount, and carried
with him two new tables of stone, as God enjoined him, Exodus 34. 1. for then
also as it is noted there, verse. 9. he prayed for the people again, as being
much afraid of the great anger which the Lord had conceived against them,
notwithstanding the Lord had yielded to pardon them before he went down the
first time from the mount, Exodus 32. 14. And indeed assurance that God has
pardoned a sin does not make his servants the less earnest still to beg the
pardon of it.

Verse. 21. And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with
fire, etc.] See the notes upon Exodus 32. 20.

Verse. 22. And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked
the Lord to wrath, etc.] This is inserted as by way of parenthesis, as if he
had said, Though I insist chiefly upon this sin at Horeb, because it was a
most grievous sin, yet alas many other rebellions of yours I might reckon up,
at Taberah, at Massah, etc.

Verse. 25. Thus I fell down before the Lord forty days and forty nights, as
I fell down at the first.] The former three verses being inserted as by the
way, now he returns to speak again of his interceding for them the second time,
when God was so highly displeased with them for that their foul sin in making
the golden calf; for the forty days here mentioned are the same forty days
the second time spent with God, whereof he had spoken before, verse. 18. which
was after he had broken the calf, and executed justice upon the people for
their sin, and many other passages which are largely related in the thirty
second and thirty third chapters of Exodus.

CHAP. X.
Verse. 1. AT that time the Lord said unto me, Hew thee two tables of stone,
etc.] That is, before my going up the second time into the mount, at that time
when upon your sin and Gods displeasure I had earnestly sought unto God for
you, the Lord, in testimony that he was reconciled, gave this charge
concerning two new tables of stone: and indeed at that time it was that he went
up with them, and stayed in the mount again the second time forty days and
forty nights. Now as the breaking of the first tables might signify, that
there was no hope for mankind to be saved by the keeping of the law; so this
providing of two new tables might signif^e, that yet notwithstanding the Lord
would have the law to be in force as a rule of holiness and righteousness
unto his people, and that the Lord by his spirit writing his law in their
hearts would enable them in some good measure to conform their lives to the
obedience thereof; and besides Gods appointing of Moses to provide these two
tables might intimate to the people, that it was by his prayer and interc^ssion
that they had this treasure again restored to them. See also the note upon
Exodus 34. 1.

Verse. 3. And I made an ark of shittim wood.] The ark here mentioned may be
understood of an ark made only for that purpose, to keep the tables in, till
the other ark was made, whereof God had spoken to him, and for the making
whereof he had given him direction in the first forty days that he was with
God in the mount. If so, this ark no doubt was made at the same time when he
hewed the two tables of stone before he went up the second time that he abode
forty day, in the mount. But if we understand it of the ark of testimony,
that was not made till he came down, after he had the second time abode forty
days in the mount; only it is here joined with the hewing of the two tables,
because in this also he did as God commanded him, though he did it not at the
same time when he hewed the two tables of stone, but afterward when he came
down from the mount: and this I rather think is the meaning of the words,
because verse. 5. he adds, and there they be as the Lord commanded me.

Verse. 4. And he wrote on the tables, according to the first writing, etc.] See
the note upon Exodus 34. 28. likewise the notes upon the tenth verse of the
foregoing chapter.

Verse. 6. And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the
children of Jaakan, to Mosera, etc.] In this and the following verse there are
many difficulties, and such as indeed (the words being read as they are in our
translation) are almost inextricable: yet we must see what may be said for the
answering of them. The first difficulty is in the connection of these words with
that which went before, to wit, how Moses, being in this chapter speaking of
those things that befell them at mount Sinai, comes here to mention the
journeys of the Israelites in places to which they came not a long time after
they had been at mount Sinai, as is evident, Numb. 33. 31, 32. But this it is
not so hard to resolve: for we must know that these two verses are not added
here as in order of History, but are only inserted by the way as in a
parenthesis, so that the meaning of Moses is not that Beeroth of the children
of Jaakan here mentioned was the next place where they pitched their tents
after they removed from mount Sinai (for as we may see, Numb. 33. mount Sinai
was but the twelveth station of the children of Israel, and Beeroth of the
children of Jaakan or Bene-jaakan, as it is called, Numb. 33. 31. was the
twenty eighth station) but his meaning is only that having gone many journeys
forward and backward, as the Lord commanded them, at length they went from
Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera or Moseroth, as it is written,
Numb. 33. 30. The second difficulty is concerning the place of Aarons death,
to wit, because Numb. 33. 38. it is said Aaron died at mount Hor, and here that
he dyed at Mosera, and Mosera in that 33. of Numbers is but the twenty seventh
station of the Israelites, and that as they went back from Kadesh-Barnea
toward the red sea, and mount Hor is their thirty fourth station, and that as
they returned again from the red sea toward the land of Canaan. But to this I
answer that this Mosera or Moseroth and mount Hor were but one mountain in the
root, though divided into diverse tops, as mount Sinai and Horeb were, by the
West part whereof, called Moseroth, Moses encamped as he went back toward the
red sea, and by the East part thereof, called mount Hor, as he returned again
Northward toward the land of Canaan; and so though Aaron dyed at mount Hor,
yet here it is said of Mosera that there Aaron, dyed and there he was buried,
and that because Mosera and mount Hor were both one and the same mountain. The
third and greatest difficulty is in the seeming contradiction that is betwixt
this place, and that, Numb. 33. 31. in that here it is said that the Israelites
went from Bene-jaakan or Beeroth of the children of Jaakan to Mosera, and so to
Gudgodah, and to Jotbath* and yet there, quite contrary in one particular, it
is said that they went from Mosera or Moseroth to Bene-jaakan, and so from
thence to Gudgodah, or Horhagidgad, as it is there called, and from thence to
Jotbathah, or Jotbath, as it is here written. To answer this, some Expositours
say that the places here named are not the same that are mentioned, Number. 33.
31. 32, 33. But because all the four places here named together are mentioned
also together there, and that with so little variation of the names as Mosera
for Moseroth, and Gudgodah for Horhagidgad, and Jotbath for Jotbathah, and
Bene-jaakan for Beeroth or the wells of the children of Jaakan, it is very hard
to think that Moses in these two places speaks not of the same journeys of the
Israelites. Another Expositour therefore, and that is Bonfrerius ^he Jesuit,
answers this difficulty thus, That as they went back from Kadesh-barnea to the
red sea the Israelites went indeed from Moseroth (which was a part of the
mountain called also mount Hor) to Bene-jaakan, as it is said, Numb. 33. 31.
but as they returned again from the red sea toward the land of Canaan, in a
way not far distant from that they had gone before, then they came first to
Beeroth of the children of Jaakan, or Bene-jaakan, and so from thence went to
Moseroth or Mosera: and indeed this answer would be very satisfactory, but that
there is one objection to be made against it, which seems unanswerable, and
that is, that both here and in Deuteronomy 33. it is said that after they were gone
past Moseroth and Bene-jaakan, they went first to Gudgodah, or Horhagidgad, and
thence to Jotbath or Jotbathah, which cannot be, if Moses*speaks there of the
Israelites journeys from the land of Canaan toward the red sea at Ezion-gaber,
and here of their going back again from the red sea toward the land of Canaan,
since if after they had passed Moseroth and Bene-jaakan they came from thence
to Gudgodah, and so to Jotbath, as they went from Canaan toward the red sea,
then as they went back again from the red sea toward Canaan they must needs
come to Jotbath, and Gudgodah before they came to Bene-jaakan and Mosera. There
remains therefore only one answer more that can be given for the reconciling
of this seeming contradiction, and that is, that it seems the Israelites, as
they traveled from Kadesh toward the red sea, went from Moseroth to
Bene-jaakan, as is expressed* Numb. 33. 31. but then finding there some
difficulty in their passing forward, they returned again from Bene-jaakan to
Mose^a, which is that remove that Moses here speaks of* but is not mentioned in
Numb. 33. and so fetching a compass about took another way, and went forward
again toward the red sea, first to Gudgodah, and then to Jotbath, as is well
expressed in some mappes. The last doubt that may be moved concerning these
words is, What was the aim and drift of Moses in the inserting of these two
verses, as it were by the way, concerning these journeys of the Israelites,
where he is relating what he did at mount Sinai. And for this we must know,
that the drift of Moses herein is by the mention of these journeys of the
Israelites to give a touch at those remarkable occurrents which at these places
happened, that might serve to humble the people, and withal to quicken them in
their care to walk uprightly with God. Thus first, the place where Aaron dyed,
and Eleazar succeeded in his room, is mentioned, because the remembrance of
Aarons death might humble them for the sin of the golden calf whereby God was
displeased with Aaron, and because the contin^ance of the priesthood in his
son was a proof of Gods being reconciled unto the people upon the prayer and
intercession of Moses, whereof before he had spoken: and so likewise their
removing from Gudgodah to Jotbath is mentioned verse. 7. because that was a land
of waters, as it is there expressed, because this bringing of them to such a
place of waters as they traveled through the wilderness was another proof of
Gods grace and favor toward them, and the respect he had to their infirmity,
that they might not murmur against him for want of water as formerly they had
done.

Verse. 8. At that time the Lord separated the tribe of L^vi, etc.] This is not
meant of the time when they came to Jotbath or Jotbathah, of which he had
spoken in the foregoing verse; for now Moses returns to the story of those
things that were done at mount Sinai (having as by the way inserted the former
two verses for the reasons above mentioned) inst^ncing in this separating of
the tribe of Levi^ (wherein not the Levites only but the priests also are
comprehended) to the spiritual employments, here mentioned as a special sign
of Gods receiving them into favor again upon his prayers and intercession.

Verse. 10. And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days
and fourti^ nights, etc.] This is thus again and again repeated, that they
might still be put in mind of the greatenesse of their sin, whereby they had
deserved to be cut off, but that Moses interceding thus earnestly for them God
was pleased to be reconciled to them.

Verse. 11. Arise, take thy journey before the people, that they may go in,
etc.] This also shows God was fully reconciled, and willing that presently they
should have entered the land, had not they by their murmuring excluded
themselves for many years after.

Verse. 14. Behold the heaven and the heaven of heavens is the Lords,] By the
heaven of heavens is meant that which is by the learned called the Empyreall
heaven, where the Angels and the Saints departed do enjoy the glorious and
beatificall vision of God; and it is called the heaven of heavens both because
it is the highest and does contain the other heavens within its orb, and also
by way of excellency, as the most holy place in the Temple is called the holy
of holies, because (...) far surpasses all the rest in splendor and glory.

Verse. 16. Circumcise therefore the foreskinne of your heart, and be n^ more
stiff-necked.] That is* mortify all your natural lu^ts and corruptions, rid
your selves of that blindness of mind, that hardness of heart, all that
spiritual pollution wherewith you are born, and be no more stubborn and
rebellious against the Lord. The first clause is meant of the mortifying of
their inward lusts, and the second of the reforming of their outward
conversation by true repentance: and because circumcision was a sign of this
work of grace which God required of his people, the casting off the old man
with all the lusts and pollutions thereof, therefore Moses uses this phrase of
circumci^ing their hearts; yea by requiring this of a people amongst whom there
were but few that were outwardly circumcised (for none were circumcised in
their forty years traveling through the wilderness, Josh. 5. 5.) he taught
them that he chiefly required and regarded this circumcision of the Spirit, and
did not one whit esteem the other in comparison of this, according to that of
the Apostle, Romans 2. 29. He is a Jew that is one inwardly, and circumcision is
that of the heart, etc. Nor does his requiring this of them imply that they
were able to work this holy change in their hearts, but only that they were to
endeavor, and to use all good means that God by his Spirit might work this in
them.

Verse. 17. For the Lord your God is God of gods, etc.] That is, far above all
that are called Gods; for under this word Gods may be comprehended not only
the false and idol-gods of the heathens, but also the Angels in heaven, and
Magistrates on earth, who are often termed Gods in the Scripture, as we may see
Psalm. 82. 6. where that which is translated in our Bibles, Thou have made him a
little lower then the Angels, and that by warrant of the Apostles quoting this
place thus. Heb. 2. 7. is in the original, a little lower then the Gods; and
so Psalm. 82. 6. the Lord speaking of Kings and other Magistrates says, I have
said, Ye are Gods; whence it is also that the Apostle says that there be Gods
many and Lords many, 1. Cor. 8. 5. Now the reason why Moses does thus set forth
the majesty and glorious excellency of God is, because the due consideration
hereof was a good means to make the people the more to stand in aw of offending
him, as the inference of these words upon that which went before does plainly
show, Be no more stiffenecked: for the Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord
of Lords, a great God, a mighty and a terrible, which regards not persons,
etc. and besides in this last clause, that God regards not persons, there is
a hint given the people to take heed of presuming to sin because they were
Gods people, in regard that they ^ad to deal with a God that regarded not
persons, and therefore would no more spare an Israelite, then he would a
heathen.

Verse. 18. He does execute ^he judgment of the fatherless, etc.] Gods example
is here propounded as a pattern for his people to follow.

Verse. 20. And swear by his name.] See the note upon chap. 6. 13.

Verse. 21. He is thy praise, and he is thy God, etc.] That is, this shall be
thy chief glory and praise amongst other nations, that this great and mighty
Jehovah is thy God, and that thou art his people, and he it is that shall be
the subject of thy praises and songs of thanksgiving continually.

CHAP. XI.
Verse. 2. ANd know you this day: for I speak not with your children, etc.] I^
the first words, And know you this day, Moses wills the Israelites seriously to
take notice of, and to lay to heart, that which he was then about to say
concerning the Lords dealing with them even from the time that he brought them
out of Egypt, and then in the next words, For I speak not with your children
which have not known, and which have not seen the chastisement of the Lord your
God, etc. he shows what great reason there was that they should be seriously
affected with the recital of these great things which God had done, namely,
because they had been eyewitnesses of them (and those that have such evidence
and such self-experience are usually more affected therewith, then those that
are only told of them) had he spoken to their children of these things, that
were not eyewitnesses of the doing of them, it were not so much to be wondered
if the bare relation of these things did not so much affect them; but speaking
to them that had known and seen all the great acts of the Lord, it could not
but work upon them, to make them the more careful to obey his commandments.

Verse. 4. And how the Lord has destroyed them unto this day.] It may be
questioned concerning these words, How it is here said of the army of Egypt
forty years after it was drowned in the red sea, that the Lord had destroyed
them unto that day. But for this we must know that hereby is only meant, that
the Israelites did enjoy the benefit of that destruction which then fell upon
the Egyptians unto that day, namely, because unto that day they durst never
after that pursue the Israelites, or attempt any thing against them.

Verse. 7. But your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which he did.]
For many of them who ca^e out of Egypt were yet alive* to wit, those that were
then under twenty years of age, and so they had seen what was done in Egypt,
and the rest had seen some all, some many of those glorious acts which God had
done in the wilderness, whereof Moses had also spoken in the foregoing words.

Verse. 10. For the land whither thou go in to possess it, is not as the
land of Egypt, etc.] Moses here shows the Israelites a remarkable difference
betwixt the land of Canaan and the land of Egypt, and his drift there^n is
thereby to love them to be the more careful to obey the commandments of God;
for the understanding whereof we must know, first, that in Egypt they never, or
at least very seldom, had any rain, Zach. 14. 18. If the family of Egypt go
not up* and come not, that have no rain, there shall be the plague, etc. but in
s^ead of rain the river Nilus used once a year to ove^flow all or the greatest
part of that country, and so did mellow and soften the earth for all the year
after; secondly, that therefore when there was any failing in the overflowing
of this river they were forced to take a great deal of pains to water their
grounds, yea those pla^es, whither the overflowing of Nilus did not reach, were
always thus watered to the g^^at cost and labor of the owners, because they
had no rain; thirdly, that it is ^^id ^ere* in Egypt thou sowedst thy seed, and
watere^st it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs, either because they dug
furrows with their feet, whereby water was conveyed from Nilus to water their
grounds; or else because they were forced to go up and down, to se^ch and carry
water, to pour it out upon the grounds where they had sown their seed, and so
watered their cornfieldsd as a man should water a garden of herbs; and fourthly,
that from the excellency of the land of Canaan, which God had provided to be
their inheritance, above that of Egypt in this particular, Moses s^^rres them
up to be the more obsequious in obeying the commandments of God. They should
have a land that was continually watered with rain from heaven, and so there
would be no need of that incessant labor and toil to which they were put in
Egypt for the watering of their grounds: and s^rely Gods fatherly care in
providing ^o well for them might justly challenge from them their utmost
endeavors to observe Gods Laws. I know there are some Expositours do otherwise
conceive of the aim of these words, to wit, that Moses therein does show the
people how wary they had need to be of keeping Gods love and favor to them,
and not to provoke him by their sins, namely, because the fruitfulness of
that land, which they were now to have, did wholly depend upon the Lords
sending them rain from heaven, the want whereof they could not supply with
digging ditches and watercourses. as they did in Egypt, in regard the land of
Canaan was a mountanous and ^illy country, to which it was not poss^ble to
convey water from rivers, as in Egypt they might. But the first exposition I
conceive is most proper, and most ag^^^able to the aim of Moses, in setting
forth the excellency of Canaan above that of Egypt from whence he had brought
them; and yet happily we may best say that both were employed.

Verse. 11. But the land whither ye go to possess it, is a land of hills and
valleys, etc.] Hereby is commended the commodious, healthful, and pleasant
situation of the land; yet withal some conceive that hereby is employed also
that because it was hills and dales, rivers could not overflow it, but it must
needs be barren if it had not always rain in due season.

Verse. 12. A land which the Lord thy God cares for, etc.] That is, Canaan is a
land which is not watered as Egypt is by the art and industry of man, but by the
special care and providence of God, whose eyes are upon it all the year long,
to send rain upon it, as he finds there is need. But, may some say, Was it not
of the providence of God that Egypt was made fruitful by the overflowing of
Nilus? I answer, Yes; but yet because the fruitfulness of Egypt was much
advanced by their watering the land as a garden of herbs, whereas Canaan was
continually watered with rain from heaven, and where there is least use of man's
indu^try, but the blessing comes immediately from heaven, there the care and
providence of God is most evidently seen, therefore is it said here of Canaan,
that it was a land which the Lord their God eared for, etc.

Verse. 14. I will give you the rain of your land in his due season, the first
ra^n and the latter rain, etc.] The first, after the sowing of the seed, that
it might take rooting in the earth; the latter, a little before harvest, that
the ear might be full: and it is to be noted that though Moses had hitherto
spoken to the people as in his own person, yet here he speaks as in the person
of God, I will give you the rain of your land, and verse. 15. I will send grass
in thy fields, etc.

Verse. 21. That your days may be multiplied, as the days of heaven upon
earth.] That is, that you and your posterity may continue in the land of Canaan
so long as the heavens shall continue in their place over the earth, namely, so
long as the world shall last; for the like phrase we have concerning the
perpetuity of David's kingdom, which was accomplished in Christ, Psalm. 89. 29.
His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven. And indeed had not the Jews provoked the Lord by their sins to cast
them out of that good land, this promise should have been made good to them;
yea and from this promise happily we may conceive hope that upon the repentance
of the Jews, and their embracing the Lord Christ as their promised Messiah,
they shall be again reestablished in this land, and therein continue with great
glory to the end of the world.

Verse. 26. Behold, I set before you this day a blessing and a curse.] This
phrase of setting before them the blessing and the curse was purposely used, no
doubt, to intimate that they might take their choice of either of these; and so
to manifest that if the curse came upon them they caused it themselves, and
could blame no body but themselves only.

Verse. 29. Thou shall put the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon
mount Ebal.] That is, thou shall cause the blessings, which the Lord has
promised to them that keep his laws, to be pronounced on mount Gerizim, and the
curses, which the Lord has threatened to them that break his laws, to be
pronounced on mount Ebal, and so shall make those mountains to be as it were
continual remembrancers to the people of the blessing and the curse, that when
they see mount Gerizim they may see the blessing set before them, and so
likewise the curse, when they see mount Ebal. This is afterward enjoined again,
Deuteronomy. 27. 11. 12. etc. where it is also more fully expressed how it was to be
done; and Josh. 8. 33. we may see how this which God here enjoined was
accordingly done. And it seems that from this very commandment given to Moses
concerning mount Gerizim, the Samaritans, many ages after this, took occasion
to build a temple there, as taking Gerizim to be a blessed place, because the
blessings were pronounced on it: for that the Samaritans temple was built upon
mount Gerizim is the common opinion of most Writers; and we may find it very
probable by comparing together John 4. 3, 20. with Judge. 9. 7. since there, to
wit Judge. 9. 7. it is evident that mount Gerizim was nigh unto Shechem, because
from the top of mount Gerizim Jotham spoke to the men of Shechem that were
gathered together, and had made Abimelech their King, and by that which is said
of the woman of Samaria, John 4. it is as evident that the Samaritans temple
was built on a mountain nigh unto Shechem; because that Samaritan woman
dwelling at Sychar, which was Shechem (as appears by the words that follow,
John 4. 5. where it is noted that this Sychar was near by the parcel of ground
which Jacob gave to his son Joseph, and that was certainly at Shechem, as is
noted upon Genesis 33. 19. and 48. 22.) speaks of the Samaritans temple as of a
place that was hard by* and perhaps in their view, John 4. 20. Our fathers
worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where
men ought to worship.

CHAP. XII.
Verse. 2. YE shall utterly destroy all the places wherein the nations which ye
shall possess served their Gods, etc.] That is, all their temples and
chapels, and whatever other places they had, wherein they served their
idol-gods. And this God enjoined them, first, to show how he abhorred idolatry;
and secondly, to prevent the Israelites being tempted to worship God in those
places. Nor does it hence follow that we may not worship God in such churches
and chapels as have been polluted with idolatry but ought to pull them down,
as some have thought; for this clause of this law i^ judicial, pecul^ar only
to the Jews, as being chiefly intended to prevent their worshipping God in any
other place then that one which he had appointed, to which we in the days of
the Gospel are not tied.

Verse. 4. Ye shall not do so unto the Lord your God.] That is, ye shall not
sacrifice to him in several places upon mountains and hills, etc. as the
heathens serv^^ their Gods; but all your sacrifices and offerings ye shall
offer unto the Lord only in that place which he shall choose for that service:
for so it follows in the two next verses, But unt^ the place which the Lord
your God shall choose out of all your tribes to put his name there, even unto
his habitation shall ye seek, and thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings
and your sacrifices, etc. Prayer and other spiritual duties of Gods worship
they might even then perform in other places, both in public and private; and
therefore the Levites were purposely dispersed here and there all the l^nd
over, and they had their Synagogues in several places where they met together
every Sabbath day to perform these holy duties; but their sacrifices were all
to be brought unto the place which God should choose, which is meant of those
places where the tabernacle was placed for some time after they were come into
the land of Canaan, such as were Shiloh, and Nob, and other places; whence is
that of the Prophet, Jer. 7. 12. Go ye now into my place which was in Shiloh,
where I set my name at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness
of my people; but principally of the temple, which God chose to be the settled
place for sacrifices, and it is called here the place which the Lord should
choose to put his name there, both because it was to be called by his name, The
house of God, and to be consecrated to his worship and service, and withal to
prevent that carnal conceit of Gods dwelling in temples made with hands, to
wit, as essentially included therein; whence it is also that the same
San^tuary, which is here called the Lords habitation, or, dewlling place, is
elsewhere called his footstool, Psalm. 99. 5. As for the reasons why the Lord
did bind his people to offer up their sacrifices in one place only which he
would appoint, they were chiefly these two: first, because hereby God would
teach them that there was but one only way to obtain pardon of their sins,
and acceptance of any service they did unto God, and that was by Christ their
promised Messiah, of whom their tabernacle and temple was a type; and secondly
because hereby they might the better be kept to one unifo^m way of worshipping
God, and corruptions in his worship might be prevented, whereinto they might
easily fall had they been allowed to offer their sacrifices some in one place,
and some in another: and for this cause it was that in aftertimes the Kings of
Juda^ were so often blamed, because they did not remove the high places, but
^uffered the people to sacrif^ce there.

Verse. 6. And thither ye shall bring your burnt-offerings, and your sacri^ices,
and your tithes, etc.] Here Moses reckons up all those holy things which they
were to bring to the place which God should choose for those services: where
first, by sacrifices are meant all other sacrifices besides burnt-offerings, as
^^nne-offerings, trespasse-offerings, etc. secondly, by tithes are meant not
those ordinary tithes which were yearly paid to the Levites (for they were not
brought to the temple, but were paid to the Levites in their several
habitations throughout the land) but a second tithe, the tithe of that which
remained after the first tithe was paid to the Levites; for that, or the money
for which they had sold it, they carried up yearly to Jerusalem, and there with
those tithes so carried in kind, or with such things as they bought with the
money, they kept a holy feast before the Lord, as is largely expressed, chap.
14. 22, 27. thirdly, by the h^ave-offerings of their hands are meant all the
several first fruits which they brought in their hands, and heaved them before
the Lord* and then left them to the priests for their portion; fourthly, by
vows and freewill-offerings are meant all such sacrifices or offerings as they
should extraordinarily bring, either upon some vow they had made, o^ freely and
of their own accord; and lastly, the firstlings are the first of that their
herds and flocks brought forth, for these also they carried up to the temple,
as is evident Numb. 18. 17, 18. where it is said that their blood was to be
sprinkled upon the altar, and the fat was to be burnt for an offering made by
fire, and then the ^lesh was given to the priests for their portion.

Verse. 7. And there ye shall ^at before the Lord your God, and ye shall
rejoice, etc.] That is, when you carry your sacrifices and offerings and other
things before mentioned to the place which the Lord shall choose, there ye
shall feast with your holy things, and rejoyc^ together before the Lord. But
here yet for the fuller understanding of this place we must note, first, that
the meaning is not that they might eat of all the holy things before mentioned;
for the burnt-offerings were wholly burnt upon the altar, and of some other
sacrifices none but the priests might eat; but the things here intended,
wherewith the people were to fea^t, were the tithes and the peace offerings;
secondly, that it is said that they should eat these things before the Lord
their God, because they were to eat them, though not in the priests court, yet
in the place where the tabernacle first and temple afterward stood, the place
of Gods special presence, to wit, in Jerusalem, which is therefore called the
holy city, Matthew. 4. 5. thirdly, that by all things they put their hand unto
(Ye shall rejoice in all that you put your hand unto) is meant all the good
things they had gotten by the labor of their hands through Gods blessing, and
so had in the power of their hands to use as they had occasion, and that
because of all that they had they carried still something by way of tithes or
sacrifices unto Jerusalem: and so this phrase is ordinarily used in the
Scripture* as chap. 15. 10. the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou put thine hand unto, and so in many other
places; and fourthly, that the drift of this place seems to be partly this,
Having told them in the foregoing verse, that when they came to be settled in
the land of Canaan they were to carry all their sacrifices and offerings, etc.
to that one place in the land which the Lord their God should choose, that they
might not think much of the labor and charge which this would put them to,
especially those that dwelt far off, he adds this by way of encouragement,
There ye shall eat before the Lord your God, etc. as reckoning their glad
enjoying of Gods presence there an abundant recompense for all their charge and
labor.

Verse. 8. Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every
man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.] That is, here we live loose and at
liberty for the duties of the ceremonial Law, to which you must be strictly
tied when you come to be at rest in Canaan; many sacrifices and rites and
feasts by reason of your unsettled estate cannot here be precisely observed,
and so every man does in a manner what he lists, but when you come to be
settled in the land of Canaan you must not think to do thus, etc. See verse. 9.
10.

Verse. 12. And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, and your sons,
and your daughters, etc.] Hereby it appears that though the males only were
bound three times a year to appear before the Lord, Exodus 23. 17. yet at those
times the masters of families were wont also of their own accord to carry their
wives, daughters, and maidservants with them, as Elkanah we see did, 1. Sam. 1.
4.

Verse. 15. Notwithstanding, thou may kill, and eat flesh in all thy gates,
whatsoever thy soul lust^th after, according to the blessing of the Lord, etc.]
This is added to explain yet more fully what difference they were to make
between the flesh they might eat of those beasts which they offered to the
Lord, and that which they did eat at other times; to wit, that they might eat
the flesh even of those cattle which they used to sacrifice, no less then the
roe-buck and the heart, that is no less then those that were not appointed for
sacrifice, and that in all places where they dwelt both clean and unclean
persons might eat of them, according to the blessing of the Lord, that is,
according as through Gods bl^ssi^g they could provide for themselves (so
allowing a lib^rall use of the creatures to the rich, but restraining all
profuse riot, and keeping men within the limits of their ability) but yet that
which they offered as a holy sacrifice or offering to the Lord, that they might
eat no where, but in the place which the Lord should choose.

Verse. 16. Only ye shall not eat the blood, etc.] See the note upon Genesis 9. 4.

Verse. 17. Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy corn, or of
thy ^ine, or of thy oil, or the firstlings of thy herds, etc.] Concerning these
tithes see the note upon verse. 6. The greatest difficulty in these words is
concerning the firstlings here mentioned to wit, how they can be here reckoned
amongst those things which the people must only eat before the Lord in the
place which he should choose, since it is evident that the firstlings of their
herds and stocks were holy to the Lo^d, and so that which remained of them,
after the blood was sprinkled and the fat burnt upon the altar, belonged solely
to the priests, Numb. 18. 17, 18. But to this an answer may be given which may
fully satisfy, to wit, that the firstlings here spoken of are not those
firs^lings elsewhere intended, which as holy things ^onsecrated to God were
allotted for the priests portion; but the firstlings here mentioned were either
the female firstlings (for they were only the male firstlings which the Lord
challenged as his due, Exodus, 13. 12.) or the firstborn after those first which
were given to the Lord, which were indeed the first that were the owners; or
the chief and best of their lambs and kids and calves, called here the
firstlings only by way of excellency.

Verse. 21. If the place which the Lord ^hy God has chosen to put his name
there be too far from thee, etc.] The meaning of this passage is not, that if
the place chosen of God for sacrificing were near hand they must not eat of
their herd or flock in their own houses, but always carry them to the
tabernacle or temple; for who can think that the Jews dwelling near to
Jerusalem did never eat of their h^rds and flocks in their own dwellings?
either therefore this clause has refere^^e to that which follows, verse. 26.
and the meaning then is only this, That though the place which God had chosen,
etc. were very far from some of their d^ellings, and they might therefore
think it too hard a task to carry their sacrifices so far, yet so it must be,
though they might kill and eat for their own re^^eshing whatsoever they desired
at home (as is granted again in these first words) yet their sacrifices they
must carry to that holy place though never so far from them; or else the
meaning is, that when they had a purpose to offer peace offerings, and by way
of thankfulness for some mercy to rejoice together, if the holy place were too
far from them, they might (having withal perhaps sent the price of
redemption thither) feast t^gether with their cattle killed for food, only they
must be then sure not to eat them as holy things, but even as they would eat of
the roe-buck or the heart. But the first resolution of this doubt I take to be
the best.

Verse. 27. And the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar
of the Lord thy God, and thou shall eat the flesh.] That is, the flesh of thy
peace-of^erings; for only the flesh of those sacrifices was eaten by the
owners, Lev. 7. 15.

CHAP. XIII.
Verse. 1. IF there arise among you a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and.]
Having in the former chapter given the people warning to take heed of being
seduced to idolatry by strangers of other nations, here he gives them the like
warning to take heed of being seduced by those that were their own brethren; If
says he, there arise a Prophet or a dreamer of dreams (that is, one that is,
or pretends himself to be such an one, that says he is a Prophet, and that God
has appeared to him in a vision or in a dream) and that among your own
brethren (f^r these words, among you, are added to imply that they must regard
him never a whit the more because he was an Israelite since amongst them many
false Prophets might and did arise, 2. Pet. 2. 1.) and, if he, gives thee a
sign or a wonder, that is, if, to make good the truth of what he says God
has by vision or dream revealed to him, he foretells some wonderful and
supernatural work that shall come to pass (such as was the cleaving of
Jeroboams altar, which the Prophet told them of beforehand, 1. Kings 13. 3. as
a sure sigue that God had sent him) and withal happily acompanieth his
prediction with some outward significant action or gesture (as when that false
prophet Zedekiah, 1. Kin. 22. 11. made horns of iron, and said, Thus says the
Lord, With these shall thou push the Syrians until thou have consumed them)
though this sign or wonder come to pass, yet if withal he shall persuade
thee to worship false Gods, or to worship the true God in a false manner (which
is all one, for he that pretends to worship the true God with false worship,
does not indeed worship the true God, but an idol-god which he pha^cieth to
himself) thou shall not hearken to him, that is, thou shall not because of his
signs and wonders regard what he says. And indeed (though a false Prophet may
be known by his foretelling things which afterward come not to pass,
according to that rule, chap. 18. 22. Whou a Prophet speaks in the name of
the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which
the Lord has not spoken, etc. yet) the accomplishment of what a Prophet
foretells is no sure sign that he is a true Prophet nor to be regarded if his
doctrine be not according to the truth which God has taught us.

Verse. 3. For the Lord your God proves you, etc.] These words are added as the
reason why they were not to hearken to any Prophet that should persuade them to
idolatry, yea though he gave them any sign or wonder which should accordingly
come to pass, to wit, because hereby the Lord did prove them, to see whether
they did sincerely love God or no. For the understanding whereof we must know
the Lord is here said to prove them by that which the false Prophets did to
seduce them to idolatry, first, because even the Lord himself may by the Spirit
of prophecy reveal things to come even to wicked men and false Prophets, as he
did to Balaam and Caiaphas, as knowing how thereby to bring glory to himself,
though they only intend to corrupt and seduce his people; secondly, because
though these predictions given, and wonders wrought are usually either mere
forgings and impostures, or else satanicall delusions, whereby men are made to
think they see those things done which indeed are not done, or lastly, are such
wonders as are indeed done, but by the power of the devil, yet it is of God
that either men or devils are permitted to do such things, who could easily
restrain them if he saw cause to do it; and thirdly, because the Lords aim, in
suffering the devil and wicked men thus to abuse men, is to make trial, that
is, by this trial to make it known, whether they love the Lord their God with
all their heart and with all their soul, this being a sure rule, that those
whose hearts are upright toward God will not be drawn away from the truth of
God by such delusions, according to that of the Apostle, 1. John 2. 19. They
went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us they
would no doubt have continued with us.

Verse. 5. And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to death,
etc.] Here they are enjoined to put the false Prophet to death that shall so
seduce the people: for the better understanding whereof we must note, first,
that every spreading of false doctrines in matters of less consequence was not
thus to be punished, but only the seducing of men from the true religion to
the direct worship of false Gods; and in this case, though many Expositours
hold that this Law concerned only the policy of the Jews, yet I see not but
that it gives the Christian Magistrate power also to provide for the securing
of his people, even by the capital punishment of those that seduce them to an
apostasy of so high a nature; secondly, that in the reason here rendered why
they should put such false prophets to death, the phrase that is used, because
he had spoken -- to thrust thee out of the way which the Lord thy God commanded
thee to walk in, is intended to imply what a dangerous and strong temptation
that of pretended miracles is to seduce men from the way of truth; and
therefore our Savior also speaking of such, said, Mat. 24. 24. They shall
deceive (if it were possible) the very elect: and thirdly, that the last
clause, so shall thou put the evil away from the midst of thee, is meant both
of the evil men that were the seducers, and the hurt which they might have
done, to wit, that by cutting off these evil men the hurt which they might do
amongst the people should be prevented.

Verse. 6. If thy brother, the son of thy mother, etc.] The drift of this
place is to let them know, that not only false prophets (of whom he had spoken
in the former verses) but all others whatsoever were to be put to death that
should seduce them to idolatry, not openly but secretly, and that they were not
to spare those that were dearest to them, etc. And for the fuller clearing of
this, we may note, first, that this phrase, If thy brother the son of thy
mother, is here used, either to distinguish true brothers from kindred, yea
from all other Israelites, who are frequently in the Scripture called their
brethren; or else emphatically to express that brother that is usually most
beloved, to wit, a brother both by father and mother, at least a brother by the
mothers side, that lay in the same belly with them, and that because our love
to such is naturally the strongest: and secondly, that in the particular
mention that is here made of the daughter, as well as of the son, as also of
the wife, there is not only respect had to the love that men bear to them, but
also to the pity that men are prone to take of that sex: men are naturally
inclined to take compassion of that sex; and therefore this is particularly
expressed, that in case a daughter or wife seek to seduce them to idolatry,
they must be put to death, and there must be no pity shown them because of
their sex. Indeed because there is no mention made here of father and mother,
therefore some have thought that by this Law the child was not bound to accuse
either father or mother, if they sought to seduce him to idolatry, the Lord not
enjoining this in regard it was so much against the reverence which children do
naturally bear to their parents. But these build upon too weak a ground:
Doubtless in Gods cause there is no more reason for the child to regard the
parents, then for the husband to regard the wife of his bosom, and Levi in
this case is commended for closing his eyes against his parents, because he
said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him, chap. 33. 9. and
therefore questionless under these that are named all other persons that are
most dear to men, even parents also, are comprehended.

Verse. 7. Namely of the Gods of the people which are round about you, etc.] In
this clause, of the Gods of the people which are round about you, etc. there is
a warning couched that they should not be moved with this argument, that the
nations round about them, far and near, all over the face of the earth, went
another way in the service of God; but rather should say as S. John does, 1.
John 5. 19. We know that we are of God, and the whole world l^eth in
wickedness. Yet withal we may understand it as intended also to show the
extent of this Law, to wit, that whatsoever gods they were which they were
persuaded to worship, they must not consent to do it, but must only worship
the Lord their God.

Verse. 9. But thou shall surely kill him; thine hand shall be first upon him,
etc.] Thou shall surely kill him, that is, thou shall inform against him to the
Magistrate, and so procure that justice may be executed upon him according to
this Law, to wit, that he may be put to death; and therefore is that added in
the next words, thine hand shall be first upon him, to wit, as being the party
accusing and giving testimony against him; for that was Gods Law that the
witnesses should throw the first stones at him that was to be stoned, Deuteronomy. 17.
7.

Verse. 13. Certain men, the children of Belial, are gone out from among you,
etc.] That is, certain vild, wicked, and mischievous persons. Belial is by
inte^pretation without profit, or, without yoke, that is, base, lawless,
rebellious and wicked; whence this name is given to Satan, or Antichrist,
opposed to Christ, 2. Corinthians. 6. 15. What concord has Christ with Belial? and
to men and women given over unto wickedness, Judge. 19. 22. The men of the
city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, etc. and 1. Sam.
1. 16. Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial; and 1. Sam. 25. 25.
Let not my Lord -- regard this man of Belial, even Nabal. As for the phrase
here used of going out from among the Israelit^s, certain men, the children of
Belial are gone out from among you, it intimates, first, their separating of
themselves from Gods people in point of religion, according to that of S. John,
1. John 2. 19. They went out from us but they were not of us, etc. and
secondly, their bold and presumptuous carriage of themselves herein, in that
they did it openly, as proclaiming war against the Lord.

Verse. 14. Then shall thou enquire and make search, etc.] This is added by way
of caution, in two regards* first, to let them know that though they did but
hear some flying report of such a wickedness, yet they might not slight such
a report, but must enquire carefully whether it were so or no; and secondly, to
put them in mind that on the other side yet they must not arm themselves
against their brethren (as is afterward enjoined) merely upon uncertain
reports* but must first make diligent search and enquiry, and if they sound it
evident and certain, then they should proceed against them as is here appointed.

CHAP. XIV.
Verse. 1. YE are the children of the Lord your God.] This is prefixed as a
reason why they should carefully observe, as all the commandments of God, so
more especially these that are here prescribed: for being the children of God,
and so consequently heirs of eternal salvation, it was fit that they should be
very careful that they did nothing that might dishonor their father, or
disparage themselves; and therefore not to mourn as men without hope, nor to
conform themselves to heathens, from whom God had separated them.

Ye shall not cut your selves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the
dead.] That is, in the forepart of your heads, just over the space that is
between your eyes. See the notes upon Levit. 21. 5. and 19. 27, 28.

Verse. 3. Thou shall not eat any abominable thing, etc.] See the notes on the
11. chapter of Leviticus.

Verse. 13. And the glede, etc.] This bird is not mentioned in the 11. of
Leviticus, but is comprehended under others of the same kind that are there
named.

Verse. 21. Thou shall give it unto the stranger that is in thy gates, that he
may eat it, etc.] Not the proselyte or stranger joined to the Church, for such
were bound to keep the whole law, and this in special, Levit. 17. 15. but the
stranger of another religion, who only sojourned amongst them.

Verse. 22. Thou shall truly tithe all the increase of thy seed, etc.] There was
a tithe paid every year to the Levites in the several places of their
habitation, Numb. 18. 24. and there was likewise another tithe (as was noted
before on chap. 12. 6.) which the owners carried yearly with them to Jerusalem,
and was spent there in holy feasting before the Lord. Either therefore these
words in the 22. verse, Thou shall truly tithe all the m^r^ase of thy seed that
thy field brings forth year by year, are meant of the first of these tithes
paid to the Levi^e^, and then those that follow verse 23. And thou shall eat
before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall ^^oose to place his name
there, the tithe of thy corn, of thy wine, and of thine oil, are meant of the
second tithe spent in their holy feasts; or if both ver^es are meant of one and
the same tithe, then doubtless they are both meant of the second tithe: for
neither vv^re the first tithes carried up to Jerusalem, nor had the owners any
power to eat of them.

Verse. 23. And thou shall eat before the Lord thy God in the place which he
shall choose, etc.] The tithes, here appointed to be eaten by the people in the
place which God should choose, cannot be meant of the tithes which were yearly
paid to the Levites. Numb. 18. 24. but were a second tithe, as is shown in the
foregoing note; and the like must be held concerning the firstlings of their
herds and slocks here mentioned, of which see the note upon ch^p. 12. 17. As
for the last clause of the verse, where a reason is rendered why the Lord did
enjoin them to go up to the place which he should choose, and there to fea^t
together with these their holy things, namely, that they might learn to fear
the Lord their God always, the ground of this may be 1. Because the very
presenting of themselves thus yearly before the Lord with their sacrifices and
offerings must needs be of it self a good means to keep their hearts in a
continual aw and reverence of God; and 2. because when they went up to Gods
holy place, the Priests were wont to instruct them in the law and the pro^ises
conc^^ning the Messiah (according to the dispensation of those darker times)
and in their sacrifices they beheld a shadow of their redemption by him, all
which must needs conduce much to teach them to fear the Lord their God.

Verse. 24. And if the way be too long for thee, so that thou art not able to
carry it, etc.] In these words there is an exception added to the former law,
to wit, that in case they dwelt very far from the house of God, and their
tithes and firstlings were so much in quantity that they could not well carry
them so far (which to imply that clause is added in the end of this verse,
when the Lord thy God has blessed thee) then they might sell these things, and
c^rry the money with them, and buy therewith what they were to use there.

Verse. 28. At the end of three years thou shall bring forth all the tithe of
thine increase the same year, etc.] Here is express mention made of a third
sort of tithe, different from those two before mentioned, verse. 22, and 23. For
1. this was only paid every third year, to wit, each third year after the
Sabbaticall year, when the land lay at rest, and so there was then no tithe
paid at all, but all things were common, Exodus 23. 10, 11. And 2. this was for
another service: the first of those tithes mentioned before were wholly the
Levites portion, and therefore often called, the Lords inheritance, and the
second or the price of them was carried up by the owners to the Lords dwelling
place, and spent in holy feasting before the Lord, but this now was laid up in
some public place in the towns and cities where they dwelt, and was not only
for the use of the Levites, but also for the stranger, the fatherless, and the
widow, etc. as is expressed here, verse. 29. So that it seems whereas the two
first years after the Sabbaticall year there were two tithes only separated
from their estates, the first for the Levites, the second to be spent in holy
feasting before the Lord, on the third year they separated a third tithe, which
was for the poor in the places where they dwelt; and so again the two next
years they separated only the two first tithes, and then on the third year
three tithes again, and so then the next year was again the Sabbaticall year. I
know there are many Expositours hold that the tithe here mentioned, which was
at the end of three years laid up for the poor, was the very same tithe which
the two years before the owners spent in holy feasting: the third year, they
say, this second tithe was not carried up to Jerusalem to be spent in their
holy feasts there, but it was laid up at home for the use of the poor. But two
arguments may be brought against this opinion from a following passage
concerning the third years tithes, chap. 26. 12. which cannot well be answered.
The first is, that this third year is there called the year of tithing, there
being no probable reason that can be given why that year should be called
peculiarly the year of tithing, but only this, because that year they
separated three tithes from their estates, one more then on other years: If the
tithes on this third year laid up for the poor were the same which the two
former years they had spent in holy feasting, then did they separate no more
tithes this third year then on other years; and why then should it be called
the year of tithing? The second argument is, that on this third year every man
was to go up to Jerusalem, and there to make a solemn pro^ession that he had
faithfully paid all his tithes; and it is no way probable that when he went
up to Jerusalem to make this solemn profession he should not then carry with
him those second tithes which were to be spent in holy seasting before the
Lord, When, says Moses, thou have made an end of tithing all the tithes of
thine increase, the third year, which is the year of tithing* and have given it
unto the Levites, the stranger, the fatherless, and the widow, then thou shall
say before the Lord thy God, I have brought away the hallowed things out of
mine house, and also have given them unto the Levi^^^, and unto the stranger,
etc. and indeed what were those hallowed things which he had brought with
him out of his house, if they were not that second tithe which was to be
spent in holy feasting before the Lord? and therefore doubtless this third
year they separated three several tithes from their increase, the first which
was the Levites yearly livelihood, the second which they carried up with
them to Jerusalem, therewith to feast before the Lord, and the third which was
laid up for the poor e.

CHAP. XV.
Verse. 1. AT the end of every seven years thou shall make a release, etc.] That
is, when the seventh year comes, which is the and or last of the seven; for we
see verse. 9. that the seventh year is called the year of release, Behold the
seventh year, the year of release, is at hand; as likewise Jer. 34. 14. at the
end of seven years let ye go every man his brother, is explained in the next
words thus, when he has served thee six years thou shall let him go free from
thee. Now this year of release was that seventh year spoken of, Exodus 23. 11.
and Levit. 25. 4. to wit, the Sabbaticall year, when the land was to keep a
Sabbath of rest, there being that year neither plowing nor sowing, nor any work
of husbandry used. The greatest difficulty concerning these words is, what this
release was, which is expressed in the following verse thus, every creditour
that lends ought unto his neighbor shall release it, he shall not exact it
of his neighbor, or of his brother, that is, of any Israelite whatsoever,
because it is called the Lords release, that is, because the Lord has ordained
it to be a year of release. Some Expositours hold that the release here
enjoined was an absolute acquitting and discharging of the debt for ever; only
they add that they were bound thus to forgive the debts of the poor only,
and that therefore it is added, verse. 4. save when there shall be no poor
among you, intimating that of the rich they might require what was owing them.
But on the other side many of the best Expositours hold that it is only meant
of a not exacting that year the debts that were owing them; and that because,
verse. 8. the people are commanded to lend to their poor brethr^n,
notwithstanding this law, even when the year of release was near at hand; and
it were strange that it should be called lending when they knew that
immediately at the year of release their debt should absolutely be acquitted
and made void. And indeed because the Hebrew word, here translated a release of
debts, may be rendered a remission, or, intermission, and is the same that is
elsewhere used, to wit, Exodus 23. 11. where speech is of the land that it
should be let rest or intermitted from tillage, that being only for the
seventh year, it cannot be gathered from this word that they were to give an
absolute release of their debts for ever, but only that they were not to exact
them this seventh year, and that because there was neither sowing nor reaping
nor other works of husbandry that year, and so the poor had not such means to
pay their debts as in other years. However as in regard of the Sabbath-rest of
this year (of which see the note upon Exodus 23. 11.) so also in regard of this
release of debts at that time, this year was a figure or type of that
acceptable year of grace, which brought us a release of our sinne^ (which are
called our debts, Matthew. 6. ^^.) by and through Christ our Savior, and whereby
we also are taught to put (...) ^e bowels of mercy, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, etc. (...) ^2, 13.

Verse. 3. Of a foreiner thou may exact it again.] The foreiner here
intended, of whom they might exa^t their debts, notwithstanding the year of
release, is by some thought to be every stranger of another nation, yea though
he were a proselyte: but others think it is meant only of those strangers that
had not embraced the true religion; and so indeed this law did the more fully
represent that spiritual release, whereof it was intended to be a figure or
type, in that none can have any share in this great privilege of the remission
of sins that are alien^ and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, that
is, none but those that are true members of the Church, and Christians indeed.

Verse. 4. Save when there shall be n^ poor among you.] This (according to our
translation) is added as an exception, that unless their debtors were poo^e
they were not bound to forbear the debt. But the other translation, which is in
the margin of our Bibles, seem^ the best, To the end that there be no poor
among you; and so it is added as a reason of the former law, to wit, that there
might not be through exacting of debts any man brought to extreme poverty.

For the Lord shall greatly bless thee, etc.] These words contain a reason
that may induce them thus to show mercy in not exacting their debts at the year
of rel^ase, namely, because if in this and other things they were obedient to
Gods laws, the Lord would so abundantly bless them, that they should be well
able thus to forbear the exacting of their debts, and it should be no prejudice
at all to them.

Verse. 12. And if thy brother, an Hebrew man or an Hebrew woman, be sold unto
thee, and serve thee six years, etc.] Which they usually did, unless the year
of Jubilee happened in the mean time, Levit. 25. 40, 41. concerning which see
the notes upon Exodus 21. 2. for this is not here added as a privilege of the
year of release, but as another act of mercy agr^eable to that before enjoined
concerning the remitting of debts every Sabbaticall year: for indeed, how
should the setting free of servants be made one of the great privileges of the
year of Jubilee, if the like had been done every seventh year, which was the
year of release? or to what purpose had it been to prescribe that no Hebrew
servant should serve above six years, as is appointed Exodus 21. 2. if they
could never serve six years, unless^ they began their service immediately after
the year of release, and that because otherwise when their release came they
must be set ^^ee.

Verse. 15. And thou shall remember that thou wast a bondman, etc.] The
Israelites bondage in Egypt, and the Lords delivering them, is often pressed
upon them, to make them ^^ew mercy to their servants, and to set them free at
the time appointed* of God, both because the remembrance of our own miseries
does naturally incline man's heart to take pity of those that are in the same
condition, and likewise because it must needs be acknowledged fitting that men
should imitate the mercy and compassion of God. But besides* there is covertly
a hint given of a further matter, to wit, that ^s they were not sent empty away
out of their bondage in Egypt* but came away thence with much of the riches of
Egypt, so they should not send away their servants empty when they set them
free, but should give them liberally of that they had, which was the thing
enjoined in the foregoing verses.

Verse. 16. And it shall be if ^e say unto thee, I will not go aw^y s^om thee,
etc.] S^e the note upon Exodus 23. 6. and Levit. 25. 40.

Verse. 17. And als^ unto thy maidservant thou shall do likewise.] Because this
follows so immediately upon that which went before concerning the boring of the
ear of that manservant which refused to be set free at six years end,
therefor many Expositours hold (and most prob^bly, there being no other place
of Scripture that shows the contrary) that even the ears of maidservants were
bored likewise, if they refused their freedom at the time appointed; yet the
Hebrews say that this clause, And also unto thy maidservant thou shall do
likewise, has only reference unto that which was said in the ^ormer verses
concerning the setting free of their menservants at six years and, and the
gifts they should give them when they set them free, to wit, that herein to
their maidservants they should do likewise.

Verse. 18. For he has been worth a double hired servant to thee, etc.] Not
because of the hard service he has done above the service of an hireling, as
some think; for by the law Hebrew servants might not be u^ed like slaves, but
like hired servants, Levit, 25. 39* 40. but because hired servants had great
w^ges, besides meat and drink, etc. which servants that were sold had not, in
regard whereof amongst us the service of an appr^ntice is counted more
prositable then that of journeymen or hired servants; and some add also
because hired servants did us^ally serve for three years, which they ground
upon that, Esa. 16. 14. Within three years, as the years of an hireling.

Verse. 20. Thou shall e^t it before the Lord thy God year by ^ear, etc.] I have
formerly shown upon Deuteronomy. 12. 17. that there were certain firstlings (which
were not those firstling-males that did first open the matrice, and that were
the Lords by that general Law of the firs^-born, Numb. 18. 15.) and that these
might b^ brought unto the Lord as p^ace-offerings, and so the owners and their
households might eat of these before the Lord; and of these therefore several
Expositours do understand this place. But yet because in the foregoing verse it
is said of the firstling males here intended, Thou shall do no work with the
firstling of thy bullock, nor shear the firstling of thy sheep; and this seems
to imply that the firstlings here meant are those firstlings which were the
Lords due so soon as ever they fell by that general Law of the firstborn, and
therefore the owners had not power to reap any profit by them; therefore others
understand these words as spoken to the priests, Thou shall eat it before the
Lord, -- that is* the priest, to whom God gav^ all the firstlings of Isra^l as
their po^tion: for as, say they, Moses spoke all that went before in this
chapter to the people of Isra^l, so here he continues his s^eech in the same
manner, though that he speaks were intended of the priests peculiarly, because
he speaks to the whole body of Israel as one man, under whom the priests were
also comprehended.

Verse. 22. Thou shall eat it within thy gates, etc.] T^^t is, the priest, as
above; and that as common meat in their own private dwell^^gs; or ^lse it is
meant that the owner should redeem it, as any other unclean beast, and then eat
it without scruple of conscience; or it is spoken of those second so^t of
firstlings, concerning which we may see what is noted, chap. 12. 17.

CHAP. XVI.
Verse. 2. THou shall therefore sacrifice the Passover unto the Lord thy God,
of the flock and the herd, etc.] Because of the Passover, here enjoined to be
sacrificed, it is said, that it must be of the flock and the herd, it cannot be
meant of the Paschall-lamb which was killed on the fourteenth day of this
month at even: but either by the Passover we must here understand jointly
both the Paschal-lamb and those other sacrifices which did accompany the eating
of the Paschal-lamb, which were of sheep or bullocks, as namely those enjoined
Numb. 28. 19. etc. and such other as men would voluntarily bring, an example
whereof we have 2. Chron. 35. 7, 8, etc. or else by the Passover is here meant
the feast of the Passover, and then thus the words must be understood, Thou
shall sacrifice the Passover, that is, Thou shall celebrate the Passover with
sacrifices of the flock and of the herd, etc.

Verse. 3. Seven days shall thou eat unleavened bread therewith, even the bread
of affliction, etc.] That is, the bread which is a memorial of your
afflictions in Egypt (as being usually the bread of those that lived in
affliction and poverty) and of your hasty coming out from thence, before your
bread had time to be leavened, concerning which see the note upon Exodus 12. 15.

Verse. 4. And there shall be no leavened bread seen with th^e in all thy coasts
seven days.] As they might not eat any leavened bread all the time of this
feast, so neither might they suffer any leaven to be in their houses, to wit,
to make it the surer that they might not be tempted to eat of it, or to use any
leaven in the bread which they baked.

Neither shall there any thing of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst the first
day at even, remain all night until the morning.] This must needs be meant of
the flesh of the Paschal-lamb, which was killed at the end of the foureteenth
day, and was to be eaten all of it that night following before the morning of
the fifteenth day, or else the remainder of it was to be b^rnt in the fire;
concerning which see the note upon Exodus 12. 10. For though the Paschal-lamb
was not prope^ly a sacrifice, because no part of it was offered upon the altar;
yet considering that it was killed to the honor of God, and as a type of
Christ, the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, it needs not
seem strange* that here it is said to be s^crificed.

Verse. 5. Thou may not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates,
etc.] That is, not in any town or city save only in Jerusalem* where Christ
our p^schallamb was sacrificed for us. And indeed, after God had c^osen that to
be the place of his public worship, they did only eat the Passover there.
See Luke 2. 41. but in any private house in Jerusalem they might both kill and
eat the Passover, Matthew. 26. 18. only their sacrifices which they offered at
that ^e^st might only be offered in the temple.

Verse. 6. There thou shall sacrifice the Passe^ver at even, at the going down
of the sun, at the season that thou came forth out of Egypt.* That is* the
very same day of the month Abib when thou came forth ou^ of Egypt, to wit,
the ^oureteenth day of the month: or if these words, at the season that thou
came forth out of Egypt, have reserence to that which went before, at even,
at the going down of the sun, yet it must not be taken so as if the time of
sunsetting were exactly the very ti^e when the I^raelites went out of Egypt
(for it is evident, Exodus 12. 29, etc. that it was after midnight ere they had
leave given them to go) but only that the night after that evening when they
first eat the Passover they went out of Egypt, and were then indeed p^eparing
to be gone; whence it was that they were appointed to eat the Passover in such
haste, the Lord having told them beforehand of that which should happen* and
had scarce leisure to make an end of celebrating that holy f^ast, because the
Egypt^ans were so eager to have them pack up and be gone.

Verse. 7. And thou shall t^rn in the morning and go unto thy tents.] That is,
the morning after the feast o^ unleavened bread was ended, which was kept seven
days; so that the ^ext words in the ^ighth verse, six days thou shall eat,
etc. are added to show what morning this was that is here mentioned, to wit,
the morrow after the solemn assembly on the sev^nth day. Indeed some hold that
the morning here mentioned must be the morning of the fiftee^th day, the
morning after they had eaten the Passover, which is altogether improbable,
because the fifteenth day was a solemn festival, and therefore it is not
likely that liberty of traveling and leaving Je^usalem on that day was allowed
them; and because we shall still find that the people used to stay at Jerusalem
all the seven days of this feast, which we may see, 2. Chron. 30. 21. and so
in other place^.

Verse. 9. Begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to
put the sicle to the corn.] Namely, to reap the wave-sheaf, the first fruits of
barley-harvest, which was on the sixteenth day of that month of^ered unto the
Lord. See the note upon Le^it. 23. 10, 11.

Verse. 10. And thou shall k^ep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God with a
tribute of a freewi^^-off^ring, etc.] ^his contribution or tribute of a
^^eewill-offering is neither the sacrifice appointed for the feast day, Numb.
18. 27, 31. nor the two loaves and sacrifices with them* commanded Levit. 23.
17, 20. for these were not voluntary offerings, but necessarily enjoined; over
and besides them God here appoints men voluntarily to bring unto him of their
fruits what they could and would.

Verse. 12. And thou shall remember that thou wast a bondsman in Egypt, etc.]
This is added, fir^^, to show that this was the chief end of solemnizing this
fea^t, to cause them with themselves to remember this their deliverance;
s^condly, as a motive to obey willingly both this and all other the
commandment^ of God; thirdly* as a motive to make them respect their servants
and the poor strangers in this t^eir feast, as in ^he former verse he had
appointed.

Verse. 13. Thou shall observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after tha^
thou ha^t gathered in thy corn and thy wine.] S^e the note upon Exodus ^3. 16.

Verse. 18. Judges and officers ^halt thou make thee in all thy gates, etc.] To
wit, judges to give judge^ent, and of^icers to ex^cute the sentence of the
judges: and because* the places of ^^di^^tur^ were usually in the gates of
their towns and cities, therefore it is said, Judges and officers shall thou
make th^e in all thy gates*

Verse. 19. For a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of
the righteous.] That is, it will make a wise man, that is able to judge between
right and wrong, think and persuade himself that he does right, when he does
manifest wrong, and it will make a good man pervert justic^ even against his
conscience, though in other things he makes conscience of his ways.

Verse. 21. Thou sh^^t not plant thee a grove of any trees near unto the altar
of the Lord, etc.] This Law the Isra^lites did afterward many times break, as
we may s^e, Judge. 3. 7. 1. Kings 14. 23. 16. 33. 18. 19. which was in them
gross idolatry; and yet the Patriarchs did formerly worship God in groves, and
that without sin. S^e the note on Genesis 21. 33.

CHAP. XVII.
Verse. 1. THou shall not sacrifice unto the Lord thy God any bull^ck, or sheep,
wherein is blemish, etc.] See the notes upon Levit. 22. 20, 21.

Verse. 2. If there be found among you within any of thy gates, etc.] The sum
of the law here delivered is this, That if any amongst them were sound guilty
of idolatry in that they had worshipped either the sun, or the moon, or any
of the host of heaven, or consequently any other creature (for these the most
glorious of Gods creatures are only mentioned to imply that much less might
they worship stocks and stones, or any other creatures) they must certainly be
stoned to death, whether it were man or woman (no pity must be shown to them
for the weakness of their sex) and the reason is employed in this verse,
because they had wrought wickedness in the sigh^ of the Lord, in transgressing
his covenant: where we must note that idolatry is termed a transgressing of
Gods covenant, not only because it was (as all other sins are) contrary to
Gods law, which they had covenanted to obse^ve and keep; but also because
therein men did openly as it were renounce God and the true religion, and choose
themselves other gods whom they would serve, and therefore this was in a more
special and ^minent manner a transgressing of the covenant.

Verse. 4. And it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, and enquired
d^ligently, and behold, it be true, etc.] This is added both lest in favor of
any man they should slight a report brought unto them, and not carefully
enquire of it; and als^ lest they should be too hasty to punish men upon
uncertain reports.

Verse. 7. The hands of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to
death, and afterward the hands of all the people.] The witnesses were to throw
the first stones at them that were condemned to be stoned, which was t^ make
men the more afraid to bear false witness, and that because it was supposed
that men would be afraid after good deliberation to have a hand in killing an
innocent man, though in their wrath and fury they might speak that which might
tend to the loss of his lise. But then afterward all the people assembled
were to have a hand in the ex^cution of him* thereby to inure them to be
servent and zealous in Gods cause against all those that should despise and
disr^gard his laws.

Verse. 8. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood
and blo^d, etc.] Her^^he I^ra^lites were taught what they were to do (...)
question did ari^e concerning any cause that was brought before their Ju^ges
and Magis^rates, in their several towns and cities, which the magistr^tes
^^^re so^nd so hard that they made a doubt, or were of different j^dgement
amongst t^^mselves, what to determine in it, as between blood and blood, that
is, in ca^e of bloodshed, whether it were to be judged wilful murder, or* as
we call i^, chance*medley, and so in any other questionable cause, either
concerning any plea about their est^^es* or concerning any stroke given, or any
other thing of the like nature* ^o wit, that in this case they were to go up to
the place which God should c^^se (which was Jerusalem in after-ages) and there
resort to the pri^s^s, as expounders of the law, and to the judge, that is, the
j^^ge^* the civil Magi^trates, who were judicially to give sent^nce according
to the ^^i^sts ^^po^ition of the law, that so by them the matter in question
might be d^c^d^^: and o^ this I conceive that is meant, 2. Chron. 19. 8, 9, 10.
Moreover in J^rusalem di^ Jehoshaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests,
and of the chief of the fathers of Israel* for the ju^gement of the Lord, and
for controversies, when they returned to Jerusalem* etc. and that they were
appointed to go up unto Jerusalem with all such caus^^ of great di^^icultie,
not because the supreme Magistrate* the Judge or King of Ista^l, did alway^^
reside there* but either because this is meant of the Sanhedrim, which was
their supreme Senate or Council, consisting partly of pri^sts and partly o^
civil Magis^rates, to whom all appeals were made, and did therefore always
abide at Jer^s^lem; or else because, if need so required, the high pri^st was
to enquire of the Lord, and to answer them after the judgemen^ of ^rim before
the Lord, Numb. 27. 21. and therefore it is said here, verse. 9. that they
should go un^o the priests, etc. and enquire, which may be m^ant of the high
^^i^sts enquiring for them of the Lord; a privilege which the Bishop of Rome
cannot challenge for the bringing of all appe^l^ to be sinally determined by
him.

Verse. 10. And thou shall do according to the sentence which they of that plac^
(which the Lord shall choose) sh^^^ ^^ew thee* etc.] Namely, because their
sentence was to be according to the La^ o^ God^ verse. 11. and in c^^e of great
difficulty to be proved so to be by ^^quiring of the Lord: for we must not
think the people were bound to rest in their sen^^^ce, if it were clearly
contrary to the law of God.

Verse. 11. Ac^or^ing to the senten^e of the Law which they shall teach thee,
etc.] Here is methinks a manise^t di^^e^ence betwixt that which the pri^st was
to do, and that which the Judge was to do: the priests office being m^an^ by
t^aching the sentence of the Law, that is, giving the interpretation of it; and
the J^dg^^ by telling them the judgment, that is, giving judgem^nt according
to that which the priest had delivered to be the meaning of the Law.

Verse. 12. And the man that will do p^^s^mptu^usly, and w^ll not ^ear^^n unto
the priest, -- or unto the judge, even that man shall die, etc.] Death is
appointed to be inflicted upon him that would not he^^ken to the p^iest,
expounding the Law, or the judge, passing sentence accordingly, to wit, if he
p^esu^^^^ously and stubbornly opposed their judgment, though they proved it
never so cl^arly o^t of the Law, or especially if the priest had ^nquir^d of
the Lord,

Verse. 14. When thou art come unto the land, which the Lord thy God gives
thee, -- and shall say, I will set a King over me, etc.] This is said, not as
in allowance of their changing the government by judges, which he had erected
amongst them, especially upon this ground, because they would be like other
nations; but only foretelling what they would do, and thereupon prescribing
certain Laws to prevent greater mischiefs in erecting of a Monarchy amongst
them.

Verse. 15. Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom the Lord thy God
shall choose, etc.] The Lord here gives them two rules, to which they should be
bound when ever they should desire to have a King to reign over them: The
first is, That they should only make such a one king as God should choose;
which was accordingly observed partly in Saul, but fully in David, and in his
progeny too, in that it was of Gods ordaining that his posterity should
successively inherit the kingdom: and this was thus appointed, because the
Kings of Judah were to be types of Christ; who was chosen of God to be the
great King of Israel, Psalm. 2. 6. I have set my King upon my holy hill of Sion.
The second is, That they might only choose one from amongst their brethren to
be their King: and this was, first, because such a one was likeliest to love
them, and to be beloved by them, and to rule over them with the more equity and
gentleness; and secondly, lest a stranger of another nation should bring in
strange Laws and customs, yea and corrupt their religion too; and thirdly, to
signify that their promised Messiah, the Lords Anointed, was to be the seed of
Abraham according to the flesh, even one of their own nation.

Verse. 16. But he shall not multiply horses to himself, etc.] That is,
excessively, even beyond that which reasonably the state of a King may require:
and this the Lord gives in charge concerning the Kings of Israel, first, to
teach both the King and the people to put their sole trust and confidence in
God, and not to rely on any outward strength of horses and chariots, which men
having abundance of such military forces are prone to do; secondly, that they
might not hereby be exalted and puffed up in their minds, even to the despising
and perhaps the oppressing of their brethren; and thirdly, that they might not,
to maintain the excessive charge hereof, be burdensome to their subjects: and
herein therefore we may well think that Solomon did not keep so close to the
rule of Gods word as he ought to have done, in that he had forty thousand
stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, 1. Kings. 4.
26. as likewise in that he fetched his horses out of Egypt, 2. Chron 1. 16.
which is expressly also forbidden here, He shall not multiply horses to
himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt to the end that he should
multiply horses; and that not only because Egypt of all the neighboring
countries was most famous for horses, whence is that, Esa. 31. 3. The Egyptians
are men and not God, and their horses flesh and not spirit, but a so to imply
that one reason why the Lord forbad their having so many horses was, lest they
should go down into Egypt to procure themselves horses.

For as much as the Lord has said unto you, Ye shall henceforth return no more
that way.] That is, ye shall no more return to Egypt: for it was not their
returning to Egypt by the same way they came from thence that was forbidden
them, but generally all going back to Egypt; yea, though they w^nt thither, not
to dwell and sojourn there, but only for trade and merchandise; for so much
this place seems to imply. The reason of this law seems to have been, first,
that hereby they might be kept from being corrupted there by their idolatry and
other foul sins, and from making any wicked leag^e or confed^racy with them;
and secondly, that hereby they might be ta^ght with such thankfulness to
rem^mber their former del^verance from the bondage they endured in that land,
as to abhor the very thought of their going thither again, lest that should
seem a contempt of their former escape thence, and an unthankful forgetting
that gloriou^ deliverance. The greatest* difficulty in these words is, what
prohibition this is, and when given, whereof Moses here speaks, The Lord has
said unto you, Ye shall henceforth no more return that way. But for this we
must know, first, that though this charge were no where formerly given in
express words, yet it was sufficiently implied, in that God had told them
often that he had brought them out of Egypt to plant and se^tle them in the
land of Canaan* and that he had so sharply rebuked them when ever they had made
any mention of going back into Egypt; and secondly, that these words may be
understood of this charge now at present given them. The Lord has said unto
you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way, that is, the Lord has
commanded me now to say this unto you, etc.

Verse. 17. Neither s^all he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not
away.] By this God allows not Princes to have more wives then one* so they took
not too too many; no more then the forbidding of perjury allows all swearing
when that is true which we swear: only God pitcheth upon the greatest sin,
and that whereto kings were usually inclined, who were wont to abuse their
power in marrying all that pleased them, though never so many; and a reason is
added why the King might not marry so many wives, to wit, that his heart turn
not away, namely, from the Lord unto the pleasures of life, or unto other Gods
(in case he should amongst others marry any idolatrous wives) as it fared with
Solomon, 1. Kings 11. 4. This as the chief reason is expressed in the law, yet
withal we may well conceive that God had respect also herein to the ease of
the people, that the Kings having so many wives and children by them, who must
be kept after the state of Queens and Princes, might not increase the burden of
their taxes and impositions.

Neither shall h^ greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.] That is, too
too excessively. Princes above all men have need of a full treasure, and
therefore the Kings of Israel are here allowed a moderate care herein: But
withal the Lord forbids them a boundless desire and endeavor to heap up
riches, and that lest such an excessive greediness after riches should make
them either oppress the people, and heap up gold and silver by rapine and
unjust exactions, or be exalted in their minds because of their great wealth,
as indeed it is usually with men that have such a mighty mass of riches, Give
me not riches (says Agur, Prove. 30. 8, 9.) lest I be full, and deny thee, and
say, Who is the Lord?

Verse. 18. He shall write him a copy of this law in a book, out of that which
is before the priests, the Levites.] The original book of the law was kept in
the Sanctuary* Deuteronomy. 31. 26. Take this book of the Law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the Lord your God, that it may be there for a
witness against thee, 2. Kin. 22 ^. And Hilkiah the high priest said unto
Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the Law, in the house of the Lord.
Here therefore God appoints that the King must not only have a copy of this
book, but also that he must either write it himself, or cause it to be
purposely written for him out of the original copy, both that it might be
perfect, and also that receiving it immediately from the Priests and Levites,
he might take it, as it were, out of Gods hand, and might be the more careful
to observe and obey it in every particular, both for the ordering of his own
life, and for the government of the people.

CHAP. XVIII.
Verse. 3. ANd this shall be the priests due from the people, from them that
offer a sacri^ice, etc.] Besides all other things, which being the Lords right
by his Law he has given to the priests and Levites.

They shall give unto the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the
maw.] The wave-breast, mentioned elsewhere, is here left out, and that, as I
conceive, because it is comprehended under the shoulder, to which it is joined
in the sheep, both being parts of the fore-quarter. But withal the maw and the
two ^heeks, added here, are no where else mentioned; the reason whereof may
well be conceived to be this, because elsewhere the Lord only prescribes what
part the priests should have of the sacrifice, and the two cheeks and maw were
no part of the sacrifice, or holy things, but cut off before and given to the
priests, and not so much as waved or heaved before the Lord.

Verse. 5* For the Lord thy God has chosen him out of all thy tribes, to sta^^
to minister in the name of the Lord* etc.] It is said of the p^iests here that
they did minister in the name of the Lord, either because they performed the
service of the priesthood by command and a^thority received from the Lord* or
rather because they performed it to the Lord, as the duties of his worship and
service which he required of them.

Verse. 6. And if a L^vit e come from any of thy gates out of all Israel* etc.]
The sum of this Law is this that w^enever any of the tribe of Levihad a
desire to come and serve in the tabe^nacle or temple, they should be admitted
to live of the holy things there* ^v^n ^s the rest that did at times serve in
that place. The priests and Levites, we know, had several cities given them
throughout the land of Israel* where they had ^^^ir constant abode, and did
there instruct the people* and performed such other duties as belonged to their
places; and so the service of the tabernacle and temple was performed by those
that from their ssverall cities went up in their tu^ns to do the service of
that place (for from the first I conceive there was some order observed for
thi^, though by David afterward this was more ^xactly co^trived, when they were
divided into four and twenty courses, 1. Chron. 23.) Now therefore here order
is taken that if any of that tribe, whether priest or ordinary Levite, had a
desire to go ^p and serve in the house of God voluntarily, when it wa^ not his
course, or happily to spend the whole remainder of his life in that service,
(...) should then be admitted to do the service of the house, and should have
his share of the holy things even as other his brethren had, whose course it
was at that time to attend upon that service.

Verse. 8. They shall have like portions to cat, beside that which come^h of the
sale of his patrimony.] That i^, though he have something whereon to live which
comes in of the sale of his patrimony, he shall for all that have a like
portion to eat of the holy things as other his brethren have that do the
service there in their several courses. But what is meant here by that which
comes of the sale of his patrimony? I answer, some hereby mean the money
which the Israelites, which dwelt far off from the tabernacle or temple,
brought with them when they came thither, and was raised of their holy things
which they sold at home, according to that Law, Deuteronomy. 14. ^4. 25. and that it
is enjoined here, that of this these that thus went up to the tabernacle or
temple should have their share as well as of other the holy things: others
again hereby understand that which was raised of his portion of the tithes paid
to the Levites, in the place where he had his dwelling, which they say he was
to enjoy, and yet was to have no less share in the holy things of the temple
when he went up to serve there. But neither of these I conceive can be meant
here, because this place speaks not of such things as were the patrimony of the
Priests and Levites in general, but of that man's peculiar patrimony which
should thus voluntarily go up to serve at the altar; which therefore doubtless
was such moneys as came in of the sale either of those houses which were his
portion and patrimony in the cities of the Levites, or of any other estate that
was left him by his father: and so the meaning of this place is, that
notwithstanding any such private estate that the Levite had, yet if he went up
to serve in the temple he must live of the holy things of the temple, as others
did. Indeed considering that the Levite might redeem his house, which he had
sold, at any time, Levit. 25. 32. it was not fit that he should be disabled to
do this by spending his money upon his own maintenance. But however if of
singular devotion to the service of the Sanctuary he should go up
extraordinarily to serve there, God would have such an one live of the altar
and not be put thereby to spend his own private estate whatever it were.

Verse. 10. There shall not be found among you any one that makes his son, or
his daughter to pass through the fire.] See the note upon Lev. 18. 21.

Or that uses divination, or an observer of times, etc.] By one that uses
divination, is meant one that foretells things to come, Mich. 3. 11. The
prophets thereof divine for money* and by an observer of times is meant such as
by observing constellations, etc. ^id pronounce some days lucky and some
unlucky, and undertake to tell men their fortune. The diviners were carried
much by inward motions, these last by outward observations in the creatures. So
also by a Necromancer, verse. 11. is meant such as by raising the dead did
enquire after secret things.

Verse. 13. Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God.] That is, tho^ shall
keep thy self entirely to him, and not seek unto any other for help; thou shall
in these things before spoken of, as in all other things, keep thy self exactly
to what thy God has enjoined thee, and not defile thy self with any of these
abominations practiced amongst other n^tions.

Verse. 15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a prophet from the midst of
thee, etc.] The heathens, that used these unlawful arts, made account that God
did by these means reveal himself to them, and deemed such high knowledge a
high degree of their happiness: lest therefore the Israelites should think
much that they were debarred of this, the Lord tells them here that he would by
prophets raised up to them from amongst their brethren as fully inform them
concerning all things necessary for them to know, as if God should come down to
them out of heaven. I doubt not indeed but this which is here spoken is meant
first and principally of Christ; for the Apostle Peter says expressly that
this was fulfilled in Christ, Acts 3. 22. For Moses truly said unto the
fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren
like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you;
and with respect to this place that seems ^o have been spoken by Philip, John
1. 45. Philip finds Nathanael, and says unto him, We have found him of whom
Moses in the law, and the prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the son of
Joseph; and that by Christ, John 5. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have
believed me: for he wrote of me. But withal I see not how we can exclude the
other Prophets between Moses and Christ, the drift of these words being
manifestly this, to show that they should have no cause to seek to enchanters
and diviners, because God would still raise them up Prophets to reveal his will
unto them: and how could this be a stay to them, if it were meant only of
Christ, who was not sent unto them above one thousand and four hundred years
after this? therefore I think it must be understood principally of Christ, as
the only Prophet of his Church, but withal inde^initely of all the Prophets
as subordinate to Christ, sent from him and inspired by him. The Jews indeed
understand it not commonly of the Messiah, but of another notable Prophet
besides, like unto Moses, which was to be sent to them, John 1. 25. But herein
they were grossly deceived: for it is evident by those places, Acts 3. 22. and
7. 37. that Christ was the Prophet here principally meant, though other
Prophets are al^o comprehended, as is before said. As for that clause, a
Prophet like unto me, though the Prophets afterward sent to Israel were not
equal to Moses, Deuteronomy. 34. 10. And there arose not a Prophet since in Israel
like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face; yet they were like him, men
sent from God as he was, raised up from amongst their brethren as he was, and
this is here chiefly intended, (see verse. 16. According to all that thou
desiredst of the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, saying, Let
me not hear again the voice of the Lord my God, neither* let me see this great
fire any more, that I die not) and so was Christ, a high priest taken from
among men, Hebr. 5. 1. yea like him and above him: for first, as Moses was as a
Mediator betwixt God and the people, Deuteronomy. 5. 5. I stood between the Lord and
you at that time, to show you the word of the Lord; for ye were afraid by
reason of the fire, and went not up into the mount; so was Christ, Heb. 8. 6.
But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the
mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises:
secondly, in excellen^y: of Moses it is said, Numb. 12. 6, 7. And he said, Hear
now my words: If there be a Prophet among you, I the Lord will make my self
known unto him in a vision, and will speak unto him in a dream; My servant
Moses is not so, who is faithful in all mine house; and so of Christ, John 1.
17, 18. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus
Christ. No man has seen God at any time, the only begotten son, which is in
the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. Thirdly, in faithfulness: for
so it is said of Christ, Heb. 3. 2. Who was faithful to him that appointed
him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house; yea and above Moses, verse.
5, 6. And Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, but Christ
as a son over his own house. Fourthly, in that as Moses brought them the law
from God, so Christ the Gospel out of his Fathers bosom. Fifthly, in signs
and wonders: for Christ was a prophet mighty in deed and word, Luke 24. 19. as
Moses also was; yea more mighty, John 15. 24. If I had not done among them the
works which none other man did, they had not had sin. And sixthly, as Moses
carried the Israelites from their bondage in Egypt to the land of Canaan, so
Christ delivered his people from their spiritual bondage, and opened heaven
for them, John 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the son and believes on him, may have everlasting life.

Verse. 18. And will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all
that I shall command him.] This is meant of the faithfulness of those Prophets
which God would send unto them* to wit, that they should deliver whatever God
gave them in change, and nothing but that which he should put into their
mouths. But most eminently was this verified in Christ, when he came to preach
the Gospel unto men; for those words of eternal life were the words which God
here says he would put into his mouth, and which accordingly he faithfully
delivered to the people, All things that I have heard of my Father I have made
known unto you, John 15. 15.

Verse. 19. Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my
name, I will require it of him.] That is, I will punish him for it: and so
indeed God did always severely punish those that would not hear his Prophets.
But principally this was fulfilled upon the Jews, who would not hearken to the
words of Christ, when God destroyed the city and the Sanctuary, as was
prophesied, Dan. 9. 26. and poured upon the people his uttermost wrath, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16.

Verse. 22. When a Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow
not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken.] That
we may rightly understand the rule here given for the discovery o^ false
p^ophets, we must note two things: first, that it must be understood only of
such ^redictions of prophets wherein they foretold some strange and miraculous
thing tha^ should come to pass, as a proof that they were truly sent from God;
for if these indeed cam^ not accordingly to pass, the people might be sure
that they were false prophets* and that God had no^ sent them. But now in other
predictions, as in foretelling some judgment or blessing that should befall
men, that which they foretold mig^t not come to pass, and yet they that
foretold these things might be the true Prophets of God for ^ll that; for thus
we know it was with the Prophet Isaiah, when he told Hezekiah that he should
die of his sick^^sse, 2. Kings 20. 1. and with Jonah, when he prophesied that
after forty days Niniveh should be destroyed, Jonah 3. 4. and the reason of
this is, because in all such predictions the people might know, judging thereof
by the known rule of Gods word, that these were conditionally foretold, though
the condition were not expressed, and therefore that in case they repented God
would not inflict the evil denounced against them, and in case they were not
obedient unto God, he would hold back the blessings promised: and secondly,
that though the not accomplishing of signs foretold be made here a sure mark
of false prophets, yet we must not hence in^erre that on the contrary when
signs foretold did accordingly come to pass, that was an infallible proof of
true prophets: for if they taught any thing contrary to the written word
touching matters of faith and of the worship of God, the people were to hold to
the written word, and not to believe them, but to punish them as false
prophets, though they did confirm their sayings, that did indeed come to pass,
as they were before taught, Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2. etc.

But the prophet has spoken it presumptuously.] To wit, because he did so
boldly foretell that such a thing should come to pass having no warrant for it
from God, and withal because it was indeed a high degree of arrogancy to
father his fancies and lies upon the God of truth, saying that God had said
that which he had not spoken.

Thou shall not be afraid of him.] That is, though he boast never so much of
the certainty of that which he says, and that indeed God has sent him; and
though he threaten in never so horrible a manner all the curses he can devise
if you do not believe him, yet thou shall not be afraid of his brags and
threatenings, nor fear to put him to death, as God has appointed.

CHAP. XIX.
Verse. 2. THou shall separate three cities for thee in the midst of thy land,
etc.] That is, in the heart of the land: for the land being divided into three
parts, in the midst of each of these partitions was a city of refuge chosen.
Moses had himself already assigned them three cities of refuge in the land
without Jordan, which they had already vanquished, Deuteronomy. 4. 21. and now he
gives order that when they had possessed themselves of the land of Canaan
within Jordan, they should there also set apart three cities of refuge more.

Verse. 3. Thou shall prepare thee a way, etc.] That is, thou shall so order it,
that from all parts of the country round about these cities of refuge, there
be a direct, plain, fair highway or causey leading to those cities, and such
as either by the breadth and fairness of the way, or by marks set up purposely
to distinguish it from others, may be known to be the ways leading to those
cities of refuge, to the end the manslayer may not be hindered or incumbered
by the uncertainty or foulness of the way, but may speedily fly thither, and
so be safe.

Verse. 4. Who so kills his neighbor ignorantly, etc.] The persons here
mentioned, that were to enjoy the privilege of the cities ofrefuge, are only
such as killed a man unwittingly, by chance-medly, as we usually call it: but
by the rule of proportion we may probably conceive that the like privilege was
afforded to him that killed a man merely in his own defense, when he had no
quarrel with him, but only sought to secure his own life.

Verse. 5. As when a man goes into the wood with his neighbor to hew wood, and
his hand fetches a stroke, etc.] And so strikes with all his might, not
fearing nor suspecting any evil that should be done thereby.

Verse. 6. Lest the avenger of the blood pursue the slayer while his heart is
hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, etc.] This last clause, because
the way is long, shows that this verse follows as depending on the third
verse (the other two being inserted as it were by way of parenthesis) and is
added to show thereason why they were appointed thus to choose the cities of
refuge in three several divisions of the land, namely, left if the man tha^
killed one ignorantly had too far to fly ere he could come to a city of
refuge, the avenger, because of the length of the way, should overtake him
before he could get thither.

Verse. 8. And if the Lord thy God enlarge thy coast, etc.] It is questioned by
Expositours of what enlarging their coasts this is meant: and because it is
said, chap. 7. 22. that they should not drive out the inhabitants of the land
of Canaan at once, but by little and little, therefore some understand this of
their full possessing of the land of Canaan, to wit, that however they did at
first only set apart three cities of refuge in the land within Jordan, yet if
afterward they came to possess the whole land of Canaan, they should then
separate three cities of refuge more therein. But first, because they never did
separate six cities of refuge more within Jordan, no not when they had the
fullest possession of the land; and secondly, because those three cities that
were separated within the land, to wit, Kedesh, and Shechem, and Hebron, were
situated in equal divisions proportionably according to the full extent of the
land of Canaan, therefore it is no way probable that God ever enjoined them to
have six cities of refuge in the land of Canaan within Jordan. Others again
think that in these words, Moses speaks only of three cities more that were to
be added besides those three without Jordan, to wit, those three above
mentioned which Joshua separated, Josh. 20. 7. and so conceive that no other
enlarging of their coasts is here meant, but only the adding of the land of
Canaan to that they had already* gotten without Jordan. But because it seems
evident that the charge which Mose^ gave before, verse. 3. and verse. 7. for
separating three cities in the midst of their land, could not be meant of the
three cities of refuge without Jordan, which he had already separated, chap. 4.
41. and yet now he speaks of three cities more, verse. 9. that were to be
separated, if the Lord should enlarge their coast, therefore I think the
meaning of this place must be, that if the Lord should enlarge their coast, to
wit, by giving them the land promised, from the river of Egypt to the great
river, the river Euphrates, Genesis 15. 18. that then they should separate three
cities of refuge more, to wit, besides those before enjoined in the midst of
the land of Canaan they were now to enter upon; and that the reason why these
were never separated was, because by their sins they lost the benefit of this
promise, the Lord never so far enlarging their coasts.

Verse. 14. Thou shall not remove thy neighbors landmark, etc,] It may be not
improbably conceived, that this law against removing of land-mark^ is here
inserted together with those concerning bloodshed, because this injury of
removing landmarks was like to be a dangerous occasion of quarrels and
bloodshed amongst them.

Verse. 15. One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity,
etc.] That is, the testimony of one man, rising up as a witness against
another, shall not be admitted as sufficient to prove the crime laid to his
charge, and to cause him to be condemned for it: and indeed though two or three
witnessesmay accuse a man falsely, yet because it is not so likely that two or
three should so combine against a man, as that one alone should accuse him
falsely; and withal there would be more hope of discovering the falsehood of
two or three witnesses so combining together, by examining them singly apart by
themselves, therefore God allowed no man to be condemned under less then the
testimony of two or three witnesses.

Verse. 17. Then both the men between whom the controversy is shall stand
before the Lord, etc.] Both the men, that is, the party accused, and the party
accusing, so that here is but one witness mentioned, which makes some conceive
the case for which direction is here given to be this, When there comes in but
one witness against a man, and takes an oath concerning some evil done by him,
and the party accused denies that which is laid to his charge, and complains
that he has born false witness against him, what shall be done in this case?
I answer, the order which the Lord gives here when the case stands thus, is
this, Because it is a very hard thing to find out here whether the witness
speak truly or falsely, therefore for his greater terror, and to make him take
heed what he says, the Judges were to bring him into the place which God
should choose, and to set him before the Ark or Sanctuary, and there to examine
him as in Gods presence, and accordingly, to punish him if they found him
false; and happily if they could not find it out by examination, the priest was
then to enquire of the Lord according to that, 1. Kings 8. 31, 32. If any man
trespass against his neighbor, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to
swear, etc. But because it is expressly said before, that the testimoni^ of one
man rising up as a witness against another was not to be admitted in
judgment, verse. 15. therefore others, and I think most probably, conceive the
law ^ere given to be this, that in case two or more witnesses did rise up
against a man, and only one of them spoke home to the proof of that the
accused party was charged with* if here the party accused did allege that
this man bare false witness against him, that then the Judges were to search
out the matter in the way here enjoined before the Lord: yet withal the like
by consequence was to be done i^ case the party accused did accuse all the
witn^sses of bearing false witness against him.

Verse. 21. Life shall go for life, eye for eye, etc.] That is, such punishment
as should have been infli^ted on the party accused, had he been found guilty,
according to that law, Exodus 21. 23. the ^ame shall be inflicted on him that
bare false witness against him, to wit, by the civil Magistrate. Indeed the
Pharisees in Christ's time expounded this of private revenge, namely that
private person might take life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, etc. and
this is that which our Savior condemns, Matthew. 5. 38, 3^. Ye have heard that
it has been said, An eye for a^ eye, and a tooth for a tooth; But I say unto
you, that ye resist not evil, etc.

CHAP. XX.
Verse. 5. WHat man is there that has built a new house, and has not dedicated
it.] Or initiated it, that is, that has not taken possession of it, and begun
to use it; which was wont to be done with solemnity of feasting, praying* and
singing of Psalms, as we may see by the title of the thirtieth Psalm.

Let him go and return to his house, etc.] That is, he may be gone if he will.
In this and the following cases this liberty was granted them, first, lest they
should go forth to battles unwillingly and timerously, not having any courage
to fight the Lords battles (see verse. 8.) and secondly, because even the light
of reason teaches men to show compassion in this kind, and not suddenly to
take off men from those comforts which they have long labored for, just when
they are at last entering upon the fruition of them, which is threatened as a
curse, chap. 28. 30, Thou shall build a house and shall not dwell therein; and
thirdly, that this privilege might encourage men to build houses, and plant
vineyards, etc. which was good and profitable for the commonwealth.

Verse. 6. And what man is he that has planted a vineyard, and has not yet
eaten of it, etc.] The Hebrew word signifies, and has not made it common,
that is, such as himself and others might eat of it; and the ground of this
expression is, because they might not in the land of Canaan eat of the fruit of
any trees they had planted till they had consecrated the fourth years fruit
unto the Lord. The fruit of the first three years was lost as uncircumcised,
the fourth years fruit was holy and to be given to God, and then the fruit of
the fifth year was fre^ for the owner and others to eat, concerning which see
the note upon Levit. 19. 23.

Verse. 8. What man is there that is fearful and faint-hearted? let him go and
return* etc.] By this the Lord taught his people how much he dislikes a
timorous and cowardly spirit in those that serve him, that so they might strive
to have faith in him, and in all straits to be secure and confident in his
protection.

Verse. 9. They shall make captains of the armies to lead the people.] That is,
they shall order the battle, and appoint every captain in his place to lead the
several companies of soldiers; for we must not think that captains were now
first chosen, when they were come nigh unto the battle, as it is said above
verse. 2. and that they had marched so far already without leaders.

Verse. 10. When thou come nigh unto a city to fight against it, then
proclaim peace unto it.] To wit, any city out of the land of Canaan. Indeed
the Hebrews say that they were to proffer peace even to the inhabitants of
Canaan. B^t because first, they were expressly charged utterly to destroy the
inhabitants of Canaan, to the end they might dwell in their room and might not
be ensnared by their dwelling amongst them; and secondly, we do not read that
ever Joshua tendered peace to any of the cities, though it be mentioned as a
strange thing, and a s^gne of Gods hardening their hearts, that never any of
those people did of their own accord crave peace, save the Gibeonites only,
Josh. 11. 19. There was not a city that made peace with the children of
Israel, save the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon; all other they took in
battle; yet we never find that there was peace proffered them, and it seems
that the Gibeonites did therefore seek it by craft, because otherwise they saw
it would not be granted them; and thirdly, it is expressly noted as a fault in
the Israelites, Judges 1. 28. that they put the Can^anites to tribute, and did
not utterly drive them out; therefore this is only to be understood of such
cities as they should besiege that were not of the cities of the land of Canaan.

Verse. 13. And when the Lord thy God has delivered it into thine hands, etc.]
That is, when through Gods assistance thou have taken it by force and assault.

Verse. 15. Thus shall thou do unto all the cities which are very far off from
thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.] But these must neither
have peace offered them, nor must their women and little ones and cattle be
spared when their cities are taken by force; for the following reason does
manifestly exclude them from both these favors, verse. 18. That they teach you
not to do after all their abominations, which they have done unto their Gods,
so should you sin against the Lord your God.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not destroy the trees thereof, etc.] That is, fruit trees
wherewith the land cannot be suddenly stored again, these might not be cut
down, no not for their use in the siege. I do not think that it was unlawful
to cut down a fruit-tree when necessity required it, only the Lord teaches
them to take heed that in their rage they did not so waste the land as to ruin
even posterity also.

Verse. 20. And thou shall build bulwarks against the city, etc.] That is, with
such trees as are not fruit trees.

CHAP. XXI.
Verse. 1. IF one be found slain in the land which the Lord thy God gives to
thee to possess it, lying in the field, etc.] The field is only here
mentioned, because in cities and towns such murders are seldom committed so
secretly but that the murderer is found out; yet when it so happened that in a
town or city a man was found murdered, and the man that did the fact could not
be found, though all diligence had been used to find it out, it is most
probable that the same course was taken for the expiation of the bloodshed,
that is here prescribed, verse. 3.

Verse. 2. Then thy Elders and Judges shall come forth, and they shall measure,
etc.] That is, the Elders and the Judges of the towns or cities round about
shall, for the better satisfaction of them all, come forth, and see the measure
taken betwixt the dead body and the cities round about it, to wit, if it be
doubtful what ^itie is nearest; and that because the next city was to make
expiation for the murder, as it follows in the next verse.

Verse. 3. The Elders of that city shall take an heifer which has not been
wrought with, etc.] This is enjoined for the expiation of that murder, the
authors whereof could not b^ found out, thereby to teach them how much the
Lord is displeased with murder, and with the neglect of Magistrates, if they
did not use all care to secure the highways about them from all robbery and
murder, and to search out the murderers when any man was secretly killed, that
he might be pu^ished for the blood he had shed. The Elders of the city next to
the slain man had this work of making an expiation imposed upon them, because
there was most probability that some of the inhabitants there had shed this
blood; and besides, they were most culpable, for not well guarding and watching
the place where the murder was committed: and that which is enjoined to be done
by way of expiation for this murder thus secretly committed, is the killing of
a heifer which has not been wrought with, and which has not drawn in the
yoke; and however some hold that this heifer did represent the murderer, in
whose stead it was put to death, and therefore it was an heifer that had never
born the yoke, to signify the murderer to have been a wicked wretch, a son
of Belial, that is, lawless and without yoke; yet it is more generally and
upon better grounds held, that this heifer did signify Christ, by whose death
they were to expect that satisfaction should be made to Gods justice, that the
guilt of this murder might not be laid to their charge. And indeed in that it
was an heifer which had not been wrought with, and which had not drawn in the
yoke, and consequently could not be slain for any thing disliked in it, the
fitter it was to be a lively representation of Christ, who was never under the
bondage of sin, nor never did any thing blameworthy, but did voluntarily
undergo that which he did suffer for our sakes. See the note upon Numb. 19. 2.

Verse. 4. And the Elders of that city shall bring down the heifer unto a rough
valley, etc.] This was done principally to strike them with the great^r horror
for the sin committed: for the carrying of this heifer, that was to bear the
punishment due to the offender, as an accursed thing, that would defile their
fields, etc. into a desert place, did notably teach them that murder was an
execrable sin, and dangerous. But yet withal it might also signify that
Christ, of whom this heifer was a type, was to suffer in a horrid place called
Calvarie or Golgotha, Matthew. 27. 33. as likewise that by this expiation the
guilt of this accursed sin was removed from them, their fields and cities.

Verse. 5. And the priests, the sons of Levi, shall come near, etc.] The
priests are here enjoined to be present, first, to show by their presence that
this was a kind of extraordinary sacrifice; secondly, that the Elders might
before them, as in Gods presence, protest their innocence; thirdly, to see
that all was done according to the law, and to satisfy the Elders in any thing
that might seem doubtful; fourthly* that they might bless them in the name of
the Lord, that is, pray for them, and upon these things thus done pronounce
them free from the bloodshed: all which is employed in the following words, for
them the Lord thy God has chosen to minister unto him, and to bless in the
name of the Lord; and by their word shall every controversy, and every stroke,
be tried.

Verse. 6. And all the Elders of that city that are next unto the slain man
shall wash their hands over the heifer, etc.] To wit, thereby first to signify
that they were guiltless of the blood of the slain man (as for the same
reason, when Pilate was to condemn Christ, he took water, and washed his hands
before the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this just person,
Matt. 27. 24.) secondly, to intimate their desire that the guilt of this murder
might fall and lie upon this heifer, over whom they washed their hands, and
that so the people might be free: and thirdly, to teach us that even those that
are most guiltless and innocent ought to clear themselves from the very
suspicion of any evil amongst men.

Verse. 7. And they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood,
etc.] This word, answer, may seem to imply that the priests did examine the
Elders concerning this murder, and then they answered him, as here is expressed.

Verse. 10. When thou go forth to war against thine enemies, etc.] This
Law, which implies a liberty for men to marry women taken captives, though they
had wives already, is herein like that of divorce, Deuteronomy. 24. which was only
suffered for the hardness of their hearts, and it is to be understood only of
the captives of foreign nations, not of the Canaani^es, who were to be all
destroyed.

Verse. 12. Then thou shall bring her home to thine house, and she shall shav^
her head, and part her nails, etc.] According to the two different translations
of this last clause there are two different Expositions given of it: for if we
read it, as it is in the margin of our Bibles, she shall shave her head, and
suffer her nails to grow, then it seems evident that her head was shaved, her
nails suffered to grow, and the servile attire of captives was put upon her,
purposely that being thus deformed he might hereby be beaten from desiring her
to be his wife. But if we read it, as upon better grounds it is in our text,
she shall shave her head, and pare her nails, and put the raiment of her
captivity from off her, that is, the goodly attire which she had on when she
was taken captive, then these outward signs were to teach them that if they
desired to marry such a captive, she must renounce her heathenisme, and all the
superfluous and corrupt customs and superstitions thereof, and worship God
only, as the Israelites did, living now a new and holy life, as became Gods
people, into whose stock she was to be ingrafted, and to show them in what
manifest danger they would b^ of being defiled by such wives, if they did not
renounce their former religion and heathenish cus^omes and course of life. I
know there are some Expositours do hold that hereby also was figured, that if
Gods people would make use of the philosophy of the heathens, or any other
thing which being good in it self has been abused by them, they must be
careful to shave off and pare away whatever is superstitious and sinful
therei^. But that these rites were intended to signify this, it is hard to say.

Verse. 13. And bewail her father and her mother a full mone^h.] This was
enjoined, either that the Israelite, that had taken this woman captive, might
have so much time to consider of what he did beforehand, and not to do that in
the heat of his lust which he should afterward repent, but might rather be
weaned from his desire of taking her to be his wife; or else this was enjoined,
as the other par^iculars before mentioned, as an outward expression of the
woman's utter renouncing her fathers house, that she might be ingrafted into the
Israel of God: for this mourning for her parents as if they were dead was a
kind of bidding farewell for ever to them, according to that of the Psalmist,
Hearken (O daughter) and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house, Psalm. 45. 10.

Verse. 14. And it shall be if thou have no delight in ^er, then thou shall let
her go whither she will, etc.] By way of satisfaction for the wrong he had done
her, he was freely to set her at liberty. Now this putting away ^f the captive
woman after he had married her, upon some dislike or displeasure taken against
her, was one of those things which God did never approve, but only tolerate to
the Jews for the hardness of their hearts. And indeed if there were danger
lest the husband should kill or grievously oppress a wife of their own nation,
upon displeasure taken against her, and therefore they were permitted rather to
give their wives a bill of divorce and put them away; much more would there
have been great danger of the killing or extreme hard usage of a wife that had
form^rly been taken as a captive, and therefore the man is here allowed to put
her away; but withal he is restrained from selling her under pretense that she
was his captive and servant, but is appointed to set her at liberty to go
whither she would.

Verse. 16. He may not make the son of the beloved firstborn before the son
of the hated, etc.] That is, the son of the hated being yet living, and that
because the right of the firstborn by Law of nature belonged unto him.

Verse. 19. Then shall his father and his mother lay hold on him, and bring him
out unto the Elders of his city, etc.] Who were no doubt to examine the truth
of the accusation brought against him, and accordingly to proceed.

Verse. 21. And the men of his city shall stone him with stones that he die,
etc.] That is, after the accusation given in against this rebellious son is
sufficiently proved the Elders shall condemn him, and so he shall be stoned;
and thus by the severity of this Law not only children were kept in aw that
they might not da^e to rebel against their parents, but also parents were
taught to be the more careful of the education of their children.

Verse. 23. His body shall not remain all night on the tree, but thou shall in
any wise bury him that day, etc.] To wi^, whether he were hanged alive, or
dead, as those Kings were, Josh. 10. 26. And afterward Joshua smote them, and
slew them, and hanged them on five trees: and they were ^anging upon the trees
until the evening. And this they were enjoined to do, first, lest they should
by being inured to look daily on the dead carcases of men become merciles^e and
cruel, and make light of killing men; and secondly, that the land might not be
defiled by that monument of Gods curse remaining upon it visibly. And thus were
the people taught to look upon death as the wages of sin* the curse of the
Law.

For he that is hanged is accursed of God.] Since the death of any malefactor
might be a monument of Gods curse for sin, it may be questioned why this
brand is peculiarly set upon this kind of punishment, that he that is hanged is
accursed of God? To which I answer, that the reason of this was, beca^s^ this
was esteemed the most shameful, the most dishonorable and infamous of all
kinds of death, and was usually therefore the punishment of those that had by
some notorious wickedness provoked God to pour out his wrath upon the whole
land* and so were hanged up to appease his wrath, as we may see in the hanging
of those Prin^es that were guilty of committing whoredom with the daughters of
Moab, Numb. 25. 4. and i^ the hanging of those sons of Saul in the days of
David, when there was a famine in the land, because of Saul's perfidious
oppressing of the Gibeonites, 2. Sam. 21. 6. Nor was it without cause that this
kind of death was, both by the Israelites and other nations, esteemed the most
shameful and accursed, because the very manner of the death did intimate that
such men as were thus executed were such execrable and accursed wretches, that
they did defile the earth with treading on it, and would pollute the earth if
they should die upon it, and therefor we^e so trussed up in the air as not
fit to be amongst men, and that others might look upon them as men made
spectacles of Gods indignation and cur^e because of the wickedness they had
committed, which was not done in other kinds of death: and hence it was that
the Lord God would have his son, the Lord Christ, to suffer this kind of death,
that even hence it might be the more evident that in his death he bare the
curse due to our sins, according to that of the Apostle, Gal. 3. 13. Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; for it
is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on the tree.

CHAP. XXII.
Verse. 1. THou shall not see thy brothers ox or his ^heep go astray and hide
thy self from them, etc.] That is, thou shall not upon any pretense withhold
thine help, yea though he be thine enemy; for that is also expressed, Exodus 23.
4. If thou meet thine enemies ox or his ass going astray, thou shall surely
bring it back to him again: and hereby we are taught that much more we must
perform this office of love to our brethren, even to seek the conversion of
them that are out of the way* James 5. 19, 20. Brethren, if any of you do err
from the truth, and one convert him; Let him know that he which converteth a
sinner from the crrour of his way shall save a soul from death, and hide a
multitude of sins.

Verse. 2. And if thy brother be not nigh unto thee, or if thou know him not,
etc.] Here two cases are resolved that might be questioned, to wit, what they
were to do in case the owners of such cattle as they found going astray did
either dwell far off from them, or were altogether unknown to them; and the
answer is* that in such cases they were to drive the cattle home to their own
houses till the owners did fetch them away: and so in case they knew the
owners, it must needs also be employed, that they were to send them word of the
cattle they had taken up, though they dwelt far off; but if they knew not the
owners, then indeed they were to keep them till the owners themselves did seek
out for them.

Verse. 5. The woman shall not wear that which pertains unto a man* etc.]
Under this all manliness is forbidden in women, and all effeminatenesse in
men, either in their attire, or in the ordering of their hair; of which the
Apostle speaks, 1. Cor. 11. 4 -- 14. or any thing of like nature* as that, 1.
Cor. 14. 34. Let your women keep silence in the churches; for it is not
permitted unto them to speak.

Verse. 7. But thou shall in any wise let the* damme go, and take the young to
thee, etc.] The end of this law was first, to teach them always in the least
things to have respect to the public good, and to prefer that before their
own private satisfaction, as here they were forbidden to destroy the damme when
it was breeding time, because she might ere long have other young ones, and so
might still continue the store of birds for the good of others; and secondly,
to show them how well God was pleased that his people should be merciful and
pitiful, and how ^e ab^orred all cruelty and hardheartednesse, in that he
would not allow them to kill the damme when they took away her eggs, or her
young ones, because this might seem a kind o^ cruelty and unmercifulness
toward the poor creature* that did su^fer enough already in the loss of her
young ones, that were so precious to her.

Verse. 8. When thou buildest a new house, then thou shall make a battlement for
thy roof.] The houses of the Israelites were always built flat on the tops,
and so they used to be much on the tops of their houses, both to recreate
themselves there* and for many other occasions. Whence is that of our Savior,
Matthew. 10. 27. What ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the house tops. Here
therefore they are enjoined always to make battlements round about their house
tops, to prevent the casual falling of any body from thence; and consequently
also under this one particular they were enjoined to prevent, what in them lay,
all occasions of bloodshed, or of any other evil, that through their default
might redound unto their brethren.

Verse. 9. Thou shall not sow thy vineyard with diverse seeds, etc.] The main and
principal end of this, and the two following laws against plowing with an ox
and an ass, and against wearing garments of linsey-wolsey, was I conceive, one
and the same, to wit, to teach them what exact p^rity and sincerity God
required in them that were his peculiar people, and how hateful to God all
mixtures were in spiritual things. There was not in it self any evil at all in
wearing a garment made of linen and woollen together, nor was it a matter of any
great moment in it self* whether they sowed a field with pure wheat, or with
wheat and ri^ mingled together, as we do now in many places. But thus was the
Lord pleased, under the^e outward elements, to teach them matters of greater
moment: for whilst the Lord would not allow them any mixture in such slight
and trivi^ll things as these, hereby they were led, as it were by the hand, to
con^^der how much more hateful to God all mix^ures were in matters of greater
moment, as in religion and in the duties of his worship, and how strictly the
Lord required that they should keep themselves to the purity and simplicity of
his word, without mingling any thing of their own inventions through curiosity
or a perverse imitation of the strange (...) of other nations, which he had not
enjoined them. If they might not sow a field ^ith mingled seeds, much less
might they teach the truth of God mixed with any error; if they might not wear
a linsey-wolsey garment, much less may we think to cloth our souls in case of
justification, with Chri^^s righteousness and our own* G^l. 2. 16. yea all
hypocrisy and whatever was not pure and sincere was hereby condemned. And this,
I say, was the main and principal drift of these laws. Now in this particular
law concerning their vineyards, there are two things that are farther
questionable, to wit first, what is meant here by sowing a vineyard with diverse
seeds; and sec^ndly, what that reason is that is here given for this law, lest
the fruit of thy seed which thou have sown, and the fruit of thy v^neyard, be
desiled. And in answer hereto, for the first, we must know that by diverse s^eds
here is meant any seeds different or diverse from that of the vine. I know that
some Exposi^o^rs hold* that ^he sowing of mingled seeds, as of wheat and
barley, in the void and empty ground betwixt the rows of the vines there
planted, is only here forbidden, and that the Israelites might lawfully sow
any one sort of seed betwixt the rows of their vines, so they sowed no more.
But this was sufficiently forbidden in that former law, Levit. 19. 19. Thou
shall not sow thy field with mingled seed; and besides the reason that is here
given for this prohibition is not that the m^ngling of diverse seeds might be
prevented, but the mingling of the fruit of any se^d with the fruit of the
vine. And therefore I conceive that the sowing of any seed together with their
vines is here sorbidden; and indeed because the reason here given for this law
is, that the fruit of their seed sown and the fruit of their vines might not
be mingled together, and so be defiled, it is worth our considering whether
this be not meant rather of the seed of fruit trees then of corn and herbs, the
fruit whereof was not likely to be mingled with that of the vine: and thus as
in that law, Levit. 19. 19. the sowing of several kinds of grain in one field
was forbidden, so here the sowing of the seed of other fruit trees together
with the vine. As for the reason here annexed to this law, lest the fruit of
thy seed which thou have sown, and the fruit of thy vineyard, be defiled, some
understand it thus, lest the fruit of their seed and their vineyard be
corrupred and marred, to wit, because whilst the heart of the earth is sucked
away by too many things sown or planted in it, neither of them can be good and
fair, as they would otherwise be, but both are spoiled and good for nothing:
and thus, they say, the Israelites were taught to take heed of a covetous and
greedy desire to draw more from the earth then it is well able to bear. But it
is better by others understood of their being defiled by being mingled
together: for as that is said to be pure which is not mixed, as that we call
pure wheat, which is not mixed with any other grain; so that may be said to be
defiled which is mingled, especially being done contrary to Gods law, and so
rendered unlawful either in firstfruits or otherwise to be offered to the Lord.

Verse. 10. Thou shall not plow with an ox and an ass together.] The princ^pall
end of this law I have shown in the foregoing note upon verse. 9. But yet there
might be other grounds of this law besides: for first, God might have respect
herein to the good of th^se poor creatures, that must needs both suffer by
such unequal yoking, the ox, on whom the whole labor of drawing must needs
lie for want of another that with equal strength should help forward the work,
and the ass, by being haled on beyond that which he is able to do: and
secondly, hereby might also be signified, both that men ought not to be
employed in those callings for which they are unfit, to the overburdening of
others that are joined with them in that service, and that God will not endure
the unequal yoking of his people with infidels, of which the Apostle speaks,
2. Cor. 6. 14, etc.

Verse. 11. Thou shall not wear a garment of diverse sorts, as of woollen and
li^e^, together.] See the former note upon verse. 9.

Verse. 12. Thou sh^lt make the fringes upon the four quarters of thy vesture,
wherewith thou coverest thy self.] Concerning the principal end of these
fringes, which was to put them in mind of the Lords commandments, see the note
upon Numb. 15. 38. But besides, by this prescr^bing them a fashion of attire,
whereby they might always be known to be Israelites, they were taught not to
be ashamed openly to prosesse themselves the people of God: and it might also
be enjoined, as some think, to prevent any undecency in the discovery of their
naked skin; for the Israelites wore long loose garments, which being opened
below, both behind, and on each side, they had four skirts or quarters, as
they are here called, and these they were that had a fringe upon them round
about, by means whereof there was the less danger of discovering their bodies
as they went, which they say is employed in the last words of this verse,
wherewith thou coverest thy self.

Verse. 15. Then shall the father of the damsel and her mother take and bring
forth the tokens, etc.] This was imposed upon the parents, because the evil of
which their daughter was accused, if true would be a dishonor to them, who
ought to have been caref^ll guardians of their daughters chas^ity: whence it
was also that if their daughter was found guilty, she was to be stoned before
the door of her fathers house, verse. 21, and if innocent, her husband was to
pay her father a hundred shekels of silver, verse. 19. for the wrong which by
this false slander was done to him.

Verse. 19. And she shall be his wife, he may not put her away all his days.]
Which was permitted to other men* Deuteronomy. 24. 1. When a man has taken a wi^^,
and married her, and it come to pass that she find no favor in his eyes,
because he has found some uncleanness in her; then let him write her a bill
of divorceme^^, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.

Verse. 20. But if this thing be true, and the tokens of virginity be not found
for the damsel.] Because in some cases it is found by experience that the
tokens of a maids virginity may fail, and so much also is acknowledged by the
Hebrews themselves, therefore some hold that though the parents could not bring
forth the tokens of their daughters virginity, yet this alone was not
sufficient to prove her guilty, and make her liable to be stoned, unless it
were by other circumstances found to be true, as by the testimony of witnesses
proving that she had no sickness upon her to hinder the tokens of her
virginity, or some such like evidence. But because the words here seem not to
implie any such thing, I rather think that in those countries the tokens of a
maids virginity did never fail, and so the want of them was taken for a
certain proof that the accusation was true, and so the damsel was to be stoned:
for though in other cases the fornication of a woman before marriage was not
punishe^ with death, Exodus 22. 16. yet here it was: first, because of the great
wrong she had done to the man that had married her, pretending to him that she
was a virgin, when indeed she was not; and secondly, because by the evidence of
her own words, wherein she professed her self a virgin when she promised him
marriage, it must needs follow that she was desiled after she was betrothed to
him, and in that case her sin was adultery, and to be punished with death.

Verse. 27. For he found her in the field, and the betrothed damsel cried, etc.]
That is, it must be presumed that she cried. Every one knows that though she
were in the sield, yet she might consent to that lewdness; but unless that
could be proved against her, they were bound in charity to hope and judge the
best; and so accordingly the Scripture speaks of it, as of that they were to
take for granted, the betr^thed damsel cried, and there was none to help her.

Verse. 28. If a man find a damsel that is a virgin, which is not betrothed, and
lay hold on her, etc.] Some conceive that this law differs from that, Exodus
22. 16, 17. because that was for such as consented being enticed, this
supposes violent hands laid upon the damsel; but for this see the note upon
that place in Exodus.

Verse. 29. Because he has humbled her, he may not put her away all his days.]
This liberty afforded or winked at in others, Deuteronomy. 24. 1. he must not enjoy.

CHAP. XXIII.
Verse. 1. HE that is wounded in the stones, etc.] By the following laws in the
beginning of this chapter certain men are disabled for being admitted into the
congregation of the Lord, that is, as most Expositours do most probably
understand it, from being admitted into full communion with the commonwealth of
Israel, at least from being capable of bearing any office of Magistracy
amongst them. We cannot with any show of probability think that all these here
mentioned, to wit, eunuchs, verse. 1. bastards and their children unto the tenth
generation, verse. 2. Ammonites also and Moabites unto the tenth generation,
verse. 3. yea and Edomites and Egyptians unto the third generation, verse. 7, 8.
(and so consequently all other nations, since no nation was like to enjoy more
privileges then the Edomites, who are called their brethren, verse. 8.) I say
we cannot with any probability hold that all these, though by circumcision
admitted into the Church, were excluded from the holy assemblies, where they
should hear the word, be instructed in the law, and be admitted to offer
sacrifices, as the signs of their faith and hope of salvation in the promised
Messiah: for there are elsewhere many express laws, that such as were
Proselytes, and had embraced the faith and religion of Israel, should have
equal liberty with the Israelites to celebrate the Passover, Exodus 12. 48,
49. When a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to the
Lord, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it,
and he shall be as one that is born in the land, one law shall be to him that
is home-born, and unto the stranger that sojourneth among you; and so likewise
to bring their sacrifices unto the Lord, Numb, 15. 14, 15. If a stranger
sojourn with you, or whosoever be among you in your generations that will offer
an offering mad^ by fire of a sweet savor unto the Lord, as ye do, so he shall
do; one ordinance shall be both for you of the congregation, and also for the
stranger, etc. either therefore by the congregation of the Lord here is meant
the assembly of Judges and Magistrates so called, because the Lord is president
over them, and they exercise that power they have in his name, and by
authority derived from him, Psalm. 82. 1. God stands in the congregation of
the mighty, he judges among the gods; and so the meaning of this phrase, of
not entering into the congregation of the Lord, is only this, that they should
not bear any public office or place of Magistracy in the Commonwealth of
Israel; or else by the congregation of the Lord is meant the people or
commonwealth of Israel, and so this expression is elsewhere often used, as
Numb. 16. 3. Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy
ever^*one of them, and the lord is among them; and again, Numb. 27. 16, 17. Let
the Lord the* God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation,
which may go out before them, and which may go in before them, -- that the
congregation of the Lord be not as sheep without a shepherd, and then the
meaning of this place must be, that such and such as are here named might not
be admitted into full communion with the Commonwealth of Israel; though they
were admitted into the Church, and so into the communion of the same faith and
worship of God, yet they might not be admitted to be members of the same body
politic, and so to enjoy all the privileges of freeborn Israelites; and
hereupon they stood after a sort separated srom Gods people, as the complaint
of such, and the Lords comfortable answer shows, Isai. 56. 3. etc. Neither
let the son of the stranger, that has joined himself to the Lord, speak,
saying, The Lord has utterly separated me from his people; neither let the
eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree, etc. they were of the Church of Israel,
but yet aliens and strangers, as I may say, from the Commonwealth of Israel,
not being capable of the privileges of other Israelites, as for instance* of
those of the year of release, and the year of Jubilee, of bearing any place of
Magistracy or office amongst them, or having any power to intermeddle in such
affairs; yea we may add too, of marrying a daughter of Israel (for though that
cannot be meant here in this branch of the l^w concerning eunuchs, yet in the
rest it may be included) and some others of the like nature. And indeed thus to
understand this phrase, of not entering into the congregation of the Lord, we
may be the rather induced, because Nehem. 13. 1, 2, 3. it is said, that when
the Jews heard this law read out of the book of Moses, that the Ammonite and
the Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever, they
separated from Israel all the mixed multitude, which seems plainly to be meant
of their separating them from being numbered amongst Gods people, and from
enjoying the privileges of freeborn Israelites, Hebrews of the Hebrews, as the
Apostle speaks of himself, Phil. 3. 5. Only some conceive that if we thus
understand this phrase, that which is said here, verse. 1. and 2. must only be
understood of eunuchs and bastards of other nations, because it seems hard that
such being Israelites were excluded from enjoying all these privileges of
freeborn Israelites. As for the reasons why here in the first place, he that is
wounded in the stones, or has his privy member cut off, is here excluded from
thus entering into the congregation of the Lord, we may conceive them probably
to have been these: first, that God might hereby show his detestation of that
unnatural and barbarous custom of the heathens of making men eunuchs:
secondly, because such men are usually of a base, and effeminate, and cowardly
spirit, and liable to be scorned and despised by others, and therefore not fit
to be in any place of authority: and thirdly, that hereby they might be taught
what purity and perfection, what unblameablenesse and freedom from all stains
and pollutions God required in his people, and particularly how pleasing a
thing it is unto God to add daily to his Church, and to increase the number of
his people, to wit, by spiritual means, and not to be barren this way, as such
eunuchs were in regard of natural generation.

Verse. 2. A bastard shall not enter into the congregation of the Lord.] What is
meant by entering into the congregation of the Lord, is shown in the foregoing
note. By bastards here cannot be meant the sons of concubines, who were in
those times counted as second wives, but either the children of such as did
prostitute themselves as common whores, or rather all that were born
illegitimate, whether by fornication, adultery, or incest. Now such as these
the Lord forbids them to admit into the congregation of the Lord, first, hereby
to teach his people what an honor it was to be of Gods peculiar people, into
the number of whom a man thus blemished might not be received; secondly, by
laying this stain and dishonor upon the spurious issu^ of such unclean
mixtures, to show his people how detestable such sins were unto the Lord; and
thirdly, lest such should be capable of bearing any office or Magistracy
amongst the Israelites who were of base and vild conditions, as bastards indeed
many times are, or at least liable to be scorned and despised for this reproach
of their birth, and so might be the less courageous in their places lest they
should be upbraided herewith.

Even to his tenth generation shall he not enter into the congregation of the
Lord.] That is neither the bastard nor his children unto the tenth generation.
Therefore after ten generations this stain was to be blotted out: for that
the expression of thus many generations, that should be excluded, does imply
that the eleventh generation was to be received into the congregation of the
Lord, is evident, verse. 8. where it is said that the Edo^ites children should
enter into the congregation of the Lord in their third generation.

Verse. 3. Even to their tenth generation shall they not enter into the
congregation of the Lord for ever.] That is, neither shall the Ammonite or
Moabite, that becomes a proselyte, and embraces the religion of the
Israelites, be received into full communion with the commonwealth o^ Israel,
nor any other of their posterity unto the tenth generation; for this was not
meant of the Israelites children born of Ammonitish or Moabitish mothers,
converted to the Israelites faith, as the stories of Rahab and Ruth do
evidently prove, but only of the children of Ammonites and Moabites that
became proselytes, who, because they were of those nations, might not be
incorporated into the commonwealth of Israel unto the tenth generation. Some
Expositours will have this last clause, for ever, to be added by way of
explaining that which went before of their not being admitted into the
congregation of the Lord unto the tenth generation, and so that the meaning of
this Law was that their posterity should never be admitted into the
congregation of the Lord; and indeed where this Law is repeated, Neh. 13. 1.
there is no mention made of the tenth generation; but it is said that they
found written in the book of Moses that the Ammonite and the Moabite should not
come into the congregation of the Lord for ever. But yet because afterward,
verse. 8. there is also mention made of some that were not to be admitted until
the third generation, even here also by the tenth generation a set number of
generations is expressed that were to be excluded; and so by the addition of
these words, for ever, this only is intended, that this Law concerning the
Ammonites and Moabites not entering into the congregation of the Lord unto the
tenth generation, was to be for ever inviolably observed, and not to be
dispensed with upon any occasion.

Verse. 4. Because they met you not with bread and with water, etc.] The rather
did God abhor this their disregard of the Israelites in their escape out of
Egypt, because the Ammonites and Moabites were the posterity of Lot, who was so
near of kin to Abraham, of whom the Israelites came.

And because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor, of Mesopotamia,
to curse thee.] That is, the Moabites: for of this the Ammonites were not
guilty, but the Moabites, as is evident in the history thereof, Numb. 22, etc.

Verse. 5. Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not hearken unto Balaam, etc.]
This is added, to imply that the fault of the Moabites was never a whit the
less, because Balaam blessed the Israelites in stead of cursing them; for they
did what they could to have won Balaam to curse them, and Balaam also sought
by all means to satisfy their desire; only the Lord their God of his own free
grace did overrule the tongue of that false prophet, and forced him to bless
them when he meant to curse them, and so turned that to good which their
enemies intended for their hurt and ruin.

Verse. 6. Thou shall not seek their peace, nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever.] The like is said of the Canaanites, Ezra 9. 12, Now therefore give
not your daughters to their sons, neither take their daughters unto your
sons* nor seck their peace, or their wealth for ever. Now this is not meant
of private revenge in malice, which was always unlawful for the people of
God; o^ that they should not seek the salvation of the souls of these people,
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, Who will have
all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth, 1. Tim. 2. 3,
4. but only of public confedracies with these people, which was likely to be
for their own hurt, though for the others good. The meaning therefore of these
words is only this, that they must not make peace, nor have any thing to do
with them, but rather be at perpetual enmity with them. And herein therefore
if David offended by making peace with the Ammonites, 2. Sam. 11. 1. 2. as many
Expositours hold he did, no marvel though the Lord suffered his messengers to
be so basely used by them.

Verse. 7. Thou shall not abhor an Edomite; for he is thy brother.] That is,
thou shall not so abhor and Edomite as to exclude his posterity, after he had
embraced the faith of Israel, from being admitted into the commonwealth of
Israel unto the tenth generation, as thou must exclude the Ammonites and
Moabites: for that this is meant by abhorring the Edomite in this clause, and
the Egyptian in the next, is evident in the eighth verse, where it is said, by
way of explaining these words, The children that are begotten of them shall
enter into the congregation of the Lord, in their third generation. The reason
here given why the Lord would have them show more respect herein to the
Edomites then to the Ammonites and Moabites, is this, because they were their
brethren, as being the posterity of Isaac by Esau, as they were by Jacob, and
so indeed the nearest of kin to Israel of all the people on the earth: Though
the Edomites used them as discourteously as they passed along to go into Canaan
as the Ammonites or Moabites did (for they refused to let them pass through
their land, and came out armed against them, Numb. 20. 20, 21.) and the fault
of the Edomite was the greater, because he was Isreal's brother; yet God will
have them show the Edomites more favor then other nations, because they were
their brethren, the Lord hereby teaching them what love men ought to bear to
their brethren, and how we ought to bear with the injuries of brethren, because
of their near relation to us, though it be a greater sault in them to be so
injurious then it is in others.

Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land.]
Though the Egyptians did most cruelly oppress them, yet must they be favored
f^^ the courtesy which in former times they received amongst them, God hereby
tea^^ing men rather to remember good turns then injuries.

Verse. 9. When the host goes forth against thine enemies, then keep thee from
every wicked thing, etc.] That is, then no less then at other times, yea then
especially above all other times: For this charge is given them, first, to
teach them that God requires that in times of war they should be as wary to
avoid all kind of wickedness as at other times: Soldiers in the war are
wont to carry themselves as if they were lawless, and might do what they list*
and therefore to prevent this, they were told here that the Lord expects that
his people should in such times of confusion keep themselves as strictly to the
rule of holiness and righteousness as at other times, according that charge
given by the Baptist to soldiers, Luke 13. 14. Do violence to no man, and be
content with your wages; yea secondly, to show them that then they had reason
to be most careful not to provoke God by any misdemeanour, whether against the
moral or ceremonial Law (such as are those particulars mentioned in the
following verses) to wit, first, because soldiers go out as it were to execute
vengeance upon others for the evil they have done, and they are not fit to
punish others that are as bad themselves; secondly because a clear conscience
is one of the best means to make men tr^ly valorous; and thirdly, because then
there is most evident need of Gods assistance, and most danger of mischief to
come upon them if the Lord should leave them and give them over into the hands
of their enemies, as is employed in the reason given for this law, verse. 14. For
thy Lord thy God walks in the midst of thy camp to deliver thee, -- therefore
shall thy camp be holy, etc.

Verse. 10. If there be among you any man that is not clean by reason of
uncleannes that chances him by night, etc.] Though for the pollution here
spoken of they were not to be shut out of their camps and cities, as lepers and
others were, yet they were it seems to go forth voluntarily from amongst their
brethren, till having washed themselves with water they returned at evening
again to their tents and dwellings: and this was to teach them what exact
purity and holiness God required in his people.

Verse. 12. Thou shall have a place also without the camp, etc.] That is, a
place designed for the use by public appointment, whither they were bound to
go, that so their camp might not be defiled with their excrements: and though
the Lord might herein intimate their duty in regard of civilitie, and the care
men ought to take not to do any thing that might offend or annoy their
brethren, yet doubtless the chief drift of this law was to teach them, that in
regard of Gods presence amongst them, they ought to keep themselves clean from
all spiritual pollutions, the outward cleanness and neatness here required
being only a shadow of that spiritual purity, which even in times of war
God required in his people.

Verse. 15. Thou shall not deliver unto his master the servant which is escaped
from his master, etc.] That is, when it should be manifest that they fled to
escape the (...) rage of cruel masters, that did causelessely oppress them: In
this case if they fled from their masters in other countries, and sought for
shelter in the land of Israel, or if they fled from any cruel ma^^er amongst
the Israelites, and sought for shelter from the Magistrate, they were not to
deliver them back to the tyranny of savage men; but in other cases, as when
they ^led in a gadding humor from their lawful lords, who did no ways
oppress them, or being guilty of some capital offense to escape deserved
punishment, we must not think God appointed his people to give harbor to such:
for this were to make this law contrary to that law, Thou shall not steal: if
they must be so just in all their dealings, as to restore the beast that ran
astray, much more such fugitive servants as thus robbed their masters by flying
from them.

Verse. 17. There shall be no wh^re of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite,
etc.] Though the tolerating of whores and Sodomites that were of the sons and
daughters of Israel be here only expressed, yet by necessary consequence the
permitting of such open filthiness by any other nations, that should live
amongst them, is also forbidden; who, besides the ensnaring of Gods people to
commit filthiness with them, might also corrupt them in regard of their
religion too, and seduce them by degrees to open idolatry.

Verse. 18. Thou shall not bring the hire of a whore, or the price of a dog,
into the house of the Lord, etc.] It is a great question amongst Expositours
what is meant here by the price of a dog: First, some conceive that because
these two are joined thus together, the hire of a whore, and the price of a
dog, this last is intended of some filthy thing as well as the first, and so
they conclude that as amongst us men are wont sometimes to give money to have
some goodly horse to cover their mares, so it was in those times for dogs, and
this is meant here by the price of a dog: Secondly, others think it is meant of
such men as did openly in the sight of others commit uncleanness in a most
impudent and brutish manner: Thirdly, others again think, that as in the
foregoing verse, the whore and the Sodomite are joined together, There shall be
no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the sons of Israel; so
it is here likewise, and by a dog is meant a Sodomite (the word dog being used
metaphorically, as it is also Rev. 22. 15. without are dogs) and by the price
of a dog is meant the hire that was given to him with whom men commit that
horrid and unnatural sin of Sodomie: And last of all, most Expositours take
it according to the plain meaning of the words, for the price of a dog that is
sold, which being an unclean and withal a base and contemptible creature, God
would not allow them to bring the price of it into his house. Now these two
last Expositions, I conceive, are most likely to be intended here, but
especially the last; and that hereby God taught them to reverence his sanctuary
and sacrifices, Lev. 19. 30. and not to offer him any thing that had been
sinfully gotten, or to contribute basely to any holy uses, as thinking any
thing good enough for his worship and service, who forbids hi^ name to be
despised, his altar and table to be thought contemptible, Mal. 1. 6, 7, 8. or
his house to be made a den of thieves, Jer. 7. 11.

Verse. 19. Thou shall not lend upon usury to thy brother; usury of money, usury
of victuals, etc.] This last clause implies the heinousness of the sin
forbidden, to wit, the exacting of usury from those that wanted meat, and for
their supply were glad to borrow of their neighbors.

Verse. 20. Unto a stranger thou may lend upon usury, etc.] That is, a
gentile, who was also an infidel: for to strangers who were brethren in the
faith they might not lend upon usury, Levit. 25. 35, 3^.

Verse. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not
slack to pay it.] To wit, a vow which was possible and lawful. See the note
upon Numb. 30. 2.

Verse. 25. When thou come to the standing corn of thy neighbors, then thou
may pluck the ears with thine hand, etc.] And therefore when our Saviors
disciples did this, the Pharisees charged them not with taking that which was
not theirs, but only with doing that which might not be done on the Sabbath
day, Matthew. 12. 1, 2.

CHAP. XXIV.
Verse. 1. WHen a man has taken a wife and married her, etc.] Two things must
be known for the fuller understanding of this law concerning divorces: first,
that whereas it is said here, that if after a man has married a wife, his wife
find no favor in his eyes, because he has found some uncleanness in her,
hereby is meant any thing whatsoever, either in her person or in her qualities
and manners, which being at the time of marriage unknown to him, he has
afterward discovered, and for it dislikes and abhorres his wife, yea though
the cause of his dislike were never so slight a matter; and therefore did the
Pharisees so propound the question they made concerning this law, to wit,
whether a man might put away his wife for every cause? Matthew. 19. 3. and
secondly, whereas it is said of such a man so disliking his wife, then let him
write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of
his house, the meaning is only, that if he put her away he must write her a
bill of divorcement, etc. for this was not a dispensation in regard of that
first divine institution of marriage, allowing the Jews without sin to put
away their wives upon any dislike taken against them, contrary to that which
God at first d^d establish for a law to all po^terity, to wit, that a man
should have but one wife, and a woman but one husband* and they two should be
one flesh (for even when Moses law was in its full force such divorcings were
displeasing to God, Mal. 2. 16. The Lord the God of Israel says that he hates
putting away) no, it was only a law made in favor of the wife so put away,
that she should have in this case a bill of divorce given her, that if she were
put away causelessly she might have this as a testimony for her that she had not
of her own accord forsaken her husband, but was put away, and that without any
just cause on her part, and so was now free. It is true indeed that by this law
there was implicitly granted a permission or toleration of these unjust
divorces to the Israelites in those times, to wit, that they might without
incurring any punishment thus put away their wives, and this injustice in the
husband did so far break the knot of marriage, that it was lawful for the
wife so put away to marry another husband; but yet still this which was thus
tolerated was sin^ull in the husband, and displeasing to God, and only
permitted by Moses for the hardness of their hearts, Matthew. 19. 8. Moses
because of the hardness of your hearts suffered you to put away your wives,
that is, because they were such a perverse and hard-hearted people that had
they been restrained from this, they would have been likely to have made the
lives of their wives extremely miserable by all kind of savage and cruel
tyrannizing ^ver them, and perhaps would at last have attempted to make them
away: and therefore also even this toleration of such causeless divorces was
abrogated by our Savior, Matthew. 5. 31, 32. It has been said, Whosoever shall
put away his wife, let him give her a writing of divorcement: But I say unto
you, that whosoever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that
is divorced commits adultery.

Verse. 4. Her former husband which sent her away may not take her again to b^
his wife, after that she is defiled.] To wit, by marrying and lying with a
second husband, her first husband being still living. It seems that after a man
had given his wife a bill of divorce, and sent her away, if he repented of what
he had done* and was reconciled to his wife thus unjustly divorced, before she
had taken another husband, he might with her consent cancel the bill of
divorce, and receive her again as his wife; but after she had once married
another husband, he might not take her again, no not after her second husband
was dead, and that because she was defiled. But why is the wife here said to be
defiled with lying with her second husband, since by the law of God she might
lawfully marry him? I answer, the most of Expositours say that it is because
this her second marriage, her first husband being yet living, was against the
first institution of marriage, and so sinful, and only tolerated for a time
amongst the Jews because of the hardness of their hearts* Matthew. 5. 31, 32.
but yet because it is hard to say how it could be sin^e in her who was as it
were perforce put away by her first husband, especially since the Apostle has
determined in a like case, to wit, in the case of a wilful separation, that
the innocent party may marry again, 1. Cor. 7. 15. therefore others think that
by being defiled here is meant only her lying with her second husband, which
in a natural way is accounted a pollution without any intimation of the
sinfulness thereof; or else her being defiled in regard of him, that is, one
whom he might no more touch nor meddle with, it being, as it follows in the
next words, an abomination before, the Lord, that a man should deliver up his
wife, as it were, to another man's bed, and then take her when he pleased
himself again.

Thou shall not eause the land to sin, etc.] That is, thou shall not cause
the land to be defiled with sin, and so to be liable to punishment, or make
others to sin by thine example.

Verse. 5. When a man has taken a new wife he shall not go out to war, etc.]
This law was for the exemption of those that had taken a new wife, that is,
those that had newly married a wife, from being sent forth to war, or from
being charged with any business, to wit, any public employment that would
necessarily* cause him to be absent from his wife: and the ground of this law
was not so much the unfitness of such men for public employments, in regard
their minds would still be so much upon their wives, as the providing for the
settling of their love one to another, as is manifest by the following words,
he shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer up his wife which he has
taken. When a woman is newly married, and so taken from her fathers house and
family, and transplanted into a new stock, she is subject to grieve much, and
has the more need to be tendered and cherished by her husband; and besides, if
the first year by living lovingly together their hearts be once thoroughly
settled one to the other, there would be the more hope of wellknit affections
for ever after; and to give a privilege to the new-marryed man in this
respect, was this law given the Israelites.

Verse. 6. No man shall take the nether or the upper millstone to pledge, etc.]
For one of the milstones being gone, the other is unusefull, and by consequence
the taking of any thing as a pledge, that is of the like necessary use for the
exercise of a man's calling, or for the sustenance of his life, is here
forbidden. See Exodus 22. 26.

Verse. 7. If a man be found stealing any of his brethren of the children of
Israel, etc.] See the note upon Exodus 21. 16.

Verse. 9. Remember what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam, etc.] This example is
added, to render them the more careful of what he had enjoined in the
foregoing verse, to wit, that in the plague of leprosy they should observe
diligently and do according to all that the priests the Levites should teach
them. Remember, says Moses, what the Lord thy God did unto Miriam, that is,
remember how for her sin and contempt of Moses the Lord struck her with
leprosy, and thereby be warned to take heed of sinning against God by slighting
the directions of the Levites, whom God has set over you to teach you in all
things what ye should do, lest otherwise ye provoke God to punish you, and to
strike you with leprosy as he did her* or rather, Rem^mber what the Lord thy
God did unto Miriam, that is, remember how she was by Gods special command
shut out of the camp seven days, until she had been purified according to the
law: If she might not be exempted, who then shall plead exemption? See that
therefore ye carefully observe those laws given concerning the shutting up of
the lepers, and the cleansing of them when they are healed, and whatever else
from the law of God the Levites shall direct you to do.

Verse. 10. When thou do lend thy brother any thing, thou shall not go into
his house to fetch his pledge, etc.] Some conceive that the end of this law,
enjoining the pledge still to be brought to the door, was to make men careful
so to order their expenses, that they might not be put in the sight of their
neighbors to pawn their clothes, and to curb the creditour, that he might not
be too harsh and g^eedy in exacting a pledge. But far more probable that is
which is held by most of Expositours, namely, that God did he^ein provide for
the poor man, both that the creditour might not pick and choose his pledge
where he pleased, though it was that which he was very unwilling to part with,
but should be content wi^h that which should be brought out to him; as likewise
bec^^se poor men are usually ashamed that strangers should come in and in
every corner behold their penury and want.

Verse. 13. In any case thou shall deliver him the pledge again when the sun
goes down, that he may sleep in his own raiment, and bless thee.] Concerning
this law, see the No^e upon Exodus 22. 26. As there the Lord presses this work
of mercy upon his people, by threatening that if by keeping away such a
necessary pledge the poor man were provoked to cry unto him he would hear
his cries, and be avenged on such a hard-hearted creditour; so here also, by
promising that in case they did herein show mercy to the poor, the poor
should bless them, that is, pray for them, and he would hear their prayers,
and so by their prayers the poor should be able abundantly to require them
though otherwise they were not able to do it.

And it shall be righteousness unto thee before the Lord thy God.] That is,
the Lord will accept of it as a holy and good work, and will abundantly reward
it; and indeed the righteousness even of such works in the best of Gods
servants consists more in Gods acceptance of them, because he says they shall
be righteousness unto them, then in any perfection that is in them.

CHAP. XXV.
Verse. 3. Forty stripes he may give him, and not exceed, etc.] That is,
^ourtie stripes is the utmost that for any offense the Judge shall appoint the
faulty person to suffer; and the reason is given, lest if he should exceed,
and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem vile
unto thee, that is, if you should proceed to what extremity you list herein,
it would argue too great a contempt of such a poor wretch, who though he have
offended is notwithstanding a brother, and therefore not to be used as if there
were no more regard to be had of him then of a beast. Now so superstitiously
careful were the Jews not to transgress this law, that their custom was
still to stay at 39. stripes, even when they meant to go as high as they might,
and that for sear lest in giving the stripes they should have mistold one:
whence was that of the Apostle, 2. Cor. 11. 24. for that I conceive was the
true reason why they never gave full four^ie stripes, though others hold they
did it out of a foolish conceit of appearing herein merciful, to wit, in that
they gave the malefactor one stripe less then by Gods Law they might have
done.

Verse. 4. Thou shall not muzzle the ox when he treads out the corn.] The
Israelites used not it seems to thresh their corn with flails, but trod it out
with the seet of beasts, Hos. 10. 11. Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught,
and loves to tread out the corn: yea and sometimes with cart-wheels, as we may
see, Esa. 28. 27. The fetches are not threshed with a threshing instrument,
neither is a cartwheel turned about upon the cummin, and verse. 28. Bread-corn
is bruised; because he will not ever be threshing it, nor break it with the
wheels of his cart, nor bruise it with his horsemen: and hence it was that God
gave them this law, not to muzzle the mouths of their oxen, so to hinder them
from eating the ears of corn when they were thus led up and down upon the
sheaves that with their hoofs they might tread it out; and herein the Lord
taught them to be merciful to the very bruit beasts they had occasion to make
use of, and to take heed of all inhumanity and cruelty toward them: and
secondly, by necessary consequence much more to beware of depriving their
brethren of that which is due to them for the service they did them, especially
so as not to let them eat the fruit of their labors. If it be unnatural not
to let the ox eat of the corn he treads out, much more it is against the
light of nature to deny requisite allowance to ministers that provide us the
food of our souls, and to keep those that any way labor for us from having a
share in the benefit that redounds to us by their means. Indeed some would have
this last the only thing intended in this Law, and that it was not at all to
be understood literally of oxen* and that because S. Paul proving from these
very words, 1. Cor. 9. 9. that it was fitting that the Preachers of the Gospel
should live of their labors, he adds, Does God take care for oxen? or says
he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this is written, etc.
But for this conceit there is no ju^t ground in the Apostles words: for he
meant not those words absolutely, that God did not in his law provide for their
merciful dealing with their oxen; but only that the principal thing intended
in that law was not so much to take care that the oxen might be suffered to
feed as they trod out the corn, as to teach them that if it were cruelty to
deny a poor beast his food in this kind, it would be far worse to deny their
brethren, and Gods laborers, to live of the fruit of their labors.

Verse. 5. If brethren live together, and one of them die and have no child,
etc.] For the better understanding of this law two things must be known: first,
that by brethen that dwell together are meant brethren that live in the same
city or tow^, or happily in the same house, as when a man's sons live
together in their fathers house; for this first clause is added by way of
limitation, to show that in case the brother or next kinsman of the deceased
party should live afar off in some remote place, the widow should not then be
bound to seek him out, but might challenge the right of marriage from the next
kinsma^ that lived in that place that was not yet married: and secondly, that
it is meant not only of next kinsmen* but also of natural brothers, as is
evident in many places of Scripture; for even in the days of the Patriarchs
(God having then given this law to his Church, as he did many other ceremonial
precepts concerning sacrifices, etc. which afterward he confirmed amongst the
Israelites by the hand of Moses) Er the firstborn son of Judah died without
issue, and Onan his second son married his widow, according to this Law; and
when Onan died also without issue, Judah advised his daughter in law to
continue a widow in her fathers house till Shel^h his third son was grown and
fit for marriage, chap. 38. 8, 9, 10, 11. and so also, Ruth 1. 11, 12, 13. when
Naomies daughters in law, the widows of her two sons that died without issue,
would needs go along with her into the land of Israel, she dissuaded them by
this argument, that she was past hope of having son^es, at least such as might
be their husbands; and the Sadduces we see propounded a question to our
Savior, Matthew. 22. 24, 25. concerning seven brethren that successively married
one and the ^ame woman, purposely to raise up seed unto their bro^her. But was
not this incest by the Law of nature, confirmed by Moses Law, Lev. 18. 16. Thou
shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brothers wife. I answer, it was
doubtless incest generally for any man to marry his brothers wife; but to the
Israelites in this particular case it was not so, and that because this was
given them as a special exception to that general Law, peculiar only to them
as being ceremonial. The firstborn were types of Christ, who is therefore
called the f^^st-born among many brethren, Romans 8. 29. and the land was to them
a type of heaven: So that he who dyed without a firstborn might seem to die
without interest in the firstborn Christ, and the blotting out his name out of
the land of Can^an carried a kind of show of being blotted out of heaven: and
therefore was barrenness counted such ^ heavy affliction, and the cutting of
their names out of the land of Canaan reputed a most fearful judgment, Let
his posterity be cut off* says David, Psalm. 109. 13. and in the generation
following let their name be blotted out. Now therefore to teach them still to
fear that heaviest of judgments, their dying without interest in Christ or
heaven, they were appointed by this law to see that the name of their deceased
brother were not put out of Israel.

Verse. 6. The firstborn which she bears shall succeed in the name of his
brother* etc.] That is, he shall be counted the legal son of his brother
that died without issue: and hence Obed, whom Boaz begat of Ruth, is said to be
Naomies son, Ruth 4. 17. beca^se he was counted the legal son of
Elimelech, her deceased son, Ruths for^er husband, though withal he was
counted the natural son of Boaz, Luke 3. 32.

Verse. 9. Then ^^all his brothers wife come unto him in the pr^sence of the
Elders, and loose his shoe, etc.] Both the woman's loosing of his shoe from off
his foot that would not marry her, and likewise her spitting in his face, were
appointed doubtless by way of disgracing and shaming the man that would not
according as God had appointed raise up seed to his deceased brother: for
though indeed in all resignations or alienations of house and land from one man
to another this ceremony was used, that he who did resign the house or land
pulled off his s^oe* and gave it to his neighbor, to whom he passed it over,
Ruth 4. 7. thereby signifying that he would now be disabled from going any more
upon such house or lands as any part of his estate (and so also in this case of
marriage it might signify that he re^^gned his right o^ marriage to any other
that would marry her) yet here I conceive it was done also in a way of
disgracing the man, to show that he was unworthy to marry her, and to enter
upon and possess his brothers inheritance; and so likewise it was much more
for her spitting in his face. There is nothing that is a greater shame and
reproach to a man then to have any body spit in his face, If her father had but
spit on her face should she not be ashamed seven days? says the Lord of
Miriam, Numb. 12. 14. and so, I hid not my face from shame and spitting, says
the Prophet in the person of Christ, Isai. 50. 6. and therefore the woman's
spitting in the face of him that would not marry her was in effect all one as
if she had openly protested him to be a man that deserved to be derested and
abhorred of all men, a man that was not worthy to show his face amongst his
brethren: yea indeed so foul a disgrace this was, that it was therefore never
done but when the woman did claim and press her right before the Elders, and
the ^ext kinsman did still obstinately refuse her; for when by a free agreement
the next brother or kinsman did resign his right to another, the widow also
consenting, here this note of ^nfamie was never put upon him, as we may see.
Ruth 4. 8. where there was no spitting on the face of the next kinsman, but
only by pulling off his shoe he resigned his right to Boaz, and so he married
Ruth.

So shall it be done to the man that would not build up his brothers house.]
See the note upon Exodus 1. 21.

V^rs. 10. And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him that hat^
^is shoe loosed.] That is, whenever in aftertimes this man's family shall be
spoken of, it shall be under the name of, The man that had his shoe loosed,
this shall they say was the house of him that had his shoe loosed: and thus
there was a note of infamy set both upon the man himself, and likewise upon
his family and posterity, that men might hereby be rendered the more careful
to submit herein to the direction of Gods law.

Verse. 12. Then thou shall cut off her hand, thine eye shall not pity her.]
Because much might be said for the woman that did in this case take hold of the
secrets of the man that was fighting with her husband, as first, that the
affection of a loving wife must needs make her passions stir when she sees
her husband beaten, and provoke her to do what she can to rescue him; secondly,
that being not able to help him by strength, she sought by taking that
advantage to force the man to give over smiting him, and did what she did not
out of wantonness but merely for her husbands help; and thirdly, that a weak
woman is not so well able to bridle her passions, and therefore may easily be
overborn by them to do that which is not fitting* therefore God did expressly
here enjoin that by no such arguments the Judges should be moved to take pity
on the woman that had herein offended, but that they should cert^inly cut off
her hand, hereby giving them to understand how much he abhorres all wanton,
bold, impure and shameless behavior in those that profess themselves to be
his people.

Ver^. 13. Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a
small, etc.] To wit, a great, to buy with, and a small, to sell with; or a
greater to be kept to be shown to the Magistrate or O^ficers when they come to
view and try thy weights and measures, and a less, which notwithstanding thou
usest continually in selling thy wares.

Ver^. 17. Remember what Amalek did unto thee by the way, when ye were come
forth out ^f Egypt, etc.] There is an E^pha^is in these words, when ye were
come forth out of Egypt, the noting whereof will help us much in the
understanding of the passage; for herein Moses implies the reason why the Lord
was so highly offended against the Amalekites, above other nations, for their
assaulting the Israelites, that he did then pass sentence against them, that
their whole nation should be utterly destroyed, and did now put them in mind to
execute against them what he had decreed; and why also in the following verse
he inferres from this which Amalek did* that he feared not God, He met t^ee by
the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, even all that were feeble behind the^,
when thou wast faint and weary, namely, because this circumstance, that he did
this to the Israelites, when they were newly come out of Egypt did much
aggravate their sin, and their contempt of God, and that in two respects:
first, in regard the Israelites had already endured so much misery; for to
oppress those that had been already so grievously oppressed was an act of
great inhumanity and cruelty, and a notable contempt of God, who is so
constantly wont to plead the cause of those that are so barbarously used: and
secondly, in regard of that which God had so lately done for the Israelites in
Egypt; for when God had so immediately before manifested the special love that
he bore to this people by taking such vengeance on the Egyptians for their
sakes, and by those many strange signs and wonders which he had wrought
amongst them, it argued a high degree of desperate boldness in the Amalekites,
that yet notwithstanding they were not afraid to fight against them, and so
indeed in fighting against them to fight against God.

Verse. 19. Thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.]
This judgment God appointed Saul to execute, 1. Sam. 15. 2, 3. but he failed
in the performance of it. Afterward God stirred up the Simeonites in Hezekiahs
days, who smote the rest of the Amalekites, 1. Chron. 4. 42, 43. And some of
them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir,
having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the
sons of Ishi. And they smote the rest of the Amalekites that were escaped,
and dwelt there unto this day: and what befell Haman and his sons, who were
of that race, is largely related in the third chapter of Esther.

CHAP. XXVI.
Verse. 2. THou shall take of the first of all the fruit of the earth.] This
seems to have been done by every m^n and that every year, either at the feast
of Pentecost, called also the feast of weeks, as seems to be employed, Deuteronomy.
16. 10. And thou shall keep the fe^st of weeks unto the Lord thy God, with
atribute of a freewill-offering of thy hand etc. or rather at the feast of
tabernacles, which is called the feast of in-gathering at the years end, Exodus
23. 16. when they brought of the first fruits of their fruit trees, as the
bringing of them in a bushel seems to imply. And these first fruits they thus
brought unto the Lord, first, as an acknowledgement that it was the Lord that
had freely given them this land, as he had promised to their for^fathers, which
is tha^, verse. 3. I profess, etc. and that of him they still held it, and to
him therefore, as by way of trib^te due to him, the Lord in chief, they brought
these first fruits; secondly, to tes^isie that the yearly fruitfuln^sse of this
their land was also from his bl^ssing, etc.

Verse. 3. And thou shall go unto the priest that shall be in those days, etc.]
To wit, as the figure of Christ, in whom only our services become acceptable
wi^^ God, Hebr. 13. 15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of pra^se
to God continually, that is the fruit of o^r l^ps, giving than^s to his name.
The ^ame was likewise taught them in the ^etting down of this basket of
first-^ruits before the altar, verse. 4.

Verse. 5. A Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went down into Egypt,
etc.] That is, Jacob: for though he was born in Canaan, yet he was of the stock
of Syrians; for Abram his grandfather came out of Ur of the Chaldees, the land
of his nativity, Genesis 11. 28. which was a part of Syria, whence Laban* who
lived in the same country, is also called a Syrian, Genesis 28. 5. Yea Jacob was
not only born of Syrian parents, and only lived as his fathers had done
before him a stranger and pilgrim in the land of Canaan, but also abode a great
part of his time there: for there he dwelt with Laban twenty years at least in
hard service, Hos. 12. 12. And Jacob fl^d into the country of Syria, and
Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. When he returned thence
into the land of Canaan, after a few years, by the extremity of famine he was
constrained to remove into Egypt, to which extremity I conceive the holy Ghost
has here special reference, in calling him a Syrian ready to perish, though
withal it* may have respect also to the poverty and misery he underwent in
Syria, and in his going thither, when he fled for his life because of his
brother Esau. But however, this acknowledgement of the meannesse of their
original was doubtless thereby to magni^y the goodness of God, in raising
them to such a condition as now they did enjoy.

Verse. 10. And thou shall set it before the Lord thy God, and worship before
the Lord thy God.] It is said before, verse. 4. that the man that brought this
basket of first fruits was to deliver it into the hand of the priest; and
therefore the meaning of this which is said here of his setting it before the
Lord, is only this, that he should leave it there set down before the altar,
to wit, by the priest, who with the rest of his brethren did afterward eat
them, all first fruits appertaining to them, as we may see, Deuteronomy. 18. 4. As for
that second clause, and worship before the Lord thy God, hereby is meant that
after he had delivered his basket of first fruits into the hands of the priest
to be set down before the Lord, and had made that thankful and open profession
of Gods great goodness to his people, which is expressed largely in the
foregoing verses, he was then to add such other duties of Gods worship and
service as were to be performed, as prayer, and offering sacrifices, and then
bowing down before the Lord, to depart away.

Verse. 11. And thou shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God
has given unto thee, etc.] Though th^s may be extended to the chear^ull using
of Gods gifts all the year after, which ^hey might indeed the more comfortably
enjoy, when they had in this te^tifyed their thankfulness, as he had
appointed; yet I conceive it is chieflly intended of their feasting together in
Jerusalem, after they had done their servi^e, together with the Levites, and
strangers, with the peace offerings they had brought thither, even as they used
to do at all other feasts, Deuteronomy. 16. 11, 15.

Verse. 12. When thou have made an end of tithing all the tithes of thine
increase, the third year, which is the year of tithing, etc.] See the note upon
chap. 14. 28.

Verse. 14. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning.] Tha^ is, even in my
greatest wants and necessities, when I was put to the greate^t straits, I have
not ventured to supply my self from them: and indeed that which men will not do
at other times, they will make bold to do when they are in want and di^tresse;
and therefore were they appoint^d particularly to clear themselves of this: or
else it may be meant of mourning for the loss of friends, I have not eat^n
th^reof in my mourning, that is, in the time of my mourning for my dead
friends; for hereby these hallowed things should have been defiled, Hos. 9. 4.
Their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners: all that eat
thereof shall be polluted; which also shows that this is meant, not of those
tithes only which were yearly paid to the Levites, whereof the owner of the
land might not eat, but also of the first and second years tithes, which the
owners were to eat before the Lord, Deuteronomy. 14. 22, 23.

Neither have I taken away ought thereof for any unclean use.] That is, for any
use besides that for which they were appointed. For any employing these
hallowed things for civil uses would have defiled them, much more if they were
employed naturally or legally to be deemed (...).

Nor given ought thereof to the dead.] That is, yea so strictly careful have I
been not to alienate these holy things to any other use then that enjoined by
thy law, that I have not diverted them to those uses wherein reason might
sugge^t they might ^e charitably and religiously employed, as for the burying
the dead, for the buying of any thing for that service, of love to provide any
thing that is to be eaten at any dead man's funeral; for indeed at funerals
the kindreds friends and neighbors used to go to eat and drink with those that
had lost their friends, as by way of comforting them: whence, Jer. 16. 7.
Neither shall men tear themselves for them in mourning to comfort them for the
d^ad, neither shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their
father or for their mother; and Ezekiel. 24. 17. Forbear to cry, make no mourning
for the d^ad, bind the tire of thine head upon thee, and put on thy shoes upon
thy feet, and cover not thy lips, and eat not the bread of men; and thereby
both they and their meat were legally unclean by the law, Numb. 19. 14. This is
the law when a man dies in a tent, that all that come into the tent, and all
that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.

Verse. 15. Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy
people, etc.] First they were to make that solemn protestation in the foregoing
verses, that they had not failed in paying their tithes exactly according to
Gods law, and then they were to add this prayer, wherein they desired God to
bless his people, and the land wherein they dwelt; and hereby the people were
taught to assure themselves, that if they did not strictly give God his right
in this matter of tithes, they could not expect a bl^ssing from the Lord either
upon them or their land, yea that without this it would be in vain to pray for
a blessing.

Verse. 18. The Lord has avo^ched thee this day to be his peculiar people, as
he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his commandments, etc.]
Which as it is a part of the covenant on Gods behalf, so is it the work of his
grace in all his people, Jer. 31. 33. But this shall be the covenant that I
will make with the house of Israel, After those days says the Lord* I will
put my law in their inward parts, and will be their God, and they shall be my
people.

CHAP. XXVII.
Verse. 1. KEep all the commandments that I command you this day.] Moses having
assembled the people that he might give them a charge for the building of a
monument of great stones at their first entrance into Canaan, whereon the law
was to be written, he first begins with this Exhortation, Keep all the
commandments tha^ I command you this day, thereby to give them a hint of the
end for which this monument was to be erected, namely, that it might be a
memorial to put them in mind of keeping Gods law.

Verse. 2. And it shall be on the day when you pass over Jordan, etc.] For the
better understanding of the charge here given for the setting up of this
monument, whereon the law was to be written, we must know first, that though it
be said here that they should do this on the day they pas^^d over Jordan, yet
thereby was not meant the very day they went over Jordan ^ut only that they
should do it at their first entrance into the land of Canaan. Day in the
Scripture ^s ordinarily used for time, as Luke 19. 42. If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace!
and so it is here. The meaning is only this, that after they were once gotten
over the river Jordan* they should take care at their first opportunity to see
that this were done: and so it is expressed, verse. 4. when ye be gone over
Jordan ye shall set up these stones. And indeed in the history of Joshua we may
see, chap. 8. 30. that this monument was not erected till after the taking of
A^: secondly, that though the text speaks only of setting ^p great stones* and
plastering them with mortar, yet it is most probable that thereby is meant the
setting up or building of some notable monument with these stones, which should
be then plastered over with plaster for the more convenience of writing the law
thereon, which could not so well have been done upon the rough stones: thirdly,
that though it be not expressed what law of God it was that was to be written
on this monument, and therefore some conceive that it was the ten commandments,
others the curses and the blessings, which were then also to be pronounc^d upon
mount Ebal and mount Gerizzim, and others this whole book of Deuteronomie, the
law which Moses had now given them, and for the proving thereof they urge much,
that it is so often called, this law, as verse. 3. Thou shall write upon them
all the words of this law, and so again, verse. 32. it is said that he wrote
there upon the ston^s a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote in the
presence of the children of Israel; yet it is most probable that either the
cursings and blessings are here meant, or else the ten commandments, called the
ten words, Exodus 34. 28. which are the sum of the whole law, and that because
we cannot conceive how this whole book of Deuteronomi^ could be written upon
this monument in such fair plain characters that every one might read it, and
yet this was expressly enjoined them, verse. 8. And thou shall write upon these
stones all the words of this law v^ry plainly: and fourthly, that the end of
erecting this monument whereon the law was thus written was twofold; first,
that it might be a memorial to put them in mind, that when God did at first
bring them into the land it was upon these conditions, that they should serve
him as his peculiar people, and keep all those laws which he had given them in
charge; secondly, that finding also hereby how far they had been from doing
exactly what God had required of them, and that hereby they were left under the
curse, this might lead them to seek salvation in Christ, the promised Messiah.
And for this very reason it was also that this monument was set up in mount
Ebal, verse. 4. the mount whence the curse was denounced, verse. 13. against them
that continued not ^n all things written in the law, to signify that those
that sought salvation in the law must needs be left under the curse; and
secondly, together with this monument there was an altar built, and set up,
verse. 5. whereon they offered sacrifices, verse. 6, 7. to teach them, that the
righteousness and salvation which could not be attained by the works of the
law was to be sought in Christ, of whom this altar was a type, and who is
indeed the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes, Romans
10. 4.

Verse. 5. And there shall thou ^uild an altar unto the Lord thy God, an altar
of stones.] See the note upon Exodus 24. 4.

Thou shall not life up an iron tool upon them.] See the notes on Exodus 20. 24,
25.

Verse. 9. This day art thou become the people of the Lord thy God.] To wit,
because they had at this time in a solemn manner renewed their covenant with
God.

Verse. ^12. These shall stand upon mount Gerizzim to bless the people, etc.]
Moses here enjoins the people that when they had set up the monument of stones
on mount Ebal, whereon the law was written, and the ^ltar, mentioned verse. 5.
and had offered sacrifices thereon as God had commanded them, they should then
afterward in a solemn manner give their consent to the blessings and curses
that should be pronounced by the priests upon those that should keep, and upon
those that should break Gods laws; and the manner enjoined for the doing hereof
was this: Six of the tribes were to stand upon mount Gerizzim, to wit, Simeon
and Levi, and Judah and Issachar, and Joseph and Benjamin (where by the tribe
of Joseph is meant the two distinct tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, the sons
of Joseph, who are here joined together as one, because Levi is here reckoned
as one of the twelve) and these were all the posterity of Leah and Rachel; and
then the six other tribes were to ^tand upon mount Ebal, to wit, Gad and Asher,
Dan and Naphtali, who were the sons of the handmaids, and with them the
Tribes of Reuben, who for his sin lost his birthright, and Zebulun the
youngest of Leahs sons: and so the tribes being thus divided, the priests
came with the ark, Josh. 8. 32. into the little valley that was betwixt these
two mountains, and there first they pronounced the blessings (happily turning
their faces toward mount G^rizzim) and then all the tribes that stood on mount
Gerizzim answered Amen, and then turning again to mount Ebal they pronounced
the twelve curses, that are afterward set down in the latter end of this
chapter, and then all the tribes that stood on mount Ebal answered Amen. Indeed
in Josh. 8. 33. it is not said that the tribes stood upon mount Gerizzim and
upon mount Ebal, but that they stood half of them over against mount Gerizzim,
and half of them over against mount Ebal: But hereby one and the same thing is
meant, only it is so expressed in Joshua, either to intimate that the tribes
stood the one company right opposite against the other, or else rather because
the people, at least their rulers and officers, stood on the first ascending of
the hills, and so indeed rather over against them then upon them. Besides,
though there is no mention made here of the priests pronouncing the blessings,
but only the curses, yet in Joshua 8. 33. it is expressly said that Joshua
read (that is, the priests by Joshuas appointment) the blessings and the
curses: and therefore doubtless the blessings were read by the priests as well
as the curses, only Moses passes over the blessings, either because they
might be easily enough gathered from the contrary curses which are expressed,
or else (as some conceive) by this his silence in not mentioning the blessings,
to lead his prudent reader to look for the blessings by another, which is
Christ, Acts 3. 26. God having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless
you in turning every one of you away from his iniquities: for silence in the
holy story often implies great mysteries, as the Apostle shows from Moses
silence concerning Melchisedecs parents, Heb. 7. 3, etc. As for the reasons why
the Lord would have the people in such a solemn manner to give assent to these
blessings and curses thus pronounced in their hearing, we may probably conceive
it was, first, to teach them hereby that the law of God was just, the sinner
himself being judge, and that he who breaks them must needs be self-condemned
even by the light of a natural conscience; and secondly, the better to
restrain them from breaking these laws, where there was no danger of being
punished by the Magistrate, by putting them in mind that these sins would
however expose them to Gods curse. And indeed the rather may we think that this
God intended in this solemn service, because most of the sins here
particularly accursed are secret sins, as secret idolatry, verse. 15. the
secret removing of the landmark, verse. 17. incest, and bestialitie, and such
other sins as men are usual to conceal. Some add besides, that mount
Gerizzim being on the right hand of the priests, and mount Ebal on the left,
hereby that day was shadowed forth, when a blessing shall be pronounced on them
at the right hand, and a curse upon them at the left. But whether there was any
ground for this mystery, I question much: What is fit to be further observed
concerning this passage, we may see in the foregoing note upon chap. 11. 29.

Verse. 14. And the Levites shall speak and say unto all the men of Israel with
a loud voice, etc.] That is, the priests, the Levites, for so it is expressed,
Josh. 8. 33. and indeed the Levites in general stood upon mount Gerizzim
amongst their brethren of the other tribes, verse. 12.

Verse. 15. Cursed be the man that makes any graven or molten image, etc.]
Under this all sins against the first table are likewise accursed, and so
under the following particulars all sins against the second table.

And all the people shall answer and say, Amen.] So subscribing to the justice
of Gods law, and as it were wishing that the curse might befall them, if they
should in any of these things transgress Gods commandments.

Verse. 18. Cursed be he that makes the blind to wander out of the way.] And so
also much more they that mislead simple men and women into any dangerous and
damnable error, pernicious to their souls.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Verse. 1. THe Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the
earth.] That is, thou shall excel all other nations both in r^gard of
temporal blessings, and especially in regard of spiritual and heavenly
advancements.

Verse. 2. All these ble^sings shall come on thee, and overtake thee, etc.] They
shall come upon thee unexpectedly.

Verse. 3. Blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the
sield.] That is, in all places.

Verse. 4. Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground,
etc.] That is blessed shall thou be in all thy possessions.

Verse. 5. B^^ssed shall be thy basket and thy store.] That is, blessed shall
thou be in the use of all that thou have.

Verse. 6. Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be
when thou go out.] That is, in all thy employments, public or private.

Verse. 9. The Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself, etc.] This
chiefly is meant of spiritual blessings, of being Gods peculiar people, and
the firm perpetuity of ^he covenant made with them; and it is added in the last
place, as the chief ^iece (...) their happ^nesse.

V^^^. ^0. And all the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by
the n^me of the Lord, etc.] That is, that thou art the peculiar people of God:
for the meaning is, that all nations should plainly perceive by the singular
blessings that shall be heaped upon this people, that God did indeed own them
for his special people* and that they were called by his name, as sons are
called by the name of their (...) and wives by the names of their husbands.

V^^^. 12. The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure, the heaven, etc.]
Mos^s calls the heavens the Lords good treasure, because he keeps there in
store those things wherewith he causes the earth to yield abundance of
increase for the enriching of those that dwell therein, as the rain to water
the ground, the heat of the sun, and the influence of the moon and stars,
to make all things therein to grow and prosper, etc.

Verse. 13. And the Lord shall make thee the head and not the tail, etc.] That
is, thou shall be highly esteemed above other nations, and not scorned and
despised as a base and contemptible people.

Verse. 15. All these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.] That is,
there shall be no avoiding these judgments: though thou triest all ways, and
with all the skill and diligence that can be used do endeavor to escape and
fly from these miseries, yet it shall not be; thou may sometimes think that
thou art gotten out of danger, but thy hopes shall be in vain, these judgments
shall still pursue thee, and at last overtake thee.

Verse. 21. The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee, etc.] That ^s,
God will send the pestilence into thy cities and towns, and you shall be no
ways able to rid your selves of it when it is among you; in vain shall any
means be used to stay the spreading of the infection, because the Lord shall
command it to cleave unto you, and to continue amongst you.

Verse. 23. And the heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth
that is under thee shall be iron.] It is not without cause that Moses says
not, The heavens shall be brass, and the earth iron, but, the heaven that is
over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron;
for the Lord intended that this should give them a hint of fear, by showing
them how God had hemmed them in with judgments on every hand, if they should
walk rebelliously against him.

Verse. 24. The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust, etc.] That
is, in stead of rain there shall fall upon thy grounds, trees, plants, etc.
powder and dust, which the wind and other things raise in times of drought.

Verse. 28. The Lord shall smite thee with madness and blindness, etc.] It is
a spiritual madness and blindness and astonishment of heart which God here
threatens, to wit, when God deprives men of the use at least of their
understanding, that they stand in a manner like a blind man, or one that is
suddenly amazed or astonished, not knowing which way to turn themselves; or
shall do such things which if they were not bewitched (as S. Paul says of the
Galatians Gal. 3. 1.) if they were not blind or drunk or mad, as we use to say,
they would never. Accordingly therefore by groping at noonday, in the
following verse, all the effects are meant of this brutish stupidity and spirit
of giddiness, wherewith the Lord in his just judgment does many times strike
men, as when they shall cast themselves headlong into manifest dangers, and
shall not be able to apprehend the occasions of helping themselves, or doing
good to themselves, though never so clearly proffered unto them, when men shall
run on securely in those sins which the very light of nature must needs
tell them are the highway to hell, and when Gods anger is clearly discovered
by his judgments, yet they will not see it, when they shall live under
plentiful means of grace, and yet shall continue ignorant, or wilfully reject
both Christ and heaven: and indeed in this regard we may well say that the Jews
did thus, through Gods just judgment, grope at noonday, and so still do unto
this hour, in that the light of the Gospel shining upon them, they would not
nor will yet acknowledge Christ their promised Messiah, which makes the Apostle
say, 2. Cor. 3. 14. that until this day there is a vail over their minds in
the reading of the old testament, and Romans 11. 8. God has given them the
spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear, unto this day.

Verse. 30. Thou shall betroth a wife, and another man shall ly with her, etc.]
The sting of the judgment here threatened lies in this, that their enemies
should lie with those they had newly betrothed to be their wives, before
themselves had enjoyed them: and so it is likewise in the particulars
following, that they should be bereaved of their new-built houses before they
had dwelt a day in them, and of their vineyards before themselves had eaten of
the fruit of them. Though it be misery enough at any time to have those things
taken away by enemies, wherein we delight* yet it is a great aggravation of
this misery, when after we have taken much pains to get them, and have set our
hearts upon them, and are filled with hope and expectation of enjoying the
fruit of our labors, then on a sudden they should be snatched away, and so all
our hope should be quite dashed, and others should enjoy all the swee^ we had
labored for.

Verse. 32. Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people, and
thine eyes shall look and fail with longing, etc.] The judgment here threatened
is first, that they should behold with their eyes when their children were
carried away captive which is a great aggravation of this calamity; for it is
not so great a vexation to hear of the loss of goods, or children, as to have
them taken away before our eyes: and therefore also is that added, verse. 24. So
that thou shall be mad for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see,
because doubtless the sorrow that enters to the heart by the eye does usually
cut deeper then tha^ which enters by the eare^: and secondly, that their eyes
should look, and fail with longing for them, etc. whereby is meant either the
failing and marring of their eyes by their extreme mourning and weeping for
their children, or else (because there is mention made of longing for them)
that they should expect and wait for some help for the rescuing of their
children (even till eyes fail with waiting) but all in vain, in that they
should never be able to deliver them.

Verse. 33. The fruit of thy land, and all thy labors, shall a nation which
thou know not eat up, etc.] From whom the less mercy can be expected: and
withal God implies how vain their hope of peace should be, grounded with their
friendship with all the nations about them, since he was able to bring a nation
upon them whom they know not, and whom therefore they never feared.

Verse. 36. The Lord shall bring thee and thy King, which thou shall set over
thee, etc.] Observable it is that it is so expressly noted, that not only
they, but their King also should be carried into captivity: for first, hereby
is employed the universalitie of the judgment, in that not so much as their
King should be able to escape out of the hand of those over-bearing enemies;
and secondly, it is a great aggravation of any peoples misery when their Kings
are cut off, that are the chief hope of any state: when the head is under
water, the whole body must needs be in great danger, and therefore we shall
find in public judgments the people of God have still lamented above all for
the loss of their prince, as Lam. 4. 20. The breath of our nostrils, the
anointed of the Lord, was taken in their pit, of whom we said, Under his shadow
shall we live among the heathen.

And there shall thou serve other gods, wood and stone. [To wit, either being
seduced by the enticing persuasions of those idolaters, amongst whom you shall
live there, or else forced to it by the tyranny of your Lor^s and masters. In
either of these cases it was a heavy judgment to Gods people, as being an evil
that endangered their souls and their eternal well-being, as so it is here
threatened as the most grievous of all miseries; yet withal there is couched in
these words too an exprobration of this peoples pronenesse to idolatry,
intimating that then they should ^ave gods enough, and b^ ^lutted with
superstitious will worship, to which they were so strongly (...)*

Verse. 37. And th^^ (...) ^^come an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword,
word, etc.] There is much included in this threatening, as that their calamities
should be so great that their very enemies should be astonished at them, and
that they should be the common table-talk of those that had vanquished them.
But the chief thing intended is, that they should be slouted, and scorned, and
made a laughing stock in all places wherever they came.

Verse. 38. The stranger that is within thee shall get above thee very high,
etc.] Moses had before threatened that the enemies of their land should prevail
against them, and tyrannize over them; but now he adds, as a farther degree of
misery, that the very strangers, that formerly lived amongst them only by
permission as sojourners* should come to lord it over them, and be in far
better condition then themselves: and indeed it does much increase men's
distress when they come to be so far beneath those that were formerly as
far beneath them.

Verse. 45. Moreover all these curses shall come upon thee, and pursue thee, and
overtake thee, etc.] See the foregoing note upon verse. 15.

Verse. 48. He shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, till he have destroyed
thee.] Their bondage is here compared to a yoke of iron, not only because it
should be so heavy and insupportable, by reason of the many g ievous miseri^s
they should suffer there, but also because they should be no way able to break
the yoke from off their necks, that is, to rid themselves out of their
bondage, but should continue under it, until it had utte^ly consumed them.

Verse. 49. And the Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the
end of the earth, as swift as the eagle flies.] That is, sudde^ly*
unexpectedly, and with unresistable violence. And indeed the Babylonian, the
nation here intended, is described to be a lion with eagles wings, Dan. 7. 4.
and Nebuchadnezzar is likened to a great eagle with great wings, as we ^ay see,
Ezech. 17. 3, 12. and there is often mention made of their swiftness, as Jer.
4. 13. Behold* he shall come upon us as clouds, and his charets shall be as a
whirl wind; his horses are swifter then eagles. Lam. 4. 19. Our persecutours
are swifter then the eagles of the heaven, they persued us upon the mountains,
etc.

A nation whose tongue thou shall not understand.] So that it shall not be
possible to call for mercy at his hand.

Verse. 5^. And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and
fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst, etc.] This last clause, wherein
thou ^rustedst, is added not only to intimate that the enemy that God would
bring against them would batter down their strongest walls and bulwarks, but
also by way of upbrayding them* for putting too much confidence in such things
as these, which alas should be no help at all to secure them against those
enemies that God would send to destroy them.

Verse. 57. And toward her young one that comes out from between her feet.]
The Heb^ew word signifies her af^er-birth, and implies that the mother should
devour both that and the child with it, which much aggravates the judgment.

Verse. 62. And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars
of heaven for multitude.] Which being dire^tly contrary to that which God had
promised, must needs be an evident sign of Gods displeasure against them.

Verse. 63. The Lord will re^oyce over you to destroy you, and to bring you to
naught.] The drift of these words is to imply how great the indignation of the
Lord against them should be, that should make him not only destroy, but also
rejoice in destroying a nation that had formerly been so precious in his eyes,
and for whom he had done such great and wonderful t^ings. Nor does this
contradict what the Lord says, Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, etc. for though God does not
delight in the destruction of his creatures, yet as there is an execution of
justice done upon wicked men that despise his mercy, the Lord is pleased with
it, and rejoices to destroy them.

And ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou go to possess it.]
To be carried away from their native country is to all men a heavy judgment,
but much heavier to the Jews then to any others, their land being the
inheritance given them of God; therefore their expulsion out of Canaan was a
loss of the pledge of their adopt^on, and a sign, as it were, that their
heavenly father had disinherited and cast them off.

Verse. 64. And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, etc.] That is, you
shall not only be carried away captive into a strange land, but also when you
come thither you shall be dispersed and scattered abroad into several places.
A great degree of their misery: when they were carried captives out of their
native country, had they dwelt all together in the land of their captivity, it
had been the less grievous; but to be dispersed into s^verall places, where
they should not see the faces of their brethren, that was a ^ore calamity
indeed.

Verse. 65. And among these nations shall thou find no ^ase, neither shall the
sole of thy foot have rest, etc.] That i^, when you are brought into a strange
country, ye shall be there as far from being settled as ye were before,
because there ye shall be continually removed and carried ab^^t from one place
to another. And indeed it was just with God, that this people, which would not
serve him in the land of his rest, Psalm. 95. 11. which was to t^em also a
pledge of eternal rest prepared in heaven, should be driven from t^ence, and
live for ever after in a restl^sse cond^tion.

Verse. 66. And thy life shall ^ang in doubt before thee, etc.] That is, thou
shall be in a continual doubt and ^ear of losing thy life: for so it is
explained in the following words, thou shall fear day and night, and shall have
no assurance of thy life. Now this their fear was occasioned partly by the
savage cruelty of their lords and masters, and partly by the guilt that lay
upon their consci^nces, which made them continually look that God should cut
them o^f in his wrath and di^pl^^^ure. And indeed observable it is that the
^eathen Poet should in this regard (...) them by the name of Judaea treme^s,
that is, Judaei trementes, trembling Jews, Juven. Sat. 6.

Verse. 67. And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again, with ships, by the
way whereof I spoke unto thee, thou ^halt see it no more again.] That is, the
Lord shall cause you to be carried again by ships into Egypt, whither he had
said you shall not return no more (as is noted, chap. 17. 16. the place to
which these words have reference) though there be mention both there and here
of returning into Egypt by the way through which they came when they came out
of Egypt, to wit, because that was the ordinary way betwixt Canaan and Egypt,
yet both places are to be understood generally of any returning into Egypt, and
not only of returning by the same way. It is true indeed that when the Jews,
after the destruction of Jerusalem, were sold for slaves by the Romans, though
many of them were then carried away by shipping into Egypt (and so that was
then accomplished which is here threatened) yet it might be well enough said
that they were brought back into Egypt ^y the way whereof God said, thou shall
see it no more, to wit, by the way of the wilderness, and that because we may
suppose that being brought by shipping near to the plains of Moab, they were
then set on shore, and so were carried the r^st of the way on foot through the
wilderness. But I say there is no necessity that we should understand this
precisely of their being carried into Egypt by the way they went out from
thence: That which is here threatened is only this, that God would bring them
to be slaves again in Egypt; and we need not wonder that this is threatened in
the last place, as a most remarkable judgment, if we consider how terrible the
very name of Egypt must needs be to them in regard of those grievous miseries
their fathers had already endured there; and that Gods undoing of that which he
had done, and bringing them back to that bondage from which he had rescued
them, when he at first took them to be his peculiar people, was a kind of
discharging them from being any longer his people, as if he had quit^ cast them
off, and meant no more to take any care of them, or to own them for his people.

And there ye shall be sold to your enemies for bondmen and bond-women, and no
man shall buy you.] This last clause, and no man shall buy you, is added, to
imply either that there should be so many of them to sale that there should not
be buyers enough to buy them (as we read in the Hi^^ories of those times, that
after the dest^uction of Jerusalem by Titus there were nin^y and seven thousand
captives of the Jews, so that they scarce knew where to sell them) or ^lse that
the Jews should be so vilified and despised, that no man should profer any
money for them. And indeed why else should this be here added? when a man is
once in bondage, the likelihood of being passed to another master dot^ rather
increase his sorrow then otherwise. He knows the worst where he is; what he may
suffer elsewhere, he knows not, and therefore one would think it should be a
comfo^t to him that no one would buy him. But I say, it is the base esteem,
which men o^ all nations should have of the Jews, which the holy Ghost here
aims at, it being to all men a great vexation to be slighted and vilified, as
if they were not worthy the looking after.

CHAP. XXIX.
Verse. 1. THese are the words of the covenant which the Lord commanded Moses,
etc.] Either this has reference to all that went before in this book, to wit,
that the law which he had repeated and explained amongst them was the covenant
which the Israelites were to enter into, that is, that which they were now by
covenat to bind themselves to do; or else they may have reference to that which
follows after, to wit, in the sequel of the chapter, The words of the covenant
which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel, that is,
the words he was to use to the people when he was now to prepare them for the
solemn renewing of their covenant with God, the work which they were
immediately to enter upon. Hitherto Moses had repeated the Laws of God, and now
^hey were to renew the covenant which God had made with their fathers in Horeb,
at the first giving of the Law; and this is that for which in this chapter he
now bends himself to prepare the people.

Verse. 5. Your clothes are not waxed old upon you, and thy shoe is not waxed
old upon thy foot.] See the note chap. 8. 4.

Verse. 6. Ye have not eaten bread, neither have you drunk wine, or strong
drink.] The more miraculously God had preserved them, the more evident was Gods
care over them, and the more reason they had to be circumspectly careful of
yielding obedience to all his commandments; and therefore it is that Moses puts
them in mind how the Lord had sustained them without bread, or wine, and strong
drink, feeding them with manna from heaven in stead of bread; and doubtless
ordinarily they had no other bread, though at sometimes they might; of which
see the note, Deuteronomy. 2. 6.

Verse. 12. That thou should enter into covenant with the Lord thy God, and
into his oath, etc.] That is, into the covenant confirmed with an oath.

Verse. 15. But with him that stands here with us this day, before the Lord
thy God, and also with him that is not here with us this day, etc.] That is* no
less with him that is not here with us, that is, your posterity that is not
yet born, t^en with him that stands here with us this day.

Verse. 16. For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt, and how we came
through the nations, etc.] This has reference to that which went before, verse.
12. 13. where he told them that they were now met together that they might
enter into covenant with the Lord their God: and the reason why this is added
may be twofold: first, to show how requisite it was that they should renew
their cov^nant with God, because having dwelt in the land of Egypt (at least
many of them in their younger years) and having gone through many idolatrous
nations in their passage toward Canaan, and seen their several idolatries and
abominations, there was some cause of fear lest perhaps some of them were
tainted by this means, and therefore it was fit, to prevent this, that they
should all solemnly renew their covenant with God, and hereto agrees that which
follows* verse. 18. Lest there should be among you man or woman or family whose
heart turns this day from the Lord our God to go and serve the gods of these
nations: or secondly, to persuade them to be willing to enter into this
^ovenant, to wit, both from the experience they had of the gross abominations
of these idolatrous people, and the Lords severitie in punishing them, and
likewise from the consideration of Gods fatherly providence in carrying them
safe through so many dangers.

Ve^s. 18. Le^t there should be among you a root that bears gall and
wormwood.] The ga^l and wormwood here meant, or the poysonfull herb and
wormwood, as it is in the margin* is idolatry, of which Moses spoke in the
foregoing words, or more generally all sins of rebellion against God, and
they are so c^lled, either because they are displeasing and distasteful to God,
even as gall and wormwood are to us, or because they will prove to the sinner
and such as shall by him be infected bitterness in the end, yea as deadly
^oyson to his and their souls: and thus the Scripture speaks of sin in other
places, as Amos 5. 6, 7. Seek the Lord -- ye who turn judgment to wormwood;
and Heb. 12. 15. Lest an^ root of bitterness springing up, trouble you, and
thereby many be desi^ed. And as sor the root that bears gall and wormwood,
thereby is meant either the evil apos^atizing heart forementioned, lest there
should be among you man or woman, etc. whose heart turns away from the Lord
our God* etc. of which also the Ap^stle speaks after the some manner, Heb. 3.
12. Take heed* brethren, lest ^here be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief
in departing from the living God: and this is called the root, that bears
this gall and wormwood, because it is hidden from men as the root is hidden
under the earth, and yet is the very spring from whence idol^trie an^ all other
sins do grow, so that when men give over their evil ways* and yet purge not
sin o^t of the heart, it is but as the cropping of weeds in a ga^den, when
the roots are left behind; or ^lse rather, the root here intended is ^ome close
idolaters that might be amongst them, who concealing themselves from the
public view, as the root is hidden under the ground, would secretly by their
example and persuasions in^ect and poison many, and cause their wicked
practices to grow and spread amongst the people, till at length they brake
forth openly to the ruin of all. And indeed the whole series of the words,
both before and after, seem plainly to be spoken of some dangerous persons that
might be amongst them, the mischief whe^eof he desires to prevent, by causing
them all to enter into a solemn covenant with God, Lest, says Moses, there
should be amongst you man or woman, or family or tribe, whose heart turns
away this day srom the Lord our Go^ to go and serve the gods of these na^ions;
lest there should be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood. (and then
mark what follows) And it come to pass when he hears the words of this
curse, etc. All the way he speaks of some false-spirited men that might be
amongst them.

Verse. 19. I shall ^^ve peace though I walk in the imaginations of min^ hear^,
to add drunkenness to thirst.] This is the voice of the s^cure sinner, that
despises the curse, and presump^^ously assures himself of peace and imp^nitie,
though he does that which he hears accursed in Gods law; I shall have peace,
says he, though I w^lk in the imaginations of mine heart, that is* though I do
what I list my self, or wh^t seems good in mine own eyes, to add drunkenness
to thirst. Now men thus imboldning themselves with hope of impuniti^ may be
said to add drunkenness to thirst in two respects: First, because whereas
naturally they thirst aster sin^e, but yet are restrained by the light and
checks of conscience, this makes them add sin to sin in abundance, to
drink iniquity like water, Job 34. 7. to work all uncleanness with
greediness, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 19. it makes them let loo^e
themselves even to take their fill and glut of sin, till they become at
length, like drunken men, vo^d of all sense and reason and remorse of
conscience, not having any thing left in them to keep them in from the
prosecuting of any villainy whatsoever: and secondly, because the longer and
further men proceed to satiate themselves with sin, the greedier they will
still be upon it, this giving of themselves to take their ^ill of sin being
as sure to make their desires after sin more eager then they were before, as
drunkenness is to increase thirst.

Verse. 20. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man.] That is, it will break forth with
great fury and terror against him. Moses alludes in this Metaphor, of the
smoking of Gods anger and jealousy against such men, either to the breath
which will break from the nostrils of some men, especially when they are in a
great chafe and fury; whence is also that expression of David's concerning the
Lords high displeasure and indignation, there went up a smoke out of his
nostrils, Psalm. 18. 8. or else to the terror and violence of smoke, which will
arise and break forth from any combustible matter when it is first set on fire,
even hiding and covering the light of the heavens with its bl^^k clouds.

Verse. 23. And that the whole land thereof is brimstone, and salt, and burning,
etc.] That is, dried up, barren and good for nothing. Brimstone and salt,
wherever they abound, will so dry up the moisture of any grounds that they
will be extremely parched and barren; and hence is this expression here used,
not unlike that also, Jer. 17. 6. For he shall be like the heath in the desert,
and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the
wild^rnesse, in a salt land, and not inhabited.

Verse. 26. For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them, gods whom
they knew not, and whom he had not given unto them.] The last clause of this
verse may be diversely translated: If we read it as it is in the margin of our
Bibles, Who had not given to them any portion, then it contains an exprobration
of the ingratitude and folly of the Is^aelites in forsaking the Lord, who had
given them the land of Canaan, and many o^^er ways done so much for them, to
go and worship other gods, who had done, and indeed could do, nothing for them.
But if we read it, a^ it is in our text, And whom he had not given unto them,
then it contains the reason why they did so highly provoke God by their
idolatry, to wit, because the Lord had not appointed them any such way of
worship: for we must know that the Israelites in all their idol-worship did
still pretend the worshipping of the true God under those id^l-gods* and
therefore against that pretense this is opposed, that he had not given unto
them any such gods, nor prescribed them any such way of worshipping him.

Verse. 28. And cast them into another land, as it is this day, etc.] These are
^till the words of the natious that should thus in time to come talk of Gods
judgments upon the Israelites after they were carried away as captives into a
strange country.

Verse. 29. The secret things belong unto the Lord our God, but those things
which are revealed, etc.] The meaning of these words is plain and easy; but
yet why they are inserted here, and what was Moses drift herein, is not easily
discerned. Some say that this is not unfitly subjoyned to the foregoing
exhortation for observing carefully the laws of God, because it discovers, and
so gives us a hint to take heed of an ordinary root of disobedience, to wit,
when men are ambitious to know and busily search after Gods secret counsels,
which they have nothing to do with, and by that means are taken off from
minding those revealed duties which do so nearly concern them. But I rather
conceive that this clause is here inserted, either by way of explaining what he
had formerly delivered, to wit, that he said not that they should certainly be
thus destroyed, as is before mentioned; No, whether your posterity (says he)
will by their rebellion thus provoke God, and so bring this heavy indignation
upon the land, that is only known to God, and secret things belong unto the
Lord, we must not meddle with them: but that which he had said was only this,
that if they did thus provoke the Lord, then all this ruin should certainly
befall them, this God had revealed, and that which God had revealed it became
them and their children seriously to lay to heart: or else by way of preventing
an objection; for if against all this that he had threatened they should object,
that God was infinitely merciful, and would not therefore destroy his people;
to this he an^wers, Secret things belong unto the Lord, how far he will show
mercy either in forbearing you, or giving you grace to repent, that depends
only upon his secret counsel, and we cannot search into it; those things which
are revealed belong unto us, and to our children for ever, and that which is
revealed is, that if we rebel against him, he will pour out all these
judgments upon the land, except by repentance and turning to him we prevent
this ruin: which is that therefore we must look to* that so by avoiding the
sin we may prevent the judgment. And this most probably is the full drift of
this clause. And so Mo^es ^akes way likewise to those promises of mercy to the
penitent, which follow immediately in the next chapter.

CHAP. XXX.
Verse. 1. ANd it shall come to pass when all these things are come upon th^^,
the blessing and the curse, etc.] As if he had said, when thou have had
experience both of the one and the other, thou shall by proof see how much
be^ter it is to serve God then to rebel against him, this will then bring thee
^o tur^ ^o the Lord, and the Lord will then again be favorable to thee.

Verse. 3. Then the Lord thy Go^ will turn thy captivity, and have comp^ssi^^
upon thee, etc.] That is, upon their serious repentance. So that it is of Gods*
mercy and compassion rather then any thing else that those that do most
seriously r^pent find favor at his hand.

Verse. 6. And the Lo^d thy God will circu^c^s^ thin^ he^rt.] See chap. 10. 16.

Ver^. 9. And the Lord thy God will m^ke th^e plenteous in ^very work of thine
hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the
fruit of thy lan^, for good.] That is, he will not bestow these outward
blessings upon thee, but it shall be for thy good that thou have them: Many are
the worse for abundance of outward things; then only are they true bl^ssings
when they are given men for their good.

Verse. 11. For this commandment, which I command thee this day, it is not
^idden from thee, neither is it far off.] By the commandment given them in
charge, which Moses here speaks of, is not meant the law only, but the whole
doctri^e of Mo^es, wherein he had revealed unto them the will of God concerning
the way and means of salvation, to wit* faith in Christ, the Messiah, and new
obedience following thereupon: and this, ^e says, they could not now neglect
under a pretense of ignorance, that they knew it not, because God had so fully
and effectually made it known unto them. Thus the Apostle teaches us under
this place, Romans 10. where he tells us that this commandment which Moses here
speaks of is the speech of the righteousness which is of faith, verse. 6. But
the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise, Say not in thine
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? and calls it therefore the word of
faith, verse. 8. And besides it is plain that Moses intended this by his own
words here used: for why else does he say that the commandment which he
commanded them was plain and ea^ie, that they might hear it and do it, verse.
12. and that it was very nigh unto them, in their mo^ths, and in their hearts,
verse. 14. Since no perspicuity of the Law can make it easy to be done, but as
it is given by the hand of a Mediator Evangelically to be kept by us; nor is
the Law written in our hearts, but as we are in covenant with God in and
through Christ. That therefore which Moses says was not hidden from them, the
doctrine of ^alvation by faith in Christ, and the law as it was the rule of new
obedience that ever accompanies true faith: for though the righteousness
which is of faith was not so clearly then revealed as it is now, and in that
regard comparatively is said to have been then hid, Col. 1. 26. The mystery
which has been hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest
to his saints; and far off, Heb. 11. 13. These all died in faith, not having
re^eived the promises, but having seen them afar off, etc. yet it was not so
hid that it was impossible for them to attain, and the law was plain and easy
to be per^ormed evangelically.

Verse. 12. It is not in heaven* that thou should say, Who shall go up for us
to ^eav^n?] That is, you cannot say that God has not revealed his will unto
you, that you would do it if you knew it, or that he has given you a dark and
obscure law, which you are not able to reach, Esa. 45. 19. I have not spoken in
secret, in a dark place of the earth; I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek
ye me in vain. I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are
right. How these passages are applied by S. Paul, see Romans 10. 6. 7.

Verse. 14. But the word is very n^gh unto thee in thy mouth, etc.] That is, it
is so clearly reve^led that thou may confess it with thy mouth, and believe
i^ with thy heart, to wit, being the^eto en^bled by the spirit of regeneration.

Verse. 19. I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, etc.] See
Deuteronomy. 4. 26.

CHAP. XXXI.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses went and spoke these words unto all Israel.] That is,
having caused the people to be assembled together according to the usual
manner, he then went unto the assembly, and spoke unto them that which here
follows.

Verse. 2. And he said unto them, I am a hundred and twenty years old this day,
I can no more go out and come in.] One main reason of calling this assembly was
that Moses might in a solemn manner substitute Joshua to succeed in his room:
and accordingly in the first place he addresseth his speech to persuade the
people not to be troubled at this change; for though the people had often
murmured and rebelled against Moses, yet being at length brought by him to the
borders of the land of Canaan, and having had such good experience of his
faithfulness in governing, it could not but be an occasion of much grief and
fear to be deprived now of him, to lose him just now when they were entering the
land; and therefore he seeks now to comfort them and to prevent their excessive
sorrow, and that first by putting them in mind of his years, not that he was
already by reason of his years unfit for this weighty office, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. but
that by the course of nature they might well expect he must now grow weak, and
decay, and wax unfit for such great labors, though God had hitherto
miraculously preserved him. As for that phrase, I can no more go out and come
in, see Numb. 27. 17.

Also the Lord has said unto me, Thou shall not go over this Jordan.] This is
a second argument whereby he persuades them to be content to part with him,
Also the Lord has said unto me, Thou shall not go over this Jordan: as if he
should have said, Had I been never so young, never so able to go in and out
before you, since God has determined that I must not c^^ry you over Jordan,
but must here end my days, it is fit that we should all yield to his good
pleasure.

Verse. 3. The Lord thy God he will go over before thee, etc.] As if he had
said, It was God before by whom ye prevailed against your enemies, even when I
was with you, and he will not leave you but destroy your enemies as formerly,
and therefore you shall have no cause to be dejected because I am taken away,
for your God will still be with you.

Verse. 7. And Moses called unto Joshua and said unto him in the sight of all
Israel, Be strong, and of a good courage, etc.] That is, be not dis^aid either
at the strength of the enemies, against whom thou must lead this people; or at
any other troubles that shall befall thee in executing this place of Magistracy
whereto thou art called: and indeed Captains and Magistrates have of all other
most need of courage and faith in Gods providence and assistance.

Verse. 9. And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it to the priests, etc.] That
is, when Moses had written this book of the law, the book of Deuteronomie, he
delivered it solemnly in the sight of the people, unto the priests, and unto
all the Elders of Israel, even thereby to give them to understand that they
were the men to whose charge it did especially appertain to see that this
original book of the law were safely kept, and that the laws contained therein
were duly observed, both by them and by the people. The priests were to teach
the people the knowledge of this law, and to them it did belong to uphold and
maintain his truth and will therein revealed, that it might not be overborn or
trodden under soot by any possessed with a spirit of error and profaneness;
and therefore was the law delivered to them: and the Elders, they were to
assist the priests and the Levites, and to see that the people regarded them in
their places, and withal to see that the judicial laws were executed: and
therefore to them also the law was delivered. As for the description of the
priests, the sons of Levi which bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord, it
may also be added to imply another reason why the book of the law was given to
them, namely, because they were to lay up this book in the side of the ark,
verse. 26. And though the Levites did usually bear the ark, Numb. 3. 31. and 4.
15. yet sometimes, especially upon extraordinary occasions, the priests also
carried it, as when they passed over Jordan, Josh. 3. 16, 17. and when they
compassed Jericho, Josh. 6. 12. and they had always the chief charge to look
to the ark and the other holy things.

And Moses commanded them, saying. At the end of every seven years, etc.] The
sum of this passage is briefly this, that Moses commanded the priests to read
this book of the law every seventh year, which was the year of release, amongst
the people, and that upon the feast of tabernacles that year. Concerning the
year of release, and the phrase here used, At the end of every seven years, see
the note upon chap. 15. 1. But besides for the fuller understanding of this
passage we must note, first, That the law, which the priests were here enjoined
to read amongst the people every seventh year on the feast of tabernacles, was
the original copy of this book of the law which Moses wrote, and which he now
delivered to the priests to be kept by them. Doubtless some part of the book
of the law was read amongst them by the Levites every Sabbath day, Acts 15. 21.
For Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being read in
the Synagogues every Sabbath day; nor can it be questioned but that the people
had books of the law, in the reading whereo^ they did daily in private exercise
themselves: if this were required of their kings, chap. 17. 18, 19. much more
may we think it was required of them that were of inforiour rank. But yet once
in seven years God would have this book to be read by the priests, from the
beginning to the end, amongst the people, both that being read in such a solemn
manner it might take the deeper impression in them, and so cause them to fear
the Lord their God, and to observe to do all the words of this law, as it
follows, verse. 12. and perhaps also that it might be made manifest to all
Israel that those copies of the law which they had, and which were read and
expounded to them every Sabbath day, did agree with this original which Moses
wrote: and secondly, that the reason why God appointed this to be done on the
year of release, was not only because that year they had most liberty of mind
to intend that service, the l^nd lying that year at rest, and themselves being
freed from the danger of having their debts exacted of them; but also because
it was a holy year, the Sabbath of years, and so the fitter for this
extraordinary duty: and thirdly, that this was appointed to be done at the
feast of tabernacles that year, because then all Israel came to appear before
the Lord, as it is said, verse. 11. for though the males only were bound to
come up at the feast, Exodus 23. 17. yet they did usually carry with them their
women also, and therefore it is said, verse. 12. Gather the people together, men
and women and children, etc. that they may hear, and that they may learn, etc.

Verse. 14. Call Joshua, and present your selves in the tabernacle of the
congregation, etc.] This was thus done, that the people might be fully
satisfied that he was called of God to this place, and that Joshua himself
might be put in mind that he was but Gods deputy, and so might still
acknowledge Gods sovereignty over him, and be the more faithful in discharging
the trust which God had put into his hands.

Verse. 16. This people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods of the
strangers of the land whither they go to be amongst them.] The gods whom they
have vanquished, as it were, that could neither preserve themselves, nor the
people that served them, for the worshipping whereof the land had spewed out
these her inhabitants.

Verse. 17. I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, etc.] That
is, I will cast them off, and take no more charge of them as my people: and so
when all kind of miseries do then come upon them, though they seek for me to
help, yet I will hide my face from them, and will not regard them.

Verse. 19. Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the children
of Israel, etc.] To wit, that which follows in the following chapter,
containing a prophecy of their falling away from God, and Gods just judgment
upon them for this their apostasy. It was given in a song, that it might be the
better remembered, and might the more work upon their affections: and the
Israelites were to learn and sing it, that in time to come, when they should so
provoke God by their sins, as is there set forth, and God should thereupon
punish them with those very evils which are there foretold, this song as out of
their own mouths might be a witness for God against them, to wit, that the
evils they suffered were of Gods sending, as being the very judgments which
God had long since threatened; and that God had in that song given them warning
enough, and they were therefore inexcusable, because notwithstanding this
warning they had brought these miseries upon themselves.

Verse. 21. For I know their imaginations which they go about, even now.] That
is, what they will do hereafter I know now, yea I see the false hypocrisy of
their hearts and their pronenesse to idolatry even at this present. This I
conceive is the drift of these words: yet it might be also intended to intimate
that there were some amongst them that had base apostatizing tho^ghts already
in their hearts.

Verse. 26. Take this book of the law, and put it in the side of the ark of the
covenant, etc.] That is, not the ark (for there was nothing in the ark save the
two tables of stone which Moses put there in Horeb, 1. Kings 8. 9.) but on the
outside of the ark, where was the pot of Manna, and Aarons rod. And this was
appointed, to signify that it was the law of God, though written by Moses, and
so the people might hear it with the more reverence and attention when it was
brought forth thence and read amongst them; and withal, that God would keep
and preserve it, and take vengeance on those that should disregard and despise
it. Indeed this was that very book which was found in the treasury of the
temple in Josiahs time, 2. Chron. 34. 14. and therefore it seems it was removed
from the ark in after-ages, and kept in some other place of the temple, wherein
seeing they transgressed the directions which God here gave to the priests, no
marvel though this precious treasure was for some years lost and not looked
after.

Verse. 28. That I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and
earth to record against them.] See the note, chap. 4. 26.

CHAP. XXXII.
Verse. 1. GIve ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak, and hear, O earth, etc.]
That is, the song mentioned in the former chapter, which God gave Moses, verse.
19. and commanded him to teach the people. And this Rhetorical expression
which Moses uses in the beginning of this song is to imply, first, of what
great importance it was which he was about to say, that it was fit all the
world should hearken to it; secondly, to imply how strangely stupid Gods own
people were, that he had as much hope that the senseless and unreasonable
creatures should hearken to him as they.

Verse. 2. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, etc.] That is, look as the dew,
the small rain, and great showrs distilling and falling down upon the grass
and herbs, do soften the ground, and so cause the grass and herbs and plants,
etc. to sprout out and grow up sweetly, and to bring forth abundance of fruit;
so shall my words prove profitable and effectual for the good of those that
hear them, softening their hearts, making all grace to grow and thrive in
their souls, and causing them to be abundantly fruitful in every good work, to
wit, unless they fall upon hearts like stones, or sandy ground, where nothing
can grow: which is much at one with that which the Lord says of his word, Isa.
55. 10. As the rain comes down, and the snow from heaven, and returns not
thither, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, etc. so
shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth, etc.

Verse. 3. Because I will publish the name of the Lord, ascribe ye greatness to
our God.] Some Expositours by publishing the name of the Lord, understand his
setting forth the excellencies of God, to wit, his infinite power, wisdom,
righteousness, etc. and by ascribing greatness to our God, they understand
also glorifying of God, and extolling his name; and so they conceive the
meaning of these words to be as if Moses had said, because I intend to show
forth the glory of the Lord, the drift of this song being to praise his name by
showing his faithful and righteous dealing with Israel, and so to lay the
blame of their revolt upon them, and to clear God of it, therefore let Israel
ascribe greatness to our God, to wit, either by obeying his will, or else by
justifying God and condemning themselves if they be punished for rebelling
against them. But I rather think that by publishing the name of the Lord is
meant only his speaking to them in the name of the Lord or in Gods stead, and
so by ascribing greatness to our God is meant their regarding the words he
should speak as became them that were to hear the great God of heaven and
earth speaking to them; and so the sense of these words to be this, Because I
will publish the name of the Lord, that is, because I shall speak to you in the
name of the Lord, and what I shall deliver shall be from God, the word of God,
speaking by me; ascribe ye greatness to our God, that is, make it manifest
that you reverence the Majesty of that great God that now speaks unto you, to
wit, by attending to what is spoken with all humility, by laying it to heart,
and yielding obedience thereto. And indeed they that hear God reverently when
he speaks, and tremble at his word, Isa. 66. 2. they that are deeply moved with
what is spoken, and endeavor to obey it with all their might, their hearts are
effected as they ought to be with the majesty and greatness of God: and on the
other side, all irreverence and carelessness in hearing Gods word, and all
slighting and disregarding of what he speaks, argues a secret vilifying of God
in the heart.

Verse. 4. He is the rock, his work is perfect, etc.] These two verses following
contain the sum of the greatest part of the song, to wit, that God was no way
to be blamed for his dealing with the Israelites, but that all the blame must
rest upon them, who had causelessly revolted from him, and so had given him just
cause to pour out his wrath upon them. Had God failed or come short in any
thing that should have been done, had he not made good his promises, or had
there been any thing to be desired that was not to be found in God, their
defection from him might have been excused under that pretense. But no such
thing could be said of God. No, says Moses, He is the rock, his work is
perfect, etc. first, he is the rock, that is, he is an almighty, stable* sure
refuge and foundation to all those that fly to him, and rely upon him, If God
be for us, who can be against us? Romans 8. 31. neither indeed is there any sure
shelter to be had but only in him. In times of danger men used to fly to rocks
to shelter themselves, 1. Sam. 13. 6. To show therefore that in times of danger
those that fly to God, and are taken into his protection, are sure and safe,
and none but they, the Scripture styles him the rock: as the coney that flies
to the holes in the rocks does easily avoid the dogs that pursue her, when
the hare, that trusts to the swiftness of her legs, is at length overtaken and
torn in pieces; so those that seek rightly to God in their distress, and trust
in nothing but his protection, do find him a sure impregnable rock of defense,
whereas they that trust in their own policy, or wealth, etc. shall at length be
surprised and destroyed, and there shall be none to help them. Thus God is the
rock. And again, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment, etc.
that is, his dealing with his people has been exactly just and holy in the
highest degree of perfection, nor has there been any the least failing in any
thing that he has done, Jer. 2. 5. Thus says the Lord, What iniquity have
your fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me, etc. And indeed
because God is infinite in power, and wisdom, and goodness, etc. and
therefore it is not possible that any thing should be better done then as God
does it, even in those works of God that have some imperfection in them, as in
giving children born blind, or lame, etc. yet as they are acts of providence,
there is a perfection of wisdom, holiness, and justice in them, and there is
nothing at all in them for which he can be blamed.

Verse. 5. They have corrupted themselves.] Having in the former verse justified
God, and shown that he was not to be blam^d if Israel were destroyed, here
Moses begins to show that all the blame belonged to the Israelites themselves,
and that because they had corrupted themselves, that is, they had broken
covenant with God; though they professed themselves his people, and called him
their father, yet they were degenerated from the holy ways of their fathers,
and were become a wicked and sinful people.

Their spot is not the spot of his children.] Others translate this clause, as
it is in the margin of our Bibles, that they are not his children, that is
their blot, and then the meaning must needs be this, that whatever they had
formerly been, yet they had now brought this stain and dishonor upon
themselves that they were not indeed the children of God. But the translation
in our Bibles does best agree with the scope of the place, their spot is not
the spot of my children, that is, their wickedness is greater then can stand
with the condition of being my children. The best of Gods children have their
spots and blemishes, their infirmities and corruptions: But to live in the
ordin^ry practice of gross sins, and to give themselves over to wicked
courses are degrees of evil which are not compatible with true grace: these
spots are ^ot the spots of his children, who must be holy as their father in
heaven is holy. And this is that which Moses here charge upon the Israelites,
though in regard of outward profession the Lord was their father, and they his
children, as himself afterward says, verse. 6. Is not he thy father that has
bought thee, etc. yet the wickedness of their lives was evidence enough that
they were not such indeed and in truth, their spot is not the spot of his
children.

They are a perverse and crooked generation.] Moses calls them cr^^ked, because
both their hearts and ways were so dissonant to the right rule of Gods will
and Law; and perverse, because they were so untoward and untractable, that
nothing would work upon them to mend any thing that was amiss in them; and the
word generation in this clause, a perverse and crooked generation, implies both
the generality of their Apostasy, and the spring from whence their wickedness
proceeded, to wit, original sin, that corruption of nature, which they drew
from their parents.

Verse. 6. Is not he thy father that has bought thee? has he not made thee,
and established thee?] To convince them of that gross ingratitude, wherewith
he had charged them in the foregoing words, Do ye thus requite the Lord, oh
foolish people, and unwise? he puts them in mind of that which was of all other
the greatest of the mercies which he had afforded them, natuely, that he had
chosen them to be his peculiar people, and so had entered into a covenant with
them that he would be their father, and that they should be his sons and his
daughters: for that he speaks of their being his children by adoption is
manifest, the phrase here used, thy father that has bought thee, implying
plainly that they were not his children by nature, but that he redeemed and
bought them, and so adopted them to be his children; and the next clause also
is to the very same purpose, Has he not made thee, and established thee? for
it is not meant so much of making them men and women, as of making them his
people, and by a sure covenant establishing them to be his sons and
daughters; and so the word is elsewhere used for a degree of grace after
creation, as Isa^. 43. 7. where the Lord speaking of Israel says, I have
created him for my glory, I have formed him, yea I have made him.

Verse. 8. When the most high divided to the nations their inheritance, etc.]
Two several ways this verse may be probably expounded: first thus, That when
God by his providence did dispose of the several nations, that came out of the
loins of Adam, in the several parts of the world, allotting to one nation one
country, and another to another, even as a man that has some great Lordship
divides it out by parcels to several tenants (and this the Lord did in the age
after the confusion of tongues at Babel; for every nation did then plant
themselves, according as God by his eternal decree had determined and set the
bounds of their habitation, Acts 17. 26.) then did he set the bounds of the
people according to the number of the children of Israel, that is, he chose the
children of Israel to be his only peculiar inheritance, where they were there
was his people, and where their bounds ended, there was an end of his people,
and there the bounds of the heathen began. But secondly thus, That when God did
at first divide the earth amongst the several nations, and bring every one of
them to countries which by his eternal decree he had determined for their
habitation, even then did he think of Israel before they were yet a people, and
took care that they should have a competent portion reserved for them, to wit,
the land of Canaan, which was for their use put into the hands of the
Canaanites, to whom he allotted so much of the earth as he knew would serve for
the Israelites, and so, as it is said here* he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel: and indeed this last
exposition does best agree with the words of the text, and is therefore
embraced by the most Expositours.

Verse. 9. For the Lords portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance.] That is, the Israelites are that portion of mankind whom he was
pleased to redeem out of the bondage of Satan, to make them his peculiar
people, and therefore it was that he took special care of them. They are
called his portion and inheritance, first, because they were to be entirely
his, they were to acknowledge no other Lord, etc. secondly, to signify that
not only they, but their children after them, were to be the Lords
successively; thirdly, to intimate the precious account the Lord made of them,
that the Lord would delight in them, and would keep them, and plead for them as
men do for their inheritance, as we know what Naboth said unto Ahab, 1. Kings
21. 3. The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the inheritance of my fathers
unto thee. Again, they are called the lot of his inheritance, or as it is in
the Hebrew, the cord of his inheritance, in allusion to the custom of those
times, when they used to divide land amongst men by lots, and to measure it out
with a line or cord, and the rather happily because the land of Canaan was so
divided amongst the Israelites. See Numb. 26. 55, 56.

Verse. 10. He found him in a desert land, and the wast howling wilderness.]
The wilderness is called the wast howling wilderness, because of the howling
both of beasts and birds, that usually keep in such wild and desolate places;
and it may be also because of the doleful complaints of those that traveling
those deserts do often perish for want of food. But why is it said that the
Lord found the Israelites in a desert land, and in the wast howling
wilderness? Not because the Lord never took them to be his people till they
were in the wilderness; for they were the Lords people when they were in
Egypt. I have seen, says the Lord to Moses, the affliction of my people which
are in Egypt, Exodus 3. 7. and it was the Lord that brought them thence out of
the tender compassion that he had of them: but either because it was in the
wilderness, to wit at Sinal, that he first entered solemnly into a covenant
with them, that he would be their God, and they should be his people, and so
gave them his laws to which they were bound to submit themselves; or else
rather, only to imply the desperate danger wherein the Israelites were when
they were in the wilderness, but that God came to their succor when they were
ready to perish: for indeed I do not think that the drift of this word found,
was to show when God began to take pity of Israel, or when they first began to
be his people; but only to set forth how likely they were to perish there, but
that God delivered them, to wit, that they were then like a poor helpless
infant laid forth in a desert, whom some man casually sinds and preserves, when
before he lay ready every moment to perish. Yea beside, under this which is
said concerning their outward danger in the desert, I doubt not but the spirit
of God intended also to imply the desperate danger of their spiritual
condition, when God first set his love upon them, and chose them to be his
people, to wit, that they were in the state of corruption and death, but that
God received them: for thus the Lord by the prophet Ezekiel sets forth the
danger of their natural estate, by comparing them to a newborn infant laid
out in some desperate place, Ezekiel. 16. 4. As for thy nativity, in the day thou
wast born, thy navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed with water to supple
thee: thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all. None eye pitied thee to
do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee, but thou wast cast out
in the open field, to the loathing of thy person, in the day that thou wast
born.

He led him about, he instructed him, etc.] This place may be read, he
compassed him, he instructed him, etc. and then the first clause must be meant
of the Lords providence, wherewith they were compassed about as with a wall,
even when they were traveling toward Canaan, so that none of their enemies
could come at them to hurt them. But reading it, as it is in our bibles, He led
him about, he instructed him, the first clause must either be meant of that we
read, Exodus 13. 18. when it is said that God led the people about through the
way of the wilderness of the red sea, purposely to avoid a nearer way there
was through the land of the Philistines, lest the people should be discouraged,
if at the very first they should be encountered with war; or else of the whole
time of their wandering about for forty year^ together in the wilderness,
wherein the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a cloud, and by night
in a pillar of fire, Exodus 13. 21. till he had brought them at last to the land
of Canaan. As for the following words, he instructed them, either is it meant
solely of the Lords giving them the law in Sinai, or else jointly of his
instructing them both by his word and works, the several dispensations of his
providence toward them in this time of their passing through the wilderness:
for all these were to instruct them; their afflictions, to teach them to fear
God, Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it, says the prophet, Mich. 6.
9. and the mercies God afforded them, to teach them to love God, and to delight
in his service, etc.

Verse. 11. As an Eagle stirs up her nost, fluttereth over her young, etc.]
The Lords dealing with the Israelites, in carrying them from Egypt to Canaan,
is here compared to the Eagles dealing with her young ones, when she first
carries them forth abroad: and therefore having told us how the Eagle stirs
up her nest, that is, her young ones in her nest, rowsing them up with the cry
that she makes; how she fluttereth over them, and spreads abroad her wings,
as it were preparing her self to flight, teaching, and provoking her young ones
to do as she did, and to fly along with her; and then at last yet farther to
encourage them, how she takes them, and bears them on her wings, then in the
next verse he applies all this to the Lords carrying the Israelites toward
Canaan, so, says he, the Lord alone did lead him, that is, with such
tenderness and care did the Lord carry them to the land of promise, stirring
them up and quickening them by his promises and threatenings, encouraging them
with manifold mercies, defending them from all dangers, and bearing with them
in their many infirmities: and at last he concludes, and there was no strange
God with him, that is, no strange God had any hand in this which was done for
the Israelites; and so thereby he implies how injurious they were in giving
away that glory which was due only to the Lord to these strange gods that had
done nothing for them. See also the notes upon Exodus 19. 4.

Verse. 13. He made him ride on the high places of the earth.] That is, to
conquer and subdue the mountanous places, and high-walled cities of their
enemies, and to possess a land far excelling others for all commodities
whatsoever: and by riding or treading upon the enemies high places is meant the
subduing of their strong holds, as chap. 33. 29. Thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places: for riding is
often used for conquering and subduing, Psalm. 45. 8. And in thy majesty ride
prosperously, etc. Rev. 6. 2. And I saw, and behold, a white horse, and he that
sat on him had a bow, and a crown was given unto him, and he^went forth
conquering, and to conquer. Isa. 58. 14. I will cause thee to ride upon the
high places of the earth, etc.

He made him to suck ho^y out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock.]
That is, honey of bees nestling in the holes of rocks, or trees in rocks; or
hony-fruits growing on trees in rocky places. The drift of the words in
doubtless in general to set forth the admirable fertility of Canaan, where
even the most barren places should yield such store of royal dainties.

Verse. 14. With fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan.] The choice^t
fatted lambs, rams, etc.

With the fat of kidneys of wheat.] That is the finest of large, plump, and
full kernel^ of the sweetest and choicest wheat, which are like kidneys in
shape. The very word here rendered, the fat of wheat, is elsewhere translated in
our Bibles, the finest of the wheat, as Psalm. 81. 16. He should have fed them
also with the finest wheat.

And thou did drink the pure blood of the grape.] That is, pure wine, red
like blood.

Verse. 15. But Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked.] That is Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 5, 26.
And he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the people, and the tribes of
Israel were gathered together. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, etc.
Esa. 44. 2. Fear not oh Jacob my servant, and Jesurun whom I have chosen. It is
derived from Josher, an Hebrew word signifying righteousness, and is a name
given them, to show that by their calling they were to be a righteous people,
and so had been in some measure, but is here given them by way of upbraiding
them for being so unlike the people that by their calling they should have
been, yea so far degenerated from what they had been.

Verse. 16. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods.] That is, made him
by their spiritual fornications exceeding angry; for jealousy is the rage of
a man, Prove. 6. 34.

Verse. 17. They sacrificed unto devils, not to God.] See Levit. 17. 7.

To gods whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers
feared not.] Two circumstances are here noted in the Israelites idolatry, by
way of aggravating their sin: the first is, that they worshipped new gods
that came newly up; and the strange gods of the heathens, which the Israelites
worshipped, though they had continued in the world many hundred years, are yet
termed new gods, newly come up, because indeed they were no better if compared
with the eternal ever-living God, who is called the ancient of days, Dan. 7.
9. and who is indeed only to be worshipped; and also because this way of
religious worship was but a new invention in comparison of the true worship,
wherewith the true God had been worshipped in his Church from the first
beginning of time, etc. That only which is from the beginning is truly
ancient, and of this therefore it is that the Prophet speaks, Jer. 6. 16. Thus
says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways, and see, and ask for the old paths,
where is the good way, etc. and whatever is erroneus in religion, though of
never so long standing, it is but a novelty. The second is, that they were
fallen to the worshipping of gods whom their fathers feared not, that is, such
as their fathers slighted as vanities, gods that could do neither good nor
hurt, Jer. 10. 5. and were not therefore worthy their fear; and this too did
make their sin far the worse, and that because though it be not always
safe for men to follow the way of their fathers in matters of religion, yet
when their fathers worshipped God aright, and so they had not only the word of
God for their rule, but also the example of their fathers to encourage and lead
them on, then to decline from the way of the truth, from their fathers conveyed
to them, merely out of a fickle and inconstant spirit, must needs greatly
aggravate their sin.

Verse. 20. And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what their
end shall be.] That is, I will let them see what a miserable end they will come
to when I forsake them, Psalm. 73. 17, 18. Until I went into the Sanctuary of
God, then understood I their end. Surely thou did set them in slippery
places, thou castedst them down into destruction.

For they are a very froward generation, children in whom is no faith.] That
is, no faith truly to believe any thing that God says to them, and no faith
nor fidelity in keeping steadfastly their covenant with God.

Verse. 21. They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God.] The
sum of that which is here threatened is this, that since they had mobed him to
jealousy, that is, provoked him to displeasure, with that which was not God,
that is, by giving away the worship which was due only to him, to gods which
were indeed no gods, so preferring mere vanities, perhaps stocks and stones,
before their creator, therefore he would move them to jealousy, that is,
would vex and disquiet them, with those which are not a people, even with a
foolish nation, that is by preferring as it were the heathen before them that
had been his peculiar people. And this the Lord did to the Israelites two
several ways: first, when he took part with the heathens, and made them
victorious over the Israelites, when the Assyrians, the Babylonians and other
heathen people, which were despised by the Israelites as poor, blind, silly
wretches, that knew nothing of God, nor had any interest in God, were by the
help of Gods providence crowned with one victory after another in their wars
against the Israelites, and did at last make them their bondslaves, and tread
them down as dirt in the streets: this must needs mightily vex and disquiet
them; for why, think they, should the uncircumcised thus trample upon the
Israel of God? and thus did God move them to jealousy with those which were
not a people, etc. But secondly, the Lord did this most eminently when he cu^
off the Jews, and took the Gentiles in their stead to be his people: for herein
S. Paul notes that this threatening was made good, Romans 10. 19. And indeed if a
Prince should take some base beggar to his bed and board to vex his wife, that
had formerly played the harlot with some base unworthy groom, this could not be
a greater vexation to her, then it was always to the Jews to think that the
Gentiles, whom they despised for their blindness and folly, should come to be
espoused to God in Christ, and enjoy the privileges of Gods Church and people,
and they should be cast off. Even the believing Jews were not without much ado
brought to yield to this truth of the Gentiles calling, Act. 11. 2, 3. and much
more was it a matter of great vexation and indignation to the rest, and indeed
so it is unto this day. See 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16. Who both killed the Lord
Jesus, and their own prophets, and have persecuted us: and they please not God,
and are contrary to all men, forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles, that they
might be saved, to fill up their sins always: for the wrath is come upon them
to the uttermost.

Verse. 22. For a fire is kindled in mine anger and shall burn unto the lowest
hell, etc.] Some Expositours understand this of the eternal torments of hell,
to wit, that the Lord would in his just anger not only pour out upon them his
judgments here, but also throw their souls afte^wards to hell, where the
unquenchable fire burns, Matt. 3. 12. But though this be a truth, that the
wicked shall not only be punished here but also eternally in hellfire
hereafter; yet it seems not so probable that this is intended here, but that
all which is here threatened is this, that the judgments, which God in his
anger would bring upon them, should utterly destroy the land: for the last
branch of the verse, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains, seems to be added by way of ex^laining
these, and to show us what was meant by the burning of this fire unto the
lowest hell.

Verse. 23. I will heap mischiefs upon them, I will spend mine arrows upon
them.] That is, I will strike them with many plagues, and they shall be wounded
with them as with arrows, suddenly and unexpectedly, according to that Za^h. 9.
14. The Lord shall be seen over them, and his arrows shall go forth as the
lightning, etc.

Verse. 24. They shall be burnt with hunger.] That is, consumed, as with a fire,
by famine, which makes men's visages blacker then a cole. etc. Lam. 4. 8. Their
visage is blacker then a cole, they are not known in the streets, their skin
cleaves to their bones: it is withered, it is become like a stick.

And devoured with burning heat, and with bitter destruction.] By burning heat,
as most Expositours conceive, is meant the burning carbuncle or plaguesore, a
fiery ulcer on the body; and therefore the same word, though there translated
burning coals, is joined with the pestilence, Hab. 3. 5. Before him went the
pestilence, and burning coals went forth at his feet; and so likewise by bitter
destruction is meant the pest, and other terrible sicknesses, whereby God soon
cutteth off the life of man with bitterness, Psalm. 91. 5, 6. Thou shall not be
afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow tht flies by day: Nor for
the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes
at noonday.

I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the poison of serpents of
the dust.] That is, that hide themselves in the dust, or that feed of the dust,
implying that as the wild beasts should kill them by force, so the serpents
also by secret subtil^y.

Verse. 25. The sword without and terror within shall destroy both the young
man, etc.] That is, they that are abroad shall be slain with the sword, and
they that are within shall die with very terror and fear: thus according to
the very letter of the words, we may very well understand this place; but yet
some by terror understand the terrible sword.

Verse. 26. I said, I would scatter them into corners, etc.] God speaks here
after the manner of men: but the general drift of the words is this, that
their wickedness provoked him almost utterly to destroy them, but that he had
respect to his own glory.

Verse. 27. Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their
adversaries should behave themselves strangely, etc.] Two several ways these
words may be understood: for first, by the wrath of the enemy may be meant the
excessive fury and rage of those their enemies whom God should employ in
punishing the sins of the people; and then that which follows, lest their
adversaries should behave themselves strangely, must be understood of the
enemies strange and inhumane dealing with his people, and so that this is
alleged as one reason why the Lord did not let loose the enemies to destroy
his people, though their sins did mightily provoke him thereto, to wit, lest
the enemy should in their boundless fury use them with such strange unheard of
cruelty, as God could not, though angry, endure his people should suffer: and
then the last branch contains another reason, lest they should say, Our hand is
high, and the Lord has not done all this. But secondly, by the wrath of the
enemy may be meant the proud insolency and madness of their enemies, puffed up
with the good success of their wars against Gods people; and this the most
of Expositours agree to. And if we understand it thus, then the words following
are added by way of explaining this, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, to wit, in saying, our hand is high, and the Lord has
not done all this, wherein their ascribing the glory of their victories to
their own prowess and power, and not unto God, is termed a strange behavior,
either because therein they did, as we may say, make str^n^e of the matter, as
if all those evils that had befallen the Israelites were not the effects of
Gods displeasure against them, as if he had no hand at all in it, but that all
was to be ascribed to themselves; or else, because in this their pride they did
so strangely exalt themselves above that they did before, as if they were not
the same men they were before, or as if they had forgotten indeed themselves to
be men: and so then the drift of this verse is this, that the reason why God
would not by their enemies bring his people so near to utter destruction as
their sins deserved, was only this, lest their enemies should hereupon exalt
and advance themselves, and boast as if without Gods help they had done all
they had done: of which mad and strange insolency it is that David speaks,
Psalm. 140. 8. Grant not, O Lord, the desires of the wicked; further not his
wicked device, lest they exalt themselves.

Verse. 28. For they are a nation void of counsel, neither was there
understanding in them.] Some refer this to the enemies of Gods people, of
whom he had spoken in the foregoing words; but it is doubtless spoken of the
Israelites, as is manifest in the following words, O that they were wise, etc.
and it is added as a reason why God was so ready to have brought such an
overflowing scourge upon them, as to make the remembrance of them cease from
among men, as he had said before, verse. 26. even because they were a nation
void of counsel, neither was there any understanding in them, that is, they
were so blinded, and hardened in their sins, that they could not or would not
see either what was like to be for their welfare here, or eternally hereafter;
when the Lord did punish them, what it was that had brought those plagues and
miseries upon them.

Verse. 29. Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would
consider their latter end!] That is, oh that they would beforehand consider
what the end will be of such stubborn rebellious courses, that so by true
repentance they might prevent these miseries which in the end will else
certainly come upon them.

Verse. 30. How should one chase a thousand? etc.] That is, seeing the Lord had
promised the Israelites that a hundred of them should put ten thousand of their
enemies to flight, Levit. 26. 8. and this they had found true in many strange
victories they had gotten, wherein a handful of them, to speak of, had
defeated whole armies of their adversari^s, how should it come to pass quite
contrary that one of their enemies should chase a thousand of them, and that
two of their enemies should put ten thousand of them to flight, except their
rock had sold them, and the Lord had shut them up, that is, except the Lord who
is their rock, and their only stay, strength and refuge, had delivered them up
into the power and hands of their enemies to be their slaves and vassals; for
so this phrase of shutting up is elsewhere used, as Psalm. 31. 7, 8. Thou have
known my soul in adversities, and have not shut me up into the hand of the
enemy. Now Moses uses this figurative expression, Except their rock had sold
them, to implie that it was not so much from the strength and prowess of their
enemies, that the Israelites became their bondslaves, as from the Lords
delivering them into their hands; and secondly, that by delivering them up thus
into bondage to their enemies, the Lord did as it were renounce all interest in
them, as if he meant no longer to be their Lord, but had left them to the power
of other lords that should have dominion over them. Indeed elsewhere it is said
that the Israelites sold themselves, Isai. 52. 3. Ye have sold your selves for
naught, and ye shall be redeemed without money, to wit, because by their sins
they brought themselves into thraldom; but here it is said that the Lord sold
them, because it was the Lord that brought this judgment upon them.

Verse. 31. For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being
judges.] That is, their gods are not as our God, and that the Heathen
themselves cannot deny. He had said that a few of their enemies could not have
overcome multitudes of the Israelites if God had not delivered them up into
their enemies hands; and now the reason of this is given in these words, to
wit, because the God of the Israelites was another manner of God then the
idol-gods of the Heathens: as if he had said, It is no wonder though multitudes
of the Heathen should be put to flight by a few of their enemies, and that
because their rock, their idolgods, can do nothing at all for their defense,
for their rock is not as our Rock, our God is of infinite power, and therefore
able to make his people victorious over all their enemies, so that it could not
be that their enemies should vanquish them except their God did withdraw his
help, and give them up into the hands of their enemies. Now this, he says, was
so clear that their enemies themselves must needs con^^sse it. I know the
meaning of those words, even our enemies themselves being judges, may be this,
that the destruction of the Israelites enemies in all ages, the Egyptians,
Amalekites, etc. did sufficiently prove this truth, that their gods were not to
be compared with the God of Israel; but I see no reason why we should not
understand it of the confession of their enemies, since the mavelous works
which God did for the Israelites could not but convince their idolatrous
adversaries, though for the most part they held the truth in un^ighteousnesse,
as we see they did, Pharaoh and his Egyptians, Exodus 14. 25. The Egyptians
said, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for the Lord fights for them
against the Egyptians.

Verse. 32. For their vine is the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah.] That is, their lives are abominable, like those of Sodom and
Gomorrah (whence also is that of the prophet, Isai. 1. 10. and therefore no
wonder though God be so highly offended with them.

Their grapes are grapes of gall, etc.] Their works are here compared to gall,
the poison of dragons, and the venom of asps, verse. 23. because they were so
distasteful to God, and so deadly to themselves and others that should be
infected by their example; of which see the note on chap. 29. 18. but withal
these expressions may have particular respect to their bitter and deadly malice
against the prophets, and other the faithful servants of God in future times,
but especially against Christ and his Apostles, etc.

Verse. 34. Is not this la^d up in store with me, and sealed up amongst my
treasures?] Some understand this thus, That what he had said in the foregoing
words concerning the bitter malice of the Jews against Christ their Messiah,
and against the servants of Christ, was one of those secrets known now
beforehand to God, to whom all future things are known, and which by the event
would be found to be true, though now it would hardly be believed. But I rather
conceive that this is spoken of the certain punishment that did abide this
people for these their horrible sins; Is not this laid up in store with me,
says the Lord, and sealed up amongst my treasures? that is, though for a time
I forbear to punish these cursed and bitter fruits and works of theirs, yet let
them not therefore think to escape; for all their transgressions are laid up in
store with me, I keep a perfect account of every one of them, and will be sure
at last to bring them all forth, and charge them full heavily upon them. But
what is meant by that last clause, and sealed up amongst my treasures? I answer
that the meaning of this is either, that a memorial of their sins was kept
in the unsearchable treasuries of his wisdom and knowledge, as safely and
carefully as men keep their treasures, and so this place is parallel with that,
Job 14. 17. My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up mine
iniquity; or else, that he kept remembrance of their sins together with
those treasure^ of wrath and vengeance which he had in store for wicked men,
which therefore he would bring forth together with their sins, when the time
came of calling them to an account, and so give them the just reward of their
wickedness. And indeed we read of treasures of snow, and of hail reserved
against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war, Job 38. 22,
23. and that they who abuse Gods forbearance, and thereby embolden themselves
to sin, do treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5.

Verse. 35. To me belongs vengeance and recompense.] That is, the work of
punishing wickedness, and consequently the wicked ways of this my people; and
therefore as their sins are known to me, so they shall be undoubtedly
punished by me.

Their foot shall slide in due time.] That is, they shall fall into some
mischief, they shall not stand steadfast in the prosperous estate which now they
do enjoy.

For the day of their calamity is at hand, etc.] That is, after they once grow
thus desperately wicked, it shall not be long ere this calamity here foretold
shall come upon them.

Verse. 36. For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants.] That is, the Lord as a judge shall punish the rebellious, and show
mercy to the good and penitent, and so will defend them against their
opp^essours, and take vengeance on them for the wrong they have done his
people. And thus by the generality of this word, judge, he passes from
speaking of Gods justice in punishing his people, to speak of his mercy in
taking pity on them in the height of their misery, and of the vengeance he
would pour forth upon their enemies.

When he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up or left.]
That is, none shut up in the enemies hand, as captives and prisoners, and no^e
left at liberty; or none shut up in houses, towers, or cities to escape the
enemy, and none left escaped from destruction: and so this phrase is elsewhere
used, 1. Kings 14. 10. The meaning is, that when they are in a manner utterly
overthrown and ruined, then will God come to their help: for indeed such
extremities are usually the best opportunities which God takes of showing
mercy to his people. See 2. Kings 14. 25, 26.

Verse. 37. And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, etc.] Some understand this of the gods of the heathen, the enemies of
his people, to wit, that the Lord, by destroying those heathen people, should
as it were triumph over their idol-gods, that could no way help them when God
came to take vengeance on them. But it is better understood by others as spoken
to his people, and that by way of upbraiding them for their folly in forsaking
him, the everliving God, to follow after those idol-gods that were able to do
nothing for them in the time of their danger. And he shall say, Where are their
gods, etc. which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of
their drink offerings? the meaning is, that God by suffering the enemies of the
Israelites to bring them to so low an ebb, that there should be none ^^ut up
or left, as was said in the foregoing verse, the Lord would discover to them
what a gross folly it was in them to go after those idol-gods, and to give
them the s^crifices which they should have offered to him: for as for that
phrase of their idol-gods eating the fat of their sacrifices, etc. all that is
intended therein is only that their sacrifices were offered to them as meat
and drink offerings, as in that regard the sacrifices which God required of his
people are called the food of his meat offerings.

Verse. 39. See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no God with me; I kill
and I make alive, etc.] As if he had said, by the experience you now have had
both of the bliss you enjoyed whilst you served me, and of the miseries I
brought upon you when you fell away to idolatry, from which your idol-gods were
no way able to free you, by the experience I say that you have had of these
things you may plainly see that I am the only true God, and that there is none
el^e can do either good or hurt.

Verse. 40. For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever.] God
speaks here of himself after the manner of men, who used in swearing to lift up
their hands to heaven, as a sign that they called God to witness the truth of
what they said, Genesis 14. 22. And Abram said to the King of Sodom, I have lift
up my hand unto the Lord the most high God, the possessour of heaven and earth;
and thus God confirms his threatenings by an oath, to show the immutabili^y of
his counsel, Heb. 6. 16, 17. For men verily swear by the greater, and an oath
for confirmation is to them an end of all strife. Wherein God, willing more
abundantly to s^ew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirms it by an oath. Now the oath which God here takes is, I live for
ever, that is, as sure as I live for ever I will do that which I now say.

Verse. 42. I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and that wi^h the blood of
the slain, and of the captives.] That is, both with the blood of those that are
slain, and of those that are hurt in battle, and so thereupon are taken captive.

From the beginning of revenges upon the enemy.] That is, from the time that I
began to take vengeance upon those that are both mine and my peoples enemies;
or from the time when I shall revenge upon the enemy all the wrongs which from
the first beginning they have done unto my people, implying that God does for a
while suffer the enemies to run on without control, but at last, when he
begins to punish them, he reckons with them for all the old score.

Verse. 43. R^joyce, O ye nations, with his people; for he ^ill avenge, etc.]
Both Jews and Gentiles are here exhorted to bless God for this his goodness
to his people in avenging them upon their enemies: and in this exhortation is
employed, first, that this which God should do for the Israelites should be so
wonderful even in the eyes of the Heathen that they should speak of it to the
magnifying of God; and secondly, that the time should come when both Jews and
Gentiles should together rejoice in the goodness of God to them, his Church
and people, and therefore S. Paul alleges this pl^ce to prove the calling of
the Gentiles, Romans 15. 10.

Verse. 44. And Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the ears of
the people, he and Ho^^ea, etc.] This was noted before, chap. 31. 30. but is
here again repeated by way of transition to that which follows, and to note
that Joshua their elect Judge stood by when this song was repeated by Moses, as
it were to assent to that which Moses said and did.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Verse. 1. ANd this is the bl^ssing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the
children of Israel before his death.] In the former chapter, verse. 48. it is
said that the very same day whereon Moses repeated that sad dreadful song,
there recorded, God commanded him to go up and die at mount Nebo: but now he
adds that yet before his death (and therefore happily the same day also) he
pronounced these following prophetical blessings upon the several tribes,
which he left amongst them as his last will and testament, and by the
sweetness thereof did much allay as it were the bitterness of the former
song. Indeed the tribe of Simeon is not at all here mentioned, and so all the
posterity of Jacobs sons have their several blessings allotted them except
that tribe only. But that was because the tribe of Sim^on was to have their
portion in the mid^t of the inheritance of the sons of Judah, Josh. 19. 1.
(whence it was that they went jointly together to fight against the Canaanites,
Judge. 1. 3.) and consequently the blessing o^ this tribe is employed in Judahs,
amongst whom they were to dwell, and yet withal that was confirmed which Jacob
at his death foretold concerning Simeon, as the punishment of his sin, that
he should be divided in Jacob, and scattered in Israel. As for the titl^ which
Moses here gives himself, Moses the man of God, thereby is meant the Prophet of
the Lord, and so he calls himself in this place purposely, thereby to assure
the Israelites that what he spoke in these prophetical blessings he spoke by
authority from God, and that therefore they were to receive them with no less
assurance of faith, no less confidence and comfort, then if they had come
immediately from God: upon which ground also the same title is given elsewhere
both to the prophets in the old restament, and to the ministers of the Gospel
in the new; for so Samuel is called, 1. Sam. 9. 6. Behold, now there is in this
city a man of God, and he is an honorable man; and verse. 7. The bread is spent
in the vessels, and there is not a pr^sent to bring to the man of God; and
Timothy, 1. Tim. 6. 11. But thou, O man of God, flee these things, etc.

Verse. 2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from mount Seir unto them; he
shined forth from mount Paran.] The drift of this Preface prefixed before the
blessings, which we have in this and the three following verses, is first, by
r^hearsing the former goodness of God to his people Israel, especially when he
gave them his law by the hand of Moses, and so entered into a covenant with them
that he would be the^^ God and they should be his peculiar people, to show the
ground of these following blessings, to wit, the free grace of God and his
singular love to them above all nations that were upon the face of the earth;
and secondly, to intimate that it was of God that he now spoke to them, and
that he was only subordinate to God in pronouncing these bl^ssings, as
formerly in giving them the law. As for these first words of the Preface, The
Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto them; he shined forth from
mount Parau, either they are all jointly meant of the glorious manner of Gods
revealing himself unto the Israelites when he gave them the Law (only there i^
mention made of Gods rising from Seir, and his shining forth from mount Paran,
which were places not far from mount Sinai, and so the glorious brightness
wherein God appeared on Sinai did seem to shoot out and spread forth it self
from all these places) or else the several branches thereof are meant of
several manifestations of God unto this people as he conducted them along from
Egypt to the land of Canaan: for the better understanding whereof we must note
that Moses, comparing the Lords revealing himself to Israel to the shining of
the sun upon the world (as the prophet Habakkuk also does, Hab. ^. 3* 4. God
came from Teman, and the holy one from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered
the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise, and his brightness was as
the light, etc.) accord^^gly he alludes to the several degrees of the suns
appearing to men in men^ioning the Lords several manifestations of himself to
his people: first, the sun gives forth its light to us in some smaller
measure before it rises, and to this he alludes speaking of the Lords
appearing ^o them when he gave them the law, The Lord came from Sinai:
secondly, after that, the sun riserh in the open sight of men, and to this he
compares the Lords farther manifestation of himself at mount Seir, in that
second clause, and rose up from Seir, to wit, when he commanded the brazen
serpent to be set up amongst them, by looking whereon the Israelites were cured
that were mortally bitten with fiery serpents, a notable type of the promised
Messiah, that sun of righteousness, who was to arise with healing in his
wings, Mal. 4. 2. And 3. the sun being once risen shines brighter and
brighter unto perfect day, and to this he alludes in the last clause, he shined
forth from mount Paran, meaning thereby the Lords repeating and explaining the
law to them by the ministry of Moses in the wilderness of Paran. But
doubtless the best Exposition of these words is, that Moses hereby meant the
whole course of Gods proceeding in the glorious manifestation of himself to
Israel, as they went along to Canaan, to wit, in the pillar of a cloud and
fire, whereby they were led, the Manna and quails which he sent them, the
giving and the repeating of the law, and all other the mavelous works which
he wrought for them.

And he came with ten thousands of saints.] That is, he came attended in royal
majesty, to wit, at the giving of the law on mount Sinai, with an infinite
multitude of those glorious spirits the Angels, who are here called saints,
because of their purity and holiness: and from hence it was that both S.
Stephen and S. Paul said of the law that it was given by the disposition of the
Angels, Acts 7. 53. and ordained by Angels by the hand of a Mediator, Gal. 3.
19. and that it was the word spoken by Angels, Heb. 2. 2.

From his right hand went a fiery law for them.] The law given to the
Israelite^ from mount Sinai is called ^ fiery law, both because God spoke it
out of the midst of the fire, Deuteronomy. 5. 22. and also to imply that the work of
the law is to terrify men, to humble them, and to be the ministration of death
and condemnation, 2. Cor. 3. 7* and 9. and this expression, From his right hand
went a fiery Law for them, was either only to intimate Gods giving them his
Law, or else rather to signify that the Law was the scepter in Gods right
hand, whereby he meant to govern his people and keep them in order; as the
Gospel is also called the rod of the Lords strength, whereby he rules in the
midst of his enemies, Psalm. 110. 2.

Verse. 3. Yea he loved the people.] As this tends to the general drift of the
preface, namely, to discover the ground of the following blessings, the
special love which God bare to the Israelites; so it has also particular
relation to that which immediately went before concerning Gods giving them his
Law, as intimating that to be a singular effect of Gods special love unto
them, From his right hand went a ^iery Law for them: Yea he loved the people.
God does many ways testify his love to his people; but one of the choicest
pledges of his love is, that he gives them his word, which he denies to others,
Psalm. 147. 19. 20. He shows his word ^o Jacob, his statutes and his
judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation, etc.

All his saints are in thy hand.] That is, all Isreal's saints are in thy
custody and protection, O Lord. To be in Gods hand is to be under his power and
custody, under his guidance care and protection, as Christ says of his sheep,
John 10. 28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish,
neither shall any man pluek them out of my hand. But this privilege Moses
limits to the saints in Israel, that is, those that are Israelites indeed, as
Christ said of Nathaniel, John 1. 47. a holy people, as they profess
themselves to be: for such as profess themselves Israelites, but are not
saints, that is, truly sanctified by the spirit of God, but live a wicked and
unclean life, God will not foul his hands with them; such dross are not worthy
to be kept so charily. Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like
dross, says David, Psalm. 119. 119.

And they sat down at thy feet, every one shall receive of thy word.] This may
be added either further to illustrate the mercy of God to Israel in giving them
his Law, when as his peculiar people he instructed them in those things that
concerned the good of their souls, and they willingly submitted themselves to
be instructed and directed by him; or else it may be added as a note of
distinction whereby the saints in Israel might be known from such as were only
Israelites by outward profession, namely, that such as were saints indeed,
would willingly receive and obey his word; and therefore is that clause added,
every one shall receive of thy word: However that phrase, they sat down at thy
feet, is certainly meant of Gods instructing them, and the peoples readiness
to receive his instruction; and either it has reference to the abiding of the
Israelites at the foot of mount Sinai to receive the Law from God, speaking
from the top of the mount unto them after the manner as disciples used to sit
at the feet of their master, who from some higher seat did read unto them,
whereupon it was that S. Paul said, Act. 22. 3. that he was brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel; or else it may have reference to their resorting to the
Sanctuary to be taught: for that is called the footstool of Gods feet, Psalm.
99. 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his foot stool; and Ezekiel. 43.
7. The Place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will
dwell in the midst of the children of Israel for ever, and my holy name shall
the house of Israel no more defile.

Verse. 4. Moses commanded us a Law, even the inheritance of the congregation of
Jacob.] This which Moses speaks concerning himself, in the name of the people,
is added to maintain the credit that was due to his ministry, to show that God
had set him over them to teach and govern them, and consequently, that what he
should now say, as well as what he had before, was to be received as if it had
been spoken the God himself from heaven. As for those words, even the
inheritance of the congregation of Jacob, the Law is so called, because God
gave it them as a rare and precious treasure, not for their use only, but for
the use of their posterity after them.

Verse. 5. And he was King in Jesurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of Israel were gathered together.] By Jefurun is meant Israel, as
before, chap. 32. 15. concerning which see the notes there. Now though it be
said here of Moses (for this has reference to the foregoing verse, where he
spoke of himself in a third person) that he was King amongst them, yet thereby
is not meant that he was indeed a King, and ruled as a Monarch amongst them,
but only that when the Princes and people were assembled together he was chief
amongst them, and as it were a King: He was in the supreme place of Magistracy,
and did the work of a King, he gave them a Law (though indeed that which he
received from God) and their chief affairs were still ordered by his direction.
And thus with this clause Moses closes up the Preface prefixed before the
blessings, wherein, by declaring the special love which God had always shown
to this people, and how God had always made use of him to make known his will
to them, he prepared the people to receive as from God that which in the
following blessings he should say concerning their several tribes.

Verse. 6. Let Reuben live and not die, and let not his men be few.] Jacob had
prophesied concerning this tribe that they should lose the dignity of the
birthright, and should never come to any excellency amongst the tribes either
for the number of the people, or any other pre-eminence, and that because of
the incest of Reuben with his fathers concubine, Genesis 49. 4. Unstable as
waters, thou shall not excel, because thou wentest up to thy fathers bed. Now
therefore for the comfort of this tribe Moses pronounces this blessing upon
them, Let Reuben live and not die, that is, though Reuben by his incest brought
that curse upon himself pronounced by the mouth of his father, yea though by
the sin of the Reubenites in adhering to Korah they deserved that God should
utterly destroy them, yet, says Moses, they shall live and not die, the name
and tribe of Reuben shall still continue amongst the people of God, and they
also shall have a share in that life eternal, which by the Messiah shall be
obtained for the Israel of God. And again, Let not his men be few, that is,
though for his sin he has lost the glory of excelling the other tribes in
the number of his men, which as ^he firstborn he might otherwise have expected
(for we see that in the first numbering of the people, Numb. 1. 21. they were
fewer then any of the tribes, except Gad, Asher and Benjamin, and at the second
they were two thousand seven hundred and seventy fewer then at the first, Numb.
26. 7.) yet shall not his men be few, though there shall not be so many in that
tribe as in some others, yet shall they still continue a numerous tribe.

Verse. 7. And this is the blessing of Judah.] Simeon is not here mentioned, of
which the reason is shown, verse. 1. but Judah is set next after Reuben, because
the honor of the birthright was partly given from Reuben to Judah, and in his
tribe the regal power was afterward settled.

Hear, Lord, the voice of Judah., and bring him unto his people, etc.] This
prophecy has respect to that blessing of Jacob, Genesis 49. 8, 9. 10, 11. Judah,
thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, thy hand shall be in the neck of
thine enemies, etc. The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver
from between his feet, till Shiloh come, etc. and so that which Moses here
says concerning this tribe implies these two particulars: first, That those
glorious privileges promised there to this tribe, concerning their Dignities,
their success against their enemies, and the raising up of the Messiah amongst
them, should not be obtained and kept without many difficulties and troubles,
and that because their enemies should often prevail over them, and the regal
dignity should not be settled suddenly amongst them, and when it was settled
it should be often. dangerously eclipsed, as indeed it was many times, but
especially in the Babylonian captivity, so that they should be forced to seek
and pray earnestly for the accomplishment of that which God had promised are
they did obtain it: and secondly, that yet at last upon the prayers of the
faithful (Hear Lord the voice of Judah) that which God promised should truly
be performed, the regal dignity should be settled in that tribe, they should
be victorious over their enemies, though their enemies did for a while triumph
over them, and carry them captives into a strange land, yet they should return
again into their own land, and out of their stock the Messiah should come. All
which how it was accomplished we see, first, in the exaltation of David to be
their king, which cost him many prayers; secondly* in the many glorious
victories of David, Asa, Jehoshaphat and other kings of Judah against their
enemies, who having prevailed more by their prayers then by their swords
returned in triumph unto their people, of which many understand that clause,
and bring him unto his people; thirdly, in the return of this tribe out of the
Babylonian captivity: for whereas the tribes of Israel, carried captive into
Assyria, did never r^^urn thence, this tribe of Judah (and those of Benjamin
that were united to them in the ^ingdome of Judah) upon their repentance and
prayers to God, were brought back again into that land of promise, and there
were settled, and so continued unto the coming of Christ; and of this
doubtless those words are principally meant, and bring him unto his people;
and fourthly, chiefly in the victory of Christ that lion of the tribe of
Judah, over our spiritual enemies, of which also, as in relation to his
prayers, we see what the Apostle says, Heb. 5. 7. That in the days of his
flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears unto him that was able to save him from death, he was heard in that he
feared.

Let his hands be sufficient for him, and be thou an help to him, etc.] That
is, he shall through thine aid be able to make good his part against his
enemies without seeking any help from any body else.

Verse. 8. Let thy thummim and thy urim be with thy holy one, whom thou did
prove at Massah, etc.] In this first branch of Levies blessing is foretold,
first, that the high Priesthood (to which appertained the breastplate that had
the urim and thummim in it, Exodus 28. 30.) should be continued in Aarons
posterity; and secondly, that God would still furnish them with those gifts
and graces, that knowledge and piety, requisite for their calling, and
signified by the urim and thummi^. As for that following clause, whom thou
did prove at Massah, and with whom thou did strive at the waters of
Meribah, for the fuller understanding thereof we must note, first, that this is
meant of that story, Numb. 20. when upon the Israelites murmuring for want of
water Moses and Aaron were commanded to fetch water out of the rock, but
through their indignation against the people did not glorify God as they ought
to have done, and therefore were excluded from entering into the land of Canaan:
for though the place where this was done was called Meribah only, not Massah,
Numb. 20. 13. (it was the place where Moses first fetched water out of the rock
in Horeb that was called Massah and Meribah, Exodus 17. 7.) yet because the Lord
did there prove Moses and Aaron, even that place is also called Massah, that is
temptation or proof: secondly, that it is said that the Lord did prove Levi,
that is, Moses and Aaron, at Massah, and did strive with them at the waters of
Meribah, because he did there try their faith, and sharply reprove them for
their infidelity; and thirdly, that this is here added both by way of
commending the zeal of Aaron (for zealous for God he then showed himself,
though weak in faith) and also by way of magnifying Gods mercy in settling the
priesthood upon his posterity, though he at that time so greatly offended him
through his unbelief.

Verse. 9. Who said unto his father and to his mother, I have not seen him,
etc.] This may have respect both to that law, Levit. 21. 11. Neither shall he
go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father or mother; or else,
to that notable fact of the Levites, Exodus 32. when at the commandment of Moses
they slew their idolatrous brethren that had worshipped the golden calf; not
sparing those that were most nearest allied to them: for therefore it is that
Moses here says of them, that he said unto his father and to his mother, I
have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children, because they did execute Gods judgment upon parents brethren
children no less then if they had been mere strangers to them.

Verse. 11. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands.] That
is, though the Levites have no inheritance in the land of Canaan amongst their
brethren, yet the Lord will provide for them, and bless them in their outward
estates, and besides, the service they do to him and to his people the Lord
will take in good part; and this we may well think is added to hearten the
Levites against the discouragements they might meet with in their calling.

Smite through the loins of those that rise up against him, etc.] That is, God
shall destroy their enemies: Because those that are set apart to take care of
the peoples souls are usually hated and persecuted by those whose sins they
reprove, Woe is me, my mother, that thou have born me a man of strife, and a man
of contention, to the whole earth* Jer. 15. 10* therefore is this promise made
here to the Levites, that God would fight against those that fight against
them, and sooner or later would surely destroy them.

Verse. 12. And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in
safety by him, etc.] For the understanding of this blessing of Benjamins
tribe, we must note that the main thing promised herein is, that the Temple
should be built in that portion of the land which should fall to the lot of
Benjamin; and in expressing this Moses uses this phrase, The beloved of the
Lord shall dwell in safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day
long, and he shall dwell between his shoulders, by way of alluding to Jacobs
dealing with Benjamin, the stock from whom this tribe was descended, first,
because as Jacob kept his Benjamin always at home with him, he would not let
him go out of his sight, so this tribe did always enjoy the special presence
of God in his Temple, and was as it were every day in the eye of their heavenly
father: secondly, because as Jacobs keeping of Benjamin always at home with
him was an effect of his tender love to him, he was his darling and therefore
he would not part with him; so this tribes continual enjoying of Gods presence
in his Temple was a speaking pledge of Gods singular love to them, the Lord
seemed herein to make this tribe his darling, as once Benjamin was to Jacob,
and therefore this tribe is called here the beloved of the Lord* and thirdly,
because as Jacobs keeping of Benjamin at home with him was to make sure, as* he
could, that no evil should befall him, Genesis 42. 4. But Benjamin, Joseph's
brother, Jacob sent not with his brethren: for he said, Lest peradventure
mischief befall him; so was the presence of God in his Temple a special pledge
of their preservation, in regard whereof this little tribe was as it were
always under the wing of their heavenly father, as little Benjamin was under
his father Jacobs; and therefore it is said, The beloved of the Lord shall
dwell in safety by him, and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders, in which last words there is also an
allusion to the situation of the Temple, which was built near to the top of the
mount Moriah.

Verse. 13. And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the Lord be his land, etc.] See
the note upon Genesis 49. 26.

Verse. 14. And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, etc.] The
fruits of the earth, which are here promised to the tribes of Ephraim and
Manasseh, are here called precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and
precious things put forth by the moon, because the sun and moon are the
mediate causes of the prosperous growth of such things, the sun by its
warmth, the moon by its moisture making the earth fruitful.

Verse. 15. And for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the
precious things of the lasting hills.] Hills are here called ancient mountains,
and lasting hills, because they were from the beginning, and shall continue to
the end of the world; and by the chief and precious things of these hills are
meant, either the choice fruits that should grow there (and it is a sign of
avery rich land when the very mountains and hills are so fruitful) or else the
mines of gold, and silver, and other metals, which are indeed usually found in
hills and mountains.

Verse. 16. And for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush.] That is, the
po^teritie of Joseph shall be blessed of the Lord, as in regard of outward
things, so also in regard of that special love which God should bear them as
his peculiar people; for this is meant by the good will of him that dwelt in
the bush; in the bush God appeared to Moses, as the God of Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob; and the good will of God thus considered as a God in covenant with them,
was that which made them truly happy, and is of that which the Psalmist speaks,
Psalm. 106. 4. Remember me, O Lord, with the favor thou bear thy people: O
visit me with thy salvation.

Let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, etc.] See Genesis 49. 26.

Verse. 17. His glory is like the firstling of his bullock* and his horns are
like the horns of Unicorns.] That is, as is the beauty of a firstling bullock,
such shall be the glory of Ephraims kingdom, and as is the strength of the
Unicorn, such shall be their strength to withstand and beat back their enemies.

With them he shall push the people together to the ends of the earth.] That
is, all his enemies that shall any where rise up against him: yet some
understand this of Joshua, who was of the tribe of Ephraim, who with his horns,
that is, his armies of the Israelites, did drive out the inhabitants of Canaan;
and so they read this clause, with them he sha^^ push the people together to
the end of the land, that is, as was said before, the land of Canaan.

And they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of
Manasseh.] That is, these are the horns before mentioned: and hereby first, he
gives us to understand, that what he had hitherto prophesied of Joseph was to
be understood jointly of the two tribes of Ephraim and Manesseh; and secondly*
by giving to Ephraim the younger ten thousands, and to Manasseh the elder but
thousands, he implies that though in the last mustering of these tribes, and so
now when Moses blessed them, the men of Manasseh were many mo^ then the men of
Ephraim, Numb. 26. 34, 37. (whereas in the first mustering there was most of
Ephraims tribe, Numb. 1. 33, 35.) yet in process of time Jacobs prophecy
should be accomplished concerning Ephraims excelling his brethren in the
numerousnesse of his people, Genesis 48. 19. His younger brother shall be greater
then he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.

Verse. 18. Re^oyce, Zebulun, in thy going out; and Issachar, in thy tents.]
Here two tribes are blessed together, Zebulun and Issachar: Of Zebulun it is
prophesied that they should be happy in their going out, that is in their going
forth to trade in merchandise by shipping, which agrees with that which Jacob
also prophesied concerning this tribe, Genesis 49. 13. Zebulun shall dwell at the
haven of the sea, and he shall be for an haven of ships: and of I^sachar, that
they should be happy in their tents that is, in their quiet life at hom^, and
in their country employments of feeding cattle, and tillage. And by joining
both together, Moses gives them to understand, so to make them contented with
their several conditions, that both their several ways of living should
yield them matter of rejoicing in the goodness and bounty of God to them, the
tribe of Issachar should be as happy in their staying at home to follow their
husbandry as those of Zebulun to follow their merchandise; and on the other
side, to the tribe of Zebulun the rockie sandy seashore should yield as
plentiful a crop by their merchandise as the rich and ^at soil of the men of
Issachar should yield to them: whence also it is added, verse. 19. They shall
suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sands.

Verse. 19. They shall call the people unto the mountain, there they shall offer
sacrifices of righteousness.] This is a prophecy of their religious
thankfulness for Gods blessings, that they should duly go to mount Sion to
worship the Lord, and should invite their brethren to go along with them. But
why is this noted in them as a matter remarkable and commendable, rather then
in other the tribes of Israel? Surely because these tribes were seated by the
seaside, in the outmost parts of the land, and being so far off from the
temple at Jerusalem it was the clearer proof of their devotion, zeal, and love
to Gods house, that they would not make that an excuse to neglect Gods worship,
but would at the times appointed go up to his house, and there offer their
sacrifices, sacrifices of righteousness, as they are here called, that is
just, righteous, and acceptable sacrifices, offered in faith, and according to
Gods Law.

For they shall suck of the abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the
sands.] This is added to imply both that being enriched by God, they should be
the better able to bear the charges of their journey, and of their sacrifices;
and likewise that Gods bounty to them should enlarge their hearts with the more
servent desire of returning thanks unto him, whereas many men the more they
suck in of the wealth of this world, and fill their bellies with this hid
treasure, the less they regard Gods ordinances, the less they care for the
breasts of the Churches consolation; it should be far otherwise with them,
for the richer they grew the more zealous and forward they should be in all the
duties of Gods worship and service.

Verse. 20. And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlarges Gad.] Here Moses
begins with the sons of the handmaids, and first with Gad, and in this first
clause of Gads blessing is employed that this tribe should have a large portion
in the land, and that God should afterward enlarge it by further conquests.

He dwells as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head.] The
arm notes strength, as the crown of the head, principality; and so hereby is
meant that as a lion teareth sometime in one place, sometime in others, so this
tribe should diverse ways spoil their enemies, and that none should be so
strong or excellent but Gad should overcome them: a great blessing indeed to
them who had their inheritance without Jordan, and bordering upon their
enemies. One remarkable instance we have of their prowess, 1. Chron. 5. 18,
19, 21, 22.

Verse. 21. And he provided the first part for himself, because there in a
portion of the lawgiver was he seated.] This first part was the country of
Sihon, which was first conquered. It is said that the tribe of Gad provided
this for themselves, because they desired it of Moses for their inheritance,
and thereupon offered to go up armed in the forefront of the battle before
their brethren, Numb. 32. 17. and yet withal it is said they were seated in a
portion of the lawgiver, because God by Moses the lawgiver gave them this for
their inheritance, Numb. 32. 33. And Moses gave unto them, even to the children
of Gad* and to the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh, the
sons of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon King of the Amorites, etc.

And he came with the heads of the people, he executed the justice of the Lord
and his judgments with Israel.] Moses speaks here prophetically of a thing to
come, as if it had been done already; and his meaning is, that this tribe
should with the Princes and Captains of the people go forth armed before their
brethren, and execute Gods judgments upon the Canaanites.

Verse. 22. Dan is a lions whelp, he shall leap from Bashan.] That is, look as a
lion comes rushing suddenly out of the forests and dens in Bashan, and
seiseth upon those that pass by ere they thought on any danger; so should the
Danit^s leap unexpectedly out of their forts, and fastnesses, and secret
places, where they lay in ambush, and destroy their enemies when they look not
for them. It was not therefore because Bashan was a part of Dans territories
that it is said here, he shall leap from Bashan (for Bashan was not Dans
possession but Manassehs, Deuteronomy. 3. 1* 3. All Bashan, being the kingdom of Og,
gave I unto the half-trib^ of Manasseh, says Moses) but it was because Bashan
was a place where were many lions, to whom in regard of their sudden assaults
made upon their enemies the children of Dan are here compared.

Verse. 23. O Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of the
Lord, possess thou the West and the South.] In the first clause of this
prophet^call blessing* O Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with the
blessing of the Lord, Moses foreshews the fruitfulness of the soil wherein
this tribe should have their dwelling: for as Jacob did in this regard compare
this tribe to a hind let loose that has a large walk, scope and liberty, and
so in choice of pastures finds plenti^ of feeding, Genesis 49. 21. so Moses here
explaining that Metaphor breaks forth into an admiration at the consideration
of the great plenty and abundance of good blessings which their inheritance
should yield them: but withal ^seth such an expression to set forth this,
Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with the blessings of the Lord, as
might plainly implie, first, that their bliss should con^ist not so much in
their having such plenty and fullness of those outward blessings, as in their
being fully satisfied therewith; and that the thing which should yield such
satisfaction to their souls was not so much the blessings themselves, as the
singular love and favor of God, whereof to them these blessings were pledges.
As for that second clause, possess thou the West and the South, either thereby
was signified that their lot of inheritance should fall to them in the
South-west part of the land, and the sea lying on the West, this might also
implie that besides the other rich commodities of their land they should also
enjoy the advantage of merchandising too; or else it is only added to signify
the large extent of their portion, which should stre^ch it self far out both
Westward and Southward.

Verse. 24. Let Asher be blessed with children, etc.] Three things are in this
verse foretold concerning this tribe: first, that they should be blessed with
children, whereby may be meant not only the multitude but also the strength,
healthfulnesse, beauty and comeliness of their children: secondly, they should
be of a meek, gentle, lovely and amiable disposition, and should accordingly be
greatly beloved by all that dwelt about them, let him be acceptable to his
brethren; and indeed it is God that enclines the hearts of men to love those
that are most lovely: and thirdly, that their country should exceedingly
abound with oil and other good things, which is expressed figuratively, and let
him dip his feet in oil: much according to that speech of Job, chap. 29. 6.
When I washed my steps with butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil:
and indeed hereto agrees that which Jacob also foretold concerning this tribe,
Genesis 49. 20. Out of Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal
dainties.

Verse. 25. Thy she is shall be iron and brass, and as thy days so shall thy
strength be.] In this verse two things more are foretold concerning Asher:
first, that his land should be full of mines of iron and brass and other
metals* for that is intended in the first clause, whether we read it, as it is
in the margin, under thy shoes shall be iron and brass, or as it is in our
text, thy shoes shall be iron and brass; secondly, that they should continue
healthful and strong even unto old age, and as thy days so shall thy strength
be, that is, all thy days thy strength shall continue.

Verse. 26. There is none like unto the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the
heaven in thy help, etc.] Concerning this word Jesurun, see Deuteronomy. 32. 15. As
before Moses blessed the several tribes, so here he begins to set forth the
happiness of all the people, even all the tribes in general, and that for the
special interest that they have in God, who has all the creatures at his
command for their help: for thence is that phrase of Gods riding upon the
heavens in their help, whereby is employed first, that look as a man turns and
winds the horse he rides on which way he ple^seth, so does the Lord rule the
heavens and all the host of them; and secondly, that when Gods people are in
any distress, and present help is necessary for them, God will come in to
their aid with as much speed as the heavens move.

Verse. 28. Israel shall then dwell in safety alone.] See the note on Numb. 23.
9.

The fountain of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and wine.] That is, the
people which flow out of Jacob, as out of a well or fountain, shall be seated
in a fruitful land: so that fountain is here used for a river or stream
issuing from a fountain, as Psalm. 104. 10. He sends the springs (or
fountains) which run among the hills; and waters often signify peoples, Rev.
17. 15. The waters which thou saw, where the where sits, are peoples, and
multitudes of nations and tongues. And thus this phrase is used* Psalm. 68. 26.
Bless ye God in the congregations, even the Lord from the fountain of Israel;
and Isa. 48. 1. Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, which are called by the name of
Israel, and are come forth out of the waters of Judah. Indeed the Hebrew word
here translated the fountain, does sometime signify an eye, in which sense some
interpret this place, that the eye of Jacob should look upon a land of corn and
wine, etc.

Verse. 29. And who is the sword of thy excellency.] God is here said to be the
sword of Isreal's excellency, because it was by his fighting for them that he
became famous and excellent above others for martial exploits.

And thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee.] That is, they shall pretend
to be friends for fear, when they are enemies in their hearts; or it may be
meant that the boasting of their enemies in the help of their idol-gods, and
their vilifying the strength of Israel, through the assistance of their God,
should in the conclusion be discovered to be lies.

CHAP. XXXIV.
Verse. 1. ANd Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountai^ of N^bo,
etc.] Look as the labourer, when the night comes, goes to his chamber that he
may lay himself down to rest; so did Moses, at the commandmen^ of the Lord, go
up to mount Nebo to die.

And the Lord showed him all the land of Gilead unto Dan, etc.] That is, he
showed him the whole land of Canaan: for Gilead was on the outside of Jordan,
and given to Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, Deuteronomy. 3. 12, 13. Dan which wa^ called
also Leshem, Josh. 19. 47. or Laish, Judge. 18. 27, 29. was a city in the
furthest part of the land Northward, where also the portion of Naphtali lay:
the land of Ephraim and Manasseh was in the midst of Canaan in Samaria, the
land of Judah was in the Southern part of the country, and the midland sea,
called the utmost sea, verse. 2. was the Western coast: this view therefore
which Moses had of the whole land was by the mavelous work and grace of God
toward his servant, for by the ordinary power of nature it was not possible
that in one place, and at one time, he should behold so large a country; and
therefore God says to Moses, ver. 4. I have caused thee to see it with thine
eyes. And this doubtless God did for him, to comfort him, and to allay the
bitterness of death, by showing him before his death what a rich pleasant and
fruitful country God had provided for his af^licted people: for though he
were never like to set his foot upon it, yet it must needs do him good to think
that Israel, the people whom ^e loved so dearly, should enjoy so fair an
habitation.

Verse. 5. So Moses the servant of the Lord dyed there, etc.] Though Moses
brought the Israelites to the river Jordan, yet into the land of Canaan he
might not carry them, that honor was reserved for Joshua or Jesus the son of
Nun; and so it is also spiritually. The law may fit us and prepare us for
Christ, but it can never bring us into possession of the heavenly Canaan, that
honor is peculiarly reserved for our Lord Jesus Christ, who by his own blood
opened a way into that holy place, having obtained eternal redemption for us,
Heb. 9. 12. and is now gone before thither to prepare a place for us.

Verse. 6. And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, etc.] That is,
Jehovah buried him, or M^chael, Jude 9. Now this burial of Moses by Christ was
a type of Christ's abolishing the ceremonial law given by Moses; for it is he
that has abolished the law, and the ordinances, he has blotted out the
handwriting of ordinances, that was against us which was contrary to us, and
took it out of the way, Coloss. 2. 14.

But no man knows of his sepulcher unt^ this day.] There was never any of
Gods Worthyes deserved the honor of being carried to the grave with the
solemnity of a mournful funeral better then Moses did, who had brought the
Israelites out of Egypt, and had forty years together endured so much for
their sakes in governing them, and leading them through the wilderness; yet
lest the Israelites should in a preposterous zeal yield any superstitious
honor either to his dead body, or sepulcher, the Lord would not suffer them to
bury him, but miraculously conveyed away his dead body, and buried it, nor ever
suffered them to know where he was buried. Indeed it is said, Jude 9. That
Michael the Archangel contended with the devil, and disputed about the body of
Moses, whereby it appears that the devil would have had the place of his
burial known, that it might have been an occasion of idolatry, but the Lord
prevented this mischief. And besides, by burying the dead body of Moses in an
unknown place, lest the Israelites should take up his dead body again in an
unwarrantable manner, and carry it with them into the land of Canaan, the Lord
Christ was pleased to signify, though more obscurely, that he has so abolished
the legal ordinances, that they must be buried in eternal oblivion, and never
be looked after nor minded any more. And indeed they that go about to revive
any of those ceremonies of the law, their work is no other in Gods eyes then
the raking up of Moses dead body, which the Lord would not have to be taken ^p
again from the sepulcher wherein he laid it.

Verse. 9. And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
Moses had laid his hands upon him.] See Numb. 27. 18.

FINIS.

