THE PEDIGREE AND PERIGRINATION of ISRAEL. Being an abridgement of the
Histories of The creation of Adam. Cain and Abel. Noah. Abraham. Isaac. Jacob.
Joseph. Joshuah. Deborah. Ruth. Hezekiah. Zedekiah. And the taking of the Arc.
With Meditations and Prayers upon each HISTORY.

By John Jackson of Kilingraves in Com. Ebor. Gentleman.

I am a stranger with thee, and a sojourner as all my Fathers were,

Psalm. 39. 14. LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, for John Wilcox, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Crown in Duck-lane, 1649.

(...) meaning of the Frontispiece.
AS the glorious Sun did enlighten the earth at the Creation, and comforted
the creatures: so it represents to us ^ur dark and blind condition, until
that Son of Righteousness did shine upon us, whereby we are enlightened and
comforted.

The next is the desolate condition of our first Parents after their fall,
sitting under that they did, and we now hope in, which is by the pillar of
perfect faith, placed upon the rock of a sure confidence, and under the safe
shade of that vine the Church, pointing up to their hope.

The Rain-how puts us in mind of the deluge in the time of Noah, of Gods mercy
if we repent and amend, as likewise of the 2d judgment to come by fire.

That of Moses and Aaron represents Gods commands, and Isreal's obedience to
them in their perigrination ^or us to imitate, by our duties to our Governors
and Superiors appointed over us.

The Arc, Altar, and the Cheruhims in the Sanctum Sanctorum, shows how we
should worship toward the Holy of Holies in heaven, the end of our hope.

The Dove descending, as it did show unto Noah, the ceasing of the waters,
whereby he and them in the Arc were comforted: So it may signify unto us the
comfort of the holy Ghost; and the ceasing of Gods wrath, and the safety of
them within the Arc of his Church, that expressed in the clouds, as a cloud of
witnesses may confirm us of that happiness which the Saints possess, and
which they shall enjoy, (...) thus b^lieve, obey, and serve this Creator of
Heaven (...) Earth.

Just and true are thy ways thou King of Saints, Revel: 15. (...)

Thou Leadest thy People like sheep by the hands of Moses and Aron. Ps: 77. 20.

The Law was geven by Moses but grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. Joh. 1.
17. 1649. (...) Author inve^t W. M. Sculpsit.



To the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty beyond TRENT, my dear and Native
Country.
The Author does principally present these his Endeavors.
I Am bold to present you with these following Histories and Meditations; the
which, if (...) your liesure you will please to peruse, though they be plain,
yet I doubt not, but they will administer you some comfort, in regard they are
e^tracted out of some choice places of holy Scripture, which is the fountain
whence our chiefest consolations flow: and never any age did stand in more
need of spiritual comforts, then we do in these (...) times of ours, which
occasioned me to the composing of them, and I am in hope that they will (...)
equally profitable as they are seasonable. I shall desir^ your favorable
construction for some errors in the Press; or what failing may be in my self
(...) composure. So wishing you as much happy solace in the perusing, as it
pleased God to afford me in (...) penning of them, I rest,

From my chamber in Holborn, 28. September. Your most affectionate Countreyman
and servant, JOHN JACKSON.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader.
THis short abridgement being drawn our of some part of the Histories of the
old Testament, yet following the very plain phrase of the holy Scripture, I do
recommend unto thee, it being so portable to carry about thee, and so
profitable to read, being the circumstances of such matter as behooves thee to
know and practice, to comfort and encourage thee in this thy pilgrimage, and to
parallel all thy sufferings in these sad and bad times, by the examples of
these Kings, Priests, and Prophets, which were holier and better then thy self,
thereby to teach thee with the like resolution and perseverance to follow the^^
st^ps, and them in all their good examples of piety, patience, and devotion; as
likewise to obey thy Governors and superiors appointed by God over thee. It
will be likewise useful for thee in thy private closet, for thy contemplations
in the fields, for thy children to read at home, to perfect them in the
knowledge of the wonderful works of God, that in their innocence and youth
they may be engrafted in this so necessary knowledge, learning betimes to
practice the piety of these holy men, and to strengthen them in grace, and a
happy course, in this their spiritual warfare toward their hoped for
happiness.

Now (...) the several meditations and prayers following each History, if they
fall short of thy (...) of phrase, or length of line^, or (...) of zeal, I
shall desire God to enlarge thine heart unto more perfection in thy self, and
to stir up happy and learned men, that may enlarge this so necessary work,
tending to devotion, so requisite for this age, so full of spiritual pride,
the which has so much enfatuated our understandings, and brought us to so
dangerous a distemper; and God divert from us that heavy judgment which is the
attendant unto this burning fever of pride and self-conceit, and insensible
frenzy, which cannot be cured, but by him that raised the dead to life. And
that God of power and mercy, give us all that perfect humility which is so
pleasing unto him, and the only safe and sure rule, which will bring us to all
other virtues, and to that right and plain way, that will lead us to perfect
happiness in heaven, the resting place of the humble and meek in heart.

So desi^ing God to direct thee in the reading, and all of us to practice what
we read, I commit thee to Gods merciful guidance and protection.

J. J.

To his much respected Friend Mr. John Iackeson.
SIR,
I Have perused with much comfort the Manuscript you sent me; and whereas you
desire my opinion of it, truly Sir, I must tell you, without complement, that
it is a very useful and pious piece of devotion. Doubtless, you were truly
inspired, when you were compiling the work, and your soul had taken a high
fight toward her Creator, insomuch that one may find that you felt the joys
of heaven, while you were thus meditating upon them.

This part of the Christian Commonwealth will be much obliged to you for such
material notions, and strains of piety. For my particular, I must confess
they aff^rded me much solace in this my sad condition, for they raised my
spirits to a great height of comfort, and I am confident they will work the
same effect in any soul that is susceptible of spiritual impression. So, with
my very kind respects to my dear friend, your kinsman, Major John Jackson, I
rest.

From the Fleet this 11. of September. Yours most affectionately to dispose of,
JAMES HOWEL.

THE Creation of Heaven and Earth, and the life of ADAM.
IN the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth, Genesis 1.
the Earth being a mere Chaos, without form, and darkness was upon the
deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the waters.

And God commanded there should be light, and separated the light from
darkness, which was day and night. Then God commanded a Firmament, which was
made, and called it Heaven.

After by his power, he made ^he herbs and trees to bud, and bear fruit. Then
he commanded to be made the two great Lights in the Firmament, the Sun and
the Moon, and it was so, and there was Morning and Evening. After, God caused
the waters to bring forth abundance of Creatures of all kinds, with feathered
Fowls. Moreover he made the Earth to bring forth Creatures of his kind.

After these great works, God created Man, even according to his own Image,
to rule over the Earth, and all these Creatures.

This wonderful work by Gods power was done in six days, Genesis 2.
and God rested the seventh day, and sanctified it.

The Lord made this Man, of the dust of the ground, and breathed in him life,
and then was he a living soul. Then the Lord planting a Garden in Eden, put
therein the man whom he had thus created; that place being planted with all
sorts of trees of pleasure: and for meat, the tree of Life, and the tree of
Knowledge, of good and evil, being in the midst of that Garden: And out of
Eden went a river to water the Garden. Then was the man put into the Garden, by
God, to dress and keep it, giving him leave to eat of every tree, only forbad
him to eat of the Tree of Knowledge; the which if he did, he should die the
death. Then the Lord for his comfort, formed of the Earth the Beasts of the
field, and the Fowls of Heaven, and brought them to the man, who named them.
But besides for Adam, he created one of greater comfort and help; for the Lord
causing a heavy sleep to fall upon him, took out of his side one of his Ribs,
of which he made Woman, and brought her to Adam, who called her Woman: And
they were both naked, but were not ashamed.

Now in this Garden was a Serpent, Genesis 3.
who was more crafty then any beast of the field, who said to the Woman, has
god said that ye shall not eat of every tree of the Garden? Yes, said the
Woman, of every tree, but that in the midst of the Garden, God has
commanded, we should not touch it, lest we dye. Then the Serpent said to the
Woman, ye shall not die at all: but God does know, that when you shall eat
thereof, your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, to know both good
and evil. So the Woman seeing the tree was good to eat, pleasant to the eye,
and a tree to get knowledge, took of the fruit thereof, and gave likewise to her
Husband; then both their eyes were opened, and finding themselves naked, they
sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves breeches.

After this, in the cool of the day, hearing of the voice of God, they hid
themselves amongst the trees from his presence: but the Lord called the man,
who answered. I heard thy voice in the Garden, and was afraid, being naked.
Then the Lord said unto him, have thou eaten of the tree I forbad thee? And the
man said, the woman thou gave me, she gave it me, and I did eat thereof.
Then said the Lord to the woman, why have thou done this; who answered, the
Serpent did beguile me, and I did eat.

And then the Lord said unto the Serpent, because thou have done this, thou art
accursed above all Cattle, upon thy belly shall thou go, and dust shall thou
eat all thy days. I will also put enmity between thy seed and her seed,
she shall break thine head, and thou shall bruise his heel. And to the woman
he said, he would increase her sorrows, and that in sorrow should she bring
^orth her children, and be subject to her Husband. And to Adam, for his
disobedience he cursed the earth for his sake, that thorns and thistles should
it bring forth, and that in sorrow he should eat his meat all the days of
his life, and in the sweat of his face he should eat his bread, till he
returned to the earth from whence he was taken: and as he came from dust,
thither he should return: and Adam called his Wife Hevah. The Lord made them
coats of skins, and clothed them; then the Lord sent him forth from the
Garden of Eden, least he should ea^e likewise of the tree fo Life, sending him
to till the earth from whence he was taken. And being so cast out, at the East
side of the Garden of Eden, he set the Cherubims with the blade of a sword to
keep them from the tree of Life.

After this, Adam knew Hevah his Wife, who conceived and bare Cain, who became
a tiller of the ground: and again, she brought forth Abel, who was after a
keeper of sheep.

After this, when he was one hundred and thirty years old, he begat another
child, calling him Seth: and he lived after that, eight hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. So all the days of Adam were nine hundred and
thirty years, and then he dyed.

Meditations and prayers upon the Creation and life of Adam.
O Thou incomprehensible God, who wast from all beginning, even before the
Creation of this Heaven and this Earth, and who for all Eternity wilt continue,
after the dissolution of this thy great workmanship the world, which thou have
created.

O Lord, I that am thy Creature, and composed of this Earth by reason of sin
and ingratitude, do find my self most deformed and full of darkness, even as
that Chaos the world it was, before thou O Lord did look upon it, and give
it light.

Now my God, being in this depraved condition, and sitting in this darkness.
In thy mercy look thou upon me, enlighten my soul, and create a new heart in
me, and let thy blessed Spirit move upon the waters, and troublesome waves of
my vast unbridled concupiscence and vain affections, whose floods are
uncessant in this deep and darkesome Sea, which is so full of danger to my
distressed soul.

O thou fructifier of the Earth, which by thy wonderful and unsearchable power,
and comfort to mankind, created the trees, and herbs, and by making them to
bud, and bring forth both blossomb, and fruit in their due time.

Look mercifully O Lord upon this lump of earth I am composed of, and so
refresh me with the dew of thy grace, as that timely, me from this thy Plant,
growing from this earth, there may spring out the tender buds of contrition,
the blossom of Charity, and the fruit of good works and piety: And let the
holy Sunbeams of thy goodness, which thou have set in the Firmament of thy
mercy, preserve me from the bitter cold and frosts of Afflictions, and the
mildewes and blastings of the temptations and vanities of this world, which are
so dangerous in the bud and blossom of my good purposes and resolutions
toward thee.

O Lord, as thy wonderful works in the Creation are far beyond the weak
capacity and apprehension of mortal man to conceive; yet by thy goodness,
some things thou make us sensible of, which are so visible to our mortal
eyes, and so admirable to our due consideration, whereby we may so see thy such
infinite power and providence; for which, to magnify, extol, and praise thee
O thou God of omnipotency.

As in wonder thou did create thy Creatures abundantly, both by Sea and
Land, so thy goodness did this great work, at a time of great mercy, and
providence to Adam, whose Creation did next follow.

O Lord, how abundant is thy goodness, and thy ways of mercy, except our sins
provoke, and stop the current of thy blessings.

What creature is more miserable then man in his birth, and first breeding, yet
how wonderfully have thou ordained, and provided for him, that though he came
most feeble and crying into this miserable world, no creature more unable to
help himself; yet thou O God by thy goodness, even before his being have thus
provided thy creatures and comforts to him for his preservation.

O Lord, how unsearchable are thy works, and how infinite was thy goodness in
the Creation of our first Father, of which substance I am; let me with wonder
admire, and ^e astonished, that whiles I consider, that being so made of the
very dust of the Earth: and yet to thy blessed Image, O Lord most mighty, O
thou my only hope, and comfort of my soul, I want new words to express this
thy boundless goodness; for how does this thy so high and divine mercy herein
meet with my so deep and earthly misery.

Therefore let me who am this dust fall down in all humility before thee, upon
that Earth of which I am made. And O Lord my maker, whose Image I am, let thy
power and strength look in pity upon me, and bring me to the true knowledge
of my self, and thy goodness: and grant that this thy holy countenance may so
shine in me, that thereby I may be so enlightened by the splendour of thy grace,
as I may break from the danger and darksome corners of my own blind and
corrupt conditions so derived unto me: and so by seeing thy goodness and mercy
with most ardent and burning zeal, I may adore and magnify thee my Creator.

O the unconceivable loss of that happiness which was once in Paradise, that
just reward of disobedience (and the dangerous ^^endant of spiritual pride,
(...) knowledge) the bane of (...) ^nhappy children of Adam* (...) ^eeth are
set on edge by the forbidden fruit that he did eat (we still pursuing to know
more then is needful, or that we ought to do), the which even at this
unhappy time ^s so like to destroy us, and to throw us out of this our fools
paradise, which we esteem of so much (...) pleasure, (the which indeed) though
it come far short of the Paradise of happiness in Eden; yet by thy mercy O
God, to a sinful Nation, one of the best amongst the thistles, and thorns, of
this our banishment from the happiness we have lost.

O Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may discern before the cool of the day,
and my latter end, my great offense against thee, and not to esteem it any
safety for me, to run from thee, or by covering my secret or open sins with the
fig leaves of hypocrisy, it being of such weak and deceitefull ^^vert to thy
All-seeing eye.

But oh thy mercy my Creator, in the depth of thy so just judgments, whereby
we were lost, and by thy so great mercy, whereby we were redeemed and
preserved.

By one woman's pride, being seduced by the Serpent, we suffered, and by the
humility of another, being full of grace, who was the Mother of our Redeemer
that saved us, the one by the Cherubin in thy wrath, was kept out of that
terrestrial Eden* The other with a heavenly salvation, brought us the blessed
tidings of that happiness in celestial Paradise. And thus by thy mercy
did thou break the head of the Serpent, and saved us by that Messiah the
Savior of the world.

This is he, Joh. 1. 1.
that in the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word
was God, and the same was in the beginning with God, and all things were made
by it.

He was in the world, 10.
and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not.

He came to his own, 11.
and his own received him not.

O unmeasurable mercy of thine, O God, thou pattern of perfect goodness, from
thy glorious seat of mercy in heaven, thus to look upon us the great map of
earthly misery, and objects of thy wrath.

As for our redemption, 14.
to make this word flesh to dwell amongst us, and to see the glory of it, as the
glory of the only begotten Son, full of grace and truth.

Surely there is no mercy or comfort like this thy incomprehensible goodness
O Lord, thus to give thy self unto us. This is even such a gift as may
sufficiently astonish the Receiver. Therefore, O thou bountiful Benefactor,
give me grace even to forsake my self, and give it unto thee. Let me outstrip
by a heavenly expedition those Shepherds and Kings, who came first to offer
unto thee, the Angels the^ rejoicing, when this thy Word was made flesh, and
came amongst us. Lead me O Lord by that blessed star of thy grace to that
manger of mercy. Let no difficulties hinder me in this my holy pilgrimage, to
the blessed Bethlehem, where thou art. And if these three Kings took such a
long journey to see thee O god, in that homely stable. What difficulties should
we undergo to enjoy thy heavenly salvation. Let me imitate these Shepherds
and Kings by their humility and offerings (O Lord) by offering even all that I
have unto thee; my heart in perfect humiliation with those Shepherds, and both
heart and goods in charity to the poor and distressed, inimitation of the
humility and Presents of these three Kings.

That at last, in the fullness of thy mercy, being delivered out of this misery
wherein I am fallen, by the fall of Adam, out of earthly Paradise: And being
thus redeemed by thee, as these devout Shepherds and Kings did see thy face
here upon earth, in such humility; grant that I may so follow thee here, by
such humble and harmless steps, as hereafter I may enjoy the happy fight of
thee in glory in the heavenly Paradise, where the Saints and Angels do rejoice
in thy presence, even for ever and ever.

THE HISTORY of Cain and Abel.
CAin being a Tiller of ground, Genesis 4.
brought an oblation of the fruit thereof unto the Lord: and Abel did the like
with the increase of his Cattle, and of the fatt of them, unto the which the
Lord had respect: but unto the offering of Cain he had no regard; for which he
was wroth, and his countenance fell down. Then the Lord said unto him, why art
thou wrath, and why is thy countenance cast down? If thou do well, shall not
thou be accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door.

After this, Cain spoke to his brother, and meeting him in the field, did
murder him. Then the Lord said unto Cain, where is Abel thy brother? who
answered, I cannot tell, am I my brothers keeper? Again, the Lord said, what
have thou done, the voice of thy brothers blood cries unto me from the earth.

Therefore thou art now cursed from the Earth, which has opened her mouth to
receive thy brothers blood from thine hand. When thou shall till the ground, it
shall not henceforth yield unto thee her strength; a Vagabond, and a Run-agate
shall thou be in the earth. Then Cain said to the Lord, my punishment is
greater then I can bear; behold, thou have cast me out this day from the
Earth, and from thy face, shall I be hid, and shall be a vagabond, and
whosoever finds me, shall slay me. Then the Lord said unto him, whosoever
kills thee, he shall be punished seven fold: and the Lord set a mark upon
Cain, lest any man finding of him should kill him. Then he went out of the
presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the Land of Nod, toward the East fide of
Eden, and he knew his Wife, who conceived, and bare a son called Enoch: and
he built a City, calling it by his name, Enoch.

Meditations and Prayers upon the History of Cain and Abel.
Oath miseries and mischiefs that befall us, when we have lost thy favor, and
the happiness of thy guard and protection O LORD. For so it fell out with Adam
and his generation after their falling from thee, and loss of that happiness
and safety, the which in their innocence they enjoyed in Eden, and lost by
their disobedience unto thee.

How are our natures thus depraved when we have lost thy heavenly guidance,
being made weak and miserable by our own perverse wills, as appears: but this
so sudden and most unnatural murder of Cain, the first child of Adam, thus
to kill Abel his most innocent brother.

O Lord be merciful unto me a sinner, one of the sons of Adam, and who
stands in the same corrupted condition, and under the lash of thy judgments,
for my manifold sins; strengthen me with thy grace. Let the tears, my Savior,
in obedience unto thee, and shed for me, in the garden of sorrow, strengthen my
soul, and repair the loss of thy favor O God, which my first Parents lost
by their disobedience in that Garden of pleasure in Paradise.

Let the vigor of thy blessed grace prevent all vice in me: and so endew me
with thy goodness, as in stead of murdering. I may do all the works of
mercy to my brother.

Grant that the sacrifice of my prayers in humility may be presented unto thee
with zeal and perfectn^^ of heart; for as thou art of much mercy, so thou art
a jelous God; therefore with Abel, let me bring unto thee even the fatness of
uprightness and innocence, in the sincerity of my soul; then with the piety
and humility of Abel shall I be acceptable unto thee.

O Lord keep me harmless, that I may die in the happiness of Abel, and deliver
me from the cruelty and hardness of heart which was in Cain, and from the mark
of thy wrath for sin and iniquity.

O Lord deliver me from such despair as was in Cain, for murdering this his
innocent brother, whereby he became a vagabond, or to lose all hopes of thy
mercy, with Judas, forbetraying his Master, and my Savior.

But make me sensible of thy bounty, and my penury, thy mercy, and my misery,
thy strength, and my weakness, And Lord let thy insinite goodness and power,
help and strenthen me, in all the inevitable dangers so subject unto me, by
the fall of these my first Parents, whose infirmities I carry thus about me.

But in Jesus Christ thy Son, and my Savior, look in mercy upon me, whose
innocence did exceed that of Abel's, the son of Adam, and whose sacrifice
was of such incomparable value; for he sacrificed even himself for me a
sinner. It was not the fat of Lambs upon the Altar, but this immaculate Lamb,
the Son of God, he shed his most precious blood upon the Altar of the Cross
for my Redemption.

The sprinkling of whose blood speaks better things then that of Abel's, Heb.
12. 24.
for his cried for vengeance to thy seat of Justice (O God:) but tbis most
precious blood did call for, and procured mercy, from thy seat of mercy. And
therefore with much comfort in my suite and most humble confidence of thy
mercy, I beseech thee with this most precious blood so shed for me, to wash
from me the foul blemishes, and heal the putrifactions of my soul, fallen
upon me, by that offense of my first Parents in Paradise; which sore I have
made worse by my own loose and sinful scratching.

But O my God, let his sufferings, patience, and obedience, satisfy for the
vanity, rashness, and disobedience that reigns in me. Let the sufferings of
him in whom there was no guile, stand for me which am so full of guilt.

Let the blessing of that fruit of my redemption, more sweet then Manna which
came from that tree the Cross, in this veil of misery, to which we are
allotted, O Lord, it being of such inestimable value, let it take off the
bitterness of that curse, which is so justly due unto me, for that pleasant
and banefull deceiving fruit of that tree in Paradise, whereby we are made thus
miserable, and subject to such cruelties as was in Cain, and all other
infirmities: and by thy grace so qualify me with the gifts of innocence and
harmless living; that by avoiding all the acts of cruelty, and shunning that
dangerous rock of despair, at last I may arrive to that happy habitation of
Eternity, prepared for the innocent, and such as trust in thee, and thy
incomprehensible mercy; it being that place of happiness those Innocents
enjoy, who were the first most happy and harmless Martyrs in their Infancy,
for thy sake O my Savior.

THE HISTORY of Noah.
NOah was the son of Lamech, Genesis 5.
who did prophecy concerning him, of the comfort that should proceed from
him, because of the earth, the Lord had cursed, and Lamech lived after he
begat Noah, five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and daughters.

And it came to pass, Genesis 6.
when men began to multiply upon the face of the earth, and great impiety did
abound; that Gods wrath was kindled against the^ for their iniquities, for God
saw the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that every thought and
imagination of his heart was evil continually: and the Lord said, I will
destroy man from the face of the earth, both man and beast, and the creeping
things, and the fowls of the air, for it repents me that I have made them.
But Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord; for he was a just man and perfect
in his generations.

Noah had three sons, 6.
Sem, Ham, and Japhet: and the earth was corrupt before God, and filled with
violence. And God said unto Noah, The end of all flesh is come before me, for
the world is filled with iniquity and violence; Behold, I will destroy them with
the Earth. Make thee an Arc with rooms in it, and pitch it within and
without, and fashion it as I direct thee: a window and a door shall thou make
in it: make it with a lower, a second, and a third story.

For behold, I will bring a flood of waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh,
and every thing that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I establish
my covenant, and thou shall come into the Ark, thou and thy sons, and thy wife,
and thy sons wives with thee. And of every living thing of all flesh, male and
female shall thou bring into the Ark to keep them alive with thee, and take in
with thee food of all sorts, for thee and for them. And Noah did all that the
Lord commanded him, and when the Ark was finished, the Lord said unto him, Come
thou and all thy house into the Arc, for thee have I seen righteous before me
in this generation.

And bring into the Arc of every clean beast by sevens, Genesis 7.
and of unclean by 2. male and female: and of fowls by seven, to keep ^eede
alive upon the face of the earth; for after seven days I will cause it to rain
upon the earth 40. days and 40. nights^and Noah did as the Lord commanded him.
He was 600. years old when the flood was upon the earth: and after he and his
family were entered into the Arc, and all other living creatures, as 'twas
commanded, the flood came upon the earth, and the Ark was born above the
waters, and went upon the face of it, and the waters prevailed exceedingly upon
the earth, and all the high hills that were under heaven were covered: and all
flesh dyed that moved upon the earth, and the waters prevailed one hundred and
fifty days upon the earth: but after God made a wind to pass over the earth,
and the waters assuaged.

And after the hundred and fifty days the waters were abated, Verse. 8.
and the Ark rested upon the mountains of Ararat, and after forty days Noah
opened the window of the Ark, and sent out a Raven which went forth too and fro
until the waters were dried up from off the earth: also he sent forth a Dove
to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground: but the Dove
found no rest for the sole of her feet, but returned to the Ark. But after
seven days more he sent forth the Dove again, and the Dove came in to him in
the evening, and in her mouth was an Olive leaf, so by that Noah knew the
waters were abated upon the earth. After that he staid seven days more, and
sent the Dove out again, which returned no more unto him: then Noah removed
the covering of the Ark, and looked, and behold, the face of the earth was dry,
and God commanded Noah to come out of the Arc, and all that was within it; the
which he did: and after he built an Altar unto the Lord, and offered burnt
offerings on the Altar, which was pleasing to the Lord: and the Lord blessed
the earth again and promised never to destroy it by water any more, and set the
Rainbow as a sign thereof.

And the Lord blessed Noah and his sons, and Noah began to be a Husbandman, and
he planted a Vineyard, and he drank of the wine, and was drunk, and was
uncovered within his tent. And Ham the father of Canaan saw the nakedness of
his father, and told his two brethren without: then Sem and Japhet took a
garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backwards and covered
the nakedness of their father, and would not look upon his nakednes^: but when
Noah did awake, and knew what his younger son bad done: he said, Cursed be
Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. And Noah lived
after the flood three hundred and fifty years: and all the days of Noah were
nine hundred and fifty years, and he dyed.

MEDITATIONS upon Noah.
O Lord make me sensible of the grievousnesse of sin, and of the punishments
that follow such transgressions: let this example of the old world in the time
of Noah, teach me to look into my self, that I may see mine own iniquities,
and the corruptions of my heart, and give me, O Lord, true repentance and
contrition, that I be not drowned in the deluge of my sinfulness* but receive
me with thy servant Noah into the Ark of thy saving mercy, and good Lord, let
me not be like those secure and sinful persons, that built the Ark' and they
themselves perished, to give instructions to others, and my self to fall into
impiety; to be left out of thy holy Ark of thy saving grace, or out of the
blessings of thy holy Church, and so come at last to perish in my sins. O
Lord, whiles I am in this ark of material safety and refuge, keep me thy
servant safe from the danger of shipwreck and leaking, in the faith and unity
of the church, not to distrust thy providence in this Ark, though I live and
subsist among the bruit beasts and wild creatures of this world, who be as the
Psalmist speaks, like the horse and mule that have no understa^ding. Send the
Dove of thy holy spirit with the olive branch of thy strength and comfort unto
me, that may bring joyful tidings unto my soul of that happiness which I may
expect when I shall be enlarged out of this flesh.

Bring thy Arc, thy Church, O Lord, out of the troublesome waters of
affliction and persecution, that now so grievously toss and disturb that poor
model, that it may rest upon the safe mountains of Ararat, in the full power
of thy merciful redemption. In thy due time take from over my understanding,
the covering of the ark, that I may discern the pleasure of that heavenly
habitation, which thou have prepared for my soul, and that I may with a
particular evidence of faith and piety, pass out of this Ark thy Church
militant, to thy Church triumphant in heaven: and let me build here an altar
of thanksgiving, with the incense of zeal burning in my heart, to praise thee
for all thy mercies and goodness toward me.

And good Lord, whiles I live here the small remainder of my days, let me not
he overcome with intemperate desires, or sin in the wrong use of these thy
creatures, that thou have ordained for my miserable life: but to use them
soberly without drunkenness or any excess, that thereby I may be the better
enabled by the comforts of them, to serve thee in the moderate use thereof, and
all other thy blessings. And good Lord give me grace to cover the infirmities
of such father^, and others of the world, which I shall see to fall by
weakness into these or the like offenses, and charitably to judge of them, and
to judge of my own ways, looking into my own actions: and with a single eye to
judge my self before others, then shall not I cast a stone at another, but
reflect the worst thought upon my self, so shall the soul of thy servant, O
Lord, avoid all active scandal, and black reproach, and that curse which Cham
received from Noah his father, standing upon record for ever.

THE HISTORY of Abraham.
ABraham was the son of Terah, Genesis 11.
who descended from Sem the eldest son of Noah, and Abraham married Sarah,
who was barren: and it came to pass that Terah brought Abraham with Sarah, Lot,
and others from Ur in Caldea, to go into the Land of Canaan. And they came to
Haran, where Terah dyed, he being then two hundred and five years old; who
being dead, by Gods command Abraham departed from Haran, being then 75. years
old, with Sarah his Wife, and Lot his brothers son, with their substance and
servants, and took their journey toward Canaan; In this his journey he came to
Sheshem, and to the Plain of Morah, the Canaanites being then in the Land.
There the Lord appeared to him, promising to give his seed that Land: and in
that place did Abraham build an Altar unto the Lord.

From thence he removed Eastward from Bethel, where he likewise built an Altar
unto the Lord, and there called upon his Name. Then he after travailing
further South, a great Famine coming upon that Land he went into Egypt there
to sojourn: and when he drew near that Land, he began to be fearful of
himself by reason of the beauty of his Wife, and desired her to say she was
his Sister. Now after his coming there, the Egyptians were much taken with
her beauty, and the Princes of Pharoah's Court acquainted the King therewith.
So she was brought into his Palace, and for her sake Abraham was kindly used:
but the Lord plagued the house of Pharaoh for detaining of her; then was
Pharaoh angry with Abraham for not telling him she was his wife, and so he
delivered her back, and sent him friendly away, with good rewards. Then
departed Abraham out of Egypt, Genesis 13.
with Sarah, and Lot his brother, with great wealth both in treasure and
Cattle, and travailed toward the South, to Bethel, where formerly he had
been, even to the Altar he had made, and there he worshipped, (at that time,
Abraham's Cattle were so many, as Lot and he could not live together, and
striving there was between their Heards-men, even amongst the Canaanites their
enemies. So Abraham spoke to Lot, and desired there might be no strife between
them, they being brethren, and and left it in Lots choice whether to go: and
Lot looking for his convenience, he observed the Plain of Jordane was every
way watered; for before Sodom and Gomorrah were destroyed, it was as the
Garden of the Lord, and thither did Lot go, according to his own choice, and
so they parted one from the other: Abraham continuing in the land of Canaan.
Then it was, that the Lord again did promise that Land to the seed of Abraham.

After this, Abraham removed his Tent, and dwelt in the Plain of Mamre, which
is Hebron, and built there an Altar unto the Lord.

And it came to pass, Genesis 14.
in some wars between the Kings of Sodom, Gomorrah, and other Kings, that
Lot was prisoner, and his Cattle taken, of which a message being brought to
Abraham, he presently brought forth of his house, that were born and brought
up there, three hundred and eighteen persons, and pursued them to Dan, and
Damascus, and brought back Lot and all his substance, with the women and his
people.

Then brought forth Melchisadech, King of Salem, bread and wine unto him, who
was a Priest of the most high God, and blessed Abraham, saying, Blessed art hou
Abraham, of God, possessor of Heaven and Earth, who has delivered thine
enemies into thine hand: and then Abraham paid him tithe.

After, Genesis 15.
this the Word of the Lord came to him in a vision, giving him much comfort,
saying, how he would defend and reward him: but at that time Abraham was much
troubled, he being childlesse, resolving to make his Steward his Heir: but the
Lord promised him his own seed should inherit, and that he would multiply his
generation upon Earth, and how they should go into Egypt, and sojourn there
40^. years, and be hardly used: but that they should be delivered, and return
with great plenty.

Now Sarah, Genesis 16.
Abraham's Wife, continuing barren, she had a maidservant, whose name was
Hagar, an Egyptian, whom she desired Abraham to receive, whereby he might have
Issue, the which he did; this was ten years after he came to Canaan, and she
conceived with child, whereupon she despised Sarah her Mistrisse, of which her
pride, Sarah complained unto Abraham; who leaving her to Sarah, she dealt
roughly with her, and thereupon she fled: but in her flying, coming to a
fountain of water in the Wilderness, an Angel appeared unto her, enquiring
from whence she came, and whether she intended; who by her being told the
reasons of her journey, he persuaded her to return to Sarah her Dame, and to
humble her self unto her. Moreover the Angel told her he would increase her
seed, and that it should multiply exceedingly: and that in regard of her
tribulation, she should call her son Ishmael. So when she was delivered of
this child, Abraham called it Ishmael, himself being then fourscore and six
years old.

And after Abraham being ninety and nine years old, Genesis 17.
the Lord appeared again unto him, promising many blessings unto him, so he
would obey him: and how he would multiply his seed exceedingly, and he fell
upon his face: Then the Lord called his name Abraham, promising he should be a
Father of many Nations, that Kings should proceed from them, and that he would
give them the Land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and to be their
God, they keeping his Covenant. Then the Lord appointed Abraham, that every
man-child of eight days old should be circumcised, as well of his house, as
of strangers that were bought, that his Covenant might be in their flesh as an
everlasting Covenant, and the uncircumcised should be cut off from the people.
Then he commanded his Wife should no more be called Sarai, but Sarah: and how
he would give her a son, and she should be a Mother of many Nations; then
Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, thinking it strange, he being an
hundred years old, and Sarah ninety, then he desired the Lord that Ishmael
might live in his sight: but the Lord said again, Sarah shall bear a son,
and thou shall call his name Isaac, with whom I will establish my Covenant: and
thy prayer for Ishmael I have heard, and him will I bless and make fruitful,
twelve Princes shall he beget, and he shall be a great Nation, and that Sarah
shall bear Isaac, the next year. Then Abraham took Ishmael his son, with all
the men-children that were borne in his house, 15. and that were bought with
money, and circumcised them, the selfsame day, God had commanded him,
himself being ninety nine years old when he was circumcised, and Ishmael
thirteen.

Now again, Genesis 18.
the Lord appeared unto Abraham in the Plain of Mamre, about the heat of the
day, as he sat at his Tent door, and looking, lo three men stood by him,
whom he ran to meet, bowing himself to the ground, saying, Lord, if I have
found favor in thy sight, go not I pray thee from thy servant, but wash your
feet under this tree, and I will bring you some bread to comfort your hearts,
and after you may go: and they answered, do as thou have said.

Then Abraham made have unto Sarah, and bade her make some cakes upon the
Hearth; as likewise he made his servant kill a Calfe, and so with some butter
and milk he set before them, standing himself by under the tree, whiles they
did eat. Then they asked for Sarah his Wife, whom he said was in the Tent:
and he said, I will certainly come again unto thee, according to the time of
life; for Sarah shall have a son: Sarah heard this being at the Tent door,
and laughed within her self, because she and Abraham being old. And the Lord
said, wherefore does Sarah thus laugh; shall any thing be too hard for the
Lord to do* at the time appointed will I return unto thee, even according to
the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son, then Sarah was afraid.

So the men did rise, and went toward Sodom, but Abraham stood yet before the
Lord, and knowing of the Lords anger, he pleaded for that City, desiring the
Righteous might not be destroyed with the wicked: and desired that if fifty
righteous were therein, it might not be destroyed; for said he unto the Lord,
shall not the Judge of the world do right? but Abraham's suite continued, from
fifty to five and forty, so from forty to thirty, and so to twenty, and at last
to ten, which not being in that City, the Lord went from Abraham, and Abraham
returned to his place.

After this, Genesis 20.
Abraham went toward the South, and sojourned at Gerar, and once more said,
Sarah was his sister, and Abimilech the King sent for her, whom God (before he
touched her,) in a dream threatened death unto him for taking another man's Wife;
so with many circumstances, in the fear of God, very religiously, he
delivered her back to Abraham, blaming him for saying she was his Sister; the
which he excused, by saying he thought them to have been a wicked people, and
was afraid of his life pretending she was his sister, having both one father,
but not of one mother. Then Abimilech gave them great store of Cattle and
treasure, reproving of Sarah for her dissembling* and he gave them leave to
live in his Country, where they pleased: and by the prayer of Abraham,
Abimilech was healed of his Infirmity, with his Wife, and women-servants, who
before were barren, and now brought forth children, before they being accused
for Sarah's cause.

After this, Genesis 21.
according to Gods promise, in due season, Sarah conceived, and bare Isaac,
whom Abraham circumcised at 8. days old, and Sarah rejoiced in the Lord, and
wondered at his mercies.

And when he was weaned they made a great feast, but Sarah seeing Ishmael
mocking, she said unto Abraham, cast out this bondwoman and her son; for he
shall not be heir with my son Isaac, at which Abraham was troubled: but the
Lord com^orted him, by telling him the comfort he should have by Isaac: so in
the morning early he sent away Hagar and Ishmael, who went to the Wilderness
of Beersheba, and God was merciful to them in their journey.

After this there was great friendship, between Abraham and Abimilech, and all
differences being reconciled, Abraham giving him Beeves and sheep.

After this, Abraham planted a Grove in Beersheba, and called there upon the
name of the Lord the everlasting God.

Then the Lord to prove Abraham's faith, Genesis 22.
said unto him, take now thine only son Isaac, whom thou love, and go to the
Land of Moreah, and there offer him a burnt-offering, upon one of the
mountains I shall show thee: so Abraham went early away with Isaac his son,
two servants, his Asses, with cloven wood for the sacrifice: and the third day
spying the place, he commanded his servants to stay behind, himself and Isaac
going on to the mountain to worship, Isaac carrying the wood, himself the
knife and the fire. Then said Isaac, Father here is the fire and the wood, but
where is the Lamb for the burnt-offring; then his father answered that God
would provide it: and coming to the place, Abraham built there an altar, and
couched the wood on it, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him like-wise on the
Altar upon the wood: and Abraham stretched out his hand, and took the knife to
kill his son: but an Angel from Heaven called unto him, saying, Abraham,
Ab^aham, who answered here am I; then he said lay not thy hand upon the child,
nor do any thing unto him; for now I know thou fear God, seeing for my sake
thou have not spared thine only son. Then Abraham lifting up his eyes,
behold there was a Ram behind him, caught by the horns in a bush, the which
he took, and offered him a burnt-offering in stead of his so, and he called
the place Jehovah Jireth as it is said this day, in the Mount will the Lord be
seen: and upon this by an Angel from heaven the second time, a great blessing
was promised unto Abraham and his seed, and that in them should all the
Nations of the Earth be blessed. Then turned Abraham again to his servants,
and so went to Beersheba where he dwelt.

Now after this, Genesis 23.
when Sarah was one hundred, twenty, and seven years old, she dyed at
Kiriartharba, in the Land of Canaa^, and Abraham mourned for her: but he
arising from the sight of the Corpse, talked with the Hittites about a place for
the burying of Sarah, he being there a Stranger, and they proffered him to
bury her in the chiefest of their Sepulchers: but with much respect he desired
them to speak for him unto Ephron to give him a Cave called Maeh Pelah at the
end of a field for so much money it was worth for a burying place.

Then Ephroa in the hearing of all the people, said, No my Lord, the field I
give thee, and the cave that is therein, even in the presence of the fons of my
people.

Then Abraham bowed himself before the people, saying, Seeing thou will give it
me^, I will give thee the price of the field, and so he gave him 400. filver
sheckles for it; after which, Abraham buried Sarah in that cave, it being
against Mamre, the same is Hebron in Canaan.

Now Abraham being grown old, Genesis 24.
took care for a Wife for his son Isaac; he then calling for his Steward,
making him put his hand under his thigh, and causing him to swear by the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, that his son should not take a Canaanitish woman to
Wife: but to go into his own Country and Kindred, and there to take a Wife
for him.

Then said his servant, what if the Woman will not come with me into this Land,
shall I bring back thy son? To whom Abraham answered, beware that thou bring
not back my son thither again. The Lord God of Heaven, who took me from my
fathers house, even from the Land where I was born, that spoke, and swear unto
me, saying, unto thy seed will I give this Land, he shall send his Angel before
thee, and thou shall take a Wife unto my son from thence. Nevertheless, if
the Woman will not follow thee, then shall thou be discharged of thy oath; only
bring not my son thither again: and the servant swore unto Abraham: so he
took ten of his Masters Camels, who went his journey, and obtained Rebecka
to be his wife, as in the story of Isaac is more at large expressed.

Now after the death of Sarah, Genesis 25.
Abraham took another Wife called Keturah, which bare him diverse children: and
Ahraham gave all his goods unto Isaac: but unto the sons of his Concubines he
gave them gifts, and sent them away from Isaac his son; this he did in his
lifetime. And Abraham being one hundred, seventy, and five years old, he
yielded up his Spirit, dying in a good age, and was gathered to his people, and
his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the Cave with Sarah in the field
Ephron.

PRAYERS upon the History of ABRAHAM.
GIve me obedience, O Lord, to follow the steps of my Governors, and to be
guided by my Parents, as Abraham was by Terah his Father, who brought him to
Haran.

So likewise let me be obedient to thy blessed Inspirations, which may bring
me to the heavenly Canaan. And as Abraham carried with him in his journey, his
wife, Lot his Brother, with his servants and substance; grant that all my
nearest affections, my flesh and blood may cheerfully go along with me in
this my pilgrimage to my ^eavenly happiness, with the servants and substan^e
of piety, and good works, to attend me. And in this progress in Moreh, and in
the middle of the worldly Canaan, let thy blessed grace appear unto me, and
grant that I may build an Altar of thanksgiving in my heart unto thee, and call
upon thy Name. Preserve me in the famine, necessity, and miseries of this
world, as thou did Abraham.

But above all worldly helps, keep me from the famine of thy favor and grace,
that in thee my soul may be safe from the spiritual danger of faith and a
good conscience. By thy good guidance remove me from danger, as Abraham was by
his going into Egypt.

Let not the fear and jealousy of worldly respects, make me to dissemble
before thee O Lord, who knows't the secrets of my heart, as Abraham did by his
Wife for his earthly safety, and deliver me from such bad intions of fleshly
desires, as was in Pharaoh King of Egypt by detaining of Sarah, lest I partake
of such punishments as befell unto him.

And for such offenses against thee, as wrongs and bad intentions done to any
man or woman, grant tha^ I may not continue in them, but timely to repent: and
by leaving such sins, give satisfaction for wrongs done, as Pharaoh did to
Abraham at his departure.

And still to praise thee for thy mercies, O Lord, as Abraham did at his return
to Bethel. Give unto me the like charitable love as was between Abraham and Lot
in their parting; yea in the middle of such worldly fortunes as they had; that
most dangerous rock of ambition, pride, and Emulation: and let me not be too
much in love with the pleasant Plains of this worldly Jordan of earthly and
vain delight, with Lot in his choice; for then shall I not be so near the like
danger^ as he was at the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah.

Good Lord give unto me continual comforts, and assurances unto my soul, by
thy mercies unto me, in the hope of that blessed eternity as thou did give
unto Abraham and his seed for their blessing in the earthly Canaan, and in
this Plain of Mamre, the Hebron of this world, still let me praise thee for all
thy mercies, with this father of the faithful. Give unto me O my helper, a
helping hand unto my distressed Brethren, and friends of this world, as Abraham
did to Lot in his captivity.

With such blessings and comforts as was given to Abraham by that King and
Priest Melchisadech: and not only to be humbly thankful unto thee for the
same, but to pay that tithe of duty and obedience due unto thy Ministers as he
did.

In the sadness of my dejected spirit, and coldness of devotion toward thee,
be thou my strength and comfort, as thou wast to Abraham, in thy promise to his
seed: so shall not this my earthly Steward of vain and worldly suggestions,
possess, annoy, and supplant my good thoughts, intentions, and hopes in thee,
but still I may be made happy by thy heavenly mercies.

In the barrenness of my soul, as it was in Sarah her body, and in such
fruitfulness as was with Hagar; let me not despair with the one, nor presume
with the other, lest I be cast out of thy mercies: but in my cries send me thy
good Inspirations, to make me return timely and humbly with Hagar, and with
leisure to receive thy promised blessing with Sarah.

So by the humiliation of Hagar, and the hope of Sarah, I shall by thy mercy,
with Abraham, enjoy the Ishmael of worldly comfort here, and the Isaac of
everlasting happiness hereafter.

Grant O Lord, that I may be courteous, and charitable to all men, as Abraham
was to the three, who came to his Tent door, with the like agility and
alacrity to do good works as he did for their provision, (that a^ he, in stead
of men, received Angel^: so by thy promised mercy to well doers, shall I
receive with Abraham thy comfort here, and thy heavenly reward hereafter) where
the Angels wait at the doors of heaven to receive the righteous.

Take from me O Lord all distrusts of thy promises, with Sarah's second doubt,
and with her, wonder at thy mercies; for by this faith and confidence in thee,
I shall by thy goodness, and in good time, with this hope and well-doing, enjoy
the happiness in heaven as she did after in earth in thy promise of Isaac.

O Lord keep me from the unrighteousness which was in Sodom, lost by mine
unworthiness the mediations and prayers of the faithful do not prevail for me
before the Throne of mercy, lest that for my sins I partake of their punishment
from thy seat of justice.

O Lord, how miserable and wretched are we, even the best of us, without thy
continual help, as it befell once more unto Abraham, in Gerer, by calling his
Wife sister.

O Lord keep me thy servant from relapsing into deadly sins; yea in the least
offense against thee, as he did by this his infirmity.

And in my wicked intentions, and thy just punishments for them, deal with me
as thou did with Abimilech, to repent, and leave off, before sin fully
passes me.

Keep me O Lord from a scoffing and mocking condition, as was in Ishmael, lest
I be made a scorn amongst my friends, and be thrust from the society of the
discreet.

Let me O Lord, admire and imitate the great faith and resolution of this thy
servant Abraham, the father of the faithful; give me grace cheerfully and
faithfully, to go toward that holy Morah, and there to sacrifice my soul,
and what is most near and dear unto me, to thee, to carry that sovereign wood
to inkindle (...) zeal in me: and the sacred and sharp kni^e, to cut off the
branches of my i^bred corruptions, and fleshly love, and let the two servants,
the World and the Devil stay behind, that they may not hinder my good purpose,
and obedience to thy commands: and so by this blessed resolution and sincerity,
I shall receive thy mercy, and a timely offering from thee, as Abraham had the
Ram, with the comfort of thy heavenly grace and blessings, still more and more,
to ^^nforme and strengthen me in a holy progress toward thee O Lord.

Great was this faith in Abraham the Father, and perfect was the obedience of
Isaac his son.

But oh the incomprehensible goodness and mercy of our God and heavenly
Father, and his son my Savior by that his humiliation and obedience.

This omnipotent God brought this his only begotten Son unto Mount-Calvary,
where neither Ram nor Bullock was sufficient for that Sacri^ice which was
for our Redemption: but that Lamb of God who took away the sins of the
world, he humbled himself, and was offered as a sacrifice for our sins upon
the Cross, whose blood was far more precious the^ that of Rams; for this most
precious, holy, and unvaluable blood is the cure of our corrupttd souls, by
washing away the foul spots of sin.

Oh was ever the like obedience, or ever any love like to this?

O Lord, as the two servants whom Abraham left below the mountain might wonder
at the resolution of their Master, and his son's obedience: so let my soul and
body that desires to serve thee in imitation of these two servants with much
humility, waiting in the bottom and valley where thou have appointed us to
stay, with wonder a^mire thy goodness and mercy, for this thy fatherly mercy
unto us, and thy Son's goodness and obedience for us; for this is mercy
beyond measure, to us most miserable sinners.

O Lord, it is far beyond the apprehension of sinful man, to comprehend this
thy so infinite goodness and mercy; therefore let me for ever with
admiration look up to heaven, from whence thou descendedst, to do this so
unspeakable a work of pity and mercy: and look down into my self who was
the cause of this severe suffering, and see my own unworthiness: so by seeing
this thy incomprehensible goodness, and my own vileness, in the humbleness
of my heart, and mith admiration of thy goodness, that I may magnify thy Name
for ever O Lord: and let sorrow and compu^ction for my sins be my companions
for ever. Let me O God, see the foulness of sin, and shun it with perfect
hatred, it being of that danger to me, and such an offense against thee, O
Lord, even of such a dangerous consequence, as nothing could sufficiently
satisfy for it, but that all-sufficient and great sacrifice upon the Cross,
even by such a holy oblation as thy self O right^ous God, for sinful man.
Therefore let the consideration of the shame and pain thou sufferedst upon that
Tree, make me be ashamed to offend thee. Crucify all the wicked and vain
affections that reign in my corrupted flesh, and bring me in true obedience
unto thee. O thou Redeemer and Savior of the world, give me patience and
moderate sorrow for the loss of near friends, as Abraham was, for Sarah his
wife, and to have a charitable and venerable regard unto them, as Abraham had,
by the decent burying of Sarah. O Lord with Abraham make me careful, for the
lawful and discreet disposing of my children, as he did for Isaac: And grant
that thy good Angel may go before me, in such actions, and thy good
inspirations so to guide me, not only for the earthly marriage of my son, but
likewise that I may so use and enjoy these earthly comforts here, as that at
last I may be brought to that blessed marriage in heaven; which happiness
there, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with the Patriarks, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, and Professors of the true faith enjoy for all Eternity.

THE HISTORY of ISAAC.
THE servant of Abraham having taken his journey according to the direction of
Abraham his Master, Genesis 24.
for the obtaining of a Wife for Isaac, and said he began his journey, having
in his charge ten Camels, with such goods delivered unto him by Abraham, as
were fit for his journey; who journeyed and came to a City called Nahur; where
coming, he there made his Camels to lie down without the City, by a well of
water, being eventide, the time that women used to come for water: and then he
said, O Lord God of my Master Abraham, I beseech thee send me good speed this
day, and show thy mercy to him. Lo I stand by the well of water, whiles the
daughters of the City come hither, grant that the Maid to who^ I say, bow down
thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; If she say drink, and I will give
thy Camels drink also, let her be she that thou have ordained for thy servant
Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou have showed mercy on my Master.

Now while he was speaking, Rebeckah the daughter of Bethuel came out with her
pitcher upon her shoulder, who was very fair, and a Virgin: and going down
into the Well, and filling her pitcher, and coming up, the servant ran and met
her, saying, let me drink I pray thee a little water of thy pitcher. Then she
hastily put the pitcher to her hand, and gave him to drink, saying, moreover, I
will draw likewise some water for thy Camels, that they may drink: and then
she ran again to the Well, and drew water for the Camels: So the man wondered
at her, but held his peace, to know whether the Lord had made his journey
prosperous or not.

And when the Camels had left drinking, the man took a golden Abilloment, and
two bracelets, with ten sheckles of gold, and gave them her: and he asked her
whose daughter she was, saying, I pray thee tell me; as likewise if there be
any room in thy Fathers house to lodge in; she answered, I am the daughter of
Bethuel, whom she bare to Nahor. Moreover she said, we have litter and
provender enough, and room to lodge in: and the man bowed himself, and
worshipped the Lord, saying, blessed be the Lord God of my Master Abraham,
which has not with-drawne his mercy and his truth from him; for when I was in
the way, the Lord has brought me to my masters brothers house. She then
hearing this, ran straight home, and told her brother Laban thereof; who came
presently to the man, and said unto him, come in thou blessed of the Lord,
wherefore stand thou without, seeing I have prepared the room for thy self
and thy Camels: so he unsadled the Camels, giving them litter and provender.
Then he, and the men that came with him washed their feet, and meat was set
before him: but he would not eat, until he had delivered his message.

Then he related how he was servant to Abraham, and how God had blessed him
exceedingly, in goods, money, and servants, and how he had a son by Sarah in
her old age, to whom his Master had given all his estate, with all such
Circumstances as Abraham had commanded him as aforesaid; with such passages as
was between Rebecka and him at the Well, and how he then gave her the
Abiloments and Bracelets.

Then he said further unto them, if you will deal mercifully, and truly with
my Master, tell me, and if not, tell me, that I may turn me to the right hand,
or to the left. Then answered Laban, ct Bethuel, that this thing is provided of
the Lord, we cannot therefore say unto thee neither evil or good. Behold, she
is before thee, take her and go, that she may be thy Masters sons wife as the
Lord has said. Then he bowed himself toward the earth unto the Lord, and
gave unto Rebecka jewels of gold, and Raiments, as likewise gifts unto her
Mother, and her Brother, and then did eat, tarrying there all night.

Now in the morning when he was ready to depart, they desired Rebecka might
stay only ten days with them: but he said, in regard God had prospered his
journey, he desired forthwith to go to his Master. Then they desired to know
Rebecka's mind, and have her consent, whose answer was, she would go; and so
when they had blessed her, they let her go, and her Nurse likewise. So this
servant, with Rebecka and her maidservants, took their journey, riding upon
the Camels.

Now Isaac being walking abroad in the fields to pray, in the evening, and
looking about him, see these Camels coming toward him: and so soon as Rebecka
see him, she lighted from her Camel: and asking the servant who it was that
was coming toward them, he said, it was his Master; so she took a veil and
covered her self. Then the servant telling him what he had, Isaac took her to
his Mother Sarah's Tent, and she was his Wife, whom he loved.

After this, Abraham dying, Isaac and Ishmael buried him with Sarah his wife,
after whose death Isaac dwelt in Beerlahai Roy: and Ishmael dying at the age of
one hundred, thirty, and seven years, was gathered unto his people.

Isaac was forty years old when he married Rebecka, who continued for a while
barren: but he prayed to the Lord, who heard him, and she conceived: and at
the time of birth, being with child of two, they did strive in her womb, and
she prayed unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto her, two Nations are in thy
womb, and two manner of people shall be divided out of thy bowels, one people
shall be mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger. So at
the time of the delivery, the first that came out was red, and all over rough,
him they called Esau: and after came the other, whose hand held Esau by the
heel, who was called Jacob, and then was Isaac threescore years old.

Now these two growing into years, Esau became a cunning Hunter, and lived in
the fields: but Jacob was a plain man, and lived in Tents. And Isaac loved
Esau, for Venison was his meat: but Rebecka loved Jacob.

Now Esau coming one day very hungry and weary out of the fields, Jacob had
made some pottage, of which Esau desired to eat; for which Jacob desired
Esau's birthright, who answered, lo I am almost dead, what is then this
birthright to me, so he swear unto Jacob to give it him, and contemning of
it, he sold it; then gave Jacob unto him some bread and Lentill Pottage, and
so went away.

And alter it came to pass that there was a Famine in the land, Genesis ^^*
and by the appointment of God, Isaac he went to Gerar, and there the Lord
appeared unto him, confirming his promise to Abraham his Father, and to the
seed of Isaac. And being at Gerar, Rebecka being very beautiful, the men
thereabouts did much look after her, insomuch as Isaac being afraid, he said
she was his sister.

And it came to pass one day, Isaac being sporting with her, Abimilech King of
the Philistines looking out of a window did espy it, and called to Isaac, and
said to him, surely she is thy Wife, and why do thou say she is thy Sister;
to whom he answered, that he was afraid of his life.

Then said the King, why have thou done this? If any one of my people had lain
with her, thou should have brought sin upon us. Then Abimilech charged all
his people, saying, he that touches this man or his Wife shall dye the death.

After this, Isaac living in this Land, and sowing Corn, the increase was a
hundred fold, and his Cattle did increase exceedingly. So having a mighty
household, and growing so great, the Philistines did envy him, insomuch as they
filled up the wels which were dug in his Father Abraham's time. And being
grown so rich and potent, Abimilech bade him be gone, saying, Thou art mightier
then we a great deal. Therefore Isaac departed, and pitched his Tent in the
valley at Gerar, and there dwelt, and opened the Wells again that the
Philistines had stopped, calling them by the names that Abraham his Father had
given them: and his servants digging in the valley, found there a Well of
living water; for which there was strife between them and the Herdmen of
Gerer, they saying it was theirs.

After this, they dug another Well, and there was strife for that likewise.
After this, they dug another, for which there was no strife. So from thence
he went to Beersheba, where the Lord appeared unto him the same night, and
confirmed unto him the blessings and promise to Abraham his Father, and his
seed: and there he built an Altar, calling upon the name of the Lord.

Then came unto him Abimilech, with his friend, and a Captain of his Army, to
whom Isaac said, why come ye to me, seeing you put me out from you, who
answered him, we saw the Lord was with thee, and we used thee kindly, and sent
thee away in peace, and therefore let there be now a Covenant between us, and
let it be done; the blessed of the Lord do this.

Then he feasted them, and they arose betimes in the morning, and swear one to
another, departing in peace and amity.

Now when Esau was forty years old, he took to wife Judeth a Hittite, and
Beshemath another Hittite likewise, who were a grief of mind to Isaac and
Rebecka.

Now Isaac growing old, Genesis 27.
and his sight failing of him, he called for Esau his eldest son, who came
unto him, to whom he said I am now old, and know not the day of my death;
wherefore I pray thee take thy bow, and go into the field and kill me some
Venison, and make me some savory meat, and bring it me, that I may bless thee
before I dye; the which accordingly Esau went about to do.

Now Rebecka hearing what Isaac had said, after Esau was gone into the field,
she told Jacob what Isaac had said, and pointed Esau to do, and how he
intended to bless him before his death. So she commanded him, saying go to
the flock, and from thence bring two Goat-kids; to make pleasant meat for thy
Father, that he may bless thee; then said Jacob to his Mother, that his
brother Esau was rough, and himself smooth; by which, if his Father should
feel, he should seem to mock him, and so should he bring a curse upon himself
in stead of a blessing: but she said, let the curse be upon me: So he went and
brought them to his Mother, who made pleasant meat thereof, such as Isaac
loved, then she put upon him furre clothes of Esau's which were in the house,
and covered his hands, and the smooth of his neck with the skins of the Kids:
and so putting the meat and bread into his hands, he coming to his Father,
said, my Father, who answered, I am here; who art thou my son: and Jacob
said, I am Esau thy first borne, I have done as thou bid'st me, arise I pray
thee, sit up and eat of my Venison, that thy soul may bless me; to whom
Isaac said, how have thou found it so quickly my son; who answered, because
the Lord thy God brought it to my hand. Then said Isaac unto him, come near
that I may feel thee my son, whether thou be my son Esau or not; then
Jacob came near him, who felt him and said, the voice is Jacob's, but the hands
Esau's, wherefore he blessed him. Then he again asked him if he were Esau, who
answered him he was; then he called for the Venison to eat, that he might
bless him, the which was brought by Jacob who did eat; as likewise he drank
wine.

After which he called Jacob unto him to kiss him, who did so; then he
smelled the savor of his garment, and blessed him, saying, the smell of my
son is as the smell of a field, which the Lord has blessed: and when Isaac
had made an end of blessing Jacob, he departed from his Father. After which,
Esau coming from hunting, came to his Father, who asking whom he was, told
him it was Esau his first borne son, whereat Isaac was struck with great
fear; then he told Esau of what had been done, and how he had blessed his
brother that brought meat unto him and that he should be blessed; then Esau
hearing this, cried bitterly.

Then Isaac (...), behold I have made (...) Lord, and all his Brethren (...)
made his servants. Also (...) wheat and wine have I furnished him, and unto
thee now (...) what shall I do. Then (...) said unto him, have thou (...)
blessing, my father? bless (...) me also my Father: and (...) lift up his
voice and wept. (...) Isaac said unto him, that (...) of the land should be his
^welling place, and to have the (...) of heaven from above, and (...) time he
should break off (...) others yoke from off his (...).

After this Esau hated Jacob, and intended afterward to kill him; of which
^^^becka hearing, did forewa^^ Jacob, and wished him to fly (...) Haran to her
brother (...) for safety, until Esau's (...) was over.

After this, Genesis ^8. ^
Isaac called for Ja^^^ (...) when he had blessed him, gave him a ch^^ge not to
marry any of the daughters of Canaan, but presently (...) to the house of
Bethuel his ^^^hers Father, and take to (...) of the daughters of Laban (...)
others brother: and so after he had blessed him with a (...) blessing, he sent
him (...) Laban.

Many years after this, Jacob came unto his ^ather Isaac, who was at Mamre,
which is Hebron, where in the hundred and fourscore year of his (...) he gave
up the Ghost, and was gathered unto to his people, his sons Esau and Jacob
burying him.

PRAYERS upon the History of ISAAC.
O Lord in thy mercy direct, assist, and prepare for me through the passages
of this world, and in all my journeyes, as thou did for that faithful
servant and Steward of Abraham's.

Make me careful, discreet, and honest in all my actions and deportments, as
this good Steward was unto Abraham in his undertakings. So concerning my soul,
and that so certain a passage to eternity; prepare me O Lord, and let my care
therein transcend all thought of earthly cares, in this journey, which so
nearely concerns eternal happiness or woe.

Guide me in what I go about, and grant O God that I may take nothing in hand
but what may please thee: and give unto me O Lord thy blessing in the
prosecution, with a thankful heart unto thee for thy goodness, with this
good servant, whose prayers and praises thou did hear.

Oh let me admire thy providence and power in this thy work at the Well to
this servant: and by it let me consider how mercifully and strangely thou
bringst things to pass even amongst us, though not so pointed out by thy holy
immediate finger, as this particular.

O bring me to thy happy Wel-spring of thy happiness, O Lord, and the comfort
of thy holy grace, to refresh and direct me, even that which so far exceeds
all transitory consolations.

And if this Steward did so much pray for his Master, and praise thee O God for
thy goodness to him, how ought I, who am thy humble, but most unworthy
servant, even to exceed him in many degrees, both in my humiliation for my
sins, and thankesgiving for all thy manifold mercies; for infinite have they
been to me, beyond desert and expectation. Therefore open thou mine eyes which
are so dull, and raise up my heart which is so dead; that the one may see thy
goodness, and the other may praise thee; that this my heart may mourn for my
sins, and my eyes may flow into a fountain of tears for my offenses.

With this servant make me to be careful in what I shall undertake for
others, as he was, who would eat no meat till he had delivered his message:
so O Lord in things which concern thy service.

Let me neither eat nor sleep until I have paid my vows, and devoted my
self unto thee, for to be continued and confirmed in thy fear and favor is
happiness indeed, for beyond all earthly hopes, whose budd is barrenness, and
fruit strife.

Give me this good Stewards care to be gone, and the cheerfulness of Rebecka
to be going; by the one to discharge the trust to my friend: and by the other
to gain the love of my neighbor.

So O Lord, in that which concerns thy service, let me with resolution and
alacrity come speedily unto thee, so shall not the Bethuel of self-love, nor
the Laban of worldly care hinder me from my due obedience and service of thee.

Give me grace in imitation of this Grand-fire of the holy Patriarks, the
pattern of obedience upon his Fathers Altar, and in his constant serving of
thee; that with a contemplative heart, and a penitent soul, I may continually
call unto thee, both morning, evening, and at all times, as he did in that
evening he so happily met Rebecka: so by thy mercy shall I obtain thy
heavenly Comfort as he did in earthly respects, by meeting of her, and so be
joined unto thee for all Eternity.

Give me a tender care and regard for the obsequies of my Parents, and to join
in charity for the performance thereof, though with my enemies and most jealous
friends, as it was done by Isaac and Ishmael to their father Abraham.

Grant me patience O Lord in the barrenness of my dejected spirit, and give
me grace to persevere in my prayers unto thee, as Isaac did, in the barrenness
of Rebecka: so in due time thou will hear me as thou did Isaac, and in thy
good time shall I receive the fruit of thy consolation.

In the strivings between the flesh and the spirit as was in Rebecka's womb,
the which by reason of sin and my infirmities, I am so subjected unto, be
merciful unto me O God, and grant that still I may pray unto thee; so by thy
grace shall I be delivered, and know thy goodness and good pleasure, as she
did in her two twins.

And grant O Lord, that the blessings of thy good grace may bear rule over this
my rough and rude flesh, to keep it in subjection.

O Lord deliver and preserve me thy servant from the like hunger and weariness
in my soul, as it was with Esau in his body, that I may not endanger it for the
lentill light vanities, and fading refreshments of fleshly desires, thereby to
lose my heavenly inheritance, and that blessed birthright in heaven, purchased
for me by the birth, and left me by the death of thou my blessed Savior and
Redeemer.

In much grief of heart, I must confess O God, and with great shame and
confusion to my self, that I have done much evil in thy sight; Esau was not
more ready by that dear Bargain to eat those lentill potage, than I have bin
to swallow up sin, and offenses against thee even for a less value, my
greediness to sin was such, as even for a piece of bread have I finned against
thee; having been lead away by the meanest of temptations, and therefore I have
no other plea for my self but thy mercy O Lord, and the merits of my blessed
Savior, whose Sacrifice for sin upon the Cross, for us that were Gentiles was
of far more effecacy, then the blood of Bulls or Goites were for the Israelites.

Deliver me O Lord, from the power of my infirmities, which still persues me to
endanger my soul, as it dealt with Isacc, who fell into his father Abraham's
error, by calling his wife sister when he came to Gerer amongst the Philistims;
and give me the like Chastity, and Charity as was in Abimeleck, toward him and
Rebekah.

Give me O Lord that increase of thy grace, and mercy to sustain my soul as
thou did give unto Isacc in his corn to preserve his body, and grant that
I may be that good ground mentioned in thy Gospel, to bring forth, the fruit of
good works a hundred fold, as it was in Isacc's grain. Preserve me from the
envy of the wicked, an^ from the suggestions to sin, that the well-springs of
thy grace may not be taken from me, but raise up unto me the living wellspring
of thy mercy, that the stirrings of flesh and blood may have no power to take
from me, as the matteriall wells were taken from Isacc; and bring me O Lord
unto the spiritual Beersheba, so appear thou in mercy unto me there, as
knowing thy goodness, and believing thy promises, I may build an Altar of praise
and that thanksgiving unto thee.

In the passages of this world grant that I may always, preserve love and
friendship both with my friends neighbors, and even my enemies, with firmness
and integrity of heart, as was between Isacc and Abimeleck.

And let me so obey my Parents in my courses and carriages of this world that I
may not prove a grief of heart unto them, as Easu was to Isacc and Rebekah by
his marrying of Judeth the Hitite.

O Lord, give me such obedience unto them as may cause and draw their blessings
upon me, both in their lives and at their deaths, to be near unto them in duty
and obedience as Jacob was, whom in mercy thou did look upon, and after
gave such blessings unto, by whose offspring all the Nations of the world were
made happy.

And still to continue obedient unto them, as Jacob was unto his father in his
marriage; for this obedience to Parents is pleasing to thee O Lord, and calls
down for thy blessings upon us the children of men, let there always continue
in me a near and pious regard, for the interring of (...) Parents with a
conjunction of charity in the doing of it, even with thy greatest emulaters, as
it was in the charitable performance of this sol^mnetie, between Jacob and Easu
in the burying of Isacc their father.

So by this brotherly concord, and charitable deportment, we shall be made
partakers of that mercy thou O lord have promised, to them that do the works
of mercy; to which happy to co^^ition and the fruition of that ha^pinesse,
bring me O Lord, even (...) his sake who was the true (...) of patience,
amongst his enemie^ and gave forgivenes even to his crucifiers.

THE HISTORY of JACOB.
AFter Isaac had blessed Jacob, Genesis 28.
and in obedience to his Father and Mother, departing from Beersheba, taking
his journey to Padan-Aram, coming to a certain place, it being night, he
took a stone, and laying it under his head, he fell asleep* and falling into a
dream, there appeared unto him a ladder, which reached from the earth to
heaven, Angels going up and down upon it, and the Lord standing above it, who
said, I am the Lord, the God of Abraham, and of Isaac thy Father, the Land
whereupon thou sleep will I give unto thee and thy seed, and they shall
multiply exceedingly, and in them shall the families of the Earth be blessed,
and promising to preserve him in all his journeys, and to bring him again to
that Land. Now Jacob awaking, was afraid, but did think the Lord was in that
place, saying to himself, it was the house of God, and that there was the
gates of Heaven. Then after he had risen early in the morning, he took that
stone and set it up as a pillar, and pouring oil upon it, called it Betheil.

Then Jacob made a vow, that if God would preserve him in that journey, by
giving him bread to eat, and clothes to put on, and to come in safety back to
his fathers house, that then the stone which he had set up as a (...) in that
place, should be God house, and he would serve him, and pay the tenths.

Then Jacob travailed toward the East Country: and in his journey he came to
a Well in the field, where sheep lay fast by to be watered, and there was a
great stone upon the Well's mouth: and people being thereby, he asked them from
whence they were, who answered, they were from Haran; then he asked them if
they knew Laban the son of Nahor, who answered yes; then asking them how he
did, they said in health: And moreover, saying, here is coming his daughter
Rachel to his sheep; then he told them, is it not time to water the sheep? and
they answered they could not, until the flocks came together, and till some
came to roll away the stone from the Wels mouth.

Now whiles they were talking, comes Rachel with her Father's sheep; when Jacob
saw, he rolled the stone off from the Wel's mouth, and watered her sheep; then
Jacob kis'd Rachel, and wept, telling her he was Rebecka's son; then presently
she ran and told her father, the which when Laban heard, in have he came to
him, and kissed him, bringing him to his house. Then Jacob told him all the
cause of his coming, and continuing there a month with very much friendship
and love; then Laban pretended it was too much for him to serve him for
nothing, asking him what wages he would have. Now Laban having two daughters,
Lea and Rachel, Jacob told him he would serve him seven years for Rachel the
younger daughter, for Jacob loved her, the which Laban agreed unto. And Jacob
having served the seven years, which seemed unto him but as a few days, in
regard of his love to her. Then Jacob demanded her of Laban, according to the
agreement; upon which Laban called his neighbors together, and made a feast:
but in the evening he put Leah his other daughter into Jacob's bed, who went
in unto her: but in the morning when Jacob spyed it, he asked Laban wherefore
he had so deceived him, by giving him Leah in stead of Rachel; then Laban
answered it was not the manner of that place to give the younger before the
elder.

So they came to a new agreement, which was to serve seven years more for
Rachel, the which he performed, and then Laban gave Rachel unto him for his
Wife; yet Jacob loving Rachel better then Leah: but when the Lord saw Leah was
despised, he made her fruitful, and Rachel was barren: and Leah conceived and
bare a son, calling him Reuben: and she again conceived, and bare a son,
calling him Simeon; a third time she conceived and bare a son, and called his
name Levi; and conceiving the fourth time, she bare a son, and called him
Iduah, and praised the Lord, then she left bearing.

But Rachel envyed this her Sister, and said unto Jacob, give me children, or
else I dye. Then was Jacob angry with Rachel, saying, am I in Gods stead which
hinders thee from fruit? then she recommended her maid Bilhah unto him, who
went in unto her, by whom he had a son, who was called Dan: and she
conceived a second time, and bare a son, who was called Nepthali: and when
Leah saw she had left bearing, she gave her maid Zilpah unto Jacob, who bare
him a son, whom they called G^d: and after she bare another, calling him Ashur.

Now Reuben went into the fields in the time of wheat Harvest, and found
Man-drakes, bringing them to his mother Leah, the which Rachel hearing of, she
desired her to give her some of her son's Man-drakes, but she refused her;
Then Jacob coming out of the field in the Evening, Leah met him, saying, come
in unto me, for I have bought my son's Man drakes: so he slept with her that
night, and she conceiving, brought forth a 5th son, whose name was called
Issachar. And after this she bare another son, calling him Zebulon, and
likewise a daughter after that called Dinah. Then God looked upon Rachel, and
she conceived and brought forth a son, and she called his name Joseph.

Then Jacob was wondrous desirous to depart from Laban with his Wives and
Children to go back into his own country, but Laban was loath to part with
him, in regard he had prospered so well by his company and service.

But Jacob was loath to stay with him; then Laban offered him what wages he
would demand, the which he refused: but said he, give me all the black-spotted
and black sheep in thy flock, and I will serve thee, and thus they were
agreed: so Jacob kept one part, and Laban's sons kept the other, being three
days journey between.

Then Jacob took the rods of green Popler and Hazle, and chestnut tree, pulling
white streakes in them, putting them in the watering Troughs, when the sheep
came to drink: and drinking there when they were hot, which after made them
bring forth spotted Lambs: so he increased exceedingly, whereat Laban and his
sons were not well pleased.

Then the Lord spoke unto Jacob to go into his own Country; (...) 31.
upon which he sent for his two wives, Rachel and Leah into the fields, telling
them of the bad countenance their father showed him: and how Gods pleasure was,
he should return to his own Land, with many other circumstances of Gods wonders
and mercies to him, and of the great commands from God he had to return to his
own Land.

Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon Camels, and carried
away al his flocks and substance he had gotten, and took his journey to Isaac
his father into the Land of Canaan; before which, when Laban was gone to his
sheep-shering, Rachel took away his Idols: so they going away toward Gilead,
then Laban with his brethren followed him seven days journey, and overtook him
at Mount-Gilead. There God came to Laban in a dream by night, and bid him take
heed he spoke any thing but good to Jacob: so he overtooke him, and they
pitched both their Tents near one another.

Then Laban said to him, thou have stolen away mine heart (meaning his Idols)
and carried away my daughters; telling of him, how he intended to have sent
them away with the mirth of Songs, Timbrels, and Harps, blaming him for his
foolish doings, and taxing him for stealing his gods; withal, letting him to
know how he could be revenged on him, but that the God of Jacob the night
before had appeared unto him, who bid him take heed that he spoke any other but
good nnto him. More he said, because thou longest so much after thy father,
thou need not so to have gone away, and to steal my gods. But Jacob told him
how he feared that he would have taken his daughters from him: and for his
Gods he wished him to make a search for them, and with whom he found them that
party should die: but Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them; then
Laban came and searched in Jacob's, Leah's, and the maids Tents, out there
could not find them, and so came to Rachels, but she had put them in the
Camels litter, and sat do^ne upon them, Laban after he had searched the Tent,
after came into the Stable, where Rachel was siting, who said unto him, my Lord
be not angry that I cannot rise up before thee, for the custom of women is
upon me, so after his search he could not find his Idols.

Then Jacob was angry with Laban for persuing after him in that manner, telling
him of the hard service he had under him, even for twenty years, and of the
increase of his wealth by his care, withal how hardly he had fared, and what
strict account he gave unto him, that if the least by mis-chance were given, he
had made it good, if they were stolen by day or by night he did the like; how
in the day he had been consumed with the heat, and in the night with frost, and
was kept from sleep, and how he had served fourteen years for his two
Daughters, and six years for his sheep; and how he had changed his wages ten
times, and but that the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isacc, had been with
him, he had sent him empty; telling of him that God seeing his tribulation,
and the labor of his hands, had rebuked him the last night.

Then Laban became exceeding mild, with many expressions of fatherly love to
his wives and there children, and desired to make a firm covenant of friendship
with Jacob, the which being agreed upon, then there was a Pillar set up to be a
token thereof, and his brethren made a great (...) of stones, wherepon they
(...) all eat, which heap was likewise to be a witness between them of their
frienship, and they called it Galeed, both of them promising, neither of them
to come over that heap^^ one to the other for evil, to wh^^ both of them did
swear, Laban swear by the God of Abraham and Nahor his father; but Jacob by
the fear of his father Isacc: Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount,
calling his brethren to eat, who did so, and stayed upon the mount all night;
and early in the morning Laban roase up kissed his sons and daughters,
blessing them, departed, and went to his place again.

After this Jacob going on his journey, the Angels of God met him, whom he
called the host of God: But being in great fear of his brother Esau, he sent
messengers before unto him, with messages of great respect, and humiliation:
but they returning, told him that Esau was coming against him with four
hundred men, at which he was sore troubled, and divided his people and cattle
into companies, thinking if the one were taken the other might escape, and then
Jacob prayed unto the Lord saying, O God of my father Abraham and Isacc, which
said unto me, return unto thy country and to thy kindred; I am not worthy of
the least of thy mercies, which thou have showed unto me, for with my staff
came I over this Jordan, I pray thee deliver me from the hands of my brother
Esau, etc.

So he tarried there that night, and preparing a present for Esau of several
cattle, sending his servants before with them in two droves, himself
following, commanding them to say if Esau met them and inquired whose cattle
they were, there answer should be they were presents sent from Jacob to him,
and himself followed, so they went before and he stayed that night with the
company, but in the night he aroase, taking his two wives his two maids, and
his eleven children, sending them over the river Jabhek with all his goods.

Now after they were gone there was a man wrestled with him until break of the
day, who seeing he could not prevail, he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh,
which was loossed, but Jacob would not let him go without a blessing, then he
asked his name, and he told him Jacob, then said he thy name shall be called no
more Jacob but Israel, because thou have had power with God, thou shall also
prevail with men, and so blessed him, and as he parted the Sun aroase, and he
halted upon his thigh; therefore the children of Israel eat not the sinewe that
shrank in the hollow of the thigh unto this day.

After this Jacob going on in his journey, he espied Esau coming toward him
with his four hundred men; then he divided his children to Rachel and Leah,
and to the two maids, putting the maids and their children foremost, Leah and
her children next, and Rachel and Joseph hinmost, and he going before them
meeting Esau bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near
him, then Easu ran to him, and did embrace him, and kiss him, and they both
wept, and seeing the women and children Esau asked who they were, who answered,
they were the children God has given to thy servant, and so in order the
mothers and their children came toward him, and bowed with great reverence,
then Esau asked him what he meant by all them drovs of cattle he met, he told
him I have sent them to thee, that I may find favor in the sight of my Lord,
then Esau said I have enough my brother, keep them to thy self, but Jacob
answered, nay, I pray thee if I have found grace in thy sight, then receive my
present, for I have seen thy face as though I had seen the face of God, because
thou have accepted me therefore take my blessing, for God has had mercy on me,
and so Esau took it; then Esau said, let us take our journey and I will go
before thee, but Jacob said, my Lord thou know the children are tender, and
the cattle with young, and it were dangerous to go too fast, but go my Lord
before thy servant, and I will drive softly until I come to my Lord unto Sier,
and so they parted, Esau going that day to Sier. And Jacob going toward
Succoth, where coming he built a house, and made provision for his cattle,
after he came to Sechem in the Land of Canaan, and pitched before that City,
there he bought a parcel of Land, of the sons of Hamor, where he set up an
Altar, and called it the mighty God of Israel.

And it came to pass, that Dinah the daughter of Jacob by Leah, Genesis 43.
going to see the daughters of that country, Shechem whom the son of Hamor
Lord of that country seeing took, and defiled, and after loved her exceedingly,
desiring his father to obtain her for his wife, who according to his sons
desire went to speak unto Jacob about it, but Jacob and his sons having
heard of this wrong done to Dinah, were much displeased thereat, because he
had wrought such villainy in Israel; Now Hamor coming to Jacob told him how the
soul of his son loved Dinah, and desired she might be his wife, and how by
that there should be a continual freindship between them, their children, and
people, with great expressions of what love and happiness this would produce;
now they seemed to likewel of those Propositions, only they would not marry
with an uncircumcised people: but if they would be circumcised they would
approve thereof, all which Hamor and his son Shechem liked well of, consenting
there unto, and Shechem deferred not the doing of it, his love was such to
Dinah; so the father and the son acquainted the City therewith, who
considering of the conveniencie and neighborhood that hereby might come; so
they consented, and all the men children were circumcised, even as they went
out at the gate of the City: But on the third day after when they were sore,
two sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi took each of them a sword, and going
boldly into the City, killed every male, as likewise Hamor and Shechem, taking
Dinah out of Shechem's house and so went away, and the other sons of Jacob came
up and spoiled the City, taking all their goods, because of this wrong done to
their sister Dinah: But Jacob was troubled at this act of Simeon and Levi,
saying, they had made him stinck among the Inhabitants.

After this God commanded him to arise, Genesis 35.
and go to Bethel, and there to make an Altar unto him, the which he did
before, commanding all his household to put away their false Gods whose
counsel they observed, giving him all their Gods, or, Idols, and there
eare-rings, and buried them under an Oak. So they went toward Bethel, and
there built an Altar, and after many promises there of God unto him, and his
seed, with his worship, and testimonies of thanksgiving unto God, for all his
mercies, he departed from Bethel, and in their journey Rachel traveled in
childbirth, and was in danger: but the Midwife did comfort her, telling her
she should have a son, and in her extremity, before she died, being
delivered, called the child Benjamine, and so gave up the Ghost, and was buried
at Bethlehem, Jacob coma^nding a Pillar to be set upon her grave. Then Jacob
went on his journey, and came to Isaac his Father, to Mamre, where Isaac died.

After this Jacob lived in the Land of Canaan, where after his other sons*
sold Joseph into Egypt, unto which Land in the time of famine, by Gods great
Providence Jacob and all his sons did repair. All which, and the rest of the
life and acts of Jacob and his sons, with Jacobs Death and Buryall, are at
large expressed in the ensuing History of Joseph.

PRAYERS upon the History of JACOB.
O Lord, as Jacob by his obedience unto his Parents obtained the blessing from
them, and in his journey to Padan-Aram thou did mercifully preserve him. So
bless me O Lord in what I go about, and give me true obedience toward thee,
that thou may give me the blessings of thy holy grace to protect me through
the manifold dangers of my soul, in the pilgrimage of this world, and that thy
blessed inspirations may abide with me.

In the distresses so subject unto me for my sins, be thou merciful unto me,
as thou wast unto Jacob, when his lodging was the earth, and his pillow a
stone. If the Father of the Patriarks, and descended from the Father of the
faithful, was well contented with such thine appointment, and did praise thee
for thy mercies? Let me O Lord, a most miserable sinner, and who have been most
disobedient unto thee, reflect into my self, and with sincerity of soul, by
looking into my bad deservings, so see them, as with compassion to my self, I
may bewail my manifold sins, and by the remembrance of them, fall down upon
this earth, and think my self so unworthy, as to esteem all the sufferings
and h^rd passages of this world, not punishments sufficient to expiate my
c^ying offenses: but s^ill to bewail my sins, and to lie down with my head
upon this s^one of Contrition with patience and thankfulness to submit to thy
blessed will.

And in these my streights and most just sufferings, thou who sit in
heaven, and then stood upon the top of that ladder which reached down to the
earth ^here Jacob was* Look down from thence O Lord, and speak mercifully
unto me, and let thy blessed Angels descend down upon this ladder, and steps
of thy favor to assist and comfort me in all my troubles.

O Lord, awaken thou my drousie spirit, that by thy grace, casting off all
fears, I may apprehend thy goodness, and discern the gates of heavenly
mercy; for which, let me rise early: and by taking up steadfast thoughts, and
good resolutions, I may raise up a pillar of praise, pouring thereon the oil
of cheerful thankfulness for all thy mercies, as Jacob did upon that stone
he stepped on: and for all thy preservations let me pay my vows unto thee.

Lord keep me thy servant from voluptuousness and curiosity, the great
distempers of these times, and by the example of Jacob thy servant, and the
Predecessor of Kings, who desired but bread and raiment; give me grace to
mortify all my vain affections, and surfeitnig pleasures of this world, and
most willingly to be contented with thy good pleasure.

Continue thy good providence toward me, as thou did unto Jacob in his
journey, when he came to that Well, where he so happily met with Rachel.

Let me always admire thy wonderful ways, and means, whereby thou bringst
thy mercies and blessings unto us. And let me O Lord well consider and see, how
many times in the course of my life, thou have showed me thy works of mercy;
by preventing me in things, whereby my own weak judgment and intentions,
destructions of soul and body had been the iss^e. And likewise how by ways
and means of thy special providence, thou have protected and directed me into
the ways of safety: and therefore as Jacob after thy good guidance was brought
unto that Well, from which he rolled the stone, to do the office of courtesy.

So good Lord, in imitation of him for thy goodness, let me remove by thy
mercy all sad and heavy thoughts from over those good inspirations, which thou
have infused into the dry well of my heart, springing from thy grace: And that
I may abundantly distribute this holy water to the rich, by friendship and
courtesy, and to the poor by love and charity.

And as Jacob in the fullness of joy in his heart by meeting of Rachel, wept:
so good Lord, when I shall find at any time the blessed comfort of thy grace,
and good inspirations, let me embrace them with true thankfulness and
rejoicing in thee for thy mercies: and in fear for thy judgments, weep for my
offenses against thee.

In the manifold uncertainties and unconstancies of the friendships of this
world, and worldly men, give me such honest care and patience as Jacob had by
Laban's hard servitude unto him.

Still to discharge the trust committed unto me, and never to distrust thy
mercies and deliverance. And though things fall not according to my will and
choice, as it fell out with him about Rachels; let me O (...) with Jacob's
other seven years ^^tiently wait thy liesure and (...) time.

So for thy heavenly mercies in (...) dryness and coldness of my resol^^^ons
and devotions toward thee, let me with patience and prayer wait for that
good time when thou shall enlarge and deliver my soul from this thraldom and
bondage of self-love, and the snares of worldly slavery, whereby I may be
fitted for my journey to the heavenly Canaan, there with joy to meet Isaac and
all that rest in the happiness to see thy presence O God.

Remove from me all distrusts of thy promises and providence, that common and
dangerous rock, whereupon this weak Vessel we sail in is so subject to fall
upon, by the cross winds and troubled Seas of our unfaithful constitutions;
for so it was with Rachel, when in the bitterness of her anguish she said to
Jacob, give me children, or else I dye.

But O Lord, so instruct my heart with such firm hope in thee, as all doubts
may depart from my weak and stupid senses, and open thou the eyes of my
understanding, clearly to discern how much thy mercy and goodness are unto
me, beyond my deservings, and so by this pious patience I shall in thy good
time enjoy the fruit of my hopes, as Rachel after did by her issue in Joseph,
that happy son of so good a father, the very comfort and preserver of the
seed of Israel.

Good Lord let it enter into my heart to see with admiration and wonder how
thou did perform thy promises unto Abraham by this numerous generation of
Jacob. After so many doubts, by fleshly weakness, barrenness of
constitutions, and the great difficulties and dangers in the s^verall stations,
journeys, and perigrinatio^s of Abraham and Isaac, and the great opppession of
the seed of Jacob in Egypt, and their long and dangerous perigrination to that
land of promise, and how from them to come our Savior.

O mercy beyond man's apprehension or deserving, whereof they did only hope
for, and the which we the sons of the bondwoman now see, and so happily
enjoy: and by the enjoyment of which promise, both the seed of Jacob and the
Gentiles receive such an unvaluable blessing, being such, as all the hopes and
promises to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were but types: and the tempoall plenty
of the Patriarks in their land of milk and honey, and all their deliverances
were but shadows in comparison of the fruits of this hope, and the
super-aboundant mercy of our redemption from sin, and the fullness of heavenly
grace bestowed upon us by this promised Messiah, in whom they in hope did
rejoice, and by whom they and we are made so happy in the enjoyment and
fruition.

Oh the hidden treasure of happiness, now so transparent and glorious,
inlighten my soul O Lord, that by this blessed enlightening, I may see thy
wonderful mercy, and my own misery, to put off all worldly love and vain
delight, and make sale of all my earthly merchandise to purchase this jewel,
even the love of thee my Savior, far more precious then that manna was to to
the children of Israel; for no earthly love is like in perfect happiness to
this of thine O thou Savior of the world.

Good Lord, let me continually obey blessed command and holy inspirations, and
as Jacob by thine appointment returned into Canaan and with expedition took
his journey, with his wives, children, family, and goods.

So Lord, let me break from the love of this world, wherein I am made a slave
to sin, and so subjected to uncertainties as Jacob was, for twenty years, with
so many changes of his wages.

And let not the allurements and vain promises of this world detain me,
either for the enjoying the fading profits therein, or to stay in the vanities
thereof, with such hopeless and helpless promises as Laban did intend to him.
But let me with resolution and sincerily follow thy good directions, and break
from such things as may offend thee to the hurt of my soul.

Deliver me O Lord from the fears and jealousies, so subject to the infirmities
of flesh and blood, and from the danger of my enemies, as thou did Jacob
from his brother Esau; let thy protection be with me, and thy holy Angels to
guard me. And as Jacob sent his wives, children, servants and goods in order
and came before him, with such Presents and directions as might appease the
fury of his brother Esau.

So O Lord in my progres toward thee by a true faith and humble confidence;
give me a holy care and prudence to send unto thee beforehand, my heart and
good intentions, with my goods of piety and good works that in mercy thou
may receive me, so shall I escape thy judgments so justly due to me for my
sins.

O Lord keep me from a wandering spirit, and a loose condition, so shall I avoid
evil, and all occasions of evil. Let me not do like Dinah, who went a
gadding to see the daughters of Shechem, whereby she was entrap'd and brought
to solly, so shall I avoid sin to my self, and the punishment of others, as it
befell to that unhappy Prince and City of Shechem.

And O Lord preserve me from the like cruelty that was in Simeon and Levi,
whose revenge was implacable and transcendent, being odious in the eyes of
their Father and to all good people; yet by this terrible judgment, teach me
to know thy displeasure against sin, and leave such severe punishments to thy
unsearchable judgments.

O thou my Creator, Redeemer, and Preserver, or wonderful in my creation,
infinitely good in my redemption, and most merciful in my preservation; the
great strength, guide, and directer of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in all their
passages, through the Deserts, and Labyrinths of this crooked world; which
mercies of thine O Lord have been most bountifully and mercifully extended
unto me, a most miserable sinner. Therefore as they at all times, and upon all
occasions, in their several stations, for thy mercies and deliverances unto
them, did build Altars; and offer Sacrifices of thankesgiving unto thee for thy
goodness: and Jacob according to his vow, at the beginning of his
perigrination, where he set up that stone, did now at his return in that very
place pay his vows even at Bethel, with much solempnity and piety.

So O Lord, let it enter into my heart, duly to consider of thy great mercies
unto me from time to time, let me not cast them behind me, but call them to
mind: and as Jacob by finding thy mercies, did not forget them, when he came
back to Bethel, but there did perform his duty and promise unto thee: so let
me always remember thy deliverances unto me, and how in my several distresses
I have so seen and found them, as they having moved good thoughts and purposes
in me of better living, good Lord, let not my dullness and fleshly vanity
dispossess me of a happy resolution to serve thee. But as thou have begun in
me by thy good motions, so continue them and thy mercies unto me, that by the
strength of thy grace and good Inspirations, I may persevere in all good
purposes to pay my vows, and upon the Altar of my heart to sacrifice most
humble thanks and praise unto thee, even for ever.

Here begins the History of Joseph.
THE HISTORY of Joseph.
JAcob loved Joseph more then all his children, Genesis 37.
because he was the son of his old age; and he made him a coat of many
colors: and Joseph dreamed certain dreams, the interpretation whereof much
displeased his brethren, and they hated him, and conspired to slay him. But
Reuben his brother heard it and delivered him out of their hands. But it came
to pass afterward that they stripped him, and took and cast him into a pit
where was no water; and they sitting down to eat bread, a company of
Ishmaelites came from Gilead with their Camels, bearing spicery, balm and
myrrh; going into Egypt.

And Judah did persuade his brethren not to kill Joseph that his blood might
not be upon them, but to sell him to these Ishmaelites: and they sold him to a
Midianite Merchant for twenty pieces of silver, and he carried Joseph into
Egypt.

And his brethren took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid and dipped the coat in
the blood, and brought it to their father who knew it, and said, It is my
sons coat, and some beast has devoured him: and Jacob rent his clothes and
mourned for him many days.

And all his sons and daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be
comforted: after the Midianites sold Joseph into Egypt, unto Potiphar an
officer of King Pharaohs, who was Captain of his guard.

Now the Lord was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man, and found favor in
the sight of Potiphar, who made him overseer of his house, and all that he had
he put into his hand; and the Lord blessed the Egyptians house for his sake,
and Joseph was a goodly person and well favored.

It came to pass that Potiphars wife grew in love with him, tempting him to
lie with her; but he refused, and said unto her, My Master has been kind
unto me, and committed all to my charge: and how then can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God?

But she daily solicited Joseph: and one day coming into the house she caught
him by the garment, saying, lie with me, and he left his garment and fled: then
she called aloud unto the men of her house, and said, An Hebrew is brought unto
us to mock us, he came and urged to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice:
and when he heard me cry he left his garment and fled: and when her lord came
home she told him of this passage: and his wrath was kindled against Joseph,
and put him into prison. But the Lord was with Joseph, and showed him mercy,
giving him favor with the keeper of the prison.

And it came to pass that Pharaoh King of Egypt was wroth with his principal
Butler and Baker, Genesis 40.
and they were committed to the prison where Joseph was; and they dreamed
dreams both of them one night.

Joseph coming unto them in the morning, they were sad: and he said unto them,
Wherefore look you so sadly? and they told him their dreams, the which he
interpreted; that the Butler within three days should be released and in King
Pharaohs favor, and deliver the cup into his hand as he formerly did: and
Joseph desired him to remember him with Pharaoh when he was thus advanced.

And Joseph interpreted the Bakers dream, that within three days he should be
hanged on a tree: and it came to pass the third day was Pharaohs birthday,
that he made a feast to all his servants: and he restored the chief Butler to
his place, and he gave the cup into Pharaohs hand, but he hanged the Baker: yet
did not the Butler remember Joseph, but forgot him.

And it came to pass after two years that Pharaoh dreamed that he stood by
the river, Genesis 41.
and there came out of the river seven well favored kine, fat, and they fed in
a meadow; and seven other kine came out of the river ill favored, and lean,
and stood by the other kine, and did eat them up: and he dreamed a second
dream, that seven ears of corn came up upon one stalk, rank and good; and
seven thin ears and blasted with the East wind sprung up after them, and the
seven thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears.

Pharaoh being troubled at these dreams, sent for the Magicians of Egypt, but
none of them could interpret these dreams.

Then spoke the chief Butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do Remember my faults
this day, thou wast wroth with me and thy chief Baker, and put us in prison;
and we dreamed both in one night, and there was in the prison with us a young
man an Hebrew that did interpret our dreams, and according to his
interpretation, I was restored to favor, and the Baker hanged.

Then Pharaoh sent for Joseph out of the dungeon, and he shaved himself, and
changed his raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh: and Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I
have dreamed a dream, and no man can interpret it: and Joseph answered
Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me. God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace.

Then Pharaoh related his dream, and Joseph answered,

The dream of Pharaoh is one* the seven good kine, are seven years; and the
seven good ears, are seven years; and the seven thin and ill favored kine that
came up after them, are seven years; and the seven empty ears blasted with the
East wind, shall be seven years of famine; this is the thing that God is about
to do. Behold, there shall come seven years of great plenty thoroughout all
the land of Egypt; and there shall be seven years of famine, and the famine
shall consume the land. Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and
wise, and set him over the land of Egypt, to provide in the seven years of
plenty, for the famine that shall follow: and the counsel was good in the eyes
of Pharaoh and his servants.

And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, for as much as God has showed thee all this,
there is none so discreet and wise as thou art: therefore thou shall be over my
house, and according unto thy word shall all my people be ruled: only in the
throne will I be greater then thou: and Pharaoh set him over the land of Egypt:
and took off his Ring from off his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and
arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.

And he made him ride in the second Chariot which he had; and they cried before
him, Bow the knee: he made him Ruler over all the land of Egypt, and he gave
him to wife Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah Priest of On.

Then was Joseph thirty years old.

And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the
land of Egypt, and gathered provision in the seven years of plenty, for the
seven years of famine that was to follow: and unto Joseph was borne two sons
before the years of famine came: and he called the name of the first Manasseh,
and the name of the second Ephraim. After the famine was over the land of
Egypt, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread, and Pharaoh sent them to Joseph;
then Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians: and all
Countries came into Egypt to Joseph for to buy corn, because the famine was so
sore in all lands.

Now when Jacob heard there was corn in the land of Egypt, Genesis 4^*
he said to his sons, Get you thither and buy for us from thence, that we may
live and not die: and Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt,
but Benjamin staid at home with Jacob: and the sons of Israel came into Egypt
unto Joseph who sold the corn, and bowed down themselves before him with
their faces to the earth: and Joseph knew them to be his brethren, but made
himself strange unto them, and spoke roughly unto them: and he said unto them,
Whence come ye? they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food: then said
Joseph unto them, Ye are spies: to see the nakedness of the land you are come:
and they said unto him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come: we
are all one men's sons, we are true men, thy servants are no spies: and they
said, Thy servants are twelve brethren the sons of one man in the land of
Canaan, and behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not
living. And Joseph said unto them, Ye are spies, hereby ye shall be proved: By
the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother
come hither: and he put them altogether three days into prison, and Joseph
said unto them the third day, If ye be true men, let one of your brethren stay
here in prison, and go ye and carry corn for the provision of your houses,
and bring your youngest brother to me, and they did so: and they said, one to
another, We are verily guilty concerning our brother Joseph, in that we saw the
anguish of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear: therefore is
this distress come upon us. And Reuben answered them saying, spoke I not unto
you, saying do not sin against the child, and ye would not hear, therefore
behold all his blood is required; and they knew not that Joseph understood
them, for he spoke unto them by an Interpreter: and he turned himself about
from them and wept, and returned to them again, communing with them, and took
from them Simeon and bound him before their eyes: so Joseph dispatched them
away with their provisions, and commanded their money to be put in their sacks:
and they laded their asses with corn departed thence: and opening their sacks
and there finding their money they were afraid, saying one to another what is
this that God has done unto us?

And they came unto Jacob their father, unto the land of Canaan, and told him
of that befell unto them: but Jacob was troubled to part with Benjamin, and
said unto them me have ye bereaved of my children, Joseph is not living, and
Simeon is not here, and ye will take Benjamin away, all these things are
against me: then Reuben spoke unto his father saying, kill my two sons if I
bring him not to thee: and he said my son shall not go down with you; for
his brother is dead, if mischief befall him in the way, then shall ye bring
down my gray hairs with sorrow to the grave.

But the famine continuing sore in the land, Genesis 43.
and having spent that which they brought out of Egypt, Jacob said unto his
sons go again and buy us some food in Egypt: and Judah spoke unto him
saying, the man did solemnly protest unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face
except your brother be with you; and Israel said, Wherefore dealt you so ill
with me, as to tell the man that you had another brother? And they said, The
man did ask us straight of our state and kindred: and Judah said unto Israel
his father, Send the young man with me, and we will arise and go, that we may
live and not die for want of food, both we and thou, and also our little ones;
and I will be surety for him; of my hand shall thou require him: if I bring him
not to thee, then let me bear the blame for ever: and then father Israel said
unto them, If it must be so, Now then do this; Take of the best fruit of the
land in your vessels, and carry down the man a present: a little Balm, and a
little Honey: Spices and Myrrh, Nuts and Almonds; and take double money in
your hand, and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks:
carry it again, peradventure it was an oversight: take also your brother and
go again unto the man; and God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that
he may send away your other brother and Benjamin: If I be bereaved of my
children, I am bereaved.

And they took that present, and Benjamin, and went down to Egypt, and stood
before Joseph: and when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the Ruler of
his house, Bring these men home, kill provision and make ready, for they shall
dine with me: and they were brought thither, but were afraid by reason of the
money they carried back in their sacks: and they communed with the Steward, and
told him of it: and he said, Peace be to you, fear not, your God, and the God
of your fathers has given you treasure in your sacks: I had your money: and he
brought Simeon unto them: and he bringing them into Joseph's house, gave them
water to wash their feet, and he gave their Asses provender.

And when Joseph came home they brought him the present, bowing themselves to
him to the earth: and he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father
well, the old man of whom you spoke; is he yet alive: and they answered, They
servant our father is in good health, he is yet alive: and they bowed down
their heads and made obeisance; and he lift up his eyes and saw his brother
Benjamin his mothers son, and said, Is this your younger brother of whom you
spoke unto me? they said, Yes: and he said, God be gracious to thee my son.

And Joseph made haste, for his bowels did yerne upon his brother, and he
sought where to weep; and he entered into his chamber and wept there; after he
washed his face and came out, and refrained himself; and said, set on bread:
and they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and the
Egyptians that did eat with him by themselves; because the Egyptians might not
eat bread with the Hebrews: and they sat in order according to their age, and
they sent messes unto them from before Joseph; but Benjamins mess was five
times as much as any of theirs: and they drank and were merry with him.

And Joseph commanded his servants to fill their sacks with food, Genesis 44.
and to put in every sack their money; and to put a cup of silver in the sack
of the youngest with his corn money, and betimes in the morning they were sent
away, they and their Asses. And when they were gone a little way, Joseph said
unto his Steward, Follow after the men, and when thou do overtake them, say
unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for good? and he overtooke them,
and he spoke unto them as he was bidden, and they said unto him, Wherefore
says my Lord these words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to
this thing. Behold, the money which we found in our sacks mouths we brought
again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we steal out of
thy Lords house, silver or gold? with whomsoever of thy servants it be found,
both let him dye, and we also will be my Lords bondmen. Then they speedily
took down their sacks, and opened every man his sack; and he searched,
beginning at the eldest, and left at the youngest; and the Cup was found in
Benjamins sack: then they rent their clothes, and laded every man his Ass, and
returned to the City.

And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house, and they fell before him to
the ground: then Joseph said unto them, What deed is this that ye have done?
wot ye not that I can divine? and Judah said, What shall we say unto my Lord,
what shall we speak? or how shall we clear our selves? God has found out the
iniquity of thy servants: Behold, we are my Lords servants, both we and he also
with whom the Cup is found. and he said, God forbid I should do so: but the
man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant; and as for you, get
you up unto your father: then Judah came near unto him, and said, O my Lord,
let thy servant I pray thee, speak a word in my Lords ears, and let not thine
anger burn against thy servant; for thou art even as Pharaoh: and Judah said,
our father was loath to part with Benjamin, saying unto us, Ye know that my
wife bare me two sons, the one is dead, and surely he is torn in pieces for
I saw him not since; and if ye take this also from me, and mischief befall
him, ye shall bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to my grave: Now therefore
when I come to thy servant my father, and the young man our brother be not with
us: seeing that his life is bound up in the youths life, that he will dye; for
thy servant became surety for the young man unto my father, saying, If I bring
him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father for ever. Now
therefore I pray thee, let thy servant abide in stead of Benjamin a bondsman to
my Lord: and let the young man go up with his brethren: for how shall I go up
to my father and this Benjamin be not with me, lest peradventure I see the
evil that shall come to my father.

Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that stood by him: and
he cried, Cause every man to go out from me, and there stood no man with him
while he made himself known to his brethren, and he wept aloud; and he said
unto his brethren, I am Joseph, does my father yet live; and his brethren could
not answer him, for they were troubled at his presence: and Joseph said unto
his brethren, Come near unto me I pray you and he said: I am Joseph your
Brother whom you sold into Egypt: be not angry with your selves that ye sold me
hither, for God did send me before you to preserve life: for there is and shall
continue a great famine, And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity
upon earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. So it was not you
that sent me hither, but God; he has made me father to King Pharaoh, and a
Ruler in Egypt: Haste you and go up to my father, and say unto him, thus says
thy son Joseph, Come down to me and thou shall dwell in the land of Goshen,
thou and thy children, and thy childrens children, and thy flocks, and thy
herds, and all that thou haste.

And you shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that you have
seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither.

And he fell upon his brother Benjamins neck and wept, and Benjamin wept upon
him: moreover, he kissed all his brethren and wept upon them: and after that
his brethren talked with him: and the fame thereof came to Pharaoh, and it
pleased him and his servants: and Pharaoh said Joseph, Bid your brethren load
their beasts and go into Canaan and bring your father and all his families,
and take wagons to bring them, and all they have; for they shall have the good
of the land of Egypt, and eat the fat thereof: and Joseph gave them wagons
according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and provision for the way, with
changes of raiments: But to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver,
and five changes of raiment: and to his father he sent twenty Asses laden with
good things of Egypt: and provision for his journey into Egypt: and they went
up out of the land of Egypt unto the land of Canaan unto Jacob their father,
and told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is Governor over all the
land of Egypt: and Jacobs heart fainted, for he believed them not: and they
told him all the words of Joseph which he had said unto them: and when he saw
the wagons which Joseph sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father
revived: and Israel said, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, I will
go and see him before I die.

And Israel took his journey with Genesis 46.
all that he had, and came to Beersheba and offered sacrifices unto the God of
his father Isaac: and God spoke unto Israel in the visions of the night, and
said, Jacob, Jacob, I am God, the God of thy father, fear not to go down
into Egypt, for I will make thee a great Nation: I will go down with thee
into Egypt: and I will also bring thee surely up again, and Joseph shall put
his hands upon thine eyes.

And Jacob departed from Beersheba with all his families: with all their
cattle and goods, and came into Egypt, Jacob and all his seed with him: all
the souls of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt were threescore and ten:
and he sent Judah before him to Joseph to direct his face to Goshen: and they
came to the land of Goshen: and Joseph made ready his chariot and went up to
meet Israel his father, and presented himself unto him, and he fell on his
neck and wept; and Israel said unto Joseph, Now let me die since I have seen
thy face. And Joseph said unto his brethren, and to his fathers house, I will
go up unto Pharaoh and tell him, my father and you are come hither: and when
Pharaoh shall ask you, What is your occupation? Ye shall say, Thy servants
trade has been about cattle; that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen: for
every Shepherd is an abomination unto the Egyptians.

Then Joseph told Pharaoh of his fathers coming into Egypt: Genesis 47.
and presented five of his brethren unto him: and Pharaoh said unto his
brethren, What is your occupation? and they said, Thy servants are Shepherds
both we and also our fathers: and they said moreover, The famine is great in
Canaan, now therefore we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of
Goshen. And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brethren are
come unto thee: in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou know any
man of activity amongst them, then make them rulers over my cattle.

And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob
blessed Pharaoh; and Pharaoh said unto Jacob, How old art thou? and Jacob said
unto Pharaoh, The years of my pilgrimage ar^ one hundred and thirty years: few
and evil have the days of the years of my life been.

And Jacob went out from before Pharaoh: and Joseph placed his father and his
brethren in the best of the land, as Pharaoh had commanded: and Joseph
nourished his father and his brethren, and all his fathers household according
to their families.

And Israel did grow and multiply exceedingly in Goshen: and Jacob lived in the
land of Egypt seventeene years: so the whole age of Jacob was one hundred
forty and seven years: and the time drew nigh that Israel must die, and he
called his son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy
sight, put I pray thee thy hand under my thigh: and deal kindly and truly with
me: Bury me not I pray thee, in Egypt* But I will lie with my fathers, and thou
shall carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place: and he said, I
will do as thou have said: and he said, Swear unto me: and he swear unto him:
and Israel bowed himself upon the beds head.

And Jacob being sick, Genesis 48.
Joseph brought his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim with him, and Jacob was
told of their coming, and he strengthened himself and fate upon the bed:
Israel, after he had blessed Joseph, called for his two sons to bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age so that he could not see: and Joseph
brought them near unto him, and he kissed them, and embraced them: and Israel
said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face, and lo God has showed me
also thy seed: and Joseph brought them out from between his knees; and he bowed
himself with his face to the earth, and Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his
right hand, toward Isreal's left hand, and Manasseth in his left hand, toward
Isreal's right hand, and brought them near unto him: and Israel stretched out
his right hand and laid it upon Ephraims head who was the younger; and his left
hand upon Manassehs head, guiding his hands wittingly, and he blessed Joseph,
and said, God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk: the God which
fed me all my life long unto this day; the Angel which redeemed me from all
evil bless the lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my
fathers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth.

And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of
Ephraim, it displeased him, and he held up his fathers hand to remove it from
Ephraims head unto Manass^hs head: and Joseph said unto his father, Not so my
father, for this is the first borne; put thy right hand upon his head: and his
father refused, and said, I know it my son, I know it: he also shall become a
people, and he also shall be great: but truly his younger brother shall be
greater then he, and his seed shall become a multitude of Nations: and he
blessed them that day saying, in thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make
thee as Ephraim and Manasseh: and Israel said unto Joseph, Behold, I die, But
God shall be with you, and bring you again unto the land of your fathers.
Moreover, I have given to thee one portion above thy brethren which I took out
of the hand of the Amorite, with my sword and with my bow.

And Jacob called all his sons, Genesis 49.
and said, gather your selves together, that I may tell you that which shall
befall you in the last days: gather your selves together and hear ye sons of
Jacob, and hearken unto Israel your father: and he blessed them, and he charged
them and said, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my fathers, in
the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittit in the land of Canaan, which
Abraham bought for a possession of a burying place: there they buried Abraham
and Sarah his wife: there they buried Isaac and Rebeckah his wife: and there I
buried Leah: and when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was gathered unto
his people.

And Joseph fell upon his fathers face and wept upon him, and kissed him: And
Joseph commanded his servants the Physicians to embalme Israel: and forty
days were fulfilled for him, (for so are fulfilled the days of those which
are embalmed) and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore and ten days: and
when the days of mourning were past, Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Go up and bury
thy father as he made thee swear: and Joseph went up to bury his father, and
with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all
the elders of the land of Egypt; and all the house of Joseph and his brethren,
and his fathers house; only their little ones they left in the land of Goshen:
and there went up with him both Charets and Horsemen, and it was a very great
company: and they came to the threshing floor of Arad which is beyond Jordan,
and there they mourned with a great and sore lamentation: and he made a
mourning for his father seven days: and his sons did unto him according as he
commanded them, and carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the
cave as he appointed.

And Joseph returned into Egypt, he and his brethren, and all that went up with
him: and when Joseph's brethren saw their father was dead, they said,
Peradventure Joseph will hate us, and will certainly requite us all the evil
which we did to him: and they sent a messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father
did command before he died, saying, so shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I
pray thee, now the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin, for they did unto
thee evil: and now we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of the
God of thy father: and Joseph wept when they spoke unto him: and his brethren
also went and fell down before his face, and they said, Behold, we be thy
servants: and Joseph said unto them, Fear not, for I am in the place of God:
but as for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good to
bring to pass as it is this day, to save much people alive. Now therefore
fear you not, I will nourish you and your little ones: and he comforted them.

And Joseph dwelt in Egypt he and his fathers house, and lived one hundred and
ten years, and saw Ephraims children of the third generation: and the children
of Machir the son of Manasseh, were brought up upon Joseph's knees.

And Joseph said unto his brethren, I die; and God will surely visit you, and
bring you out of this land, unto the land which he swear to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob: and Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel, saying, God will
surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from hence.

So Joseph died, being one hundred and ten years old: and they embalmed him,
and he was put in a coffin in Egypt: and after in the time of Joshua, when the
children of Israel came over Jordan they brought his bones out of Egypt and
buried them in Shechem in a parcel of ground Jacob bought of the sons of
Hamer the father of Shechem for an hundred pieces of silver, and it became the
inheritance of the sons of Joseph.

MEDITATIONS Upon the History of Joseph who was sold into Egypt by his brethren.
O Lord God everlasting, which out of thy great mercy to mankind, sentest thy
only begotten Son Jesus Christ into this world, for the redemption of me a
sinner: and who for my sake was sold unto the Jews by Judas, one of his
disciples: was crucified for my sins: and is gone before to the heavenly
Canaan, to be a Mediator at thy right hand for my sinful and famishing soul:
for his sake be thou merciful unto me, that am a sofourner here in this Egypt
of the world, that the vain temptations of the flesh, may not have power over
me; but give me the like Chastity that Joseph had. Neither let me grow in love
with the fleshpots of voluptuousness; nor be blinded with the Egyptian
darkness of this world. But grant, I do most humbly beseech, for his sake my
Jesus, that was sold, and died for my sins, that I may happily pass this
pilgrimage here in this land of Egypt, and use my stewardship like blessed
Joseph, by dealing honestly and truly with all men: and where I find favor
and friends, as he did, make me ever thankful unto thee for thy mercies
therein; and to be religiously careful to discharge that trust which shall be
committed unto me like Joseph; that it may be with me at my accounting day, as
it was with the wise steward to know what to do.

For blessed is that servant whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing.
Good Lord give me charity toward my Christian brethren, and as concerning them
that have done me wrong, as Joseph did; Take revenge from the soul of thy
servant, O Lord, I beseech thee; and give me grace to do good against evil:
and to forgive, as I desire to be forgiven of thee.

And blessed Lord, after a^^ thy blessings and mercies, here in this Egypt that
thou have prepared as an earthly comfort for me a sinner, make me ready, and at
thy call to take a happy passover, for my passage toward the celestial
Canaan; and in the mean time give me grace to overcome all difficulties, and
to be obedient, to my taskmasters and superiors, in this vale of trial,
where the enemies of my soul, strive against my intended journey toward the
Land of promise. Good Lord keep me from hardness of heart, and the Egyptian
plagues and punishments my sins have so much deserved: grant me, O Lord, a
good and prosperous voyage thorough the Red sea of danger; help my hungry and
drooping soul, feed and strengthen it with the Manna of thy blessed Spirit.
Good Lord give me grace to subject my self to follow and obey my Governors as
the Israelites did submit to Moses and Aaron; and not to follow mine own
devises and inventions, But to obey them that thou have appointed over me; and
not to be one of the murmuring Israelites, neither Seditious and contentious,
against Order and Government, with Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. But in all things
to submit my judgment, in the way of my Pilgrimage, to the Rules of Jesus
Christ, and the governors of his holy Church, as thou O Lord, have commanded;
not following my own fancies, nor the suggestions of my spiritual enemy that
clothes himself like an Angel of light, to deceive, and fill my soul full of
spiritual pride, the sin that cast down the Angels from heaven: from which
most dangerous rock, O Lord, deliver thy servant, that puts his trust under the
shadow of thy wings of mercy: that at last I may come with humbleness of heart
and soul, through the wilderness of this world, so full of cares, troubles,
and temptations, to the land of promise, that heavenly Jerusalem which thou
have prepared for them that love and fear thee, and fight a good fight through
this desert of danger and diffidence; let me not in this passage, O Lord, lean
to the pleasures and plenty of Goshen, but obey thy laws delivered at Mount
Sinai, and cheerfully go on like a good Israelite, in this my passage the
which so much concerns my soul, so that, good Lord, by a true faith and
confidence in thee, with a happy perseverance in the obedience of thy
Commandments, at last I may arrive amongst them, that live and fear thee, in
that heavenly feast of tabernacles, and receive the comfort of that blessed
saying, Come ye blessed of my Father; and in that heavenly and eternal
habitation, where all tears shall be wiped away, and all afflictions and
temptations cease, sing Halleluiah, and praise, and honor, and glory, and
worship, unto the Lamb that sits upon the throne for ever.

THE HISTORY of Moses.
AFter the death of Joseph Exodus 1.
the children of Israel did increase exceedingly in Egypt, and grew very
mightily: and another King reigning after the death of Pharaoh, he was jealous
of their greatness and strength, and therefore set taskmasters over them to
afflict them with their burdens, and to keep them under, in so much as they
made their lives bitter with hard bondage by work in mortar and brick, and all
manner of service in the field with much rigor: and the King in his jealousy
of them, commanded the Midwives to kill the male children, and to save the
daughters, that should be borne of the Israelites: but the midwives feared God,
and would not do his commands: but excused it to the King.

And there was a man of the house of Levi that took to him a Exodus 2.
wife of his own tribe, who conceived and bare him a son being a goodly
child, whom for fear she hid three months: but when she could not longer hide
him, she made for him an arc of bulrushes, daubing it with slime and pitch,
putting the child therein, and laid it amongst the flags by the rivers side.

And his sister stood a far off to see what would become of the child. And
Pharaohs daughter coming down the river with her maids to wash her self,
found the arc, and sent her maids to fetch it: and opening of it found the
child, who wept, and she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the
Hebrews children: and Pharaohs daughter commanded the sister that watched the
child, to call an Hebrew woman to nurse it; and she went and called the
childs mother; and Pharaohs daughter said unto her, Take this child and nurse
it for me, and I will give thee thy wages: and the woman took the child and
nursed it: and the child grew, and she brought him to Pharaohs daughter, who
took him for her son, and called his name Moses; because she drew him out of
the water.

Now after he grew to years, when the Israelites had hard burdens upon them,
he went out amongst them, and seeing an Egyptian strike an Hebrew, one of his
brethren, who warily looking about him, and seeing no body, he slew the
Egyptian and hid him in the sand.

And the second day going abroad he saw two Hebrews at strif: and he said to
him that had done the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? who answered,
Who made thee a Judge over us? Intendest thou to kill me as thou did the
Egyptian? then Moses was afraid, and when Pharaoh heard of it, he sought to
kill Moses, but he fled from Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Midian: and there
sitting down by a well, came seven daughters of the Midian Priest, who drew
water into troughs to water their fathers flock: but there came other shepherds
and drove them away: But Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their
flock^ who returning to their father, he asked the reason they came so soon
back, and they told him, that a certain Egyptian had helped them: and he
commanded to call him to his house to eat bread: who came and dwelt with him:
and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter to wife, by whom he had a son called
Gershom.

Now after this Pharaoh died, and the children of Israel were exceedingly
grieved by reason of their great bondage; and they cried unto the Lord, who
heard them, and remembered his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Now Moses keeping the flock of his father in law, Exodus 3.
and leading them to the back side of the desert, he came to Horeb the
mountain of God: where appeared unto him an Angel of the Lord in a flame of
fire in the middle of a bush: and Moses turned toward it, to see why the bush
was not burnt: then God called unto him out of the midst of the bush, and
said, Moses, Moses, draw not nigh hither: put off thy shoes from off thy feet,
for the place whereon thou stand is holy ground: and told him, I am the God
of thy father, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Then Moses hid his face,
for he was afraid to look upon God: and God said unto him, I have seen the
afflictions of my people which are in Egypt, and have heard their cry, by
reason of their taskmasters: and told Moses that he would send him to Pharaoh,
and to bring his people of Israel out of Egypt: and Moses said unto God, Who am
I that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of
Israel out of Egypt? and God told him he would be with him, and that for a
token thereof, after he had brought them out of Egypt, they should serve God
upon that mountain: and Moses said unto God, When I come unto the children of
Israel, how shall they believe me? then said the Lord, Say unto them, I am,
has sent me unto you.

But Moses answered and said, Exodus 4.
Behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice: and Moses having
a Rod in his hand, the Lord commanded him to cast it upon the ground; and it
became a serpent, and Moses went from it.

And the Lord said unto him, Put forth thy hand and take it by the tail: the
which he did, and it became a Rod again.

And the Lord said more to him, Put thy hand into thy bosom, the which he did,
and when he took it out, his hand was leprous as snow: and he said, put thy
hand into thy bosom again, the which he did, and it became as it was before:
yet nevertheless Moses was very scrupulous to go: Excusing himself that he
wanted eloquence and was slow of tongue: and the Lord said unto him, Who has
made man's mouth, who makes the dumb, or deaf; the seeing, or the blind, but
I the Lord? and the anger of the Lord was kindled against Moses, and then he
appointed Aaron to join with him, and to assist him in this great work, for
the deliverance of the children of Israel out of Egypt. And so Moses returned
to Jethro his father in law, to desire leave to go into Egypt to see his
brethren, who bid him go in peace. And Moses returned toward Egypt with his
wife and children, and the Rod in his hand, with command from God to do
wonders before the King of Egypt: And Aaron met Moses in the mount of God, and
kissed him.

Moses telling him, all the words of the Lord who had sent him: and all the
signs he had commanded him: And then they two gathered all the Elders of
Israel together, and did the signs in sight of all the people, who believed
them, and worshipped God, for his goodness.

After that they went to Pharaoh, desiring they and the children of Israel
might hold a Fast unto the Lord in the wilderness. But he would not obey the
message and voice of the Lord.

And they said again, The God of the Hebrews has met with us, let us go, we
pray thee, three days journey into the Desert, to sacrifice unto our God lest
he lay his plagues upon us, of pestilence and sword: but Pharaohs heart was
hardened, and would not let them go, and added more to their work, whereof they
complained mightily to Pharaoh. But he said, Ye are now idle, therefore ye say,
Let us go and do sacrifice to the Lord: and the people murmured at Moses
because their task was greater since his coming to them; and Moses was much
troubled thereat.

Then the Lord spoke unto Moses, Exodus 6.
and told him of all his promises unto Abraham and his seed, to give the land
of Canaan; and of the bondage of Israel in Egypt, and his Covenant, and sent
him again to Pharaoh to let the children of Israel go out of his land: but
all this while the children of Israel did mightily murmur against Moses and
Aaron; Moses was then fourscore years old, and Aaron fourscore and three.

And they went both unto Pharaoh again, and Aaron cast down his Rod before
Pharaoh and it became a serpent: and the sorcerers of Pharaoh did the like with
their enchantments: But Aarons Rod swallowed up all theirs.

And as God commanded, Moses and Aaron in the morning they met Pharaoh at the
water, and at the Rivers side, and desired that the people of Israel might go
and worship God in the wilderness.

But he refused, then he smote the waters in the sight of Pharaoh, and they
were turned into blood; and the fish died, and the river stanke; yet Pharaohs
heart was hardened: this continued for seven days, in which time they dug
for water to drink.

And the Lord commanded Moses Exodus 8.
to go again unto Pharaoh, to let the people of Israel go, and still his
heart was hardened: and Aaron stretched forth his hand with the Rod over the
ponds, and caused frogs to come over the land of Egypt; and the Magicians did
the like: then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said Entreat the Lord
that he may take away the frogs from me and my people, and I will let the
people go that they may do service unto the Lord.

And Moses said, That thou may know that there is none like the Lord our God,
the frogs shall depart, but only they shall remain in the rivers; and the
Lord did according to the word of Moses.

And the Lord commanded to say unto Aaron to stretch out his Rod and smite the
dust of the land, that it may be lice thorowout all Egypt, and it was so: and
the Magicians attempted to do the like but could not.

And they told the King it was the finger of God; yet he hearkened not unto
them.

Then the Lord commanded Moses to go early in the morning unto Pharaoh as he
came forth and speak to him, that the people of Israel might go to serve him;
and to tell him what plagues otherwise would follow; but still his heart was
hardened: then there came a grievous swarm of flies into the house of Pharaoh,
and into all the land of Egypt; and the land was corrupted by reason of the
flies.

Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Go ye sacrifice to your
God in the land: But Moses said, they desired to go three days journey; for it
was an abomination to the Egyptians to sacrifice in their land; and Pharaoh let
them go; desiring Moses to entreat the Lord for him; the which he did, and the
flies departed out of the land of Egypt.

Yet again Pharaoh hardened his heart and would not let them go: Exodus 9.
then all the cattle of the land of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the
children of Israel died not one: yet was Pharaohs heart hardened, and would not
let them go.

Then as the Lord commanded, Moses took ashes of the furnace and stood before
Pharaoh and sprinkled it up toward heaven, and there became boiles and blames
upon man and beast, and upon the Magicians.

And still was the heart of Pharaoh hardened, and would not let the children of
Israel go: and Moses stretched forth his Rod, and the Lord sent thunder and
hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground; so there was fire and hail
mingled together, such as was not since the land of Egypt became a nation: and
it smote both man and beast, and every herb, and brake down the trees: only
in the land of Goshen where the children of Israel were, was none.

Then Pharaoh sent for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned, the
Lord is righteous; I and my people are wicked: Entreat the Lord for me, and I
will let ye go.

And Moses went out of the city, and spread his hands unto the Lord, and the
thunder and hail ceased: yet nevertheless Pharaohs heart was again hardened;
neither would he let the children of Israel go.

And Moses and Aaron came again unto Pharaoh, Exodus 10.
and said thus unto him: Thus says the Lord God of the Hebrews, How long will thou refuse to humble thy self before me? let my people go that they may
serve me: and his servants persuaded him to let them go, but he refused to
hear them.

Then Moses stretched forth his Rod, over the land of Egypt, and there came an
East wind which brought in Locusts which went over the land of Egypt, and the
land was darkened: and they left no green thing upon the land. Then Pharaoh
called again for Moses and Aaron in haste, and said, I have sinned against the
Lord your God, and you: forgive my sin, and entreat the Lord for me.

The which Moses did, and the Lord sent a mighty West wind which did drive the
locusts into the Red Sea: but yet would not Pharaoh let the children of Israel
go. Then the Lord commanded Moses to stretch forth his hand toward heaven;
and there was a thick darkness throughout the land of Egypt three days; but
all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings. Then Pharaoh called
unto Moses, and said to him, Go ye, and serve the Lord, only let your flocks
and herds stay here: but Moses refused that, and said, they must have
sacrifices for the Lord and all their cattle: then Pharaoh would not let them
go, but bid Moses to see his face no more.

And the Lord commanded Moses to speak to all the children of Israel, Exodus 12.
upon the tenth day of the month, to take every house a lamb, a male lamb
without blemish, and to keep it until the fourteenth day, and then kill it in
the evening, and to take the blood with a bunch of hyssop and strike it on the
two side posts, and upon the upper post of the door; and that they shall eat
the flesh that night roasted with unleavened bread, and bitter herbs: That they
shall eat it with their loins girded, shoes on their feet, and staves in their
hands, and in haste, for it is the Lords Passover.

For the blood upon the posts shall be a token that the Lord would pass in
mercy by them, when the Egyptians should be destroyed.

And after the performance of many other ceremonies before the eating of the
Passover, it came to pass that at midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn
of Egypt; and Pharaoh rose up in the night, and all the Egyptians, and there
was a great cry: then the children of Israel, according as they were commanded,
departed, taking their dough before it was levened, and the kneading troughes
upon their shoulders, with great store of Jewels they had from the Egyptians.
And they journied toward Succoth, being in number about six hundred thousand
on foot, besides children: after they had been in Egypt four hundred and
thirty years.

But they went not the nearest way by the land of the Philistines: but about
through the wilderness of the Red Sea.

And Moses took the bones of Joseph along with him: and they came from Succoth
in Ethem in the edge of the wilderness, and there encamped: and the Lord went
before them by day in a pillar of a cloud; and by night in a pillar of fire.

And when King Pharaoh heard they were gone, Exodus 14.
he made ready six hundred chosen Chariots, and all the Chariots of Egypt and
Captains over them, and a great army, and the children of Israel coming near
the Red Sea, the Egyptians overtooke them: and they were afraid, and cried unto
the Lord, and did murmur against Moses exceedingly: thinking it better to have
staid in Egypt: but Moses comforted them: then the Lord commanded them to
march, and Moses to lift up his Rod, and to stretch out his hand over the Sea,
and the Angel, and the pillar of the Cloud which went before, removed and stood
behind them: and the Lord caused the Sea to go back by a strong East wind,
and it was dry land, and the waters were divided, and the children of Israel
went into the midst of it upon the dry ground, and the waters were as a wall
on every side; and the Egyptians followed them: but by Gods will, when they
were in the middle of the water their Chariot wheels fell off: in the morning
when all Israel was over, Moses stretched forth his hand and the waters closed
up, and Pharaoh and all his Army were drowned: and when Israel saw this great
work they feared the Lord, and believed him, and his servant Moses: and Moses
and the children of Israel sang praises unto the Lord.

After which Moses brought the children of Israel three days into the
wilderness and found no water; Exodus 15.
and when they came to Marah the water was bitter, and the people murmured
against Moses: and he prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree the
which he cast into the water and they were made sweet. And then they came to
Elim, where were twelve wells of water, and seventy Palm trees, and there
encamped: from thence they came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between
Elim and Sinai, being the fifteenth day of the second month, there the people
of Israel did murmur at Moses and Aaron: repenting they came from the flesh
pots of Egypt; then Moses and Aaron said unto them, At even ye shall know that
the Lord has brought you out from the land of Egypt; and what are we that ye
murmur thus against us?

And as Aaron was speaking to them, they looking toward the wilderness, the
glory of the Lord did appear in the cloud: and it came to pass that in the
evening the Quails came up and covered the Camp, and in the morning the dew
lay round about the host.

And after the dew was gone, there lay a small round thing like the frost of
the ground, and they said one to another, It is Manna. And Moses said unto
them, This is the bread the Lord has given you to eat, gather thereof: and he
that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had no want.

Moses commanded them to leave none until the morning: but some of them did
not hearken to him, but kept of it till morning and it bred worms and stanke:
and this Manna was not to be found upon the seventh day.

It tasted like wafers made with honey.

And Moses spoke unto Aaron to keep in a pot an Omer full of it therein, and
lay it before the Lord to be kept for their generations. So Aaron laid it up
before the Testimony to be kept: the children of Israel did eat Manna forty
years, until they came to the borders of Canaan.

And the children of Israel journied from Sin, and came to Rephidim, and there
was no water to drink: wherefore the people did chide with Moses, and murmured
against him.

And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying, What shall I do with this people? they
be almost ready to stone me: and the Lord commanded him to call the Elders of
Israel and go to the Rock in Horeb; and smite the Rock, and there shall come
water out of it for the people to drink: and Moses did so in the sight of the
Elders of Israel.

Then Amalek came to fight with Israel, and Moses bade Joshua go and meet them
with a chosen company; and Joshua did so, and fought with him: and Moses stood
upon an hill with Aaron and Hur, and had his Rod in his hand, and in the fight
whiles he held up his hand the men of Israel prevailed, but when he let it
down Amalek prevailed. But Moses hands being heavy they took a stone and put
it under him, and he sat thereon, and Aaron and Hur staid up his hands of each
side; and they were steady until the going down of the Sun: and Joshua
discomfited Amalek. There Moses built an Altar and called it Joshua Nissi.

And Jethro father in law to Moses, Exodus 18.
his wife with his two sons, came unto Moses into the wilderness, where he
encamped at the mount of God, where they received one another with great love:
Moses telling him of all what God had done for Israel, by delivering them from
the hands of Pharaoh: and Jethro sacrificed to the Lord, and blessed the Lord
God of Israel: and Aaron came, and all the Elders of Israel to eat bread with
Jethro: but Jethro seeing Moses sit in judgment amongst the people from
morning to evening: he persuaded Moses to take some helpers, and not to wear
himself out: which counsel he followed; only when matters of great
difficulty came to be heard, Moses heard them: and Jethro departed from Moses
and went into his own land.

After this the children of Israel removed, Exodus 19.
and came to the desert of Sinai, and encamped before the mount: and Moses went
up unto God, who spoke unto him, and bad him tell the sons of Jacob what he
had done for them; and if they served him, he would continue his mercies
exceedingly unto them: and Moses told the people what the Lord said, and all
the people answered together: We will obey the Lord. And Moses returned the
words of the people unto the Lord: then he commanded him to sanctify the
people unto the Lord, and to be ready against the third day, for then he would
come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai: but commanded bounds
to be set about the mountain, that the people should not come upon the Mount,
nor touch the borders of it lest they be destroyed; only Moses and Aaron were
to go up: and Moses sancti^ied the people, and bid them be ready the third
day; and that day in the morning was thundering and lightning, and a thick
cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud, so that all
the people trembled.

And Moses brought forth the people to meet with God, and they stood at the
bottom of it: and the mountain was altogether on a smoke, for the Lord
descended upon it in fire: and the whole mount quaked greatly: and the Lord
called Moses unto him to the top of the mount: and the Lord said unto Moses,
Go down, charge the people, lest they break thorough to gaze, and perish: so
Moses did as the Lord commanded: and then God commanded Moses and Aaron to come
up: then was delivered unto them by word from God, the Ten Commandments.

And the people being much afraid of the thundrings, lightnings, Exodus 20.
and sound of trumpet; and smoking of the mountain, they removed and stood
afar off: and they said unto Moses, Speak thou unto us, and we will hear:
but let not God speak with us lest we die. And Moses said unto the people,
Fear not, for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your
faces, that ye sin not: and the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near
unto the thick darkness where God was, and there the Lord taught unto Moses
his laws and ordinances to deliver to the people.

After this the Lord commanded Moses, Exodus 24.
with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy Elders of Israel to come up, who were
commanded to worship a far off; and Moses above came near the Lord.

And returning from the Lord, Moses wrote all the words of the Lord, and rose
up early in the morning, and built an Altar under the hill, and twelve pillars
according to the twelve Tribes of Israel.

And he sent young men of the children of Israel, which offered burnt
offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen unto the Lord: and the Lord
again said unto Moses, Come up to me into the mount and I will give thee Tables
of stone, and the Law and Commandments which I have written that thou may
teach them: and Moses with Joshua his minister went up to the mount of God; and
said unto the Elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we return: Aaron and Hur
are with you: If any man have any matters to do, let him come unto them.

The^ Moses went up into the mount and a cloud covered it: and the glory of the
Lord abode upon mount Sinai: and the cloud covered it six days, and the
seventh day he called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud, and the sight
of the glory of the Lord was like a devouring fire on the top of the mount, in
the eyes of all the children of Israel.

And Moses was in the mount forty days, and forty nights.

And after his return, he by Gods appointment, set down Laws, and
Ordinances, and Ceremonies, for the people of Israel to keep.

Now whilst Moses was in the mount, Exodus 32.
the people gathered themselves together to Aaron, and said, Make us gods to
go before us: for as for this Moses that brought us out of Egypt, we wot not
what is become of him: and Aaron to please them, bade them break off their
eare-rings, which they did, and of them did make a Calfe, and did worship it:
and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play.

And the Lord said unto Moses, Go, get thee down, for the people thou
broughtest out of Egypt have corrupted themselves, and are quickly turned
aside, out of the way which I commanded: they are a stiff-necked people, and
the Lords wrath was growing hot against them to consume them. But Moses
besought the Lord his God to spare this people, whom he had brought out of the
land of Egypt with such power and might: and to be merciful unto them for
Abraham Isaac and Jacobs sake: and the Lord heard the prayers of Moses for them.

And Moses coming down from the mount with the two Tables of the Law, the
work and writings of God: Joshuah hearing the noise of the people as they
shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the Camp: but Moses
said, No, it is the noise of them that sing: and as he came near the Camp he
saw the Calfe and the dancing, and Moses anger waxed hot; and he cast the
Tables out of his hands and brake them beneath the mount: and he took the Calfe
which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and ground it to powder, and
strewed it upon the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.

And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto thee that thou have
brought so great a sin upon them? and Aaron answered, Let not the anger of my
lord wax hott, thou know the people that they are set on mischief.

Then Moses stood in the gate of the Camp, and said, Who is on the Lords side?
and go in and out from gate to gate thorough the Camp, and slay every man his
brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor: and the
children of Levi who were consecrated, did according to the word of Moses: and
there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.

And on the morrow Moses said unto the people, You have sinned a great sin,
and now I will go up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall make an atonement
for your sin: and Moses went up and prayed for the people: and the Lord
commanded Moses to lead the people forth, and sent his Angel with him.

Then Moses took the Tabernacle and pitched it without the Camp a far off,
33.
and every one that sought the Lord went out unto the Tabernacle: and when
Moses went unto the Tabernacle, the people rose up, and stood at their tent
doors looking after Moses until he went into the Tabernacle; and the cloudy
pillar descended and stood at the door of the Tabernacle whiles the Lord
talked with Moses; then every man rose up and worshipped in his tent door.

The Lord commanded Moses to he we two Tables of stone like to the first, and
to be ready in the morning to come unto mount Sinai, 34.
but not any man to come up with him; neither any man to be seen thorowout all
the mount: neither that the flocks or herds should feed before the mount: the
which was done, and Moses went up unto the Lord; and it came to pass when
Moses came down from the mount with the two Tables of the Testimony, his face
shone, and and Aaron and the children of Israel were afraid to come near him,
but he put a veil over his head, and told them what the Lord had commanded.

Then the children of Israel mightily 35.
gave themselves to the adoring of the Tabernacle wherein was the Arc of the
Covenant, which being finished Moses reared up, and put the Testimony into the
Arc, and put the Mercy-seat above upon the Arc, and he set a Laver between
the Tent of the Congregation and the Altar: and Moses and Aaron, and his sons
washed their hands and their feet thereat, when they came near the Altar, and
the glory of the Lord filled the Tabernacle, and the cloud of the 40.
Lord was upon the Tabernacle by day, and fire by night in the sight of Israel
thorowout all their journies.

Then Moses consecrated Aaron and his sons, Levit. 8.
and girded them with girdles, clothed them with robes, and put the Ephod upon
them; and the Breast Plate of Urim and the Thummim; and put upon Aarons head the
Mitre and the holy Crown as the Lord commanded Moses: and then sacrificed unto
the Lord.

And the Lord commanded Aaron and his sons not to drink wine nor strong
drink when they shall come into the Tabernacle. 10.


In the wilderness of mount Sinai, in the Tabernacle the Lord commanded Moses
to take the number of the children of Israel: Numb. 1.
their males by name, every one by the poll from twenty years and upward, fit
for war: and the whole number was six hundred and three thousand five hundred
and fifty, besides the tribe of Levi, who were appointed over the Tabernacle of
the Testimony, to bear the Tabernacle and the vessels thereof to minister unto
it, and encampe about it.

And Moses and Aaron did encampe before the Tabernacle toward the East: and
Moses numbered all the first borne among the children of Israel; the males from
a month old and upward, and they were twenty two thousand two hundred
threescore and thirteen.

And the Lord commanded Moses to make two silver Trumpets to call the people
together, 10.
and for their marches.

And the cloud being by God taken up from off the Tabernacle of the Testimony,
the children of Israel took their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai,
and the cloud rested in the wilderness of Paran, the Tribe of Judah marching
first with their Standard; and after them the Tribes in order.

And they departed from the mount of the Lord three days journey, 11.
and the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord went before them to search out a
resting place for them: and when the Arc went forward then Moses said, Rise
up, O Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee
flee before thee: and when it ^ested he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many
thousands of Israel.

After this the children of Israel did murmur and long after the flesh pots of
Egypt. 11.


And Moses heard the people weep every man in the door of his tent, and the
anger of the Lord was greatly kindled; and Moses was much grieved, by reason of
the great burden that was upon him, of so great a people.

Then the Lord commanded seventy of the Elders of Israel to assist him, upon
whom was the Spirit of the Lord, and the people still murmuring: and Moses with
the Elders came into the Camp, and there went forth a wind from the Lord
which brought Quails from the Sea, which fell by the Camp in very great
plenty, and the people gathered abundantly of them: and whiles the flesh was
between their teeth, the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them, and smote
them with a great plague.

And it came to pass that Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses, 12.
because he married an Ethiopian woman, and the anger of the Lord was against
them; and Miriam became leprous.

Then Aaron said unto Moses, Alas, my lord, I beseech thee lay not the sin
upon us wherein we have done foolishly. And Moses cried unto the Lord. Then
Miriam was sent out of the Camp 7. days, the people journeying not, but after
that time she returning, the Camp removed and pitched in the wilderness of
Paran.

Then the Lord commanded Moses to send forth of every tribe one to search the
land of Canaan, and to know the strength and plenty thereof; 13.
and they coming to the brook of Eshcoll cut off a cluster of grapes, and they
brought it upon a staff by two men; with some pomegarnets and figs, and did
give relation of the land: and some of them spoke very doubtful of the land,
and put the people in fear.

Insomuch as the Congregation wept and murmured against Moses and Aaron, 14.
and wished they had died in the land of Egypt, or in the wilderness, and
desired to return into Egypt: then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before
all the Assembly of the Congregation of Israel; and Joshua and Caleb who had
searched the land, rent their clothes, and commended the land exceedingly to
the people, and advised them not to rebel against the Lord. But they bade
stone them with stones, and the wrath of the Lord was kindled against them: But
Moses prayed earnestly to the Lord for this people, and he heard him, and
pardoned them.

But the Lord said, Because all those men which have seen my glory, 15.
and my miracles which I did in Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted
me now these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice, they shall not see
the land: but my servants Caleb and Joshua, because they have followed me, them
will I bring into the land whereinto they went, and their seed shall possess
it: and the children of Israel, and the people murmured exceedingly, and
contrary to the command of Moses, got up into the top of the mountain,
repenting and being ready to go to the place the Lord had promised: but the
Arc of the Covenant staid behind in the Camp; then the Amalekites, and the
Canaanites came down and discomfited them.

It came to pass afterward Korah, 16.
Dathan and Abiram, with certain of the children of Israel, with two hundred
and fifty of the Princes of the assembly, men of fame and renoune gathered
themselves against Moses and Aaron, saying unto them, Ye take too much upon
you, seeing all the congregation is holy: wherefore then lift ye up your selves
above the congregation of the Lord: then Moses said unto them, even to morrow
the Lord will show who are his, and who are holy: and Moses said unto Korah,
Hear I pray you, ye sons of Levi.

Seems it but a small thing unto you that the God of Israel has brought you
so near himself to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them; and seek ye the
Priesthood also? And Moses sent for Dathan and Abiram, but they would not come
up; but murmured against Moses, for bringing them out of the land of Egypt.

And Moses was much troubled, and said unto Korah, Be thou and all thy company
before the Lord with Aaron to morrow, and bring each of you your Censer,
putting Incense therein: and they did so, putting fire in them, and stood in
the door of the Tabernacle of the congregation with Moses and Aaron; and the
glory of the Lord appeared unto them: and the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron,
saying, Separate your selves from among this congregation that I may consume
them in a moment. And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, of the
spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will thou be wroth with all the
congregation? And God commanded Moses to bring the people from the Tabernacle
of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, and he did so. And all the Elders of Israel
followed him: and he spoke unto them, saying, Depart I pray you from the tents
of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs lest ye be consumed.

And so they departed and stood in the doors of their Tents, their wives and
their children: and Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me
to do all those works, for I have not done them of my own mind; if these
men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation
of all men, then the Lord has not sent me: but if the Lord make a new thing,
and the earth open her mouth and swallow them up, with all that appertain to
them, and they go down quick into the pit, then shall ye understand that
these men have provoked the lord.

And it came to pass as he had made an end of speaking all these words, that
the ground clave asunder that was under them, and swallowed them up, their
houses and their goods: and the earth closed upon them, and they perished from
among the congregation; and there came a fire out from the Lord, and consumed
the two hundred and fifty men that offered incense; and as God commanded,
Eleazer the son of Aaron took the censers out of the fire, and made of them
broad plates to cover the Altar, because they were formerly hallowed; and to be
a memorial to all the children of Israel, that no stranger which is not of the
seed of Aaron come near to offer incense before the Lord, that he be not as
Korah and as his company.

But on the morrow after this great judgment fell upon Korah, the congregation
murmured against Moses and Aaron, saying, They had killed the people of the
Lord. And they being gathered together, Moses and Aaron looked toward the
Tabernacle, and the cloud covered it, and the glory of the Lord appeared. And
Moses and Aaron came before the Tabernacle of the congregation: and the Lord
spoke unto Moses saying, Get you up from among this congregation that I may
consume them in a moment; and they fell upon their faces, and Moses bade Aaron
to take a Censer, and put fire therein from of the Altar, and put on incense
and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an atonement for them, for that
wrath was gone out from the Lord, and the plague was begun: and Aaron did as
Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation, but the plague
was begun among the people; and then he put on incense and made an atonement
for the people, and stood between the dead and the living, and the plague
ceased. Now they that died of the plague were fourteen thousand and seven
hundred, besides them that died about the matter of Korah: and Aaron returned
unto Moses to the door of the Tabernacle, and the plague stayed.

And the Lord commanded Moses to speak unto the children of Number. 17.
Israel, to bring twelve rods, for every Tribe one, and thereon to write their
names, and to write Aarons name upon the rod of Levi; and to lay them up in the
Tabernacle before the Testimony: and the Lord said, That the man's rod whom he
shall choose, shall be the chief, and shall blossom, thereby to make the
children of Israel cease from murmuring against Moses and Aaron; and Moses did
as the Lord commanded, and every one of the Princes gave him a rod according to
their fathers houses, Aarons rod being amongst them: and Moses laid the rods
before the Lord in the Tabernacle of witness: and going on the morrow into the
Tabernacle, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, brought forth
buds bloomed, and yielded Almonds: and Moses brought them forth, and they took
every man his rod: but the Lord bade Moses to bring back Aarons rod before the
Testimony to be kept for a token against the Rebels, and take away their
murmurings lest they die; and Moses did so as God commanded: and the children
of Israel spoke unto Moses, saying, Behold, we dye, we perish, we all perish:
Shall we be consumed with dying?

And the Lord commanded the Tribe of Levi to be joined unto Aaron to minister
unto him, 18.
and only that Aaron and his sons should minister before the Tabernacle of
the witness, and that the Levites should keep the charge of the Tabernacle,
but they should not come nigh the vessels of the Sanctuary and the Altar lest
Aaron and they should die: and that no stranger should come near them: and gave
them many other Ordinances to observe.

Then came the children of Israel unto Zin, 20.
and abode in Kadesh where Miriam died and was there buried: and in that place
was no water, in so much as they gathered themselves together against Moses and
Aaron, and the people did chide with Moses, and wished they had died with their
brethren.

Then Moses and Aaron went from them unto the door of the Tabernacle, and fell
upon their faces: and the Lord bade Moses and Aaron take the Rod and assemble
the people together, and speak unto the Rock before them, and it should give
forth water; and they gathered the congregation together before the Rock, and
Moses said unto them, Hear now ye Rebels, must we fetch you water out of this
Rock?

Then Moses lift up his hand, and with his Rod he smote the Rock twice, and the
water came out abundantly: and the congregation drank, and their beasts also.
And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, Because ye believe me not to sanctify
me in the eyes of the children of Israel; therefore ye shall not bring this
congregation into the land which I have given them.

After this Moses sent messengers to Kadesh to the King of Edom, letting him
know of all their passages in Egypt, and of the wonders that God had done;
desiring to pass through his Country only to go by the Kings high way, and
pay for what they took: but the King of Edom refused it: wherefore Israel
turned another way, and came to mount Hor, where the Lord spoke unto Moses and
Aaron saying, Aaron shall be gathered to h^ people, for he shall not enter into
the land which I have given unto the children of Israel, because ye rebelled
against my word at the water of Meribah: take Aaron and his son Eleazar and
bring them up unto mount Hor; and Moses brought them up, and as the Lord
commanded, Moses stripped Aaron of his garments and put them upon Eleazar his
son, and Aaron died there, in the top of the mount, and Moses and Eleazar
came down from thence, and when the congregation of Israel saw that Aaron was
dead, even all the house of Israel mourned for him thirty days.

And they journied from mount Hor by the way of the Red sea, 21.
and compassed the land of Edom, but they were much discouraged because of the
way, and the people spoke against God and Moses, then the Lord sent fiery
serpents amongst the people, who bit them, whereof many died, and then they
confessed their sins unto Moses, and desired him to pray to the Lord for
them; the which he did.

And the Lord commanded Moses to make a fiery serpent, and set it upon a pole,
that every one that is bitten, when he looks upon it shall live: and Moses
did accordingly make a brazen serpent; and they that were bitten when they
beheld it, lived.

And the children of Israel then journeyed faster and came to Beor unto a
place, 21.
where the Princes and Nobles dug it by the directions of the Lawgiver, and
went further, where they sent to Sihon the King of the Amorites to let them
pass thorough his land, paying for what they had, and only to go the Kings
high way while they were past his borders, but he would not suffer them to
pass; but gathered his people together, and fought with Israel; where the
Amorites were overthrown, Israel taking all their cities and dwelt in them,
and the Country thereabouts; and Moses sent to spy out Jaazer, and drove the
Amorites from thence and possessed it.

And after they marched, and Og King of Bashan raised his people, and then
Israel did overthrow them, and possessed their land.

After this the children of Israel ^^
set forward and pitched in the plains of Moab: and Moab was afraid: Balak
the son of Zippor was King of the Moabites at that time, who sent messengers
unto Balaam to come to him, letting him know, how the children of Israel who
came out of Egypt came near him; praying him to curse them.

And he bade the messengers sent lodge there that night, but God said unto
Balaam, Thou shall not go with them: neither curse them for they are blessed:
and Balaam told the messengers, Get ye home, for the Lord refuses to give me
leave to go with you: and the Princes returned to Balak, saying, Balaam
refuses to come with us: then Balak sent Princes more honorable then they
with proffers unto Balaam of great preferments and honor unto him: but he
answered, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, he could
not go beyond the command of God, to do less or more: but desired them to
stay that night, that he might know the will of the Lord: and that night the
Lord said unto Balaam, If they call, go along with them, but do that which I
shall say unto thee.

Then Balaam rose up in the morning and sadled his Ass, and went with the
Princes of Moab: and the Angel of the Lord stood in the way, and as he was
riding with his two servants, the Ass seeing the Angel of the Lord, with his
sword in his hand, he turned out of the way, and Balaam smote her, it being
between two walls: the Ass thrust her self upon the wall, crushed Balaams
foot against the wall, and then he smote her again; then the Ass fell down
under Balaam; and then he smote the Ass again, and the Lord opened the mouth
of the Ass, and she said unto Balaam, What have I done unto thee that thou
have smitten me these three times? and Balaam said unto the Ass, Behold, thou
have mocked me, if I had a sword I would kill thee: and the Ass said unto
Balaam, Am not I thine Ass, upon which thou have ridden ever since I was thine
unto this day? was I ever wont to do so unto thee? and he said, Nay: then the
Lord opened the eyes of Balaam and he saw the Angel of the Lord, and he bowed
down his head, and fell flat on his face, and said, he had sinned. Now
therefore, if it please thee, I will return back: but the Angel said, Go on
with the men, but only speak that word I shall speak unto thee: and so he
went with the Princes, and Balak hearing of his coming he went to meet him, and
said unto him, Wherefore did thou not come sooner? am not I able to promote
thee to honor? but Balaam said, The word that God puts into my mouth will I
speak.

And they offered burnt-offerings, and he said unto Balak, How shall I curse,
whom God has not cursed, or how shall I defy whom the Lord has not defied?
at which Balak was offended, but he answered; must I not take heed to speak
that which the Lord has put into my mouth? and after other burnt-offerings at
Zophim, his answer was to Balak, Behold, I have received commandment to
bless, and he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it; he has not beh^ld
iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel; the Lord his
God is with him, and the shout of a King is among them: then Balak said,
Neither do thou bless them nor curse them: but he answered, All that the Lord
speaks, that I must do: but Balaam seeing it was Gods will to bless Israel,
he left after looking to enchantments, but set his face toward the
wilderness, and he saw Israel abiding in their tents according to their
tribes; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he said, How goodly are thy
tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel, etc. then Balaks anger was
kindled against him; but Balaam prophesied, saying, I shall see him, but not
now: I shall behold him, but not nigh: There shall come a Star out of Jacob,
and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite the corners of Moab,
and destroy all the children of Seth: out of Jacob shall come he that shall
have dominion, etc.

And Balaam rose up and went and returned to his place, and Balak also went his
way.

And Israel abiding in Shittim the people began to commit whoredom with the
daughters of Moab and bowed toward their gods; 25.
and the anger of the Lord was kindled against them.

One of the children of Israel came and brought unto his brethren a Midianitish
woman in the sight of Moses and all the congregation of Israel, who were
weeping before the door of the tabernacle; and when Phineas the son of
Eleazar the son of Aaron the Priest saw it, he rose from amongst the
congregation, and took a Javelin in his hand and went after the man of Israel
into the tent, and thrust both the man and the woman, Zimri and Cozbi, through;
so the plague was stayed in Israel: and those that dyed of the plague were
twenty and four thousand.

And Moses desired of the Lord to set a man over the congregation, 27.
to go in and out before them, that they may not be as sheep that have no
shepherd; and the Lord said unto Moses, Take thee Joshuah the son of Nun, a
man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thine hand upon him, and set him before
Eleazar the Priest and before all the congregation, and give him a charge in
their sight; and thou shall put some of thine honor upon him, that all Israel
may be obedient; and he shall stand before Eleazar the Priest who shall ask
counsel for him, after the judgment of Urim before the Lord: and Moses did as
the Lord commanded him, and he took Joshua and set him before Eleazar the
Priest and the congregation; and he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a
charge as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

After this the children of Israel warred against the Midianites, and they slew
the King of Midian, and burnt their cities, and their goodly castles, and there
Balaam was slain, they divided the spoil of the Country.

And Moses growing old, Deuteronomy. 31.
he called Joshuah unto him before the people, giving him good counsel, and
bidding him to be valiant: and encouraged the people, and sets forth a song
of Gods mercies and vengeance.

After which the Lord spoke unto Moses, 32.
saying, Get thee up into this mountain Abarim unto mount Nebo which is in the
land of Moab that is over against Jericho, and behold, the land of Canaan which
I give unto the children of Israel for a possession, and dye in the mount
whither thou go up, and be gathered unto thy people as Aaron thy brother
died in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people: because ye trespassed
against me among the children of Israel at the waters of Meribah Kadesh in the
wilderness of Zin, because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children
of Israel; yet thou shall see the land, but thou shall not go thither: and
after Moses had blessed the twelve Tribes of Israel, 34.
he went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of Nebo, and the Lord
showed him the land of promise which was promised to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob:
so Moses the servant of the Lord died there in the land of Moab, according to
the word of the Lord, and he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab over
against Beth Peor: but no man knows of his sepulcher unto this day: he was
120. years old when he died, his eye was not dim, nor his natural force
abated: and the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty
days; and there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses whom the
Lord knew face to face: In all the signs and wonders which the Lord sent him
to do in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, to all his servants, and to all his
land; and in all that mighty hand, and in all that great terror which Moses
showed in the sight of Israel.

MEDITATIONS Upon some parts of the History of Moses.
O Lord direct my meditations, and assist me humbly and truly to contemplate
this thy great work of the deliverance of thy children of Israel out of Egypt
by Moses, after they had sojourned there four hundred and thirty years; after
which time, according to thy promise, thou did deliver them, and brought
them to the land of promise.

This great deliverance, O Lord, is the true type of a great mercy that did
follow, which was by our Moses Jesus Christ, who redeemed, and brought us that
were Gentiles, and under the bondage and slavery of sin, to serve and follow
him out of the darkness wherein we were inthraled; being far worse then the
Egyptian yoke.

O Lord my God, let it enter into my heart, most humbly and seriously to
consider of this inestimable mercy of my redemption, and of thy wonderful and
unvaluable goodness toward me a sinner: by sending into this Egypt of the
world, such a guide, such a deliverer, and such a Redeemer as all the Angels
and powers in heaven do adore, even thy only Son.

Let me be astonished, O Lord, with wonder at this thy so great mercy, and be
confounded in my self for offending thee, so glorious and so gracious a God.

And let my sinful soul be converted unto thee, to serve thee with all
humbleness of heart. O Lord, how suitable in mischief were Pharaoh and Herod,
by giving way to Ambition and Jealousy, and the reigns to commit cruelty to
an unlimited height, for the murdering of innocent Infants. Pharaohs ambition
was to destroy the Hebrew children, amongst whom was Moses, which thou, O God,
preservedst to deliver the people of Israel out of Egypt: and Herod's design to
destroy the children in Jury, amongst whom was that immaculate Lamb Christ
Jesus: even to destroy him who delivered the Gentiles, and was after crucified
to deliver and redeem both Jew and Gentile.

O Lord, how wonderful are thy works and all thy goodness: for flesh and
blood could not prevail against thy providence: for the cruelty of Pharaoh
could not prevent thy goodness, for thou did multiply and bless thy
children of Israel: and preservedst Moses in a poor basket of bulrushes to do
thy great work to deliver thy people out of the thraldom of Egypt.

And O wonder of wonders, and mercy of mercies, out of the manger at Bethlehem
came our blessed Savior who redeemed the world: and how wonderfully, O Lord,
have thou preserved thy Church for whom he died, and multiplied thy servants
through the persecutions of this world.

As it was thy great mercy and blessing, O Lord, to preserve Noah and his
family in that great Arc whereby mankind was preserved upon earth: So it was
thy mercy to preserve thy servant Moses in that little arc amongst the watery
flags of danger, to preserve and bring thy children of Israel descended from
Noah, out of Egypt to the land of promise, from which stock so preserved, came
my Savior Jesus Christ: as these have been thy mercies, O God, to preserve
thy people of Israel by thy Prophet Moses the type of Christ: and to redeem
the world by thy Son my Savior Jesus; So O Lord, many have been thy mercies
unto me a sinner, by thy manifold mercies and deliverances even since my
infancy hitherto, both by sea and land. Good Lord, in thy mercy take from over
me this thick and mysty cloud of stupidity, that so much darkens my
understanding, that I may discern these thy mercies, and fear, love, and
serve thee with all the faculties of soul and body: and good Lord grant that I
may love my kindred and neighbors, as Moses did love his Nation the Hebrews,
with kindness and affability to all men, as he used to the daughters of Jethro.

Let the soul of thy servant know, that in the places of peace, quietness,
and retiredness from the eye of this world so full of vanity and pleasures,
there art thou to be found, for in the desert behind the mountain and near
Horeb thou wast with Moses.

O Lord, bring my soul from these worldly cares, afflictions, and temptations
amongst which I live; and lead me with thy saving grace toward thy holy
mountain: with contemplations of holiness and penitency for my sins, and
there let me rest in thee and be freed from the thorny and scorching passages
of this world.

As thou, O God, did wonderfully appear unto Moses in the Bush by a flame of
fire which did not burn nor consume it: so I do most humbly beseech thee,
enter into the heart of thy servant, and inflame it with holy love and zeal
toward thee: and enlighten it, O Lord, that it may discern thy wonderful
goodness: and that I may have always such a burning desire to serve thee, as
no overflowings of the waters of this world may quench it: let me with Moses,
put off my shoes of worldly thoughts, cares, and sinful imaginations, when I
shall presume to come before thee, for the place where thou art is holy: and
places consecrated unto thee and thy service, in the assembly of Saints, are
not to be profaned by any kind of unholy actions; for we must worship toward
thy holy temple, and enter into it with reverence; for so, O Lord, thou did
command all thy people in all nations of the world.

Give me grace to obey thy good inspirations as Moses did obey thee, by going
unto Pharaoh: Lord, let thy wonderful works, that thou have done and that I
daily see, strengthen my faith and confidence in thee; and not to distrust thy
power and goodness, but that I may resolutely go on to serve thee with a
blessed perseverance, until my soul shall be delivered out of this Egyptian
bondage, be freed from the taskmasters of afflictions, and the fleshpots of the
pleasures of this world.

Moses was slow in speech, and doubtful of himself, yet God did work
mightily by him. By his example let us master our fleshly opinions, and know
that God has his own work; and not to judge of the defects of other men.

And good Lord, teach me to look into my self, for if I have received that
which others want, it is thy mere mercy and goodness: and as I ought always
to be thankful for thy gifts, yet let me not be proud of them; for as thy
goodness gives them, so thou can take them away as thou please; for the
foot of pride brings down thy wrath upon us the chief of men; and though
Moses had that defect, yet by thy power he did greater matters then either
Absolon or Achitophel could bring to pass; for thou make our speaking, and
hearing, and all our senses to serve thy commands; and my Re^eemer made the
dumb to speak, and the lame to walk: as by thy great mercy thou have
delivered me from the Egyptian plagues which the hardness of my heart has
deserved; so prepare me I do most humbly beseech thee, and make me ready to go
out of this Egypt of the world, and to be obedient unto my Leaders, and
Governors, Moses and Aaron, in the midst of all perverseness and perverse men
whomsoever.

In the darkness of this world enlighten me, and as thou did send a
distinct light to the children of Israel in Goshen; so enlighten, O Lord, my
inward soul with the light of thy blessed spirit, to discern thy wonderful
mercies toward me; and grant that I may praise thee for thy goodness, and
obey thee as a man separate from all the world: prepare me, O God, to be ready
for my passage to the Celestial Country of eternity as the Israelites were;
with my loins girt in c^aritie, my shoes on in mortification, and my staff
in confidence: sprinkle the posts and lintles of my heart with the hysope of
thy grace, and the precious blood of thy salvation; that I may be known to be
thine, and be received into thy mercy when thou shall come to visit me, and to
bring me through the Red Sea of that dangerous passage to the heavenly Canaan
of eternity.

Keep me at that time, O Lord, from distrust and diffidence; strengthen me in
the narrow passage, between the two walls of that dangerous water of
presumption and despair, that I be not drowned with the Egyptians of this
world, whose trust is in their chariots and not in thee; and whose hardness of
heart and contempt of thee, brought them to destruction.

O Lord, be merciful to my thirsty soul, and preserve me from murmuring
against thee, thou which diedst upon the tree of the Cross, take all
bitterness from my soul, and quench my thirst with the holy water of thy
grace, and grant that I may cheerfully go on toward the land of promise.

Without thy continual help how frail and perverse are we? as the rebellious
Israelites ever murmuring and repining against Moses and Aaron; send therefore
that heavenly Manna unto me that may strengthen my soul and preserve it unto
thee in faith, and obedience.

Thou know my frailty, O God, and how feeble I am, as likewise my unruly and
unbridled conditions, my stubbornes and hardness of heart: therefore I do
most humbly beseech thee for thy mercy sake in Jesus Christ, with thy
miraculous and merciful Rod of grace to strike upon my stony heart, that from
that rock may ascend unto mine eyes a fountain of tears, with such a true and
perfect contrition as may come before thee, and by thy mercy my sins may be
washed away, and that I may thirst no more after vanity.

O Lord, how weak is the arm of the strongest man without thy help: for Moses
could not hold up his hand with the Rod without assistance from thee where
Amalek fought with Israel, but Aaron and Hur assisted him.

I do most humbly beseech thee, in the fight that I have against the Amalek of
sin and impiety: give me thy Rod of grace and strengthen me, and make me able
to hold up my hands and heart unto thee, and in my weakness and distress send
me, O Lord, spiritual comforters, which may assist and strengthen my faith,
that I may hold out until the sun of my age be set, and obtain victory over
all my spiritual enemies.

With what wonderful fear did thou, O Lord, deliver thy holy
Commandments unto Moses, and with what reverence and fear did the children of
Israel stand without the bounds of Mount Sinai; and only Moses, Aaron, Nadab,
Abihu, and seventy Elders of Israel went into the mountain who worshipped a
far off, only Moses came near the Lord.

Good Lord, make me to fear and tremble to break these thy holy commandments
which thou did deliver with such circumstances of glory and terror: and
with thy children of Israel let me keep without the bounds of mount Sinai as
thou appointedst them, and out of all humane curiosity humbly wait to receive
thy laws from the hands of Moses, and the Prophets and Ministers of thy Church.

Keep rash presumption from the soul of thy servant: for though Aaron, Nadab,
and Abihu, and the seventy Elders were good and holy men, yet they kept their
distance in their worship toward thee O God, and at the writing of the Law.

So good Lord, give me lowliness, to stand before thee without the bounds of
Sinai, with such as are humble of heart, and there worship and wait thy
leisure for what thou shall command me by Moses, my spiritual guide, by whom I
must be directed; for I must not be my own director.

Without this continual help of thine, O Lord, and by thy Ministers and
Shepherds thou appointest over us, how dangerously does that Wolf the devil
assault and prevail against this britle and corrupt flesh of ours: for Moses
being absent but for a few days the people went a whoring after their own
inventions.

Into what extreme folly did they run headlong even to worship a calfe, and
to give that which was most precious unto them to make an idol, and their
jewels to make a calfe: O Lord Jesus look upon me, and help me, in this time
of danger to my soul: how at this time do the most of this world wherein I
live go a whoring after their own ways, as though neither Moses nor any
Prophet were amongst the^: how have they consumed the land, and given their
jewels to raise up the idol of arrogance and pride: and what do we else but
sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play: and no man mournes for the
misery of the land. O Lord Jesus, strengthen my faith and belief in this
dangerous Sea wherein are so many rocks and quicksands, of Error and
Innovations. Be thou my Pilot, and grant that I may steer a right course
toward thee in this sea, so covered with the mists and fogges of Heresy and
Schism; that by a true faith I may arrive unto the harbor of my hoped for
happiness, and with speed send some in the spirit of Moses to us again; and
deliver us from the like punishment that fell upon the Israelites for that
their sin; and that peace may be in our Land, that thy Tabernacle, O Lord,
may be raised up, and that we may worship toward it, every man with humility
at the door of his tent with the children of Israel so humbled and prostrate;
and that we may do as they did, give our selves to adorn the Ark of the
Church wherein is the Arc of the Covenant, and rear it up with Moses in the
solemnity of spiritual and divine worship, for there is the glory of the Lord
and of all God* people.

O Lord, let me know that Aarons worship before thee in his robes of holiness
the ornaments of honor, the mitre and crown, upon his knees humbly before thy
Altar in the Sanctuary being according unto thine own holy order, was more
pleasing unto thee then the confusion of such who step up without order or
ornament, spiritual or corporal into the Church, not so much as looking with
reverence toward thy place of worship.

For doubtless, O Lord, thy Son and our Savior the great example of
humility, did come into this world to teach us humility, and that by his grace
working in us humility, lowliness and devotion should increase and continue
in this world.

Therefore let me not, O Lord, with the proud spiritual Pharisees of these
times, being blasted with boldness presume to step into thy house the place of
worship but with reverence, and in imitation of thy children of Israel who
worshipped and wept at the door of the Sanctuary.

O Lord, the children of Israel though they provoked thee unto anger by their
murmuring distrusts and iniquities in their journeys, even ten times: when I
look into my self, O Lord, I find and must needs confess to my own shame
and confusion, that in this my pilgrimage I have exceeded them in impiety,
both in number and degree: for indeed my sins are numberless, having
murmured exceedingly in my journeys at the crosses of this world, as never
considering from what hand they came, nor how justly I have deserved them: I
have for most part of my time eaten, drunk, and rose up to play, and thirsted
after the fleshpots and pleasures of this world: I have neglected thy service
and have not humbled my self before the door of thy Sanctuary to bewail my
sins as I ought to have done: the due obedience that I owe to my Superiors
and Pastors of thy Church have I neglected, following mine own inventions and
opinions, and have wandered like a sheep out of the fold, whereby I have
fallen into by paths and crooked ways; leaving that good way thou have
appointed: and thereby have drawn thy just displeasure upon me. O Lord, my
God, standing in this sad and dangerous condition, give me grace truly to
humble my self before thee: and as thou did hear the prayers of Moses thy
servant who mediated for thy children of Israel, and was merciful unto them:
So I do most humbly beseech thee by the merits of thy Son and my Savior
Jesus Christ my Mediator, for his sake be thou merciful to me, and deliver me
from final destruction denounced against me.

How endless, O Lord, are our impieties, when we grow proud and stiff-necked,
and how rebellious then do we grow against thee and thy Ministers whom under
thee we should obey.

O Lord, deliver me thy servant from a rebellious spirit, and teach me, not to
spurn against them that thou have appointed over me with Korah, Dathan and
Abiram, so spiteful against Moses and Aaron thy Ministers, nor to cover my
rebellious impiety with the specious cloak of holiness as they did, when
nothing was in their heart but ambition and desire to rule, and to bring that
out of order which thou, O Lord, had established in Moses and Aaron.

How wonderful are thy judgments, O Lord, and how unsearchable are thy ways!
Let the example of these men, and the just and terrible punishment that fell
upon them, make me fear to break thy Ordinances, or disobey my Governors
that thou have appointed: for what are we, O Lord, in a headless government,
and what mischief shall not betide us?

O Lord, preserve me from the fiery stings and punishments of that old serpent,
which mine iniquities deserve, and in these afflictions that I may suffer for
my sins, give me grace to look up toward him that died for me upon the
Cross, that by his merits I may be healed, and praise thee for thy mercies,
and live to go in my pilgrimage by a true obedience unto thee: and that I may
no more murmur against thee, nor be weary of the Manna of thy blessings: and O
Lord, as Moses saw the Land of promise before his death, upon the top of the
mountain: so good Lord, raise up my thoughts, before I dye, from these earthly
things to contemplate the eternity hereafter; and give me a taste and faithful
apprehension of that heavenly Country which I do expect; that with joy of
heart, and comfort to my soul, I may leave this earthly tabernacle, and ascend
unto that place of happiness where Moses and other thy Prophets, Apostles,
Saints, and Martyrs sing praise unto thee that sits upon the throne for ever.

THE HISTORY of Joshua.
AFter the death of Moses God made choice of Josh. 1.
Joshua the son of Nun to be his Champion, and to go before the children of
Israel: and Joshua commanded the Officers to go unto the Host amongst the
people, and command them to prepare victuals and provision, within three days
to pass over the river Jordane toward the land of Canaan: and Joshua spoke to
the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, saying,
You and yours are to possess the land beyond Jordane, but ye shall pass over
before your brethren armed to help them until the Lord has given your
brethren rest as formerly he has given you: and they answered Joshua, saying,
All that thou command us we will do, and obey thee as we have done Moses:
and whosoever shall not observe thy commands let him dye: only be thou valiant.

And Joshua sent out two men as Spies to view the land, and they came unto
Jericho, and lodged in the house of Rahab the harlot: which was told to the
King of Jericho: and he sent unto Rahab to bring forth the men: but she hid
them: and answered, they had been there, but she knew not who they were.

And in the evening the King sent out Scouts to pursue them: (...) Rahab had
hid them in the top of her house, and covered them with the stalks of flax:
after the Scouts were gone out, she came unto the men, and said unto them: I
know the Lord has given you the land, for terors are fallen upon us: and the
whole land are afraid of you, for we have heard how the Lord dried up the water
of the red sea for you when you came out of Egypt, and what you did to the two
Kings of the Amorites Sihon and Og whom you utterly destroyed, and therefore
your Lord is the true God of heaven, therefore in regard of my kindness unto
you, show kindness unto my fathers house: and give me a token to save alive my
father and my mother and my brethren and sisters and all they have: and they
answered her, give ns safety, and when the Lord gives us this Land we will
deal kindly and lovingly with thee: and her house standing upon the town
wall, she let them down by a cord: and bade them be gone to the mountain and
hide themselves three days until the scouts return and then go their way;
and they said unto her, that we may remember thy love and our promise, when we
come unto this place: tie this scarlet cord thou letst us down withal unto thy
window, and thou, thy father, thy mother brothers sisters and all they have
shall be safe. But if any go out of thy house at that time, let his blood be
upon his own head: for all shall be safe within: but if thou utter this to any
we will be quit of our promise and oath: and they departed: and they did
observe her counsel hiding themselves three days, and after came to Joshua
and told him the state of things and of the fear of the Inhabitants about
Jericho.

And Joshua hastened and came to Jordan with the children of Israel, and after
three days the officers of the host commanded the people that when they see
the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord remove, the Priests and Levites bearing
it, they should remove and go after it, and to keep a distance from it, to
know the way they must go, and Joshua said unto the people sanctify your
selves, for to morrow the lord will do wonders amongst you, and Joshua spoke
unto the Priests to take up the Arc and go before the people, the which they
did, and the Lord said unto Joshua this day will I begin to magnify thee in
the sight of Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so will I be
with thee. Command the Priests that bear the Ark when they come to the brink
of Jordan to stand still; and he said to the children of Israel hereby ye shall
know that the living God is amongst you to drive out the heathen before you;
behold the Arc of the Covenant even the Lord of all the earth passes over
before you into Jordan. Then the people removed from their tents to pass over
Jordan, the Priests bearing the Ark of the covenant before them: and when they
dipped their feet in the river, the water rose on a heap and the people passed
over dry over against ^ericho, and when all the people were over, the Lord
commanded Josua to take twelve men according to the tribes and command them to
take out of the midst of Jordan where the Priests feet stood twelve stones and
carry them over and leave them where you shall lodge this night; the which
Joshua did accordingly, and they brought the^ upon their shoulders, and left
the^ to be a sign to after ages that the water of Jordan was cut off before the
Arc of the covenant of the Lord when it passed over, and the Arc stayed in
Jordan until the people were passed over and that Joshua had commanded twelve
stones in the river of Jordan where the Priests had set their feet to be
placed: but the children of Reuben and Gad and half the tribe of Manasseh
passed over armed before the children of Israel unto the plains of Jericho
being about 40000. and the Priests that bare the Ark of the Covenant were come
out of Jordan, the water returned to his place: and those stones which they
took out of Jordan did Joshua pitch in Gilgal for a token unto their childrens
children that they came on dry land over Jordan as he did the red sea: that all
the earth might know the power of God and fear him for ever.

And all the Kings of the Canaanites and the Amorites that dwelt thereabout,
when they heard of this wonderful work were astonished, and their hearts
failed them: and the Lord commanded Joshua to make sharp knives to circumcise
the Israelites the second time, the which he did perform at the hill of
foreskins, now all the people that came first out of Egypt were circumcised:
but they that were borne by the way as they came out of Egypt them they had not
circumcised until now: and they continued in the camp until they were whole:
and the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the Passover in the
evening in the plains of Jericho: and they did eat of the old corn of the
land the morrow after the Passover unleavened cakes and parched corn, and the
Manna ceased; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan.

And Joshua coming toward Jericho, there stood a man over against him with his
sword drawn in his hand, and Joshua went unto him and said, Art thou for us,
or for our enemies, and he said, Nay, but as a Captain of the host of the
Lord am I now come: and Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship,
saying unto him, What says my Lord unto his servant: and the Captain of the
Lords host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place
whereon thou stand is holy: and Joshua did so.

Now Joshua straightly besieged Jericho, 6.
so that none could go out or come in: and the Lord commanded Joshua with his
army and 7. Priests to bear before the Ark 7. trumpets of Rams horns, and the
seventh day to compass the city 7. times, and the Priests to blow the
trumpets, and the people to shout with a great shout: and Joshua commanded them
so to do, and they did accordingly: and the seventh day they rose up early and
compassed the City seven times, and at the seventh time when the Priests blew
the trumpet Joshua commanded the people to shout for the Lord has given you
the City: and it shall be accursed, even it and all that is therein: only
Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all that are with her, because she hid our
messengers: but let all the gold and silver, and vessels of brass and iron be
consecrated to the Lord, they shall come into the treasury of the Lord. So when
the Priests sounded the trumpets the people shouted, and the walls of Jericho
fell flat down and they took the City: and they utterly destroyed the City,
and put them to the sword man and woman, young and old, ox, sheep, and ass;
but Joshua sent the two spies unto Rahabs house, those men whom she had
entertained: and they brought her safe forth of her house with her father and
mother, her brethren and all she had, and her kindred, and left them in safety
without the Camp of Israel, and they burnt the City: and Rahab lived long
after amongst the Israelites: and Joshua cursed the man that should build
Jericho again: and Joshua was famous throughout the land.

But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed thing, 7.
even Achan one of the tribe of Judah, for which the anger of the Lord was
kindled.

And Joshua sent spies from Jericho to Ai, to view the Country, and they
viewed Ai: and they returned to Joshua, and told him, that in Ai were but few
people. Joshua upon their report sent thither about three thousand men and they
fled before the men of Ai, being mightily discomfited: the which did much
dishearten the people of Israel: and Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the
earth upon his face before the Ark of the Lord until the evening, he and all
the Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads: and they did grieve
exceedingly. And the Lord said unto Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou
thus upon thy face, Israel has sinned and transgressed my Covenant, for they
have taken of the accursed thing, they have stolen and dissembled; therefore
could not the children of Israel stand before their enemies, neither will I be
with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from you.

And the Lord commanded them to sanctify the people against the next day, that
the accursed thing may be taken from amongst them: and in the morning Joshua
rose up early and brought Israel by their tribes: and the tribe of Judah was
taken by lot, and every household of that tribe was examined, and Achan was
found to have stolen the accursed thing: and Joshua coming to Achan, said unto
him, Achan my son, give I pray thee, glory unto the Lord God of Israel, and
make confession unto him; and tell me now what thou have done, hide it not from
me: And Achan confessed the fact, saying, I have sinned against the Lord God of
Israel: for when I saw amongst the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two
hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, I took
and hid them in my tent: and Joshua presently sent for them, and being brought
unto him, and before the children of Israel, he laid them before the Lord, and
Joshua and all Israel with him brought Achan, the silver and the gold, and the
Babylonish garment, his sons and daughters, his oxen and his asses, his
sheep, and his tent, and all that he had unto the valley of Achor, and all
Israel stoned him with stones and after burnt them; and raised over him a heap
of stones, so the Lord turned from his fierce anger.

And the Lord commanded Joshua to go a second time to Ai, Josh. 8.
with a great army: and he chose thirty thousand of the most valiant men,
giving them directions what to do and sent them away by night, commanding them
to lie in ambush near the City of Ai: and they lay before Bethel and Ai: and
Joshua rose early in the morning, and with all the Elders of Israel, and a
great strength he marched toward Ai and drew near the City: and when the King
of Ai saw it, hastily came forth with his whole strength to give battle to
Israel: but he knew not of the ambush: and Joshua and all Israel seemed to fly
before them: and the whole strength of Ai and Bethel pursued them toward the
wilderness: then they which were in ambush speedily made toward the City, and
took it: and instantly set it on fire.

The men of Ai looking back and seeing their City on fire they were astonished
and disheartened: and being scattered and in disorder, Joshua and his army fell
upon them one way, and they that took Ai issued out another way, and so cut
them off every man: and they took the King of Ai alive and brought him to
Joshua: and the Israelites returning to Ai put all within it to the sword; so
there fell that day of men and women twelve thousand. And Joshua burnt Ai down
to the ground; and the King of Ai he hanged upon a tree: and after the Sun
was down commanded to take him down, and his carcass to be cast at the entry
of the gate of the City, and raised thereon a great heap of stones.

And Joshua built an Altar unto the Lord God of Israel in mount Eball, as Moses
had commanded, and there they offered sacrifice, and writ the Law of Moses upon
the stones: and there the Arc of the covenant being brought, all Israel and
the Elders, Officers, and Judges stood before it, and before the Priests and
Levites that bare it: and the whole Law was read unto them.

And when all the Kings on this side Jordane heard of these things, Josh. 9.
they joined together to fight with Joshua: but the Gibeonites had heard what
they had done to Jericho and Ai; they cunningly came unto Joshua in poor
habit and great humiliation unto the camp at Gilgal: and there made their
peace with Joshua and the Princes of the Congregation who swear unto them. But
after the Princes finding they had deceived them, for their oath sake they
would not destroy them: and Joshua called them before him, and said, Wherefore
have you beguiled us, saying, you dwelt a far off when ye dwell among us? for
this deceit ye shall be bondmen and hewers of wood and drawers of water for the
house of my God: and they said, It was told us that Moses commanded we should
be wholly destroyed, therefore we were afraid and did this thing, and do with
us as thou please: and Joshua saved their lives, and made them hewers of wood
and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of the Lord; and
so they did continue to do.

Now the King of Jerusalem and the other Kings understanding that the
Gibeonites had made peace with Israel; Josh. 10.
and Gibeon being a great City they feared greatly; therefore five Kings and
all the strength they could make came and encamped before Gibeon, they of the
City having made their peace with Joshua, sent presently for aid unto him: then
presently Joshua marched with a mighty army from Gilgal toward Gibeon all
night, and falling suddenly upon them gave them a great defeat: and flying
before Israel the Lord cast great stones from heaven upon them, and killed more
of them then the sword, and the Sun and Moon stood still that day, until
the people had destroyed their enemies: and Joshua and all Israel returned to
Gilgal; but the five Kings fled and hid them in a cave: afterward Joshua
commanded they should be brought forth, then Joshua called for all the men of
Israel, and said unto the Captains, Come near and put your feet upon the
necks of these Kings, and they did so: and after Joshua commanded them to be
hanged upon five trees, and there they did hang until the evening: and being
taken down, Joshua commanded they should be cast into the cave where they were
found and laid great stones to the caves mouth: and Joshua conquered all the
Country and put them to the sword: Josh. 11.
for the Lord God of Israel fought for Israel: and Joshua returned and all
Israel with him unto the camp to Gilgal.

After this Jabin King of Hazar, Jahab King of Madon, and all the Kings north
of the mountains, gathered themselves together and raised a mavelous great
host: and pitched themselves together by the waters of Merom to fight against
Israel: and Joshua came and all his people of war with him, and came suddenly
upon them by the waters of Merom, and put them to a very great slaughter, and
chased them unto great Zidon and Mizpeh, houghing their horses, and burning
their chariots: and Joshua returned and took Hazor and killed the King thereof,
and did all things as the Lord commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses
command Joshua, and so did Joshua.

So Joshua took the whole land according to all that the Lord said unto Moses:
Josh. 13.
and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel, according to their
divisions by their tribes: and the land rested from war, chap. 18. And the
whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together at Shiloh, and
set up the tabernacle of the congregation there for the land was subdued before
them.

And the Lord appointed them by Joshua Cities of refuge, Josh. 15.
that he that kills a man unawares and unwittingly may flee thither for
refuge, and coming to that City he shall stand at the entering of the gate of
the City, and declare his cause to the Elders of that City, and they shall
receive him in: and if he be followed thither they shall not deliver him back,
because he did the act unwittingly and hated him not before time.

And they appointed Kedesh in Gallole in mount Nepthale, and Shechem in mount
Ephraim, and Hebron in the mountain of Judah: and on the other side Jordan by
Jericho Bezer in the wilderness out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in
Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golon out of the tribe of Manasseh.

These were the Cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the
strangers that sojourned among them, that whosoever kills any person at
unawares may flee thither, and not die by the avenger of blood until ^e stand
before the congregation.

Now after the land was conquered, and every tribe settled in their several
divisions.

Joshua called for the Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of
Manasseh, and commended them for their valor, and obedience to the Commandment
of their Lord: and said unto them, Now the Lord has given rest unto your
brethren, return you unto the land of your possession which Moses the servant
of God gave you on the other side of Jordane, but be careful to do the
commandments and the Law which Moses gave you, and love the Lord your God and
serve him with all your heart, and with all your souls; so Joshua blessed them
and sent them away, and they departed from the children of Israel out of
Shiloh: Josh. 22.
to go unto Gilead the land of their possession formerly by the hand of Moses,
and when they came to the borders of Jordan, there they built an altar by
Jordan, and when the children of Israel heard thereof they gathered themselves
together at Shiloh to go and war against them, and they sent unto them
Phineas the son of Eleazar the Priest, and with him ten Princes of each tribe
of Israel one, and coming unto the children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh unto
Gilead, and said unto them, Thus says the congregation of the Lord: What
trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn
away from following the Lord in that ye have built you an altar? Is the
iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we are not cleansed until this
day although there was a plague in the congregation of the Lord? if the Land
you possess be unclean then come over to us where the tabernacle dwells and
take possessions amongst us, but rebel not against the Lord, nor rebel
against us in building you an altar beside the Altar of the Lord our God. Did
not Achan commit a sin in the accursed thing, and wrath fell on all the
congegation of Israel, and that man perished not alone in his iniquity? then
the children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh answered them: The Lord God of gods,
The Lord God of gods, and Israel shall know that this is no rebellion in
building this altar: being not intended to offer thereon burnt offerings, or
meat offerings, or peace offerings thereon; but only our reason was to set up
a monument for fear of the time to come, that your children might speak to
our children, What have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? because the
river Jordan has divided us, and so your children make our children cease from
fearing the Lord: and therefore we raised that altar, not for burnt-of-ferings,
but that it may be a witness between us and you and our generations after us,
that we may do the service of the Lord before him with our burnt offerings and
with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings that your children may not
say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part in the Lord, and therefore
this altar we have made is a witness unto you and to your children hereafter.

God forbid that we should have any altar but that Altar of the Lord our God
that is before the tabernacle: and when Phineas the Priest, the Princes of the
congregation, and the Elders of Israel heard this from them, Phineas said unto
them, This day we perceive that the Lord is among us because ye have not
committed this trespass against the Lord: and they returned unto the land of
Canaan unto the children of Israel, and they all rejoiced and blessed God, and
the children of Reuben, Gad and Manasseh, called the altar Ed, as a witness
between the Lord and them: and after that God gave rest unto Israel from their
enemies round about.

And Joshua waxen old, Josh. 23.
called for all Israel and for their Elders, for their heads, and for their
Judges, and told them of all things the Lord had done for them, and what the
Lord would do if they served him: counselling them to be valiant and
courageous, and to keep the Law delivered by Moses, and not to turn neither
to the right hand nor to the left, nor to lean to the gods of the heathens:
not to swear by them, or make marriages with them, if they did so, that they
would be snares and traps unto them and thorns in their eyes until they
perished from off the good land the Lord had given them.

And he said, I am going the way of all the earth, and you know nothing has
failed you that the Lord promised you: but if you transgress the Covenant of
the Lord your God, and serve other gods and bow your selves to them, then shall
the anger of the Lord be kindled against you, and ye shall perish from the land.

And Joshua again gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shichem and called for
all the Elders of Israel, and they presented themselves before God, and Joshua
told them of all the good things that the Lord had done to the children of
Israel from Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to that time. And the people said, they
would serve no other gods then the God that brought them and their fathers out
the land of Egypt from the house of bondage, and which did those great things
in their sight, and preserved them in all their ways: and after much
persuasions of Joshua unto the people to serve the Lord: he made a covenant
with them that day, and set them a Statute and an Ordinance in Shechem, and
Joshua wrote it in the book of the law of God, and took a great stone and set
it up there under an oak that was by the Sanctuary of the Lord: so Joshua let
the people depart every man to his inheritaece, and after he departed to his
fathers, being one hundred and ten years old: Josh. 24.
and they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnah-Serah which is
in mount Ephraim.

MEDITATIONS upon the History of Joshua.
O Lord, thou art gracious unto thine Inheritance, for though thou did take
thy servant Moses to his fathers, yet thou did not leave thy children of
Israel destitute and without a Leader to go before them, but sent them Joshua
thy servant to be their captain and defender.

This is, thy goodness, O Lord, still from time to time to be a preserver of
thy people whom thou have chosen, and this mercy of thy special providence and
love, extended it self, O God, not only to thy children of Israel, but to thy
holy Church militant here upon earth, and likewise to us most miserable sinners
by thy continual providence over us; How often, O Lord, have thou delivered me
the son of thy handmaide, from time to time, and raised me helpers and
preservers: I have found these thy mercies, and let the due consideration of
them, enter into the closet of my heart, and there rest by a blessed
remembrance of them, never to be forgotten; and grant that I may humble my
self before thee with all due thankfulness and obedience to serve thee, and
thou, O God, which continuedst thy mercy unto thy servant Joshuah and the
children of Israel, continue thy good mercies unto me, direct and guide me over
this Jordan of danger, that I be not drowned in sin, and grant that I may
rightly and truly follow my guides, and the Arc of thy holy Covenant, by an
humble and true distance, directly to follow their feet, lest I fall into the
crooked by-pathes, of my own inventions, and as thy children of Israel, after
their deliverance over Jordan did show their thankfulness, by picking up
stones at Gilgall, so fix and pitch in my heart, O Lord, some Sacred monuments
of praise and thankesgiving for my redemption from the deep waters of pride and
mischief: and circumcise thou my corrupted heart, and so cleanse and purge me,
that I may be made fit to fight against sin and Satan, and the Jericho of
this inconstant world, and grant that I may keep a holy passover here in the
plains of my pilgrimage, before I approach before the walls of Jericho to
conquer the lusts and vanities thereof: let my soul know, O Lord, that the
Princes of darkness will rise up against me to destroy my soul, (as the
Cana^nites and the Amorites did rise against Joshua) and therefore arm me with
thy shield of faith, and strengthen me with the helmet of salvation: and as the
Reubenites, the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh did go before the
children of Israel toward Jericho, so let thy blessed Angels, O Lord, go
before me in this my passage of life and danger of sin: and let the enemies
of my soul be astonished and in fear as they were before the children of
Israel: and as thy holy Army, O Lord, did go by thy command seven times about
Jericho with such solemnities as thou did appoint, and by thy wonderful
mercy, the walls of Jericho fell down, and the city was destroyed by fire: so
give me thy servant grace to obey thee as thou command, thought it please
not my sense, and to imitate thy holy Prophet David, to worship thee seven
times a day, and to obey and serve thee in those things, and in that way, as
thou by thy holy word, and the Church of Christ commands me, though it seem
contrary to mine own unruly fancy, conceit, and opinion; that by thy mercy and
my obedience, the stony walls of my wilfulness and iniquity may fall down in
me, and thy divine fire may consume all the dross of my inward and sinful
soul; and as Rahab the harlot, though a sinful woman, was the instrument of
safety, to the spies sent by Joshua to view Jericho; and by her was discovered
the fears of that country and people, which charity and hospitality of hers
proved afterward the saving of her self, her kindred, and all that she had; so
by this example let me know, O Lord, that thou can work good out of evil,
for the good of thy servants, and them that go forward to serve thee in the
obedience of thy commands.

And good Lord, by this let me know, and discern, the great reward thou
preparest for them that do the works of charity, and what a buckler and
defense it is unto them, in the time of danger when the judgment and strength
of man is feeble for O Lord, it is thy promise to reward the works of mercy:
furthermore, good Lord, keep covetousness, pride, and dissembling from the
soul of thy servant; let not the Babylonish garment of pride take hold on me,
nor let me incline to the wedge of gold to infatuate my understanding, thereby
to draw me from my obedience to that which thou command; then shall I avoid
the punishment due unto disobedience, and the hurt and danger which may redound
unto thy Israel my brethren; good Lord, when I shall fall, raise me up with
true repentance, and let me lie in wait by all prudent and careful ways in an
holy ambush, to destroy and entrap these men of Ai, the enemies of my soul;
and after thy deliverance of me, and the forgiveness of my former offenses,
build in my heart an altar of thankesgiving to sacrifice my soul unto thee and
praise thee in the presence of the Ark of thy Covenant before all the Elders of
thy Church; and if in this my spiritual progress, I shall meet with any
people of bad deservings, give me grace to bear with their infirmities, and to
keep my Covenant and promise with them, and to help them in their distress,
as Joshua did deliver the Gibeonites, because of his oath that he swear unto
them; and good Lord, help and assist me in the continual conflicts of this
world, of so much danger and trouble to my soul: help me at the waters of
Merom, from the conflicts that there I may suffer, by the grand opposers of my
hoped for happiness, and for my deliverance I may give thanks unto thee, and
serve thee, in that thy tabernacle of Shiloh which is the house of God.

Lord, by thy mercy give me the benefit and comfort of thy Cities of refuge,
that by my sins of ignorance and weakness, I may not fall into thy hands of
Justice, but may be received unto mercy: and give me grace, O Lord, to be
thankful and well contented with that portion of livelihood, which thou have
appointed for me, amongst the tribes thy servants, in this Israel wherein I
live: give me grace to follow and obey the counsels of my spiritual
governors, and have a venerable regard to their commands, as the good
Israelites had, to the last counsels of Joshuah, and so good Lord, living in
the true obedience of thee, I may depart this transitory life in thy blessed
fear and favor, even for Jesus Christ his sake, my only hope, my captain and
deliverer.

Amen.
THE HISTORY of DEBORAH.
NOw after the death of Josh^^h and Ehud, Judge. 4.
the children of Israel did that which was evil in the fight of the Lord; for
which their sins the Lord sold them into the hands of Jabin, King of (...), the
Captain of whose host was Sisera, who oppressed them exceedingly, even for
t^^eaty years. At which time Deborah the Prophetess, Wife unto Lapidoth,
judged Israel, who then dwelt under a Palmetree, between Ramah and Bethel, in
M^^nt-Ephraim, to whom the people came up for judgment, who in their distress
cried unto the Lord: and the people coming thus unto her, she (...) Barak, the
son of Abino^^ out of K^desh-Nepthali: who coming to her she told how the
Lord had commanded he should take with him ten thousand men of the children of
Nepthali and Zebulon, and go toward mount-T^bor, saying to him likewise, how
the Lord would bring Softra with all his Army to the River Kishon, and deliver
them into his hands: but he answered, that except she would go with him her
self, he would not go; to whom she replied, I will surely go with thee: but
the journey thou take shall not be to thire honor, for the Lord shall sell
Sisera into the hand of a Woman: So she arose, and went with Barak, to Ka^esh,
they having with them ten thousand men of Z^^^lon and Nepthali, who after (...)
to Mount-(...).

Now it was that Heber the Kenite the father in law of Moses, had severed
himself from the Kenites, and pitched his Tent near Kadesh. And they showed
Sisera how Barak was gone up to Mount-Tabor; whereupon he gathered all his
strength together, even nine hundred chariots of Iron, and great store of
people gathered from Harosheth unto the River Kishon; of which Deborah hearing,
she bade Barak to rise and go against Sisera, saying that the Lord was gone
before, and how Sisera should be destroyed.

So Barak marched down from Mount-tabor with the ten thousand men, and by the
help of the Lord he discomfited Sisera and all his host, pursuing and killing
them, leaving not a man; at which time Sisera leaving his Chariot, fled on his
feet, and came to the Tent of I^^l the Wife of Heber the Kenite; for there was
peace then between Jabin and the house of Heber.

Now Sisera coming toward the Tent, Jael came out to meet him, who said unto
him, turn in my Lord, turn in to me, fear not. So he went in, and she
covered him with a mantle: but he being athirst, desired of her a little water,
but she having a bottle of milk, gave him that to drink.

And then he said to her, stand at the door, and if any enquire if any man be
here, say no: so he lay down to sleep, she covering of him.

Now whiles he was sleeping and weary, she took a nail of the Tent, and a
hammer, and coming softly unto him, smote the nail into his Temples, fastening
of him to the ground, and so he dyed.

At which instant Barak pursuing of Sisera, and coming toward the Tent, Jael
came out to meet him, saying, come in, and I will show thee the man whom thou
seek: so he came in and found Sisera dead, the nail being in his Temples.

So God subdued on that day Jabin King of Canaan before the children of Israel.

PRAYERS upon the History of DEBORAH.
HOw unhappy are we by our inbred corruption, like these the children of
Israel, who still was relapsing from the service of their Creator, and
Preserver, even before, in, and since their forty years journey toward that
land of Promise. And now at this very time, being grown so high in iniquity,
as for their due punishment, the Lord sold them to the King of Canaan, who
pesecuted them for twenty years; such is the reward of sin, and so just is the
Lord in his judgment against sinners.

O Lord let me to know, that when we do wickedly, that thy justice lies at our
doors, and how thy wrath will break in upon us. And if with Judas we betray the
sincerity of plainness in our heart toward thee, with the deceitful kiss of
hypocrisy, and sell thee, and in thee, our selves, to commit wickedness in
thy sight.

Most justly may thou deal with us as thou did with Israel, when they
were sold by the King of Canaa^.

Therefore O Lord deliver me from this most dangerous merchandising with sin,
lest I become Bankrupt by mine iniquity, and so come short of paying my duty
and service unto thee, thereby to be cast into the jail of thy displeasure:
and by the loss of thy favor and grace, be sold as a slave to sin, and
partake with the punishment so due for such a dismal debt; not only for twenty
years with Israel, but even for Eternity with such who have not known thee.

O Lord in the most dangerous distress of my soul, by reason of sin, give
me grace to call timely unto thee, yea to come unto thee thou supreme Judge of
Israel* even thou which dwel^est between the Cherubims, and sits'^ under the
Palm Tree thy blessed seat of mercy.

Look upon my distress, and deliver me from this sin, and that punishment
that I so justly deserve for mine iniquity, and deliver me from the powerful
enemy of my soul, who seeks to corrupt and destroy me, either from the truth
or power of thy word, like Barak, whose confidence was more in a frail woman,
Deborah, by her presence, then in thy promises who art omnipotent.

Bring me with the strength of thy grace to the holy mountain of thy power
and saving health, strengthen my faith and confidence in thee, to fight against
this proud Sisera of sin my capital enemy, and send thy might from this thy
holy mountain of Tabor, that by thy power and gra^^ I may be made able to
overthrow and defeat all the disturbers of my souls health, who lies so
strongly in wait to destroy me, with such worldly advantages by their River of
Kishon.

Dissipate all the designs O Lord of all my spiritual enemies, let them fly
before thy wrath as Sisera did to the Tent of Jael, and there let them perish
in the snares of their own intended mischiefs to the innocent.

Retain in me a harmless and a pure conscience, so shall I lie down with
safety, and rest under thy happy protection, with security to my soul, and
escape the like judgment that f^ll upon Sisera, which is the reward of
presumptuous and unrepentant sinners.

And for thy mercies let me praise thee, and in the innocence of a sincere
soul, for ever to serve and obey thee, until I shall be freed from this
spiritual warfare here, and be made happy to rejoice with thee in that
happiness and bliss of eternity hereafter. And let me magnify thy Name with
Deborah and Barak, saying with them,

Praise ye the Lord for the avenging of Israel; Judge. 5.
hear O ye Kings, give ear O ye Princes, I, even I will sing unto the Lord; I
will sing praise unto the Lord God of Israel.

The mountains melted from before the Lord, even that Sinai from before the
Lord God of Israel.

My heart is toward the Governors of Israel, that offered themselves
willingly among the people, bless ye the Lord.

Awake, awake, Deborah, awake awake, utter a song. Arise Barak, and lead thy
Captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam.

The river of Kisho^ swept them way, that ancient River, that River of Kishon.
O my soul thou have trodden down strength.

So let all thine enemies perish O Lord: but let them that love him be as the
Sun, when he goes forth in his might.

THE HISTORY OF RUTH.
IN the time that the Judges ruled in Israel there was a Dearth in the Land,
upon which* Elimelech of Bethlehem Judah went to sojourn in the Country of
Moah, with his Wife Naomi, with their two sons, where continuing a while
Elimelech died, and she remained with her sons, who took them Wives of the
Moabites, the one was named Orpah, the other Ruth, who lived thereabout ten
years, where both these sons died, after whose death Naomi hearing the Lord
had given them bread in her own Country, thither she returned, with her, two
Daughters in Law into the Land of Judah; then Naomi persuaded these her two
Daughters in Law, to return to their own Mother^ houses, desiring the Lord
would show the like favor (...) them, as they had done to the Dead, and to
her; wishing them comfort in the house of their husbands, and when she had
kissed them they wept: But they desired still to continue with her, to whom
she answered, turn again my daughters, for I shall have no more sons to be
your husbands, and pleaded much with them to return, so Orp^^ departed, but
Ruth stayed with her: but still Naomi persuaded Ruth to go, but Ruth told her
whither she did go she would go, and where she dwelt she would dwell, saying
moreover, thy people shall be my people, and thy God, my God, where thou die
I will die, and there will I be buried, the Lord do so to me and more also, if
ought but death part thee and me; So when Naomi ^aw her love and
steadfastnesse, she brought her along with her to Bethlehem, and it was in the
beginning of Barley Harvest; where Naomies deceased husband had a Kinsman of
great power, whose name was Boaz.

Now Ruth desired her Mother in Law, that she might go with others to gleane,
who giving of her leave, she went and gleaned after the Reapers, and it
happened to be in the field of Boaz, who coming from Bethlehem, he said to the
Reapers, the Lord be with you, and they bad the Lord bless him, and he seeing
Ruth, he asked the servant, that oversee the reapers, who she was, who told him
she was the Moabitish Maid that came with Naomi, and how she desired to
gleane there.

Then said Boaz unto Ruth, my daughter go not into any other field, but abide
by my Maids, go after them, I have charged the servants that they touch thee
not when thou (...) thirst drink such as the servants have, then she fell on
her face, and bowed to the ground, and said unto him how have I found favor in
thine eyes, that thou should know me, seeing I am a stranger: But he told
he^ he heard what she was, and what she had done for her Mother in Law, having
left her Father, Mother, and her Country, to come amongst strangers, so the
Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God of
Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust; then she said let me find
favor in thy fight my Lord, for thou have comforted me.

Then Boaz bad her come at meal-times to eat bread, and so she sat by the
Reapers, and he reached her parched Corn and she did eat, and he commanded
she should gleane amongst the sheaves; and so returning in the Evening with
plenty to her Mother in Law, she asked her with whom she did gleane, who told
her it was in the Field of Boaz, then said Naomi, blessed be the Lord for he
cease not to do good, to the living and to the dead, telling Ruth he was of
her husbands kindred, and did wish her not to gleane in any other place, but
with the Maids of Boaz.

Now Naomi did love Ruth, Ruth 3.
exceedingly she finding her goodness, and constancy, and said unto her, shall
not I seek rest for thee my Daughter, that thou may prosper, saying is not
Boaz out Kinsman, and this night he winnoeth Barley, wash and anoint thy self,
and put on thy Raiment, and get thee down thither, and let him not know of thee
until he have left eating, and drinking, and when he shall sleep mark where
he lies down, and uncover the place of his feet, and lie thee down, and he
shall tell thee what thou shall do. And Ruth did according to her directions.
Now when Boaz had eat, drunk, and cheared his heart, he lay down by the heap of
corn, and she came softly, and uncovering his feet, lay down: and he awaking
about midnight, and feeling one, he was afraid. Then he said, who art thou;
she answered, Ruth thy handmaid, spread therefore the wing of thy garment over
me for thou art the Kinsman. Then said he, Blessed be thou of the Lord my
daughter, thou have showed more goodness in the latter end then at the
beginning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, were they poor or rich.
And now my daughter fear not, I will do what thou requirest, for all the City
of my people know thee, that thou art a virtuous woman. Telling her, that true
it was, he was her kinsman: but there was one nearer, so bade her lie there all
night: and if in the morning he would do the duty of a Kinsman, to marry her,
well and good: but if he would not, he would then do the duty of a Kinsman
himself: So she lying at his feet until the morning, she arose early, he
desiring that none should know that any woman had been there: so he calling for
her sheet, giving her fix measures of barley, and returning to the City, she
came to her Mother in law, and gave her the corn, telling her all the passages
between Boaz and her self. So she bade Ruth sit still until she heard
further of the thing, telling her how he would not rest until the thing were
done.

Then without delay, Ruth 4.
Boaz went up to the gate of the City, to whom came this Kinsman named, to
Ruth, Boaz desiring him to sit down; likewise ten Elders of the City came and
sat down with them. Then said Boaz to this Kinsman, Naomi is come out of the
country of Moab, who will sell a parcel of land that was our brother
Elemelicks, and so proffered it unto him, being of nearest in kindred, to
redeem it, before them Elders. If he would not, that himself being the next,
he would. Then he said he would redeem it. Then said Boaz, if thou buyest it of
Naomi, thou must also buy it of Ruth the Moabitis, the wife of the dead, to
stir up the name of the dead upon his inheritance; the which this Kinsman
refused, saying, if he did so, he should destroy his own, and so put off that
his right to Boaz, and to confirm it according to the custom, then he put off
his shoe, and gave it to him, which confirmed the agreement.

Then Boaz called them all to witness of this contract, wherein he likewise
did buy Ruth the Wife of Mahlon to be his Wife, to stir up the name of the
dead. All which the Elders did witness, who prayed unto God that Ruth might be
to him like Rachel and Leah, which two did build the house of Israel, and that
he might be famous in Bethlehem, and that by the seed of Ruth, his house might
be like Pharez, whom Thamer bare unto Judah.

So Boaz took Ruth to his wife, and the Lord gave her a son: and the women said
to Naomi, blessed be the Lord, which has not lest thee this day without a
kinsman. And his name shall be continued in Israel, and this shall bring thy
life again, and cherish thine old age; for thy daughter in law which loves
thee has born unto him, and she is better unto thee then seven sons.

And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her lap, and became nurse unto it,
and the women gave it a name, calling it Obed, which after was the father of
Ishai, the father of David the King.

PRAYERS UPON THE History of RUTH.
O Lord, in the prosperities and adversities of this world, thou have thy ways
of mercy unto us, as it befell unto the children of Israel, even in their
famines, what blessings did thou give the^, by their perigrinations into
other Lands: and how did thou from time to time, not only provide for their
bodily sustinance, but likewise for their spiritual welfare, both in Egypt
and other places.

And O Lord, no less was thy extraordinary mercy unto Naomi, by her journey in
the time of famine unto Moab, with her husband and children, whom though by the
course of nature death deprived her of the^, yet thou did raise up unto her
a most happy daughter in law, even Ruth.

O Lord, this is the general current of thy continual mercy unto us, and
nothing makes us so unhappy as the want of the fight and consideration of that
which daily befalls us, through the course of our frail life. Therefore open
thou mine eyes that I may see these thy mercies unto me, and for ever praise
thee for thy goodness.

The constant resolution and charity of Ruth unto her Mother in law is for our
imitation, as the very true example of love and pity, it being the more full
of goodness and rarity, they being of two several Nations and Religions.

O Lord, give me such happy love and pity as was in this thy servant Ruth with
her resolution in the pursuit of all good things, which may tend to thy glory
and worship; let no worldly persuasions or reasons draw me from my way to
Bethlehem, in the land of thy promised happiness: but with the good and
virtuous, let me follow their steps, as Ruth did Naomi, that thou their God
may be my God, and that I may turn from my worldly and Moabitish affections,
and attain to the happy serving of thee in Judah; so shall I live and dye
amongst the righteous, by this thy mercy and help unto my weakness. And as
nothing but death could part Ruth from Naomi, so good Lord, let my soul so
love and fear thee, as to my last breath my hope, comfort and confidence may
rest in thee alone, and undividable.

O Lord furnish me with such happiness as was in Ruth, by her charity and humble
deportment; for which as thy blessing was upon this thy own gift of mercy unto
her: so she had the happiness of a good esteem in the world, she being so
full of modesty and virtue.

Give me O Lord such piety as may be pleasing unto thee, with such humility
and harmless courtesy, as may gain the love and good opinion of my neighbors.

O Lord grant unto me such perfect friendship with my friend, as was between
Naomi and Ruth, with such loving and plain intentions: so by thy goodness and
mercy shall I enjoy such love, comfort, and content as was between them to
their dying days.

O Lord, all thy works are so full of wonder, as we cannot sufficiently admire
them, as it was by thy providence to bring Ruth unto Judah, not only through so
many stops, by confirming her good purpose: so now, so strangely to bring her
to glean in the field of Boaz, whereby such a happiness did befall her, not
only for worldly respects, ^ut likewise even in a heavenly happiness, by the
marriage and issue she had by Boaz.

O Lord my God, my ingratitude would cast me even into hell without recovery,
if I should not for ever most thankfully acknowledge thy many mercies and
deliverances unto me, not only in my temporal preservations and blessings, but
thou have brought me into the field of thy plentiful goodness, to the bottles
of comfort, and the sheaves of thy strength and saving grace, showing me all
thy blessings, to strengthen my confidence in thee, and bought me at a dearer
rate then Boaz paid for Ruth.

Boaz coming into the field amongst the reapers, said to them, the Lord be
with you: and they answering, the Lord bless thee. Admirable and exemplary was
the goodness and plainness of the hearts of our Ancestors, whose blessings
was one upon another: and by such their good meanings, the blessings of God
being upon them. What blessings from time to time did God give unto the
blessings which Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob gave to their children and people.
Lamentable is the condition we are grown unto in this our iron and ungodly age,
whiles this blessing is accounted superstition, and common courtesy being even
departed from amongst us. Our very children having left off thet common duty
and civility which formerly they used, even with their milk, learning to be
surly, saucy, and disobedient.

O Lord deliver me from this bad custom, that tends to such ungodliness, from
spiritual pride, and an overweening opinion and conceit of my own judgment.
But give me grace to follow the good and plain paths of my forefathers, in
such things as concerns my obedience unto thee, and my duty to my Parents and
Superiors with christian courtesy, to be friendly, humble, and charitable to
all men; for thou promisest thy blessing and exaltation to the humble: but
confusion will fall upon the proud, whom thou O Lord do resist.

The love of Ruth to Naomi was great, and the comfort she received from her did
exceed with her integrity in the doing of it, being so sincere by leaving her
country, her parents, and her deceased Husbands house. And therefore as Boaz
by his blessing and prayer for her, said, the Lord recompense thy work, and a
full reward be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings thou art
come to trust. So God the rewarder of the righteous and merciful, seeing her
humility and goodness, did hear the prayers of this righteous man, by showing
such great mercy unto her, the which did after follow, even in a plentiful
manner indeed, for though by her first husband she had no Issue; yet by Boaz
she had Obed, from whom descended the wel-spring of our happiness and
salvation.

Oh thy goodness O Lord, whose bounds are without limit, and whose works and
ways are unsearchable; thy rewards are the fulness of happiness, and thy mercy
extends from generation to generation, to such as love and fear thee. Therefore
O Lord, mortify all vain and wicked affections which are so inbred in me, by
thy grace cast them out, and place in stead thereof the strength of a lively
faith, and the fullness of love and charity, that thereby I may forsake my
self, and all things that are dear and near unto me, and follow the good
steps of the godly, as Ruth did Naomi. So that at last I may arrive to the
happiness, and rest within the limits of thy true Church, that pillar of truth
and safety, and there with an humble heart to serve thee as Ruth did, by
coming into Judah, that once limited place of thy worship.

O ^he good plainness and harmless simplicity of that golden age of the world,
when bread and water was their common viands, and parched corn the masters
food, as it was with Boaz, an eminent man in his age, for such was his fare and
entertainment to a stranger, when he reached some to Ruth, yet then did God
bless them with comfort, health, and length of days. O Lord deliver me from
the pampering of this my corrupt flesh, with the voluptuous sensuality of these
licentious times, the bane of the soul by such luxury, and the shortning of
our days by such surfeits. But give me such moderation as I may rather fast
then feast: and by which in this health of my soul, I may the better serve thee
here, and that thereby hereafter I may attain unto that happiness, where the
length of days both for soul and body is life everlasting. O Lord make me
studious to requite courtesies, and zealous to balance the works of charity
and piety, as Naomi her zeal was for Ruth, by wishing her to Boaz, and give
prosperity to all my good intentions with the blessing of a thankful heart for
the success of thy mecies unto me.

Grant O God, that I may be faithful and firm in my promise, as Boaz was to
Ruth, true to my friend, as he was to his kinsman, and discreet in my actions,
as be was in his performance before the Elders. Gods divine providence did
mightily appear by the marriage of these two righteous, Boaz and Ruth, as his
blessings upon them after made it manifest. O happy Bethlehem, to which place
Ruth the mirror of love and pity, with so much difficulty came unto, led
thither by the light of divine power, and following the good steps of Naomi,
who there was made happy in her son Obed.

O happy Bethlehem, to which place that ever blessed virgin Mary came, that
most resplendent Vessel of bliss and happiness, being led thither by the
light of the holy Ghost, and then coming upon devotions toward Jerusalem. O
thou blessed Bethlehem, consecrated to our happiness, for there was born a
Savior. Ruth was happy in her son Obed: but this Mary, blessed amongst women,
by her son, redemption and salvation came into us. O Lord my God, let the
star of thy brightness appear unto me, that with them lowly Shepherds I may
come to this sacred Bethlehem, and there find out that lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world; more happy were them Kings who came to see thy
holy face in the manger at Bethlehem by their humiliations and offerings, and
this blessed sight of thee, then in all their glistering loyalties and
vainglory of this world. Let me O Lord partake with these Kings in their
devotions and humiliations, thou King of heaven. Indue and lead me with the
star of thy grace, that I may come unto thee with the presents of perfect
humility, patience and perseverance in the pursuit of such things as shall be
pleasing unto thee. So after thine enlightening here by this light of thy holy
countenance and favor unto me, grant that at last I may attain unto that
everlasting light in heaven, where from the manger and thy crucifying for our
sins, thou art exalted into glory everlasting.

THE HISTORY OF Hezekiah, and the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar in
the reign of Zedekiah.
IT came to pass in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah that Senacherib King of
Assyria, Isa. 36.
came into Judah and took all the strong holds, and he sent Rabshakeh from
Lachish to Jerusalem unto Hezekiah with a great Army: then came forth unto him
from the King, Eliakim and diverse others: and Rabshakeh said unto them, Say ye
unto Hezekiah, Thus says the great King of Assyria, What confidence is this
wherein thou trustest? and spoke other great words, and blasphemed against the
God of Israel, and demanding pledges for his Master the King of Assyria.

Then said Eliakim unto him, I pray thee speak unto thy servants in the Syrian
tongue for we understand it, and speak not to us in the Jews language in the
ears of the people that are upon the wall.

But Rabshakeh said, Isa. 37.
Has my Master sent me to thy Master and to thee to speak these words? Has
not he sent me unto the men that sit upon the wall, that they may eat their
own dung, and drink their own piss with you? and he spoke this with a loud
voice in the Jews language: and said more, Thus says the King of Assyria, Let
not Hezekiah deceive you, for he shall not be able to deliver you: neither let
him make you trust in the Lord, or think he can deliver you, hearken not to the
King; but come you out with a present and make your agreement, that ye may eat
under your own vines, and drink in your own cisterns: but the people held
their peace answering him not a word; for so the King commanded them: then came
Eliakim and the rest that were sent out, to Hezekiah with their clothes rent,
and told him the words of Rabshakeh: when the King heard it he rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth, and went into the hose of the Lord; and he sent
Eliakim and the Elders of the Priests covered with sackcloth unto Isaiah the
Prophet the son of Amos.

And they told him of the blasphemy and threatening of Rabshakeh: and the
Prophet answered them, Thus shall you say unto your Master: Thus says the
Lord, Be not afraid of the words wherewith Rabshakeh has blasphemed me:
Behold, I will send a blast upon him, and he shall hear a rumor and return
to his own land, and there he shall fall by the sword: and the King of Assyria
being gone from Lachish to fight with the King of Ethiopia: he sent messengers
to Hezekiah to say unto him, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive
thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the King of
Assyria, as well as other lands: and Hezekiah received the Letter from the hand
of the messengers, and after he had read it, he went into the house of the Lord
and spread it before the Lord, and prayed unto him, saying, O Lord of hosts God
of Israel that dwell between the Cherubins, thou art the God, even thou
alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth: thou have made heaven and earth:
incline thine ear, O Lord, and hear; open thine eyes, O Lord, and see, and
hear all the words of Senacherib which has sent to reproach the living God.
Now therefore, O Lord, our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms
of the earth may know that thou art the Lord, even thou only.

Then Isaiah the son of Amos sent unto Hezekiah, saying, Whereas he had
prayed unto the Lord against Senacherib, the Lord would near him, and put a
hook in ^is nose, and a bridle in his lips and turn him back by the way he
came, and that he should not come into the city of Jerusalem, nor shoot an
arrow there, nor cast a bank or trench against it; but would defend and
preserve the city for his own sake, and for his servant David's sake: and the
Angel of the Lord went forth and smote in the Camp of the Assyrians one hundred
four score and five thousand: Jer. 37.
so Senacherib King of Assyria departed and returned and dwelt at Niniveh: and
after it came to pass as he was worshipping in the house of Nisroch his god,
that Adramelech and Sharezar his sons smote him with the sword, and they
escaped into the land of Armenia, and Esarhaddon his son reigned in his steed.

And in those days was Hezekiah King of Israel sick unto the death, Isa. 38.
and Isaiah the Prophet came unto him, and said, Thus says the Lord, Set thine
house in order for thou shall die: then Hezekiah turned his face toward the
wall and prayed unto the Lord, Saying, Remember now, O Lord, I do beseech
thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart: and he
wept exceedingly: then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah, saying, Go, and
say to Hezekiah, Thus says the Lord, the God of David thy father, I have heard
thy prayer, and have seen thy tears, Behold, I will add unto thy days
fifteen years, and I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the
King of Assyria.

And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord, I will bring again the
shadow of the degrees which is gone down in the Sunnedyall of Ahaz ten degrees
backward: and Hezekiah praised the Lord for his mercy, saying, The Lord was
ready to save me, therefore will I sing my song to the stringed instruments all
the days of my life in the house of the Lord: and Isaiah gave order to apply
unto him a lump of figs, and lay it as a plaster upon his boil, which did
heal him.

About that time Merodach Baladan Isa. 39.
the son of Baladan King of Babylon sent a letter and presents unto Hezekiah
hearing he had been sick: and the King was glad of their coming, and
entertained them with great courtesy, and showed them all his precious things;
the silver, gold, spices, and the precious ointments; his armor, and all that
could be seen in his house, or his dominions.

Then came Isaiah the Prophet unto King Hezekiah and said unto him, What said
these men, and from whence came they? and Hezekiah said, They came even from
Babylon: then said he, What have they seen in thine house? and Hezekiah
answered, I have showed them all in my treasures, and nothing have I hid from
them: then said Isaiah unto him, Hear the word of the Lord of hosts, Behold,
the days will come that all that is within thine house, and that which thy
fathers have laid up in store until this day shall be carried to Babylon,
nothing shall be left, says the Lord: and of thy sons which shall issue from
thee shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuchs in the palace of the King
of Babylon. And according to this prophecy, many years after it came to pass.

Jeremiah living at that time when Nebuchadnezar came to besiege Jerusalem,
Isa. 37.
he told them what would befall: but the Princes were wroth with him and put
him in prison: after he had been there many days Zedekiah the King sent and
took him out, and the King asked him secretly, Is there any word from the
Lord? and Jeremiah said, There is: for thou shall be delivered into the hand of
the King of Babylon, therefore hear me, O my lord the king, let my suit come
unto thee, that I may not return to prison where I was, lest I dye there: then
the King commanded he should be committed into another prison, and that he
should have given him daily a piece of bread out of the Bakers street, whiles
the bread lasted: but still the Prophet persisted, and told them, Thus says
the Lord, This city shall surely be given into the hand of the King of Babylons
army: therefore the Princes were incensed against him, and said unto the King,
We beseech thee, let this man be put to death, for thus he weakeneth the hands
of the men of war and all the people in this city in speaking thus unto them.

And the King said, He is in your hands, do with him what you please: and they
took Jeremiah and cast him in a dungeon, and they let him down by a rope, and
in the dungeon was no water but mire that he sunk in: and some men complained
of this cruelty done to Jeremiah unto the King, who commanded thirty men to go
and take up Jeremiah out of the dungeon: and they took old rags and cast them
down into the dungeon, the which Jeremiah put under his arm pits, and so they
drew him up: and Zedekiah the King sent for Jeremiah and said unto him, I will
ask thee a thing, hide nothing from me: and Jeremiah said unto the King, If I
declare it unto thee, will thou not put me to death? and if I give thee
counsel will thou hearken to me? so the king swear secretly unto Jeremiah
saying, as the Lord lives that made us this soul, I will not put thee to
death, nor give thee into the hands of these men that seek thy life.

Then he said unto the king, Jer. 38. 17.
thus says the Lord God of hosts the God of Israel, if thou will go forth to
the Princes of the king of Babylon, then thy soul shall live; and this city
shall not be burnt with fire, and thou and thy house shall live. But if thou will not go forth unto them, then shall this city be given to the Chaldeans,
and they shall burn it, and thou shall not escape out of their hands, and the
king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews that are fallen to the
Chaldeans, least they deliver me to their hands, and they mock me.

But the Prophet said, they shall not deliver thee, obey I beseech thee the
voice of the Lord, so shall it be well with thee. But if thou refuse to go
forth, this is the word that the Lord has showed me. Then said Zedekiah unto
Jeremiah, let no man know of these words, and thou shall not die; the which he
did: so Jeremiah after, abode in the Court of the prison, until the day that
Jerusalem was taken.

And it came to pass on the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah,
Nebuchadnezzer king of Babylon, and his army came before Jerusalem and besieged
it, and in the eleventh year of Zedekiah the city was taken, and all the
Princes of the king of Babylon entered the city, at which time Zedekiah and all
his men of war fled out of the city by night, by the way of the kings
gardens, but the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them, and overtook
Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and took him and brought him to
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, who gave judgment upon him, and caused his
sons to be slain before his face, and all the Nobles of Judah, and he put
out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chains to carry him to Babylon, and
they burnt Jerusalem, and brake down the walls thereof, and carried captive to
Babylon all the remainder of the people that were within the city, but left the
poorer sort that had nothing, and gave them vineyards and fields; and the king
of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to take him, and do him no harm,
but use him with all kindness, so they took Jeremiah out of the Court of the
prison, and sent him home, so he dwelt among the people.

MEDITATIONS upon the History of king Hezekiah.
EVerlasting God, whilst we live here in this earthly Jerusalem, nothing is to
be expected, but continual conflicts in our spiritual warfare, between the
world, the flesh, and the spirit; how bitterly O Lord, and vehemently does the
enemy of my soul, like Rabshekah, suggest into me distrusts and fears, to
make me doubtful of thy promises and providence, endeavoring to weaken my
faith and confidence in thee, by putting great fears, doubts, and troubles, to
my inward and frail senses.

In this affliction and trouble to my soul, O Lord I beseech thee from time to
time to give me grace with good Hezekiah, to come unto thee with my heart rent,
and continually to implore thy blessed help and assistance, and that I may
obtain the like mercy that he did receive from thee, and let not that hellish
blasphemer prevail over me, but put thou a hook in his nose, and a bridle in
his lips, and send a blast upon him, that he may be driven away, and have no
more power to disturb and oppres my weak and feeble soul, by his threatenings
and suggestions; and good Lord, in all thy conflicts, batteries, and
oppressions, that hereafter I may meet withal by this my spiritual and
dangerous enemy to my soul, give me grace most humbly to come unto thee my
hope and helper, and to thy house where thou dwell between the Cherubins;
and there, as Hezekiah in his trouble and distress, did spread out the letter
of Zenacherib before thee, and humbled himself before thee with much sorrow;
so good Lord, in all my troubles, grant that I may spread before thee, with
true and perfect humility of heart, the troubles and afflictions of my soul;
and then O Lord hear me, and in pity look upon my danger, and deliver me,
from the power of the Zenacherib of this world, and his instruments, the
disturbers of my pilgrimage to my heavenly happiness, and the quiet of a good
conscience in this Jerusalem, strengthen (O Lord) my outward walls of flesh and
blood, enable me with obedience and patience, quietly to bear the reproaches
and threatenings of this my spiritual enemy, which in a kind of proportion, the
Children of Israel did endure upon the walls of Jerusalem; deliver me from the
danger of their deadly arrows O Lord, and grant they may not entrench about my
soul to endanger it.

And O Lord, as for thy servant David's sake, thou did look favorably upon
Jerusalem, so I do most humbly beseech thee for thy son Jesus Christ his sake
to be merciful unto me, to defend and keep me thy servant that puts his
trust in thee, from the danger of al my spiritual enemies, whenever it shall
please thee to visit me by the bed of sickness, be thou then merciful unto me
a sinner, O Lord, and with Hezekiah let me turn unto thee with true and perfect
contrition of heart, and grant that then I may receive mercy and comfort from
thee, thou God of mercy and compassion, and as thou sent'st thy Prophet Isaiah
unto Hezekiah to comfort him in his sickness, and who administered unto him
help both for soul and body, so be thou merciful unto me a sinner, and at the
hour of distress and danger, send unto me thy servant, spiritual comforts,
to assist my feeble soul toward thee, and good Lord let the lengthening of my
days here upon earth, and my health, be sanctified unto me, that thereby I may
be strengthened to serve thee better and more carefully, for thy goodness and
mercy; and let me know and continually consider, that the eternal life
hereafter, is the only true happiness, and let me so run my course here, O
Lord, that at last I may attain and come to that safe haven of felicity, the
only hope of my souls health, and the hope of all them that put their trust in
thee.

O Lord thou see and know the great we aknesse and frailty of flesh and
blood, and that without thy continual help we cannot stand, but still are
subject to stumblings and falls by the traps of the old serpent and watchful
enemy, when it shall please thee O Lord to hear my prayer, and to deliver me
thy servant from all those dangers and evils, as thou did Hezekiah, and the
which I have so humbly desired of thee. Let me not fall I do most humbly
beseech thee, into that great impiety and danger, to forget thy mercies, to
grow proud and confident of my self, and of my wealth and power; and to expose
my vanity to the Babilonian messengers and intelligencers, the enemies of my
soul, But let me always be watchful over my self, to avoid the danger of
all wicked suggestions, and still to humble my self before thee, and truly to
know, and seriously consider, that all things upon earth, beauty, wealth, or
whatsoever else, that is most pleasing to our fond and unbridled fancy, are as
but dung, even glistring and fading vanities; and so shall they servant O Lord,
by avoiding these vanities, continue in thy favor, and befreed from the
bondage and yoke of Babylon, and all the just punishments of sin, and be safe
within the walls of Jerusalem, and worship thee in thy holy Temple for ever.

MEDITATIONS Upon the taking of Zedekiah, and the captivity of the children of
Israel.
O Lord, when we are captived unto sin, and drunk in our iniquities, how blind
do we run headstrong to destruction? neither Zedekiah nor his Princes would
follow the counsels of the Prophet Jeremiah, for the king was besotted, and the
Princes were infatuated in their understandings, and so destruction came upon
them. O Lord make my soul to know the great danger of sin, and what effect it
works, where presumption fears no danger, and hardness of heart, shuts the
gates of mercy. Therefore O Lord remove from me thy servant this hardness of
heart, and presumptuous sining against the least; I run by my corruption into
this dangerous way of blindness and wilfulness to perdition; make me capable
and willing to receive good counsel, and to obey the instructions and
directions of my spiritual guides, and not to follow my own dark obstinate
mind and opinion, that will lead me by a back way, and a bad way toward
Jericho, where my spiritual enemy will entrap, overthrow, and triumph over me;
then shall I be captive to a merciless enemy, and never see again the beauty
of Jerusalem, but live in chains and Babilonish blindness with Zedekiah. But
open thou mine eyes O Lord, that I may see the mysteries of thy laws, and obey
them; then shall I behold the beauty of thy holiness for ever.

THE WICKEDNESS Of the sons of Eli, and the taking of the Ark of the Lord by
the Philistines.
THE sins of the sons of Eli was very great before the Lord, 1 Samuel 2. 12.
for by their bad carriage, men abhorred the offering of the Lord, and they lay
with the women that assembled at the door of the Tabernacle of the
congregation. Eli then being old, and hearing all that his sons had done in
Israel, with too much mildness he said unto them, why do you such things? I
hear of your evil dealings by all the people, it is no good report I hear of
you, my sons, ye make the Lords people to transgress; but they hearkened not
to the voice of their father, and there came a man of God unto Eli, and told
him of all the mereies that God had done unto his house, to sacrifice and wear
an Ephod before him, telling him of his too much adhering to his sons, and
threatened the judgment of God upon his house, and that Hophni and Phineas his
two sons should dye both in one day, and that God would raise up another
faithful Priest to sacrifice before him, and that the remainder of Elies house
should come and crouch to him for a morsel of bread, and shall say, put me I
pray thee into one of the Priests offices, that I may eat a piece of bread.

And the Lord said to Samuel the Prophet, I will do a thing in Israel, at
which both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle, for what I
shall do against Eli; when I begin I will also make an end, for his iniquity
which he knows, because his sons were wicked, and he restreined them not;
Samuel feared to show Eli that vision, but Eli called Samuel and said, my son
what is the thing that the Lord has said unto thee. I pray thee hide it not
from me, and Samuel told him every whit, hiding nothing from him.

Now the Israelites went out against the Philistines to battle, and pitched by
Eben-ezer, and the Philistines met them, and they joined in battle, and Israel
was smitten, and 4000 of them was slain.

And the Elders of Israel coming into the Camp, they said, let us fetch the Ark
of the Covenant of the Lord out of Shiloh unto us, that when it comes among
us, it may save us out of the hands of our enemies; so the people sent to
Shiloh to bring from thence the Ark of the Lord of hosts, which dwells
between the Cherubins, and the two sons of Eli, Hophni, and Phineas, were
there with the Ark of God, and when it was brought unto the Camp, all Israel
shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again. When the Philistines
heard thereof, and that the Ark was come into the Camp, they were afraid,
saying, God is come into the Camp of Israel, and woe unto us, who shall deliver
us from this mighty God, this is the God that smote the Egyptians with all the
plagues, but they nevertheless encouraged one another to quit themselves like
men, that they might not be servants to the Hebrews, and after fighting with
Israel, they overthrew them, and they fled every man to his own tent, and there
fell of Israel that day thirty thousand, and the Ark of God was taken, and the
two sons of Eli, Hophni, and Phineas, were slain; and there ran a man of
Benjamin out of the Army, and came to Shilo the same day with his clothes rent,
and with earth upon his head; and when he came, Eli sat upon a seat by the way
side watching, for his heart trembled for the Ark of God, and when it was told
unto the city, they all cried out, and the man came to Eli, telling him he
came out of the Army; then said Eli, what is done there my son? the messenger
answered, Israel is fled before the Philistines, and there has been a great
slaughter; thy two sons Hophni and Phineas are dead, and the Ark of God is
taken; and when Eli heard mention of the Ark of God, he fell backward from his
seat by the side of the gate, and brake his neck and died, he was then 98
years old and blind, and heavy of body, and he had judged Israel forty years;
and his daughter in law the wife of Phineas being with child, and near her
time, hearing the Ark of God was taken, fell into travail, and being delivered
of a son a little before her death, they would have comforted her herewith,
but she did not regard it; but she named the child Jehabod saying, the glory is
departed from Israel, for the Ark of God is taken.

And the Philistines took the Ark of God and brought it to Ashdod, and set it
in the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon, and when they came in the morning
into the house, they found Dagon fallen upon his face to the earth, before the
Ark of the Lord, and they set him up in his place again, and coming the next
morning early, Dagon was fallen upon his face again to the ground before the
Ark of the Lord, and was broken upon the threshold, only the stumpe of Dagon
was left, for which the Priests of Dagon, nor the people ever after did tread
on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod; but the hand of the Lord was heavy upon
them of Ashdod, and all the coasts thereabout, and they were destroyed and
smote with Emrods, and when they saw the judgment upon them, they said the Ark
of the God Israel shall not abide with us, for his hand is sore upon us, and
upon Dagon our God, and they assembled themselves together, and concluded to
carry the Ark of the Lord unto Gath, and they carried it about thither, and
that city was likewise smitten with the hand of God, with a great destruction,
and they had Emrods in their secret parts; therefore they sent the Ark of God
to Ekron, and they cried out saying, you have brought the Ark of the God of
Israel to us to destroy us and our people, and all the Lords and people of the
Philistines gathered together, and said, send away the Ark of the God of
Israel, and let it go again to his own place, that we be not utterly destoyed,
for there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city, and the men that
died not, were smitten with Emrods, and the cry of the city went up to heaven,
and the Ark of the Lord was with the Philistines 7 months, and they called
their Priests and Divines together, to conclude how they should send the Ark
away, and they said, send it not empty, but in any wise return unto the God of
Israel a trespass offering, then ye shall be healed; then said they what
shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? they answered, five
golden Emrods, and five golden mice, according to the number of the Philistine
Lords, for one plague was on you all, and on your Lords, and you shall make
Images of your Emrods, and Images of the mice that hurt the land, and give
glory unto the God of Israel, to take his hand off you, your Gods and your
land, and do not you harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and Pharaoh
hardened their hearts when he wrought wonderfully among them did they not let
the people go, and they departed? Now therefore make a new cart, and take two
milch kine, on which there has come no yoke, tie the kine to the cart, and
bring the claves home from them, and take the Ark of the Lord and lay it upon
the cart, and put the jewels of gold which ye return for a trespass offering
in a coffer, and tie, by the side thereof, and send it away; and see if it go
by the way of his own coaste to Bethshemesh, if so, then he has done us the
great evil. But if not, and that it go another way, we will take it as a
chance that happened to us; and they did do what was commanded them, and laid
the Ark upon the cart, and the coffer, with the Jewels; and the kine took the
straight way of Bethshemesh, and went lowing along the high way, and turned not
aside; and the Lords of the Philistines went after them; and they of
Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat, and seeing the Ark they rejoiced to see
it, and the cart came into the field of Joshuah, a Bethshemite, and stood there
where there was a great stone, and they clave the wood of the cart, and offered
the kine a burnt offering unto the Lord, and the Levites took down the Ark of
the Lord, and the coffer, with the Jewels, and put them on a great stone, and
the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed the same day
unto the Lord.

And when the Lords of the Philistines had seen those things, they returned to
Ekron, and the stone whereon they set the Ark, is called the great stone of
Abell which is in the field of Joshuah the Bethshemite, and the Lord smote the
men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into the Ark of the Lord, even
fifty thousand men, and the people lamented, and they sent messengers to the
inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim to fetch up the Ark unto them, and they came and
fetched the Ark of the Lord unto them, and brought it into the house of
Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazer his son to keep the Ark of the
Lord, and there it continued twenty years, and all the house of Israel
lamented after the Lord.

And long after twenty years, 2. Sam. 6.
David gathered all the chosen men of Israel, and went with them, from Baal of
Judah to bring up the Ark of the Lord of hosts that dwells between the
Cherubins, and they set the Ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of
the house of Abinadab, and Uzzah, and Ahio the sons of Abinadab drove the
cart, and Ahio went before the Ark, and David and all the house of Israel
played before the Lord on all manner of instruments made of fur wood, on
Harps, and Psalters, Timbrels, Cornets, and Cimbals, and when they came to
Nachons threshing floor, Uzzah put forth his hand to the Ark of God and took
hold of it, for the Oxen shook it; and the anger of the Lord was kindled
against Vzzah, and God smote him there for his error, and he died by the Ark of
God, and David was afraid of the Lord, upon the death of Uzzah, and would not
remove the Ark of the Lord unto the city of David, but carried it into the
house of Obed-Edom the Gittite, where it continued three months, and the Lord
blessed Obed, and all his household; and when David understood how God had
blessed them, because of the Ark of God, David went and brought the Ark of the
Lord from thence unto the city of David with much gladness; and after, they
that bare the Ark had gone six paces, he sacrificed Oxen and fatlings to the
Lord, and David danced before the Lord, and was girded with a linen Ephod; and
so it was brought by David and all the host of Israel, with shoutings, and
with the sound of Trumpet, into the city of David; but Michall, Saul's daughter,
looked through a window, and seeing king David leaping and dancing before the
Ark, she despised him, and they brought the Ark of the Lord, and set in the
tabernacle that David had made for it, and then David offered burnt offerings
and peace offerings to the Lord, and blessed the people in the name of the Lord
of hosts; and he gave to every man and woman of all Israel, bread, flesh, and
wine; and so they departed every one to their house.

And David returning to bless his house, Michall the daughter of Saul came out
to meet him, and said, how glorious was the king of Israel this day, who
uncovered himself in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants, as one of the
vain fellows, shamelesly uncovereth himself* and David said unto Michall, it
was before the Lord which chose me before thy father, and before all his house,
to appoint me Ruler over the people of Israel, therefore will I play before the
Lord, and I will be yet more vile then thus, and will be base in my own sight;
and of the maidservants which thou have spoken of, of them shall I be had in
honor: therefore had Michall the daughter of Saul no children, until the day
of her death.

MEDITATIONS Upon the Arc of the holy Covenant.
O Omnipotent God give unto me thy servant a venerable regard unto thine
ordinances, and to worship thee as I ought to do, and not to incline to an
unreverent serving of thee, and self-conceit; but let zeal possess my soul,
and humble devotion dwell in my heart; deliver me O Lord from the danger of
these had and evil times, for thine altars are profaned, and thy worship in
thy holy places are wholly neglected, and the glory seems to be departed out of
this our Israel; let me look back O Lord to the times of old, how thy servants
the children of Israel did worship toward thy holy temple, and the Ark of thy
holy Covenant, placed between the Cherubins; and how thou wast pleased
therewith; what blessings O Lord from time to time did go along with this Ark
of thy Covenant, and what punishments did fall upon them that did profane it?
O Lord give me humbleness of heart to desire an humble knowledge of thee, and
not to be busy in prying into thy secrets, to look into the Ark of thy
Covenant, least I be destroyed with them of Bethshemesh, neither let me
distrust thy power O Lord, or intermedle with holy things, but keep the right
and lowly rule that thou have commanded; so shall I avoid and escape the
punishment of Uzzah, the sad experience of evil, which curiosity and intrusion
into Gods secrets and other men's callings, ever brought unto the conscience.

Lord let me stand with perfect humility afar off with the Publican, and
humbly without the bounds of the Sanctuary with thy people of Israel, in their
worship toward thee, and not proudly to presume to come into the Sanctum
Sanctorum, the holy of holyes, but venerably to worship toward it with
lowliness of heart; keep thy servant O Lord from the dangerous disease of
these times, let me not be wise in my own conceit, nor busy, and opinionated
of my own Judgment, to disturb Church and State, and to sear my own
conscience, but give me grace to be humble and meek; and as the children of
Israel did obey Moses by keeping without the limits of mount Sinai, and must
not touch the border of it whiles the law was delivered; so keep me, O Lord,
far from presumption, that neither eye nor hand out-compasse themselves to my
destruction; and this was by a most strict charge from thee O God, and that
only Moses and Aaron should come before thee upon the mount, with great
punishments threatened unto the breaker of this command. By this restraint, let
thy servant tremble at thy Judgments, and fear with the children of Israel in
the conservation of my spirit, and obey thee with humility from the very
bottom of my heart, as the Israelites did at the bottom of mount Sinai, and
let me not O Lord follow the dangerous example of them, that with so much
presumption go about to break the rules which thou have commanded, presuming
to step before them whom thou have appointed to be their guides, to break with
pride of spirit within the borders of mount Sinai, contrary to thy commands;
good Lord let me leave my Judgment in points of faith, to the Priests that
thou have appointed to come into the inner Temple of thy holiness, where they
do receive the holy oracles of truth from thee to deliver unto us, that do
humbly wait in the place and state which thou have ordained. For this
boundless and unruly pride, and groundless self-conceit, as it brought the
Angels from heaven, so O Lord from time to time it has disturbed the world,
and thy holy Church, filling it full of heretics and blasphemers, who have
been the firebrarnds of thy wrath, as plagues and punishments for the sins of
the world; preserve me therefore O Lord from this so dangerous a rock, and let
me not follow my own will and fancy, and keep thy servant from rash and heady
resolutions, and not be too confident of my own opinion, for what am I O Lord,
to build a Church to my own weak imagination, to rend my self from the Elders
and Congregation of Israel, to go a gadding after my own inventions, and to
fall into the traps of innovations, and the private opinions of these bad and
dangerous times, the Seminaries and seedplots of sedition and tumults, the
ruin of Church and Commonwealth, of all order, government, charity, and
brotherly love. But let me keep O Lord that safe rule to walk in, even the
plain path of thy Church, which thou have appointed both in the old, and the
new law.

For O Lord, the Church, the Ark of thy Covenant, was always eminently to be
seen and known to the Israelites in all their journies, from Egypt to
Jerusalem, and toward it they did worship, so after thy mavelous
deliverances of them over the red Sea, and the deserts of this world; this Ark
was placed in thy holy Temple at Jerusalem, where all the Tribes of Israel came
up to worship; and toward which holy of holies, they did worship, wheresoever
they were dispersed; and in their captivities: and the sacrifices there was
more acceptable to thee, then the Adorations that were at Bethel framed by
Jeroboam, that made Israel to sin, by a worship of his own invention; for
vain glory, the true type of heresy and innovations.

By this O Lord, let thy servant to see that there was always a known and
certain way of worship, and a visible Church to thy children of Israel, even in
the middle of the red Sea, and Jordan of danger and drowning, being pursued by
the Egypt of this world, and still from time to time, this people of thine, and
in thy Church, there were guides and governors for them to follow, to preserve
them from bypath, and in the right rule of thy Church, and saving truth,
which Church and worship was hid from the Gentiles for their great
abominations, and by thy secret judgments; yet out of thy great and wonderful
mercy to mankind, according to thy promise, and prophesies, a Messiah did come
to redeem the Gentiles, and to bring them unto thee, and that great mercy of
his Redemption, which wonderful mercy was by my blessed Redeemer and Savior
Jesus Christ, the long hoped for Messiah, descended from the root of Jesse the
great deliverer of the Gentiles, from the thraldom and bondage of sin, whom
no creature could redeem, but that immaculate lamb the son of God, descended
from that blessed root, of whom all the Prophets have so much prophesied; and
above all, the Prophet Esaiah of the calling of the Gentiles, and the great
visibility of the Church, that should be at his coming, for all the world to
see and follow; and by which they should learn to leave all blind corners, and
crooked bypath of ignorance and wilfulness, and all good and humble souls
thither to repair both Jews and Gentiles, even to this Church, placed upon an
open mountain, that every one might see the light thereof, thither repair for
the comfort and care of their souls; for there are the true Physicians, and
the wholesome balsames, to cure the festred sores of sin, and there is safety
for the humble of heart, and there is ever light prepared for them.

Thus with humility of heart, ascend up into that mountain of the Lord, and
Thus O Lord by thy incomprehensible mercy, thou have given us a way to follow,
confirmed to us and the truth thereof, by the great example of thy servants in
the primitive Church; the Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors and Virgins, and other
thy Saints, by their great sufferings and persecutions in the spiritual
progress of this world, before the Ark thy Church could come to rest, from
that deluge and troublesome waters of afflictions.

In all their sufferings and persecutions, following the Example of their Pilot
and Redeemer, being humble and meek, and obedient to their temporal Lords, and
giving unto Caesar, that was Caesar's, only their faith and a good conscience,
they preserved unspotted before thee O Lord, desiring rather to submit their
lives, then hold up their hands, and prayed for their persecutors, rather then
they would shed the blood of any man, that had the least stamp of Gods Image
upon him.

Let me not therefore O Lord spurn against authority, nor laugh at devotion,
as Michall that proud Dame did scoff at David for dancing before the Ark, nor
think it superstition to follow thy holy Ark seven times about Jericho, if it
be commanded by Scripture, or men of divine authority have so determined, for
there is a blessing goes along with this Ark of thy Covenant, and happiness is a
reward to the humble and devout soul, that attends without reluctation upon
thy ordinances, and the discipliue of thee O God, whiles this Ark of truth
stood with Dagon, that Idol fell down and was brossen, for truth and falsehood
cannot stand together; let the soul of thy fervant know this (O Lord) and let
me not think to serve thee but with a single, sincere, and an humble heart,
and not to mix it with my own foolish fancy, but to serve thee by that rule as
thou have appointed; and good Lord let the Dagon of sinfulness that is raised
up in my corrupt heart, fall down and be broken in pieces, and place in steed
thereof thy holy Covenant and truth; Lord cleanse and purge me, and make me
worthy to receive the Arc of thy Covenant, thy saving truth, and holy spirit;
that by my corruptions and wickedness of life, it may not he with me, as it
was with them of Ashdod, and Ekron, whiles the Arc was amongst them; to bring
punishments and plagues upon me, for my iniquity and profaneness, and
inordination. But sanctify my soul O Lord, and give the blessing unto me,
that thou did give unto Abinadab and Obed-Edom, with whom the Ark did rest;
and make me a happy vessel to receive thy holy spirit, and then will all
things be happinesses and blessings unto me, both in this life, and in the life
to come.

O Lord, though Eli and his sons did unrighteously before thee, to the bad
example of the Israelites, yet let not the bad example that I may see by some
bad members in thy Church, make me to stumble in my way, but still to follow
the Ark of thy Covenant, and mourn after it as the children of Israel did mourn
and rejoice in the prosperity of thy Church, when there shall be any joyful
remembrance of any kind of mercy or deliverance.

O Lord, bring me thy servant into the sanctuary of thy saving grace, and thy
holy Ark the Church, in safety unto the city of David, in despite of all
mocking Michals, that all the world may praise thee for all thy mercies, as
David did magnify thy mercy in the presence of all the congregation, with a
kind of spiritual joy, beyond the limits of all humane conceit, or the
capacity of a proud Naturalist, and place it there O Lord, in the Tabernacle of
peace and quietness, that all the world may see thy mercy, and know the way to
their salvation, leaving all blind bypaths, and distracted ways that tend, and
bend to destruction.

For thou O Lord have showed us a way, and left us unexcusable if we follow it
not, without unsound and deceitful reasoning; and our destruction is of our
selves.

But let all praise and glory be given to thee O Lord for thy goodness and
truth, Thou O Lord art the way, the truth, and the life.

Lord lead us all by that way which thou have shown, unto that truth which has
promised that life, then shall all doubtful errors be removed from our souls,
and we shall live in that Ark, where is the light and glory of thy presence for
ever.

FINIS.

