A Collection of Dr. Jacksons WORKS



A COLLECTION OF THE WORKS OF THAT Holy Man and Profound Divine Thomas Iackson,
D. D Late President of CORPUS CHRISTI College In OXFORD. Containing His
COMMENTS Upon the APOSTLES CREED, etc. First Volume. With the Life of the
Author, and an Index annexed.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton for Timothy Garthwait at the little North-Door of
S. Paul's Church. 1653.

To the Christian Reader, more designedly, to the Younger sort of Students in
Divinity, and Academicall men.
Grace, Mercy, etc. With this Account of the Design.
IT is a part of Ingenuity to acknowledge the Parties by whom a man has
benefited. See his Meditations in English, and in Greek and Latin, put out by
learned M. Casaubon.
M. Aurel. Antoninus mentions with a Grateful and particular Memoration, some
single Principles of Morality, which He received from Such, and Such, the
prudent Instructors of his Youth.

It is a piece of Charity to show unto others those Mines that have enriched
our selves: or the Fountains out of which we have drunk, Cleansing, quenching,
and healing Waters.

We do not well to Conceal from those in the City (though they have shut us out
as unclean) the great good we have discovered during our exclusion. (Thus much
in effect) said the Samaritan Lepers, 2 King. 7. 9.

O that my Lord was acquainted with the Prophet in Israel (said Naamans little
captive Maid) He would cure my Masters Leprosy, 2 King. 5.

Come see a Man that told me all that ever I did, said the Samaritan woman to
her neighbors, Joh. 4. 29.

If I mistake not, I shall in some acceptable measure at once perform (at
least resemble) all the forementioned Offices, when I have in short told the
Christian, more signally the Learned, or Reader willing to learn, Thus much:
That, What acquired skill I have in Theology, what understanding I have got in
Holy Scripture, (under God) I owe it all to this Author. Hic vir, Hic est.
This is the Man I acknowledge to have been my Master, and Mystagogus in
Divinis. From him I learned how to use my small Stock of Humane learning in the
pursuit of Divine. By him was my soul convinced of the Truth of Scriptures, and
stored with Arguments to persuade others, that at least, it was worth their
Labor to Try whether practice of Scripture Rules would not produce submission
to the Authority of Scripture. I did not know what a Monster that Idol
Infallibility was, till I saw it drawn out by his Pencill. I had swallowed, and
as I thought concocted, the common Definition of Faith, by a Full particular
Assurance. But when I read this Author, I perceived that Plerophorie was the
golden Fruit that grew on the Topbranch, Faith is an Assent to the Truth or
Goodness of what God Reveals in his Word, be it History, Mystery, Precept,
Promise, or Threat.
not the First seed, no not the spreading Root, of that Tree of Life, by
feeding on which the just does live, and that, true Fiducia can grow no faster
then, but shoots up just parallel with Fidelitas; I mean, that true Confidence
toward God, is adaequate to sincere and conscientious Obedience.

Before I had Read this Author, I measured Hypocrisy by the gross and vulgar
Standard: Thinking the Hypocrite had been one that had deceived men like
himself, but in this Author I found him to be a Man that had attained the
Magisterium Satanae, even the Art of deluding his own Soul, with unsound, but
high persuasions of Sanctity: and that, not by the Cubeia, or Cogging of
unrighteousness, but by virtue of some One (or more) excellent Quality,
wherein he out-strips the very Saints of God.

From Him I learned many instances and exemplifications of that Holy, but
heavy Doom, of our Judge, and Savior, Luke 16. 15. The things which are in
high esteem with men, are abomination in the sight of God. And that, the Common
Receipts (if not the Notions) of the World touching Good and Evil, are as
distorted, and monstrous, as if a man should define an Humble meek man, by
Cowardice: or a Prudent Christian, to be One, That had conquered his Conscience.

To end this First Stage of the Preface; I must profess that I have not only
reaped from this Authors sown fields, an Harvest of knowledge, but some
weighty sheaves of consolation too: He has so convincingly (above others)
proved out of Moses, the Prophets, and the Psalms, and the Jews also; That our
Blessed Lord Jesus is the Christ, That my soul Rests upon it as upon a Basis,
or Center immovable; And I am persuaded, were his Works translated into Latin,
the Christian world, (of what Division soever, that keeps the foundation) would
confess it self Confirmed by him, and a Debtor to him.

And now having this opinion rooted in my heart, I hope the Reader will
approve, at least pardon; if I pronounce this Author, The Divine, of his Rank,
and Age: and if in token of my private thankfulness for good received from him,
I breath out, first toward Heaven, Benedic Anima mea Domino, etc. Psalm. 103.
and then toward men on earth, tokens of good will, and wishes.

Ovid. Met. 4. l.
-- qui Te genuere Beati.
Et matter Foelix and fortunata profecto
Siqua Tibi soror est, and quae dedit ubera Nutrix.
Happy were the Parents that had such a Son of understanding. Blessed was the
womb that bore him, and the paps that gave him suck. Blessed was that Alma
matter, that had such a name writ in her matricula, (in whose blessing her other
sister was blessed also) and that Phrontisterion, who had him first a nursling
child, and then a nursing father of her children. Blessed were the Places
where these Apostolical Feet of Beauty trod, when he went abroad Evangelizans
pacem, Evangelizans Bona. And blessed be the memory of that man, whose hand
(like the hand in the Margin) pointed out first unto me this Author. His name
is sweet, and his Bones N. F.
shall one day flourish out of their Dust.

If Others at the first view, (Nay after some Readings and Reviews) of this
Author come not up to my Rate, or esteem of Him, I have their Excuse as ready
in my Pen, as mine own Blame is fresh in my memory. For when a Fatherly friend
of mine (Mr. F. of happy Memory, thinking my younger years had need of such an
Instructor) commended this Author unto my Reading; for some good time after, I
wished he had lent me his understanding together with this Book: Yet with
constant and frequent Reading, I first began to like, at last I mastered, and
made mine own, so much of him as enabled me to improve, and impart his Sense to
others: I often took his matter, and preparing it to their Capacity, preached
it in popular Auditories. I shame not to tell this, because I know my Title to
it was just by Donation, not by Plagium. The Author intended it for this
purpose: His very design being to afford helps to younger Students; to the
Abler, Hints and provocations for searches into the less beaten but more
profitable paths, the abstruser but Richer veins of Theology.

It is to be expected that two Objections will militare against the Labors of
this great Author, and either break the Arms, (weaken the hands at least) or
Dazel, if not darken, the Eyes of the Industrious Reader. The One is, That his
Style is obscure. The Other, That his Doctrine is Arminian. The second part of
this Preface will endeavor (with humility and Reason) to satisfy them. And to
the former of these I answer; His Style is Full and deep, which makes the
Purity of it seem a kind of Blackness, or darkness; and though it abound in
substantial adjectives, yet it is more short then other Authors, in
Relatives, in Eeking and helping particles, because he writ to Scholars. His
stream Runs full, but always in it own Channel, and within the Banks; if any
will yet say it overflows, He must give me leave to tell him, It then inriches
the Ground. His Pen drops Principles, as frequent as ordinary men's do sense.
His matter is rare; His Notions, uncouth parcels of Truth, dug (...)
profundo, and so at first Aspect look like strangers to the Ordinary Intellect,
but with Patience and Usance will cease to be so. And the Reader shall
assuredly find this most certain token of true Worth in Him, that the more he
is acquainted with, the better he shall like Him. The probability of this proof
I gather from one of those Responsa prudentum, which long since I read in
Plutarch. A professed Orator had made a speech for One, who upon the first
reading, went about the conning of it with much cheerfulness and contentment;
but after 2 or 3 days familiarity and Repetition, had begot a Fastidium, he
came to the Orator and told him; Sir at the first or second reading, I liked
this Oration very well, but now, I am quite of another mind, to say the truth,
I loath it heartily; Well says the Orator, how often mean you to speak this
Oration to the People, any more then Once? No, said he, But once only. Go your
way then, They will like it as well as you did at first Time, I warrant you.
But Reader, if thou will believe above twenty years Experience or Conversation
with this Author, Thou will find at every return, new matter both of
Observation and delight in Him.

Now for the second Objection. It will be found a mere Noise; The fancy of a
prejudicate mind. The Reader must in justice Examine the particulars, before he
pass his judgment, and then in wisdom, not suffer himself to be deprived of a
rich Treasure, upon poor Pretenses. It would fret a son of Valor, to find
himself Robbed by a weakling and a Coward, that had first possessed his fancy
that some Visors (supported with stakes in the Twilight) were stout Fellows
ready to come in, if he did not deliver his Gold.

2 I may with modesty aver, That there is not one word in this Volume, that
(to my thinking) can possibly be so forced, or wrested by the dissenting, as to
take offense thereby.

3 I find him through the whole Body of his Writings most Religiously Careful
to give unto God the Things that be Gods, even the glory of his Grace, his most
Gratuitous Grace in Christ preventing, exciting, furthering, and making to
persevere in all works or courses of Christianity, and that so requisite and
intrinsecall to every holy Action, that all our sufficiency is from it. By the
Grace of God we are what we are, and do what we do. And surely had the great
Goodness of the Lord been Taught and tendered, in such manner as this Author
sets it forth, This Age had felt it self better Thriven in Christianity, and in
the power of godliness, then it now is. Sin had not so abounded, but Grace had
superabounded, and reigned through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus
Christ our Lord.

4 Nor can any man (think I) produce one passage, that intimates, much less
inferrs any inordinate prelation of The strength of Nature, He making the chief
use of that poor Remnat of Free Will left in us sons of Adam, to consist not in
meriting or preparing, but, in our not being so untoward patients as we might
possibly be, in not doing that evil which is in Our power to do.

5 Nor will any man speak evil of Him, but he that himself narrows the Grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and engrosses that plenteous ransom he paid for all the
sons of Adam to some small number of such he conceits himself to be.

Finally, if the worst be Given, that this Objection pretends to, The offense
will be much assuaged, if the ordinary Reader do but know, That the Lutheran,
i. e. A considerable part of the Reformed Church is of that opinion, and that
the other name is used mostly to inflame the Odium.

In sum, This Man of God knew he might not Strive, nor multiply questions to
gender strife: therefore he demands but two postulata of the dissenting man. 1
That God has a True freedom in doing good. 2 That man has a True freedom in
doing evil. From him that agrees with him in these two, he will not dissent in
other points. Epist. before the Attributes.


But from such as teach, That all events are so irresistibly decreed by God,
that none can fall out otherwise then they do. Or, That nothing can be amended
that is amiss; He justly differs. For, besides that the Tenets be See
Busbequius Epist. 4.
Turkish, being pressed they yield a morbid bitter juice, and put out a Forked
sting. Their Consequent being, that either, There is no moral evil under the
Sun; or, That the Fountain of Godnesse (who is Ultor and intentator malorum)
his will is the cause of such evil.

I beseech the Readers Pardon, that I come but now to the last part (the most
proper Business) of the Preface, to give account of the Design, dispatched,
and, cum Bono Deo, intended.

This Great Author, having framed to himself an Idaea of that complete Body of
Divinity which he intended; for his own more Regular proceeding, and our better
understanding, did direct all his lines in the whole Peripherie of his studies,
unto the Heads contained in the Creed, as unto their natural Center. He
published in his Life time Nine Books of Comments upon the Creed. Viz.

These Three now Reprinted. 4 Justifying Faith. 5 A Treatise of Unbelief. 6 Of
Gods Essence and Attributes. 7 Of, The knowledge of Christ. 8 The Humiliation
of Christ. 9 The Consecration of Christ. Together with some other Treatises and
Sermons, Appendices to the former, which indent with, and like Tallies, own
the Treatises to which they Relate, very appositely. viz. A Treatise of the
Holy Catholic Church, which is part of the twelfth Book of Comments intended.
Christ's Answer to Saint John's Disciples. Diverse Sermons preached before the
King. Two Sermons. Bethlehem and Nazareth. And, The Woman a True Comfort to Man.

He left unpublished, according to the Account following. The tenth Book of
Comments, Ready for the Press: Containing the Manner how sin found Entrance
into the World. Of the nature of sin. Of our first servitude to it. Of that
poor Remnant of Free Will left in the sons of Adam, with direction to use it
aright. And how we are set Free by the Son of God. The eleventh Book in
Adversarijs. Containing a Treatise upon the Articles of Christ's coming to
judgment, The Resurrection of the dead, and Life everlasting. The twelfth of
the Catholic Church, part whereof is Printed and mentioned above. Besides a
great number of Treatises and Sermons, respective Appendices to the Books
aforesaid: So many, as would fill a Page with a Particular Catalogue. For the
Publishing whereof in due Time, and manner, and suiting with this Volume, The
Worthy persons, whom the Author made Supervisors of his Will, will be
conscientious and Prudent Accountants to the Church of Christ, And some others,
Pious and Learned men of that University, Cheerful Assistants thereto.


But here, if the Reader be of my Temper, Secretum peto. I must lead him aside
a little to Condole the loss (the Great loss) of one most Considerable piece,
Finished and (Alas for the Day!) lost some years ago. It was, The Treatise of
Prodigies, or, Divine Forewarnings, betokening Blood. I am bold to say: Reader,
Write this a Prodigy. And to render it the more Prodigious, take notice, that
it was lost in the Authors Life Time; as his ingenious Amanuensis (Mr. B.) told
me, inquiring after it above 9 years ago. What shall be said or thought of
This? Surely, The World was not worthy of such a Blessing! It sentenced it self
unworthy thereof, by the stupid total neglect of what he Preached at Court,
and Printed at Oxon: in the Year 1637. about The Signs of the Times, a Subject
near of Kin to that Treatise.

The longing impatient desire of Retreiving this Treatise, makes me not blush
to transform this Preface into a kind of Proclamation: (...), or rather into a
most humble and earnest Supplication, unto the Person that has this Treatise
in keeping, (if yet it be kept from the Malice of the Destroyer) That he will
please to bring it in unto the Stationer, for whom this Book is Printed, upon
assurance to receive it again; or for it, twelve or twenty Copies, (or a sum of
Money Aequivalent) if it be Printed: For it is the desire and design of more,
and more able men, then my self, to Collect and Publish This Authors Works as
Complete as possibly may be.

The Earnest whereof is Given in this First Volume; with this further Account.
The Quarto Impression was scarce and dear, and ill Printed. The weighty and
many Quotations of Authors so exceeding falsely figured, (and disfigured too)
that it cost so much Time and great Turning, sometimes to find out One single
place, as none can believe, that has not tried the like: nor could all the
Authors be found in London. This the Famous Library of Oxon: and the cheerful
Candor of a learned Friend there supplied.

I am hopeful that the Authors Sense is not altered in the least measure, (for
the least sin in that kind is sacrilege.) I am sure, I was so scrupulously
careful of changing, as that I have omitted what I thought necessary
correction. For example, in the Epistle to the Reader, line 12. I think, I
ought to have changed the word Conscience, into Conscious, or, less
conscience, into more conscientious; unless you will say, Conscience there
signifies Guilt. So Page the 12. Line 3. after And yet -- These two words, They
persecuted, should be inserted, as I conjecture; unless the comparison betwixt
the Roman and Turkish Emperors Subjects make them needless. So in the 250
page in the Margin, surely it ought to have been R. P. but it was R. B. in the
old Copy, and in the search of Parsons Resolutions, not finding absolute
evidence that he was the party meant, I let R. B. stand.

Yet have I added now and then, a Citation or Note in the Margin. As where the
Great Business of Charles Martell is Related page 110. I have cited diverse
Authors, whom the Reader may consult, for his own better satisfaction.

To conclude, There is a saying, and men may think, (...). But, the pecuniary
profit be to the Tradesman. If my heart deceive me not, as diverse Nutus Dei did
invite the beginning, and many remarkable momenta providentiae did encourage
the Progress, (in a Time of greatest trouble for outward estate) so the Glory
of God Almighty, the Benefit of his Church and Children, the doing of some
small Thing (in a Time of Cashierment) that may tend to the discharge of a most
unprofitable servants account at the last Day, is the gain aimed at. And if our
Pr: Brethren (Sons of the same Fathers with us) that cast us out, viewing well
the second and third Books, and being here advertised, That twenty of those
men, whom they have put from the Stations (wherein God had set them in the
Church of England,) as Factors for the Church of Rome, have contributed each
man their Symbolum, to this Impression, will by this be brought to see their
mistake; and taking this (...) for (...), confess themselves deceived, and
unwittingly made Proctors for (...) and transported in this particular, became
partial, and (...); it will be an Accession above expectation.

The Good Lord lay not this sin to their Charge, but reconcile them to their
former selves, and be Reconciled both to them and us in Christ, and prosper the
work both dispatched and intended to his Glory, and the good of his Church, for
our Lord Jesus's sake.

The Prayer of the most unworthy One of all his servants. B. O.

(...). Plutarch (...), 483.
If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again, and
show me both the Ark and his Habitation.

But if he say, I have no delight in Thee --, Let him do to me as seems good
unto Him. Good is the Word of the Lord.

The Law of the Lord is an undefiled Law, converting the soul. The Testimony of
the Lord is sure, and gives wisdom to the simple.

Let the Word of God dwell in you plenteously.

Search the Scriptures -- Which are able to make thee wise unto salvation.

In which are some things hard to be understood, which the unlearned and
unstable wrest, as they do also the Other Scriptures, to their own destruction.

Remember them which are the Guides, or have the Rule over you.

The Priests lips should keep knowledge: and they should seek the law at his
mouth.

He that hears you, hears me --.

Lo, I am with you always, even to the End of the World.


THE LIFE and DEATH of the Venerable, Dr. JACKSON, Dean of PETERBROUGH, and
President of Corpus-Christi College in OXFORD.
Written by a late Fellow of the same College.
BEing earnestly desired by an intimate and Powerful Friend, to deliver some
Character of that Reverend and Learned Doctor Jackson, (late President of our
College) I might very well excuse my self from my unworthiness to undertake so
weighty a Task. I must seriously confess, it was not so much the Importunity of
that Friend, which prevailed with me, as the Merit of the man which Extracted
it, and made me resolve rather to run any hazard of my own Reputation, then not
to pay the Honors due to his Memory. The Respect and Interest which he gained
in the hearts of all men that he conversed with, (and most from them that knew
him best) was too great to be buried in this Grave, or to be extinct with his
Person. A good Name is compared to a rich and pleasant Odor, which not only
affects the Sense, whilst he that wears it, is in presence, but fills the the
house, and makes you enquire, who had been there, although the Party be gone
out of the Room. For his Birth, He was descended from a very worthy Family in
the Bishopric of Durham, His Life seemed to be Consecrated to Virtue, and the
Liberal Arts, from his very childhood: He had a natural Propensity to Learning
from which no other Recreation or Employment could divert him. He was first
designed (by his Parents) to be a Merchant in Newcastle, where many of his near
Friends and Alliance lived in great Wealth and Prosperity; but neither could
that Temptation lay hold upon him.

Therefore (at the instance of a Noble Lord) he was sent to the University of
Oxford, for which highly esteemed Favor he returns his solemn thanks, in the
very First Words, and Entrance of this Book. He was first Planted in Queens
College, under the Care and Tuition of the Profound D. Crakanthorp, and from
thence removed to Corpus Christi College, who although he had no notice of the
vacancy of the Place, till the day before the Election, yet he Answered with so
much readiness and applause, that he gained the admiration, as well as the
Suffrages of the Electors, and was chosen with full Consent, although they had
received Letters of Favor from Great Men for another Scholar. A sure and
Honorable Argument of the incorruptedness of that Place, when the peremptory
Mandamus of the Pious Founder, Nec prece, nec pretio, (presented with the
Merits of a young man and a Stranger, shall prevail more then all other
Solicitations, and Partialities whatsoever. This Resolution has been often
assured unto me from one of the Electors (yet living) M. John Hoar of West
Hendred, a man of Reverend years and Goodness. There was now a welcome
necessity laid upon him, to preserve the High Opinion which was conceived of
him, which he did in a Studious and Exemplary Life, not subject to the usual
intemperances of that Age. Certainly the Devil could not find him idle, nor at
leisure to have the Suggestions of Vice whispered into his ear. And although
many in their youthful times have their Deviations, and Exorbitancies, which
afterward prove Reformed and Excellent men. Yet it pleased God to keep him in
a constant Path of Virtue and Piety.

He had not been long admitted into this place, but that he was made more
Precious, and better Estimated by all that knew him, by the very danger that
they were in suddenly to have parted with him: For walking out with others of
the Younger company to wash himself, He was in imminent peril of being Drowned.
The Depth closed him round about, the Weeds were wrapped about his head. He went
down to the bottom of the Mountains, the Earth with her bars was about him for
ever, yet God brought his soul from Corruption, Jonah 2. 5, 6. that (like Moses
from the flags) for the future Good of the Church, and Government of the
College where he lived, there might be preserved the meekest man alive, or
(like Jonas) there might be a Prophet revived (as afterward he proved) to
forwarn the people of ensuing destruction, if peradventure they might Repent,
and God might revoke the Judgments pronounced against them, and spare this
great and sinful Nation. It was a long (and almost incredible) space of time
wherein he lay under water, and before a Boat could be procured, which was sent
for, rather to take out his Body (before it floated) for a decent Funeral, then
out of hopes of recovery of Life. The Boatman discerning where he was by the
bubling of the water, (the last signs of a man Expiring) thrust down his hook
at that very moment, which by happy Providence (at the first Essay) lighted
under his arm, and brought him up into the Boat. All the parts of his Body were
swollen to a Vast proportion, and although by holding his head downward they
let forth much water, yet no hopes of Life appeared, therefore they brought him
to the Land, and lapped him up in the Gowns of his Fellow-Students, the best
shroud that Love or Necessity could provide. After some warmth and former means
renewed, they perceived that Life was yet within him, conveyed him to the
College, and commended him to the skill of Doctor Channel, an Eminent Physician
of the same House, where with much Care, Time, and Difficulty, he recovered to
the equal joy and wonder of the whole Society. All men concluded him to be
reserved for High and Admirable Purposes. His grateful Acknowledgements toward
the Fisherman and his Servants that took him up, knew no limits, being a
constant Revenue to them whilst he lived. For his thankfulness to Almighty God
no heart could conceive, nor Tongue express it but his own, often communicating
the Miracle of Divine mercy in his deliverance, and resolving hereafter not to
live to himself, but to God that raises the dead. Neither did he serve God
with that which cost him nothing; I must rank his abundant CHarity, and Riches
of his Liberality amongst the Virtues of his first years, as if he would strive
with his Friends, Patron, and Benefactors, Utrum illi largiendo, an ipse
dispergendo vinceret, Whether they should be more bountiful in giving, or he in
dispersing: Or that he was resolved to pay the Ransom of his life into Gods
Exchequer, which is the Bodies of the Poor. His heart was so free and enlarged
in this kind, that very often his Alms-deed made him more Rich that received
it, then it left him that gave it. His progress in the study of Divinity was
something early, because (as he well considered) the journey that he intended
was very far, yet not without large and good Provisions for the way. No man
made better use of Humane knowledge, in subservience to the Eternal Truths of
God, produced more Testimonies of Heathens to convert themselves, and make them
submit the Rich Presents of their Wisemen, to the Cradle and Cross of Christ.
He was furnished with all the Learned Languages, Arts, and Sciences, as the
praevious dispositions, or Beautiful Gate which led him to the Temple; but
especially Metaphysics, as the next in attendance, and most necessary
Handmaid to Divinity, which was the Mistress where all his thoughts were
fixed, being wholly taken up with the Love and admiration of Jesus Christ, and
him Crucified. The Reading to younger Scholars, and some Employments imposed by
the Founder, were rather Recreations and Assistances, then divertisements from
that intended Work. The Offices which he undertook (out of Duty, not Desire)
were never the most profitable, but the more ingenuous; not such as might fill
his Purse, but increase his knowledge. It was no small accession of Respect
unto him, (or rather a consequent of the good Repute which he had already
gained) that those two Noble Hostages, (M. Edward, and M. Richard Spencers,
Sons to the Right Honorable Robert, Lord Spencer, Baron of Wormleighton) were
commended to his charge, whom he restored fully instructed with all good
Literature, the glory of Learned and Religious Nobility, and the very Ornaments
of the Country where they lived; for which faithful discharge of his great
Trust, he (and his Memory) were ever in singular Veneration with that whole
Family, and their Alliances. His Discourse was very Facetious (without offense)
when Time, and Place, and Equality of Persons permitted it. He was Entregens,
(as our Neighbors speak it) a man (upon occasions offered) of Universal
Conversation. When he was chosen into Office, the Governor of the College was
wont to give this Testimony of him, That he was a man most sincere in
Elections, and that in a Dubious victory of younger wits, it was the safest
experiment for an happy choice, to follow the Omen of his Judgment. He read a
Lecture of Divinity in the College every Sunday morning, and another day of
the week at Pembroke College (then newly erected) by the instance of the
Master, and Fellows there. He was chosen Vice President for many years
together, who by his place was to moderate the Disputations in Divinity. In all
these He demeaned himself with great depth of Learning, far from that Knowledge
which pusseth up, but accompanied with all gentleness, courtesy, humility,
and moderation. From the College, he was preferred to a Living in the
Bishopric of Durham (in their Donation) and from thence (with consent from the
same College obtained, where no request could be denied him) removed to the
Vicaridge of New Castle, a very populous Town, furnished with multitudes of
men, and no small variety of Opinions. It was a difficult task, (and only
worthy of so pious an Undertaker) so to become All Things to All men, that by
all means he might gain some. This was the place where he was first appointed
by his friends to be a Merchant; but he chose rather to be a Factor for Heaven.
One precious soul refined, polished, and fitted for his Masters use, presented
by him, was of more value to him, then all other Purchases whatsoever. He
adorned the doctrine of the Gospel (which he preached and professed) with a
suitable life and conversation: Manifesting the signs of a true Apostle. In all
things showing himself a Pattern of good-works; In doctrine incorruptnesse,
gravity, sincerity, sound speech that cannot be condemned, that they which were
of the contrary part might be ashamed, having no evil thing to say of him,
Titus 2. 7, 8.

I lately received letters from a Gentleman, who lived there at the same time
with him, who gave this Testimony of him. He was a man very studious, humble,
courteous, and charitable. At New Castle (when he went out) what money he had,
he usually gave to the poor, who at length flocked so unto him, that his
servant took care that he had not too much in his pocket. At a certain time
Doctor Henderson, the Towns Physician, his neighbor and intimate acquaintance,
(having made a Purchase) sitting sad by him, and fetching a sigh, he demanded
what was the reason? He said, that he had a payment to make and wanted money:
Doctor Jackson bad him be of good cheer, for he would furnish him; and calling
for his servant, told him the Physicians need, and asked what money he had. The
man stepping back silent, the Doctor bids him speak, at length the man said,
Forty shillings; he bad him fetch it, for Master Henderson should have it all:
at which Master Henderson turned his sadness into laughter Doctor Jackson
demanded his reason. He said, that he had need of 400. pound, or 500. pound.
Doctor Jackson answered, that he thought forty shillings was a great sum,
and that he should have it, and more also if he had had it. Thus in a place of
busy Trade and Commerce, his mind was intent upon better things, willing to
spend and to be spent for Them, not seeking Theirs but Them. After some years
of his continuance in this Town, he was invited back again to the University by
the death of the President of the same College, being chosen in his absence,
at so great a distance, so unexpectedly without any suit or petition upon his
part, that he knew nothing of the vacancie of the Place, but by the same
Letters that informed him that it was conferred upon himself. A preferment of
so good account, that it has been much desired, and eagerly sought after by
many eminent men, but never before, went so far to be accepted of. Upon his
return to Oxford, and admission to his Government, They found no alteration by
his long absence, and more converse with the world, but that he appeared yet
more humble in his elder times; and this not out of coldness and remission of
spirit, but from a prudent choice and experience of a better way: not without a
great Example of Paul the Aged, who when he had Authority to command that which
is convenient, (yet for loves sake) chose rather to beseech, Epistle to
Philemon. He ruled in a most obliging manner, the Fellows, Scholars, Servants,
Tenants, Nemo ab eo tristis discessit, no man departed from him with a sad
heart, excepting in this particular, that by some misdemeanour, or willing
error, they had created Trouble, or given any offense unto him. He used the
Friends as well as the Memory of his Predecessors fairly. He was Presidens
pacificus, a lover and maker of Peace. He silenced and composed all
differences, displeasures, and animosities by a prudent Impartiality, and the
example of his own sweet disposition. All men taking notice that nothing was
more hateful unto him then Hatred it self, nothing more offensive to his body,
and mind, it was a shame and cruelty (as well as presumption) to afflict his
peaceable spirit. It is a new and peculiar Art of Discipline, but successefully
practiced by him, that those under his Authority were kept within Bounds and
Order, not so much out of fear of the Penalty, as out of love to the Governor.
He took notice of that which was good in the worst men, and made that an
occasion to commend them for the goods sake; and living himself, tanquam nemini
ignosceret, as if he were so severe, that he could forgive no man, yet he
reserved large Pardons for the imperfections of others. His nature was wholly
composed of the properties of Charity it self. Charity suffers long, and is
kind, etc. Bears all things, believes all things, hops all things,
endures all things. I can truly avouch this testimony concerning him, that
living in the same College with him, more then twenty years, (partly when he
was Fellow, and partly when he returned President) I never heard (to my best
remembrance) one word of Anger, or dislike against him. I have often resembled
him in my thoughts (with favor of that honorable Person, be it spoken) to him
(whose name sounds very near him) who being placed Dr. Juxon.
in the upper part of the World, carried on his Dignity with that Justice,
Modesty, Integrity, Fidelity, and other gracious plausibilities, that in a
place of Trust, he contented those whom he could not satisfy, and in a place
of Envy procured the Love of them who amulated his greatness, and by his
Example showed the pre-eminence and security of true Christian Wisdom, before
all the sleights of humane Policy, that in a busy time no man was found to
accuse him; So this good Man (in that inferior Orb which God had placed him)
demeaned himself with that Christian Innocence, Candor, Wisdom, and Modesty,
that malice it self was more wary then to cast any aspersions upon him. I shall
willingly associate Him to those other Worthies his Predecessors in the same
College (all living at the same time) To the invaluable Bishop Jewel,
Theologorum quas Orbis Christianus per aliquot annorum centenarios produxit
maximo, as grave Bishop Goodwin has described him, the greatest Divine that
for some former Centuries of years the Christian World has produced. To the
famous Mr. Hooker, who for his solid Writings was surnamed, The Judicious, and
entitled by the same, Theologorum Oxonium. The Oxford of Divines, as One calls
Athens, The Greece of Greece it self. To the learned Dr. Reinolds, who managed
the Government of the same College, with the like care, honor, and integrity,
although not with the same austerities.

He willingly admitted (and was much delighted in) the acquaintance and
familiarity of hopeful young Divines, not despising their youth, but accounting
them as sons and Brethren, encouraging and advising them what Books to read,
and with what holy preparations, lending them such Books as they had need of,
and hoping withal that (considering the brevity of his own life) some of them
might live to finish that work upon the Creed, which he had happily begun unto
them. This was one of the special advises and directions which he commended to
young men. Hear the Dictates of your own Conscience: Quod dubitas ne feceris,
making this the Comment upon that of Syracides, In all thy matters trust (or
believe) thine own soul, and bear it not down by impetuous and contradictious
lusts, etc. He was as diffusive of his knowledge, counsel, and advice, as of
any other his works of Mercy.

In all the Histories of learned, pious, and devout men, you shall scarcely
meet with one that disdained the World more generously: not out of ignorance of
it, as one brought up in Cells and darkness, for he was known and endeared to
men of the most resplendent Fortunes; nor out of melancholy disposition, for he
was cheerful and content in all estates, but out of a due and deliberate
scorn, knowing the true value, that is, the vanity of it. As perferments were
heaped upon him without his suit, or knowledge, so there was nothing in his
power to give, which he was not ready and willing to part withal, to the
deserving or indigent man. His Vicarage of St. Nicholas Church in New Castle,
he gave to Mr. Alvye of Trinity College, upon no other relation, but out of
the good opinion which he conceived of his merits. The Vicarage of Witny near
Oxford, after he had been at much pains, travail, and expense to clear the
Title of the Rectory to all succeeding Ministers, when he had made it a Portion
sitting either to give, or keep, he freely bestowed it upon the worthy Mr.
Thomas White, then Proctor of the University, late Chaplain to the College,
and now Incumbent upon the Rectory. A College Lease, of a place called Lie in
Gloucestershire presented to him as a gratuity by the Fellows, he made over to
a Third, (late Fellow there) merely upon a plea of Poverty. And whereas they
that first offered it unto him were unwilling that he should relinquish it, and
held out for a long time in a dutiful opposition, He used all his power,
friendship, and importunity with them, till at length he prevailed to surrender
it. Many of his necessary friends, and attendance have professed that they made
several journeys, and employed all powerful mediation with the Bishop, that
he might not be suffered to resign his Prebendship of Winchester to a Fourth;
and upon knowledge that by their contrivance, he was disappointed of his
resolution herein, he was much offended that the Manus mortua, or Law of
Mortmain should be imposed upon him, whereby in former days they restrained
the liberality of devout men toward the Colleges, and the Clergy. But this
was interpreted as a discurtesie and dis-service unto him, who knew that it was
a more Blessed thing to give then to receive. But that which remained unto him,
was dispersed unto the Poor, to whom he was a faithful dispenser in all places
of his abode, distributing unto them with a free heart, a bountiful hand, a
comfortable speech, and a cheerful eye. How disrespectfull was he of Mammon,
the God of this world, the golden Image which Kings and Potentates have set up?
before whom the Trumpets play for War and slaughter, and Nations and
Languages fall down and worship, besides all other kind of Music for jollity
and delight, to drown (if it were possible) the noise of Blood, which is most
audible, and cries lowdest in the ears of the Almighty. How easily could he
cast that away, for which others throw away their lives and salvation, running
headlong into the place of eternal skreekings, weeping, and gnashing of teeth.
If it were not for this spirit of Covetousness, all the World would be at
quiet. Certainly (although the nature of man be an apt soil for sin to flourish
in, yet) if the Love of money be the root of all evil, it could not grow up in
him, because it had no Root: and if it be so hard for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom of God, and the narrow gate which leads unto Life, then he that
stooped so low by humbleness of mind, and emptied himself so nearly by
mercifulness unto the Poor, must needs find an easier passage: Doubtless,
they that say and do these Things, show plainly that they seek another
Country, that is, an heavenly, for if they had been mindful of This, they
might have taken opportunity to have used it more advantageously.

His Devotions toward God were assiduous and exemplarie, both in public and
private. He was a diligent frequenter of the public Service in the Chapel,
very early in the Morning, and at Evening, except some urgent occasions of
Infirmity did excuse him. His private Conferences with God by Prayer and
Meditation were never omitted, upon any occasion whatsoever. When he went the
yearly progress to view the College Lands, and came into the Tenants House,
it was his constant custom (before any other business, discourse, or care of
Himself, were he never so wet or weary) to call for a retiring room to pour out
his soul unto God, who led him safely in his journey. And this he did not out
of any specious pretense of Holiness, to devour a Widows House with more
facility, Rack their Rents, or Enhance their Fines, for excepting the constant
Revenue to the Founder (to whom he was a strict accountant) no man ever did
more for them, or less for himself. For thirty years together he used this
following Anthem, and Collect (commanded by the Pious Founder) in Honor and
Confession of the Holy and Undivided Trinity. Salva nos, Libera nos, Vivifica
nos, O Beata Trinitas, etc. Save us, Deliver us, Quicken us, O Blessed Trinity.
Let us praise God the Father, and the Son, with the Holy Spirit, let us praise
and Super-exalt his Name for ever. Almighty and everlasting God, which have
given unto us, thy servants, Grace by the Confession of a true Faith, to
acknowledge the Glory of the Eternal Trinity, and in the Power of the Divine
Majesty to Worship the Unity: We beseech thee that through the stedfastness of
this Faith, we may evermore be defended from all Adversity, which live and
raignest, etc.

This he did perform, not only as a Sacred Injunction of the Founder (upon him
and all the Society) but he received a great Delight in the performance of it.
No man ever wrote more highly of the Attributes of God then he, and yet he
professes that he always took more comfort in admiring, then in disputing, and
in praying to, and acknowledgeing the Majesty and Glory of the Blessed Trinite,
then by too curiously prying into the Mystery. He Composed a Book of Private
Devotions, which some judicious men (having perused the same) much Extolled and
Admired, as being replenished with Holy Raptures, and Divine Meditations, which
(if it be not already annexed to this Book) I hope the Reader will shortly
enjoy in a Portable Volume by it self.

Thus have many other Famous Scholars and Polemical men (in their Elder times)
betaken themselves to Catechizing, and Devotion, as Pareus, Bishop Andrews,
Bishop Usher, and Bellarmin himself seems to prefer his Book De Ascensione
Mentis ad Deum, Of the Ascension of the Soul to God, before any other part of
his Works. Books (says he) are not to be estimated, Ex multitudine foliorum,
sed ex fructibus, By the multitude of the Leaves, but the Fruit. My other Books
I read only upon necessity, but this I have willingly read over three or four
times, and resolve to read it more often; whether it be (says he) that the
Love toward it be greater then the Merit, because (like another Benjamin) it
was the Son of mine old age.

He seemed to be very Prophetical of the Ensuing times of trouble, as may
evidently appear by his Sermons before the King, and Appendix about the signs
of the Times, or Divine Fore-warnings therewith Printed some years before,
touching the Great Tempest of Wind which fell out upon the Eve of the Fifth of
November, 1636. He was much astonished at it; and what apprehension he had of
it appears by his words. -- This mighty Wind was more then a Sign of the Time,
the very Time it self was a Sign, and portends thus much, That though we of
this Kingdom were in firm League with all Nations, yet it is still in Gods
Power, we may fear in his Purpose to plague this Kingdom by this or like
tempests more grievously then he has done at any time by Famine, Sword, or
Pestilence, to bury many living souls, as well of Superior, as of Inferior
Rank, in the Ruin of their stately Houses, or meaner Cottages, etc. Which was
observed by many, but signally by the Prefacer to M. Herberts Remains, I shall
not prevent the Reader, or detain him so long from the Original of that Book as
to repeat the Elogies which are there conferred upon Him; I cannot forbear one
passage in that Preface wherein he makes this profession. I speak it in the
presence of God, I have not read so hearty, vigorous a Champion against Rome
(amongst our writers of his rank) so convincing and demonstrative as D. Jackson
is. I bless God for the confirmation which he has given me in the Christian
Religion against the Athean, Jew, and Socinian, and in the Protestant against
Rome.

As he was always a Reconciler of differences in his Private Government, so he
seriously lamented the Public Breaches of the Kingdom. For the Divisions of
Reuben he had great Thoughts of Heart. At the first Entrance of the Scots into
England, he had much compassion for his Countrymen, although that were but the
beginning of their Sorrows. He well knew that War was commonly attended with
Ruin and Calamity, especially to Church and Churchmen; and therefore that
Prayer was necessary and becoming of them, Da pacem Domine in diebus nostris,
etc. Give peace in our time, O Lord, because there is no other that fights
for us but only thou, O God, One drop of Christian blood (though never so
cheaply spilt by others like water upon the ground) was a deep Corrosive to his
tender heart. Like Rachel weeping for her children, he could not be comforted.
His body grew weak, the cheerful hue of his countenance was impaled and
discolored, and he walked like a dying Mourner in the streets. But God took
him from the evil to come; It was a sufficient Degree of punishment for him to
foresee it; it had been more then a thousand Deaths unto him to have beheld it
with his Eyes. When his Death was now approaching, being in the chamber with
many others, I overheard him with a soft voice repeating to himself these and
the like Ejaculations. I wait for the Lord, my Soul does wait, and in his Word
do I hope; my Soul waits for the Lord more then they that watch for the
morning. As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness, I shall be
satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. And he ended with this Cygnean
Cantion, Psalm. 116. 5. Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our God is
merciful. The Lord preserves the simple, I was brought low and he helped me.
Return unto thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.
And having thus spoken, soon after he surrendered up his Spirit to Him that
gave it.

If you shall curiously enquire what this Charitable man left in Legacy at his
death, I must needs answer, that giving all in his Life time, as he owed
nothing but Love, so he left nothing when he Dyed. The Poor was his Heir, and
he was the Administrator of his own Goods; or (to use his own Expression in one
of his last Dedications) he had little else to leave his Executors, but his
Papers only, which the Bishop of Armagh (being at his Funerals) much desired
might be carefully preserved. This was that which he left to Posterity in pios
usus, for the furtherance of Piety and Godliness, in perpetuam Eleemosynam, for
a perpetual deed of Charity, which I hope the Reader will advance to the utmost
improvement. He that reads this will find his Learning Christening him The
Divine, and his Life witnessing him a man of God, a Preacher of Righteousness,
and I might add, a Prophet of things to come. They that read those
Qualifications which he in his Second and Third Book requires in them which
hope to understand the Scriptures aright, and see how great an insight he had
into them, and how many hid Mysteries he has unfolded to this Age, will say
his Life was good, Superlatively good. The Reader may easily perceive that he
had no design in his opinions; no hopes but that blessed One proposed in the
beginning, that no preferment nor desire of Wealth, nor affectation of
Popularity, should ever draw him from writing upon this Subject; for which no
man so fit as he, because (to use his own Divine and high Apothegme) No man
could properly write of Justifying Faith, but he that was equally affected to
Death and Honor.

Thus have I presented you with a Memorial of that Excellent Man, but with
infinite disadvantage from the unskilfulness of the Relator, and some likewise
from the very disposition of the Party himself. The humble man conceals his
perfections with as much pains, as the proud covers his defects, and avoids
observation as industriously, as the Ambitious provoke it. He that would draw a
face to the Life, commands the Party to sit down in the Chair in a constant and
unremoved Posture, and a Countenance composed, that he may have the full view
of every line, color, and dimension; whereas he that will not yield to these
Ceremonies, must be surprised at unawares, by Artificial stealth, and
unsuspected glances, like the Divine who was drawn at distance from the Pulpit,
or an ancient man in our days, whose Statue being to be erected, the Artificer
that carved it, was enforced to take him sleeping. That which I have here
designed (next to the Glory of God, which is to be praised in all his Saints)
is the benefit of the Christian Reader, that he may learn by his Example, as
well as by his writings, by his Life as well as by his Works, which is the
earnest desire of him who unfaignedly wishes the health and Salvation of your
Souls.

E. V.

THE ETERNAL TRVTH OF Scriptures, AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF Thereon wholly
depending, Manifested by it own light. Delivered in two Books of COMMENTARIES
upon the Apostles Creed. The former, Containing the positive grounds of
Christian Religion in general, cleared from all exceptions of Atheists or
Infidels. The later, Manifesting the Grounds of Reformed Religion to be so firm
and sure, that the Romanists cannot oppugn them, but with the utter overthrow
of the Romish Church, Religion, and Faith.

By THOMAS JACKSON, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by R. Norton, for T. Garthwait, 1653.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, RALPH Lord EVRE, Baron of MALTON and WILTON, Lord
President of his Majesty's Court established in the Principality and Marches
of Wales: My singular good LORD.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THough few others would, I trust Your Lordship will vouchsafe countenance to
these Commentaries, rude and imperfect I must confess, but whose untimely or
too hasty birth (if so it prove, and must be censured) has not been caused by
any inordinate appetite, but only from a longing desire of testifying that
love and duty which I owe unto your Honorable Family and Person, as in many
other respects, so chiefly in this: That being engaged unto a more gainful,
but not so good a course of life, and well-nigh rooted in another soil; I was
by your Lordships favorable advice and countenance transplanted to this famous
Nursery of good learning. Wherein (by his blessing who only gives increase to
what his servants plant or water) I have grown to such a degree of maturity, as
these raw Meditations argue, or so wild a graft was capable of Course and
unpleasant my fruit may prove: but, whiles it shall please the Lord to continue
his wonted blessings of health and other opportunities, altogether unfruitful
(by his assistance) I will not, altogether idle I cannot, be. Such as these
first fruits are (much better I dare not promise,) the whole after-crop (I
trust) shall be: both, for the sincerity of my intention, acceptable (I doubt
not) to my God; the later, I hope, more ripe in the judgment of men, then can
in reason be expected the first fruits of the same man's labors should be. Thus
humbly beseeching your Honor to accept these as they are, and to esteem of
them (howsoever otherwise) as an undoubted pledge of a mind endeavoring to
show it self thankful for benefits already received; and much desiring the
continuance of your honorable favors: I continue my prayers unto the Almighty
that he would multiply his best favors and blessings upon you.

Corpus-Christi College in Oxford. October 5. Your Lordships much devoted
Chaplain, THOMAS JACKSON.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
IGnorant altogether I am not of the disposition, though not much acquainted
with the practices of this present age: wherein, to have meditated upon so many
several matters as I here present unto thy Christian view, will unto some (I
know) seem but an effect of melancholy, as to have taken the pains to pen
them, will argue my want of other employments, or forlorn hopes of worldly
thriving. Unto others (and those more to be regarded) so soon in print to
publish what had been not so well concocted, and more rawly penned, will be
censured as a spice of that vanity which usually haunts smatterers in good
learning, but wherewith judicious Clerks are seldom infected. To the former I
only wish minds more settled, or less conscience of their own extravagancies
and careless mispence of choicest time, faults apt to breed a mislike of
others industry in such courses as will approve themselves in his sight that
sits as Judge and trier of all our ways, howsoever such as desire to be mere
Bystanders as well in Church as Commonwealths affairs, may upon sinister
respects, mutually misinform themselves. For many of the later, I am afraid,
lest, being partly such and so esteemed, they preposterously affect not to be
taken for more judicious scholars then indeed they are: for the fostering of
which conceit in others, their unwillingnesse to publish what they have
conceived aright, may well be apprehended as a means not improbable. Not to
expose their Meditations to public censure, is and has been (as the Christian
world too well can witness) a resolution incident to men of greatest
judgment: though no such essential property, as necessarily argues, either
all so minded to be, or all otherwise minded, not to be, alike judicious.
Certain it is, the more excellent the internal feature of men's minds is, the
greater disparagement to them will an ordinary representation of it be, and to
adorn their their choice conceits with such outward attire as best beseems
them, would require too great costs and charges. Thus from perfection oft-times
springs defect: whilst judgment, too much over-growing fancy, and drying up
that kind affection, whereby the fruit and virtue of one soul is diffused unto
another, makes men more jealous of diminishing the high estimate of their
fore-prized worth, then zealous of their inferiors good, which many times
might be reaped in greatest abundance from such labors as yield least
contentment to their Authors. In this respect alone can I gratulate my
imperfections: hoping that as my meditations can neither please the delicate,
for their form, nor inform the judicious for their matter, so they may prove
neither offensive for the one, nor unfruitful for the other, unto many of a
middle and inferior rank.

At the least (I trust) they will occasion some others, whom God has blessed
with better ability and opportunity, to hunt that out which in this long
range I may chance to start, or make full conquest of that goodly field wherein
that inestimable pearl lies bid, for whose discovery these my travels may
happily yield some observations not impertinent. To this end have I purposely
trained my wits to untroden paths, to adventure on new passages, unto that
true treasure which all of us traffic for, oft-times one to another
hindrance, the more because we beat one place too much, when as many others
might afford us the same or greater commodities better cheap. Though the truth
be one: yet it is not always of one shape, whiles we look upon it diverse
ways. The Mine wherein it lies, is inexhaustible; oft-times more full of
dross and rubbidge, where most have dug: and, though the inward substance
of it be the same, yet the refining of it admits variety of inventions. Do not
prejudice me (charitable Reader) so much as in thy secret censure, as if these
premises might seem to argue my dissent in any conclusions which our Church
professes: the event (I trust) shall acquit me, and condemn all my accusers,
if any I have; and how I stand affected in points of spiritual obedience to my
superiors, thou may be informed, if it please thee but to peruse some few
sheets of these my first fruits, which I presume thou will, surely thou
ought, ere thy censure pass upon me. If in the explication of some Points I
fully accord not with some well esteemed domestic Writers: I trust Sarahs
freeborn children may enjoy that privilege amongst themselves, which is
permitted the sons of Hagar, in respect of their brethren, though all absolute
bondmen to their mother. Yet that I do not thus far dissent from any of my
mothers children, upon emulation or humor of contradiction, thou will rest
satisfied upon my sincere religious protestation, That the whole fabric of
this intended work was set, and every main conclusion resolved upon, before I
read any English Writer upon the arguments which I handle. From some indeed
which had written before me, I have since perceived a direct dissent in one or
two points of moment; but wherein they had (in my judgment) contradicted the
most judicious Writers of our Church and all Antiquity I am acquainted with,
more rashly, then I would do the meanest this day living. Yet shall they, or
whosoever of their opinion, find the manner of my disputing with them, such as
shall not (I trust) exasperate, howsoever the dissonance of matter may dislike
them. For outlandish or foreign Latin Writers, I must ingeniously confess,
when I first labored to be instructed in the fundamental principles of faith
and manners, some points which I much wished, I found they had not handled, in
others, wherein I misliked nothing as unsound, I could not always find that
full satisfaction, which (me thought) a more accurate Artist (for a mean one I
was then my self) would require. The greater since has been my desire either
of giving, or by my attempt, of procuring satisfaction. But will not others,
when I have done my best, so think and say of mine, as I have done of these
much better endeavors? It were great arrogance to expect any less.
Notwithstanding, if what they shall find defective in my labors, move them to
no worse patience, then what I thought (at least) was so in theirs that every
way go before me, has done me: nor I, nor they, nor the Church of Christ, (by
this means partaker, and free to dislike or approve of both our labors) shall
(I trust) have any great cause to repent us of our pains. For thy better
satisfaction, I will acquaint thee with the particulars which moved me to write.

First, in unfolding the nature and properties of Christian Faith, to omit the
errors of the Romish Church, (wherein it is impossible it should ever come to
full growth,) many in reformed, too much followed in particular Sermons, did
strive to ripen it too fast. I have heard complaints immediately from the
mouths of some yet living, of others deceased, that they had been set too
far in their first Lessons: that the hopes they had out of hand directly
built upon Gods general promises applied to them by their Instructours, were
too weighty, unless the foundations of their faith had first been more deeply
and surely planted. That certainty of justification and full persuasion of
inherent sanctifying grace, whereat these Worthies (whose footsteps I precisely
track not) aim, is (I protest) the mark which I propose unto my self, but
cannot hope at the first shoot to hit; if at the second, third, or fourth (as
shall please God,) it must content me. In the mean time (I hope) I shall
neither offend him, nor any of his, as long as I gather ground of what I
prosecute, and still come nearer and nearer the proposed end. The first step,
me thought, that tended most directly to this certain apprehension of saving
faith, was our undoubted Assent unto the divine truth of Scriptures in general:
and for the working of this assurance, means subordinate I could conceive none
better for the kind (particulars others happily may find more forcible,)
then such as I have prosecuted at large in the first Book: not ignorant, that
such as moved me more, might move others less, those every man most, that were
of his own gathering, wherein the disposition of the divine providence (always
concurrent to this search so men would mark it) is most conspicuous. For this
purpose I have proposed such variety of Observations, as almost every one able
to read the Scriptures or other Authors, of what sort or profession soever,
students especially, may be occasioned to make the like themselves, well hoping
to find a Method as facile and easy for establishing the assent of the simple,
and altogether illiterate, unto those articles whose distinct explicit
knowledge is most necessary to salvation. But many (I know) will deem the
broken traditions, or imperfect relations of heathen men (for these I use,) but
weak supporters for so great an edifice: nor did I intend them for such
service. Their ignorance notwithstanding, and darkened minds, do much commend
the light of divine truth, so may the experience of their vanity dispose our
minds to embrace the stability of Gods Word with greater steadfastness. We know
the virtue and benefit of the Sun, not so much by looking upon it self
continually or directly, as by the variety of other objects or colors, all
pleasant with it to the eye, but altogether invisible or indistinguishable
without it: so for mine part, I must profess, that such historical narrations,
poetical fictions, or other conceits of Heathens as they themselves knew little
use of, nor should I have done had I been as they were, being compared with
this heavenly light of Gods Word, did much affect me even in my best and most
retired meditations, of sacred mysteries, their observation, as it were, tied
my soul by a new knot, or fest, more surely unto that truth, which I knew
before to be in it self most sure, most infallible. Yea even in points wherein
my heart, unto my seeming, was best established, it much did nourish, augment,
and strengthen belief already planted, to observe the perfect consonancie, of
profane with sacred Writers, or the occasions of their dissonancie, to be
evidently such, as Scriptures specify: that of many events wondered at by their
Heathenish relators, no tolerable reason could be given, but such as are
subordinate to the never-failing rules of Scripture. And whosoever will, may (I
presume) observe by Experiment, the truth of what I say. There is no motive
unto belief so weak or feeble, but may be very available for quelling
temptations of some kind or other, either in speculation or practice; oft-times
such as are absolutely more weak or feeble, more effectual for expelling some
peculiar distrust or presumption, then others far more forcible and strong
for vanquishing temptations of another kind, in nature most grievous. Many,
half students, half gallants, are often tempted either to distrust the
commendations of this Eden which we are set to dress, or distaste the food of
life that grows within it, from delights suggested by profane books, wherewith
commonly they are first acquainted, and hence much affect the knowledge their
Authors profer, as likely to Deifie them in the worlds eyes. Our proneness to
be thus persuaded, is a witness of our first parents transgression, and these
suggestions as relics of Satan's baits, whereby he wrought their bain. But
what is the remedy? not to tread in any heathenish soil, lest these serpents
sting us? rather the best medicine for this malady would be a confection of
that very flesh wherein such deadly poison lodged. Other arguments may more
persuade the judicious, or such as in some measure have tasted the fruits of
the spirit: But none the curious artist better, then such as are gathered from
his esteemed Authors. Even such as are in faith most strong, of zeal most
ardent, should not much mispend their time, in comparing the degenerate
fictions, or historical relations of times ancient or modern, with the
everlasting truth. For, though this method could not add much increase, either
to their faith, or zeal: yet would it doubtless much avail for working placid
and mild affections. The very pencilmen of sacred writ themselves were taught
patience, and instructed in the ways of Gods providence, by their experience
of such events as the course of time is never barren of, not always related by
Canonical Authors, nor immediately testified by the spirit, but often times
believed upon a moral certainty, or such a resolution of circumstances
concurrent into the first cause or disposer of all affairs, as we might make of
modern accidents, were we otherwise partakers of the spirit, or would we mind
heavenly matters as much as earthly.

Generally two points I have observed, not much for ought I know, if handled at
all by any writer: albeit their fruit and use would fully recompense the best
pains of any one man's lifetime, though wholly spent in their discussion, whose
want in my mind has been the bane of true devotion in most ages. The first is
an equivalencie of means in the wisdom of God so proportioned to the
diversity of times, as no age could have better then the present, howsoever
they may affect the extraordinary signs and wonders of former generations. Of
this argument here and there, as occasion shall serve in this work; elsewhere
at large, if God permit. The second is, an equivalencie of Errors, Hypocrisy,
Infidelity, and Idolatry, all which vary rather their shape then substance, in
most men, through ages, nations, and professions, the ignorance of God
remaining for the most part the same, his attributes as much (though in another
kind) transformed by many in outward profession joined with the true Church, as
in times past by the Heathen. The truth of which assertion, with the original
causes of the error, and means to prevent it, are discussed at large in the
article of the Godhead. Many likewise for ought their conscience (because not
rightly examined) will witness to the contrary, are strongly persuaded they
love Christ with heart and soul, and so detest as well the open blasphemy, or
professed hatred, which the Jew; as the secret enmity the Jesuit or other
infamous Heretics, bear against him: when as often times the only ground of
their love to him, is their spite to some or all of these, as they are
deciphered to them in odious shape, the only original of their despite to
these, the very dregs of Jewish, Popish, or other Heretical humors in
themselves, by some light tincture of that truth which they outwardly profess,
exasperated to more bitter enmity against them with whose internal temper they
best agree, then otherwise they could conceive; as admission to place of credit
or authority makes base minds, conscious of their own forepast villainies, more
rigid censurers of others misdemeanors, or cruel persecutors of such
malefactors, as themselves in action have been, and in heart yet are (were all
occasions and opportunities the same) then any moderate or sincere man in life
and action could be. Of the original of this disease, with the crisis and
remedy, as also the trial of faith inherent, in the articles concerning Christ
and remission of sins.

From the manner of Jerusalems progress to her first destruction, and discovery
of the Jews natural temper (the principal subject of my subcisive or vacant
hours from these meditations, and other necessary employments of my calling) I
have observed the original as well of most states, as men's miscariages
professing true religion, to have been from presumption of Gods favor before
dangers approach, and distrust of his mercy after calamities seiz upon them:
The root of both these misperswasions to be ignorance or error in the doctrine
of Gods providence, whose true knowledge (if I may so speak) is the fertile womb
of all sacred moral truths, the only rule of rectifying men's wills,
persuasions, and affections, in all consultations or practices private or
public. Unto this purpose much would it avail to be resolved, whether all
things fall out by fatal necessity, or some contingently; how fate and
contingency (if compatible each with other) stand mutually affected, how both
subordinate to the absolute immutability of that one everlasting decree. Want
of resolution in these points, (as far as my observation serves me) has
continually bred an universal threefold want: of care and vigilancie for
preventing dangers in themselves avoidable: of alacrious endeavors to redeem
time in part surprised by them; of patience, of hearty submission to Gods will,
and constant expectation of his providence, after all hope of redemption from
temporal plagues long threatened by his messengers, is past. For here we suppose
(what out of the fundamental principles of Christian religion shall in good
time be made evident) that in all ruinated states, or forepast alterations of
religion from better to worse, there was a time wherein the possibility of
misfortunes which afterward befell them, might have been prevented, a time
wherein they might have been recovered from eminent dangers, wherewith they
were encompast, a time after which there was no possibility left them of
avoiding the day of visitation, never brought forth but by the precedent
fullness of iniquity, but always necessarily by it. In the discussion of these
and other points of like nature (because more depending upon strict examination
of consequences deduced from the undoubted rules of Scripture, then upon
authorities of antiquity, skill in the tongues, or any other learning that
required long experience or observation) I labored most, whilst those Arts
and Sciences which are most conducible to this search, were freshest in my
memory. And could I hope to satisfy others in all or most of these, as fully
as I have long since done my self, I should take greatest pleasure in my pains
addressed to this purpose. But would it please the Lord in mercy to raise up
some English writer, that could in such sort handle these points, as their use
and consequence, or necessity of present times requires: succeeding ages (I am
persuaded) should have more cause to bless the day of his nativity, then of the
greatest States-mens or stoutest Warriors this land has yielded since the
birth of our Fathers this day living. It shall suffice he to begin the offering
with my mite, in hope some learned Academicks (for unto them belongs the
conquest of this golden fleece) will employ their Talents to like public use.
What I conceive, shall be (by Gods assistance) unfolded in as plain and
unoffensive terms, as the nature of the subject will bear, or my faculties
reach unto, partly in the Article of Gods providence, partly in other
discourses directly subordinate unto it.

Lastly, for the full and perfect growth, at least for the sweet and pleasant
flourishing of lively Faith, one of the most effectual means our industry that
can but plant or water, attains unto, would be to unfold the harmony betwixt
Prophetical predictions, and Historical events concerning the Kingdom of
Christ, and time of the Gospel: a point, for ought I know, not purposely
handled by any modern writer, except those whose success cannot be great, until
their delight in contention and contradiction be less. Notwithstanding,
whatsoever I shall find good in them or any other, without all respect of
persons, much more without all desire of opposition, or occasion of contention
(a matter always undecent in a Christian, but most odious and lothsom in a
subject so melodious and pleasant,) I will not be afraid to follow, intending a
full Treatise of the diverse kinds of Prophecies, with the manner of their
interpretations, before the Articles of Christ's Incarnation, Passion and
Ascension.

These are the especial points, which for the better confirmation of true
Christian faith, and rectifying persuasions in matters of manners or good life,
are principally aimed at in these meditations. The main obstacle the Atheist
stumbles at, is the Article of the bodies resurrection. Whose passive
possibility shall by (Gods assistance) be evidently demonstrated against him by
the undoubted rules of nature, whose Priest or Minister he professes himself
to be. That de facto it shall be, the Scriptures, whose truth ere then will
appear Divine, must assure us; Nature cannot, though thus much were in some
sort known and believed by many natural men from traditions of the ancient, or
suspected from some notions of the law of nature not quite obliterated in all
sorts of the heathen, as shall in that Article (God willing) be observed. But
why our Assent unto this and all other Articles in this Creed, being in good
measure established, the momentary hopes or transitory pleasures of this world,
should with most in their whole course of life, with all of us in many
particular actions, in private and secret temptations, more prevail, then that
exceeding weight of glory, which Christian hope would fasten on our souls, to
keep unruly affections under, has often enforced me to wonder, and wonderment
hereat first moved me to untertake these labors, if by any means I may attain
unto the causes of this so grievous an infirmity, or find out some part of a
remedy for it. Doubtless, had the heathen Philosophers but known or suspected
such joys, as we profess we believe and hope for, or such a death, or more
then deadly torments, as after this life ended we fear; their lives and manners
would as far have surpassed the best Christians now living, as their knowledge
in supernatural mysteries came short of the most learned that are or have been
in that profession: and yet whatsoever helps any Christian or heathen had for
increasing knowledge or bettering manners, are more plentiful in this then any
precedent age, so that the fault is wholly in our selves, that will not apply
medicines already prepared, as shall (God prospering these proceedings) be
declared in the last Article of this Creed.

For controversies betwixt us and the Romish Church, besides such are directly
opposite to the end and method proposed, I purposely meddle with none: of that
rank, some (as that of the Churches infallibility) undermine the very
foundation, others (as the doctrine of merit and justification, the
propitiation of the Mass) unroof the edifice, and deface the walls of Christian
faith, leaving nothing thereof but altarstones for their idolatrous sacrifices.
For this reason have I built with one hand, and used my weapon with the other:
laying the positive or general grounds of Faith against the Infidel or Atheist
in the first Book, and gaurding them in the second by the sword of the Spirit,
against all attempts of Romish Sanballats, or Tobiahs, who still labor to
persuade our people the walls of Christ's Church here erected since our
forefathers redemption from captivity, unless supported by their supposed
infallibility, are so weak, Nehem. 4 5.
That if a Fox should go upon them, he should break them down. In the third
(which was at this time intended, but must stay a while to bring forth a
fourth) I batter those painted walls, whose shallow foundations are discovered
in the second. The other controversies about the propitiatory sacrifices of the
Mass, Merits, and Justification, I prosecute in the Articles of Christ's
Passion, and of final judgment.

By this (beloved Reader) thou may perceive my journey is long, and may well
plead my excuse for setting forth so soon: but from that course which I have
chosen, or rather God has set me, I trust nor hopes of preferment, nor any
desires of worldly wealth nor affectation of popularity, by handling more
plausible or Time-serving arguments, shall ever draw me away. So far I am from
aiming at any such sinister end, That since I begun to comment upon the nature
of Christian faith, I never could, nor ever shall persuade my self it possibly
can find quiet lodging, much less safe harbor, but in an heart alike affected
to Death and Honor; always retaining the Desires, and fear of both (either
severally considered, or mutually compared) in equal balance. Both are good
when God in mercy sends them; both evil, and hard to determine whether worse, to
unprepared minds, or whilst procured by our sollicitous or importunate suit or
bestowed upon us in their Donours anger. Only this difference I find; death is
mankinds inevitable doom, but worldly preferment neither so common to all, nor
so certain to any: the less (in reason) should be our endeavors either for
providing it, or preparing our selves to salute it decently, though coming of
it own accord to meet us. But what meditations can be too long, or what
endeavors too laborious for gaining of an happy end, or giving a messenger of
so importunate and weighty consequence as death one way or other brings,
correspondent entertainment? This Christian modesty I have learned long since
of the heathen Socrates, to beseech my God he would vouchsafe me such a portion
of wealth, or whatsoever this world esteems, as none but an honest, upright,
religious mind can bear: or, to use the words of a better teacher, That of all
my labors under the sun, I may reap the fruit in holiness, and in the end, the
End of these my present meditations, Everlasting Life.

Thine in Christ, THOMAS JACKSON.

A Table of the Several Sections and Chapters in the 2. Books following.
The first Book divided into two general parts: The one explicating the nature
of Belief in general: the other showing the Method, how our Assent unto the
divine truth of Scriptures may be established.
The first general part contained in the first and second Sections.
SECT. I.
CAP. 1. THE definition of Belief in general, with the explication. [from
parag. 1. to the 12.] The diverse objects and grounds thereof, and by what
means it is increased. parag. 12, etc. Page 2
SECT. II.
CAP. 2. Of Assent unto objects supernatural, or, unto what a natural Belief of
such Objects, or a bare acknowledgement of Scriptures, for Gods Word, binds all
men. page 7 CAP. 3. Of general incitements, to search the truth of Scriptures,
or Christian Belief. 9
The second general part, containing the Heads or Topics of such observations
as may confirm the divine truth of Scriptures, of which some are External, some
Internal.
SECT. I.
Of Observations internal or incident unto Scriptures, without reference to any
relations or events other then are specified in themselves. 13 CAP. 4. Of
Historical Characters of sacred Antiquities. 13 CAP. 5. Of the Harmony of
sacred Writers. 17 CAP. 6. Of the Affections or dispositions of sacred Writers.
19
SECT. II.
Of Experiments and Observations external, answerable to the rules of
Scriptures. page 25 CAP. 7. Containing the Topic, whence such observations
must be drawn. 25 CAP. 8. That Heathenish Fables ought not to prejudice divine
truths. 26 CAP. 9. Observations out of Poets in general, and of dreams in
particular. 27 CAP. 10. Of Oracles. 30 CAP. 11. Of the apparitions of the
heathen Gods, and their Heroicks. 34 CAP. 12. The reasons of our mistrusting of
Antiquities. 37 CAP. 13. Of the diversity of events in different Ages. 39 CAP.
14. Of the original and right use of Poetry, with the manner of its corruption
by later Poets. 42 CAP. 15. Of some particular Fables resembling some true
stories of the Bible. 47 CAP. 16. Of Noah's and Deucalions flood, with other
Miscellane observations. 50 CAP. 17. Of Sacred Writers sobriety and discretion
in relating true miracles, compared especially with later Heathens vanity, in
coining fruitless wonders. 57
The third SECTION of the second general Part.
Containing Experiments drawn from the revolution of States, or Gods public
judgments, but especially of the estate of the Jews from time to time. 61 CAP.
18. Of the state of these Jews before our Saviors time, gathered from heathen
Authors, with Tullies objection against them. 61 CAP. 19. The ill success of
Pompey the great for his going into the Sanctum sanctorum: the manner of his
death witnessing his sin: the miscariage of Crassus, (parallel likewise to the
manner of his offense against Jerusalem) with the like disasters of other
Romans that had wronged or molested the Jews. 63 CAP. 20. Tacitus objections
against the Jews refuted by their palpable grosseness, and more competent
testimony of other heathen writers. 69 CAP. 21. The means of these Jews
thriving in captivity: In what sense they might peculiarly be termed a mighty
people: wherein they did exceed or were exceeded by other nations. 73 CAP. 22.
That all the heathens objections against, or doubts concerning the Jews estate,
(...) prevented or resolved by Jewish writers. 78 CAP. 23. The fulfilling of
Moses and other prophesies, touching the desolation of ^ewr^, and destruction
of Jerusalem: and the Signs of the Time witnessing Gods wonderful hand
therein. 83 CAP. 24. The fulfilling of our Saviors prophecy Matthew. 24 with
others concerning the time ensuing Ierusalems destruction. That those signs in
the Sun and the Moon are long since past, as may appear from our Saviors words
(expounded parag. 3.) compared with the Prophet Joels, parag. 8. 90 CAP. 25.
That the Saracens are the true sons of Ismael: Of their conditions and manners
answerable to Moses prophecy. 103 CAP. 26. The beginning and progress of
Ismaels greatness. 107 CAP. 27. The persecutions of the Jews by Traian: and
the desolation of their Country by Adrian: their scattering through other
Nations, foretold by Moses. 111 CAP 28. Of the Jews estate after the
dissolution of the Roman Empire, generally thorowout Europe, until their coming
into England. 114 CAP. 29. Of the fulfilling of other particular prophecies of
Moses in the Jews persecutions, in England, Germany, France, and Spain. 120
CAP. 30. General collections out of the particular histories before mentioned;
the strange dispositions of the Jews: and Gods judgments upon them; all
testifying the truth of divine Oracles. 129
LIB. I. SECT. IIII.
Of Experiments in our selves, and the right framing of Belief, as well unto
the several parts as unto the whole Canon of Scriptures. 140 CAP. 31. Showing
the facility and use of the proposed Method, by instance in some, whose belief
unto divine Oracles has been confirmed by Experiments answerable unto them 140
CAP. 32. Containing a brief resolution of doubts concerning the extent of the
general Canon, or the number of integral parts. 145 CAP. 33. A brief direction
for preventing scruples, and resolving doubts concerning particular sentences
or passages in the Canon of Scripture. 148 CAP. 34. Concluding the first Book
with some brief admonition to the Reader. 149
The Second Book. How far the ministry of Men is necessary for planting
Christian Faith, and retaining the unity of it planted.
SECT. I.
What obedience is due to Gods Word, what to his Messengers. Page 154 CAP. 1.
The sum of the Romanists exceptions against the Scriptures. 155 CAP. 2. The
former objection as far as it concerns illiterate and Laymen retorted and
answered. 156 CAP. 3. The general heads of Agreements, or differences, betwixt
us and the Papists in this argument. 162 CAP. 4. Of the two contrary
extremities; the one in excess proper to the Papists, transferring all
obedience from Scriptures to the Church; the other in defect proper to the
Anti-papist, defrauding the Church of all spiritual authority: That there is
some peculiar obedience due unto the Clergy. 165 CAP. 5 Of the diversity of
humane actions: the Original of their lawfulness, unlawfulness or
indifferency: which without question belong to the proper subject of
Obedience, which not. 168 CAP. 6. That sincere obedience unto lawful authority
makes sundry actions lawful and good, which, without it, would be altogether
unlawful and evil. page 170 CAP. 7. That the Apostles rule (Whatsoever is not
of faith is Sin) does no way prejudice the former resolution: What actions are
properly said to be, not of faith: In what case or subject, doubt or scruple
make them such. 177 CAP. 8. That such as most pretend liberty of conscience
from our Apostles rule, do most transgress it; with general directions for
squaring our actions unto it, or other rules of faith. That by it the flock
stands bound to such conditional assent as was mentioned, Chap. 4. 185 CAP. 9.
Of the nature, use, conditions, or properties of conditional assent or
obedience. 189 CAP. 10. Wherein this conditional belief differs from the
Romans implicit faith. That the one, is, the other, not, subordinate to Gods
Word, or Rule of faith. 196 CAP. 11. In what sense we hold the Scriptures to to
be The Rule of Faith. 198
SECT. II.
That the pretended obscurity of Scriptures is no just exception, why they
should not be acknowledged the Absolute Rule of Faith, which is the
Mother-objection of the Romanist. 201 CAP. 12. How far it may be granted the
Scriptures are obscure; with some premonitions for the right state of the
question. 201 CAP. 13. The true state of the question about the Scriptures
obscurity or perspicuity: unto what men, and for what causes they are obscure.
206 CAP. 14. How men must be qualified, ere they can understand Scriptures
aright: that the Pope is not so qualified. 210 CAP. 15. The Romanists
objections against the Scriptures for being obscure, do more directly impeach
their first Author, and his Messengers their Penmen, then us, and the cause
in hand. 220 CAP. 16. That all the pretenses of Scriptures obscurity, are but
mists and vapors, arising from the corruption of the flesh, and may by the
pure light of Scriptures rightly applied, easily be dispelled. 223 CAP. 17.
That the Mosaical writings were a most perfect rule, plain and easy to the
ancient Israelites. 229 CAP. 18. Concluding this controversy, about the
obscurity of Scriptures, according to the state proposed, with the testimony of
Saint Paul. 233
SECT. III.
That the continual practice of Heretics in urging Scriptures, for to
establish Heresy, and the diversity of opinions amongst the learned, about the
sense of them, is no just exception, why they should not be acknowledged as the
sole, entire, and complete Rule of Faith. 235 CAP. 19. Containing the true
state of the question, with the adversaries general objections against the
truth. 236 CAP. 20. That the former objections, and all of like kind, drawn
from the cunning practice of Heretics, in coloring false opinions by
Scriptures, are most pregnant to confirm ours, and most forcible to confute the
adversaries doctrine. 239 CAP. 21. The pretended excellency of the supposed
Roman rule, for composing controversies, impeached by the frequencie of
Heresies in the Primitive Church, and the imperfection of that union, whereof
since that time they so much boast. Page 242 CAP. 22. That our Adversaries
objections do not so much infringe, as their practice confirms the sufficiency
of Scriptures, for composing the greatest controversies in Religion. 247 CAP.
23. The sufficiency of Scriptures for final determination of controversies in
Religion, proved by our Saviors and his Apostles authority and practice. 254
CAP. 24. That all their objections, drawn from dissentions amongst the learned,
or the uncertainty of private spirits, either conclude nothing of what they
intend against us, or else more then they mean, or (at the least) dare avouch,
against Gods Prophets and faithful people of old. 260 CAP. 25. How far, upon
what terms or grounds, we may with modesty dissent from the Ancient or others
of more excellent gifts than our selves: That our adversaries arguments impeach
as much the certainty of human sciences as of private spirits. 266
SECT. IIII.
The last of the three main Objections (before proposed) which was concerning
our supposed defective means for composing controversies, or retaining the
unity of faith, fully answered and retorted: That the Roman faith has no
foundation. 271 CAP. 26. Containing the true state of the question, or a
comparison betwixt the Romish Church and ours, for their means of preventing or
composing controversies. 272 CAP. 27. That the Romish Church has most need of
some excellent means for taking up of contentions, because it necessarily
breeds so many and so grievous. 275 CAP. 28. Of two senses, in which the
excellency of the Romish Churches pretended means for retaining the unity of
faith, can only possibly be defended, the one (from the former discourse)
proved apparently false, the other in it self as palpably ridiculous. 278 CAP.
29. That their arguments, drawn from conveniencie of reason, or pretended
correspondencie between Civil and Ecclesiastical Regiment, do prejudice
themselves, not us. 282 CAP. 30. That the final trial of this controversy
must be by Scriptures: that the Jesuits, and modern Papists, fierce oppugning
all certainty of private spirits in discerning the divine truth of Scriptures,
or their true sense, has made the Church their mother utterly incapable of any
Plea by Scriptures for establishing her pretended infallibility. 285 CAP. 31.
The insufficiency of the Roman Rule of faith, for effecting what it aims at,
albeit we grant all they demand in this controversy: The ridiculous use
thereof amongst such as acknowledge it. The sufficiency of Scriptures for
composing all contentions, further illustrated. 297 CAP. 32. Briefly
collecting the sum of the second Book. 306
THE ETERNAL TRUTH OF SCRIPTURES, AND CHRISTIAN BELIEF, thereon wholly
Depending: manifested by its own LIGHT.
The first Book of Comments upon the Creed. First General Part.
SECT. I.
I believe in God the Father, etc.

IF in any at all, most of all in this present argument, may the truth of that
usual Axiom best appear, Dimidium facti qui been coepit, habet. What Is well
begun, is well-nigh done.

If God shall enable me rightly to unfold the contents and meaning of this
first word [Believe] I may justly presume, the one half of this intended work
to be finished in it, seeing it is an essential part of every Article in the
Creed: such a part, as, if it be understood amiss, we cannot possibly
understand any one proposition of this whole confession aright. I shall not
therefore seem tedious (I trust) unto the judicious Reader, although I be
somewhat long in unfolding the nature and conditions of belief; the diverse
acceptions and degrees of the same; with the means how it is, or may be wrought
in our hearts.

Whether we speak of the Act, and operation of believing, or of the
disposition, and inclination of the mind, whence this operation proceeds, it
skilleth not much: he that knows the true meaning of the one, without any
further instruction may know the other. And because the Act or Operation is
more easy to be known, let us begin with the most common and general, that is,
with the best and most usually known acception or notion of belief.

CAP. I.
Of Belief in general.

TO believe a thing, is to assent unto it as true, without any evident
certainty of the truth thereof, either from our sense or understanding.

2 That belief is an assent; that to believe is to assent, all agree: but what
more besides assent is required to some especially to Christian belief, is much
controversed among Divines: of which (God willing) in the Articles following.

3 That evident certainty, either of sense or understanding, must be excluded
from the assent, which is properly called belief, is evident and certain by our
usual and common speech. Thus whiles we demand of him that relates any thing
unto us for true (as news or the like) whether he know his relation to be
certainly true, or no: if he neither have immediately heard, nor seen the
things which he relates, but have only taken them at the second hand, his
usual answer is: Nay, I know not certainly, but I verily believe they are true
for diverse reasons and credible reports: but if he had either seen or heard
them himself, he would not say, I believe, but, I know they are most true. For
evident certainty does drown belief.

4 Yet is this evident knowledge (whether sensitive or intellectual) to be
excluded only from the thing it self which is to be directly believed, not
from other things that are linked or united to it by nature.

5 That which we evidently know, may oft-times be the cause, why we believe
some other matters that have affinity with it. As he that sees it very light
in the morning, when he first opens his eyes, may probably believe the Sun is
up, because he evidently sees the air to be light. But no man (if you should
ask him the same question) would say, that he believed the Sun was up, when
either the heat thereof does scorch his face, or the beams dazzle his eyes; for
now he knows this truth directly and evidently in it self. Nor is there any
man that has his right mind, that will say he verily believes twice two make
four: for this is evident, and certain to ordinary capacities, and he that
only believes this, knows nothing. For what men know certainly and
evidently, they will not say, they only believe, but know: what they so know
not, they may truly and properly say, they believe, if their assent to it be
greater then to the contrary.

6 Some again distinguish this unevident assent (which is properly called
belief) from other assents or opinions, by the grounds on which it is built.
The ground of it (in their opinion) is Authoritas docentis, the authority of
the teacher or avoucher of the points proposed to be believed.

7 This distinction in some cases is true, but it is not necessary to all
belief; nor does it fully and properly distinguish belief from other unevident
assents or persuasions. For even those assents or persuasions, which seem most
to rely upon authorities, may be strengthened by other motives or inducements:
yea our belief, or relying upon authorities, usually (always if it be strong)
arises from experiment of our Authors fidelity and skill, as shall appear
hereafter. For our present proceedings we take it here as granted or supposed,
that this word [Belief] as it is usually taken, is more general then that
Assent or persuasion, which relies upon authority; yet not so general as to
comprehend these assents or persuasions, which are evidently certain.

8 It may be objected, that the Apostle calls evident knowledge, belief, when
he says, The Devils believe there is a God, and tremble. For it should seem,
that the Devils know as evidently that there is a God, as we do that the Sun
did shine but yesterday, or this morning. For they once enjoyed the presence of
God, and saw his glory, and since have had evident experience of his power.

9 Of Gods Being (no doubt) they have evident certainty; albeit of his other
attributes their knowledge is not so direct nor evident, but conjectural, or a
kind of Belief. Wherefore unto this place of our Apostle we may answer two
ways: Either that under this word [Belief] he comprehends not only their
assent unto the Being, or existence of the Godhead, but their assent unto other
Attributes of God, which they know not so evidently, and therefore may be said
to believe them. Or if he understand only that assent, which they gave unto
the existence or Being of the Godhead, he calls this (though joined with
evident knowledge) a Belief, in opposition or with reference unto the Belief of
Hypocrites (against whom he there speaks) which was much less then this assent
of Devils. For albeit that which is greater in the same kind, cannot be
properly and absolutely said to be the less; as we cannot properly and
absolutely say that four is three, but rather contains three in it: yet upon
some reference of the greater unto the less contained in it, or unto some
other third, we may denominate the greater with the name of that which is less
in the same kind: as we may say of him that promised three and gave four, that
he gave three, because three is contained in four. So the Philosopher says,
that Habitus est dispositio, every habit is a disposition, not absolutely and
properly, for it is more; yet because it is more, with reference unto that
which is less, or unto the subject in whom it is, we may say it is dispositio,
that is, it contains disposition in it, albeit no man would say that habitus
were dispositio, if he should define it.

10 And men usually object to such as scoff at matters of Religion, that the
day will come, wherein, if they repent not, they shall believe the things which
now they little regard. Albeit they cannot be said in that day to believe them,
if we speak properly and absolutely, without reference to their former
incredulity. Our meaning is, they shall do more then believe them, for they
shall feel them. Nor can we say properly that the Elect after the resurrection
shall believe the articles of faith: seeing all agree, that of these three
principal virtues, Faith, Hope, and Love, only Love shall then remain. The
reason is that which you have heard already; because evident knowledge must be
excluded from the nature of faith and belief; and the godly shall then clearly
see Christ face to face, and fully enjoy the fruit of his Passion, which now
they only believe.

11 As for certainty, We may not exclude it from the nature of belief, unless
this speech be warily understood. For the certainty of the Articles of our
Faith ought to be greater, then the certainty of other knowledge; for we must
believe them, although they be contrary to the capacity of our understanding:
for even this must we believe, that many things (as all supernatural things)
surpass the reach of our understanding. Yet this we may safely say, that the
certainty of the articles of our belief, [as of Christ his death, of his and
our resurrection,] cannot be so great to us in this life, as it shall be in the
world to come, when we shall evidently know them. This rule then is infallible;
That the knowledge of any thing is more certain, then the belief thereof:
although the belief of some things (as of Christ his Passion) be more certain,
then the knowledge of other things; as namely, then the knowledge of humane
sciences. So then out of this it is evident, that belief taken generally, does
neither exclude all certainty, nor necessarily require any; seeing some belief
has a kind of certainty adjoined with it, and some cannot admit it.
Wherefore it remains, that Assent is the essence of belief in general; I say,
such an assent, as is not joined with evidency.

12 This Assent may be weaker or stronger, and so come nearer unto, or be
further from certainty, according to the nature of that object, whereunto we
give assent; or according to the nature of that, whereupon our belief is
grounded; or lastly, according to our apprehension either of the object, or
that which is the ground of our assent. Excess in the first of these [to wit,
in certainty or stabilitie of the object] does rather argue a possibility of
firmer belief, or more credibility, not more firm or actual belief. For as many
things are more intelligible then others, and yet are least understood of many:
so many that are most credible, are least believed.

13 Excess in the second of these, whence the assent of belief may be
strengthened, [that is, in the ground of belief,] does rather argue a stronger
hypothetical belief, then any absolute belief; unless the apprehension or
conceit of this ground be strong and lively. In ordinary reports or contracts,
it skils not of what credit the party be, unto whose credence or authority we
are referred for the truth of any promise or report; unless we have good
inducements to think, that he did either say, or promise as we were told. If we
be not thus persuaded by some apprehension of our own; we give only
conditional assent unto the report or promise, and believe both with this
limitation [if he say so, whose credit we so esteem.] But if we can fully
apprehend that he said so, we believe absolutely.

14 As in science or demonstrations it is requisite, both that we know the true
cause of the effect, and also that we apprehend it certainly as the true cause;
(otherwise we have only an opinion:) so in true and absolute belief it is
requisite, that we have both a sure ground of our belief, and a true
apprehension of that ground; otherwise our belief must needs be conditional,
not absolute. It remains therefore that we set down, first the nature of the
objects that may be believed: secondly, the several grounds of belief: and
thirdly, the manner of apprehending them; albeit in some the apprehension of
the object it self, and the ground of belief, are in a sort all one; as in that
belief which is not grounded upon the authority of the teacher. This rule is
general; Wheresoever the objects are in themselves more credible, the ground
may be more strong, and the apprehension more lively, so men be capable of it,
and industrious to seek it: and equal apprehension of such objects as are more
credible in themselves, (upon such grounds as are more firm) makes the belief
stronger, then it could be of objects less credible, or upon grounds less
firm. Caeteris paribus, every one of these three: First, Greater credibility of
the object. Secondly, Surer ground of belief. Thirdly, more lively apprehension
of the object or ground, increase belief.

15. For the Objects of belief, (whence this assent must be distinguished,)
they are either natural, or supernatural; but first of that which is natural.
The (...) of natural belief are of two sorts, either scibilia, or opinabilia;
either such things as may be evidently known in themselves, but are not so
apprehended by him that believes them; or else such things, as we can have no
evident or certain knowledge of, but only an opinion. And of this nature are
all the monuments of former ages, and relations of ancient times, in respect of
us which are now living: all future contingents, or such effects, as have no
necessary natural cause why they should be, nor no inevitable let or hinderance
why they may not be; as whether we should have rain or fair weather the next
month, whether such or such Nations shall wage war against each other the next
year. These matters past, and contingent which are not yet, but may be, albeit
they agree in the general nature of opinabilia, that neither of them can be
exactly known, but only by opinion believed: yet both differ in that which is
the ground of our assent or belief. The ground or reason why we believe things
past, (as that Tully lived in Julius Caesar's time, or that the Saxons inhabited
this land,) is the report of others. The ground or reason why we believe future
contingents, is the inclination or propension which we see in second causes to
produce such effects; or the coherence betwixt any natural or moral contingent
cause, and their possible or probable issue. As if we see one Kingdom mighty in
wealth, and at peace and unity in it self, bearing inveterate hate to another;
or if we know that the one has suffered wrong, not likely to be recompensed,
and yet able in politic estimation to make it self amends: we believe that
such will shortly be at open hostility one with another. Or if we see the air
waterish, we believe it will shortly rain. Yet are not the grounds why we
believe things past, and the grounds of believing future contingents, always
so opposite, but that they may jump in one, and conspire mutually for the
strengthening of belief. For we would believe our former conjecture of war or
weather a great deal the better, if a cunning Statesman should give judgment
of the one, or an Astronomer, or some that we know very weather-wise, his
opinion of the other. For now besides the probability of our own conjectures,
we have other men's authority to confirm our belief. In both kinds, (either
where the grounds of each are several, or where both conspire together) as the
ground of belief, or our apprehension of the ground is greater, so our belief
waxes stronger. Thus we believe the Roman stories of Caesar's times more
firmly, then the relations of Herodotus concerning matters of Egypt, or other
countries; because more Writers, and they such as are less suspected of vanity
or imposture, do testify the truth of Roman affairs.

16 Other things, which are credible, or may be believed, are (as we said)
scibilia; such things as may be exactly known by natural reason, though not of
the party which only believes them; (for exact knowledge always expels mere
belief of the same thing in the same party.) That the Sun is bigger then the
Earth, or that the motion thereof is swifter then any Arrows flight, may be
known exactly by a Mathematician; but ordinary Contrymen (such as are not
rustically wayward) do believe it; evidently and exactly know it they cannot.
The ground of their belief in such a case is authoritas docentis. And this
authority of teachers, or others, upon whose assertions we rely, consists
partly in a persuasion of the teachers or relators skill in those matters which
he teaches or relates; and partly in his honesty, fidelity, or veracitie in
his dealings or sayings. And as these are reputed greater, so do we more
believe him in these things which he avoucheth for true, and rely more
securely upon his authority. For as we said before, Caeteris paribus, the
certainty of belief increases as the ground of belief does, both for the
number of points believed, and for the firmness of the belief it self. If two
of the same faculty teach us diverse things, whereof we have no other ground
but their assertion, we believe him better, whose skill and fidelity we
account of better; and the more the parties be that report or avouch the same
thing, the more we believe them, if they be reputed skilful and honest. And
where the authority is the same, both for extension and degrees, yet we
believe the things taught, better, from the better or more immediate
apprehension of the authority. As if Aristotle, Euclide, or Archimedes were
alive, and in that reputation for skill in their several professions, which
their works are in; we would believe those conclusions which we heard them
teach, better than such as we had from them by others, or (as we said) at the
second hand. For though the authority in both cases were the same: yet should
not our apprehension of it be so, but more immediate in the former. We see by
daily experience, how opinions only grounded upon the authority of teachers
for their skill in such matters well reputed of, do enforce others (especially
inferiors in that kind of skill) to give an assent unto the same truth,
although they have good show of reason to the contrary. As what Countreyman is
there, but would think he might safely swear, that the Earth were an hundred
times greater then the Sun? yet if an Astronomer, (of whose skill he has had
experience in other matters, which he can better discern) one whom he knew to
be an honest plain dealing man, not accustomed to cog with his friend, should
seriously avouch the contrary, that the Sun is bigger than the Earth; few
Contrymen would be so wayward as not to believe their friend Astronomer,
Albeit (his authority set aside) they had no reason to think so, but rather
the contrary. And it were a sign of ignorant arrogancy, if Punies or
Fresh-men should reject the axioms and principles of Aristotle, usual in the
Schools, because they have some reasons against them, which themselves cannot
answer. For reason might tell them, that others (their betters) which have gone
before them, have had greater reasons to hold them, then they can yet have to
deny them. This persuasion of other men's skill or knowledge will win the assent
of modest and ingenuous youths, unto such rules or Axioms, as otherwise they
would stiflie deny, and have witty reasons to overthrow. But albeit this
assent, which men give to conclusions, they know not themselves, but only
believe upon other men's asseverations, may be very great; as many Contrymen
will believe an Astronomer affirming that the Sun is greater then the Earth,
better then they will the honestest of their neighbors in a matter that may
concern both their commodities: yet if the relators or avouchers could make
them conceive any probable reason of the same conclusions, [as if the
Astronomer in the mentioned case could show, how every body the further it is
from us seems the less, and then declare how many hundred miles the Sun is
from us:] Men's minds would be a great deal better satisfied, and this assent
or belief, which formerlie did only rely upon authority, would be much
strengthened by this second tie or hold-fast. And if we would observe it, There
is usually a kind of regresse betwixt our Belief of authorities, and our
Assent unto conclusions taught by them. First, (usually) we believe authority,
and afterward the conclusions taught by it, for the authorities sake. But
after we once find experiment of the truth of conclusions so taught, we
believe the authority the better from this experimental truth of the conclusion.

17 Out of all these acceptions and degrees of Belief or Assent, something may
be gathered for better expressing the several degrees of true Christian belief;
which like Jacobs ladder reaches from Earth to Heaven. The first step whereof
is belief or assent unto things supernatural.

The first general part. SECT. II.
CAP. II.
Of assent unto objects supernatural.

THings supernatural we call such, as the natural reason of Man cannot 1
attain unto; or such, as naturally can neither be known or assented unto as
probable, but are made known or probable by revelation. Such are the mysteries
of our salvation, and the Articles of Christian Belief. For no Article of our
Belief (if we consider them with all the circumstances, and in that exact
manner as they are proposed in Scripture to be believed) could ever have come
into corrupted men's cogitation, unless God had revealed it unto him. Seeing
then we cannot know them in any sort by humane reason and authority; neither
can humane reason or authority be the ground of our assenting to them; it
remains then, that Authoritas docentis, The word of God, be the ground of our
belief.

2 Here then must you call to mind what we said before that authoritas
docentis did consist in two things; namely in the skill, and fidelity, or
sincerity of the Teacher: and by how much we know those to be greater, by so
much is our assent or belief strengthened. Now it is evident to reason, that God
is infinitely wise, and therefore cannot be deceived; whence necessarily it
follows, that he knows, and can tell us the truth. Again, it is evident
that God is most just and true, and therefore will not deceive us, but will
tell us the truth if he profess so. Again, we cannot conceive of God aright,
but we must conceive of him as omnipotent, and full of power; and consequently
such an one as needs not in policy, or jealousy of our emulating him in
knowledge, to tell us otherwise then he knows. And therefore Aristotle
reprehends the Metaphys. Lib. 1. cap. 2.
Poets for saying, that the Gods did envy Men knowledge. His resolution is in
English to this effect, That Poets should the Gods belie, (...).

More like, than Gods should Men envy.


3 And if the Heathen were of opinion, that the Gods did not envy Men
knowledge; then must they needs believe, that if they taught them any, they
would teach them true knowledge. Wherefore this must be laid down as a certain
ground, That whatsoever God teaches us, is most true. Nor is there any,
(admitting there were a God) but would assent unto this. But here is the
difficulty. How can we be assured that God does teach us any of these things?
Or, how shall we know that this we call Scripture, is the Word of God? If our
apprehension of this ground be sure, our faith is firm and absolute: if our
apprehension hereof be doubtful, our faith must needs be unstable, or, at the
best, but conditional.

4 Let us first therefore look what this conditional assent or belief does
bind us unto.

Although many, that firmly believe, whatsoever God says, is true, either do
not acknowledge or do not firmly believe that these Scriptures are the Word of
God: yet thus much in all sense and reason any natural man will grant; there be
great presumptions and probabilities, why they should be taken for the Word of
God. And he that does acknowledge but thus much, does by this acknowledgement
bind himself to reverence them above all humane writings. For all men
naturally know, that if they be Gods Word, they are worthy all possible
reverence. Wherefore if a man suppose it only as probable, that they are, or
know nothing to the contrary why they may not be Gods Word: he is bound to
reverence and esteem them above all words or writings of man. As for example;
If any Subject in this land should receive Letters concerning some lawful and
indifferent request from any other his equal or fellow subject, whom he had
great reason well to respect; suppose he certainly knew that they were such a
man's Letters, and no counterfeit: yet if he should receive Letters in his
Majesty's name, containing the same or other as reasonable request: although he
knew not so certainly that these were his Majesty's Letters, as that the others
were some well-respected Subjects, yet is he in duty bound to use them with
greater respect and reverence, than the former. The bare presumption and
probability that they were the Kings Letters, does bind him to enquire
further, whether they were his Letters or no: nor were his fault excusable, if
he should show any sign of disloyalty, or irreverence toward them, until he
knew that they were not such, as their Title or superscription did import.

5 He that has but the same probability, that the Scriptures contain in them
Gods own words, as that Livie his Histories contain the Roman affairs, must
needs esteem of them infinitely above all humane works. And This fruit
hypothetical or supposed Belief may bring forth, even in the unregenerate or
natural man. And what has been said of reverence to the Scriptures upon this
supposal, is also most true of man's actions. If men do but believe it as
probable, that the Scriptures are the Word of God: this belief will procure
many good moral actions, and much amendment of life, though not such spiritual
perfection, as God in his Word requires. And the reason of this assertion is
evident. For we see daily, that men undertake actions of great difficulty and
danger, not so much according to the probability of attaining some good, as
according to the greatness of that good which possibly may be attained. So we
see many, that might live in ease at home with certainty of moderate gains, to
undertake voyages to the West or East Indies, only upon this resolution, That
if it be their luck or lot to be rich, there they may have enough, although the
adventure be subject to great dangers, and obnoxious to infinite casualties.
And many there be, that will not usually lay out a penny, but upon very fair
ground of some gain or saving thrift, who yet will be well content to venture a
Crown or an Angel in a Lotterie, where there may be some possibility, though
no probability, of obtaining twenty or thirty pounds. These, and infinite
other examples, obvious to daily experience, may serve as a perfect induction
of our general assertion. That the mere possibility of obtaining some great
and extraordinary good, is of greater moment in s^^ying ^ctions, then certainty
of accomplishing petty desires, or greatest probabilities of purchasing
ordinary commodities or delights. To deduce then out of this general the
particular we intended. In the Scripture are promised to all such as love God
and do his will, far greater blessings, then humane knowledge could ever have
conceived. The like is true in avoiding dangers. ^ undertake matters of more
difficulty and charges, to prevent (...) (...) mischances which may ensue,
then they would do to escape some imminent but ordinary danger, or to release
themselves from some smaller harms that already have befallen them. Could men
consider these things seriously, and account of them but as probable: what is
there in this life, which in any reason they should not venture for the
obtaining of so great a good? Were men but probably persuaded that there were
(as the Scriptures and the Articles of our Belief tell us) a life everlasting,
full laden with all the fruits of true life, joy, peace, and all choicest
pleasures, without any annoyance: how could they not be most ready, and
willing to spend this whole transitory life (whose days are but few, and most
of them evil, full fraught with grief and distress) in the service of God, who
would thus reward them? Yea, how could they not be desirous to lay down this
life it self, upon hope of obtaining such a life? For this life compared to
that to come, has not the proportion of a Farthing to whole Millions of Gold,
or all the treasures in this World. Nor is the case herein like unto that of
adventures or Lotterie; where a man may venture his life, or goods if he list,
but if he do not, none calls him to an account for not doing it: But in the
Scriptures everlasting torments, grief, and perpetual horror are threatened to
all such, as frame not their lives according to Gods will in them revealed.

CHAP. III.
Of general incitements to search the truth of Scriptures or Christian belief.

1 WE may hence clearly see how inexcusable, even in the judgment of flesh and
blood, all men are, that either by hearing or reading have any access unto the
Gospel, and do not use the best endeavors of their natural wit (if God as yet
have touched their hearts with no better grace) to search out the truth
thereof. For seeing in the Scriptures are proposed to every man's choice
everlasting life, or everlasting death: what extreme madness is it for men to
enter into any course of life, or to undertake any matter of moment, which may
exact their chief employments, before they have diligently looked to the main
chance? before they have tried the utmost of their wits, and others best
advise, to know the tenor of their own estate? We see daily what great pains
men of no small account do take in the study of Alchymie, spending their
spirits, and most of their substance in trying conclusions, and searching out
the truth of those things, for which they have but weak grounds of Philosophy
or reason; only the conceit of the good they aim at, (which is rather possible
then probable for them to attain) inforceth a kind of hope, and encourages
them to go forward.

2 To speak nothing of the good the Scripture promises, the very conceit of
eternal death (me thinks) should move, either the Chymicks, (which spend much
gold only upon hope of getting more) or any other man whatsoever, to spend all
the treasure, whatsoever either this their Art, or all other could yield, to
secure themselves from such horrible torments, as the Scriptures threaten to
their Contemners or negligent Hearers. And why should not all men then in
reason bestow most time and pains, in searching the truth of those things,
which concern their souls estate? whose security in all reason they should
purchase with the highest hopes, and utmost aim of all other travails in this
life. Here then (as I said) the full height of man's Iniquity, and his
inexcusable Madness, is most plainly discovered; that having these two motives,
which in natural reason do sway all Humane Actions, offering themselves to
encourage him in searching the Scriptures: yet notwithstanding most men bestow
less labor in them, then in other ordinary Studies. First, if we compare the
good they set before us, as a recompense and reward of our travails, it is
beyond all comparison greater then the scope of any other Trade or Science. For
here is a double Infinity of solid Good: First, they promise Joy two ways
Infinite, both in Degree and Continuance. Secondly, they threaten unto their
Contemners and despisers death and torments doubly infinite, both in Degree and
Continuance. Now if the probabilities of the truth of Scriptures were far less,
than is usually found in other studies, or Humane hopes; yet could this in
Humane reason be no reason why we should labor less in them, than in other
affairs; seeing the incomparable excess of the good they promise, does
abundantly recompense this. But if the Probability of the truth of Scripture,
be in natural reason equal to the probabilities which men usually take for
their grounds in many greatest attempts; then certainly not to bestow as great
pains and travail, in trying the truth of their promises, as in any other Human
attempts, or affairs, does argue infinite Madness. Ask we the Chymick, what
reason he has to toil so much in the study of Paracelsus, or other intricate
Writers of his Faculty; (the like we may say of any Physicians:) their answer
(as you may read in their writings) is this: Many Philosophers in former ages
have labored much in this study, and have set down good rules of their
experiments; who (as is probable) would never have taken such pains upon no
ground. And verily this tradition, or the authority they give to their Writers,
is their chief motive. For I think few of their Ancient Authors have bequeathed
to their successors any Gold made by this Art, thereby to encourage them. If
then tradition, consent of time or approbation of Authors, or relation of
experiments, be an especial inducement for men to adventure their charge,
pains, and travel in this Faculty, as in all other affairs: without all
controversy the Scriptures in all these motives have an especial Prerogative
above all other faculties or sciences, albeit humane reason were admitted
judge. For the Authority of Gods Church is far more general, then the consent
of any Writers in any one faculty whatsoever. The consent of time likewise is
greater. For no Age since Christ's time in these civil parts of the World, but
by the report of other Writers, as well as Christians, has yielded obedience
unto Scriptures as the Word of God. Men of most excellent spirits and learning
in every Age, have addicted their studies unto this truth. About the time of
our Saviors coming, Curious Arts, and other civil disciplines did most
flourish. The Grecians sought after Wisdom and secular Philosophy with the
like; the Romans after Policy, State knowledge, and discipline of war; all the
World almost, (above others, those places wherein Christianity was first
planted) was then set upon Curious Arts: yet we see how the study and search of
Scriptures in short time did prove, as Aarons Rod amongst the Magitians
Serpents. It has devoured all, and brought them to acknowledge Allegiance unto
it; using the help of best secular Arts, as it were Nutriment for the growth of
Christianity, and expelling the rest as Excrements out of the Church. Nor can
the Atheist name any Age, wherein the Heathen had an Oliver to oppugn our
profession, but we had a Rowland to defend it. If they had a Porphyrie or
Celsus to oppose Philosophy against it, we had an Origin (a ^
Man by their own, confession, of the most rare wit and hope for Philosophy
then living,) to forsake Philosophy and follow Christianity. It was not despair
which made him, and many other excellent Scholars, Christians: but the sure
hope which they found in this profession, made them contemn all other hopes,
and cleave to it with their hearts and souls; albeit their souls should, for so
doing be violently separated from their bodies. This trial, I am persuaded, few
of their greatest Philosophers would have endured; but they had the Potentates
of the World, as ready to applaud them, as to disgrace the Christians; and yet
the Christians multiplied as the Israelites did by oppression in Egypt. How
resolute they were, if we may not be believed bearing witness of our own
profession, let Epist. lib. 10. ep. 100. ad Trajan. aliter Ep. 97. In iis, qui
ad me tanquam Christiani deferebantur, hunc sum sequutus modum. Interrogavi
ipsos, an essent Christiani, confitentes iterum, ac tertio interrogavi,
supplicium minatus, perseverantes duci jussi. Neque enim dubitabam qualecunque
esset quod faterentur pervicaciam certe, et inflexibilem obstinationem debere
puniri. -- Propositus est libellus sine autore multorum nomina continens, qui
negant se esse Christianos, aut fuisse. Quu^ praeeunte me deos appellarent, and
imaginituae, quam propter hoc jusseram cum simulachris numinum adferri, thure,
ac vino supplicarent, praeterea maledicerent Christo; quorum nihil cogi posse
dicuntur, qui sunt revera Christiani, dimittendos putavi.
Pliny testify, in whose judgment, Constancy and Resolution was the only
crime in our Profession deserving punishment. And for this cause, he took want
of resolution, in such as had been accused before him under the name of
Christians, as a sufficient Argument that they were not Christians in deed or
heart; For, such, as he had been informed, could not be enforced to any such
idolatrous practice, as he persuaded these men unto.

3 Lastly, the experiments which are related by Authors of this profession, men
(in any reasonable man's judgment) as much to be Believed herein, as any other
Writers in theirs; are far more notable and apt to produce belief, and hope of
attaining the truth in this profession, than any others can have in theirs. The
experiments of others were but ordinary and natural; these are extraordinary
and supernatural. If the Atheist should impudently deny the truth of their
report: we may convince him with S. Augustines acute Dilemma. If the Miracles
related by our Writers be true, they give evident experiment of the truth of
Scripture: if there were no such particular miracles, but all feigned; then
this was a miracle above all miracles, that Christian Religion should prevail
against all other Arts, Power, or Policy, without any extraordinary event or
miracle. It was not so easy a matter to cozen all the Roman Emperors, and
their Deputies, with feigned Tales; the World, which hated Christians so much,
was inquisitive enough to know the truth of their reports. I may conclude; Nisi
veritas magna fuisset non praevaluisset. It was miraculous doubtless, that it
should so enrease without arms; without any promise of carnal pleasure, or
security: but even against their natural inclination that did profess it, and
all the Worlds opposition against it. It had enemies both private and public,
domestic and foreign, even the flesh and sense of those which followed it
fought against it.

4 Mahomet since that time has found a multitude of followers; but all either
enforced to follow him by threats of shame, disgrace, and tortures in this
life; or else allured thereto by fair promises of carnal pleasures to be
perpetual without interruption in the life to come. He has set his followers
such a course, as they might be sure both of wind and tide. And if the Haven
whereat they arrive were as safe as their course is easy, they were of all men
the most happy. But Christianity from its first beginning, was to row against
the stream of flesh and blood, and to bear out sail against all the blasts that
the Devil, World, or Flesh could oppose against it. In a word, the increase of
Mahumetism has followed the barbarous Turkish monarchies advancement, as
moisture in bodies does the increasing fullness of the Moon. And it had been an
extraordinary Miracle, if a barbarous multitude (never acquainted with any
civil pleasures,) should not have composed their minds unto their Emperors,
in following a Religion, framed, as it were, to court the senses, and woo the
flesh. But Christianity then flourished most, when the scorching heat of
persecution was at the height: When the countenance of Emperors, as terrible
to their foes (for their Heroical valor) as plausible to their friends (for
their lovely carriage) were most fiercely set against it. What Princes either
more terrible to their enemies, or more amiable to their friends, than Trajan,
Dioclesian, or others of the Christians persecutors were? What man living is
there of civil education, that would not have lothed Mahomet, and the whole
succession of the Ottoman Family, in respect of these Roman Princes? And yet a
great part of their native Subjects, men, as otherwise excellently qualified,
so of a quiet and peaceable disposition, yet ready always to venture their
lives for these Heathen Princes, in most dangerous service against the enemies
of the Roman Empire, but most ready to follow the Crucisied Christ through
fire and sword, against their Emperors command (dearer to them than this mortal
life) and all the Worlds threats, or allurements. It were sottish to think,
that such men had not perfect notice of some Higher Powers Commandment to the
contrary, (whom they thought it safer to obey) when they contradicted the
commandments, or fair allurements of these supreme Earthly Powers. And it were
as silly a persuasion to think, that, if the great Turk would change his
religion for any other, that might yield like hopes of carnal pleasure after
this life, any great number of his Subjects would lose their dignities for
refusing subscription.

5 The brief of what has been, or may be said concerning the grounds or
motives of our Assent unto Objects supernatural, may be comprised in these four
Propositions following; of which the first two are Axioms evident in nature,
and received by all. The two latter undoubted Axioms amongst true Believers,
but suppositions only to mere natural men, or Novices in Christianity.

6 The first, The Style or Title of these Sacred Books pretending divine
Authority, bind all men to make trial of their truth, commended to us by our
Ancestors, confirmed to them by the Blood of Martyrs their Predecessors, to use
the means which they prescribed for this trial; that is, Abstinence from things
forbidden, and Alacrity in doing things commanded by them.

7 The second, Ordinary Apprehension, or natural Belief of matters contained in
Scriptures, or the Christian Creed, are of more force to cause men to undertake
any good, or abstain from any evil, than the most firm Belief of any ordinary
matters, or any points of mere Natural consequence.

8 The third, Objects and grounds of Christian Belief have in them greater
stability of truth, and are in themselves more apt to found most strong and
firm Belief, then any other things whatsoever merely credible.

9 For, as the most noble Essences, and first Principles of every Art, are most
intelligible: so are divine Truths of all other most Credible. Not that they
are more easy to be Assented to of any, at their first proposal, But that they
have a greater measure of credibilitie in them: and as their credibilitie and
truth is inexhaustible, so Belief of them once planted, can never grow to such
fullness of certainty, as not to receive daily increase, if we apply our
minds diligently unto them: so that true Christian Belief admits no stint of
growth in this life, but still comes nearer and nearer to that evidence of
Knowledge, which shall swallow it up in the life to come. For the conceit of
impossibilities or repugnances in nature, objected by the obdurate Atheists to
make the Principles of Christian religion seem incredible (that they might like
old Truants have the company of Novices in Christianity to loiter, or
mis-spend good hours with them:) we shall by Gods assistance dispel them, and
all other Clouds of like Errors, in unfolding the truth of those Articles,
which they most concern.

10 The fourth, The means of apprehending the truth of Scriptures, and
experiments confirming their divine Authority, are, both for variety of kinds,
and number of Individual, in every kind, far more and more certain, than the
means of apprehending the grounds of any other Belief, or the experiments of
any other teachers Authority.

11 Some Particulars of every kind, with the General Heads or Common places
whence like Observations may be drawn, we are now to present, so far as they
concern the confirmation of the truth of Scriptures in general. For the
experiments, which confirm the truth of such particular places of Scripture, as
teach the Articles of our Creed expressly, will come more fitly into the
unfolding of the Articles themselves.

The second general part of the first Book.
SECT. I.
Of Observations internal or incident unto Scriptures, without Reference to any
relations or events, other then are specified in themselves.

ALthough the Experiments confirming the truth of Scriptures be, as I have
said, many and diverse; yet all may be reduced into these general heads or
kinds. They may be found either in the Style or Character of these writings
themselves; the Affections or dispositions of their Writers; or in Events or
Experiments (whatsoever the course of times affords) answerable to the Rules
set down in Scriptures.

CAP. IV.
Of Historical Characters of Sacred Writings.

TO any man endued with reason not perverted, the Books of Moses give more
perfect proof of matters done and acted, then any other History in the World
can possibly do: albeit we set aside the secret Characters of Gods Spirit
speaking in them, which we suppose can be discerned of none, but such as have
the mark of the Lamb answerable to it engraven upon their hearts: But now we
seek such inducements to Belief, as may persuade the natural unregenerate man
of the Historical truth of these sacred Volumes.

2 The prejudices arising from the strangeness of matters related by him, the
Reader shall find mitigated in the next discourse. In the mean time I must
request him to suspend his judgment of them, and only to intend the lively
Characters of Historical truth in other relations, of matters neither strange
nor incredible in themselves. Either Moses wrote a true History, or else his
words are but a Fiction: either Poetical to delight others, or Political to
advantage himself or his successors. Let such as doubt of their Historical
truth, duly examine, whether many things related by him can possibly be
referred to any of these two ends. As for example, if these relations, Genesis 4.
1. and the 25. had not been either real Adjuncts of some Famous Truth then
sufficiently known, or else appointed by God to be notified for some special
purpose to posterity: how could it possibly have come into any man's thought,
or to what end should it have gone thence into his Pen, to show the reason why
Evah should call her first son Cain, or her third Seth?

3 He that would set himself to contradict, might reply; Moses his invention
was so copious, as to forecast that those insertions might make his History
seem more probable: or that he spoke unawares according to the Custom of the
times wherein he lived. But why then should he omit the like in all the
generations from Cain and Seth unto Noah? the reason of whose name given him by
his father he likewise specifies, Genesis 5. 29. Genesis 5. 29. Then Lamech
begat a son, and called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us
concerning our work, and sorrow of our hands, as touching the earth which the
Lord has cursed. It was doubtless from some diversity in the matter
presupposed unto this work, not from the workmans choice or invention, why the
reason of these three men's names should be specified, as afterward will more
plainly appear. For the positive notes, or sure tokens of a true History, they
are most plentiful in the stories of Abraham, Jacob, and Joseph. Each part of
which, the Divine Providence, (whereof these are the most Ancient, most
perfect, and most lively patterns,) would have set out with such perspicuitie
of all circumstances, that the Reader might be an eyewitness of their
Historical Truth. The subject and issue whereof is in it self so pleasant, as
will ravish sober and attentive minds, and allure them to follow the main
current of Divine Mysteries, which flow from these Histories mentioned, as from
their first Heads or Fountains. To point at some few, rather than handle any
particulars.

4 If we may judge of the truth of men's writings by their outward form or
Character, as we do of men's honesty by their looks, speech, or behavior: what
History in the World bears so perfect resemblance of things done and acted, or
yields (without further testimony then its own) so full assurance of a true
narration, as the stories of Abraham's departure out of his Land, his answers to
God, Sarahs distrust upon misconceit of Gods promises; her seeking to fulfill it
by giving her Maid to Abraham, the manner of her speech upon her Maids
contemning her, the debate and issue of her controversy, the Dialogue between
the Angels of God and Abraham, with Sarahs Apology for laughing at their
Message; Abraham's journey to Mount Moriah, his servants expedition to Aram
Naharim, with his Commission to provide his young Master a Wife? There appears
not in any of these the least surmise of any Political respect, not any sign
of affected delight, or Poetical representations: seeing this Author falls
immediately into other matters, and relates every thing (though many of most
diverse natures) with such natural specification of every circumstance, as
unless our hearts were prepossest with Belief, that he had writ them by his
direction, who perfectly knows all things, as well sore-past, as present, or
to come, we would be persuaded that most of them were relations of such as
acted them, uttered to their familiar friends immediately upon the fact,
whilst all circumstances were fresh in memory.

5 How others are affected I cannot tell; me thinks when I read that story,
Genesis 34. I am transformed into a Man of the Old World, and become a
neighbor of old Jacob, over-hearing him and his sons debating the slaughter of
the Sichemites: The old man complains; Ye have troubled me, and made me stink
among the inhabitants of the land, as well the Canaanites as the Perizzites:
and I being few in number, they shall gather themselves together against me,
and so shall I and mine house be destroyed: and they answered and said; Shall
he abuse our Sister as a Whore?

6 Or if this description, though issuing as naturally out of the real
disposition of the true, (no fained) parties described, as brightness out of
the body of the Sun, yet because but short, may seem more imitable by Art: I
will propose a longer Dialogue betwixt this old man and his sons for a pattern:
of which fairest colors, that Art or Invention can put upon any fained
Subject, will come as far short, as Solomon's gaudy, but artificial attire, did
of the native beauty of wild Lillies; or any die that Art can give, of the
natural splendour of finest Pearls, the Onix or other more precious stone.
Genesis 42. 29. And they came to Jacob their father unto the land of Canaan,
and told him all that had befallen the^, saying, V. 30. the man, who is lord of
the land, spoke roughly unto us, and put us in prison as Spies of the Country.
V. 31. And we said unto him, we are true men, and are no Spies. V. 32. We be
twelve brethren, sons of our father: one is not, and the youngest is this day
with our father in the land of Canaan. v. 33 Then the lord of the Country said
unto us, Hereby shall I know if ye be true men; Leave one of your brethren with
me, and take food for the famine of your houses, and depart; V. 34. And bring
your youngest brother unto me, that I may know that ye are no Spies, but true
men: So will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall occupy in the land. V.
35. And as they emptied their sacks, behold, every man's bundle of money was in
his sack, and when they and their father saw the bundles of their money, they
were afraid. V. 36. Then Jacob their father said unto them, Ye have robbed me
of my children: Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin:
all these things are against me. V. 37. Then Reuben answered his father,
saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to thee again: Deliver him to mine
hand and I will bring him to thee again. V. 38. But he said, my son shall not
go down with you: for his brother is dead and he is left alone: if death come
unto him by the way which ye go, then ye shall bring my gray head with sorrow
unto the grave. Cap. 43. v. 1. Now great famine was in the land. V. 2. And when
they had eaten up the corn which they had brought from Egypt, their father said
unto them, Turn again, and buy us a little food. V. 3. And Judah answered him,
saying, The man charged us by an oath, saying, Never see my face, except your
brother be with you. V. 4. If thou will send our brother with us, we will go
down and buy thee food. V. 5. But if thou will not send him, we will not go
down: for, etc. N. 6. And Israel said, wherefore dealt ye so evil with me, as
to tell the man, whether ye had yet a brother, or no? V. 7. And they answered,
The man asked straightly of our selves, and of our kindred, saying, Is your father
yet alive? Have ne any brother? And we told him according to these words. Could
we know certainly that he would say, Bring your brother down? V. 8. Then said
Judah, to Israel his father, Send the boy with me, that we may rise and go, and
that we may live and not die, both we, and thou, and our children. V. 9. I will
be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him: If I bring him not to
thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame for ever. 10. For
except ye had made this carrying, doubtless by this we had returned the second
time. V. 11. Then their father said unto them, If it must needs be so now, do
thus: Take of the best fruits of the land in your vessels, and bring the man a
present; a little Rozen, a little Honey, Spices, and Mirth, Nuts, and Almonds.
V. 12. And take double money in your hand, and the money that was brought again
in your sacks mouths: carry it again in your hand, lest it were some oversight.
V. 13. Take also your brother, and arise, and go again to the man. V. 14. And
God Almighty give you mercy in the sight of the man, that he may deliver you
your other brother, and Benjamin: but I shall be robbed of my child, as I have
been.
The story is is Genesis 42. from the 29. unto the 15 verse of the 43 Chapter.
The circumstances, which I would especially commend unto the Readers
consideration, are, first; The old man's jealousy, v. 36. upon his sons
relation what had befallen them in their journey, and the Governors desire of
seeing Benjamin, v. 31, 32, 33, 34, 35. His peremptory reply, v. 33. to
Reubens answer, v. 37. The manner of his relenting, chap. 43. v. 6. upon
necessity of their going for more food; and his sons peremptory refusal to go
without Benjamin, in the five first verses of the 43 Chapter. * His
condescending v. 11. upon their just Apology for mentioning their youngest
brother to the Governor; and Judahs undertaking for Benjamins safe conduct
back, and forth, in the 10. 9. 8. and 7. verses; lastly, the close or
Epiphonema of his speech, v. 13. and 14. Whilst I compare one of the
circumstances with another, and all of them with other precedent and
consequent, (chiefly with Judahs speech to Joseph, Genesis 44. from the
sixteenth verse to the end of the Chapter,) although I knew no other Scripture
to make me a Christian, this one place would persuade me to become a
Pythagorean, and think that my soul had been in some of Jacobs sons, where it
had heard this controversy, rather then to imagine, that it could have been
fained by any that lived long after.

7 Or if we consider not the particular relations only, but the whole
contrivance and issue of this story; what pattern of like invention had Moses
to follow? If the Atheist grant such a Divine Providence, as he describes; let
him tell us whence he learned it. If from any more ancient description, let
this be suspected for artificial; if not, let this be acknowledged for the
first natural representation of it. Without either a former pattern to imitate,
or true resemblance of such a Divine Providence in events immediately to be
related, how could such a Supreme Power, governing and disposing all things
contrary to the designs and purposes of man, be by mortal man conceived? More
probable is the Poets fiction, that Minerva should be conceived in Jupiters
brain; then that Humane Fancy should bring forth a more Omnipotent, more wise
or excellent Deity, than the Poets make their Jupiter, without any true image
of his Providence, manifested in the effects? But after the manifestation of it
in the story of Joseph, and the live-picture of it taken by Moses; all
imitation of it was not so difficult, though he that would seek to imitate him
fully should herein come as far short of the solid marks of his historical
truth, as the Egyptians Juglers tricks did of true Miracles.

8 As all these, and many other places yield undoubted Characters of true
Historical narrations, so do his speeches unto this people, Deuteronomy. 29. 30. 31.
Infallible symptoms of a dving man, and one that indeed had born this mighty
Nation, as an Eagle bears her voung ones upon her wings. These admirable
strains of his heavenly admonitions, and divine prophesies, compared with the
live images of former truths, witnsse that he was the Janus of Prophets, Vates
oculatus tam prateritorum quain futurorum, one that could both clearly see.
what had been done beso ^ what should fall out after his death: Both which
shall hereafter (God willing) better appear, by matters related, and event,
foretold by him.

9 But to proceed, the whole Historical part of the Bible, not Moses his Books
alone, yield plenty of such passages, as being compared with other
circumstances, or the main drift and scope of the entire stories, whereof they
are parts leave no place for imagination, either why they should, or how
possibly they could have been inserted by Art or Imitation: or have come into
any man's thoughts, not moved by the real occurrence of such occasions as are
specified in the matters related. And seeing all of them are related by such as
affect no Art; many of them by such as lived long after the parties that first
uttered or acted them: we cannot conceive how all particulars could be so
naturally and fully recorded, unless they had been suggested by his Spirit, who
gives mouth and speech to man, who is alike present to all successions, able
to communicate the secret thoughts of forefathers to their children, and put
the very words of the deceased, never registered before, in the mouths or pens
of their successors for many generations after, as distinctly and exactly, as
if they had been caught in Characters of Steel or Brass, as they issued out of
their mouths.

10 When I read that speech in Ovid. 4 Metam. Fab. 8.

Sive es mortalis, qui te genuere beati,
Et Matter foelix, and fortunata profecto
Si qua tibi Soror est, and quae dedit ubera Nutrix.
If mortal thou, thrice happy sure thy Parents be;
Or if thou any Sister have, thrice happy she;
Thrice happy Nurse, whose breasts gave suck to thee.
I see no inducement to believe this for a true Story, because I know the end
and aim of his writing was, to invent Verisimilia, to feign such speeches, as
best besitted the persons whose part he took upon him to express, thereby to
delight his hearers with variety of lively representations. But when I read
that narration of our Saviors Apology for himself against the Jews, which said
he had an unclean spirit, Luke 11. 14. and a woman coming in with her verdict,
Now blessed is the womb that bare thee, and the paps that gave thee suck, v.
27. This unexpected strain, with our Saviors reply unto it; Yea rather blessed
are those that hear the word of God and keep it, v. 28. so briefly inserted
into the Story, enforce me to think, that it was penned by one that sought
only to relate the truth, part of which was this woman's speech. But with the
means of knowing the New Testament to be the Word of God, I will not here
meddle: the Old Testament sufficiently proves it, besides many other
experiments to be prosecuted in the unfolding of sundry Articles.

CAP. V.
Of the Harmony of sacred Writers.

AN other Inducement for believing the truth of the Old Testament, is the
Harmony of so many several writers, living in such distance of Ages, handling
such diversity of arguments, and covering them with styles, for the majesty of
some, and the familiarity of others, more different, then Virgils verses, and
the rudest countrymans talk; and yet all of them retaining the self same
relish. Whiles we read Tully, Virgil, Livie, Salust and Ovid, though all
living near about one time; yet their writings differ as much as Flesh and
Fish. Many learned men like some one or few of these, and yet much mislike
others, reputed as excellent writers in their kind, living about the same
time: much more might he that should have read the common or vulgar
Historiographers, Poets, or Orators of that time, have contemned them as base
in respect of the former. But the Prophets of the Old Testament, and the
Historiographers of the same, though differing infinitely in degrees of style
and invention; yet agree as well in the substance or essential quality of their
writings, as the same Pomander chafed and unchafed. There is the same odor of
life, and goodness in both, but more fragrant and piercing in the one than in
the other. And no man that much likes the one, can mislike the other: he may
like it less, but dislike it he cannot, if he like the other. Omnibus est
illis vigor and coelestis origo.


2 Many other inducements of this kind are set down at large, by that Flower
of France, and glory of Christian Nobility, in the 24 and 25 Chapt. of his book
of the truth of Christian Religion: as also in Ficinus and Vives, whose labors
it is hard to say whether he has more augmented or graced. One especial motive
is from the drift, and scope of all these sacred writings; whether Histories,
Prophets, Psalms, or the Gospel. The end and scope of all these, is only to
set out the glory of God, and the good of mankind. In their most famous
victories, and good success of their best contrived policies, they ascribe the
glory wholly to God. There is no circumstance inserted to erect the praise of
man, not of the chiefest managers of such affairs. They account it the greatest
praise that can be given unto their Worthies, to let the World know they were
Beloved of God, and that God did fight for them. Not one Writer in this sacred
volume bewrayes the least sign of envy toward others, that lived with him,
or had gone before him: Not one that gives the least suspicion of seeking his
own praise by lessening others deserts, as if he had corrected wherein others
had erred, or finished what they had well begun, but left imperfect. No
intimation in any of them to let posterity understand, that it should think it
self beholding to them for their good directions. They seek no thanks, as if
they undertook their labors voluntarily, only for the good of others; but
proclaim a necessity laid upon them, for doing that which they do, and a Woe if
they do it not. They spare not to rehearse the iniquity, and shame of their
progenitors and nearest kinsfolks, with Gods fearful judgments upon them for
the same, to register their Prince and peoples, or their own disgrace (as the
World counts disgrace) to all posterity: so Gods Name may thereby be more
glorified, and his Church edisied, Jer. 9. v. 23, 24. Let not the wise man
glory in his wisdom, nor the strong man glory in his strength: but let him that
glories, glory in that he understands and knows the Lord. Jeremy himself
reveals his own slacknesse in undertaking his appointed charge, Jer. 20. v.
7. 8, 14, 5, 16, 17, 18. he no where bewrayes any desire of praise, as if he
had excelled all his equals in wit: all that is good in him, or his people, he
gives to God. Daniel, who did excel in the interpretations of dreams and
prophecies, and had the state of many kingdoms for many years to come revealed
unto him; so as if he would have challenged the revelation of his countries
return from Captivity, he could not have been disproved, yet ingenuously
shows that he learned this out of the prophecy of Jeremy Dan. 9. v. 2.
Although his measure of knowledge was exceeding great, yet he affects not the
reputation of Knowing above that measure, which God has given him, Romans 12.
3.

3 This one quality (in them all) of not seeking their own, nor their countries
praise, but only the praises of their God, and the profit of his Church (if we
consider it well) may sufficiently testify, that they speak not upon private
motions, who were thus clear from all suspicion of private respects. Nor can we
suspect, that they should thus conspire together unto one end, from the will
and purpose of man. For what man could limit others thoughts, or rule their
wits which lived after him? Least of all can Chance be imagined the Author of
so many several writers constancy in conspiring thus to one end in several
Ages. Let us conjecture what causes we can, S. Peter must resolve the doubt, 2
Peter 1. 20, 21. All of them spoke as they were moved by the holy Spirit, which
was present one and the same to all. If they had not spoken as they were moved
by the Spirit, but as if they had moved themselves, to find out matter, or
stretched their wits to enlarge invention: then would the later sort especially
have catched at many By-narrations, and inserted many (...), little pertinent
to that foundation which others had laid before them. But now we see the
continual drift of their writings so seriously set upon one and the self-same
end, as if they had all wrought by an others diction, who had cast the platform
of the edifice himself, not minded to finish his work in any of the first
workmens age: and yet will have the later to begin where the other left,
without any alteration or tricks of their own invention.

4 All these properties of these sacred Writers, do sufficiently witness their
motives to have been Divine, but more abundantly whilst we consider the vanity
of the Jewish people, if we take them as they are by nature, not sanctified by
the Spirit of God. For naturally they are given to magnify their own Nation,
more then any other people living, yea to make God beholden unto them for their
sanctity: few of them would seek the praise of their God, but with reference to
their own Hence our Apostle S. Paul brings it as an argument of the truth of
his Gospel, 2 Cor 4 5. in that he did not preach himself but Christ Jesus the
Lord, and himself their servant for his sake so does our Savior, John 7. v.
18. He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, but he that seeks his
glory that sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. This
sincerity in teaching, (especially in a man of Jewish progeny) when it is tried
to continue without all affectation or dissimulation, is the true (...) or
touchstone, the Livery or Cognizance of a man speaking by the Spirit of God.
The like live Characters of sincerty are not to be found in any else, save only
in these sacred Writers, or such as have sincerely obeyed their doctrine. And
in many of those books which our Church accounts Apocryphal, there evidently
appears a spice of secular vanity; howsoever the Penmen of them were truly
religious sanctified men, and have sought to imitate the writing of the
Prophets, and other Writers of this sacred Volume. But much more eminent is the
like vanity in Josephus, a man otherwise as excellent for mere natural parts,
or artificial learning, as his Country yielded any, not inferior to any
Historiographers whatsoever.

5 Seeing in this whole body of Scriptures there appears one and the same
Spirit, albeit the members be of diverse fashion and quality: this sacred
volume it self may serve as a lively type or image of that Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace, which ought to be in the Church and mystical body of
Christ, Ephesians. 4. v. 3. They all endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace. None of them presumed to understand above that which was
meet for them to understand. All according to sobriety, as God dealt to every
one of them the measure of faith. They are as many members of one body, which
have not one office, v. 4. And we may see that verified in the Canon of the Old
Testament, which S. Paul attributes unto the Church in Christ; There are
diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit. And again, To one was given the
spirit of wisdom, as unto Solomon; to another knowledge, as unto Ezra Nehemiah;
1 Cor. 12. 4. Verse 14.
to another says, as unto Moses, Abraham; to another prophecy, as unto Esaias,
Verse 11.
Jeremy: All these gifts were wrought by one and the same Spirit, which
distributeth to every one as he would. The best means to discern this harmony
in their several writings, would be, to retain the unity of the Spirit by which
they wrote. But alas! we have made a division in the body of Christ, whilst
one of us detracts, envies or slanders another; or whiles we wrangle unmannerly
about idle questions, or terms of art, our jars, (ours that have the name of
Christ's messengers) make all the World besides, and our selves oft-times (we
may fear) doubt of the true and real unity betwixt Christ and his members, now
eclipsed by our carnal divisions. But howsoever these here mentioned are in
their kind, good motives unto sober minds; and the more diligent and
attentive men are to observe these and the like, the more fully shall they be
persuaded, that these writings are the dictates of the Holy Ghost.

CAP. VI.
Of the Affections or dispositions of the sacred Writers.

WIth the Experiment of this kind we may rank the vehemence of affection,
which appears in many of these sacred writers, most frequent in the book of
Psalms. And to distinguish fained or counterfeit from true experimental
affections is the most easy, and most certain kind of Criticism. He that
never had any himself may safely swear, that most Poets ancient or modern, have
had experience of wanton loves. For who can think that Catullus, Ovid, and
Martial had never been acquainted with any but painted women, or written of
love matters only as blind men may talk of Colors? Or, who can suspect, that
either Ovid had penned his books De Tristibus, or Boethius his Philosophical
Consolation, only to move delight, (as children oft-times weep for
wantonness:) or fained these subjects to delude the World, by procuring real
compassion to their counterfeit mourning? But much more sensible may we feel
the pulses of our Psalmists passions beating their ditties, if we would lay our
hearts unto them. Albeit we seek not to prove their divine authority from the
strength of passion simply, but from the objects, causes, or issue of their
passions. And the Argument holds thus; As the Ethnic Poets passions, expressed
in their writings, bewray their experience in such matters as they wrote of; as
of their carnal delight in love enjoyed, or of earthly sorrow for their exiles,
death of friends, or other like worldly crosses: So do these sacred Ditties
witness their Pen-mens experience in such matters as they profess; as of
spiritual joy, comfort, sorrow, fear, confidence, or any other affection
whatsoever. If we compare Ovids Elegy to Augustus with that Psalm of David, (in
number the 51.) why should Tr^st. l. (...). 2.
we think that the one was more conscious of misdemeanour toward that Monarch,
or more sensibly certain of his displeasure procured by it, than the other of
soul offenses toward God, and his heavy hand upon him for them? David's
penitent bewayling of his souls loss, in being separated from her wonted
joys, his humble entreaty and importunate suit, for restoration to his former
estate, argue, he had been of more entire familiar acquaintance with his
heavenly, than Ovid with his earthly Lord; that he had received more sensible
pledges of his love, was more deeply touched with the present loss of his
savor, and better experienced in the course and means of reconcilement to it
again. Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness: Pslam 51.
1.
according to the multitude of thy compassions put away mine iniquities. Wash
me thoroughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. For I know Verse
2. Verse 3.
mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, against thee
only have I sinned, and done evil in thy sight. What was it then which caused
his present grief? bodily pain? exile, loss of goods, want, or restraint of
sensual pleasurs? Yea, what was there that worldly minded men either desireor
know, which was not at his command? And yet, he, well for health of body, only
oppressed with grief of mind, most desirous to sequester himself from all
solace, which his Court or Kingdom could afford, in hope to find his company
alone who was invisible, and to renew acquaintance with his Spirit. Create a
clean heart (O God) and renew a right spirit within me. Cast me not away from
thy presence, and take not thy holy spirit from me. He accounts himself but as
an exile, though living in his native soil, but as a slave, though absolute
Monarch over a mighty people; whilst he stood separate from the love of his
God, and lived not in subjection to his spirit. If one in hunger should loath
ordinary or course sare, we would conjecture he had been accustomed to more
sine and dainty meats. Hereby then it may appear, that David had tasted of more
choice delights, and purer joys, then the carnal minded knew, in that he
loathes all earthly comfort in this his anguish, (wherein he stood in greatest
need of some comfort,) desiring only this of God; Restore me to the joy of thy
salvation, and establish me with thy free Spirit. So far was he from
distrusting the truth of that ineffable joy, which now he felt not (at the
least) in such measures as he had done before, that he hopes by the manifest
effects of it once restored, to dissuade the Atheist from his Atheism, and
cause lascivi^ blood-thirsty minds to wash off the silth, wherein they wallow,
with their cars. For so he adds, Then shall I teach thy ways unto the
wicked, and sin^ be converted unto thee. Deliver me from blood, O God, which
art the God ^, and my tongue shall sing joyfully of thy righteousness. Open
thou ^, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise; which as yet he could not
show forth to others, because abundance of joy did not lodge in his heart; for
God had sealed up sorrow therein, until the sacrifice of his broken and ^ were
accomplished. From the like abundant experience of ^ joy, the Psalmist, Psalm
66. v. 16. bursteth out into like consi^; inviting us, as Christ did his
Apostle Thomas, to come near and lay our hands upon his healed sore, and by the
scars to gather the skill and goodness of him that had thus cured him, beyond
all expectation: Come Verse 17.
and hearken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he has done to my
soul; I called unto him with my mouth, and he was exalted with my tongue.
Praised be Verse 20.
God which has not put back my prayer, nor his mercy from me. The fullness of
his inward joys was such, and Gods providence over him so manifest and
wonderful, that the present age wherein he lived could not (to his seeming) but
take notice of it, whilst the particulars, wherein the Lord had heard him,
were in fresh memory: and all posterity, he presumes out of the abundance of
his own belief, should still believe the goodness of God, from this
experimental relation of his goodness toward him. He that has least
experience of the like in himself, would he but attentively mark the fervency
of of those men's zeal, and vehemence of their godly passions, expressed in
these here mentioned, and many like unaffected strains, could not but
acknowledge that famous inscription, which a later degenerate lascivious Poet,
(out of such a vainglorious humor, as moves some basely descended to usurp
the Arms of Noble men whose names they bear,) sought to bestow on all, even
upon such as himself was, Vates in name, but not in quality, to belong of right
only to these Psalmists, or ancient sacred Poets.

Fst Deus in vobis, agitante calescitis illo:
Impetus hic sacrae semina mentis habet.
Sure in your breasts Gods Spirit has his seat,
It Is Divine motion breeds this heavenly heat.
For who can imagine, that the Author of the 74 Psalm, v. 9. should complain,
without some touch of that Spirit, which he knew had been more plentiful in
such as had gone before him; We see not our signs, there is not one Prophet
more, not any that knows how long. V. 10. O God, how long shall the adversary
reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? V. 11. Why withdrawest
thou thine hand, even thy right hand? Draw it out of thy bosom and consume
them. v. 12. Even God is my king of old, working salvation in the mids of the
earth. These sober and constant motions, as it were of Systoles and Diastoles
between Despair and Hope, expressed in this and the 44 Psalm, argue that those
wonders and noble works, which they had heard with their ears, and their
fathers had told them, were no Fables, but matters truly and really acted,
which had left deep impression in their forefathers hearts, who had so thoroughly
felt and tasted the extraordinary Goodness of their God, that the longing
desire of like Favor is transfused as hereditary to posterity, as the desire
of such meats as Parents best affect, and use most to feed upon, usually
remains in their Children.

2 Or, to use the Author of the 42 Psalm his own comparison; Braying does not
more sensibly notify the Hearts panting after the water brooks, than that Psalm
does his thirsting after the Spirit of Life; which sometime had been diffused
through his Faculties, and had fructified in Joy and comfort, but now in these
storms of affliction lay hid in his heart, only supporting it with hopes of
like fruit against a better season; as the sap whereby trees flourish in
Summer, retiring to the root in Winter, preserves them sound within, so that
although Frosts may nip, and storms outwardly deface them, yet they break forth
again, and bear fruit in the Spring. And although I never mistrusted the truth
of that dissension, betwxt the willingness of the Spirit, and weakness of the
Flesh, often mentioned in Scripture; yet I know not how it adds more life to my
Belief, whilst I see this conflict acted by the Author of the 42 and 43
Psalms. The flesh complains, as if his heart were ready to close with dejected
fear; My soul is cast down within me, all thy waves and ^^ouds are gone over
me. The Spirit like a good Physician, by reiterating that speech of comfort,
Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and why art thou so dis^eted within me,
raises it up again, and dilateth his heart with hope in God against all hope
in worldly sight. For so he concludes both these Psalms, Wait on God: for I
will yet give him thanks: he is my present help and my God. Generally, though
the Psalmists complaints be oft-times grievous, yet they never end them but
with Hearty Prayer; though God oft-times lay great Plagues upon them; yet is
their Confidence always as great, that he will heal them. The beginning of
their mournful Ditties always represent the storms of grief and sorrow, that
had gone over their souls: their end and close is like the appearing of the
Morning Star, foreshewing the removal of the shadow of death wherein they sat.
Their sudden transitions from grief to joy, is even as the breaking out of the
Sun from under a thick tempestuous Cloud: So that the outward Character of
their Songs, is a lively representation of that truth, which one of them out of
his inmost experience has left registered to the World; His wrath endures but
the twinkling of an eye, and in his pleasure is life: heaviness may endure
for a night, but joy comes in the morning. Psalm. 30. 5.

3 This patience in Adversity, and confident expectation of deliverance from
above, compared with the Heathens impatience, always ready to accuse their
Gods in their unexpected calamities, and seeking to vent their grief in
Poetical Invectives against them: infallibly testify, that the one did only
know the Divine Powers by hearsay, the others by experience; and that God was
near to this people in all which they called upon him, and beheld the affairs
of the Heathen only a far off.

4 Yet beside these particular lively Characters of experimental joy or grief,
fear, or confidence: their consonancy with the historical truth of alterations
in the state of Jewry, will much illustrate the former observations. For albeit
the Psalmists in their greatest distresses or calamities, murmur not against
the Lord God, as the Heathens do: yet the tenor of some late mentioned, with
diverse other Psalms, argue that the people of God in those times wherein they
were written, either had not such manifest signs of Gods favor; or else found
not such speedy deliverance from the dangers feared, or calamities suffered by
them, as the Prophet David in the 27 Psalm v. 1. and other of their godly
Ancestors had done. The Lord (says David) is my light and my salvation, whom
shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid*
Though an host pitched against me, mine heart should not be afraid: though war
be raised against me, yet I will trust in this; to wit, upon his former
experience of Gods mercies specified v. 2. When the wicked mine mine enemies
came, and my soes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they stumbled and fell. But
greater was his confidence from the more often experience of Gods favor, when
as his case otherwise, for the multitude and malignity of his enemies, was more
desperate, Psalm 3. v. 1. Many were his adversaries that rose up against him;
and many that said unto his soul, (when he fled from his son Absalom) V. 2.
There is no help for him in his God. Yet he, as an expert soldier, cannot be
terrified with stales or brags, but betaketh himself unto his weapons; V. 3.
Thou I ord art a buckler for me, my glory, and the lifter up of my head. So
little is he dismayed, that after his prayers he takes his quiet rest; V. 4. I
did call upon the I ord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy
mountain. I laid me down and slept, and rose again, for the Lord sustained me.
V. 5. I will not be afraid for 10000 of the people, that should beset me round
about. The same confidence, raised from the experience of Gods assistance, was
in the Author of the 46 Psalm; God is our help and strength, a very present
help in trouble: Therefore will we not fear though the earth be moved, and
though the mountains fall into the midst of the Sea. The manner of David's
carriage, his confident presaging of good success, in times more apt to breed
despair in others less experienced in assistance from above, expressed in sundry
Psalms, composed when he fled from Saul, yield abundance of observations
pregnant for this purpose.

5 Otherwiles this Kingly Prophet expostulates the wrongs offered by his
enemies so confidently, and relates his own integrity in such pathetical and
serious manner, that unless the inscription of his Petitions, or other
historical circumstance, did give us notice, to whom he tendered his complaints,
we would think that they had been so many reports, of what he had openly
pleaded at some Bar, or Court of civil Justice, in the personal presence,
sight, or audience of some visible Judge, ready to give sentence for him upon
the first hearing of his cause. If any civil Heathen, that never had heard of
any invisible God, should have taken up some of his Psalms (the ninth for
example) in the streets, he would have imagined that the Author of them had
either heard some supreme Magistrate in his time deeply protesting his
resolution for righting the poor, or else had been most intimately acquainted
with the integrity of his proceedings in matters of Justice, that he durst so
confidently avouch unto the World on his behalf; Psalm 9. v. 8. He shall judge
the world in righteousness, and the people with equity. V. 9. The Lord also
will be a refuge for the poor, a refuge in due time, even in affliction. V. 10.
And they that know thy Name, will trust in thee: for thou Lord have not failed
them that seek thee. So lively was David's, and other Ancient Psalmists
experience of the invisible Gods assistance always ready, as well in war as in
peace, as well in executing judgment upon their treacherous, deceitful, or
secret enemies, as in giving them victory over their professed and potent Foes.

6 But posterity had not, oftentimes, so full Experience of the same
assistance, as appears from the manner of their complaints. The reason of
this Diversity, in the Ancient and later Psalmists apprehension of Gods
favor; either in delivering them from danger, or righting them from wrong; was
from the Diversity of Times, the later not yielding so manifest and frequent
Documents of Gods mercy or justice, as the former had done. As Gods plagues
upon the Ancient Israelites were oft-times sudden, and (for the time) violent:
so their deliverance from them was speedy, because their stubbornness was
less, and the sins, for which they were to repent, of less continuance. But
the continual increase of this peoples wickedness, in their successions, and
posterities slacknesse, in sorrowing either for their own or Predecessors
sins, made Gods plagues inflicted upon them more durable, as appears by the
long Captivities and oppressions of this people in later Ages, If we compare
them with the often, but short afflictions, which in former times had befallen
them. This long durance of great calamities, made Posterity less apprehensive
of Gods promises then their forefathers had been; at the least, whiles these
continued, they were less acquainted with Gods favor then their Predecessors
were. And from the want of like sensible Experience of his present help in time
of trouble, later generations are more querulous and less confident in their
prayers uttered in their distress, as we may see in the 98, and other Psalms,
conceived by the Godly amongst this people in the calamities of later Times.
Thus we may see how truly the diversity of Gods dealing with his people in
different Ages, is represented in the Character, Style, or Affection of these
sacred Writers, all much different in former and latter Ages: much more may we
presume, that the general and true Diversity of Times, and GODS diverse manner
of proceeding with mankind in their several Generations, is most truly related
and exemplified in the Historical relations of the same sacred Volumes; of
which in the Section following.

7 Thus much of Experiments, or Observations drawn from the Character, or tenor
of these sacred Writings themselves, or their Writers Affections represented in
them. These I have gathered, not that I can hope to persuade any man so much by
reading them, as by occasioning him to observe the like, whiles he reads
these sacred Volumes. For every man that reads them with attentive
Observation, may apprehend much more for the framing of true Belief in his own
heart, then he can express to others: yea, to seek to make full resemblance of
our inward Belief, or such Experiments as confirm it, by outward discourse,
were all one, as if a man out of the slight impression or transitory
representation of his own face which he had lately beheld in a Glass, should
seek to describe it as fully and perfectly to another man's Apprehension, as if
he had looked upon it with him in the same Glass

8 As there presentation of our bodily shape, is lively and perfect whilst we
behold it in a true and perfect Glass; but the Memorial or Fantasy of it
when we are gone thence, imperfect and dull: So is the apprehension of our own,
or Experiments of others Belief, sensible and fresh, whilst we set our hearts
and minds unto this perfect Law of Liberty, the only true Glass of our
Souls; but more hard to retain in memory, or to be fully represented to
another by Discourse, then our bodily shape is by a bare description. And as in
the Art of Painting, general rules may be given for the right drawing of
Pictures, yet he that will take any particular man's, must look upon the love
face it self, or use the benefit of his Glass: So in this case, there may be
good directions given, how men should draw Experiments, or take Observations of
this kind, which being taken, can not be fully imprinted in another, by him
that took them: but every man must have continual recourse unto this Spiritual
Glass, which far surpasses all bodily Glasses in this; that in It we may see,
not only the true shape and proportion of our Souls as they are, or of what
fashion they should be; but It has also an operative force of assimilating
them unto the paterns of godly and religious men's Souls represented herein,
yea, even of transforming them into the similitude of that Image wherein they
were first created. The Idaeas of Sanctity and Righteousness contained in this
Spiritual Glass, are the causes of our Edification in good life and Virtue: as
the Idaea or Platform in the Artificers head, is the cause of the Material
House that is builded by it.

SECT. II.
Of Experiments and Observations External, answerable to the rules of Scripture.

CAP. VII.
Containing the Topic, whence such Observations must be drawn.

1 IF the Books of some Ancient rare Author, who had written in sundry Arts,
should be found in this Age; all bearing the Authors name and other commendable
Titles prefixed: a reasonable man would soon be persuaded, that they were His
whose name they bore; but sooner, if he had any positive arguments to persuade
himself or their Antiquity, or if they were commended to him by the authority
or report of men in this case credible. But, besides all these, if every man
according to his Experience or Skill in those Arts and Faculties which this
Ancient writer handles, should upon due examination of his Conclusions or
discourse, find resolution in such points as he had always wavered in before;
or be instructed in matters of his Profession or observation, whereof he was
formerly ignorant: this would much strengthen his Assent unto the former
reports or traditions concerning their Author, or unto the due praises and
Titles prefixed to his Works; albeit he that made this trial, could not prove
the same truth so fully to another, nor cause him to Believe it so firmly as he
himself does, unless he could induce him to examine his writings by like
Experiments, in some Faculty wherein the examiner had some, though less,
Skill. And yet, after the like trial made, he, that had formerly doubted, would
Believe these works to be the supposed Authors, and subscribe unto the Titles
and commendations prefixed, not so much for the Formers Report or Authority,
as from his own Experience. Now we have more certain Experiments to prove that
the Scriptures are the word of God, then we can have to prove any men's works to
be their supposed Authors: for one Author in any Age may be as good as another;
He perhaps better, of whom we have heard less. We could in the former case
only certainly Believe that the Author, whosoever, was an excellent Scholar;
but we could not be so certain that it was none other but he whose Name it did
bear: For there may be many Aristotle's and many Platoes, many Excelllent men in
every Profession, yet but One God that is All in All; whose Works we suppose
the Scriptures are, which upon strict examination will evince him alone to have
been their Author.

2 The means then of establishing our Assent unto any part of Scripture, must
be from Experiments and Observations agreeable to the rules in Scripture. For
when we see the reason and manner of sundry events, either related by others,
or experienced in our selves, which otherwise we could never have reached unto
by any Natural Skill; or, generally, when we see any effects or concurrence of
things which cannot be ascribed to any but a Supernatural Cause, and yet they
fully agreeing to the Oracles of Scriptures or Articles of Belief: This is a
sure Pledge unto us, that he who is the Author of Truth, and gives being unto
all things, was the Author of Scriptures.

3 Such Events and Experiments are diverse, and according to their diversities
may work more or less on diverse dispositions; Some may find more of one sort,
some of another, none all. Some again may be more induced to Believe the truth
of Scriptures from one sort of Experiments, some from others. Those
observations are always best for every man, which are most incident to his
Vocation. With some variety of these observations or Experiments we are in the
next place to acquaint diverse Readers.

CAP. VIII.
That Heathenish Fables ought not to Prejudice divine Truth.

1 NOthing more usual to men, wise enough in their generation, then for the
variety or multitude of false reports concerning any Subject to discredit All
that are extant of the same. And all inclination unto diffidence or distrust is
not always to be misliked; but only when it swayes too far, or extends is
self beyond the limits of its proper Circumference, that is, matters of Bargain
or secular Commerce. As this diffident temper is most common in the cunning
managers of such affairs: so the first degree or propension to it were not
much amiss in them, did they not Transcendere a genere ad genus; that is, were
not their Mistrust commonly too generally rigid and stiff. For most men of
great dealings in the world, finding many slipperie companions, hold it no sin
to be at the least suspicious of all: Others, being often cozened by such as
have had the name and reputation of Honest men, begin to doubt whether there be
any such thing indeed, as that which men call Honesty; and from this doubting
about the real nature of Honesty in the Abstract, they resolve undoubtedly,
That if any man in these days do not d^ ill with others, it is only for want
of sit opportunity to do himself any great good. But as Facility in yielding
Assent, unless it be moderated by discretion, is an infallible Consequent of
too great simplicity, and lays a man open to abuse and wrong in matters of
this life: so General Mistrust is the certain forerunner of Insidelity, and
makes a man apt enough to cozen himself, without a tempter, in matters of the
life to come; though otherwise this is the very disposition which the great
Tempter works most upon: who for this reason, when any notable truth of greater
moment falls out, labors by all means to fill the world with reports of like
events, but such as upon examination he foresees will prove false: for he knows
well, that the Belief of most pregnant truths may be this means be much
impaired, as honest men are usually mistrusted when the world is full of
knaves. And to speak the Truth, It is but a very short Cut betwixt general and
rigid Mistrust in worldly dealings, and Infidelity in spiritual matters; which
indeed is but a kind of diffidence or mistrust: and he that from the experience
of often cozenage comes once to this point, That he will trust none in worldly
affairs but upon strong security or legal assurance, may easily be transported
by the variety or multitude of reports, in spiritual matters, notoriously
false, to Believe nothing but upon the sure pledge and Evidence of his own
Sense or natural Reason. This is one main fountain of Atheism; of which (God
willing) in the Article of the Godhead. In this place I only desire to give
the Reader notice of Satan's Policy, and to advertise him withal, that as there
is a kind of Ingenuous Simplicity, which if it match with sob^ie^ie and serious
meditation, does prepare our Hearts to Christian Belief; so there is a kind of
Suspicion, by which we may out-reach the old Serpent in his subtlety, and
prevent his former Method of deceit. So, whilst we read or hear variety of
reports concerning any notable Event, or many Writers beating about one matter,
every one of which may seem improbable in particular Circumstances, or else
their diversity such as makes them Incompatible; we should be Jealous, that
there were some Notable Truth, whose Belief did concern us, which Satan has
sought to disparage by the mixture, either of gross improbable fruitless
fables, or else of dissonant probabilities.

2 Truth is the Life and nutriment of the world, and the Scriptures are the
Veins or Vessels wherein it is contained; which soon corrupts and putrifies,
unless it be preserved in them, as in its proper Receptacles, as both the
fabulous conceits of the Heathen and foolish practices of the Romish Church in
many points may witness. But as from Asphaltites, or the dead sea, we may find
out the pleasant streams and fresh springs of Jordan: so from the degenerate
and corrupted relish of decayed Truth, which is frequent in the puddle and
standing lakes of Heathen Writers, we may be lead to the pure Fountain of Truth
contained in these sacred Volumes of Scripture.

3 The Experiments, which now we seek or would occasion others (chiefly young
students to observe, are such as the Heathen did guess at; or men out of the
works of nature, by reading of Poets, or Ancient Writers, may yet doubt of:
whereas the true resolution of them only depends upon the Truth set down in
Scripture.

CHAP. IX.
Observations out of Poets in general, and of Dreams in particular.

1 THe most exquisite Poems are but a kind of pleasant waking dream, and the
art of Poetry a lively imitation of some delightful visions. And as nothing
comes into a man's Fancy by night in dreams, but the parts or matters of it
have been formerly in his outward senses (for even when we dream of golden
Mountains or Chimeras, the several ingredients have a real and sensible truth
in them; only the frame or proportion is such, as has no sensible example in
the works of nature:) so in Ancient Poems, which were not made in imitation of
former, as pictures drawn from pictures, but immediately devised (as we now
suppose) from the sensible experiments of those times (as pictures drawn from a
living face) many parts and lims have a real and senble truth, only the
composition or frame is Artificial and fained, such as cannot perhaps be
paralleled in every circumstance, with any real events in the course of times.
And albeit the events which the most Ancient Poets relate) through long
distance of time, seem most strange to us, yet is the ground (of their Devises
especially) Such, as upon better search may always be referred to some
Historical truth, which yielded stuff to Poetical structure, as days
spectacles do unto nights visions. This Aristotle had observed out of the
practice of the best Ancient Poets and prescribes it as a rule to Poets, to
have always an Historical truth for their ground. Nor durst Poets have been so
audacious in their fictions at the first, seeing their profession was but
either to imitate nature, or adorn a known truth; not to disparage any truth by
prodigious or monstrous fictions, without any ground of like experience. For
this is a fundamental law of their Art;

Hieron. Vida, Lib. 2. Poet.
Curandum, ut quando non semper Vera profamur,
Fingentes, saltem sint illa Simillima Very.
Though alls not true that faining Poets sing*
Yet naught on Stage but in truths likeness bring.
None, I think, will be so foolish as to take Homer in the literal sense, when
he tells us how Iris by day, and Sleep by night, run Errands for the greater
Gods, and come with these and the like messages unto Kings chambers:

(...).
Why will by counsel guide a State,
Must early rise, and lie down late.
Yet with such Artificial and painted plumes oftentimes are covered true and
natural bodies, though the messengers be Poetical and fained; yet these kinds
of night-messages had an Historical truth: for not the Poets only, but many
great Philosophers of the old world, have taken Nocturnal presages for no
dreams or fancies. Hence did Homer usurp his liberty, in faining his Kings
and Heroicks, so often admonished of their future estate by the gods: he
presumed at least, that these fictions might carry a show of truth in that
age, wherein such admonitions by night were not unusual. And his conceit is not
dissonant unto the sacred story, which bears record of like effects in Ancient
times, and gives the true cause of their expiration in later.

2 So usual were dreams among the Patriarchs, and their interpretations so well
known, that Jacob could at the first hearing interpret his young son Joseph's
dream, Genesis 37. 10, 11. What is this dream that thou have dream^ Shall I, and
thy mother and thy brethren come indeed, and fall on the ground before Genesis 37.
10.
thee? Nor did he take it only for a Fable, no more then his brethren had done
his former for a Fancy; for, as the Text says, his brethren envied him, Ver^.
11.
but his father noted the saying. And Joseph himself coming to riper year, was
as expert in interpreting Pharaohs and his servants dreams, Genesis 40. ver^ 12,
13. Then Joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it: The three
branches are three days; within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head,
and resiore thee unto thine office, and thou shall give Pharoahs cup into his
hand, after the old manner when thou wast his Eutler. And verse 19. Within
three days she Pharaoh take thine head from thee, and shall hang thee on a
tree, and the bir^ shall eat thy flesh from off thee. These considerations will
not suffer me mistrust diverse Ancient Historiographers, making report, how
Princes and Fathers of Families have had fore-warnings of future events, either
concerning themselves, their Kingdoms or Posterity. Nor were all dreams among
the Heathens illusions of wicked spirits: for Elihu spoke, out of the common
experience ^
of those Ancient times wherein he lived; God speaks once or twice, (that is,
usually) and one sees it not. In dreams and visions of the night, when sleep
falls upon men, and they sleep upon their beds, then he opens the ears of
men, even by their corrections, which he had sealed, that he might cause man to
turn away from his enterprise, and that he might hide the pride of man and keep
back his soul from the pit, and that his life should not pass by the sword. A
lively experiment of El^hu his observation we have, Genesis 20. 3. When Abimelech
King of Ge^ar had taken Sarah, Abraham's wife, God came to him in a dream by
night, and said to him, Behold, thou art but dead, because of the woman which
thou haji taken; for she is a man's wife. And again, verse 6, 7. God said unto
him by a dream, I know that thou did this even with an upright mind, and I
kept thee also that thou should not sin against me, therefore suffered I not
thee to touch her: Now then deliver the man his wife again; for he is a
Prophet, and he shall pray for thee, that thou may live: but if thou deliver
her not again, be sure that thou shall die the death, thou, and all that thou
have. And Moses witnesses the ordinary Prophecy of Ancient times to have
consisted of dreams and visions, Numb. 12. 6, 7. If there be a Prophet of the
Lord amongst you, I will be known unto him by a vision, and will speak unto him
by a dream. My servant Moses is not so that is, he is no ordinary Prophet) unto
him will I speak mouth to mouth, and by vision, and not in dark words, but he
shall see the similitude of the Lord.

3 These allegations sufficiently prove, that night-dreams and visions were
frequent, and their observation (if taken in sobriety) to good use, in Ancient
times even amongst the Nations, until they forgot, as Joseph said, Genesis 40. 8.
That interpretations were from God, and sought to find out an Art of
interpreting them: Then night-visions did either cease, or were so mixed with
delusions, that they could not be discerned; or, if their events were in some
sort fore seen, yet men being ignorant of Gods providence, commonly made choice
of such means for their avoidance, as proved the necessary occasions or
provocations of the events they feared.

4 Much better was the temper of the Nations before Homers time: They, amongst
other kinds of prophecyings and Sooth-sayings, held dreams and their
interpretations (as all other good gifts) to be from God. As no evil was done
in the Grecian Camp, which the Gods, in their opinion, did not cause, so Homer
brings in Achilles, advising Agamemnon to consult their Gods interpreters with
all speed for what offense committed against them they had sent the Pestilence
into their Camp.

Homer Il. 1.
(...)
(...),
But to what Priest, or Prophet shall we wend,
Or Dreamer? for even Dreams from Jove descend.
All those kinds of Predictions had been in use amongst the Heathens, as they
were amongst the Israelites; albeit in later times they grew rare in both: for
the increase of wickedness throughout the World the multiplicity of business
and solicitude of Humane affairs, and men's too much minding of politic means,
and other second causes of their own good, did cause the defect of true dreams
and other divine admonitions for the welfare of mankind.

5 This cause the Scriptures give us, 1 Samuel 28. 6. Saul (who had followed the
Fashions of other Nations not the prescripts of Gods Word) asked counsel of the
Lord, but the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by i. by Priests.
Urim, nor by Prophets His sins had made a separation between him and the God
of Israel, who for this cause will not afford his presence to his Priests or
Prophets, that came as mediators betwixt Saul and him; much less would he
vouchsafe his Spirit unto such Priests or Prophets as were carnally minded
themselves. This was a rule so well known to the people of God that Strabo See
Strabo. Casaubons Edit. l. 16. p. 761.
from the tradition of it (for Moses his story he had not read) reckons up this
as a special point of Moses his doctrine, concerning the worship of the God of
Israel; his words are to this effect: Moses taught, that such as lived chastely
and uprightly should be inspired with true visions by night, and such men it
was meet, should consult the Divine Powers in the Temple by night-visions: but
others, who were not so well minded, ought not to intrude themselves into this
sacred business; or, if they would, they were to expect no true visions, but
Illusions or idle Dreams; from God they were not to expect any. Yet may it not
be denied, but that the Heathens, were oft-times, by Gods permission, truly
resolved by Dreams or Oracles (though ministered by Devils) of events that
should come; but seldom were such resolutions for their good: So the Witch,
which Saul most Heathen-like consulted, when God had cast him off, did procure
him a true prediction of his fearful end. This is a point wherein I could be
large, but I will conclude. As the Heathens relations of sundry events usual in
Ancient times, confirm the truth of the like, recorded in Scripture; so the
Scriptures give the true causes of their Being, Ceasing, or Alteration: which
the corrupt and Polypragmatical disposition of later Ages, without revelation
from the cause of causes and disposer of times, could never have dreamed of; as
may partly appear from what has been said of Dreams; more fully from that,
which follows next of Oracles.

CAP. X.
Of Oracles.

I Have often and daily occasion (for the satisfaction of my mind in sundry
questions that might otherwise have vexed me) to thank my God, that as he made
me a Reasonable Creature, and of a Reasonable Creature a Student or
Contemplator, so He did not make me a mere Philosopher: (though Plato thought
this deserved the greatest thanks, as being the greatest benefit bestowed upon
him by his God) but never was I more incited in this respect to bless the day
wherein I was made a Christian, then when I read Plutarchs Tract of the causes
why Oracles ceased in his time. Whether Heathen Oracles were all illusions of
Devils, or some uttered by God himself for their good (though oft-times without
success, by reason of their curiosity and superstition) I now dispute not.
That Oracles in ancient times had been frequent; that such events had been
foretold by them, as surpassed the skill of humane reason: all Records of
unpartial Antiquity bear uncontrollal le evidence. Nor did the Heathen
Philosophers themselves, which lived in the Ages immediately following their
decay, call the truth of their former use in question: but from Admiration of
this known change, they were incited to search the cause of their ceasing.
Plutarch, after his acute search of sundry causes and accurate Philosophical
disputes, refers it partly unto the Absence of his Demoniacal Spirits, which by
his Philosophy might die or flit from ^ib de Defe*cta Oraculor^m.
place to place, either exiled by others more potent, or upon some other
dislike; and partly unto the alteration of the soil, wherein Oracles were
seated which yielded not Exhalations of such a divine temper as in former times
it had done; and without a certain temperature of exhalations or breathing of
the Earth, the Demoniacal Spirits (he thought) could not give their Oracles,
more then a Musician can play without an Instrument. And this decay or
alteration of the soil of Delphi, and like places, was (in his judgment)
probable, from the like known experience in sundry Rivers, Lakes, and
hot-Baths; which, in some places did quite dry up and vanish; in others, much
decay for a long time, or change their course; and yet afterward recover their
former course or strength, either in the same places, or some near adjoining.
Thus he expected Oracles should either come in use again in Greece, or else
burst out in some more convement Soil. The Atheists of this Age (our English
homebred ones at least) have altogether as great reason to deny the decay or
drying up of Rivers and Lakes, as to suspect the frequency of Oracles, or other
events in times past: for neither they no^ their fathers have had any more
experience of the one then of the other. Plutarchs testimony (amongst many
others) is Authentic for the use and decay of Oracles: but neither his
Authority, nor the reasons which he brings, can give satisfaction to any man
that seeks the true cause of their defect. He refers it (indeed) in a
generality to the Gods; not that they wanted good will to mankind still, but
that the matter did decay which their ministers (the demoniacal Spirits) did
work upon, as you heard before. We may upon sure grounds with confidence
affirm, That even this decay of matter, which he dreams of (had it conferred
ought to the use of Oracles) was from God. And he (as the Psalmist speaks) that
turns the floods into a wilderness, and dries up the water Psalm. 107.
Springs, and makes a fruitful land barren, for the iniquity of them that
dwell therein, did also bring, not only the Oracle of Delphi, so much
frequented amongst the Grecians, but all other kinds of divinations, used
amongst his own people in the old World, to desolation: and by pouring out his
Spirit more plenteously upon the barren hearts of us Heathen, has filled the
Barbarous Nations of Europe with better store of Rivers of comfort then the
Ancient Israel, his own inheritance, had ever known. Or if we desire a more
immediate cause of these Oracles defect amongst the Heathens; the time was
come, that the strong man's house was to be entered, his goods spoiled, and
himself Matthew. 12. 29. John 12. 31.
bound; now the Prince of this world was to be cast out.

2 Plutarchs relation of his demoniacal Spirits mourning for great Pans death,
about this time, is so strange, that it might perhaps seem a Tale, unless the
truth of the common bruit had been so constantly avouched by ear-witnesses unto
Tiberius, that it made him call a convocation of Wise men, as Herod did at our
Saviors birth, to resolve him who this great Pan, late deceased, should be.
Thamous, the Egyptian Master (unknown by that name to his Passengers, until he
answered to it at the third call of an uncouth voice, uttered Sine Authore from
the land, requesting him to proclaim the news of great Pans death, as he passed
by Palodes) was resolved to have let all pass as a Fancy or idle Message, if
the wind and tide should grant him passage by the place appointed: but, the
wind failing him on a sudden, at his coming thither, he thought it but a little
loss of breath to cry out aloud unto the shore, as he had been requested,
Great Pan is dead. The words, as Plutarch relates, were scarce out of his
mouth, before they were answered with a huge noise, as it had been of a
multitude, sighing and groaning at this wonderment. If these Spirits had been
by nature mortal, as this Philosopher thinks, the death of their chief Captain
could not have seemed so strange: but that a far greater then the greatest of
them, by whose power the first of them had his being, should die to redeem his
enemies from their thraldom, might well seem a matter of wonderment and sorrow
unto them. The circumstance of the time will not permit me to doubt, but that
under the known name of Pan was intimated the great Shepherd of our souls,
that had then laid down his life for his flock; not the fained son of Mercury
and Penelope, (...). Plut. ubi sup.
as the Wisemen foolishly resolved Tiberius: Albeit even this base and
counterfeit resolution of these Heathens coining, bears a lively image (for the
exact proportion) of the divine truth, Charactred out unto us in Scripture. For
it shall appear by sufficient testimonies, in their due time and place to be
produced, that sundry general, confused, or Enigmatical traditions of our
Saviors Conception, Birth, and Pastoral office, had been spread abroad amongst
the Nations. Hence, instead of Him, they frame a Pan, the God of Shepherds; in
stead of the Holy Spirit, by whom he was to be conceived, they have a Mercury
(their false Gods fained Messenger and Interpreter) for Pans father; instead of
the Blessed Virgin, who was to bear our Savior, they have a Penelope for their
young Gods Mother. The affinity of quality and offices, in all the parties here
paralleld, made this transfiguration of divine Truth easy unto the Heathen;
and the manner of it cannot seem improbable to us, if we consider the wonted
vanity of their imaginations, in transforming the glory of the Immortal God
into the similitude of earthly things, most dislike to it in nature and
quality. Thus admitting Plutarchs story to be most true, it no way proves his
intended conclusion, that the wild goatish Pan was mortal: but the Scriptures
set forth unto us the true cause, why both he, and all the rest of that hellish
crew should at that time howl and mourn, seeing by the Great Shephe ds Death
they were become Dead in Law; no more to breath in Oracles, but quite to be
deprived of all such strange motions, as they had seduced the ignorant World
with, before. All the antic tricks of Faunus, the Satyrs, and such like
creatures, were now put down; God had resolved to make a translation of his
Church; and for this cause the Devils were enforced to dissolve their old
Chapels, and seek a new form of their Liturgy or Service. Whilst the
Israelites were commanded to consult with Gods Priests, Prophets, or other
Oracles, before they undertook any difficult war or matters of moment, Satan
had his Priests and Oracles as much frequented by Heathen Princes upon the like
occasions. So Strabo witnesses, That the Lib. citato.
Ancient Heathen, in their chief consultations of State, did rely more upon
Oracles then humane policy. If Moses were forty days in the Mount, to receive
Plato in Mino^
Laws from Gods own mouth, Minos will be Jupiters Auditor, in his Den or Cave,
for the same purpose. In emulation of Shiloh, or Kiriath-jearim, whilst the
Ark of God remained there, the Heathens had Dodona; and for Jerusalem they had
Delphi, garnished with rich donatives of foreign Princes as well as Grecians;
so magnified also by Grecian Writers, as (...) it had been the intended
Parallel of the holy City. Insomuch, that Plutarch thinks the Plut. ibid.
story, commonly received of that Oracles original, to be less probable,
because it ascribes the invention of it to Chance, and not to the Divine
Provivence, or Favor of the Gods, when as it had been such a direction unto
Greece, in undertaking wars, in building Cities, and in time of Pestilence and
Famine. Whether these effects in Ancient times had been always from the
information of Devils (as I said before) I will not dispute. That this Oracle
had been often consulted, it is evident; and that oftentimes the Devils deluded
such as consulted them, is as manifest. But since that saying of the Prophet
was fulfilled, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write in their Jer.
31. 33.
hearts; since the knowledge of Truth has been so plenteously made known and
revealed, and the principles of Religion so much dilated and enlarged by
discourse, the Devil has chosen proud hearts and busy brains for his Oracles;
seeking by their subtilty of wit, and plausibility of discourse, to counterfeit
and corrupt the form of wholesome Doctrine; as he did of old, the truth of Gods
visible Oracles, by his Apish Imitations.

3 This conclusion then is evident, both from the joint authority of all
Ancient Writers, as well profane as sacred; That God in former times had
spoken unto the world by Dreams, Visions, Oracles, Priests, and Prophets; and
that such revelations had been, amongst the Israelites, as the Stars or
Night-Lamps; amongst the Heathen as Meteors, fiery Apparitions, or wandering
Comets, for their direction in the time of darkness and ignorance. But when
both the sensible experience of our times, and the relations of former Ages,
most unpartial in this case, have sufficiently declared unto us, That all the
former Twinkling Lights are vanished; the reason of this alteration, I see,
men might seek by Natural Causes, as Plutarch did; but this doubt is cleared,
and the question truly resolved by our Apostle in these words; At sundry times,
and in Heb. 1. 1.
diverse manners, God spoke in the old time to our Fathers by the Prophets: in
these last days he has spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has made Heir of
all things, by whom also he made the world: who, being (as the Apostle there
says) the Brightness of his glory, has put the former lights, which shined
in darkness, to flight. The consideration hereof confirms that truth of our
Apostle to all such as are not blinded in heart, where he says, That the night
was past, and the day was come: For the sudden vanishing of all former lights,
about this time (assigned by Christians) of our Saviors Birth, abundantly
evince, That this was the Sun of Righteousness, which (as the Prophet had
foretold) Malach. 4. 2.
should arise unto the world. It was the light which had lately appeared in the
Coasts of Jurie, then approaching Italy, Greece, and other of these Western
Countries, which did cause these sons of darkness, (the demoniacal Spirits) to
flit Westward, as Darkness it self does from the face of the Sun, when it
begins to appear in the East. And Plutarch tells us, That after they had
forsaken the Country of Greece, they hanted Plut. ibid.
little desert Islands, near adjoining to the coasts of this our Britanie;
where they raised such hideous storms and tempests, as Navigators report they
have done of late in that Island, called by their own Name. Both reports had
their times of truth; and the like may be yet true, in some places, more remote
from commerce of Christians. But the Heathen (as Heathenish minded men do even
to this day) sought the reasons of such alterations from sensible Agents, or
second Causes, which have small affinity with those effects: or if they had,
yet the disposition of such causes depends wholly upon his will; who, though
most Immutable in Himself, changes times and seasons at His pleasure. And
wheresoever the light of his Gospel comes, it verifieth that saying of our
Apostle, Ecce vetera transierunt, and nova facta sunt omnia: And new times
yield new observations; which cannot be taken aright, nor their causes known,
without especial directions from this rule of Life. By which it plainly
appears, that the second main Period of the World, since the Flood (whose
beginning we account from the promulgation of the Law, and the distinction of
the Israelites from other people, until the time of Grace) yields great
alteration and matter of much different observation from the former. And in the
declining, or later part of this second age, we have described unto us, as it
were, an Ebb or stanch in the affairs of the Kingdom of Israel, going before
the general Fullness of Time: After which we see the Tenor of all things in
Jurie, and of other Kingdoms of the world, quite changed. But the particulars
of this change I intend to handle hereafter: I now would prosecute my former
observations of the old world.

4 Continually, whilst we compare Ancient Poets or stories with the Book of
Genesis, and other volumes of sacred Antiquity: these sacred books give us the
pattern of the waking thoughts of Ancient times. And the Heathen Poems, with
other fragments of Ethnic writings (whose entire bodies, though not so aged as
the former being but the works of men, have perished) contain the dreams and
fancies which succeeding ages by hearsay, and broken reports, had conceived,
concerning the same or like matters. So no doubt had God disposed, that the
delight which men took in the uncertain Glimpse of truth in the one, should
enure their minds the better to observe the light which shines in the other;
and that the unstable variety of the one, should prepare men's hearts more
steadfastly to embrace the truth and stability of the other, when it should be
revealed unto them. And, as any man almost, if he be observant of his former
actions, cogitations, and occurrents, may find out the occasion how dreams
(though in themselves oftentimes prodigious, absurd, and foolish) come into his
Brain or Fancy: so may any judicious man, from the continual and serious
observation of this Register of truth find out the Original, at least, of all
the principal heads or common places of Poetical fictions or ancient
Traditions, which cannot be imagined they should ever have come into any man's
fancy, unless from the Imitation of some Historical truth, or the Impulsion of
real events stirring up admiration. I or Admiration (as shall afterward appear)
did breed, and Imitation spoil, the divine Art of Poetry.

CAP. XI.
Of the Apparitions of the Heathen Gods and their Heroicks.

1 WEre all the works of Ancient Poets utterly lost, and no tradition or print
of their inventions left, so as the art of Poetry were to begin anew, and the
Theater to be raised from the ground; the most curious wits in this or near
adjoining Countries, might for many generations to come Beat their Brains, and
sift their Fancies, until they had run over all the forms and compositions
which the whole Alphabet of their Fantasmes could afford, before they could
ever dream of bringing the gods in visible shape upon the Stage, or interlacing
their Poems with their often apparitions. And unless ensuing times should
yield matter of much different observations from that which these present do,
this invention would be accounted dull,, and find but sorry and unwelcome
entertainment of the auditors or spectators. That the like invention finds
some acceptance now, it is, because men's minds have been possessed with this
conceit from the tradition of their forefathers. For many inventions, which in
succession cease to be of like use and consequence as they were in former
times, become yet matters of delight and sport unto posterity: as Shooting
continues still an Exercise of good recreation to us of this Land, because it
has been a practice of admirable use and consequence unto our worthy
Ancestors. But whence came this conceit of the gods appearing in sensible
shapes into Homers and other Ancient Poets heads? How became it a common place
of Poetical invention, whilst Poetry it self was but beginning? Surely, as
God had spoken in diverse manners unto the old world, so had he appeared in
diverse forms (perhaps) not only to the Israelites, but unto other nations
also, before the distinction of this people from them: howsoever, as the devils
had counterfeited Gods manner of speaking to his people, so did they the manner
of His, or his Angels apparitions.

2 Such apparitions of God or his Angels, the sacred Story tells us, were
frequent, not only in Abraham's, Isaacs, Jacobs, and the Patriarchs times, but
in the Ages immediately going before the times that Homer wrote of: so that the
traditions of these undoubted Experiments (if Greece or Asia had Exodus 3. 2.
Numb. 22. 22.
not the like in Homers time) might then be fresh and unquestionable. So God
appeared to Moses in the Bush; his Angel to Balaam, to Gedeon, to Manoah ^udg.
6. 11. ^udg. 13* ^.
and his wife. The like apparitions in times following were more rare in
Israel; not that the date of Gods, or his Angels extraordinary presence was
utterly expired: but their presence was seldom apprehended, by reason of that
peoples blindness of heart, and want of Prophets eyes. For Elisha's servant
had not seen so much as a glimpse of any Angel, albeit a mighty Host of these
heavenly soldiers had pitched their tents about him, unless his Master, by his
prayer to God, had opened his eyes. His master and he may be a perfect Emblem
of the heavenly and worldly wise. The servant did see the host of the Aslyrians
as clearly, perhaps more clearly, at the least he descried it sooner then his
Master did: And when the servant of the man of God 2 Kings 6. 15, etc.
arose early to go out, behold, an Host compassed the City with horses and
chariots. Then his servant said unto him, Alas master, how shall we do? And he
answered, Fear not: for they that be with us, are more then they that be with
them. Then Elishah prayed, and said, Lord open his eyes that he may see. And
the Lord opened the eyes of the servant, and he looked, and behold, the
mountain was full of horses and chariots round about Elishah. This place, and
that other of the Angels appearing to Balaam, may instruct us, that such
apparitions might be conspicuous to some one or few whom they concerned, though
not to others present with them: and that the eyes of some, which were open
enough to worldly spectacles, might be close shut to these celestial visions,
as the ears of others have been in like case. For S. Paul only Heard the voice
which cried Acts 22. 9.
aloud unto him: though those that were with him saw the light that shone at
his conversion, and were astonished at it. From the like experience about
Creece or Asia, in his own, or the usual tradition of the like in former times,
did Homer bring in Pallas appearing thus to Achilles;

Iliad. 1.
(...):
Of all the rest not one but he
The Goddess did, though present, see.
3 As the end and purpose which Homer assigns for these apparitions of his
gods; so are both these, and many other particular circumstances of his gods
assisting the Ancient Heroicks, such as might justly breed offense to any
serious reader, if a man should avouch them in earnest, or seek to persuade him
to expect more then mere delight in them. Yet I cannot think, that he would
have fained such an Assistance, unless the Valor of some men, in former
times, had been extraordinary, and more then natural. Which supernatural
Excellency in some before others, could not proceed but from a supernatural
Cause. And thus far his conceit agrees with Scripture: that there were more
Heroical spirits in old times, then in latter, and more immediate directions
from God, for managing of most wars. And from the experience hereof, the
Ancient Poets are more copious in their Hyperbolical praises of their Worthies,
then the discreeter sort of latter Poets durst be, whilst they wrote of their
own times. Not that the Ancient were more licentious, or less observant of
Decorum in this kind of fiction, then the other: but because the manifestation
of a Divine power in many of their victories, was more seen in Ancient, then in
latter times: so that such fictions, as to the ancient people might seem (by
reason of these extraordinary events then frequent) very probable; would have
been censured as ridiculous and apish in succeeding Ages, wherein no like
events were manifested. The like extraordinary manifestation of Gods power in
Battle, and of this Heroical valor inspired into men, we see most frequent in
the Ancient Stories of the Bible, as in the books of Moses, Josuah, Judges,
Samuel: some One man in those times, was worth a Thousand others: but in the
Histories of the latter Kings of Judah and Israel, such extraordinary Heroical
spirits are very rare. The Reader may add ^he like observation of Giants
Frequent in the Times of Moses and Joshuah, but afterward seldom mentioned in
the sacred story. A representation of which Historical Truth we have in Two or
Three speech^s of Nestor [Iliad (...)] in which he intimates that in his youth,
(which was about Joshuahs time) there had been many Giants and men of stature
and strength unusual in the time of the Trojan wars. His Cyclops's for the
manner of their habitation and other qualities are live pictures of the Anakims
expelled Hebron and the mountain Countries of Judah by Joshuah. Vid. Masium in
cap. 11. Josuae. verse. 21. and August. De Civit. Dei Lib. 15. Cap. 9. and Vivem
in Comment.
One or two Miraculous Victories Israel had in Elishahs, and Judah in Ezekiahs
time: but by the power, of Angels: no extraordinary valor of any man was much
seen in them. And, these few excepted, their Pattels, their Victories, and
manner of fight, come near unto the nature of other nations in the same time.
Generally from Rehoboams time, the Histories of Judah and Israel fall much more
within the compass of modern and o^cinarie observation, then did the events of
former Ages. And if we had any perfect Register of such mattters as had fallen
out in other nations and kingdoms during the time of Moses, Josuah, and the
Judges: we should find them much more consonant to the sacred Stories of these
times, then are any Histories of later times, or of former ages, wherein any
Historiographer of better account did live. And albeit I cannot excuse
Herodotus and Ctesias, either from affecting fabulous narrations, or too great
facility in admitting the superstition report or hear-say-traditions of
others: yet is men's mistrust of them usually more universal, then in
Scholastic discretion and observation it need to be: only because the like
events have not been usual in any Age throughout these parts of the world,
since the times whereof they wrote. No marvel if many since that time suspect
the signs and wonders of the old world, when as the Psalmist, that lived before
most Heathen Writers that are extant (besides such as relate like strange
events) complains; Psalm 74. 9. We see not our signs, there is not one Prophet
more. Generally, after Judah had been capt^ved by the Gentiles, That and other
Kingdoms lie, as it were, under one Parallel, and may almost be measured by the
same line: the elevation of the Jew and Gentile is much-what the same, and the
same celestial observation may serve for both. The Priests after their return
from captivity, were forbidden to eat of the Most Holy Thine, till there arose
up a Priest with Urim and Thummim, Fzra 2. 63. But, either no such did arise at
all, from the erection of the Second Temple until Christ, time: or, if any did,
it was but to give this people a Farewell of Gods extraordinary speaking unto
them, either by Priests or Prophets. Josephus consciseth, that revelations by
Urim and Thummim did finally cease 200 years before his time. Put more probable
is the opinion of others, that this, as all other kind An^^. ^^. 3. Cap. ^^.
of Prophecies, and many extraordinary signs of Gods power and presence
(sometime most frequent in that nation) did cease with that generation which
returned from captivity, or immediately after the finishing of the Second
Temple: as if God during all that time, had appointed a Fast or Vigil, as an
introduction to the Time of Fullness, ^foel 2. 28. Wherein their sons and
daughters should prophecy, and their old men, dream dreams, and their young
men see visions, and his Spirit should be poured out on all flesh; as well upon
the servant, as the master; as well upon the Gentile, as the Jew, Malach. 1.
11. For this cause, as I said God had enjoined this long fast in Judah, to
humble the Jew, and te^u^h him, that He was no more his God then the Gentiles;
and imposed silence to all his prophets dis-inuring his chosen Israel from his
wonted Call: that so this people might grow more mild, and apt to herd together
with his other slock, now to be brought into the same fold, wherein both might
jointly hear the great Shepherds voice. As God* elsewhere, had threatened, so it
came to pass, that visions had ceased in Judah, before the rising of the Roman
Empire: and likely it is that presages by dreams, or like means, formerly usual
among the Ancient Heathen, did either altogether determine, or much decrease in
many Nations about the same time. For which reasons, the Romans of that Age,
being the only wise men of the world (given too much by nature unto secular
Polic^e: did give less credit to the relations of the Ancient Greeks, or the
events registered by their Ancestors in their own Country. The like
incredulity remains in most of us; but may be easily removed by discovering
the root of it.

CHAP. XII.
The reasons of our mistrusting of Antiquities.

1 IT is the common practice of men to measure matters of Ancient times, by
observation of the times and place wherein they live: as commonly we pass our
censure on other men's actions and intentions, according to our own resolutions
and secret purposes in like cases. And, besides this general occasion of
mistaking other men's actions, and events of other times, every particular sort
of men seek to assign causes of things suitable unto their proper Faculties. The
Natural Philosopher striveth to reduce all effects to Matter and Form, or some
sensible quality; the Mathematician, to abstract Forms or Figures, or
insensible influences; the Politician thinks no alteration in public States,
or private men's affairs, falls out, but from some Politic cause or Purpose of
man: and whilst in the Annals of Antiquities he reads of sundry events,
surpassing the reach or skill of man's invention, or contrary to the ordinary
course of nature, he attributes all unto the Simplicity or credulity of their
Ancestors. Albeit, if we should search the true cause of their credulity in
yielding assent unto such strange reports, it will easily confute the error of
posterity: for this credulity in such particulars, could not have been so great
in their Ancestors, unless their minds had been first inclined to the
general, from the tradition of their Predecessors. But why their forefathers
should either have invented such strange reports, or be so inclinable to
believe them: if we search into the depth or first spring of this persuasion,
we cannot imagine any other cause, but the real and sensible Experience of such
strange events as they reported to posterity. This did enforce Belief upon the
first Progenitors of any Nation: and from the fullness of this persuasion, or
actual Belief in them, was bred this credulity or aptness in posterity, to
believe the like, which yet in success of time did by little and little wear
out. It is great simplicity and uncharitable credulity in us, to think, that
either the most Ancient, or middle Ages of the world, were generally so simple,
credulous, or apt to believe every thing, as some would make them. It had been
as hard a matter to have persuaded men of those times, that there were no Gods,
no divine power or providence: as it would be to persuade the modern Athiests,
that there is an Almighty power, which created all things; governs and
disposes of all things to his glory. The most politic Athe^st now alive, is
as Credulous in his kind, as the simplest creature in the old world was: and
will yield his assent unto the Epicures or other Brutish Philosophers
conclusions, upon as light reasons, as they did their Belief unto any Fable
concerning the power or providence of the Gods: the reason of both their
credulities in two contrary kinds, is the same. The often manifestation of an
extraordinary power in Battles, or presence in Oracles, and sensible documents
of revenge from heaven, made the one prone to entertain any report of the Gods,
though never so strange: and the want of like sensible signs or documents of
the same power in our days (whilst all men's minds are still set upon politic
means and practices for their own good) does make the other so credulous and
apt to assent to any Politik Discourse, and so averse from Belief of the
Prophets or sacred Writers, which reduce all effects to the First Cause. But
this we cannot do so immediately as the Ancient did: because God uses his
Wisdom more in the managing of this Politic world, then he did in times of
old; and men naturally are less apprehensive of His Wisdom, then of His Power;
so that his present ways are not so obvious at the first sight unto sense as
sometimes they were, though more conspicuous to sanctified reason now at this
day then before, and the manner of his proceeding more apt to confirm true
Belief in such as follow his (...), then ever it was. For the same reason were
the Ancient Israelites more prone to Idolatry, then their successors were,
after the erection of the second Temple; or either of them were at any time to
serve their GOD. For the sensible signs and bewitching inticements of some
extraordinary powers, mistaken for Divine, were then most common; and Gods
Wonders and miracles grew more rare, because they swarved from his
commandments. What Jew was there, almost, in the time of the Maccabees, but
would have given his body for an Holcaust, rather then sacrifice to any of the
Heathen Gods? The undoubted experience of long Woe and misery for their former
Idolatry, made them so averse from this sin. And the certain signs of the
Messiahs approach, did support them from falling into Atheism. Such violence as
these later willingly suffered at the hands of Heathen Princes, rather then
they would consent unto Idolatry, their Forefathers in the wilderness were as
ready to offer unto Aaron, for not furthering them in their idolatrous
imaginations. So we read Exodus 32. when God had but for a while withdrawn his
extraordinary presence from them, and Moses his instrument in working miracles,
had been but a short time out of their sight: they complain he ta^ied long, and
gather themselves together against Aaron, and say unto (...); Up, and make us
Gods to go before us: for of this Moses, the man that brought us out of the
land of Egypt, we know not what is become of him. There was no danger l^st they
should turn Athiests, this was a sin unknown in that age. And this people had
experience enough of extraordinary powers in Egypt, which they took for Gods.
So far are they from thinking there was no God that guides the world, that they
thought there were Many: and if one did withdraw his presence, another might
serve to conduct them: one they must have, otherwise all help of man was in
vain. As Jannes and Jambres had withstood Moses Miracles with their Magic; so
had the devils, their masters, sought to work wonders about the Egyptian idols,
which did stupisie the people. For albeit Their Wonders were not so great, as
Gods: yet were they more delightful to their outward sense; for their service
for the most part, was sport and play. They were never dainty to show their
juggling tricks, for their own advantage; always pliable to the humors and
lusts of men: whereas the Omnipotent Majesty of God would have all to frame
their lives and actions according to his written Laws, which might not be
altered or misinterpreted, at the pleasure of men; nor would he vouchsafe to
work his miracles in all ages, or unto such as were unworthy spectators of
them. Thus had Satan his Oracles and sacrifices often times better frequented,
then God had his; As in these times, such Preachers as will accommodate
themselves unto the peoples Humors, are most frequented; but such as hold this
sin as Sacrilege and dishonor to their God, are despised and set at naught.
And though we may not mitigate Aarons fault, nor diminish these Israelites
transgression (as their foo^ pos^v does) by transferring the blame of this
idolatrous fact upon the M^which followed the Host of Israel out of Egypt: yet
it is more then probable from the circumstance of the Text (besides the
tradition of the ancient Hebrews,) that there was some magical or demoniacal
skill practiced in the (...) moultin* of this Egyptian god, whence this peoples
superstition toward it was mer^ased. The Heathen Princes of those times were
no Babies; as ^
wa^y (we may presume) upon what occasion to forgo their children, as misers
are to part with money: and yet these were wrested from them, and their blood
shed by their own hands, to pacify the rage of powers, then manifestly known
for supernatural. But when both Gods Wonders grew rare, and the devils tricks
waxed scant, either by restraint from above, or of their own free choice, as if
by their long continuance they had grown out of request: they see it more boot
to draw the Politic world unto Atheism, which never did flourish until the
rising of the Roman Monarchy. Unto this main inconvenience of the late Romans,
and other worldly wise men's distrust of wonders past, this second mischief did
accrue, That sundry Writers of those times, did hold it a part of their
Profession, to fill their Books with such stuff, as they found in Ancient
stories; as if their Histories or Poems had not been Current, without as many
parts or heads of invention, as others had in former Ages. And this experience
of counterfeit wonders, meeting with the want of experience of any true wonders
of that time, did concur as Form and Privation for the producing of Insidelity
in men's minds already disposed to this evil by secular Policy. And these were
enough to carry our minds below the lowest degree of any credulity, or
suspicion of truth, in like reports: unless the Scripture did forewarn us of
this guile and policy of Satan, which we may the better prevent, if we
diligently observe; First, the difference of times and places: Secondly, how
strange Fables and lying wonders receive Being from notable and admirable
decayed Truths, as Baser Creatures, do life, from the dissolution of more Noble
Bodies.

CAP. XIII.
Of the Diversity of Events in different Ages.

THe diverse Characters of different times rightly taken, give us as easy and
perfect a Crisis between the Fictions of latter, and the true Annals of former
Ages: as out of ordinary discretion men usually make between foolish Travailors
reports of great wonders in Spain, or France, and the judicious records of
uncouth sights, and strange events, in the East and West Indies. And we have
altogether as little reason to deny either the general truth of strange events
recorded by the Ancient, or the Prototypes of Poetical inventions in former
times, for the want of like experience in later, as we have to discredit Benzos
martyrs, or other late navigators observations of the East and West Indies;
because many, who have traveled France, Spain, and Italy, while they make true
relations of their travels, relate no such event, as the Indies afford many.
And yet Guls, when they fly abroad, will relate (among such as know them not)
as strange matters of near adjoining countries, as he that has compassed the
utmost ends of the world. Now it were a great folly to discredit all late
Navigators for the absurdity of some few Guls, and as great madness it were to
disparage all Ancient stories, for the absurd and preposterous imitation of
latter writers, against all experience of later times. For diversity of times
yield as great diversity of observations, as the diversity or distance of
place: only this is the difference; daily observation yields experiments of
this diversity in place, whereas the word of God alone which endures for ever,
gives us the sure rules and grounds of alterations in the events of different
ages. And yet in many remote places lately made known unto the inhabitants of
Europe, such strange events as Antiquity has told us, were sometimes frequent
in th^se Countries which we now inhabit, are not at this day altogether
unusual. And the face of Time is now there much-what such, as the Ancient
Registers of Times have pourtrayed unto us: as if the affairs and fashion of
this visible world, were framed according to some invisible patterns or
supercoelestial Characters; which varying their aspect in revolutions of time,
did now (by reflecting that force upon those remote countries, which they did
on these near adjoining in times past) produce the like shape and fashion of
things there, as they have done here. And those places shall, in time, come to
the self same temper and disposition which we now enjoy: and the posterity of
such as now live there, shall hereafter suspect the undoubted stories of our
times concerning their Ancestors, as we do many Ancient stories of Jewry,
Syria, Asia, or our own countries, for want of like modern experiments in our
land.

2 For the better rectifying of our Assent, which must be by the right
balancing of Credulity and Mistrust, it shall not be amiss to consider, that,
besides these general diversities of times and places, Particular Kingdoms and
nations have their several ages proportionable to Infancy, Youth, Virility, and
Old Age in men. Nor is the Period either of the whole Age, or the several parts
thereof, one and the same in all, but varies in diverse kingdoms, as the course
of life, or several ages do in diverse men. Some Kingdoms bear age well unto a
Thousand; Some to six hundred years: Others break and decay in half that time.
Again, as in the course of man's life diversity of ages requires diverse manners
or conditions: so, in the same people or nation, some events are usual, as best
befitting them in that degree of their growth which answers to Youth, or
Infancy, which seldom or never fall out in that part of their age which answers
unto mature or Old age in men, because not convenient for their constitution
then; and yet the want of like experience makes them as distrustful and
incredulous of what formerly had been, as old men are forgetful of their own
disposition or temper in youth. Generally, when the fullness of any nations
Iniquity (wherein their decrepit age consists) is come, They grow more and
more incredulous: so as they verisie the Latin Proverb concerning the
disposition of old men: Nullus senex veneratur Jovem: more true of states; As
they grow old,
Their zeal grows cold.


3 As the world was redeemed by Christ, so do nations begin a new Computation
of their ages, from their Admission to Christianity. Some were come to Youth,
or Virility in that profession, before others were born in Christ: as Asia and
Asrica, for the most part, were Christians before Europe. Again, the Ancient
inhabitants in some provinces had been Christians, long before other people
that afterward subdued them, and lived in their countries: as the Britains in
this Island had been long partakers of Gods mercy in Christ, before the Saxons;
and the Ancient Gauls, before the Franks, which afterward seated themselves in
their habitations. Generally, Miracles were usual in the Infancy of
Christianity, as we read in Ecclesiastical stories: nor can it be certainly
gathered when they did generally cease. To say they endured no longer then the
Primitive Church, can give no universal satisfaction, save only to such as
think it enough for all the world to have the light of the Gospel looked up in
the Chancel of some one glorious Church: for some Churches were but in the
Prime, or Change, when others were Full of Christian knowledge. The use of
Miracles at the same instant was befitting the one, not the other. For God
usually speaks to newborn children in Christ, by Miracles or sensible
declarations of his Power, Mercy, or Justice: as parents de^ their children
from evil, in tender years, by the rod, or other sensible signs of their
displeasure; and allure them to goodness with apples, or other like visible
pledges of their love: but, when they come to riper years, and are capable of
discourse, or apprehensive of wholesome admonitions, they seek to rule them by
reason. Proportionably to this course of parents does God speak to his Church:
in her Infancy, (wheresoever planted) by sensible documents of his Power; in
her Maturity, by the ordinary Preaching of his word, which is is more apt to
ripen and confirm true Christian Faith then any miracles are, so men would
submit their reason unto the rules set down in Scripture, and unpartially
examine all events of time by them, as elsewhere, God willing, we shall show.

4 These grounds, well considered, will move any sober spirit at the least to
suspend his assent, and not suffer his mind to be hastily overswayed with
absolute distrust of all such Miracles, as either our writers report to have
bin wrought in this our land at the Saxons first coming hither, or the French
Historiographers record in the first conversion of the Franks, or in the Prime
of that Church.

5 And the Franks and Saxons before their conversion to Christianity, were
much-what of that temper, in respect of their present posterity, as Greece was
of in Homers, or Italy in the days of Romulus, in respect of Cicero's, or
Plutarchs time: nor would I deny, but that admonitions by dreams were usual
amongst them, as they had been amongst the Eastern nations.

And, without prejudice to many noble Patriots and worthy members of Christ
this day living in that famous Kingdom of France, I should interpret that dream
of See Aimoinus (aliter Annonius.) de Gestis Francorum Lib. 1. c. 7. and 8. in
the Corpus Francicae Histor. printed in Folio. 1613. Hanoviae.
Bassina, Queen unto Childerick the first, of the present state of France: in
which the last part of that threefold vision is more truly verified, then it
was ever in the lineal succession of Childerick and Bassina, or any of the
Merovingian, or Carlovingian Families.

6 The vision was of three sorts of beasts; The Frst, Lions and Leopards; The
second, Bears and Wolves; The third, of Dogs or lesser creatures, biting and
devouring one another. The interpretation which Bassina made of it, was
registered certain hundred years ago; That these troops of vermin or lesser
creatures, did signify a people without fear or reverence of their Princes, so
pliable and devoutly obsequious to follow the Peers or Potentates of that
Nation in their factious quarrels, that they should involve themselves in
inextricable tumults to their own destruction.

7 Had this vision been painted, only with this general notification; that it
was to be Emblematically understood of some state in Europe: who is he that can
discern a picture by the known party whom it represents, but could have known
as easily, that this was a map of those miseries that lately have befalne
France; whose bowels were almost rent and torn, with civil and domestic
Broils? God grant her closed wounds fall not to bleed a fresh again. and that
her people be not so eagerly set to bite and tear one another (like dogs or
other testie creatures) until all become a prey to Wolves and Bears, or other
great ravenous Beasts; which seek not so much to tear or rent in heat of
revenge, as lie in wait continually to devour and swallow with unsatiate
greediness, the whole bodies of mighty Kingdoms, and to die her Robes, that
rides as Queen of Monsters upon that many-Headed beast, with streams of blood
that issue from the bodies squezed and crushed between their violent teeth;
yea, even with the Royal blood of Kings and Princes. Many such examples of
admonitions by dreams and other extraordinary signs of future woe or
calamities, both foretold and fulfilled many hundred years since Bassina and
Childericks days, I could bring, which might confirm the Historical truth of
the like mentioned in Scriptures to any civil Heathen, as they have enforced
such as we most suspect for Atheists, to acknowledge a divine power or
providence in them. And I know not what reason any professor of truth can have
to deny the like presignifications in later times upon extraordinary occasions,
or in some transmutations of Kingdoms; if he have so much Religion as not to
doubt of Nebuchad-nezzars vision. But of such signs, (whether good, or ominous)
and of their lawful use elsewhere. Of the use of prophecies amongst the Heathen
and Barbarous people, and of that offense which some take at such as seem to
give any credit to them, as if this were against the truth of scriptures, we
may perhaps take occasion to speak, when we come to unfold the diverse kinds of
prophecies amongst the Jews, with their interpretations. Thus much may suffice
for the removal of that prejudice, which Atheists, Infidels, and other
Worldly-wise men have, of their Ancestors Credulity, or Fabulosity, which were
not incident to primary Antiquity, but unto Ages in succession nearer to those
times wherein wonders had been plentiful: as commonly the Braggadochian humor
does hant the degenerate race of worthy Ancestors, before their posterity come
to be Sneaks or Pesants, which in the race of private persons answers in
proportion to Infidelity, the common Symptom of decrepit Age in Kingdoms.

CAP. XIV.
Of the Original and right use of Poetry: with the manner of its Corruption by
later Poets.

1 THe positive truth, which (in the removal of impediments and offenses) has
been made more then probable in the former discourse, may yet be made more
evident from more particular observations concerning the manner how Monstrous
Fables have descended from true Wonders: which will best appear by setting down
the Original and right Use of Poetry.

2 A Poet being (as his name imports) a Maker, according to the Latin proverb,
is not made by Art, but framed to this divine Faculty by Nature. Not that any
amongst the Romans became Poets on a sudden: but that many very fruitful wits
in all other kinds of learning, could not be forced by any industry, art, or
culture to such a temper, as was befitting this plant of Eden, which grows
not in any modern breast without more tender care and greater cherishing, then
any other slip or branch of the tree of knowledge; and yet when all is done
seldom comes to any proof, unless it borrow grounds from the Ancient: as
tender plants can hardly be removed from a better soil to a worse, without some
of the earth wherein they naturally grow. Were Arts to begin anew, Poetry,
which was the first and most common among the Ancient, in all probability,
would spring the last, and grow the slowest amongst us. Their wits of old were
not naturally or generally better then ours: why then was the way to Parnassus,
which unto us using all help of Art and Imitation, is laborious and hard to
ascend, so plain and easy to them, without any guide or help; all other
Artificial learning being then either unknown, or very scant? Such knowledge or
observations as they had or cared for, they knew not otherwise how to convey
unto posterity, then by Poetical numbers and resemblances. He is a Poet by
nature (says that excellent Poet and divine Philosopher) That is apt to be
ravished with the true and native beauty of such Objects as are represented to
his senses, and can express his conceit by such pleasant resemblances, as often
as he shall have occasion to utter his mind in writing or set speech. This
inclination or disposition is as the ground or soil whereon Poetry does
naturally grow, whether in Ancient or Modern breasts: but the Ancient had this
advantage. The Fashion of the world in their times was more apt to ravish their
thoughts with Admiration: wonderful Events were then frequent: nor did their
frequency abate, but rather increase wonderment, because their variety was
great, and the apprehension of invisible or Supernatural Powers in them usual.
So that admiration was then enforced upon men, and the breasts of such as
diligently observed these events, or were any way disposed by nature to the
Faculty, were inspired with lively and sublimate affections, apt to vent
themselves in such Poetical Phrase and resemblances, as we cannot reach unto,
unless we raise our invention by Art and imitation, and stir up Admiration by
meditation and study. And because neither our senses are moved with any
extraordinary effects of Gods Power, nor our minds bent to observe the ways of
his Wisdom, so as we might be stricken with true Admiration of them, we have
fewer good sacred Poems, then of any other kind. But as the Ancients chief
learning did consist of Poetry: so the excellency of their Poetry was chiefly
seen in the proper and native subject of this Faculty, that is, in matters of
Sacred Use or observation: whence the title of Vates did descend unto secular
or profane Poets, which retained the number and manner of speech used by the
former.

3 That such as were Vates indeed, were taught this sublimity of speech by
admiration of extraordinary events, may be confirmed by the Historical
narrations of the Sacred Story: wherein Poetical Hymns or sons are the usual
consequents of strange or wonderful events. As, Judge. 5. after the victory
gotten over Sisera, Then sang Deborah, and Barach the son of Abinoam, the same
day saying; Praise ye the Lord, etc. So likewise Hannah after the Lord had
heard her prayer, and taken away her barrenness, burst out into the like
Poetical Hymn, 1 Samuel 2. So did the Blessed Virgin upon her cosen Elizabeth's
salutation, and John Baptist springing in her womb, take up her song, Luke 1.
46. My soul does magnify the Lord, etc. So does Zachary, John Baptists father,
take up his prophecy, Luke 1. 68. and Simeon, Luke 2. 28. So likewise after the
manifestation of Gods wonders in the red Sea, all his people (as if they had
been baptized in a sacred Helicon) presently turn Poets, Exodus 15. 1. And
again, Numb. 21. after they had returned to Beer, the Well which Moses had
opened out of the hard rock with his rod, Israel (as if they had washed their
mouths in Hippocrene) had their voices tuned to an high strain of Poetry: Then
Israel sang this song: Rise up, WELL, sing ye unto it, the Princes dug this
Well, the Captains of the people dug it, even with their staves.

4 That the frequent use of Poetry among the Ancient heathen, did arise from
like occasions, may be gathered from Strabo: who from Antiquity, better Strabo
Lib. 1. Fol. 15.
known to him then us, avoucheth it as unquestionable, that all other set
speech, whether Historical or Rhetorical, was but the Progeny of Poetry,
falling in latter times from its wonted state and dignity; whereas the Ancients
knew no other branch of Artificial or set speech, but only Poetry. Albeit to
speak properly, it was (in respect of the Efficient or impulsive causes) rather
Superartificial, then Natural or Artificial; and Rhetoric and History only
Artificial. This opinion will not seem strange, if we consider, that the wiser
sort in those times did commend such matters only to writing, as might inflame
posterity with devotion and love of virtue. For Poetry, as the same Author
tells us, was accounted by Antiquity, Prima quaedam Philosophia, a kind of
sacred moral Philosophy, appropriated, as it seems, at the first to the
relation or representation of supernatural Events or divine matters only: of
which the most Ancient had best experience, and were impelled to communicate
them to posterity, elevated (as is observed before) by the excellency of the
Object, to this celestial kind of speech which is most apt to ravish younger
wits, as it self was bred of Admiration. This use of Poetry appears in some
Fragments of most Ancient Poets, in their kind proportionable to the book of
Psalms, of Job, and the songs of Moses, the only pattern of true Poesy: whose
subjects, usually, are the wonderful works of God manifested unto men. Some
degenerate footsteps of these Holy men the Heathen, about Homers time, did
observe: using their Poets and Musicians for planting modesty and chastity
amongst other virtues in their auditors. -- (...).
So Agamemnon left Hom. odys. 3.
the musical Poet as Guardian to Clytemnestra, who continued chaste and loyal
until Aegisthus got the Poet conveyed into an uninhabited Island. For this
reason was Poetry Strato Ibid.
taught children first throughout the Grecian Cities, as Moses had commanded
the Israelites to teach their children his divine Poem, Deuteronomy. 31. 19. and 32.
46. And they much wrong that divine Plat. lib. 10. de Repub.
Philosopher, that think he was any farther an enemy unto the sacred Faculty,
then only to seek the reformation of it by reducing it to its first natural
use; which was not mere delight, as Eratosthenes dreamed, rightly taxed by
Strabo for this error. That might perhaps be true of the Comical Latin poets;

Poeta quum primum animum adscribendum appulit,
Id sibi negoti credidit solum dari,
Populo ut placerent quas fecisset Fabulas.
When first the Poet bent his wits to write,
The only mark he aimed at, was delight.
Which notwithstanding had neither been the only, nor chief use; no end at
all, but rather an adjunct of Poetry amongst the Ancient: by the wiser and
better sort of whom nothing was apprehended, at least approved as truly
delightful, which was not also Honest and of profitable use for bettering life
and manners. The law of nature being then less defaced, They could read it
without spelling, and comprehend all the Three Elements of Goodness, jointly
under one entire conceit, as we do the product of diverse Letters or Syllables
in one word, without examination of their several value apart. But when the
Union of this Trinity, wherein the nature of Perfect Goodness consists, was
once dissolved in men's hearts, and Delight had found a peculiar Issue without
mixture of Honesty or Utility: the desire of becoming popular Poets, did breed
the bane of true Poesy; and those Sacred Numbers, which had been as Amulets
against vice, became incentives unto lust. Or if we would but search the native
use of Poetry by that end which men, not led awry by hopes of applause, or
gain, or other external respects, but directed rather by the internal impulsion
of this Faculty, and secret working of their Souls, do aim at: It principally
serves for Venting Extraordinary Affections. No man almost so dull, but will be
Poetically affected in the subject of his strongest passions. As we see by
experience, that where the occasions either of Joy for the Fortunate Valor, or
Sorrow for the mishaps of their Contrymen, or Alliance, are most rife, this
disposition is both most pregnant and most common. And as Speech or
Articulation of voices in general, was given to man for communicating his
conceits or meaning unto others; so Poetry, the Excellency of Speech, serves
for the more lively expressing of his Choicer Conceits, for Beautifying His
darling-thoughts or Fancies, which almost disdain to go abroad in other then
this exactly-proportioned attire, The souls wooing suits (if I may so speak)
whereby she wins others to Sympathize with her in abundance of Grief, or to
consent with her in excessive Joy, or finally to settle their Admiration or
dislike where she does hers. And the more strange or wonderful the matter
conceived, or to be represented, is, the more pleasant and admirable will the
true and natural representation of it be: and the more he that conceives it, is
ravished with delight of its Beauty or goodness, the more will he long to
communicate his conceit and liking of it to others. Whence, such as had seen
the Wonders of God and had been fed with his Hidden Manna, sought by their
lively and hearty representations to invite others, as the Psalmist does, To
taste and see the Goodness of the Lord, as Birds and Beasts, when they Psalm.
34. 8.
have found pleasant food, call (on their fashion) unto others of the same
kind, to be partakers with them in their Joy: until Satan, who hunts after the
life of Man, as Man does after the life of Birds, did invent his counterfeit
Calls to allure our souls into his Snare. For, when men had once taken a delight
in the natural representation of events, delightful in themselves: he stirred
up others to invent the like, albeit there were no real truth or stability in
the things represented, and the manner of representation usually so light and
affected, as could argue no credence given by the Authors to their own report,
but rather a desire to please such as had never set their minds to any
Inquisition of solid Truth, whose unsettled Fancies cannot choose but fall in
Love with as many Fair Pictures of others pleasant Imaginations as are
presented to them. For, as to view the connection of real Causes with their
Effects (most of all, if both be rare, or the concurrence of Circumstances
unusual) does much affect the judicious understanding: so the quaint or curious
contrivance of Imaginary Rarities, set forth in splendent Artificial colors,
does captivate the Fancies of such as are not established in the love of truth.
But (as the Orator said of such as applauded the Tragedy of Pylades and
Orestes) how would such men's souls be ravished, could they upon sure grounds be
persuaded, that these stories were true, albeit devoid of Artificial Colors,
or Poetical contrivances, never used by sacred Antiquity? in whose expression
of Wonders, the Phrase is usually most Poetical, as naturally it will always
be, where the mind is much affected; their invention less Artificial or
affected, then our Historical narrations of Modern affairs; the Character of
their style, (as was intimated before) does argue that they sought only to set
down the true Proportion of matters seen and heard, with such resemblances as
were most incident to their kind of life. And from the Efficacy of such
extraordinary effects upon their souls, is it, that the Prophets so often
express the same things in diverse words, as if all they could say, could not
equalize the sensible Experiments, which did move their Hearts and Fancies (as
the Musicians hands or breath does his instruments) to sound out such
Pathetical Ditties. Nor had their Ditties any greater disproportion with their
subject, then our Songs of Famous Victories, have with theirs; or other
passionate Ditties, with their composers affections: albeit he that has
experience of Love, or abundant Grief, or Joy, will speak in another Dialect,
then ordinarily he uses, without any touch of affectation.

5 Hence we may clearly discern, whilst wonders decayed, and men sought as
great delight in Fained, as their forefathers had done in True Representations:
how the disproportion betwixt Representations, and the real Events, or
Experiments of the times, wherein the later Poets lived, became so Monstrous
and Prodigious. This fell out just so, as if the Armorours of this Age should
not observe the stature of men now living, but fashion their Armor by old Guy
of Warwicks Harness, or our Painters, not look upon the bodies of modern
Englishmen, but take their proportions from some Ancient Pictures, which had
been truly taken about some 1000 years ago, in some other Country, that had
yielded men of more ample stature in that Age then this land of ours did in
any. Such an Error as this, which we have mentioned in Poetry, would quickly
have been reformed in any other Faculty, that had concerned men's temporal
profit or commodities, or whereof others had been as competent Judges as the
Professors: for so, when they had begun to wander, or digress a little from
their right end, they should presently have bin called to this account; Quid ad
rem? your Work may be Pretty, but not to our Purpose. But when such Admirable
Events, as were well worth Poetical expression, decreased, and worldly cares
did multiply, as men increased: the divine art of Poetry, which admits not many
competent Judges in any age, was counted no better then a matter of mere
delight, or recreation; and for this reason the Prodigious Representations of
it, so Monstrously disproportionable to the truth represented (because often
times more pleasant to men wearied with other studies or employments, then the
bare narration of the truth) were never reformed. And so at length, that
Audacious Licentiousness of Fictions, for moving delight, did in the judgment
of posterity disparage the very patterns or Prototypes of Poetical
representations, whereunto later Poems had been framed: As many Tall Fellows in
this present age, if they should see the true image or picture of some Ancient
Giants, would swear that the painter had played the Poet: were it not that the
dead bodies or limbs of some Ancient people, lately dug out of the ground,
did by their unusual bigness teach us to estimate (as we say) Ex pede
Herculem, how great others might have been, whose big limbs and bones have not
come unto this Ages sight.

6 But most of these strange Events were such, as did continue no longer then
while they were a doing, wherefore we must seek out the true proportion of
these Heavenly Bodies, by their shadows, represented in the later Profane
Poets. The Original and manner of whose digression from the paterns of the
Ancient Divine Poets, or rather from Divine truth, the pattern of Ancient
Poetry it self, was partly as you have heard, partly as follows.

7 Gods wonderful works have been more plenteous in Asia, then in other parts
of the world; more plentiful in Judea, and the Regions about it, then mother
parts of Asia; most plentiful in them, about the Israelites deliverance ^
out of Egypt. In that time and in the ages before, or immediately succeeding
it, Artificial learning was very scant; and Characters, either not invented, or
their use very rare in most places. The fresh memory of such wonders
presupposed; the lively image either of inch licentiousness in coining fables,
or confounding true Histories with the mixture of false and unnatural
circumstances, (as these wants every where in all times naturally breed) we may
clearly behold in the modern Turks: who are as abundant in Prodigious Fables,
as defective in good learning; and for want of printing, or neglect of writing,
have no perfect Character of the worlds Fashion in times past, nor any distinct
order of former Events. It is but a petty solecisme among them, to affirm that
Job the Huss^ite was chief Justice; and Alexander the Great, Lieutenent general
unto King Solomon.

8 The like confusion of times and places might be more incident unto the
Asiatick Nations, before Alexanders time, because their Ancestors had been
acquainted with more strange events, latelier forepast then the modern Turks
are. Now always the more strange the events be, the more ready they be to
Mount upon the Wings of Fame; and once so mounted, the more apt to receive
increase in every Circumstance, and vary their shape, whilst they fly only
from mouth to mouth in the open air, not fashioned or limited at their first
birth, by some visible Character, or permanent Stamp set upon them.

9 From this vicinity of true wonders in Jury, or thereabouts, were the Medes,
Persians, and Syrians, so much addicted to Fabulous narrations, that their
delight in such traditions did make their later writers ambitious in the skill
of coining wonders; as Strabo tells us. And Greece, as it received Artificial
Strabo. Lib. 11. Fol. 107.
learning first from Asia, so did it drink in this humor with it. For the
traditions of Gods Miracles in Jury, and the Regions about it, having been far
spread, when Greece began first to tattle in Artificial learning, the Grecians
(Always Children in true Antiquity, as the Egyptian Priest told one of their
Philosophers) were apt to counterfeit the form of Ancient Truths, and misapply
it to unseemly matters, or foolish purposes; as children will be doing that in
homlier stuff, which they see their elders do in better. Finally, the same
humor which yet raigns amongst men, might possess most of the Heathen. There
is no famous Event that falls out, (though it be but a notable Jest) but in a
short time, is ascribed to a great many more, then have any affinity with it.
As many of Diogenes conceits have been fathered upon Tarleton: and what the
Christians say of S. George, the Turks ascribe to Or Chederles Busbequius. ibid.
Chederley. If it be any story concerning wayfaring men; every Hostler,
Tapster, or Chamberlain, will tell you that it fell out in their Town, or in
the Country thereabouts. And though you hear it in twenty several places, yet
shall you have always some new tricks of addition put upon it. In like manner
did the reports of sundry events, which either fell out, only in Jury, or upon
occasion of Gods people, fly about the world, sometime with cut and mangled,
but most usually with enlarged, Artificial wings, as if the same had been acted
every where, or the like invented upon every occasion.

CAP. XV.
Of some particular Fables resembling some true stories of the Bible.

1 TO draw some instances from the The first Fountain. The Well of Beer,
mentioned before, did prefigure Christ, the Rock and Fountain, whence Numb. 21.
issue streams of waters unto Eternal life. And that sacred Poetical spirit,
which now possessed them, was as a Praeludium to those Hymns and Songs uttered
by Christ's Apostles, and his Disciples, when the Spirit of God was poured upon
them, after Christ's Glorification. Neighbour-countreys, amongst whom the Fame
of this Event was spread, might easily hence take occasion to ascribe the
effect unto the Well. And hence had Greece her Helicon, and others (by her)
reputed Sacred Wells, whose waters drunk did make men Poets on a sudden.
Besides that, the opportunity of such places, as Helicon and Parnassus were,
did dispose men's minds unto this Faculty, The Demoniacal spirits, which for
this reason would frequent the same, might inspire such with Poetical Fury as
did observe their Rites and Ceremonies; counterfeiting the spirit of Divine
Prophecies, as they had done Gods voice in Oracles. Who can doube, if he
compare both stories, but that the Fable of Hyppocrene or Aganippe in Baeotia,
so called because dug by an horses foot, as Poets faign, did take beginning
from the story of this sacred Well which Moses dug with his Rod; and (as the
Israelites have a tradition) the Princes afterward with their Staves? And the
Phaenicians which followed Cadmus into Europe, are made such wanderers by the
Poets, as the Israelites were in the wilderness: and Cadmus himself, the Founder
of Hippocrene or Aganippe, amongst other of his inventions is said to have been
the first that taught Greece the use of letters, or that wrote Histories in
prose; and in one word, another Moses. The Fiery Serpents, which stung the
Israelites murmuring for want of water, might Numb. 21. 6.
grow in short time to be Dragons; and hence, as it is most likely, are Cadmus
Ovid Met. l. 3. ^ab. 1. vel. 2.
companions said to be slain by a dragon, whilst they sought for water. The
Sun, as we read in the story of Joshuah, at his prayer once stood still in the
Josh. 10. 13.
vale of Gibeon. The occasion is in the same place specified; That Joshuah
might have A Day of the Amorites: such A Day as was never before it, nor shall
be after it. This strange Miraculous Event, the Heathen people of those times
had noted, and delivered it by tradition unto their posterity; who, after the
manner of this world, sought to assign some causes of it. The Poets in ages
following, ascribe it (with some additions) unto that unnatural prodigious
murder, which Atreus had committed; and for ought we know, besides the reasons
specified in sacred writ, God might use this, partly as a means, to make Greece
and other countries, that should hear of Atreus Bloody Fact, stand amazed at
such foul Impiety, whereat the heavens did blush, and the Sun stood still. The
times of Atreus his Fact, and Joshuah his Victory, come near to one point: if
Statius the Poet be not far out in his Chronology. For he tells us, that this
horrible fact of Atreus was committed, about the time of the Theban War; for
which reason the Mycenae amongst other good neighbors, did not aid King
Adrastus, and his Argives against the Thebans.

Milite vicinae nullo juvere Mycenae.
Funereae dum namque dapes, mediique recursus
Solis; and hinc alii miscebant praelia fratres.
Their Mycene, neighbors only send no aid,
Their tragic cheer had bred such bloody broyls,
Whose direful sight the blushing Sun had staid,
Whilst fierce revenge in heart of Brothers boils.
2 And some Chronologers, whose skill in this Faculty, and other good
literature, I especially Reverence, refer the Siege of Troy to the time of
Judges, or Age following Joshuah; whereas the Theban war was in the Age before:
for Tydeus, father unto Diomedes (who was one of the greatest Sticklers against
Troy) was one of the greatest Chieftains in the Theban war.

3 From the forementioned humor of seeking to play the Poets or Painters in
adorning true stories; or of vain curiosity in inventing the like: we may
easily conjecture, what variety of reports would in that temper of the world be
extant, of Samsons Consecrated Hair, wherein his inconquerable strength as the
sacred story tells us, did consist. Let Dalilah, Samsons wife, be but mistaken
for his daughter; (as few reports of foreign or forepast matters, Judge 1^, 1^,
18.
but (...) as much in some circumstance or other) and for Samson and Dalilah
you have the famous Legend Nisus and Sylla. This mistake was very easy. For
such as had heard of Dalilahs treachery, without any particular certain^^^ of
that circumstance, whether she were his daughter or wife, might justly suspect
that she was his daughter, one that wanted an husband, doting upon some
forrainer, whom she hoped to win unto her love by this practice. Or perhaps
Sylla had betrayed her father Nisus, upon hope of satisfying her lust; and Ovid
(with other Poets) having heard of like practice, did Stage-playlike put
Samsons Hair upon Nisus his Head; as usually the Grecian Poets have borrowed
their best Stage-attire from the glorious wardrope of Israel. Other
circumstances of this story are very like; save only that Ovid faines Nisus
his unvanquishable fortune, to have been seated in one hair, which was of the
Ovid. Metam. l. 8. fab. 1.
color of his costly robes.

-- Cui splendidus ostro
Inter honoratos medio de vertice canos
Crinis inhaerebat, Magni Fiducia Regni.
One skarlet bright, amids the ranks of white and reverend hairs,
He had, whereon did hang the Hope, and Hap of his affairs.
But Samsons strength was in his locks, as he told Dalilah; There never came
Judge, 16. 17.
rasor upon my head, for I am a Nazarite unto God from my mothers womb:
therefore if I be shaven, my strength will go from me, and I shall be weak, and
be like all other men. For the means and opportunities whereby Dalilah did, and
Sylla is fained to have compassed her intended treason, they are the very same.
Dalilah, as it is said, made Samson sleep upon her knee, and she called a man,
and made him to shave the seven locks of his head; and so Ovid brings in Sylla,
taking Verse. 19.
the like opportunity of her fathers sleep;

Prima quies aderat, qua curis fessa diurnis
Pectora somnus habet, thalamos taciturna paternos
Intrat, and (heu facinus!) fatali nata parentem
Crine suum spoliat. --
First sleep was come, and weary limbs were at their sweet repose
When she unto her fathers bed, in sliest silence goes:
But let no silence cloak her shame, (O detestable theft)
Her Father of his Fatal Hair the Daughter has bereft.
4 Not much greater variety is there between the story of Lots wifes
transformation into a pillar of salt, and Niobes into a stone. The Poets feign
that Ovid. Met l. 6. Fab. 3. aliis 4.
Niobe was transformed, upon her grief for death of her children: and the Jews
have a Tradition, that Lots wife was overtaken with that Hydeous shower of Fire
and Brimstone, whilst she staid behind her husband to see what would become of
her friends, and her kinsfolk, which remained in Sodom. And it is probable out
of that Chapter, that Lots sons in Law remained in Sodom. and likely their
wives too, Lots other daughters. For so it is said (not Genesis 19. 14.
without Emphasis in the Original) Take thy wife and thy two daughters, which
are found, or (as the Chaldee paraphrase) which are found faithful with thee,
(that Verse. 15.
is, which are not corrupt by conversing with others abroad) lest thou be
destroyed with others in the punishment of this city. Whether this Tradition of
the Jews be true or no, it makes little for my present purpose. Very Ancient it
is, and whether true or false, might give occasion to the former Fable, as
other stories of the Bible do sometimes the rather, because the sense is
mistaken. As the common opinion is, that Lots wife was transformed into a
Pillar of Salt, when as no circumstance of the text does enforce so much, but
rather leaves us free, to think, what is more probable; that fearful showers of
Gods Vengeance, wherewith Sodom was destroyed, were heaped upon her, so that
her body was wrapped wrapped up in that congealed matter, which was perhaps in form
like to some thunder-stone, or the like, from which it could not be discerned,
being as it were Candyed in it.

5 If such a transformation of Lots wife seem strange; what will the Atheist
say unto the destruction of Sodom, and the five Cities? or if this seem more
strange and incredulous, because their destruction vanishes whilst they
perished; What can he say to the salt sea? Doubtless, unless God had left
this as a Lasting Monument to confute the Incredulity of Philosophers, by an
ocular and sensible Demonstration, they would have denied the truth of ^h^s
Effect, as well as they doubt of the Cause, which the Scriptures assign of it.
Is the violence of that strom, which destroyed the five Cities, strange, and
above the force of nature? so is the quality of that Sea, and the Haud procul
inde campi, quos ferunt olim uberes ^nagris^^ Urbibus habitatos, ful^ninum
jac^u arsisse* and manner ^ gia, terram^; specietor^^dam, ^nn srugiseram per
a^d^sse, nam cuncta sponte edita, aut ^n^nu sata, sive herba ^enus aut
fl^re-seu solitarn in srec^e^n adolevere, atra, and inania velut in ^^nere ^
anes^unt. I g^ st^ut Jud^ as qu^n^^^ ur^ ^gne ^xlest^ t^^g^asse c^^^ esse^^m, ^
hal^ la^us in fr^^ terram, ^or rump^ su^er ^^^ sum sp^^um, c^^ ^aetus segetum
and autumni ^utres ere rear, sole, ^^l ^ ^uat^ grant. Tac^^us lib. 5. Host.
So^l about it, contrary to the nature of all other seas, or inland lakes.
And let the most curious Philosopher in the world give any natural cause of it;
and the disproportion between the cause, and the known effect, will be more
Prodigious in Nature, then the cause, which Moses gives of it, is strange. Some
Cause by their confession it must have; and though the storm were raised by a
Supernatural Power, yet admitting the violence of it, to be such as the
Scripture tells us, and the fall of so much durable matter, no cause can be
conceived, so probable in nature, as that which Moses gives; as out of the
grounds of Philosophy, and diverse Experiments in nature, I could easily prove.
^ut St^abo l. 1^. p^.
Strabo that great Philosopher, and no Credulous Antiquarie, has eased me of
this labor. For albeit he held the Syrians for a Fabulous people: yet the
evident marks of Gods wrath, that had been kindled in that place, (as
concavities made by fire, distillation of pitch out of the seared rocks, the
noysom smell of the waters thereabouts, with the relics and ruins of the
Ancient Habitations) made the Tradition of neighbor inhabitants seem probable
unto him; That there had been Thirteen populous Cities in that soil, of which
Sodom was the chief, whose circumference then remaining, was sixty Furlongs.
But (as the custom is of secular Philosophers) he seeks to ascribe the cause of
this desolation rather unto Earth then Heaven, and thinks the Lake was made by
an Earthquake, which had caused the bursting out of hot waters, whose course
was upon Sulphur and Brimstone. And it is not unlikely, that the earth did
tremble, whilst the heavens did so terribly frown, and the Almighty gave his
Fearful Voice from out the clouds: and once having opened her mouth to swallow
up those Wicked Inhabitants, the Exhalations of whose sins had bred these
Storms, became afterward a Pan or Receptacle of moisture, infecting all the
waters which fell into it, with the loath some qualities of those dregs of
Gods wrath, which had first settled in it; as bad Humors, when they settle in
any part, plant (as it were) a new nature in the same, and turn all Nutriment
into their Substance.

CAP. XVI.
Of NOAH'S and DEUCALIONS Flood, with other Miscellane Observations.

1 NOt any son so like his natural father, as Deucalions Flood is like Noah's.
Every Schoolboy, from the similitude of their substance, at the first sight
can discern the one to be the bastard Brood of the other; albeit Ovid, from
whom we have the picture of the one, has left out, and added, diverse
Circumstances at his pleasure; which assures me, that he had never read the
sacred Story (as some think he did) but took up the confused Tradition of it,
which had passed through many hands before his time: For other Poets which had
come to Plut. de Solertia Animalium. (...).
Plutarchs reading, though not to ours, make mention of Deucalions Ark, his
Doves returning to him again before the waters Fall, his Prognostication of the
waters decrease, by her perpetual absence at her last setting out. This
Tradition was so commonly received in Greece, that some Etymologists think the
Famous Hill Parnassus did take its name from the Arks abode upon it, as if it
had first been called (...), which word Plutarch uses in that place.
Larnassus. These are sure testimonies that such a flood had been: but that in
Deucalions time any such had been, or that the Ark did stay in Greece, has no
show of truth. See S. Augustine, De civit. Dei, Lib. 18. cap. 10. and L. vives.

2 If Trogus Pompeius Works had come entire into our hands, or had they light
upon a more skilful and sincere Epitomist then Justin, we should have found
more evident prints of the story of Noah's Flood, in that Controversy, between
the Scythians and Egyptians; whether were the most Ancient people: As Justin
relates it, Lib. 2. thus it was.

3 The Egyptians thought the Heavens over them had been in love with their
soil, and that from the conjunction of the ones mildness with the others
Fertility, the first people of the world had been brought forth in Egypt. The
Scythians alleged, it was most probable, that their country was first
inhabited, because if fire had shut up the womb of their mother earth, this
Element did forsake theirs first, as being the coldest country: or if water
had covered the face of nature, and made it unapt for conception by too much
moisture, this Veil was first put off in Scythia, as being the highest part of
the inhabited Land. Unto these reasons of the Scythians, the Egyptians yielded,
as Justin reports. Both of them erred in the manner of man's Propagation; both
again held a general Truth, in thinking mankind had some late Propagation, and
that Kingdoms had not been so frequented with people in former generations, as
now they were. The Scythians agreed herein with Scripture, That the higher
parts of the World, which they inhabited, or parts near unto them, were first
dried up from the waters; for in the mountains of Armenia the Ark stayed, and
Noah went first on land in that country. The Story of whose preservation in
this Deluge, and the propagation of Mankind from him, and his children, not
being expressly recorded to the Scythians, they Imagine that men had grown like
Mushromes after Rain, because they had been so few, and now were come unto such
great multitudes. Nor did Noah only go first on land in Armenia, but his
posterity had their habitation in the mountainous Countries, until their
multitude caused them to seek Tres vero Noe filii Semas, Japhetus, and Chamas
centu^ annis ante diluvium nati, primi relictis montibus planitiem habitare
coeperunt, and aliis recenti etiam tum cladis memoria pavidis, nec audentibus a
celsiore loco descendere, ide^ faciendi autores and exemplum fuere. Joseph.
lib. 1. Antiq. cap. 5.
more room; as we may gather Genesis 11. v. 1, and 2. Then the whole earth was of
one Language, and one Speech; and as they went from the East (that is, from
Armenia) they found a Plain in the Land of Shinar, and there they abode. Some
broken Traditions of this Truth might cause the Ancient Scythians to stand upon
their Pantofles, and plead Prioritie of nature from superiority of place. And
this conceit of Antiquity being propagated to posterity, they seek to
Fortify their Title to it (called in question) by such reasons as were
alleged before. And even in these their reasons, though false in particular,
there appears a certain general glimpse of Divine Truth: For in that they take
it as granted, that either fire or water had stopped the course of nature, this
is an infallible Argument, that they had heard of the Dominion allotted by Fate
to those two Elements over other Bodies; albeit they did not rightly apprehend
the manner of the worlds destruction by them, nor whethers course was first
passed. This Tradition of the Worlds destruction by Fire and Water, and the
distinction of their courses (though not so plainly revealed in the old
Testament) had come more distinctly to Ovids hand; who brings in Jupiter,
resolving to plague the old World rather by Water then Fire, because Met. L. 1.
Fab. 7. Jamque erat in totas sparsurus sulintna terras, sed timuit, ne forte
sacer tot ab ignibus ^ther conciperet slammas, tot us^^, ardesceret axis.
it was to have a Fatal dissolution by Fire:

Fsse quoque in Fatis reminiscitur assore Tempus
Quo Mare, quo Tellus, correptaque Regia Coeli
Ardeat, and Mundi Moles operosa laboret;
He calls to mind the day would come (for Fates had set the same)
When Sea and Land, Heavens, Elements, and all this Mundane Frame
Should sweat with Heat, and melt as Wax before the Fearful Flame.
4 The Egyptians likewise had many reasons why they might justly think
themselves a very Ancient people, and those not dissonant unto Scripture; which
witnesses Egypt to have been a mighty Kingdom, every way better replenished
then any other Country that we can read of in times so Ancient; first possessed
by Mizraim, the son of Cham, by whose name it is continually called by the
sacred Writers, as well the Prophets and late Historiographers, as by Moses;
and in the Eastern Languages bears that name until this day, as Com. in Genesis
cap. 10. v. 6. Vid and Josephum, lib. 1. Antiq. c. 7.
Mercerus tells us. This Mizraim also did propagate sundry particular Nations
in short time, as we find registered Genesis 10. 13, 14. All which might make for
the Egyptians conceit of their Antiquity. And albeit the old Canaanites were
as Ancient and populous a Nation (though not so united in a Kingdom) as the
Egyptians; yet, before these Altercations arose, or (at least) before any other
people took notice of them, their posterity was rooted out by the Israelites,
who though they came in the others place, yet came not into competition with
the Egyptians for Antiquity in the Judgment of any Heathen writer; because
the Israelites were no people, till the time that Egypt was one of the
mightiest Nations upon earth; and the Heathen being ignorant (as making little
reckoning of their original) took them for a Colonie of the Egyptians, as
appears by Strabo, ^ib. 16.
who in recompense of this his Error has elsewhere acquainted us, with another
Experiment, which may confirm the Antiquity of Moses story concerning Shems
posterity.

Moses tells us Genesis 10. 23. that Aram, son of Shem, and brother to Ashur, had
Uz, and Chul, and Mash unto his sons. The Aramites no question had their name
and propagation from Aram. Some think the Arabians, or other Countries about
Idumaea, or both, had their Original from Uz: Others, that the Massiani in
Arabia were so called of Mash: Josephus, that the Armenians were the progeny
of Chul. Consonant to all these opinions is Sed Scriptura^ mutare cum sit
vetusta, non est necesse; culpanda potius nominis ^utatio quae frequens est and
usitata omnibus gen^^bus; and videntur quidam literarum mutation^bus temerar^is
earn efficere. Optime omn^u existimo P^ssidoniurn, hic quoque a gentiurn
cognatione and communitate interpretationem vocum ducere. Nam Armeniorum,
Syrorum, and Arabum, multum cognationis prae se ferunt nationes, sermon, vita,
corporum forma, maxim ubi degunt in vicinia. Idque ostendit Mesopotamia ex
tribus his conflata populis. Maxune enun in his similitudo est illustris: quod
si qua est varietas pro eo atque ali^ parts aliis magis ad septentrionem, aut
meridiem vergunt, aut in medio sunt sitae; nihilominus tamen communis affectio
obtinet. Assyrii quoque Ariani and Armenu inter se at^^ istorum sunt assimiles.
Estque colligendum harum gentium nomina esse affinia: Qui enim a nobis Syri, ii
ab ipsis Syris Aramart dicuntur, bisque convenient Armenii and Arabes, and
Erembi, Strab. l. 1. This opinion of Strabo confirms Jesepbus observation
concerning the changing of nations names, Lib. 1. Antiq. c. 6. Porro gentium
quaedam adhuc servant derivatam a suis conditeribus appellationem, qu^d^m etiam
mutaverunt, monnullae in familiarein accolis and notiorem vocem sunt v^s^,
Gracis p^ttssunum talis nomenclaturae autoribus. Hi enim posterioribus saeculis
veterem locorum gloriam sibi usurparunt, gentes nomibus fib^ no^^s insigniur^t,
dianque tanquam ad suum jus attinerent, mores quoque proprios in illas invehunt.
Strab^ his observation of these people; whom the Grecians call Syrians, the
Syrians themselves call Aramaeans; and his collection is, That the Armenians,
and the Erembi (that is, the ancient Arabians) have taken their denomination
from the same name, a little varied (as the custom is) by continuance of time,
and variety of Dialect. That these three Nations did all proceed from one
stock, he gathers from the similitudes and perfect resemblances of their nature
customs and manner of life.

5 Put for the first habitation or Antiquity of Armenia or Scythia it skils
not much. That mankind had a new propagation about the time assigned by Moses
of the Universal Flood, and that the Nations were propagated from those
Regions, which Moses tells us were allotted to the Sons of Noah, and inhabited
by his Nephews, is apparent, from the sudden increase of Arts and Sciences:
Which were in a good measure perfect in those Countries, in times as Ancient as
any profane History can point unto; yet seated only in a narrow room, whence
they were derived, as from a Center, to more remote parts of the World. The
ripeness of Literature, Civil Discipline, and Inventions, amongst the
Assyrians, Caldeans, and Egyptians, before the like did so much as bud forth in
Greece, Italy, or other Countries, far distant from the former does argue, that
these were the stock, and others but slips or Branches transplanted thence.
Again, the State and Pomp of these Eastern Countries, before Greece, or Italy,
or any other Western People, did grow into the Fashion of a Kingdom or civil
Nation, demonstrates unto us, That the Inhabitants of those places were the
Heirs of the World, who had the Court, Kingdom, and Metropolis amongst them,
and other Nations but as Colonies of men of meaner sort, not so near allied
unto the Firstborn; or (as it were) of a younger house, and far ruder
Education. And it is most likely, or rather evident, that the sons of Japhet
did first inhabit Scythia, or the Northern parts of Asia Minor, and other parts
near adjoining, before they came into Greece, or other Countries of Europe. And
these were the sons of Noah's meanest posterity, until the fullness of Shem and
Chams iniquity were accomplished. For as Gods promise unto Abraham was not
accomplished in his Person, but in his Posterity, many generations after his
death; so neither did his curse upon Cham take place, till the sametime. The
Execution of Gods curse upon the one, was the collation of his blessing upon
the other: but the enlarging of Japhets race came long after both. Thus the
Egyptians were the first great Princes; the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians the
next; the Grecians and Romans after them; and in later times the race of Ismael
has been the mighty People: for of him the Saracens lineally descend, and the
Turks, by Adoption Heirs of the same promise. So truly does the Scripture tell
us the truth of all antiquity, and the true causes of Nations increase; but of
this Vid. Fagium in cap 16. Genes. and Paraeum.
elsewhere. To conclude this story of Noah.

6 The former Argument drawn from the sudden increase and propagation of men,
the scarcity of Arts, Civil Discipline and Inventions, with other Experiments
better known to them then us, enforced certain of the Ancient Philosophers to
hold a perpetual Vicissitude, some of General, some of Particular Deluges,
whereby the works of Antiquity, once come to perfection, had been, and
continually should be defaced; either generally throughout the World, or in
sundry Countries according to the extent of the Inundation. This Opinion might
seem more safe, because not ea^^e to be disproved in that Old World, in which
the wisest living (besides the people of God) had no distinct Knowledge of any
thing, that had happened 100 year before his own Birth; much less what
mutations should follow after his death: but unto us their Prognostication is
like unto some late Prophecies of Doomsday, confuted by a world of witnesses,
even by the continuance of every thing after that time: which, by their
prophecies, should have imposed a fatal end to all things. We may truly use the
Mockers words, to these mockers of truth; Since the old Philosophers died, all
things continue alike, Seed-time and Harvest have been still distinct, nor has
there been any Flood to destroy either the Whole Earth, or any entire Nation
thereof. For Assurance of which promise, the Almighty has set his Bow in the
Cloud: whose Natural Causes, though the Philosophers can in some sort assign,
and show the manner how diversities of colors arise in it; yet the Ancient
Poets saw more, (then either they themselves have left expressed, or later
Philosophers sought to conceive) when they feigned Iris to be Thaumantis Filia,
the Daughter, or (as we of this age would say) the Mother of Wonderment: the
Messenger of the great God Jupiter and his Goddess Juno. The occasions of this
Fiction (had they been well acquainted with them) might have informed
Philosophers, that the Rainbow, had some better use, then a bare Speculation
how it was made; some Final, besides the Material and Efficient Cause, unto
whose search the Admirable Form or composition of it did incite men naturally.
And the Ancient Philosophers (who were for the most part Poets, and endued with
more lively notions of the First, and Supreme Cause of all things) did usually
assign a Final Cause, (commonly) Supernatural, of such effects as proceeded
from Efficient and Material Natural Causes. As the Pythagoreans thought the
Thunder (whose matter, form, and efficient they well knew) was made to terrify
such as were in Hell* not erring in the general, that it had some such like
use, though mistaken in the particulars, whom it was made to terrify. Natural
Philosophy gives us the Material Arist. 2. Post. Ph^s. 2. l. c. 3.
and sensible Efficient Causes; the Scripture only the true and Supernatural
End, which leads us to the Immortal, Invisible, and Principal Efficient Cause
of all natural effects, even of Nature it self. And Aristotle acknowledges the
motions or dispositions of the Matter to depend upon the End or Final Cause:
albeit he gives no Final cause at all of main principal, much less the Supreme
or Principal Final cause of all natural effects, but confounds the Form with
the End, against his own principles, and contrary to the Analogy between
Nature and Art, which is the ground of all his Discourse, about the Matter,
Form, and Efficient. For the Artificial Form is not the End of the Artists
work, but rather incites the Spectator to view and admire his Skill, from which
his gain or fame may redound. And these (one, or both) are the Principal end of
all his labors: so is the Glory of the First, and Supreme Efficient Cause, the
Principal and utmost End of all the works of Nature; and Nature itself (if I
may so speak) the Art or Skill of the First and Supernatural Cause. But as
Aristotle's Philosophy is imperfect, because it leads us not, either unto the
First Cause, or Last End of all things; so it is fully sufficient to confute
such Divines, as think there were Rainbows before the Flood. Which opinion has
no pretense of Scripture to enforce it: and grounds in nature it can have none,
unless they will avouch this evident untruth, That every disposition of the
Air, or every Cloud, is fitly disposed to bring forth the Rainbow. And if
other Natural Causes, with their motions and dispositions, depend upon the
Final; such as acknowledge the truth of Scripture have no reason to think, that
either the Clouds or Air had that peculiar disposition which is required unto
the production of the Rainbow, before the Flood, when this wonderful Effect
could have no such use or end, as it has had ever since. For it was ordained,
as the Scripture tells us, to be Genesis 9. 12, 13. 14.
a Sign or witness of Gods Covenant with the New World, a Messenger to secure
mankind from destruction by Deluges. Now if it had appeared before, the Sight
of it, after the flood, could have been but a silly comfort to Noah's Timorcus
Posterity; whose mistrust, lest the the like inundation should happen again,
was greater, then could be taken away by any ordinary or usual Sign, if we may
believe such Joseph. hist. Noae. Ant. 1. Lib.
Testimonies of Antiquity as we have no reason to suspect. I omit the
discussion of Vid Ammian. Marcell. lib. 20. in Fine. Et quoniam indicium est
permutationis aurae (ut diximus) a sudo acre nubium concitans globos, aut
contra ex concreto immutans in serenam laetitiam coelum: ideo apud poetas
legigim* saepe Irim de coelo mitti, cum praesentiu^ rerum fit status mutatio.
See Joh. Archiep. Cantuariensis his perspectiva Communis, Lib. 3. in Fine.
their Opinion, who think the Rainbow does naturally argue such a temper of
the air, as is unapt for the present to conceive any Excessive Moisture. Either
from these reasons in nature, then well known, or from the Tenor of Gods
forementioned Covenant, communicated to the Ancient Heathen people by
Tradition, does Jupiter in Homer make Iris the messenger of his Peremptory
command unto Neptune, to desist from aiding the Grecians.

Iliad. o.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
From Jove I come a messenger, to him that Neptune hight,
His pleasure is, that thou henceforth, ne come in field or fight:
But hence to Heaven, or to wide Sea address thy speedy flight.
7 The true Mythologie of which Fiction I should, from the circumstance of the
Story, conjecture to be this. The swelling of waters and abundance of
moisture, did advantage the Grecians, and annoy the Trojans, for whom fair
weather was best, as having greatest use at that time of service by Horse. For
this reason is Neptune by Iris commanded to get him into the Sea; which ^s as
much as to say, the Overflow of waters and abundance of moisture was now to be
assuaged; and Apollo on the other side sent to encourage Hector, and his
Trojans; The meaning is, that Jupiter would now have fair and dry weather.

Hom. ibid.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Go to! prepare the Troops of Horse (for they must do the deed)
And charge thine enemies at their ships, but charge them with all speed;
Mean time I Will go before, and smooth the way, you follow must;
I Will turn the Grecian Chieftains back, or lay them in the dust.
Such mysteries of Nature are often wrapped in Poetical Fictions, though many of
them not so easy to be discerned in such distance of time; this kind of
Divinity being now worn out of date. But we that have this Supernatural
Commentary upon the works of nature, may see in the mixed colors of the
Rainbow, more clearly then in any Prophetical vision, the Old Worlds
destruction by Water: and This presents future consumption by Fire, whose
brightness is predominant in the waterish humor. The resolution of the cloud,
by the heat of Sunbeams reflected upon it, prefigures unto us the melting of
the Elements with fire, 2 Pet. 3. 12.

8 Scarce any thing in the frame of Nature, no not the untruths of Poetical
Fables, or lying stories, but bear Witness of the Divine Truth revealed in
Scriptures; so men would not be preposterous in their observations; like Julian
the Apostate: who sought to discredit the Sacred Story of the Tower of Babel,
by the Poets fictions of the Giants war against Heaven; as if there had been no
more probability in the one then in the other. If he could have showed us any
Poem of the same Subject, more Ancient then that story, he might have had some
piece of an excuse for his Impiety; some pretense for accusing the Scripture
of Poetical Imitation: but if the Poets have been Imitators of Moses, or other
Writers of this story, the blame must lie upon them, either for wilful
corrupting of the truth, or (which is most likely) for taking the Hyperbolical
Phrase of Scriptures in a strict sense; as if they had meant to build a Tower
up to Heaven Indeed, when as the Phrase imports no other intendment in them,
then only To build an Exceeding High Towa^ which might secure them from
Inundation (as some think;) or else endure as a Monument of their Fame, or a
Refuge whereunto they might resort, and continue their Combination.

9 But the later Grecians, having their Consciences convict with the Evidence,
not their Affections conquered with the Love of Truth, were driven into more
desperate Impudence, to say that our Savior Christ had taken those Divine
Sentences, which they could not but admire, out of their divine Plato: whereas
Plato himself (as S. Ambrose, and S. Augustine, out of Testimonies not now
producible, gather) had his best Divinity from such as wrote of Christ, Aug.
lib. 2. de Doct^. Christ. Cap. 28.
although the Medley of their Divinity and his Philosophy, is but like the
mingling of Jordans sweet streams with the salt Sea. That Plato had either
read, (...) been instructed by such as had read the Books of Moses, he will
easily Believe, that shall read the speech of Aristophanes in the Dialogue of
Love, or Banquet-discourse. In the beginning (says he) there were three sorts
or Sexes (...) Plato in (...)(...).
men, not these two only which now are extant, Male, and Female; But a th^^
common nature composed of these, whose Name now only remains, without any
such real Nature, as the word Androgyni imports.

10 This opinion (doubtless) was conceived from a misconceit of Mo^ his
meaning, in making diverse mention of our First Parents Creation. Genesis 2. He
makes first mention of Adams Creation, then of Evahs, distinct from it. But
Genesis 1. 26, 27. and Chapt. 5. 1, 2. He seems to relate both their Creations
so jointly and briefly, that a man, not acquainted with the Hebrew Dialect. nor
the Mysteries of Matrimony represented in that Story, might think, that
neither distinct Man or Woman had been there created, but Androgyni.
Furthermore God said, Let us make Man in our likeness according to our Image,
and let Them rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the fowl of the Heaven,
and over the beasts, and over all the Earth, and over every thing that creeps
or moves on the earth. Thus GOD created Man in his own Image, in the Image of
GOD created ^e Him; he created Them Male and Female. And a secular Artist that
affects Artificial, being ignorant of Moses his Method, might think that
these were not Repetitions of the same, but distinct Stories of diverse
Creations. From the like ignorance of the Grecians in the Eastern tongues, or
some default in the written copies which they followed, did the River Perath
enlarge its name by translation from one tongue to another, as it does its
streams by passing from place to place. For if we join the Hebrew Pronoun or
Article with the Noun, whereby this River is named in Scripture, the compound
is only different in termination from the same Rivers name in Creek. Moses
Genesis 2. having mentioned Three Rivers of the Garden, adds, And there was a
Fourth which is Perath [ Which according unto the Greek termination i^ (...),
not (...)(...), (...) of the Hebrew Beth is the Greek (...) (...)(...)
Hu Perath] or rather [Hu Prath] which words conjoined are Huphrath. All these
argue, that the sacred Antiquity of Jewry was, unto other Nations, as Nilus to
Egypt, the main Stream or Principal River, whence they drew most of their
Inventions, either of necessity or delight; albeit these Cuts or petty streams
thence derived, did quite alter their native quality in the conveyances,
receiving infection from the Soil through which they ran, or putrefying in the
Cisterns wherein they settled.

11 For confirmation of all, we may add this. The Greek Alphabet has been
taken from the Hebrew, as is evident to such as will compare both. The Grecians
themselves acknowledge, that they had their very Letters from the Phoenicians*
who were next neighbors to Judea.

12 To Recollect the sum of all that has been said throughout this Discourse.
As both the first Elements, and sundry Primitive words of the Greek and
Hebrew, scarce differ so much one from another, as Three from Four, or one
Digit number from the next unto it, and yet after many deflections from the
first Roots or Themes of both, and new Frames of words by Artificial
Composition, (a thing as natural to the Greeks as spreading branches to the
Vine) the Languages themselves, or whole product of both Elements, are much
different: So are the Principal or first Heads of the Grecian Inventions,
derived for the most part from the Hebrews; although by successive Artificial
Imitation their Variety grow greater, and their resemblance of divine Truth
the less. So likewise were Logical conceits first clothed, like Natures
children, in Terms not much abhorrent from Common and Civil Use; but after
diverse Reflections of Artists Imaginations, and endless Revolution of Conceit
upon Conceit, the Logicians Dialect is become a Distinct Language from all
others; so that a man may as well speak Greek to a mere Latinist, as
Logick-Latin to a mere Humanitian* Thus much of the Heathens digression from
the Historical truth of Scriptures* It remains that we compare the moral use,
and issue of their Inventions with the End, Scope, and Fruit of these Divine
writings.

CAP. XVII.
Of sacred Writers Sobriety and discretion, in relating true Miracles;
compared especially with later Heathens vanity, in coining Fruitless Wonders.

1 ALbeit the Superstition of later Gentiles was most opposite to the most
True, most Ancient Religion of the Israelites: yet if we trace the most Civil
sort of them backwards in their Sinister ways, we shall find It, and the right
path of the Israelites, like the two opposite Branches of Pythagoras his
Letter, jumping as it were in one Trunck. Sundry Fragments of Orpheus, Linus,
Pythagoras, yea of Eu^ipides, much later then the former, with many Sayings of
other Ancient Poets and Philosophers, do witness that their Authors had Many
Notions of Good and Evil, not much dissonant from the Moral Law of God, fully
consonant (for their general truth) unto the good Sentences of Jobs Friends:
albeit even these were mingled with many particular Errors of the Divine
providence. Much more did the most of the Heathen, since the division of the
Jews from other people, by their Sacred Laws, go much, every day more then
other, awry, from those good rules of life, which had been naturally ingrafted,
both in the Jews and Gentiles Hearts. These excellent Sayings of the Ancient
Heathen, and their posterities credulity to believe all reports of their Gods,
demonstrate that they had observed many Wonderful Experiments, and Evident
Documents of a Divine providence; and communicated the same unto posterity,
both in plain Literal Moral Discourses and Allegorical or Mystical Fictions. In
thus doing, perhaps not intending so much, that their Successors should expect
the same Events, or Course of things to continue for ever: as that they should
learn to Reverence these Sacred Powers, to glorify them as Divine, who could
always alike effect what they intended, though by means most contrary. But unto
the Heathen, destitute of Gods written word, the best Observations of their
Ancestors became quickly like a Calendar out of date; they could not discern
the works of God, nor his inward secret Calling, when once the course of his
proceedings, or manner of his speaking to them changed. Thus Planetiades in
Plutarch ascribes the defect of Oracles Plu^de defectu Oraculorum.
unto the Carelessness or Malignancie of the Gods, as if, these once taken away,
they had no other means left for procuring the welfare of Mankind. Put in Jewry
the true Doctrine of the Divine Power, or Providence was well known For God by
Moses had both given them his written Oracles as an absolute Fphemerides of all
things that had been since the first moment of Time, by whose Rules they were
to discern all other succeeding Predictions; and also continually raised them
up Prophets, like yearlie Astronomers, to continue the Ephemerides, which Moses
had made for the direction of man's Life, and to instruct them as it were in a
Monthly Calendar of every particular Alteration or Change, unto which that
great Lawgiver in his General Predictions could not descend. From this reason
it is, that the Penmen of the Sacred Story do not always relate the same, or
like Events, but assign diverse manners of his working and speaking to several
Ages. Some afford us lively Monuments of his Power; others Patterns of his
Wisdom; some Examples of his Justice; others, of his Mercy: yet all of them
continually acknowledge him to be the Only Author of their Good, albeit the
manner of procuring it be diverse, yea contrary. Thus Fzra, Nehemiah, and other
Godly men of that time, ascribe their Redemption from Babylonish Captivity, as
immediately to the Wonderful Working of their God, as their Fore-elders did
their Deliverance from Egyptian Thraldom: although no such Miracle of his Power
were seen in the later. The former Deliverance had confirmed his Omnipotent
Ability of doing what He would, the later, his infinite Wisdom in doing what
He could, by what means He would: and it was his good Pleasure to be Glorified
in sundry Ages, by diverse Manifestations of his several Attributes.

2 But the Heathen wanting His Word for their direction, after they had once
begun, knew not how to make an End. If God cease to show his Miracles in any
one kind, which they had heard of before, either they sought to continue them
by feigning the like, (more ready to play upon former reports, then to observe
the course of Gods proceedings in their own times:) or else from the variety
of wonderful Events, whose Cause they knew not, they imagine a plurality of
Gods. Others, from these men's Superstition, and Curiosity, were prone to
suspect the Truth of what had been; after once such sensible Events, or
Experiments begun to cease. This gave the first occasion unto Atheism; which
h^th most abounded since the propagation of the Gospel, whose Glory has quite
extinguished those petty lights, which purblind Heathen only used for their
direction, being most conspicuous to the Flesh or Sense, as the Gospel is to
the Spirit. For as dim or weak sights can make some shift with Starlight or
Candles, that shine a far off, but are quite put out by looking upon the bright
Sun; So has the Brightness of Christ's Glory revealed, put out the Eyes of
corrupted Nature, in such as loved darkness more then Light, and would not
seek for any remedy at his Hands, which gives Sight to the Blind. Yet might
this their disease be sooner cured, if they would compare other Countries
vanity in faining wonders without Occasion, with this Religious Sobriety of
the later Writers of the Bible, or other godly men, who have written of Jews
Affairs; not one of them since Ezekiahs time relating such wonders, as their
Fathers had told them. This Sobriety in them evidently shows, that the Former
Miracles were no Fictions of Humane Fancy: otherwise the Jews, living between
Ezekiahs and Christ's time, would have been copious in their Inventions of the
like, as we see by experience, that the learned fews since our Saviors time
have been most ridiculously apish in coining, and the Illiterate as gross in
believing most absurd and Filthy Fables. That this people, during the whole
time of the Second Temple, added no books to the Canon of the Bible, confirms
their Forefathers care, of admitting none in former times, but upon evident and
sure Experiments of their divine Authority. Again, it was most miraculous, that
this people which had Prophets, and sacred Writers in every Age, before the
Babylonish Captivity, should after their redemption thence lie so quiet, that
not the most Learned among them did ever challenge the name of Prophet; though
they had men of divine spirits, and excellent observation in Heavenly matters,
as appears by the Author of Ecclesiasticus, the Book of Wisdom, and other
Books of good use amongst all Religious men, though not Canonical amongst the
Jews themselves. Answerable to this sobriety of the learned was the disposition
of the unlearned among this people; which during the former Period of time,
wherein they wanted Prophets, were generally most averse from all Idolatry,
whereunto they were most prone, while Prophecies were most plentiful amongst
them; and yet continued still as far from Atheism, as Idolatry. The reason of
all which, I have given before. God had enjoined a General Silence throughout
this Land, that all might hearken more attentively unto the Criers voice,
appointed to prepare the ways of the Lord: after whose message once fully
accomplished, as it had been after the ringing of a Market-Bell, every
Mountebank throughout their coasts, sets to sale the dreams and fancies of his
own brain, for Divine Prophecies.

3 Lastly, the Heathen in their most Sacred Traditions, and matters of greatest
consequence, add circumstances according to the occurrents of their own Times,
which suit no better with the Substance, or Essence of their Ancestors
Observations, then a Pigmeies slipper with a Giants Foot. How shamefully does
the wanton Poets faign his Gods to long after such matters, as he himself did
most delightin? The best end and use of his greatest Gods apparitions are often
times to accomplish beastly lust; Divine truths are usually transformed into
the Poets private affection. Ovids description of Jupiters coming to Semele,
Aethera conscendit auliumque sequentia traxit Nubila, queis nimbos immistaque
fulgura ventis Addidit, and tonitrus and inevitabile Fulme^. Libr. 3. Metam.
Fab. 3.
is not much unlike the manner of GODS passing by 1 King 19. 11, 12. And
behold, the Lord went by, and a mighty strong wind rent the mountains and brake
the rocks before the Lord, and after the wind an earthquake, and after the
earthquake fire.
Eliah upon the mount; and therefore not altogether unbeseeming the Majesty of
the Great King, if all circumstances were answerable to the substance of the
description: but it is brought to an absurd, profane, and foolish purpose. So
likewise Det pignus amoris Si modo verusis est, quantlisque and qualis ab alta
Junone excipitur, tantus talisque rogato Det tibi complexus suaque anre
infignia sumat. Ovid. Ibid.
Semeles petition unto Jupiter, is but Exodus 33. 12, 13, and 18. Then Moses
said unto the Lord; See, thou say unto me, Lead this people forth, and thou
have not showed me whom thou will send with me: Thou have said moreover, I know
thee by name, and thou have also found grace in my sight: Now therefore I pray
thee, if I have found favor in thy sight, show me now the way that I may know
thee, and that I may find grace in thy sight. Again he said, I beseech thee
show me thy glory.
Moses his request unto God, Effeminate and transformed in sundry circumstances
to the Poets humor. Moses, Exodus 33 18. desired to see the Glory of the Lord:
and the Lord answered him, Thou can not see my Face: for there shall no man
see my Face and live. Yet willing to confirm this his Servants Faith, he
condescends thus far to his suit: Exodus 33. 20, 21, 22, 23.
Whilst my glory passes by, I will put thee into a cleft of the rock; and will
cover thee with mine hand whilst I pass by, and thou shall see my back-parts,
but my face shall not be seen. Either from some mistaking of this place, or
from experience of others sudden death, upon such apparition of the Divine
Majesty, as Moses and Elias by peculiar dispensation had escaped, did that
tradition spring which Manbah conceited so deeply, Judge. 13. 22. And Manoah
said unto his wife; we shall surely die, because we have seen God; as Gideon
had done likewise, Judge. 6. 22. Hence was that of H^mer lib. 1. Od^ss. (...)
Alas my Lord God, for because I have seen the Angel of the Lord face to face,
I shall die. This Tradition had come to Ovids Co^pus mortale ^umultus n^n tul^
^thereos^d m^p ^u^ahl us a^s^.
hands, who makes that Majesty, which he had described to be so great, so
Improvident withal, as to grant her foolish request, on whom he doted, to her
utter ruin; and so Impotent, that he could not protect her, albeit he strove
to cover her with his hand: and so finally neither the God could enjoy his
Love, nor his best Beloved her Life. Such are the consequences of latter
Heathens greatest Miracles; but in the Sacred Story, wherein are specified
Events as strange as Poets relate any, such causes are assigned of them, as are
more weighty, and the manner of their relation more Grave and Serious then the
Events are Rare; if God at any time appear, either in vision by night, or
corporal shape by day, it is for some Extraordinary purpose. All the Miracles
or wonders wrought in Israel, were to bring that people unto the knowledge of
the true God, to rely continually upon his Providence; A matter more hard, if
we consider the frailty of our own flesh, then the effecting of any Miracles,
reported to have been wrought for the Jews. Why his Wonderful Works should be
most frequent amongst this people, this reason is as plain as probable, from
the End. This people was placed as a Light unto all the Nations of the World
besides: They enjoyed extraordinary prosperity that others might be allured to
reverence them, and Taste the Goodness of their God: Their unusual Judgments
and strange kind of Afflictions were as so many Proclamations unto the World,
to beware of like Rebellion: seeing all the world was set on wickedness, and
God had appointed a day, wherein he would judge the world in righteousness,
necessary it was, to set out a pattern of his Mercy and Justice in some People;
and without wrong to any other, it was His especial Favor, to make choice of
Abraham's seed for this purpose, on whom he showred his mercies in greatest
abundance, whilst they were obedient and faithful in the works of Abraham; but
when they rebelled, and vexed Isa. 63. 10.
his holy Spirit, then he turned to be their Enemy, and he fought against
them, making them continual Examples of his unpartial Judgments, as shall
appear in the next Section.

SECT. III. The Third Section of the Second general Part. Lib. 1.
Containing Experiments drawn from the Revolution of States, or Gods public
Judgments, but especially of the Estate of the Jews from time to time.

OF all external Experiments, the most Firm and solid, for assuring the truth
of these divine Oracles unto our souls, are gathered from the Revolution of
States, or Gods Judgments upon several Lands and people. In the observation of
which, the continual story of the Jewish Nation does best direct us. The
Intercourse of their particular afflictions, before our Saviors time; the
manner of their Recoverie from them, as from so many Spices of some grievous
disease growing upon them; The Epidemical Crantzius I. 10. Wandal. c. 18.
Christiano sanguine abutuntur ad Restinguendum Cruorem qui perpetuo illis
Fluit, whose fathers cried, His Blood be on us and our children.
disease, which through every generation hants theirs, since they desired our
Saviors blood to be upon them and their children: are so many Probata, or
tried Experiments, that these Celestial precepts contain the onley Method of
preserving the Public or private welfare of Mankind, whose observations may
cure, whose neglect will breed, all the misery that can befall any people. And
this Method I would wish every Christian to follow; First diligently to
consider the State of the Jews from time to time, for it evidently confutes
the Atheist, and confirms the Truth of the old Testament: and the Truth of it
established, does most evidently confute the Jew, and witness the truth of the
Gospel unto us, as shall be proved (God willing) in due place.

CAP. XVIII.
Of the state of the Jews in General, before our Saviors time, with Tullies
Objection against them.

1 IT is storied of Enimver^ tanta fuit autoritas Alphonsi, ut etiam victus
conditiones dixerit, and victores victi metu cesserint, quasi victorians casu
non virtute se consecutos arbitrati. Ant. Panormitan. l. 4. de dict. and Fact.
Alphonsi.
Alphonsus the Great, that being sometime Prisoner to his Enemies, he did so
carry himself amongst them, and prescribe them such Conditions for his release,
as might argue, that they had overcome him only by Chance. This was not so
strange in a Prince, so Famous and Venerable for the Integrity of his whole
life, and so Amiable in his carriage toward his Enemies; A man, as it were made
to overcome and quel all the spightful malice or Base Intendments, that could
be devised against him, by his Heroical open Heart, and Bountiful Hand toward
all, and indefatigable Clemency even toward such, as sought to outvie it by
Ingratitude, and just provocation of his heaviest displeasure. But that the
Jews, a people whom others prejudicial conceit of their peevish self-conceited
Singularity, (raised from their strict observation of Laws contrary to the
customs of other people) had made for the most part Odious, ere known unto the
world, should August. (ex Seneca) 16. de Civit. Dei. c. 1^
Victivictoribus leges dare, being Captives, give Laws unto their Conquerours,
even to such as sought to Triumph in their disgrace, as Birds over an Owl
caught in a snare; did justly minister occasion of Wonderment to sundry
Heathen, and might have taught the proudest and mightiest of their Enemies /
that they had overcome them only by permission or Chance, or (if these words
seem unfit) for want of that good Hap and Favor in their Battles, which they
after their overthrowes finding, became by it in a sort, Conquerours of their
enemies, even whilst they were detained in Captivity.

2 The full Height and Amplitude of those Fortunes, whereof This People was
only capable, would bring the natural man, (could he fully comprehend them)
within perfect ken of that Incomprehensible Omnipotent Power, which was only
able to effect them. But because these cannot be taken by any Ethnic
Observations, which reach not near those Ancient times, wherein their
Extraordinary Success was most Conspicuous; we must gather them from the
manner of their States declining, since it has been known to Ethnic or other
Writers, not liable to suspicion of partiality on their behalf God in his
providence (as Moses prophecies compared with later, and the succession of
their Histories, Testify) had ordained, as the Fullness of Time and their
Iniquity drew near his Favors toward them should decrease by such an uniform
proportion, that their Contraction in later, might notify their excessive
Greatness in former times. The manner of their deliverance from the Babylonish
Captivity (to such as rightly observe the diverse manner of Gods proceeding in
different ages before specified) will give the true Estimate of Wonders wrought
for their Forefathers: and Cyrus Favor toward them will appear most credible,
from the representation of like extraordinary Kindness showed them in Egypt
by Ptolomaeus Philadelphus; Of the favors that God procured the Jews from
Diverse Kings, etc. See Josephus Antiq. l. 12. c. 2, and 17. l. 16. c. 10. l.
19. c. 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Maccab. 15.
who, thougt their supreme Lord by right of Conquest, set at liberty a Hundred
thousand of their Bodies, captivated by his Father, to submit himself unto
their Laws, which he (directed by the Divine providence) caused to be
translated into the most known tongue then on earth, through which the nations
(as it were through a perspective-glasse) might better discern the New Star of
Jacob which was shortly to arise.

3 It is a point without the Circumference of Politic Observation, plainly
arguing such a Celestial Providence, as can control the purposes of the
greatest Princes, why Jerusalem so often Ruinate, should still be repaired
again or, the Temple continue in such Beauty after it had so often fallen
into the enemies hands; especially seeing the Flourishing state of the One was
apprehended by their Conquerours, as a great Encouragement, and the
Fortification of the Other, as a great Opportunity of this peoples Rebellion;
upon which consideration Ezra 4. 17. 1 Esdr. 2. 25, etc. Jos. l. 11. Antiq.
cap. 3. Etsi Cambysem pro Artaxerxe habeat. Appianus de Bell Syriac. Yet here
is omitted the reedification by Hireanus in Julius his time. Jos. Ant. l. 14.
c. 16. Their demolishing by Sasius. l. 14. c. 28. and l. 15. c. 1. Reedifying
in Ca^u^ time. Joseph Ant^ l. 14. c. 17. and in Claudius his Time. Empto jure
muniendi, struxere inuros in pac^ Tanquam ad Bel^am ^ac^^us Hist. l. 5.
Artaxerxes did inhibit the execution of Cyrus Grant for the Reedifying of
Jerusalem. The City walls had been razed since the time of the Babylonish
Captivity, (which was before any Heathen Historiographer of note) first by
Ptolomey the First; secondly by Pompey the Great; and yet repaired before
Vespasians time, who overthrew their strongest munitions, as Adrian afterward
did the same, once again repaired.

4 The Truth again of that Favor which they found under the Egyptians, (though
otherwise known by unpartial writers) is more then Credible in it self, from
the extraordinary Favor which they found amongst the Nations, about the time
of their Conquest by Pompey. Tully tells us in his Oration pro Flacco, that Gold
was transported out of Italy it self, and all the rest of the Roman Provinces,
for Garnishing the Temple of Jerusalem. The prohibition of this practice in
Asia, enacted by Flaccus Governor of that Province, was afterward laid to his
Charge, though the like had been decreed by the Roman Senate in the time of
Tullies Consulship. It was no little prejudice unto his cause, that Pompey in
the Conquest of that City, did think so reverently of the Jews religion and
Temple, that, albeit he Jos. de Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 5.
viewed the Golden Table, Candlestick, and other Vessels of like metal, with
many costly Ornaments, and two thousand Talents of their Sacred Treasure: yet
he did not diminish so much as one Jot of it, nor spoil Jerusalems Temple of
any Ornaments, to beautify the Temples of his Roman Gods. This abstinence of
Pompey, Tullie in the forecited place acknowledges, albeit (for bettering the
cause he had in hand) unwilling to confess, that Pompey did abstain for any
Religious Respect of the Jews or their Laws: for after many shifts, Cicero pro
Flacco. Sua cuique civitati religio, Laeli, est, nostri nobis. Stantibus
Hierosolymis, pacatisque Judaeis, tamen istorum religio sacroru^ a splendore
hujus imperii, gravitate nominis nostri, majorum institutis abhorrebat. Nunc
vero hoc magis, quod illa gens, quid de imperio nostro sentiret, ostendit
aimis, quam chara diis immortalib esset, docuit, quod est victa, quod elocata
quod servata
he takes this as the best argument to elevate the Romans conceit of the
Jewish religion; Whilst Jerusalem flourished and the Jews were quiet, yet their
sac^ed rites were altogether dissonant unto the splendour of the Roman Empire,
the gravity of that nation, and the institution of their Ancestors; much more
(as he thought) should the Romans now make less account of that nation, which
had given perfect proof what good will they had born unto the Romans, by their
late taking arms against them. And what good will the Immortal Gods did bear to
them, their late Fortunes did witness, in that they had been vanquished, made
tributarie, and (as he thought) were at the Romans disposition for their
preservation or destruction.

5 If these Jews late subjection were any disparagement to their Religion; much
more might Pompey's and Tullies overthrow discredit the Roman Gods, which
Pompey's Faction did reverence more then Caesar's; yea Fortune it self, on whose
Favor Lib. Epist. ad Attic.
Tullie relied after he had fallen out with all the rest, could not be excused,
if earthly calamity were any just presumption of impiety against Heaven. But
if Tullie would have sought but the first Fountain of his Countries wrack; want
of Reverence to the Jewish Temple, and their Religion was cause of Pompeys and
Crassus overthrow, and their overthrow the Ruin of the Roman State.

CAP. XIX.
Of Pompey's ill success after his entry of the Sanctum Sanctorum: The manner
of his death fitting his sin. Of Crassus, Cassius, etc.

1 I Know the Secular Politician can epsy many Over-sights in Pompeys
proceeding The original causes of Pompeys fortunes sudden alteration.
against Caesar, and assign other Causes of his disaster: But he that had gone
into the Temple of the Lord, with more Reverence then Pompey did, might have
understood that it was his Unhallowed progress into the Most Holy Place, which
had set an untimely Period to his greatness growth. This was the main Spring
or Head of all his other particular Errors observed by Secular Politicians.
Hitherto he had marvellously prospered in all his ways, Fortune had been his
Guide, and Felicity his Attendant. Although his Wisdom and Experience would not
suffer him to over-see any thing, that lay within the compass of warlike
skill: yet happy Chance delighted to have a Finger in his proceedings, always
bringing somewhat to his aid, and furtherance, from beyond the Hemisphere of
Humane Policy; so as the Issue and product of all his Enterprises were still
discerned to be greater, then could amount from the particular means forecast
by him, or his Counselors, for their Achievement. See Tully de lege ^^an^lia,
of Pompeys felicity in his African expedition: and piratical war.
He had the help of Wind, and weather, to prosecute his foes by Sea: the Favor
of As in his Conquest of Mithridate, See Flor. de Gest. Romans l. 3. cap. 5.
Nollurna ea Dimicatio fuit. Et ^una in partibus, quippe quasi commilitans, cum
a tergo hostibus, a facie Romany se prabuisset, Pontici per errorem longius
cadentes umbrassuas, quasi hostium corpora petebant. V^d. Stadit comment. in
locum.
Moon and Stars to make him Conqueror by Land. Thus Fates had been his friend,
until his ascending the Holy Mount: but upon his descent thence, Fortune (to
use the Romans language) began to turn her wheel upon him. His wonted
providence and forecast Vid. Plut. in Pompeio, and Applanum lib. 2. de Bell.
civili. and Dionem, in in^^jo, lib. 42.
forsook him; and he that in his younger days (when his heart was as full of
hopes as his blood of spirits) had used greatest vigilancie to prevent all
dangers in matters of smaller moment, whose loss might easily have been
recovered: now in that age, whose usual Symptoms are Timiditie, and too much
care, suffers those Consultations on which his Own, his Friends, his Countries
Fates, and Fortunes wholly depended, on which the whole state of the world did
in^ manner hang, to pass away as in a dream; yielding his irrevocable consent
to whatsoever any Parasite should propose, in points wherein error and
oversight were incorrigible, and their consequence, if bad, remediless; with as
great speed and little care, as a man would answer, yes, or yea, to some idle
question proposed unto him betwixt sleeping and waking. Answerable to this his
Sottish demeanor, Victory, which before had Wooed him, once in his last
extremit^ (like a wanton Minion disposed to flout her blind decrepit doting
Lover, seems a little to make toward him, Such was Caesar's censure
either wanting eyes to discern her, or (...) to give her entertainment. But
not Victory her self could make him victorious, in whose death and overthrow
the Almighty would have his Judgments seen. For seeing it could not content
him to have vanquished so many Kings and Kingdoms, but he will provoke the King
of kings in his own House, by his Unmannerly Intrusion into his most Secret
Closet, reserved alone, of all places of the earth besides, (though all the
earth besides were His) for His Holiness presence and his Priests: it seemed
just to this Lord of Heaven and Earth, the Supreme disposer of all Success, to
give the Kingdoms subdued by Pompey into his Fatal Enemies hand, not leaving
him so much firm ground of all his Conquests as might decently cover his
miserable Corpse. Since the foundations of the Earth and Sea were lald, Hic,
post tres consulatus, and tandem triumph^^, (...) ^-qi terra^um or^em
sanctiffi^nt (...) man e^ecti ^ape^ quod ascen^^t non potest (...) ge^^mum
annum agentis, pit^te natalem ipsius, vitae fuit e^^tur: in tantum in ille viro
a se dis^^da^te ^ortuna, (...) cui modo ad victoriam Terra de^u^^at, deesset ad
sepul turam. V^llei. Pater. Hist. 1. lib. 2.
never had so high a Flow of all good fortunes, so sudden, so strange, so low
and naked an Ebb, Ut cui modo defuerat terra ad victoriam, deeset ad
sepulturam: that he, who, as the Roman Orator says, had conquered more
Provinces then almost any of his Countrie-men had seen, He Qui mare (...)
e^sam, quod Romany parebat, pacaverat, in eo ipso periit, qui olim mill
navibus (tot enim ferunt) praefuerat, tunc in naticula ^tum occisus est, (...),
ab eo P^olem^ quodammodo, cujus patrem ipse in eam regionem ac Regnum
reduxerat. Di^a Hist. (...) lib. 42. and statni^ p^st. Sic Pompetus, inter
Romanos habitus antea potentiss^^nus, ut Agamemnon eitam cognominaretur, quod
mill navitus and ipse ^um Imperio praefutsset, tunc quasi unus de extremae
sortis Aebyptiis, ad montem Cassium interiit, ea ipsa d^, qua qu^ndam de
Mith^^date and paratis triumphum duxerat: ut ne in his quidem extrema cum
primis convenerint.
that had commanded 1000 ships, restored the use of the Sea to the Nations
again, and freed all others from the violence of Pirates, sole Lord of that
Element, and the coasts adjoining; should (upon that very day, which in memory
of this The Piratical was the most honorable War that ever any Roman
undertook, and justly deserved a glorious triumph: but Pompey triumphed in his
Sin, whilst he included Juries Conquest, as part of that days glory, which the
Lord for this reason would have defaced by his miserable death, as he had
polluted the solemnity of Gods Sabbath in Jerusalem, for he took it on the
Sabbath day. Vid. Joseph. lib. 1. de Bell, Jud. cap. 5. And Dion, l. 66. says
that Titus did so, (...).
matchless victory he had celebrated some few years before at Rome with
greatest Triumph and Solemnity) become a prey to a Beggarly Egyptian Boat, and
fall into such base Hucksters hands, as knew not the worth of so great a Prize,
but (as if he had been some ravenous Sea Monster, that had lived by Public
Harms, of whose death only some petty commodity might be made) present his
Head to the chief Magistrate in hope of reward, leaving that Body, whose goodly
presence had overcharged the greatest Temples, like a pestiferous Carrion, or
some offensive Garbage, or forlorn Spawn, rather hid then (...); Vix caperet
templum quem parva recondit auna. Epitaph. Pompeti apud Appian. l. 2. de Bello
Civili.
Buried in a little heap of Sand.

2 The strange stupiditie, and more strange Destiny of this famous Prince, so
Wise by nature, so well Experienced, and always before this time most
Fortunate, did argue to the Heathens apprehension, that He was Appian. ibid.
(...), as we would say, Taken in the Brain by the Hand of God, and his Hopes
blasted from above. But such is the preposterous dullness of Humane sagacitie
in Divine matters, that even where the Print of Gods ways is most sensible and
perspicuous, the wisest of us run Counter still until His Word direct our
footsteps, and His Spirit give life unto our senses. For the most Religious
amongst the Romans, The Romans preposterous and impious collectio^s upon
Pompers overthrow.
deeming Pompey such as they thought themselves, one that had never given just
offense to any of their Gods; upon his miscarriage, either altogether Hence
were these and like complaints. Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet; at Cato parv^,
Pompeius nullo; quis putet esse Deos?
Disclaim the Divine Providence, or else Exclaim against the Ingratitude or
Malignitie of Celestial Powers; as if there had been no other God or Gods, but
such as they and Pompey had well deserved of. Whereas his Fatal Overthrow, whom
their gods they thought had most reason to ^avour, should have instructed them,
that there was a God of gods in Jurie, which did bear rule over the ends of the
world, who would not be worshipped after their fashion, as Pompey dreamed. For
the reason of his desire to see the Most Holy Place, was to be resolved whether
the Romans, which worshipped the gods of every Nation subdued by them, had not
that God already, which the Jews adored: Romanorum prim Cn. Pomp. Judaeos
domuit. Templumque jure victoriae ingressus est. Inde vulgatum, Nulla Intus
Deum effigy, vacuam sedem, and Inania Arcana Tacitus lib 5. Histor. Vide
Florum. l. 3. c. 5.
but finding no graven Image, nor likeness of any thing in heaven or earth,
many Romans, which till that time had lived in suspense and admiration who this
God of the Jews should be, held their concealed Mysteries for mere Gulleries,
and thought it folly to worship they knew not whom, For Lucan. 2. lib.
Incerti Judaea Dei; yet were his Judgments upon this great Peer of Rome, the
first among that people, that had to do with the Jews most Certain, yet
Judgments mixed with Mercy and long suffering. Seeing Uzzah, and Uzziah King of
Juda, for intermedling in the Priests office, were smitten, the one with sudden
death, the other with continual Leprosy until his dying day; who can expect
that this Alien should escape unpunisht for like presumption? Nevertheless,
because he did approach the Most Holy Place, though with an unsanctified heart,
yet with no sacrilegious hands, he had a longer time of repentance then his
next Peer in Might amongst the Romans, his Predecessor in like miserable and
disgraceful death, though his Successor in like, but more shameful sacrilegious
base profaneness.

3 That Sacrilege was one especial cause of Crassus miscarriage in the
Parthian Wars, the Heathens of that time had observed; and it may be, Plutarch,
The miscarriage of Crassus parallel to the manner of his sin against Jerusalem.
(...), etc. Plutarch in Crasso. As the destruction of Heirusalem did not
immediately follow upon our Saviors, but upon his servants, S. James unjust
death.
from unwritten Traditions the nurse of error, did mistake the story. Sure it
was not the Goddess of This Hierapolis was Bambyea or Edessa, where Dirceto
the great Syrian Goddess was worshipped, as appears from Strab^s 16 Book.
(...). It was beyond Euphrates: whereas Crassus had ominous signs of his
destruction at his first passage over that River Plutarch.
Hierapolis, but the God of the holy City, which made the young and aged to
stumble one against another. Or if Crassus and his Son had this first Omen of
their overthrow at their Egress out of this Goddesses Temple; this does not
argue that it was either solely or principally for this offense therein
committed; albeit even sacrilegious wrongs against the Heathen Gods, did often
redound to the true Gods dishonor, being not intended by worldly minded men,
so much against them in Particular, as in contempt of the Deity or Divine
Power Simply: Nor are such warnings usually sent immediately g upon the
principal (...) act, but rather after continuance in the like. And the
vicinitie of this h places name, (which was a second witness of Crassus sins)
might have put him in mind of his former misdeeds in Jerusalem, with whose
sacred treasure he had dealt just so, as Plutarch says he did with the
treasury of that Goddess of ^rapolis. Which makes me supect that Plutarch did
mistake the story. For as Josephus tells us, he took away the two thousand
Talents, which Pompey left untoucht, and eight thousand besides. But such was
the Heathens prejudice of the Jews, that the least injury offered to their
Idol-Gods was more then the most grievous sacrilege that could be devised
against the God of Israel. The worst that could be done against his Temple,
was, in many of their opinions, but as reprochful words, which can bear no
Action, because not easily appliable to any determinate person: with many of
them it was all one, Non esse Does, and non apparere, represented in some
visible shape or image. Thus Polybius, otherwise an ingenuous writer, imputes
the cause of Antiochus Epiphanes sudden and fearful death, unto his intended
pillage of the Goddess Artemis Temple; when as this misereant was guil^e of
that actual crime before, for ransacking the Temple of Jerusalem. (See Joseph.
Antiq. l. 12. c. 13.) But as the plenarie cause of Crassus miserable and
shameful death, was his shamelesly miserable and Sacrilegious Mind in geral: so
in the means, or manner of His end, the Almighty would have his particular
offenses against his Priest and Temple to be most Fminent and Conspicuous. ^
totum esse in colli^, trabem ^, n^^il aliud loco (...)(...), ^ inserta erat
trab^ ^. solus ^ templi au^, ^ totum quantum ^. Joseph. A^^. Lib. 14. c. 12.
Fleazar the high Priest, seeing him wholly bent to make a golden Harvest of
the Parthian expedition, feared lest he should rake all the sacred Treasure
into his cossers. For preventing of which misehief he presents him with a
Golden Beam, whereon the Hangings of the Temple hung, hoping thereby to redeem
the rest of the sacred Treasure; but he having gotten this into his hands,
which otherwise he could not have found (being covered with wood) contrary to
his Oath, most agreeable to his Humor, seized upon all the residue. Yet gold
which he thus greedily sought, as (to his seeming) the only sure Nerve of war,
by the Almighties disposition, became the indissoluble chain of his dismal
Fates. As love to it had made him perjure himself to circumvent Gods Priest; so
did it expose him to circumvention by a Perjured ^ Aug^us ^^sis ^. Quod ^.
semper potentio^ autem, ^ se Crassi ami^ ex^, and Part^o ^. Dion. 1 (...). 4.
Villain; who having found out his appetite, prepared a sit Bait for his Bane.
For by feeding this greedy thirst of gold, he insinuated himself into the
society of his Secrets, which he disclosed unto the Parthian. Had Crassus wits
naturally been ^o dull, or had he usually showed himself so gross and sottish,
as he proved in this expedition, he had never born any place amongst the
Remans, much less had they ever permitted him to manage any for rain Wars. But
(...) partly from his prodigious Stupiditie, incapable of any warning by so ^.
many Ominous Signs and tokens, as did stupisie his whole Army besides, partly
from his more then brutish Facility, in taking an uncouth way (as if he had
been a tame beast before the drover) until he came to the very Stand, where his
enemies stood with their bows bent, and their arrows of death made ready upon
the string for his destruction, all the Roman writers agree, that He was lead
awry by Sinister Fates. Now if they had but once read what God he was, that had
blinded Absalom to disclaim Achitophels good counsel, and ratisie Hushais plot
for his Overthrow, 2 Samuel 17. they would easily have granted that the same God,
and no other, Tum Cassiani rursum aegre serebant, and omisso Crasto, qui
monitores audire gravabatur, conviciis incessebant Abgarum. (in Greek, Acharus,
in Dion. Augarus, and in Plut in Crass. Ariamnes.) Sceleratissime hominum, quis
te malus demon ad nos adduxit? quibus veneficiis, quibus pras^igiis
persuasisti Crasso ut per vastas sol tudines i^er faceret. Numidae latronum
principi magis decorum quam Romano Imperatori? Ille versipellis confortabat eos
blanditiis, and hortabatur, durarent paulisper: milites vero sublevabat
accurrens, and cum risu cavillabatur: Quid, per Campaniam vos iter facere
putatis, ut requiratis fontes ac rivos and umbras, scilicet, balne asque and
continuata pene diversoria? non meministis vos transire per Arabum and
Assyriorum confinia? Ita tum Abgarus Romanos quasi paedagogus quidam
castigabat: and priusquam deprehenderetur in perfidia abequitavit, non clam,
sed ex consensu Cra^^i, fiagens se curaturum necessaria and turbaturum consilia
hostium. Appian de Bell. Parth. Augarus si quod utile consilium Crassus
cepisset, dehortatus hominem est: sin damnosum, confirmavit; ac tandem
hujusmodi rem confecit. Crassus Seleuciam contendere decreverat, quo se tuto
cum exercitu ac commeatu praeter Euphratem ac trans eundem pervenire posse
cogitabat: a Seleucia (quam ut a Gracis hominibus habitatam, facile sperabat in
suam potestatem venturam) ad Cresiphontem Urbem baud difficulter se
trajecturum. Id consilium, tanqua multo tempore opus habiturum, ut repudiaret,
ac potius adversum Surenam, qui prope cum parva manu esset, iret, Augarus
persuasit. Quibus constitutis, cum Crassum ut petirer, Surenam (cum quo sub
speculandi pra^extu frequenter congrediebatur) ut superare posset, paravisset,
Romanos nihil solicitos, ac tanquam ad certum jam victoriam proficiscentes,
eduxit: in eisque tum per insidias opprimendis Parthum adiuvit. Dion. lib. 40.
As he came into this danger by Augarus treachery, so was he slain after he had
yielded himself unto Surenas, contrary to his oath and promise, Vid. Appian. l.
citato, and Strabon l. 16.
had infatuated Crassus heart to renounce Cassius, and other grave experienced
Roman Warriors wholesome advise, and betake himself wholly to the Barbarous
Fugitive Augarus directions, suborned by the Parthian to betray him.

4 But Cassius, much wiser then his General in this one particular of
mistrusting Forainers, was afterward as far over-seen in the main chance, and
overtaken with that sin which had caused Crassus blindness: First, polluted
with like So says S. Augustine de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 45. Postea. (i. post
Pompeii victoriam de ludaeis) Cassius Templu^ spoliavit, Of his cruel exactions
in Judea, Vide Joseph. antiq. l. 14. c. 18.
Sacrilege, and cruel oppression of these Jews: then with his own blood, Of
his gross error in mistaking his victorious friend for his persecuting enemy.
Vide Velleium Paterculu^ l. 2. and reliquos Romans hist. autores.
shed by his servant at his commandment, upon as gross an oversight as
Crassus had committed. So shall they all, sooner or later, be Infatuate, that
rob God of His Honor, and put their trust in Wrong and Violence. And thus
till this time did they perish all, as many as bare ill will to Sion; for
Hierusalems Hour was not yet come, because the Dayspring had not visited her
from on High. The glory of her Temple was not as yet revealed; unto whom,
after Her children had offered greater disgrace then the Romans had done to
their Temple, the Staff of her wonted Stay begins to break, the bonds of her
former peace untwine, and only one part of her double Fates remain; if then
she fall, she rises not again, she has no inclination left but to
destruction; The burden of the Fathers sins, and the yoke of captivity due
thereto, grows heavier and heavier in the descent upon posterity, without all
hope of recoverie, much less of revenge, upon such as offer her greatest
violence; but rather happy shall that man be thought, and highest earthly
honor shall be the wages of his service, that rewards her children, as they
had served their Lord and Savior. But these times were not come in Crassus or
Cassius days, in which some Relics of her Ancient Hopes remained, to see the
rods and scourges of her correction consume and wither, after once the Almighty
had taken off his punishing Hand. And if unto these Three above mentioned, we
add the like destiny of Antonie and Scipio; and the ill success of the other
Romans, who had ought to do with these Jews before our Saviors time: we may
conclude, that although the Romans were then Lords of the earth, yet This
People, whom they held as Base, retained the privilege of Gods Royal Priests.
Although the souls of all flesh were the Lords, who for this cause revenged the
oppressed in every Nation: yet Israel only (as the Prophet Jerem. 2. 3. Levit.
23 10.
speaks) was as A Thing Hallowed unto the Lord, His First Fruits; all such as
devoured them did offend, evil should come upon them, although inflicted by
their own, or their servants hands at their appointment. Lastly, if we call to
mind the former distinction of Ages, and the diverse manner of Gods dealing with
them, before and after the Baby Ionish Captivity; the contraction or
Abridgment of their large Privileges, in the long succession of times foretold
by Ancient, and acknowledged by their own later Writers: we cannot mistrust the
Amplitude of their Fundamental Charter, or their Historical Narrations of what
the Lord had done of old unto Jabin, Sisera, and S^herib, would we (allowing
some different condition of times) compare theirs with Pompeys and his
Accomplices unusual Fates. Gods Power was more immediately Gods judgments upon
Pompeys I^ ^h (...) most just, because they had parti cipated ^ Sin.
manifested in the one, his Wisdom more admirable in the other, his Justice the
same in Both. Yet a Roman would reply: If Pompey had so grievously offended,
why should He not have born the whole burden of His sins? So he should, had
either be alone offended, or the Romans suffered him to have lived a Private
Life; but if they will associate themselves as members to their natural Head,
and profess their service and Allegiance unto Him, that stood as pros^ribed by
the Court of Heaven: Gods quarrel with the whole Faction is most Just, All of
them are guilty of their Generals Sins, All liable to the Plagues and
Punishments due thereto. Yet, besides that Pompeys intolerable Presumption and
Proph (...), according to the usual Course of Gods Justice might propagate his
Destiny unto such of his Adherents, as had been free from any actual wrong
done to the Jews, or contempt of their God and Religion in particular: a great
many of his Chief Followers had polluted themselves with the like Sin in
Jerusalem. For, as (...) qu^: To ^ veto p^, ^^d pl^ sunt. (...) ant^m gravur ^
Jud^ visum ^ll, quam san ctum illud Are ^ ^u^quam ^aus vi^um, (...) e^^e
dectum. Denique Pom peius una cum Sui^ Comitib in templum ^ l^bra cu^ ^ and ^
in qu^ ^.
Josephus tells us, Pompey went not into the Most Holy Place alone, but
accompanied with a Multitude. All of them, no doubt, had sinned presumptuously
against the Admonitions and Threathings of Gods Priests; and this peoples curse
(it seems) did follow them, whither they themselves durst not; for as the same
writer testifies, No other calamity in that war did grieve the Nation so much,
as this Polluting of their Temple.

5 Whatsoever Tullies or other Politic Romans conceit of this people in his
time was; many amongst the Romans, as well as in most other Nations, had
(without question) either observed the like Fatal mischances of such as vexed
them, or else had felt some good in observing their Laws, whose persons unknown
they hated. In one, or both which respects, these Jews stood upon better terms
with their Conquerors, then any other Captives did. And unless it had been a
received Opinion amongst other Romans, that this had been A People Favored of
the Divine Powers; why should (...) have objected their late Conquest by Pompey
to prove the contrary? And me think (...) it might have moved him and others,
so much devoted to the Roman Gods before, to have thought these Jews did serve
a better God then they knew any, after they had seen their own state utterly
ruined without all hope of recoverie, and their gods either unwilling, or
unable, (as (...), doubtfully complains) to redress those miseries and
calamities, of which they should at least have given them warning, when as
Hierusalems (...)* which Pompey had demolished, were (according to this peoples
Hope, from which no power on earth could deject them, being supported by the ^
Promise of their God) Reedified within twenty years, and they ^ with great
Privileges for their good Service performed to Caesar. For chiefly by their
means became He Lord of Egypt, the first and surest ground o^ b^ good success
in Africa; as Josephus out of the public Decrees and ^ of Roman Writers boldly
avoucheth, challenging the Heathen to ^ him or his Testimonies, if they could,
Though this they easily ^ have done, if he had cited them amiss, because the
Originals were then every where Extant.

6 The former testimonies alleged out of Tully (whose works we have) so well
agreeing with Josephus, who it seems had never read them, will not suffer any
ingenious man to suspect the truth of that which the same Josephus cites, out
of Strabo the Cappadocian, whose works are lost. Quatuor ^ rant genera in
Cyrenensium urbe, Civ^s, Agricolae, In quilini, and Quanti Judai, hoc jam in
omnes urbes subrep^, etc. J^s. Ant. l. 14. c. 12.
The Jews (says he) have crept into most Cities, nor can a man almost name any
place in the inhabited world, where they once get footing, but they hold
possession. Egypt, Cyrene, and many other nations have admitted their Rites,
and in liew of them, nurse huge multitude of Jews using their own Domestic
Law. Besides that a great part of Alexandria is assigned to their use, there be
Colonies of this Nation throughout Egypt which enjoy Magistrates of their own,
for determining all controversies of right and wrong in such sort and form as
is used in Absolute States. Seneca inter alias civilis Theologiae
superstitiones reprehendit Sacramenta Judaeorum* Christianos ta^^ jam tunc
Judaeis immicistimos in neu^^am partem commemorare ausus est, ne vel lau daret
contra suae patriae veterem consuerudine^, vel reprehenderet contra propriam
sorsitan voluntatem. De illis sane Judais, cum loqueretur, ait, cum interim
usque eo sceleratissimae gentis consuetudo convalvit, ut per omnes jam terras
recepta sit, victi victoribus leges dederunt --. Mirabatur haec dicens, and
quid divinitus ageretur, igno^, subjecit plane sententiam, qua significaret,
quid de illorum sacramentorum ration^ sentiret. Ait enim: Illi tamen causes
titus s^i noverunt, and major pars populi sacit, quod cur faciat, ignorant. Aug
l. 6. de Civit. c. 11.
Saint Augustine has the same observation out of Seneca's Books concerning
Superstition, which this Reverend Father had perused, though, with diverse
others of that famous Philosophers works, now lost.

7 What Strabo had observed of these Jews in Syllas, and Seneca in his time, is
intimated by Sequitur auri illa invidia Jud^ci. Hoc nimirum est illud, quod non
long a gradibus Aureliis haec causa dicitur, ob hoc crimen hic locus, abs te
Lali and illa turba quasi a est. Scis quanta sit manus, quanta concordia,
quantum valet in concionibus, etc. Cic. Orat. pro (...).
Tullie in fewer words. You know well (says he unto his adversary) what a
great faction it is: how closely they hand together, what sway they bear in
assemblies. But how great soever the number of this people was at Rome, they
durst not have been so bold in the Mistresse-city of the world, unless their
Patrons there had been many. And it seems by Tullies conclusion, in the
forementioned place, that the bare unkindnesse offered by Flaccus to this
Nation, was worse taken at Rome, then the wrongs and violence, which he was
accused to have done to sundry other people. Aurum in aerario est, furtum non
reprehenditur, a judicibus oration avertitur, vox in coronam turbamque
effunditur. Cic. Orat. pro Flacco.
The gold (says he) for which Flaccus was accused, is in the Treasury: you
charge him not with theft, but only seek to make him odious: your speech is
turned from the Judges and directed to the Company.

CAP. XX.
Tacitus Objections against the Jews resuted, by their palpable grosnesse, and
more competent Testimony of other Heathen writers.

1 Unto this their powerfulness in persuading other Nations to renounce their
own, and embrace their Laws and Religion, Hi ^itus quoquo modo mducti, ontiqui
tate d^f^ ^ tur. Cetera in (...) ra*^, pravitate valuere. N^m (...) ^sque ^pr^
^: ^igioui bus patriis, tributa and ^npes illuc con ge, ba^r. Y^it. Hist. lib.
5.
Tacitus ascribes the increase of these Jews estate; albeit he maliciously
attributes this attractive force unto the Impiety of their Laws, as if by
Sympathy they had wrought most upon wicked and depraved natures. Put wherein
did their Impiety consist? Profana illic omnia, quae apud nos sacra. Rurtum
concessa apud illos, quae nob (...). Idem ibid.
What we Romans esteem Sacred, they account Profane, what is polluted to us, is
lawful to them. This argues that either the Roman religion o^ Theirs, was
Superst tious and profane: and he, like a true Patriot and right Romanist*
Ioath to suspect that Religion wherein his Forefathers had prospered so well,
charges the contrary Orthodoxal with superstitious Impiety. Most true it was,
that the Jews of his time were a wicked people, but every way of the Loosing
^^and: their strength, which had been long in gathering, was suddenly broke by
Titus, and their wonted means of increase, by addition of Proselytes, quite cut
off. For after the Temples destruction, Nullus ad amissas that (...) op^s: From
the first day of our Saviors Ministerial Function, they did not win half so
many Gentiles to Judaism, as our Savior and his Disciples did Jews unto
Christianity. Tacitus then spoke not of such Jews as lived in his time, when
their strength and greatness was in the Wane; but of their Ancestors, during
the time of the Second Temple. Nor was it that, which was most wicked indeed in
this people, or their predecessors (as their particular opposition, or
contrariety unto divine truths) but rather what was only good in them, as
their Constancy in their Religion, and steadfast Profession of Abraham's Faith,
common to them and the Christians; which was the ground of this Politics
hateful Censure, for this reason a-like bitter against them and the Christians.
That Either should be so resolute in defense The grounds ^.
of their own Religion, was, in his opinion, a Pernicious Superstition, liable
to any punishment that could be imposed, as ^.
another Roman Writer of his time was not ashamed to avouch. If Wilfulness
simply deserve punishment, the Carnal minded make no scruple in what measure it
be inflicted, seeing the more grievous the Torture is, the greater it always
argues their Wilfulness or Obstinacy to be, that will undergo it rather then
obey their Superiors, so as the Crime seem always commensurable to the
Punishment, though it could be increased in infinitum. And Tacitus seems well
to approve of Antiochus's Savage Cruelty against the Jews, as a Medicine that
would in time have wrought a Reformation, if the Parthian had permitted this
cruel Surgeon to have applied his Patients with change of such corroding
plasters. So Immoderate is the ambitious man's desire, that to be Lord of others
Bodies does but whet his appetite, and stir up alonging to become Lord of their
Faith and Consciences also. And to refuse absolute Obedience in matters
Spiritual, as well as Temporal, unto such as are competent Judges of the one,
not of the other, in a Sin as hateful as Rebellion, the foulest Crime that can
be conceived or fashioned in the Politicians Brain.

2 Besides these general motives, which would minister enough of matter for
Superiors to condemn their Inferiors: it did in particular Exasperate Tacitus,
and other Politics of his temper, to see so many natural Romans renounce their
Name and Country, forsake Father and Mother, Friend and Alliance, for
maintenance of Jewish Religion. And albeit that Nation had sustained incredible
calamities by the Romans, yet it vexed him to remember, that they should be
able to have done the ^
Romans so much mischief always stirring when others were quiet; being, to his
seeming, a Base People in respect of many other subject to the Roman Empire.
Perhaps his hate to Christians was propagate from his inveterate malice against
these Jews, in whose region Christianity (as he confesses) did first spring.
But ^
(...) testimony will sufficiently quit the Christians from those Imputations,
which ^ vel culp^ sua vel e^^otis, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem
convenire, ^ ^ Sacramento ^on in s^^lus aliquod obstringere, sed ^e (...), ne
lat^, ^e ^ depositum appellari ab^^garent --. Quo magis necessarium credi^^ ex
^ esset ve^i, and per (...) qu^^ere. Sed nihil aliud inveni, quam super^
cognitione ad consulendum Te dec^c^r^i. Plin. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 1^ ^ nec
quidquam p^^us imb^^ntur, quam contemnere D^os, exuere patriam* ^.
Tacitus unjustly lays upon them. As for that impiety, wherewith he chiefly
charge the Jews religion, it implies an Evident Contradiction. Such as
conform themselves (says he* to their customs are likewise transformed in
mind. The first precept, wherewith they are seasoned, is to contemn the Gods,
to put off all natural affection to their Country. If the Jews did either
forsake father, or mother, or other kindred, It was for the love of their God,
Religion and Country. For, unless the greatness of their love to God drowned
the other, no people in the world did ever match them in love to their
Kinsfolks, Friends and Countrymen. But if they persuaded the Romans to esteem
the glory of Rome as vile, in respect of Jerusalem; and account Romish Rites
and Ceremonies, compared with theirs, as Sacrilegious and profane; they did
That but upon good and warrantable grounds, which any true Roman would have
done upon far worse; that is, they sought their Countries good, by winning the
good will of others to their Estate and Religion.

3 But what madness possessed Tacitus his mind, that he should think, or
rather write (for I do not think that he thought, or cared what he wrote, when
he avouched) that the wickedness of their Laws was a means of alluring wicked
or lewd companions to their observance? I would their greatest Enemies were
admitted Judges; whether such as indeed were, or such as any Civil Heathen
would so account, not such as it pleased Tacitus only, out of mere pride and
spleen, to call wicked persons, would not in all likelihood, be more ready to
subscribe unto the Rites of Venus or Bacchus, (whose service Tacitus so well
likes) or any other of the Romish Gods, then tie themselves unto Judaical
Ceremonies; which, once subscribed unto, were to be most strictly observed by
Aliens as well as Jews; nor could they be thoroughly acquainted with their Laws,
or admitted to other Mysteries, until they had communicated with them in that
Sacrament of Circumcision, always most loathsome and Grievous to Flesh and
Blood. What pleasures of the flesh, what dissoluteness or Luxury, or what,
that can be properly called Sin or Enormitie, did their Laws maintain or
nourish, or their Rites or Ceremonies any way insinuate? All that Tacitus
(comparing their rites with those of Bacchus) could in conclusion say against
them, was; That Liber festos laetosque ritus posuit; Judaeorum mos absurdus
sordidusque. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
Bacchus his rites were Merry and pleasant, Theirs, absurd and Base.

4 Unto these Political Surmises of Tacitus, altogether ignorant of foreign
Antiquities, I will oppose the judgment of Strabo a less Partial Strabo' s
Testimony of the Jews religion. Lib. 16. p. 761 Casaub. edit.
writer, and a professed Antiquarie, living about our Saviors time: from whom
amongst others we may gather, that the Famous and Conspicuous Hill of Sion
stood as a Problem to oppose the Nations; and from Admiration of her strange
and unobservable Fortunes and change, were so many Opinions blazed abroad of
those Jews Original and state. Of all that were extant in his time, capable of
any Credit, this following went best for current, and did sway the most, to
wit; That these Jews (as you heard before of his error in this particular)
were descended from the Egyptians: the cause of their departure out of Egypt,
was to seek a place, where they might worship God aright, persuaded hereunto by
Moses, whom he takes for an Egyptian Priest, but one that condemned the
Egyptians for painting Beasts, the Africans and Grecians for using Pictures of
men to represent God; deeming it a madness to imagine, that He that contained
all things, could be represented by any visible or sensible Creature. Chastity
and holiness were the dispositions of such as sought Him, or could hope to
know His Will: and for this purpose ordained Sacrifice, neither chargeable to
such as should use them, nor otherwise offensive by their undecencie, lewdness
or absurdity. (...).
With th^se persuasions (says he) Moses prevailed with the better sort, and
such as se^^red God, to forsake Egypt: and seated once about Jerusalem,
neighbor Countri^^ did associate themselves unto them, allured by the Equity
of their Laws, and the Purity of the Religion which they professed, whence he
erected a new Kingdom, and that no mean One. And his Successors for a time
continued in his Institutions, just and rightly Religious. But after they had
(as Tacitus likewise observes) joined the Priesthood to support their Kingdom,
they grew more ^et was St^a^^o somewhat offended with Circumcision and their
Sabbaths, as (...) ignorant of their causes, ^ Sabbaths indeed were then (...)
(...). Strabo lib. 16. p. 761. See Dio^s acqu^tal of these Jews ^ imputations.
D^ a reliquis hominibus obti^ent, cum al^^s in rebus, u^uque vitae quotidiano,
tum ^ colunt, unum autem quendam (...) studio venerantur. Nec ull^m si^^lach^^^
^ quam hab^, (...) suum illum Deum Ines^abilem and formae expertem, religioso
ejus cul^^ caetero, mo^ D^ lib. 37.
Superstitious, Tyrannical to their own, and noisome neighbors to other
Countries. (...) Yet was their Hold or Fort still had in Honor: not detested
as a nest of The or seat of Tyrants, but Reverenced as a Temple. Thus far
Strabo. Who although he were mistaken in sundry particulars of this Peoples
Antiquity, (as all beside themselves of necessity were, by reason This sacred
Volume was kept secret from all such as did not observe their Rites) yet from
Tradition he had learned as much, as could be known of them in general: That
Moses their first Lawgiver was a Prophet, and one that relied not upon
Poliere, but the Divine Oracles; that this people in Ancient times had been
much better, and had prospered accordingly.

5 With this Strabo the Geographer, that noble Historian Dion Cassius (...)
accords, but more fully with Strabo the Cappadocian, whose Works, new lost,
Josephus cited. This people (says Dion) differ from others, as in ma^^ other
points and daily practice of life, so especially in this, that they worship
(...) other Gods, but only One of their own, whom they hold to be Invisible
and (...)ble, and for this cause admit not any Image of Him: yet do they
worship (...) more devoutly and religiously then any other people do their
Gods. But who (...) God of theirs was, or how He came at first to be thus
Worshipped, how greatly he was feared of this people, were points he listed not
to meddle withal, many other had written thereof before him. It seems he gave
but Regio ipsa, (...)* (...)* (...) appel(...) ^ unde ^ (...) (...) (...) Qu^,
and ^, ^^que ^a^pe imminutum ^uerit, ita tamen auctum est, ut etiam condendi
leges licentiam (...) (...). ^ read, ut legum quoque pote^^atem vice^it. Dion.
Ibid.
little credence unto Tacitus discourse of their Original, for he ingeniously
professes: That he knew not whence they had this name of Jews, but others that
followed their Rites, although Aliens by Birth and ^rogeny, did Brook the same
Name or Title; even amongst the Romans themselves therewere of this Profession.
He adds; Although this People had been often crushed and diminished: yet did
they rise and increase again above the Control of all other Laws, only
subject to Their Own. Thus he spoke of the Jews living in Pompey's time, after
which they had been often crushed before Tacitus wrote, yet recovered strength
again.

CAP. XXI.
The means of these Jews thriving in Captivity. In what they exceeded other
people, or were exceeded by them.

1 THese Allegations, and many other, which out of Heathen Writ^ could bring,
sufficiently prove, that albeit these Jews rasted of as bitter calamities as
any other did: yet had they this strange Advantage of all; that whereas all
other were forsaken of their Friends in their adversity, and their Laws
usually changed by their Conquerours, oft-times abrogated or neglected by
themselves upon their ill success: these Jews still found most Friends, and
their Laws (never forsaken by them) most earnest Favorers, in the time of
their Captivity and distress. This was quite contrary to Nature Politic
Observation, or Custom of the world. Wherefore seeing Nature and Policy can
afford us none, we must seek resolution from their Laws. The reasons
subordinate to the Cause of Causes (Gods providence) were these. In the time of
their distress, They did more faithfully practice their Laws themselves, and
had better opportunity, or greater necessity of communicating them unto
others: they being of themselves always most potent to allure sober and
discreet minds to their observance, made known and not prejudiced by the
foolish or sinister practice of their Prosessours. So their great Lawgiver had
foretold, Deuteronomy. 4. verse 5, 6, 7, 8. Behold I have taught (...) Or (...) and
Laws, as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do even so in the land,
whither ye go to possess it. Keep them therefore a^o them; for That is your
Wisdom and Understanding in the sight of the people, which shall hear of all
these ordinances, and shall say; Only This People is Wise and of
Understanding, and a great Nation. For what Nation is so Great unto whom the
Gods come so near unto them, as the Lord our God is near unto us in all that we
come unto Him (...)? And what Nation is so great that has Ordinances and Laws
so righteous, as all this law which I set before you this (...)? That They had
not in later God was mo^^ ^avourable to these Jews then (...) any other People,
times so great prosperity, as others had, was no Argument that Their God was
not more near to Them, then the Gods of other Nations to their Worthippers; for
He was the God of gods, and Lord of lords, which did good to every Nation; yea,
He made the Romans so great a Nation, albeit they knew it not. That these Jews
were now in subjection, and the Romans Lords, was no Argument, that He was
better to the Romans then to Them, or that They were a less Nation, if we make
an equal comparison. For if God should often recover a man from dangerous
diseases, and propagate his life unto 200. years, in health and strength
competent for old Age; This were no argument to prove that He were not more
Favorable to him, then to men of younger years or middle age, whose strength
is greater for the present, but they unlikely to recover health often impaired,
or to renew life once lost in Human Estimation, or to account half so many
years. In like sort was This Peoples Often Recovery from so many Overthrows and
Captivities; their long continuance a distinct Nation from others: more In what
sense the Jews might truly be thought a Mighty Nation.
Extraordinary then the Romans present Strength or Greatness. And albeit many
other Empires and States were larger, then the Kingdom of Israel was at any
time, yet no other people could be said so great a Nation as this. For others
continued the same rather by Identitie of Soil, or like Form of Government,
then by any Real or Material Unity or Identitie of people: their increase was
merely Political, and their greatness rose by way of Addition or Accumulation;
that is, by admitting such mixture of others, that from the first Erection of
the Kingdom, ere it came to its full greatness, the number of Aliens might
overspread and hide the natural inhabitants, or Progenyes of such as laid the
Fundamental Laws thereof, which were seldom so continuate by direct
Succession, as they might be rightly distinguished from others. And as Theseus
his ship was accounted one and the same, because it retained the same Form,
though not so much of the same Timber, whereof it was first built, as did go to
the making of Half the Keel: so the greatest States amongst the Heathens,
retained perhaps some few Fundamental Laws, or relics of Ancient Families
descending from their First Founders, in which respect alone they might be
taken for one Kingdom, but not so properly termed one People or Nation, to whom
greatness could be truly Attributed, seeing a great many of several people
were to share in this Title. But These Jews (besides the perpetual Unity of
their Particular, as well as Fundamental Laws, less varied either by change,
addition, or abrogation, then the Laws of any other Nation) continued still One
and the same People by a strict Union of Succession, their grouth was natural,
after the manner of Vital Augmentation. For albeit they admitted some mixture
of strangers, they could notwithstanding always distinguish the Progeny of
Foreign Stocks from their natural Branches, which they could still derive from
their several Stemmes, and these all from one and the same Root: so that after
so many Changes, and Alterations of their State from better to worse, and back
again; after so many glorious Victories, as Scriptures mention gotten by them
over others; and so many captivityes of their persons and desolations of their
countries, as others had wrought, They remained still one and the same people,
by such a kind of Unity, as a great Oak is said One and the Same Tree, from
its sirsi Spring to its last Fall, whether naked and berest of leaves by blasts
of Autumn or Winters frost, or stoyled of Boughs by the Loppers Ax, or
Beautified with pleasant Leaf, or ^ar-spreading Branches. If the glory of
other Kingdoms were more Splendent for a Flash, presently to be extinguished,
(as being greater then their corruptible nature was capable of:) this no way
impeacheth Gods promise for making Abraham's Seed a Mighty Nation; seeing it was
not at any time so great a People as at all times it might have been, had they
observed the means appointed for their grouth. How incomparable the Height of
Sions Roof, above other Nations, might have been, we may (...) from the
Capacity of her Foundations. The known Altitude and continuance of her Walls,
though never finished to her Founders desire, yet Such, ^.
as whosoever shall look upon with an unpartial eye, must acknowledge ordained for
Extraordinary Strength and Creatnesse. For take we this Kingdom with its
defects; what wonder can Revolutions of time afford like to this late
mentioned? That by such an Unity of Natural propagation from One Root, (almost
perished before it sprouted) and distinct lineal succession never interrupted,
Abraham's Seed should continue One and the Same Nation for Two Thousand years:
sometimes the mightiest amongst Coeval Kingdoms, a scourge and terr^ur to all
neighbor Countries; and after many grievous wounds and deadly, (in their
estimation that gave them, received from others) still preserved alive, to see
the successive rise and fall of Three great and potent Monarchies, yet able in
decrepit days, to hold play with the Fourth, the might that ever was on earth,
even whilst it was in it is Best Age, full Strength and perfect Health, free
from any intestine Broils, secure of all external Assaults. Much better were
these Jews able to encounter the Roman Empire, in Tacitus his life time, then
It, (within three hundred years after his death) to defend the Imperial Seat
against Barbarous, silly, and foolish Nations, unhatched when the Roman /
Eagles wings were spread over the most famous Kingdoms of the earth. Suppose
the Roman Empire had received, at the same time, but half so terrible a blow in
Italy, as these Jews had done in Jury and Jerusalem under Vespasian, and his
Son: The Roman Empire had never the like push before it fell, as it had by the
Jews in Adrians time.
how easily had the commotions of their Relics, in Trajans and Adrians times,
shaken the Roman yoke from off the Nations neck? Or if the other ten Tribes
return had been but half so entire and complete, as Judahs and Benjamins were;
the Roman Eagles had never come to prey upon their Carkases in the territories
of Judea. But it was their Strong God, which before had scattered Israel
amongst the Nations, and at the time appointed shut these Jews up in
Jerusalem, as in a Prison.

2 Again other Kingdoms gained little by their greatness, save only
Magnificent Names or swelling Titles. No other people enjoyed so great
proseritie, so good cheap, as This sometimes did, and all times might have
done. No other had so good Assurance or Security of that Prosperity or Peace
they enjoyed* as This People had, unless themselves had made a wilful
Forfeiture: nor was the Public Health or Welfare of any other State or Kingdom
so fully communicated to every particular and inferior member. For usually the
Titularie or abstract Brightness of that Glory, wherewith other Great States
outwardly seemed most to shine, was maintained with the perpetual Harms and
internal secret Mischiefs of many private persons, as Great Flames are not
nourished without great store of Fuel: whereas the prosperity of David's
Throne, as in other points so in this, was established like the Moon: that
whilst They turned unto their God, their State was capable of greatest
Splendour, without consumption of their natural parts or Substance. And even
whilst other States did for their Sins prevail against Theirs, yet such Peers
as had been principal Instruments of their woe, and took Occasion to disgrace
their Laws or Religion, in their Captivity and distress, had for the most
part, (as was observed before) Fearful and disasterous Ends: and might more
justly have taken up that complaint, after their spoils of Jewry, which
Diomedes did after the destruction of Troy,

Quicunque Iliacos ferro violavimus Agros,
-- nefanda per Orbem
Supplicia scelerum poenas expendimus Omnes.
What did Troys Fall, or Phrygian Spoils, the Graecians State advance?
Whom Fearful Plagues Haunt through the world: Such was the Victors chance.
Many of them (no doubt) before their dying day, had observed as he did, that
they had fought against some God, whilst they wronged this people: and would
have been as unwilling to bear Arms against them again, as he was against the
Relics of the Trojans:

Nec mihi cum Teucris ullum post eruta Bellum
Pergama: nec veterum memini laetorve malorum.
With Troy my Spleen to Trojans ceas't, her flames quench th'heat of War
I little Joy of what is past; Rub not a Bleeding Scar.
3 For these and many like Consequents, this people in the Issue and up-shot of
their greatest calamities, had both reason to rejoice, and the Heathens just
cause to say: The Lord had done great things for them, albeit he often suffered
Psalm. 126. 2.
them to be Conquered. For even this Sickliness of their State was a means of
its long life, Their Scourges and Phlebotomies a Sign of Gods tender Care over
their Health, until they grew proud of his Favor, and waxed obdurate by his
often Fatherly corrections, as one of their own writers well observes. The Lord
does not long wait for us, as for other Nations whom He punishes when 2 Ma^^.
6. 14.
they are come to the Fullness of their Sins. But thus He deals with us, that
our sins should not be heaped up to the Full, so that afterward He should
punish us, and therefore He never withdraws His mercy from us, and though He
punish with adversity, yet does He never forsake his people.

4 Finally, their Decay and Increase was such as could not be measured by the
Rules of Policy. Hence was it that Tacitus was not tacitus, but a Tatler,
transported from himself, his wonted sagacity and ingenuitie, as being quite
out of his natural Element, while he meddled with their affairs. That
Contrariety, which he observes betwixt Theirs and the Romans Religion, was as
great betwixt their Policies. What was good in the One, was naught in the
Other: that which Rome did think might preserve her in health, was apprehended,
by the wisest amongst this People, as ready Poison for their State. Those Plots
which would have crushed any other People once brought under, did often work
Their Advancement, and their Enemies Fall. Whence both their Rising and
Falling, and Consequently, the Success of such as opposed themselves against
Them, were, in other Nations apprehension, sometime in their own, merely Fatal,
altogether Incorrigible by worldly Policy, especially in more Ancient times.
Hence did the Wise Men of Caldea, upon the first notice of the Winds Turning
for them, read Hantans Destiny, but too late: If Mordecai be of the Seed of
the Jews, before whom thou have begun to Fall, thou (...) 6. 13.
shall not prevail against Him, but shall surely Fall before Him. Achior the
Ammonites Speech to Holofirnes, whether truly uttered by him, or Fained by the
Penman of that Story, was framed (no doubt) according to the known Experience
of thosetimes, and contains such Advise, as a Faithful Councellor, well
acquainted with their Estate, upon like Occasion should have given unto his
Lord, not so well acquainted with it. This he was bound unto by the rules of
Poetry, which the Author of that Book (unless perhaps his Memory Unto what
time (...) Histories to be referred, See Sul^. Seve(...) Judith (...). 17, etc.
faild him in the Circumstance of Time, an Escape incident to Fictions, for
their Assinitie with Lies) very well observes, if his work be rather to be
censured for a Poem then an History; his Advice was This: And whiles They
sinned not before their God, They prospered, because the God that hated
iniquity was with Them. But when They departed from the way which he appointed
Them, They were destroyed in many Battails after a Wonderful Sort, and were led
Captive into a Land which was not theirs: and the Temple of their God was cast
to the ground, and their Cities were taken by the Enemies. But now They are
turned to their God, and are come up from the Scattering wherein They were
scattered, and have possessed Jerusalem, where their Temple is, and dwell in
the Mountains which were Desolate. Now therefore my Lord and Governor, if
there be any Fault in this People, so that They have sinned against their God,
let us consider that this shall be their Ruin, and let us go up, that we may
overcome Them. But of there be none Iniquity in this People, let my Lord Pass
By, lest their Lord defend Them, and their God be for Them, and we become a
Reproach before all the World. The first Root of all such Effects or known
Experiments, as in Ancient time, yielded matter to their Neighbors of this or
like observation, was Gods First Promise unto Abraham: And I will make of thee
a great Nation, and will bless Thee, and make Thy Name Great, and Thou shall be
a Blessing, I will also bless them that bless Thee, and curse them that curse
Thee, and in Thee shall all the Families Genesis 12. 2.
of the earth be Blessed. Which promise, as it does concern the Temporal State
of the Jews, was to be limited according to the Tenor of Achiors Speech, and
did then only take Effect, when they followed Abraham's Footsteps, and lived
in Faithful Obedience to Gods Laws, or having transgressed them, did turn again
with their whole Heart to seek the God of their Fathers. The causes of the
Heathes, Insulting over the Jews in their distress.
From Experience of their good Success in such cases, partly (I think) were
their Neighbor Countries so Savage and Merciless toward them in their
greatest Distress, always Crying, upon like occasion, as the Edomites did in
the Day of Jerusalem, Down with it! Down with it! Even to the Ground. Because
they could not hope for any Revenge, but by waiting the Turning of their Fates,
and taking them in the Ebbing of their Fortunes: for when they begun to rise,
they knew there was no means to stay them. The Judaea terra quali nunqua^ ante
motu concussa, magnam pertotam eam regionem jacturam fecit pecudum: quin and
hominu^ oppressa sunt ruinis aedium circiter december millia. M ilitaris tame^
multitudo nihil detrime^ti accepit, ut pote sub dio agita^s. Haec clades etia^
in maius aucta rumoribus, quos nuncii, gentilium odiorum non ignari, dabant
auribus Arabum, immane quantum extulit hostium animos, quasi subversis
Judaeorum urbibus and extinctis hominibus, nulli jam superesse^t. Legatos
itaque gentis, qui rebus afflictis pacem petituri venerant co^prehensos
necaveru^t, moxque magna alacritate properaverunt ad hostilem exercitum.
Joseph. Antiq. l. 15. c. 7.
Arabians Immane and Savage Practices upon their Ambassadors, seeking
Compassion to their Lamentable Estate torn and ruinate by the Mighty Hand of
their God, in a Fearful and Prodigious Earthquake, do argue a deep rooted
Memory of their Ancestors strange Overthrowes (mentioned in Scripture) by this
peoples Forefathers, and these later Arabians, long lying in wait to do these
Jews a Mischief, if they had not been restrained by the Mighty Hand of God; who
now, as they suppose, being turned their Enemy, they apprehend this
Opportunity of working a Full Revenge. Nor are their hard hearts mollified
with their Public Miseries, nor their inveterate malice so quenched with their
Ambassadors Blood, shed in the seventh year of Herod's reign, but it burst out
again in Vespasians time. For these Arabians, though never (as Am. Marcellinus
Lib 14. notes) any true Friends, or Well-willers to the Roman State, were the
forwardest men to assist Titus in Hierusalems last and Fatal Siege. For the
same reasons were the Nations round about them as earnestly bent to hinder the
Re-edifying of Jerusalem, after the Return from Captivity, as these were now
to pull it down, as fearing lest this Peoples good Fortunes should rise again
with their City Walls. But as Nehemiah notes, After the enemies had heard that
the Wall was finished, they were afraid, and their Courage failed them, for
they knew that this Work was wrought by God. Nehem. 6. 16.

5 These and like Observations make me think, it was not Skill in Astrology, or
such Arts as the Magi used, (whereunto this of all people was least addicted)
which first hatched that opinion of the Refer: Diog. Lae^us in Prooemio. p. 6.
Jews descent from the Magi: rather the later Heathen, ignorant of their
Original, and not able to derive that strange success which did hant them, or
their demeanor answerable thereto, from Ordinary or natural Causes, referred
all to Magic Spells, or some Art of Divination. So unwilling is Flesh and Blood
to acknowledge such as They Hate, for the Beloved of the Lord; and so powerful
is the Prince of darkness, either to blind the hearts of the worldly wise, or
to avert their eyes from beholding an Unpleasant Truth, that if at any time the
Finger of God appear in the Deliverance or good Success of his people, the
Infidel or Natural man ascribes such effects as Magicians (unless upon
presumption of Travelers Privilege amongst the Ignorant) durst not arrogate
to themselves, unto Magical or other like Arts; because the corruption of their
Nature is more capable of such Practices, then of true Belief in God, and they
more prone in distress to fly unto Sorceries or Magic Charms, then with true
Faith and Firm Constancy to expect The Deliverance of the Lord by such means as
the Faithful Israelites did. Dion Xiphil. l. 71. 2 Kings 3.
So when the Christian Legion had, by their Prayers, relieved Antoninus's Army,
ready to swound for Thirst, with plenty of water, in as Miraculous Sort as
Elishd did sometime the Host of Israel; the Heathens, acknowledging the Effect
for Supernatural, ascribed it to Arnuphis, the Egyptian Sorcerer, his
acquaintance with Mercury, and other supposed Gods of the Air. In like sort the
modern Jew, acknowledging many Wonders wrought See Munster on the Second
Chapter of Math. Hebr.
by our Savior; takes it for a sufficient Argument. That all of them were
wrought by Magic Skill only because the Evangelist says, He had been in
Egypt; so is he b^^nded with wilful malice, that he cannot see how, by this
Objection, he lays all the wonders which Moses wrought, open to the like
Exception of Atheists, Insidels, and Heathen. For both Moses, in whom he
Trusts, and Abraham in whom he Glories, and all the Patriarchs, from whom the
Jews descended, had been in Egypt in ripe Age, where our Savior came not but
in his Infancy. As for his Miracles, the Testimony of Moses, and other
Prophets, whose divine Authority is acknowledged by the Jew, shall evince
them, wrought by The Einger of God. In the mean time the estate of the Jews
since Their death, sufficiently known to all the world, and foretold by Them,
shall manifest against the Atheist, that They all wrote by The Spirit of God.

CAP. XXII.
That all the Heathens Objections against, or doubts concerning the Jews
Estate, are prevented or resolved by Jewish Writers.

1 OUt of that which has been hitherto Premised, this Conclusion stands firm,
supported both by foreign Writers observation, and these Jews own confession,
That They were a People Remarkable, for their unusual Prosperity and Calamity.
I am fully persaded it would have given full Satisfaction to any ^ngenuous
Roman or later Heathen, That This was a People Beloved of God, had they known
as much as we do: that all they could Object in contempt of the Jews, or their
Religion, had been (conceived before by the Aslyrian and Babylonian; but
Falsified in the Event) fully answered by Judaical Writers, and plainly
foretold by their Prophets; lest such Events as occasioned others to contemn
them, might have proved Temptations to the Godly amongst this people, as if
they had been Forsaken of their God. The days had been, wherein the
Babylonians had taken themselves for men, and their Idols for gods, as good as
Rome had any; and these Jews for as Base a People as the world yielded: They
had gathered captivity as the sand, mocked the Kings, and Hab. 1. 1^.
made a s^orn of the Princes, deriding every strong Hold: and hence (as the
Prophet foresaw) they were as ready as the Romans to take courage in
transgressing and doing wickedly* imputing this their power unto their God. But
the Prophet is not herewith dismayed, nor tempted to think his Gods power was
less then theirs; albeit, to show himself a true Patriot of Israel, he
complains of their Intolerable Presumption, which in due time he well foresees
should be abated. Art not thou of old, my Lord my God, mine Holy One? We shall
not die: O Lord, thou have ordained them for Judgment, and O God thou have
established them for correction. Thou art of pure eyes, and can not behold
wickedness: wherefore do thou look upon The Transgressors, and hold thy
tongue when the wicked devoureth the man that is more righteous then He? and
make men as the ^ishes of the sea, and as the creeping things, that have no
Ruler over them? They take up all with the Angle, they catch it in their Net,
and gather it in their Yarn, whereof they rejoice and are glad. Therefore they
sacrifice unto their Net, and burn incense unto their Yarn, because by them
their portion is Fat, and their meat plenteous. Shall they therefore stretch
out their Net, and not spare continually to slay the Nations? No: he knew their
time was limited, and other Nations, as Jeremiah says, When his Time was come,
were to serve themselves of Him; though God at that time had exposed the
Princes of Judah to his violence, for their Violent Oppression of their
Brethren, as Habakkuk expressly notes in the beginning of his forementioned
Prophecy. These Jews, before the Event did prove the contrary, were as
incredulous they should be brought into Captivity by the Babylonian, or such
foolish Idolaters, as the Romans were of their great prosperity under David or
Solomon. And for to beat down this proud Humor in them, the Prophet Ezekiel
foretells, That for their Extreme Cruelty the Lord would punish them by the
Most wicked of the Heathen: Make a chain: for the Land is full of the judgment
Ezech. 7. 23.
of Blood, and the City is full of Cruelty. Wherefore I will bring the Most
Wicked of the Heathen. and they shall possess their houses: I will also make
the Pomp of the Mighty to cease, and their Holy Places shall be desiled. When
Descruction comes, they shall seek peace, and shall not have it: Calamity
shall come upon Calamity, and Rumor shall be upon Rumor: then shall they seek a
Vision of the Prophet, but the Law shall perish from the Priest, and Counsel
from the Ancient. And lest any should marvail, why God would so use his Chosen
People; he gives the reason in the words immediately following, Because he was
a God of Justice. The King shall mourn, and the Princes shall be clothed with
desolation, and the hands of the people in the land shall be troubled: I will
do unto them according to their ways, and according to their judgments will I
judge them, and they shall know, That I am The Lord.

2 More particularly both Tullies Objection, concerning their Overthrow and
Conquest, is directly answered; Strabo and Seneca's doubt, concerning their
thriving in Captivity, fully resolved; and Tacitus false Imputations of their
increase, sufficiently cleared by the Psalmist: They were stained with their
own works, and went a whoring with their own inventions: therefore was the
Psalm. 106. 39.
wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and he abhorred his own
inheritance, and he gave them into the hand of the Heathen: and they that hated
them were Lords over them. Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were
humbled under their hand. Many a time did he deliver them, but they provoked
him by their counsels, therefore they were brought down by their iniquities.
Had Tully read thus much, he might have been fully satisfied, that it was not
love or hate of his Immortal gods, which made the Romans Conquerors, the Jews
Captives: But it was their Love to Sin, only Hateful to their God, which
brought them in subjection unto the Romans; and made Caesar, whom Tully and
other Romans hated, Lord over them, as they had been over the Jews. And if
Strabo, Seneca, Tacitus, or others, that either envied or marvelled at these
Jews prosperity, had read what follows in the same Psalm, they had rested
better satisfied with the reason that the Psalmist there gives, then with such
as Blundering Politicians guess at: For although they had been brought down by
their iniquity, yet their God, who had given them into their Enemies Hand, saw
when Psalm. 106. 44, 45, 46.
they were in Affliction, and heard their Cry. And he remembered his Covenant
toward them, and repented according to the multitude of his Mercies, and gave
them Favor in the sight of all them that led them away Captives. The Psalmist
had better understanding of Gods dealing with these People, then Tully and
Strabo had; and in Confidence of Gods Mercies, which they had often tasted, he
concludes with this Prayer: Save us, O Lord, our God, and gather us (...) among
the (...) the we may prais^ by Holy Name, and glory in thy (...) Though this
Godly P^almist saw this People in greater distress then they ^.
were in Tull^ time, yet he attributes not their Captivity and oppre^ (...) any
want of Good Will in their God toward them, but unto the^r (...) toward him:
for if they had been thankful unto Him, the (...) (...) light on them should
have been spent upon their Enemies. But as an (...) Psal^ (...) in the per^^n
of his God* ^sal. 81. 11. (...) people ^ (...) m^ (...) and Israel would have
none of Me. So (...) them ^ of th^^r (...), and they (...) walked in their own
Coun^ my People would (...) ^kened unto Me, and Israel had walked in my ^ I
would (...) h^ bled their Enemies, and turned my hand against ^ A^: The (...)
of the Lord should have been Subject to the (...) their (...) s^^uld have
^n^ured for ever. I would h^ve sed Them (says the Lord with the wheat, and
with the honey out of the rock would I h^ (...) (...).

3 This one place to omit many other, abundantly proves the (...) ^
Assert on, That ^f this People had continued in well doine, all the Nation
continually (...) (...) (...) at Th^^r ^xtraordinary Prosperity. (...) (...)
Christ^an may as well doubt, as the ^eathen wonder, Why Israel (...) in my
(...)* as the Author of the hundred and sixth Psalm co^ of, was not d^oved at
once, as other great and mighty Nations had (...). (...) the more abundant
Favors their Forefathers had sound, and (...) greate^ Gods ^essings (laid up
for their Po^) were, the (...) (...) was their Ingratitude in rebelling* their
Rebellion it self so much (...) wilfully ^nous; and alwa^es the more wilful or
^ainous any Sin (...) more grievous certa^n, and more speedy punishment it
deserves. How (...) that Mos^ (...) and Holy One. which so often protests ^e
res^eth no (...) Person* (...) this most Ungrateful, Stubborn, and R^^^llious
People, (...) g^^ then any other?

4 The full and necessary Consequence of these Collections is Thus (...) and no
more: The ^inal ^xtirp^tion of these ^ews had been accomplashed (...) (...)
(...) before it came to p^, had the Lord been only Just, or res^ their
deserts, (...) hom he so often preserved, when justly he might have ^ the. But
if we look farther into the wa^es of Gods Providence. (...) (...) (...) and
reason of destroying others, and preserving them, will appear one (...) ^. For
that sudden Execution of his Justice upon others, which did (...) much advance
his Glory, equally practiced upon them had as greatly (...) (...) an oug^^ the
Nations. This cause of their long preservation the Lord himself as^gns Deuteronomy.
32. 26. I have said I would s^atter them abr^d. (...) (...) (...) their
Remembrance to cease from amongst men; save that I (...) (...) (...) of the
^nemy, les^ their Adversaries should wax proud, and (...) (...) (...) ^ur (...)
hand* and not The Lord, has done all this. Again, a (...) ^ most Just, so was
he most kind and Merciful toward all* (...) excepted) even toward the
Gentiles, in these Jews; for by their (...) deliverance and restoration the
other might have learned, That their (...) ^ of ^od* and Lord of lo^ds, most
worthy to be Honored of all the world, as he himself adds in the forecited
place: For the Lord shall (...) ^
(...) people and ^^pent toward, his servants, when he sees that their (...) ^
and none ^ Hold, nor le^t abroad: when men shall say* (...) her^ are (...)
(...), their mighty God in wh^m they trusted which and eat the sat of th^^r
(...) (...), and did drink the wine of their drink offering? Let them ri^^ up
and (...) you; let him be your refuge: Behold now, for I. I am He, and there is
no gods with Me. Thus, since these Jews began first to be a Nation, as well the
Wane as the Increase of their*estate; or (to use our Apostles words) as well
their Diminution as Abundance might have yielded the docil and well disposed,
greater riches, then the Spoils of their Cities and Country did the proud and
Mighty amongst the Gentiles. And albeit they often times sinned more grievously
then others did yet were there always left some Godly amongst this People,
which in their distress knew themselves and could teach others the right way
to Repentance; of which the Heathen, one and other, were altogether Ignorant.
And this was an especial Cause, though subordinate to the former, of their long
preservation. For when they were not so extreme bad. as to continue in former
sins, but unfainedly called upon the Lord in their distress, He heard their
prayers; and being once received to His, they found Favor at their Enemies
hands. So Solomon had observed, When the ways of a man please the Lord, he
will make also his Enemies to be at peace with him. The truth whereof we have
seen Prove. 16. 7.
continually experienced in these Jews, before our Saviors time, though much
degenerate from their ^ncestors But their posterity, as much degenerate from
them as they from the other, go as far beyond the middle sort in punishment, as
they came short of their First Forefathers in all Graces and Favors bestowed
upon them by their God. Though these (such I mean as lived since our Saviors
time) cry unto the Lord, yet does he not hear them, although their distresses
have been more, and more grievous many hundred years together, then their
Forefathers* What is the reason? Because they have turned their ears
continually from hearing the Law, therefore their prayers are continually
turned into Sin, Prove. 28. 9. Psalm. 109. 7.

5 Thus though the Alteration of the Jewish State be such, as all the World
might Wonder, and stand amazed at; such as would make the wisest Heathen
Gidd^e, that should seek to comp^sse the true Causes thereof by Politic
Search; yet unto us Christians, that have the Oracles of our God, their Estate
cannot seem strange; seeing nothing, good or b^d, that has befallen this
people, from their first Beginning to this present day but is Foretold in the
Sacred Story, which has continually proved it self as Infallible a
Prognostication for what is to come, as it is an Authentic Register of all
things past.

6 The particular Kalendars, wherein their Good or Dismal Days are
distinguished, according to the diversity of their ways, we may find Levit.
26. After Moses had proposed Extraordinary Blessings if they would walk in the
Laws which he had given them, he threatened them with Plagues and Calamities in
their own Land; with Bodily sickness, Incursion of Enemies, Oppressions and
spoil of goods, strange overthrows in Battle, and fearfulness of Heart, v. 16.
And if these would not reclaim them, then he threatens to punish them Seven
Times more according to their Sins: as with Barrenness of Soil, Prodigious
Famine, and scarcity of Fruit, v. 18. And yet if they hold on still to walk
stubbornly against Him, He threatens to multiply the former ^lagues Seven
Times; by sending Wild Beasts among them, which should spoil them, and destroy
their cattle, and make them few in number, and your Highways shall be
desolate, v. 21. The like multiplying of his Plagues for the Increase of their
Stubbornness, he reiterates Twice again. Yet, if by those you will not be
Reformed, etc. He increases all the Former Plagues Seven Times again, v. 23.
and 28. The First and Second degrees of the Plagues threatened, were in part
fulfilled in the days of Gedeon, Samson, Samuel, and Saul. The third likewise
(by Wild Beasts) we see fulfilled in the days of Jehoram King of Israel, 2
King. 17. 25, 26. The fourth and fifth likewise we see in part fulfilled in
their Captivity, in the days of Manasseh, Jehoiachim, and Zede^iah; and in the
time Ptolomey the First, under Antiochus Fpiphanes. Both their own and other
Stories, give us full Experiments of this Prophecy. As their stubbornness did
Increase, so Gods plagues here threatened did wax more Grievous: these later
Calamities being, at the least, Seven Times greater (both for Extent and
Durance) then the former Persecutions, which they suffered by the Philistines,
Moabites, Aramites, and Ammonite^ ^ut The last Plague, which contains all the
rest more then Seven Times was not accomplished till after our Saviors Death:
after which time, all the rest (in part fulfilled before) are more then Seven
Times multiplied upon them. In their former Overthrows or Captivities, they
suffered the violence of War, and oftentimes felt the Extremity of Hostile
laws: but after these Storms were past, so they would submit themselves unto
their Conquerors, they usually found (as was showed before) more then ordinary
Favor at their hands. But since our Saviors Death, the Memory of their former
^lagu^^ has been but an Invitation of the like* or worse; their continual bad
usage prescribing the law fullness of their abuse. In the 28. of Deuteronomy,
the Extraordinary Blessings, and Plagues which were to overtake this People,
either in their Life or Death, are more exactly calculated. And albeit their I
lessings might have been more, and more Admirable, then the Curses that have
befallen them: yet Moses *it seems) foreseeing, or fearing what would Be
rather then hoping the Best that might Be, is almost Four times as long in
Calculating their Plagues, as their Blessings. So have the Miseries of these
later Jews been Four times as long, as the prosperity of their worthy
Ancestors; if we would take an exact measure of the One, from the Sacred
Histories before the Babylonish Captivity, of he Later from Experience and
Relation of Jewish or Heathen writers. And yet no Plague, either known by
Experience, or related by any Writers, but is evidently foretold by Moses. His
particular Predictions shall be inserted, as the Events shall give the Occasion
throughout th^^ Discourse. To begin with that most Horrible Plague, Deuteronomy. 28.
53, etc. An^ thou shall eat the fruit of thy Body, even the Flesh of thy Sons
an^ thy Daughters, which the Lord thy God has given thee, during the si^ge and
straitness, wherein thy enemy shall enclose thee. So that the Man that is
tender and exceeding dainty among you, shall be grieved at his Brother, and at
his Wife that ^^eth in his Bosom, and at the r^mnart of his Children, which he
has yet lef^. For fear of giving unto any of them of these sh of his Children,
whom he shall eat, because he has nothing left him in that si^ge and
straightness, wherein the enemy shall besiege thee in all thy Cities. The
tender and ^ainty Woman among you, which never could venture to set the soal of
her foot on the ground (for her softness and tenderness) shall be grieved at
her Husband that l^eth in her Bosom, and at her Son, and at her Daughter, and
at her Afterbirth, that shall come out from between her feet; and at her
Chil^ren which she shall bear. For when all things lack she shall cat them
secretly, during the siege and straightness, wherein th^^ enemy shall ^esiege
thee in thy Cities. This It was ^ man of (...), w^o in the ^ Son, 2 King. ^
manner, ^.
Prophecy we see fulfilled, to an Hairs-Breadth, in Vespasians time.

CAP. XXIII.
The Fulfilling of Moses and others Prophecies, touching the Desolation of
Jewry, and Destruction of Jerusalem: and the Signs of the Time, witnessing Gods
Wonderful Hand therein.

1 SEeing that part of Tacitus is lost, whence we might have known more,
concerning their Calamity, then we can find now in Heathen Writers, we must
take the Conclusions, answerable to Moses predictions, from Josephus a Jew by
Birth, no way partial for Christians. And his Conclusions (to omit Moses's
Authority or other Inducements) can not seem Improbable, from such Premises,
as the Roman writers have confirmed; though little intending such Inferences,
as we now make from them. Do those calamities of the Jews, related by Josephus
and Eusebius, seem strange? They justly may, if we consider This People as
Natural or Ordinary men, not as Patterns of GODS Extraordinary Judgments.
Strange might their Judgments seem, and incredible to the Romans or
Worldly-wise, unless other circumstances of that Time, witnessed by the Romans
themselves, were as rare. But if, By the Romans Opinion, every Unusual Effect
in Nature did Portend some such strange Event in Human Affairs: why should not
the Wisest of them in that Age, expect some Extraordinary or Miraculous
Matters of Vespasians time? yet, (excepting what he did to those stubborn Jews)
his other Acts were but Ordinary, and required no Pompous or Magnificent
Prologues: whereas many Signs, either foreshewing his Exaltation to the Empire,
or confirming his Right unto it, or Authority in Managing it, were such as no
Heathen, I think, has ever heard of before, but most Consonant unto Gods
wonted Signs in Israel whilst their Kings did prosper. Seeing the Wisdom of
the Wise, and Understanding of the Prudent amongst this People, had been long
hid, as the Lord had threatened by his Prophet Esaias Chapt. 29. and they
themselves had complained, We see not our tokens, we have not one Prophet more:
Whence was it that Josephus the Jew should become a prophet for Vespasians
good, who had already brought much, likely to bring more Harm upon his Country
and Him, now Captived, and Imprisoned by Him? So Et unus ex Nobilibus Captivis
Josephus, cum co^jiceretur in vincula, constantissime asseve^avi^ fore, ut ab
eodem brevi solveretur, ve^ ja^n imperatore. Sueton. in Vesp. It is not
pr^obable that either Suetonius, Taci^us, or Dion should take this testimony
from Josephus (though he relate it, Book 3. Chapt. 14. of the Jewish Wars) but
from the Romans that were ear-witnesses of it. It is less probable again that
Josephus should learn this from any prophecies concerning Christ, for he knew
Vespasian was no Jew: rather God made him as a mouth to these other dumb signs
which Roman writers relate, by his appointment foreshewing Vespasians
Exaltation; as Dion notes: For speeking of other signs he says: Sed haec
quidem omnia egebant interpretatione. At Josephus, natione Judaus ante ab eo
cap^us constrict usque vinculis ridens ait; Nunc quidem me vincies, post annum
autem solves, quum fueris Imperator factus. Igitur Vespasianus ut alii quidam,
ad principatum natus erat. Dion. hist. Romans lib. 66.
S^etonius and Tacitus (no Factious Friends for Jews or Christians) tell us,
Josephus did Solace himself at his Commitment, with This; That Vespasian the
Emperor should shortly release him. Though Vespasian at that time was far
enough from such Hopes, in the Judgment of the Roman State, which had
appointed him General in the Jewish wars, because Suetonius in Vespasiano.
His mean Birth, and obscure Family, did minister least Suspicion of affecting
the Splendor and Dignity of the Roman Empire, if He should prove Conqueror.
Did the rest of his unruly Countrymen, conceit any such matter of Vespasian,
as Josephus did? Then had they not continued stubborn as they did. But although
Israel knew him not, and his people had no understanding, yet the dumb
Pra^dente eo quondam, Canis Extratius triclinio manum humanam intulit. Coenante
rursus, Bos arator decusso jugo, tric^ i^upit, ac fugatis ministris, quasi
defessus, procidit ad ipsos accumbens pedes cervicemque submisit. Apud Jud^
Carmeli Dei Oraculum consulentem, ita confir^avere Sorts, ut quicquid
cogitaret animo volveretque quantumlibet magnum, id e^^e proventurum
pollicerentur. Suet. in Vesp. Dion Cassius Reports that of the Ox and Dog,
and other perticulars besides. Lib. 66. initio.
Ox knew him to be his Owner, and appointed Lord of the Farth, and in Sign of
his Submission to him, having ^^st off his yoke, r^^ suriously into the Room
where he sat at supper; where affrighting his Attendants from him, he straight
prostrates himself before his Feet (as if he had been weary) offering his neck
to His Clemen^y. Oracles had ceased in Jewry (at least from speaking any good
unto the Jew^ yet the Oracles of Carmel assure Vespasian of good Success in
all that he should set ^is hand unto.

2 As these, and many other Presignifications were more then Natural, so the
means of his Advancement (if we respect only the purpose of men) were merely
Casual: nor is it possible for the Atheist to imagine their Concurren^e
contrived by Policy.

3 But herein we may clearly see Gods Covenant of exalting this People, and
humbling their foes, quite Inverted. All the Plagues threatened to such as bare
ill will to Sion, light on her Friends and Inhabitants, All the ^les^ing^
promised to such as prayed for Jerusalems Peace, are heaped upon them that work
her Ruin. More particularly do they verisie that Prophe^^e of M^, ^^^t. 28.
4^. The stranger that is amongst you shall climb up on high, and t^^^ shall
come down beneath allow. For these Children of the Kingdom, taking Violent but
false hold upon Gods truest Promises, do, by their unseasonable desire of
exalting themselves above the Nations, hoise Him up to highest Dignity, that
was ordained to pluck them down from their seat, and bring them below all other
people. The manner of it was thus.

^ Opinion ^ Prae^o, Legatum insuper Sy^ae Consularem suppetias ser^ntem rapta
Aquil^ ^ugaveru^^. A^ ^, ^um ex^ auxiliari, and non in^^renuo duce, ^ui tamen
tuto tanta res committ^, (...) ^us est, ut iudustriae expertae, ne^ metuendus
ullo modo ob Humilitatem Generis ac N^ (...) (...) (...).
4 There was a constant Opinion through the East, that Jewry about this time
should bring forth the Monarch of the World. In Confidence of which Prophecy,
the Jews (as the Roman Writers observe) did Rebel. Vesp^: (otherwise likely to
have lived in Danger, and died in Obscurity and disgrace whereunto Nero had
designed him) appointed, for reasons before alleged, to Manage these Wars, gets
Renown for his good Service, among the Roman^* Good w^ of the Eastern nations,
and upon Nero's death and Civil Broiles thence ensuing, partly by promise of
assistance from the Parthian, partly by other unexpected Occurrents, had the
Empire thrust upon him, otherwise N^^ tam^n qu^dquam (...) ^entav^t, prom^is
atque etiam instantibus suis, quam solicitatus quo^ and ig^ and a^ ^ort^^to
^avo^e. Suet. ibid.
backward of himself to entertain Hopes, suggested to him from Heaven by many
wonderful Signs and tokens.

Yet after all this, being made Emperor on a sudden, before he could bethink
himself what belonged to so High a Place, he wanted ((...) as the Historian ^.
notes) Authority and Majesty to countenance his proceedings: and these again
are conf^^med unto him, at his first entrance into the Empire, by means more
Miraculous then the former. Since Rome began was it not heard, that, any Roman
had opened the eyes of the Blind; unless this man had been from God* he ^ould
have done nothing. Why then do the Heathen rage, and the people ^in thing,
against God, and his Anointed, The Christ, as if He had not Healed him which
was born Blind, with Spittle? when as Vespasian, ^perour, d^d ^ure one
desperately blind, by spitting upon his eyes* or whence came that virtue into
this new Emperors feet, that he should ^eal a lame and withered thigh, by
treading upon it? Both these effects were well known unto the most judicious
Roman Writers of those times, so constantly avouched by them, as can leave no
place for su^pition in Ages following Ae^^imari a medicis jubet Vespasianus an
talis ^acitas ac debilitas open humana superabiles ^^^ent. M^^d^ci vary d^ Huic
non ex^^am vim l^is and ^^dit^ram si p^r obs^antia: illi elapsos in (...)
a^^^^s, si salu^ris vis ad^ibeatur, pos^e ^grari* ^d ^ortasse cordi D^is, and
divino ministerio princip^ ^: denique p^ r^medi^ gloriam p^n^s Casar^m; ^i
Iudibrium pe^es miseros fore. Igitur Vespas^^nus ^uncta fort^n^ suae (...)
^^^us, n^c quidqu^m ^ incredibile, ^to ip^e v^, e^cta quae a^ dine, jussa
ex^quitur. Statim conversa ad usum manus, ac c^coreluxit dies. U^que qui
intersuere nunc qu^ que memorant, pos^qu^m nullum mendacio pretium. ^us histor.
lib. 4. Suetonius has the same story with the same circumstances.
.

5 What shall we Christians say to these things? Only this; In both these
Cures there was the Finger of God* pointing out Vespasian to the world, as
Seeing they had rejected the true Son and Heir of David, the Lord raised up
Vespasian (as it were an adopted Son and lively pattern of old David both in
Meannesse of Birth, Manner of Exaltation and Humility) to rule them with an
iron rod, and seed them with the Sword. Suetonius Character of his pa^^en^e and
disposition, has a perfect relish of David^ Spirit. Mediocritatem pristinam
neque d^lavit unquam, ac frequenter etiam prae se tulit. Quin and conantes
quosdam originem Flavii generis ad Conditores Reatinos Comit^^que Herculis
cujus monumentum exstat via Salaria refer, irrisit ultro. Ad^oque nihil
ornamento^um extrinsecus cupide appetivit, ut triumphi die satiga^us tarditate
and taedio pompae non reticuerit: me^ito se plecti, qui triump^ quasi aut
debitum majoribus suis, aut speratum unquam sibi, tam inepte senex
concu*pisset. Sueton, in Vespasian*
Christ's Right Hand appointed for some Extraordinary and Peculiar Service, even
to in^ the Plagues foretold by him, upon these Jews, which had reviled,
traduced, and crucified the Lord of Glory for the like, and infinite other far
greater Miracles wrought amongst them. These strange Calamities, had they
fallen in Nero's, or other like Emperors time, might have been attributed to
their Cruel disposition: but that Vespasian for his natural Neque caede
cujusquam unquam laetatus, justis suppliciis ^llac^ymavit etiam and ingemuit.
Idem. Ibid.
Inclination another Moses, scarce provocable to revenge Practice of Treason
against his Person in private men, should work that strange desolation upon a
whole Land, has this signification, that he was Gods Instrument only in this
Business; what he did, he did impelled by Him, not of his own Motion or
Inclination. And because he had Convenit inter omnes tam certum e^m de sua
suorumque genitura semper fuisse: ut post a^liduas in se conjurationes ausus
sit a^are Senatui, aut Filios sibi successuros, aut Neminem. Dicitur etiam
vidisse quondam p^r quietem, stateram in media part ve^^ibuli Palatinae domus
positam examine aquo: cum in alte^a pa^te Claudius and Nero ^^arent, in altera
ipse ac filii. Nec res fefellit: quando totidem annis, parique temporis spatio
utrique imperave^unt. Sueton. in Vespas.
diligently executed that which was right in Gods eyes, and had done unto these
Jews, according to all things that were in Gods Heart, he had (by what
Revelation God best knows) Jehu's Blessing Sealed unto him, That his Son
should sit upon his Throne: so confident was he in this persuasion, as after
the discovery of many, to scorn all Conspiracies, though daily intended against
^; avouching still, either his Sons, or None, must succeed him in the Empire,
as both of them did. Though the later (much degenerate from so worthy a Father,
most dislike unto his noble brother) was most unworthy, and incapable of so
High a Place, but only from his Fathers deserts, which GOD had ordained,
should be rewarded with this Honor. Had either of his Sons rendered according
to the reward bestowed upon them, more Scepters had sprung from the Flavian
Stock: But as it Grew ^pace, so did it quickly Fade; Titus, the fairest Branch
to all men's seeming, being plucked off, to his great Hearts grief, in the
Blossom, for what Secret sin, GOD knows best, This One was grievous enough,
to have deserved a more grievous death, that apprehending his Fates approach,
he durst so Considently look Heaven in the Face, and Expostulate his untimely
death as unjust, seeing he never had offended the Sacred Powers thereof but
Only Once. The Signs of those Times were Extraordinary, could the Romans have
rightly observed them: But these Great Conquerours were taken with their
Captives ^rrour in not discerning, or mis-applying them. As the Spring Sun,
which naturally reviveth all other living Creatures, often times prepares such
Human bodies as are fullest of Life and Blood, but most neglective of the
opportunity of taking Physic, or using diet convenient for that season, to hot
and desperate diseases, never perceived in their Summers growth, until they be
ripe of death in the Autumn: so albeit the Sun of Righteousness, whose coming
into the world, was to give life unto it, did first arise in Jewry; yet by her
childrens Confidence in their wonted Temper, so whole and sound unto their
seeming, that of all other people, they only needed no Physician, the very
Beams of saving Health did secretly dispose their evil disposed hearts to
violent death, which burst out in the later end or Autumn of that Age, wherein
he appeared. For that Generation with whom our Savior Christ Jesus conversed
on earth, was not fully past, until this People began to swell with insolent
and proud hopes of Sovereignty over others, and by their untimely provocation
of the Romans, bring sudden Destruction upon themselves; as stout and full
Bodies, by violent and unseasonable Exercises, are soonest brought down from
the height of their strength, unto the grave. The Romans again, seeing these
Jews defeated, and themselves possessed of their hopes, (Vespasian being called
to the Empire during these wars, which Titus his son did gloriously finish, to
the utter ruin of that Nation) think sure their Gods had been more potent then
the GOD of the Jews; and apply the Prophecy, meant of Christ, unto Vespasian,
as if He had been That Monarch of Suetonius in Vespas. and Tacitus, Hist. l. 5.
Vid. annot. ex Tacito infra paragr. 8. and ex Sucton. supra 4.
the World, which, according to the common received Opinion throughout the
East, was at this time to arise in Jewry. So does the God of this World still
blind the eyes of the worldly-wise with Fair Shows or earthly shadows of
Heavenly Things, that they cannot, or care not to look into the Body or
Substance of Divine Mysteries, for whose representation only those are given;
otherwise incapable of any cause either in Nature, Reason, or Policy. Vespasian
the Emperor (indeed) was the Second Type or shadow of the Messiah, That great
Monarch and Prince of Peace, whose endless Kingdom shall put down all Wars for
ever. For seeing by the Fall of these Jews, as Saint Paul says, Salvation is
come unto the Gentiles, it pleased the Wisdom of our GOD, to have their
Destruction Solemnized with the self-same Signs, that His birth had been, which
brought forth Life unto the World.

For immediately after their Fatal Overthrow by Titus; Janus had his Temple
shut, and Peace a Temple erected by Vespasian. Thus Divine Suggestions Effect
no more in most men's thoughts, then diurnal Intention of mind does in hard
Students broken sleeps; which usually set the Soul a working, seldom finding
any distinct Representation of what she seeks, though contenting her self
oft-times for that Season with some pleasant Phantasm, as much different from
the true nature of that she hunts after, as the clouds, which Ixion embraced,
were from Juno. Vespasians Secret Instinct in this devotion did aim no doubt
(as it was directed by all Signs of the Time) at the true Prince of Peace, but
was choked and stifled in the Issue or Passage, and his intent blinded in the
Apprehension, by the palpable and gross conceits of Romish Idolatry, wherein
he had been nuzled; as men's Inbred desire of true Happiness is usually taken
up and blind-folded by such pleasant sensible Objects, as they most accustom
themselves unto. And yet, God knows, whether this virtuous Emperors last Hopes
were inwardly rooted in Pride and Presumption of heart; or rightly conceived
there, were only brought forth amiss. As, if a man should first apprehend the
state of Blessedness or Regeneration in a dream, the Representation of it
would be gross, though the Apprehension sound. Quite contrary to his Sons
disposition, when he himself apprehends death coming upon him, (which the
Physicians and Astronomers could not persuade him to beware of) he solaced
himself with this saying; Now shall I be a God: his inward Hopes of a Celestial
state after this Dion. ^iph. l. (...).
life might (for ought that any man knows) be true and sound, and the
representation only tainted with the Romans gross Conceit.

6 But whatever became of Him in that other World; His Entrance into this, His
Continuance herein, and Departure hence, were in all the worlds sight of
unusual and Extraordinary Observation. The disposition of the Times, by the
most irreligious amongst the Romans, were referred to Fates or divine Powers,
who had not graced the Birth, Life, and Death, or long flourishing Reign of
Augustus with half so many Tokens of their Presence on Earth, or Providence
over Humane Affairs. What Effect, or issue, can the Roman assign answerable
unto them? Rome could not invite the nations to come and see, whether any
prosperity were like hers, for hers had been far greater and of longer
continuance, then now under Vespasian; who was suddenly called away by a Dion.
ex Xiphil. lib. 66
Comet from Heaven, and Augustus his Sepulcher opening of its own accord to
welcome him to his grave. Whereat then did all these Signs point? They should
have been as a New Star to lead the wise men of the West unto Jerusalem now
crying out of the dust unto the careless Roman; Have ye no regard all ye that
pass by? Behold and see if there be any sorrow Lamen. 1. 12.
like unto my sorrow which is done unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted
me in the day of his fierce wrath. It was not Titus and Vespasian that had
afflicted her, they were but His Deputies, that was Lord of Sion, who had
Decreed what they Effected. His de causis ute^que Imperatoris Nomen obtinuit,
neuter tamen Judaicus cognominatus est, licer alia multa, ut par erat tam magna
parta victoria, atque imprimis arcus Triumphales eis decreti sunt. Dion. li. 66.
For this cause did neither the Father nor the Son take the name of Judaicus,
albeit the Difficulty of the War, begun by the Father, and the Famousnesse of
the Victory achieved by the Son (according to the custom of the Romans
observed by them in their Triumphs and other Solemnities) did solicit them
hereunto. For what victory gotten by any Roman was like unto this either for
the multitude of the Slain, or the Captives? Nothing in this kind could seem
strange unto the Politician, if it had proceeded from Tacitus pen. But Satan,
it seems, by Gods permission, has called in that part of Tacitus as a Book too
dangerous for his Scholars to read; lest, giving Credence unto it, they might
Believe him less, and Christians more, in any other points; and yet praised be
the Name of Our Gracious God, who envies no man the truth, and has left us
abundant Records of this Story, all answerable to his Sacred Word, and
Prophecies of old concerning Jerusalem. From that part of Tacitus, which is
left, we may gather, how consonant his Conclusions would have been unto that
Faithful, and most Ingenious Historian Josephus, with whom he Jumps in these
particulars; That this people were of Bodies So are they not now.
Healthful and able, their City Fons perennis aquae, cavati sub terra montes,
and piscinae servandis imbribus: praeviderant conditores ex diversitate morum,
crebra bella; inde cuncta, quamvis adversus longu^ obsidium: and a Pompeio
expugnatis, (...) aeque usus pleraque monstravere. Atque per avaritiam
Claudianorum temporum, empto jure muniendi, struxere mu(...) in pace tonquam ad
bellum: magna colluvie, and caeterarum in bium clade aucti. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5
The writers of Sacred (...) corrplain of defect of water in Hiernsalem. since
that time. Vid. Strab. lib. 16. Est locus saxosus aquis ipse quidem abundates.
This barrenness was only about Jerusalem; for Tacitus acknowledges the
fertility of Judaea.
exceeding strong, every way well provided against long siege. Which Assertion
would have ministered Suspicion to such as measure all Stories by rules of
Policy, unless some Roman writer had avouched it, seeing Pompey had razed the
City-wals, and Sosius had taken it by force in Augustus time; since continuing
in Subjection unto the Romans until the last and Fatal Rebellion. But Tacitus
tells us, that these Jews made their benefit of Claudius his covetousness, and
purchased license to fortisie the City in time of peace against war: during
which it grew more populous then before, by the relics of other ruinated
Cities resorting unto it. And albeit he differ from Josephus in the number of
the besieged; yet he acknowledges Six Hundred Thousand of all sorts; the Women
as resolute as the Men; Armor and munition enough for as many as could; and
yet more in this People that durst use and manage them, then could be expected
in such a number. Their Seditious, and Factious, their stubborn and desperate
minds against God and man, and their own souls, neglective of fearful Signs
from Heaven, and other prodigious Tokens foretelling their Desolation, are
Pathetically described by the same Writer. The preparations likewise on Titus
his part we may gather from him, to be as great as any Roman ever used. His
army, at the first approach to the City, thought scorn to expect the help of
Famine to make the Besieged yield; and yet after one or two Assaults made to
little purpose, enforced to desist, until all the Engines of Battery, either
of Ancient or Modern Invention, were ready. And all these circumstances, we
have fully set down in this fragment of Tacitus which is left.

7 Were that Register of Hierusalems Tragical Funerals (to use his words) now
extant as entire, as he intended it, what other Conclusion from the former
Premises could we expect, then such Woe and Miseries as Moses and Jeremy had
foretold, and others have related to us? Josephus (as if Jeremiahs spirit had
directed his pen) says, their Misery did far surpass all Plagues inflicted
upon any Nation, either by God or Man. The multitude of Jew^ dead in the Wars,
was equal to the number of living men in Israel under King David, when Jacobs
posterity flourished most, besides Fifty Thousand taken Captives. The Josephus
says, that, the High Priest (requested by (...), in Nero's time) Nubred the
people in Jerusalem, at Easter, and (reckoning but Ten to a Lamb) sound,
2700000 persons purified and Sound. Well then, might the number of Capi^es be
(...) and destr^^ed in the S^^ge (...) as besaies.
number (albeit he makes it eleven hundred Thousand) cannot seem strange, if
we consider the Confluence of this people from all Nations almost under Heaven
unto Jerusalem at their Passover. Dion tells us, that besides the natural
inhabitants of Jewry, strangers, not only of Jewish Progeny, but such as
observed their Rites and Customs, did flock to the Cities defense, both from
those parts of the Roman Empire, through which they were scattered, and from
the Countries beyond Euphrates not Subject to the Romans: Consonant herein, to
Josephus, Book (...). chapter 1^. of the Jewish Wars.
where he tells us that the greatest part of the slain, were strangers, but
most of Jewish Progeny. The whole Nation (to use his words) was shut up by
Fates, as in a Prison; or to speak more significantly; Foiled by the Romans in
the Field: they were driven into the City as into a Slaughterhouse. And here
the Psalmists curse begins to seize upon the Nation, that which should have
been for their Good, proves the occasion of their Fall: the Effect of Gods
blessing upon Abraham proves a Plague to his Seed: the huge number, wherewith
God had multiplied them, which had late made them swell with hopes of Victory
in the Open field, brings grievous Famine suddenly upon them once enclosed in
the City: and Famine no sooner got within the Walls, but lets in her
Fellowmessengers of Gods Wrath; first breeding the Pestilence by the Carkases
of the famished, then disposing the Bodies of the living to receive this and
such other loathsome infectious diseases, as hunger and the huge Multitude of
the besieged in such a streit place would quickly breed; and yet they so
desperately set to increase these Miseries, as even in their greatest penury to
receive Fugitives from Titus Camp. For, as Dion storieth, diverse of his
Soldiers sled to the besieged, being partly wearied of the difficult Siege,
partly animated thereto, by a Rumor bruted throughout the Roman Army, that
this City could not be taken.

8 Thus, All Occasions conspire to work them woe whom God will plague. The
general persuasion of the East, that Jewry, about this time, should bring forth
the Monarch of the world, ministers matter for their False-Prophets to work
upon: and from their trust in their Prophets, it was, that neither the present
Adversity which they felt, nor Prodigious Signs from heaven could dissuade or
terrify the Seditious from their enterprise unhappily undertaken. God (no
doubt) had so disposed, that the Roman Soldiers should despair of Victory, to
give Countenance to these false Prophets, and make these Cast-a-wayes, who
still delighted most in Lies, more confident in the ways of death. Though the
Signs, recorded by Tacitus concurring with Josephus in relation of those
horrible signs, adds: Pauci in metum trahebant: pluribus persuasio inerat,
antiquis Sacerdotum literis contimeri, eo ipso tempore fore, ut valesceret
Oriens, profectique Judaea rerum potirentur, quae ambages Vespasianum ac Titum
praedixerant. Sed vulgus more humanae cupidinis, Sibi tantam fatoru^
magnitudine^ interpretati, ne adversis quide^ ad vera mutabantur. Tacit. Hist.
lib. 5. Unto all the former mischiefs these did accrue: Praelia, dolus,
incendia inter ipsos, and magna vis srumenti ambusta. Tacit. Hist. lib. 5.
Tacitus (and Josephus in his 7th Book 12. Chapt. of the Jewish Wars) might
seem Fearful, yet their Interpretation was Ambiguous: they might as well menace
Their Enemies Harm, as Their Destruction; howsoever to regard them much might
argue Heathenish Superstition; and In-discreet avoidance of Superstition, makes
Hypocritical Professors of true Religion preposterously stubborn in Imitation
of true Confidence. They could pretend the Prophets admonition: Learn not the
ways of the Heathen, and be not afraid of the signs of Heaven, though the
Heathen be afraid of such. For the customs of the people are vain, Jer. 10. 2.
and hence assume his Resolution to themselves, Paveant Illi, ne autem paveas
Tu; Let the Idolatrous Heathen tremble and quake, but why should Israel be
afraid of these Apparitions of their God? Or if a man would have measured all
by Politic Observations, it was more likely the Romans should have for saken
the Siege, then the besieged have fallen into their hands. But God was against
Them, and They could not be for Themselves. For, as Cumque vicina quaedam
aedificia succendissent, velut hac quoque via Romanos, etiamsi maxim circulo
illo potirentur, ab ulteriori progressu rejecturi: simul and ipsum destruxere
murum, and inviti munitionem, qua templum includebatur, exusserunt. Ita Romany
aditus ad Templum patefactus suit. Dion. Lib. 66.
Dion notes, (which I think Josephus omitteth) they themselves, by making way
for their more commodious defense, did (against their will) demolish the chief
Muniment of the Temple; at which breach the Romans entered, but net without some
Stay, Amated only with Reverence of The Place. Nor did the Success answer
their Resolution in the Assault (albeit they were far more in number then the
defendants) until Titus commanded part of the Temple to be set on fire: But
then, as the same Author witnesses, Some offered their bodies for sheaths unto
the Romans swords; Some killed their Fellows, requited instantly with like
kindness from them again; Some leapt into the fire; All accounted it their
Happiness to perish with the Temple. Dion. l. 66.

9 The Lord had often professed his dislike unto their Solemn Feasts, and his
loathing of their Sacrifices; both fully manifested in this their last
Calamity. Such as the Stench of their Dead was now to their polluted senses,
Such had the Abomination of their sweetest Incense long been to His Holiness,
now to be purged with the Priests own Blood, sacrificed in the flames and ruins
of the Temple: the City, as often before, was now taken upon the Sabbath day.
Other particular Miseries, described by Josephus and Eusebius, I leave for this
time to the Readers private Meditations: desirous only in these Generalities,
to justify theirs or other Ecclesiastical Writers reports, against all
Suspicions cast upon them by Atheists or Infidels, from the Testimony of such
as Infidelity it self cannot suspect for partial. Both sorts afford us Evident
Documents of the divine Truth of Scripture; and might afford us more then we
are aware off, were we better acquainted with the Ancient manner of
interpreting Scriptures amongst the Jews, in our Saviors and his Apostles
time: of which hereafter If now upon Occasions of these relations concerning
Ierusalems last Day, and the Signs of the Times ensuing, I interpret One or Two
places otherwise, then such as are most followed in our times do, the Christian
Reader, I hope, will grant me Pardon, upon promise of such Satisfaction as
shall befit one Ingenuous Christian to expect of another, to be made; when I
shall come to explicate the diverse kinds of Prophecies amongst Gods People,
with the right manner of their Interpretations.

CAP. XXIV.
The Fulfilling of our Saviors Prophecy, Mat. 24. with others, concerning the
Times ensuing Jerusalems, Destruction.

1 REading Josephus, I cannot but acknowledge Hieremiahs Lamentation, as well
for a Prophecy of these late times under Vespasian, and Titus, as an History or
Elegy of the miseries that had befallen Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. The Lord,
I know, had then done that which he purposed: but now more properly has
fulfilled his word that he had determined of old time; he has Lament. 2. 17,
etc.
thrown down and not spared, he has caused thine enemies to rejoice over thee,
and set up the Horn of thine Adversaries. Arise, cry in the night, in the
beginning of the watches: pour out thine heart like water before the face of
the Lord, lift up thine hand toward him for the life of thy young children,
that famish for hunger in all the corners of the streets. These words perhaps
were meant, in diverse measures, of both Calamities; but the Complaint
following, of the later only under Titus: Behold, O Lord, and consider to whom
thou have done thus. Shall the women eat their fruit, and children of a span
long: shall the Priest and the Prophet be slain in the Sanctuary of the Lord?
the young and the old lie on the ground. My Virgins, and my Young Men are
fallen by the sword: thou have slain them in the Day of Thy Wrath: thou have
killed and not spared. Thou have called as in a Solemn Day my Terrors round
about; so that in the day of the Lords wrath none escaped or remained. Those
that I have nourished and brought up has mine Enemy consumed.

2 Many particulars, here set down by Jeremy, are not so much as once intimated
by the Sacred Story, which describes the Siege by Nebuchadnezzar. But no
calamity either intimated by any Historical Relations of those times, or
prefigured in Ieremies complaint, but in this later Siege by Titus, is most
exactly fulfilled: as if the Lord had but sown the seeds of destruction and
desolation by Nebuchadnezzar; which now being come to their full growth and
ripeness, this People must reap according to the full measure of their Iniquity.
They are as dry Stubble, and the Romans as a consuming Fire. Nebuchadnezzars
Host perhaps slew some, but had no occasion to make a General Massacre in the
Temple, destitute of Defendants ere it was taken, the King and his greatest
Co^manders being first fled into the Wilderness; nor was it destroyed until the
heat of war was past, and most of the People lead into Captivity. But whilst
in this later destruction by Titus, it fell by the furious Heat and Brunt of
War, the number of such, as were either willing or forced to end their days
with it, was of all sorts exceeding Great: and which was most Miserable, many
who had taken Joseph de Bell. Jud. l. 7. c. 10, 11.
their Farewell of Life, and had bid Death Welcome, revived again to renew their
more then deadly Sorrows, and to reiterate their bitter Complaints, which This
Lamentable Accident could only teach them to Act aright, and utter with such
Tragical and Hideous Accent, as was befitting a Calamity so Strange and Fearful
as never had been known before. Even such as Famine had caused to faint, having
their Vocal Judgments clung together, and their Eyes more then half closed up
with death, upon sight, or noise of the Temples crackling in its last and Fatal
Fire, rowsed up their spirits and resumed their wonted strength, to proclaim
unto all Neighbour-Regions in shril and lowdest Outcries; That there was Never
Any Sorrow like unto this Sorrow wherewith the Lord had afflicted them in the
Day of his Fierce Wrath, and yet they blow the fire which it had kindled,
ventilating and enlarging the devouring flame (whose extinction the abundance
of their Blood did otherwise seem to threaten) by violent Breathing out their
last Breath into it. The ghastly Confusion of this Fearful Spectacle and hideous
noise are so lively expressed by Josephus, and others, that they may well serve
the Christian Reader, as a map of Hellish misery. I only prosecute the
fulfilling of Jeremies Prophecy; in particulars related by Joseph. lib. 7. c.
8. De Bello Judaic.
Josephus: as of The Woman's Fating Her Child, a Thing So the Circumstances of
his relation plainly show. It was worse then That, 2 King. 6.
never heard of in that or any Nation before: of the Priests Slaughter both in
the Temple, and after the destruction of it. For Titus, otherwise inclined to
Mercy, seeing it consumed by Fire, which he sought by all means to save,
commanded such of the Priests, as had escaped the flame, in a By-room
adjoining, to be Executed, telling them, It was fit they should perish with the
Temple, for whose sake, might it have stood, he willingly would have saved
their lives. Again, the Massacre of the promiscuous multitude of women and
children, unfit for War, are particularly described with all the circumstances
by Josephus, Book 7. Chapt. 11. of the Jewish Wars. Of six thousand persuaded
by a False Prophet to repair unto the Temple, there to expect Signs from God of
their deliverance, not one Man, Woman, or Child escaped.

3 Thus Moses fore-shews the grievous Plagues, which hung over this Nations
head, but then a-far Off: Jeremy after points out the Very Place where they
shall fall; our Savior Christ only knew the distinct Period of Time, wherein
Both the former Prophecies should be accomplished. I will Mat. 24. Luke 21.
not trouble the Reader with Rehearsal of particular Calamities foretold by
Him; their observation is already made unto his hand by Eusebius, and will
apply themselves, being compared with Josephus; so perhaps will not some places
of Scripture following, though as much concerning the same times. For the
better understanding of which we must call to mind, what was observed before;
That Jerusalem was the Lords own Seat, and the Jews a People set apart by Him,
and distinguished of purpose from others, to Exemplify his Mercy and Justice
in their Prosperity and Distress. Consequent hereunto his pleasure was, that
in the desolation of Jewry, and destruction of the Temple, other Nations should
be put in mind of their mortality, and not think in their hearts that these
were Greater Sinners then any other Nation; but rather that he who plagued them
was Lord of the whole Earth, as well as Jewry; that the like and more Fearful
Judgments did hang over their heads, unless they would learn by the known
Calamities of this People, to avoid them. So says the Lord to All the Earth
without Exception: For Lo I begin to Jer. 25. 29.
plague the City where my name is called upon, and should you go free? ye shall
not go quit: for I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth,
says the Lord of Hosts. Therefore Prophecy thou against them, all these words,
and say unto them; The Lord shall roar from above, and thrust out his voice
from His Holy Habitation: he shall roar upon his habitation, and cry aloud, as
they that press the grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth. The
sound shall come to the ends of the earth: for the Lord has a controversy
with the Nations, and will enter into judgment with All Flesh, and he will
give them, that are wicked, to the sword. And thus says the Lord God of Hosts;
Behold a plague shall go forth from Nation to Nation, and a great whirlwind
shall be raised from the coasts of the earth, and the slain of the Lord shall
be at that day, from one end of the earth even unto the other end of the earth;
they shall not be mourned, neither gathered nor buried, but shall be as the
dung upon the ground. Howl ye sheep-herds and cry, and wallow your selves in
ashes, ye principal of the flock: for your days of slaughter are accomplished,
and of your dispersion, and ye shall fall like Precious Vessels. And the flight
shall fail from the sheep-herds, and the escaping from the Principal of the
flock. Thus when the City and Temple was first destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar, all
the Nations round about them were enforced to taste of the same Cup. Babylon
her self that begun the Carouse, which she meant not to Pledge; hoping to make
her self Sport to see others drunk with the Blood of their slain, was compelled
at length to drink so deep of the dregs, till (as the Prophet speaks) all her
strong-men did fall, and her Princes slept their Everlasting Sleep. This
Prophecy notwithstanding concerns the Second Destruction of Jerusalem, as
literally as the former: and sundry plagues here mentioned, for ought that can
be gathered from any History Sacred or Profane, were not in any degree verified
of the Nations, in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, or his Son. But scarce any
Nation was free from such calamities as are here described in the time of Titus
and his Successors; as shall be declared anon. Rome her self, which had
rejoiced at Judahs misery, and triumphed in Isreal's woe, trodden Jerusalem under
her feet, and given her dust and ashes for a covering to her Nakedness, was
shortly after Pinched at the Heart with like Sorrows; how soever her outward
Robes of Majesty did cover her secret Wounds from their eyes that lived after,
or beheld her estate only a-far off, not acquainted with her inward Gripes or
smothered Outcries. All is not Sound within, that is Fair without, nor they
furthest from Danger who feel least pain for the Present: such as since have
lived securest, neither regardful of Hierusalems misery, nor the calamities of
other Nations that ensued them, altogether unacquainted with any like sorrows
of their own times, shall have their deepest share in the Horrors of that
Dreadful Day, whereof these were but Shadows and Maps, to represent unto us in
some proportion the Inconceiveable Affrightments that shall then appear. But as
no man knows of that Day and Hour, so neither did the Prophets themselves
distinctly conceive the manner of it: They did see it only in these
Adumbrations, which in process of time grew still more lively. The second
destruction of Jerusalem, and the Signs following it, exceeds the former in
the distinct prefiguration of the later day, as much as a Map of a particular
Country taken at large, does the representation of the same in a general Map of
the whole Earth, of like quantity. And as Maps have a distinct quantity of
their own, easy to be known by sense, but which no man measures so much for it
self, as for to know the Capacity of the Country which it represents: so have
most Prophecy* of the old Testament a distinct, Peculiar, Natural, or Literal
sense Verified in the time of the Law, which is not so much to be respected as
the Mysteries of the Gospel, or matters of the world to come prefigured by
these Events past: the most secret of which Mysteries, after some one or few
Circumstances be revealed, may be distinctly known. For the proportion of one
Circumstance or Event with another, is all one in the later, and in the former;
so that by the distinct knowledge of the former, we may discern the later,
after it be Paralleled in any one part: as by the measure of a Map, we find out
the quantity of the ground represented. For this reason has our Savior Christ
pictured us out The Last Day by the calamities of Jerusalem only. For, (under
correction) I should think, that no one part of his Prophecy, Mat. 24. from the
15. to the 36. Verse, but is literally meant, and has been verified of
Hierusalems Fatal Day, and the times ensuing. For so our Savior concludes;
Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till All these things be
done. All what? All he had spoken of before. What, did the Sign of the Son of
m^n appear? did he send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, to gather
the Elect from the four winds? No. Christ is not yet come: the Elect are not
thus gathered. Yet upon Hierusalems destruction they had the Watchword given:
the nations had then a glimpse of his Last Coming in Glory: Then it Sounded the
first time unto judgment; and the Sun and Moon were seen in Tragical Attire,
that the whole world might take notice of such a Woeful Tragedy toward, as we
expect: wherein the whole Frame of Nature, even the earth it self, this Stage
of Mortality, shall be Actors; and all Mankind were Then set to Learn their
Parts. Our Saviors coming with power and great glory mentioned in the ninth
Verse, must be understood in such a sense, as he is said to have Come in his
Kingdom, or with Power, at his Transfiguration. And that first Verse of the
ninth of Mark will best interpret the place above cited, Mat. 24. 34. Sundry
learned Interpreters, I know, expound both places otherwise. Some interpret
these words, Of the Gospels promulgation, which is called the Power of God: but
it is usual in Prophecies, to attribute that unto the Type or Pledge which is
proper to the Substance. And CHRIST'S Transfiguration was both a lively Type
and a pledge of his future appearance in Power and great Glory.
But, to omit the former for this present, the continuation of our Saviors
speech does enforce this my Interpretation of Saint Matthew. For having spoken
of the calamities that were shortly to fall out in Judah and Jerusalem, (as
all agree) in the former verses, he adds, Verss. 29. And immediately after
the tribulations of those days, shall the Sun be darkened, and the Moon shall
not give her light, and the Stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers of
heaven shall be shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of man in
heaven; and then shall all the kindreds of the earth mourn; and they shall see
the Son of man come in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory: and he
shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall gather
together his Elect from the four Winds, and from the one end of heaven to the
other. Now learn A Parable of the Fig Tree; when her bough is yet tender, and
it brings forth leaves, ye know that Summer is near: so likewise when ye see
all these things, know that the Kingdom of God is near, even at the doors.
Verily I say unto you, This Generation shall not pass, till all these things
be done. Some refer these words [immediately after] to the troubles of the
Church; as if their meaning were this: And immediately after God has made an
end of the troubles of his Church, these Signs shall follow. But who knows when
that shall be? whereas our Saviors words must be referred to those days
whereof he had spoken, which were comprised within determinate and set Bounds,
and would shortly manifest themselves; so as all men might be certain when to
expect those Signs, which he promised to all the world for the confirmation of
His Doctrine and their Faith. The full and natural meaning of the place is, as
if he had said,: When you have seen Hierusalems Fatal Day, then look for such
Signs in the Sun and Moon as I have told, for the one does Prognosticate the
others Approach, as certainly, as the Budding of the Fig Tree does Summer. The
like connection of these fearful Signs with Hierusalems desolation we have in
Saint Luke, chapt. 21. 25, Having spoken before only of the tribulation of
Jerusalem, he continues his speech: Then there shall be signs in the Sun, and
in the Moon, and in the Stars, and upon the earth, trouble amongst the Nations
with perplexity, the Sea and the Waters shall roar, and men's hearts shall fail
them for fear, and for looking after those things which shall come on the
world. For the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken; and then shall they see the
Son of man come in a cloud with power and great glory. And when these things
begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up your Heads, for your
Redemption draws near. And he spoke to them a Parable; Behold the Fig Tree
and all trees, when they now shoot forth, ye seeing them, know of your own
selves that Summer is then near: so likewise ye, when ye see these things come
to pass, know ye that the Kingdom of God is near. Verily I say unto you; this
generation shall not pass, till All These Things be done. As we are bound by
Christian Faith to Believe that this Prophecy is not yet, but shall be Fully
accomplished at the last Day: so in truth I should suspect my Heart of
Infidelity, if I did not acknowledge it truly verified (in such a sense as I
have intimated) immediately after the destruction of Jerusalem. The former
Distinction of Our Saviors Coming in Power, or to present the terrors of the
last Day, and His last coming unto Judgment Indeed, he himself has intimated:
for he gave his Disciples infallible Signs, when they might certainly expect
the former, verse 33. Heaven and earth shall pass, etc. but of that day and
hour (to wit of the last judgment) no man, no not the Angels of Heaven, but my
father only knows, As if he had said; This last day shall not come with such
Observation, as the former will: the Signs here described shall not
Prognosticate, but accompany it: In the Former, there were signs in the Sun and
Moon; but in the Later both Sun and Moon shall cease to ^e: In the Former, the
powers of Heaven were shaken, the Earth did tremble, and the Sea did roar; in
the Later, The Heavens shall be gathered like a scroll, and pass with away a
noise, the 2 Pet. 3. 12.
elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are therein
shall be burnt, Revel. 21. 1.
the Sea shall be no more: the whole Frame of Nature shall be dissolved on a
sudden, and such as until that time mind earthly matters, confining their
thoughts within this Sphere of Mortality, shall be intrapped in the ruins, and
pressed down to Hell with the weight of it; Only such as being In this world,
are not Of it, but have their Conversation in Heaven, where their Redemer sits
at the right hand of GOD, shall escape these sudden and fearful dangers, as
Birds that are without the Compass of the Trap when it begins to fall; Seeing
it will be too late for men to begin their Belief Then: too late to fly from
death, when destruction has surprised them; or to cry for Mercy first, when
Gods Judgments begin to seize upon the World. The Atheist or careless Worlding
may gather both the Terrors and Calamity of that Day, from the often-mentioned
lively representation of it under Titus: for even in his time the Heavens and
the Earth did threaten to pass away, that all the world might know Christ's
words should not pass away. The fire of Gods wrath, which Moses had foretold
should eat the Foundations of the Mountains in Jewry; and such as Bell. Jud.
(...) 7. c. 11.
Josephus tells us had been krndled in the Holy Mount, did devour the
Foundations of the Mount Vesuvius It is worth the labor to Com pare the (...)
and 20. Epist. of Pliny 16. Book of Epistles with Dion; and consider.
in Campania. The Consequences thereof with other Prodigious Concomitants, were
so strange and fearful, that if we compare the Ingenious Heathen
Historiographers description of them, with the forecited place of S. Luke, his
Relation does as fully answer our Saviors Prediction, as the Historical
narrations of Events past, contained in Scripture, do the Prophecies that had
gone of them before.

4 The sudden Earthquakes were so Grievous, that all the Valley was sultering
hot, and the tops of the Mountains sunk down; under the ground were noises like
Thunder, answered with like Bellowings above. The Sea roared, and the Heavens
resounded like noise; huge and great Crashings were heard, as if the Mountains
had fallen together: great stones leaped out of their places, as high as tops
of Hills; and after them issued abundance of Fire and Smoke, in so much that it
darkened the Air and obscured the Sun, as if it had been Eclipsed, so that
night was turned into day, and day into night. Many were persuaded, that the
Giants had raised some Civil Broyls amongst themselves, because they did see
their Shapes in the smoke, and heard a noise of Trumpets: others thought the
World should be resolved into the old Chaos, or consumed with Fire; some ran
out of their Houses into the Streets: others from the Streets or Highways
into their Houses; others from Sea to Land; some again from the Land to the Sea
So Dion. (...). 66.

5 These questionless were The Signs of the Son of Man, that made all the
Kindreds of the Earth thus Mourn. For the Calamity was Public: the Abundance
of Ashes and Dust was such that it overspread Egypt, Africa and Syria choking
not only Men, but Beasts and Birds, poisoning Fishes, and spoiling the grounds
where it came. The inhabitants of Rome (whither this infection came a few days
after the fire kindled in Campania) thought that the Frame of the World had
been out of joint: that the Sun did fall down to the earth, and the earth
ascend up to heaven. And albeit the ashes and dust did not such present harm
there, as it had done every where else: yet it bred a most grievous Pestilence
breaking out not long after: and in the year following, whilst Titus went to
view the calamities of Campania, a great part of Rome was burnt by fire issuing
out of the ground. Amongst other harms, these following were most remarkable:
It consumed the Temple of Serapis, of Isis, of Neptune, the Pantheon, the
Diribitorium, the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, unto which the Jews were not
long before enjoined to pay that Tribute, which they formerly had done to the
Temple of Jerusalem. Thus though the Ark be taken, yet will it be the Downfall
of Dagon their chief God that took it: and though Jerusalem lay buried in her
Ruins, for her Peoples grievous Sins; yet shall hers, as All Sacred Pensions
Sacrilegiously employed, devour the Seats of their possessors. But what can we
more say, then this noble Historiographer Dion. lib. 66.
has said of this Event: Id malum Divinum potius quam Humanum fuit: this was a
Calamity more then Humane, in which the Finger of God was Evidently seen. And
as it was a Type of the last Day: so may it, and the like following, confirm
the truth of Sodoms Destruction. Nor did God speak only once in this Language
to the Roman: (to omit other wonderful works of God in these times, to be
recounted in their proper place) The like fearful Earthquakes, with other
Prodigious Concomitants, fell out in Trajans time at Antioch: But the harms not
terminate within her Territories, or the Cities about her, herewith destroyed.
For abundance of Soldiers and multitudes of other people did repair from all
quarters to the Emperor Wintering there; some in Embassages, some for Suits,
some upon other Businesses, some to see Plays and Pageants. Whence the damage
as this Author says, did redound to all that were Subject to the Roman Empire.
This out of question was the Lords doing, That all the world might Hear and
Fear his Wondrous Works; and wondering enquire after the true Causes and
meaning of them. Thus Antioch, as well as Edom and Babylon, is overtaken with
the Psalmists curse, for Rejoicing in the Day of Jerusalem. Besides ^he
Massacres of the Jews there committed when Titus came unto that City; ^he
Inhabitants after their Insinuating Gratulations, petitioned with all Humility
See Jos. lib. 7. de Bell. Jud. c. 21. or 24.
and Policy, that the Relics of this People (for whom there was no place left
in their own land) might be Extirpate thence, comprising the Christians, no
doubt, under this Name.

6 Many particulars, then known, are not registered by such Heathen writers ^s
now are extant; and many Signs of those Times not regarded by any Heathen: all
which might witness the Truth of our Saviors Predictions, and ex^ound their
meaning, were they as well known to us, as to the Faithful then ^ving; whose
Meditations, it seems, were so wholly taken up with these Contemplations, that
they had no leisure to leave their Comments in writing ^o Posterity. That
dreadful Woe directed against the women of Jerusalem, with child and giving
suck, did take these Antiochians at the rebound. Women in such cases could not
die, but a double death, and yet how many such ^re slain none can tell. Of an
infinite company of all sorts, starved by their ^se imprisonment in houses,
whose foundations were sunk, the roof remaining, Only one woman was found
alive, which had sustained her self and her Dion. 1. 68.
child by her milk; Another child found in the like concavity alive, sucking
his deceased mothers Duggs. In fine (says the Author) there was no kind of
violent Disaster, which did not at this time befall men. For the Earthquakes
being caused by the Divine Power, men's Wits were not their own, nor knew they
what Medicine to seek for these Miss-haps. Such as were on the Housetops had no
List to descend to fetch any thing out; such as were in the Field, had no Mind
to return back to fetch their clothes; Trajan himself was drawn out at a window
by no Mortal Creature (as this writer thinks) so astonished with this
disastrous Sight, that for many days after the Earthquake had ceased, he durst
not come into any House. See Dion. l. 68.

7 Neither of these strange Signs of the Son of Man fell out in any corner of
the world, but the one in the Chief, the other in the Second City of the
Empire, at that time the Emperors Court: so that the whole Worlds
Representative (as we may so speak) was in Danger, and all men, at least, men
of all sorts, at their Wits End; and by their terrors all mankind had public
warning to prepare themselves against That terrible and dreadful Day: These
being such Types of it, as the First Destruction of the Holy City and Temple by
Nebuchadnezzar, was of the Second by Titus; so as that which is truly said of
the one, may in an higher degree be truly avouched of the other.

8 Of these times again was that of the Prophet meant; I will pour out my
spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophecy. And I
will Joel 2. 28, 30, 31. Zach. 14. 7.
show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, Blood and Fire, and Pillars of
Smoke: the Sun shall be turned into darkness, and the Moon into Blood, before
the great and terrible Day of the Lord come. But whosoever shall call on the
name of the Lord shall be saved. If we rightly observe the Prophets Method in
this place, it will both Justify and Illustrate the former Interpretations of
Jeremy, and our Saviors Prophecy. First he speaks (none can deny) of Christ's
coming in the Flesh, and Effusion of the Holy Ghost upon all people; I will
pour out my Spirit upon all flesh. By The Spirit, the Gospel was to be
communicated to all Nations: and thus (as the Evangelist witnesses) at the
first descending of the Holy Ghost upon the Apostles, there were resident at
Jerusalem Acts 2. 5.
men that feared God of every Nation under heaven: and all these at their
Baptism received the gift of the Holy Ghost, whereby they might manifest the
Acts 2. 38.
Power and Virtue of the Gospel unto the Countries where they lived. If we
compare the generality of Saint Lukes speech in that fifth verse, with our
Saviors, Mat. 24. 14. And this Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached
throughout the whole world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the
End come: We cannot doubt but our Saviors prophecy was verified before the
Destruction of Jerusalem, which was the End he meant should come. But why
should the Prophet Joel, immediately after his description of the time of
Grace, add in the second place; I will show wonders in the Heavens, and in the
Earth; blood and fire, and pillars of smoke? Does he call the people of God
again unto Mount Sinai, to fire, blackness, darkness, and tempest, unto the
sound of Trumpets, the voice of words, which they that once had heard, should
not desire to hear any more? No: but he would have the world understand, That
after the Gospel was once proclaimed throughout It, the Lord would show himself
as terrible a Judge to all such as did not embrace the Glad Tidings thereof, as
he had done before to the Israelites at the promulgation of the Law. Both that
fearful sight in Mount Sinai, and those other Prodigious Appariti* in Italy and
Syria, were Types and representations of That Dreadful Day. The former was seen
and testified by the Israelites only, because the Law was only revealed to
them: the horrors of the later are registered by Heathen Writers, known and felt
by the principal Nations of the World, and from them diffused to all others (as
Earthquakes, which begin at the Center, leave their Effects upon the whole
Surface of the Earth) because the Gospel was at that time communicate to all
the inhabited or frequented Parts of the World. Those Prodigious Signs then,
which the Prophet Joel describes, and the Heathen witness to have been so
frequent among the Nations, presently after Jerusalems destruction, and the
Extirpation of the Jews, were added as so many Seals, to assure the Truth of
the Prophets and Gospel; and to testify both to Jew and Gentile, That if
either the one did follow his Jewish Sacrifice, or the other his wonted
Idolatry, after the Truth of Gods new Covenant with Mankind was Sealed and
proclaimed, There remained no more sacri, fice for sins, but a fearful looking
for of judgment and violent fire: that there was no other name under Heaven
able to save them from such everlasting Flames, as they now had seen some
Flashes of, but only the Name of Jesus, whom the Jew had crucified. So the
Prophet Joel concludes, Whosoever shall call on the Name of the Lord, that is,
of Jesus (for now all Israel might know for a surety, that God had made that
Jesus whom they had Crucified, both Lord and Christ) He shall be saved. The
fruits of calling upon the name of the Lord, and that distinction betwixt the
state of the Elect and Reprobate, intimated by the Prophet in the last Verse of
that Chapter, shall be most fully manifested in the Day of Judgment: For such
as have watched and prayed continually, always expecting their Masters Coming,
shall, upon the first apprehension of his approach, lift up their Heads, as
knowing that their Redemption draws near. But for the Riotous or careless
liver, he shall not be able to stand before the Son of Man: instead of calling
upon his Name, he shall cry unto the Hills, Cover me, and to the Mountains,
Fall ye upon me. Yet was the same distinction, between the Reprobate and the
Elect, truly notified by the confident Carriage of the Christians in those
fearful times lately mentioned (which did so much affright the Heathen) as we
may gather from Antoninus the Emperors Decree, inhibiting the Christians
persecution by the Commons of Asia. It seems the other had accused the
Christians as Hurtful Persons and offensive to the Gods; unto which the
Emperor makes Reply in this manner: I know the Gods are careful to disclose
hurtful persons; for they punish such as will not worship Eusebius. l. 4. c. 13.
them, more grievously then you do those whom you bring in trouble, confirming
that opinion which they conceive of you, to be wicked and ungodly Men --. It
shall seem requisite to admonish you of the Earthquakes, which have and do
happen amongst us; that being therewith moved, ye may compare our estate with
theirs: They have more Confidence to God-wards than You have. I will shut up
this Discourse for the present with that Saying of our Savior; Remember Lots
Wife: and His Exhortation, Take heed to your selves, lest at anytime your
Hearts be oppressed with S^rfetting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life;
and lest that Day come on you Luke 21. 34.
unawares: for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the Face of
the whole Earth. So did the former Calamities in Titus and Trajans time, which
were as the Days of Noah; They ate, they drank, and rose up to play: and when
they said, Pax and tutaomnia, sudden destruction came as an unexpected Actor
upon the Stage. For as you heard before, one Cause of the great Concourse unto
Antioch at that direful Season, was to see Plays and Prizes: and in the former
under Titus, Duas integras urbes, Herculaneum and Pompeios, populo sedente in
Theatro, penitus obruit. Dion. l. 66.
two whole Cities were overwhelmed with the Tempest of Gods Wrath, while the
Citizens were sitting in the Theater. So must all such Fruitless Spectacles,
or pleasant (but unseasonable) Comedies, be concluded with their Spectators
Tragedy in the Catastrophe of this great and spacious Amphitheatre.

All that follows, till you come at the 9th Paragraph, was, An APPENDIX, in the
former Edition; yet set before the whole Book; and so must be accounted, and
allowed for in the Reading.
ALbeit Lawful in every Age it has been, to Vary (if without dissension) from
former Interpreters, in unfolding divine Mysteries, without Censure of
Irregularity, so the Explication be Parallel to the Analogy of Faith: yet
partly, to clear my self from all Suspicion of Affecting Novelties; partly,
more fully to satisfy the ingenious and unpartial Reader, I have thought good
to acquaint him with Some Observations, which have almost be^^othed my mind
unto that exposition, of our Saviors Words related by Saint Matthew and Saint
Luke, which I here commend to his Christian consideration.

That happily will cause others to suspend their Judgments, which for a long
time did retard my Persuasion, and inhibit my Assent unto the Truth I here
deliver. For albeit the Reasons alleged seemed very probable, whilst weighed
apart, but far more pregnant from comparing the Concurrence of all
Circumstances, which led me to that opinion: yet on the other side strange it
seemed, that my best grounds being borrowed from the relation of Antiquity, no
Ancient Writer, living shortly after those times, should have observed the
like. But whilst I considered again, how the Almighty, whether, in his just
Judgment for the Sins of that present, or, in his Wisdom and Mercy for the
greater good of future Generations had deprived us of all their sacred
Meditations that lived about Titus's time, or immediately after: both Effects,
as I conceived, might have One and the same just Cause, though secret and only
known to God, not fit for us to make any further Inquiry after, the^ might stir
us up to true Admiration of his Wisdom. And truly Admirable his Wisdom seemed
in this, that the Canon of the new Testament being finished in the most known
Tongue then extant in the World, (in which respect besides others, The Gospel
of the Kingdom might be truly said to be preached through The Whole, for a
witness to all Nations) he would have it Severed from all other Writings, as
well by the Subsequent as Precedent Silence of Ecclesiastical Sacred Writers.
He that would not have any Prophet in Israel after the Erection of the Second
Temple, would not, for the same Cause only known to Him, have any Writings of
men, (otherwise most religious and devout) to be extant in the Age immediately
following the Gospels Promulgation, that it thus shining, like a Solid or
compact glorious Star in the Transparent Sphere, Environed every where with
Vacuity, might more clearly Manifest ^t Self by its own Light to be
Supercelestial.

Necessary it was the Period of that Generation, wherein our Savior lived and
died, should have the Divine Truth of his Gospel confirmed unto them by Signs
(as the Joel 2. 3^.
Prophet speaks) In the heavens and in the earth, to increase their Care and
diligence in commending it to Posterity, who were to rely on it immediately,
not on their Forefathers relation of Signs past. The like or more effectual,
and as fully answerable to the Rules set down in it, they could not want, so
long as they carried souls or minds careful to observe and practice what is
prescribed. And who knows whether the Lord had not appointed, that the serious
consideration of those Prodigious Signs, which followed the publishing of the
Gospel, should sleep in all or most intermediate Ages, till these later days
wherein we live, wherein such Observations are more Seasonable, We being the
Men on whom the later Ends of the world are come. Happily had Ecclesiastic
Writers Commented upon those times, our curious Modern Wits, too much addicted
unto Gentilism, would have given less Credence to the pregnant Testimonies of
profane Authors, as suspecting, lest Christians, (in whose Custody their
writings for many generations have been) had infected either the whole
Discourses or some peculiar Circumstances pertinent to their purposes, or apt
to countenance their Opinions, otherwise improbable in the worlds Judgment.
But now, by how much the Silence of Ecclesiastic Authors in these narrations
has been greater, and the Testimonies of Heathen Writers more plentiful or
pregnant, so much the more unexcusable is the curious and unregenerate Artist,
or incredulous Atheist. That most generations, since those times whereof we
treat, should expect Signs in the Sun, and Moon, to come before the Day of
Judgment, cannot seem either strange in itself, or prejudicial to this
Doctrine which we deliver, if we call to mind how men otherwise truly Religious
have been usually ignorant, or mistaken in the meaning of divine Mysteries,
until the time appointed for their Revelation, or until they unfold their
Enigmatical Construction by the approach or Real Existence of the Events
foretold. Thus, many well affected to our Savior and his doctrine did expect
Elias should come before the Kingdom were restored to Israel, even whilst they
had John Baptist, (of whom that Prophecy was properly meant) amongst them; Yea,
after he had Sealed his Embassage with his Blood. Even in the Apostles time,
That our Savior should instantly come to give Final Judgment, was an Opinion
(as it seems from S. Paul his Admonition to the Thessalonians) generally
received 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1.
amongst Christians: first occasioned as is most probable, from misconstruction
of our Saviors Prophecy, Verily I say unto you, This Generation shall not
passtil all these things be done, and this Misconstruction caused from a Common
Error or Ignorance in not distinguishing betwixt the Typical and the Mystical
or Substantial Sense of Prophesies; oft-times, both alike literally and
necessarily imported in the self-same words.

From this Error of Christians in misapplying our Saviors words, unto the
Substance, which, for that time, were only applyable to the Type, was the like
Tradition propagated to the Heathen of those times: as may be gathered from
Lucan, who lived when S. Paul flourished, and died by the same Tyrants
appointment. His description of the last Day is but a Poetical Descant upon our
Saviors words related by three of his Evangelists: The Sun shall wax dark, and
the Moon shall not give her light, and the Stars of heaven shall fall, and the
powers of heaven shall be shaken.

Lucan Lib. 1.
-- sic, cum compage soluta,
Secula tot Mundi Suprema co^gerit Hora,
Antiquum repetens iterum Chaos, omnia mistis
Sidera sideribus concurrent: Igneapontum
Astrapetent: Tellus extendere Littoranolet,
Excutietque Fretum: Fratri contraria Phoebe
Ibit, and obliquum bigas agitare per arbem
Indignata, diem poscet sibi: totaque discors
Machina divulsi turbabit Foedera Mundi.
When the last hour has summed up Time, and when
This Frame resolves into's First Chaos; Then
The Stars shall justle, Reel, Fall fowl, and drop
Into the Sea. Churl ^arth will grudge; and stop
The waters Course. The Moon shall Counter-move
The Sun: And claim to Rule the Day. Thus Love,
(Love, that Atoned each Atome with his Brother,
Made Feuds (in League or Truce) to Kiss each other;)
Love, Ligament of Th'universe, Turned Hate;
All falls in pieces --. See you, Doomes-Dayes Fate!
The Romans might well have taken their Martyred Poet for a Prophet, at least
in this Prediction, when within few years after they did behold the Sun, and
Moon, with all the Host and powers of heaven, Tragically Acting what he had
penned. A preamble to such Effects they might have seen in that calamity at
Ve^uvios. (...)* vibus (...) (...)(...) quo propi^s accede^^^ ^al^d^or and
den^^or ^am p^ e^^, nigrique and a^ (...), and ^^^cti ig^e lapides: ^am vadum
^ubitum, (...)(...) montis littora ob(...). P^. lib. 6. ^
The Romans conceit of that rueful Spectacle, whose Admiration had brought her
great Philosopher, Natures Curious Secretary, to his untimely Death in Dions
words (Book 66.) was thus: Postremo tantus fuit cinis, ut inde pervenerit in
Asricam, Syriam, and Aegyptum, introieritque Romam, ejus^ aerem compleverit,
and solemn obscuraverit. Nec mediocris etiam Romae trepidatio complures ad dies
accidit (or as some read) [id Romae accidit paucis post di^bus,] quum omnes
ignorarent id quod sactum erat in Campan a, nec quid esset, conjectura assequi
possent. Itaque etiam ij putare coeperunt, omma sursum deorsum ferri, solemque
in terram cadere, ac terram in coelum conscendere. See the 5 paragraph of this
Chapter, where this is English* ed.
So well does this Heathen express the Prophets Words: I will show Wonders in
the heavens, and in the earth, Blood, and Fire, and Pillars of smoke. Joel 2.
30. But most admirable is the consent between the same Prophet, and Pliny the
younger, who was an eye-winesse of the first rising of that smoke, portending
such dismal times. That great and terrible Day of the Lord, before which (as
the Prophet speaks) the Sun was to be turned into darkness, and the Moon into
Blood, was not to be terminated unto one set, Natural, or Artificial day, but
to be extended unto all the Prodigious Calamities, which after Jerusalems
destruction successively ensued throughout the world, or (as another Jer. 25.
31.
Prophet speaks) unto the continuance of that great Controversy which the Lord
had with the Nations: before which, the Burning of Vesuvius was as a Beacon to
give warning to all slesh. And the Ingenious Reader, will, I hope, be incited,
by P^ies expressing the beginning of that Prodigious Sight, to Admire the
Hidden Mysteries, that are often enwrapt in the Enigmatical Propriety of
Prophetical Words, rather then censure this Observation following for a Tale of
Smoke or Critical Conjecture, fet beyond that Region wherein these Fiery Comets
appeared. The word in the Original, rendered by Pillars, properly signifies a
Palm Tree. From the Analogy betwixt Pillars, and whose long Trunk and broad
Top, it comes to signify a Pillar, or Supporter, Pliny the younger setting
down the occasion and manner of his Uncles It was ^e that wi^^ the Natural
History.
death, resembles the first Apparition of that Huge and strange Cloud unto a
P^aster (...) est al^ qua (...) (...)(...) (...) alut^d ^e, and a medio (...)
^a, (...) (...)* (...) ve^tice Pl^. (...). lib. ^.
Pine Tree for to no other (as he says) he could more fitly compare it,
though, for this reason, it might altogether as (...) have been compared to a
(...) the ^ Pa^m (...), (...) d^ (...) (...). N^lla est ^ -- ^. 4.
Palm Tree, had that Tree been as well known in Italy, as in the Region wherein
the Prophet lived, that did foretell this strange Apparition so long before.
Plinies words are these, Matter mea melicat e^ apparerenubem inusitata and
magnitudine and specie. Surgit ille --. ascendat locum, ex quo maxim Miraculum
illud conspici poterat. Nubes, incertum procul intuentibus ex quo monte
(Vesuvium fuisse postea cognitum est) oriebatur: ^^jus formam non alia magis
arbor quam Pinus expresserit. Nam longissimo velut trunco elata in altum
quibusdam ramis diffundebatur. Credo, quia recenti spiritu evect a,
deinsenescente eo destituta, aut etiam ponderesuo victa, in latitudinem
vanescebat, candida interdum, interdum Representing Blood and Fire as the
Prophet had foretold.
sordida and maculosa, prout terrant cineremue sustulerat. Magnum id,
propriusque noscendum ut Eruditissimo Viro visum est. It was told Him That
there Appeared a Cloud, for Bigness and Shape never the like seen. Up the Gets
-- and goes to an Advantage whence he might the Better see that Strange Sight.
A Cloud Rose, (as yet the Beholders knew not from what Mountain, afterward it
was found to be Vesuvius) much Resembling a Pine Tree, For it seemed to have as
it were, a Long Trunk, and Boughs spreading out above --. Sometime it appeared
White, other-while Duskie and Dapled (or stained and spotted) according to the
blended proportions of Earth and Ashes. He thought it a strange Sight indeed,
and worthy his Adventuring nearer to View it, etc. That the Sun was turned into
Darkness, that with this Smoke was mixed Fire, may appear from the same
Authors Words a little after: Jam dies alibi, illic nox omnibus noctibus
nigrior, densiorque, quam tamen Faces Fiery Meteors.
multae, variaque lumina solvebant. Plin. Ep. 1. 6. Ep. 16.

This, which occasioned Wonderment to the Heathen, was (no doubt) a sufficient
Warning to all Godly Christians, to betake themselves to their Prayers: to
expect the confirmation of their Faith by their mighty deliverance from those
dangers, wherein innumerable Heathens utterly perished, which made the hearts
of all mankind, (besides) to fail. This corporal preservation of the Elect
from fear or danger, whilst Cast-awayes perished, and trouble raged among the
Nations, was that Redemption which our Savior speaks of.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and lift Luke 21.
28.
up your heads: for your Redemption draws nigh. For this was a sure Type or
pledge of their and our Everlasting Redemption. And before the bursting out of
that Fire, and the erection of those Pillars of Smoke before mentioned, God, as
our Savior foretold, had sent his Angels to gather his Elect together, either
to places free from those general Calamities, or miraculously to preserve them
in the midst of them. For to deny or suspect the truth of Dions relations, I
have no reason: and yet what other Cause to assign of those Giants Apparitions
in Vesuvius, and the Towns about it immediately before that danger, I know not,
but only that which our Savior had given.

And He shall send his Angels with a great sound of a trumpet, and they shall
gather together his Elect from the Four winds, and from the one end of the
Heaven to Mat. 24. 31.
the other.

Thus Dion; Ita verores acta: Viri multi and magniomnem naturam Humanam
excedentes, quales exprimuntur Gigantes, partim in ipsomonte, partim in agro
circumjacente, ac in oppidis interdiu noctuque terram obire, at que acra
permeare visebantur. Posthaec consecuta est maxima siccitas, ac repent ita
graves terrae motus facti, etc. L. 66.

The like Gathering of the Elect, Ecclesiastic Writers mention in the Siege of
Jerusalem and Jewish wars; the Godly sit at ease and in peace, whilst the
Obstinate and Seditious were overwhelmed with Calamity upon Calamity. And yet
all the Calamities which accompanied Jerusalems Destruction, did in greater
measure afflict the Heathens within few years after It was destroyed. Above
other places, Gods plagues hanted the Roman Court, that all the world might
take notice of our Saviors Prophecies. And the Romans, albeit they knew not
who had given the Advice, resolved yet to practice as our Savior advised Let
him (says our Savior) that is upon the house top not come down into the
house, neither enter therein, to fetch any thing out of his house. And let him
that is in the field, not turn back again unto the things which he left behind
Mark 13. 15. 16.
him, to take his clothes. So Pliny testifies, that, in the times above
mentioned, albeit the Pumice stones did fly about men's ears in the open
fields; yet they held it more safe during the Earthquake, to be abroad, then
within doors, arming their heads with Pillows and Bolsters against the blows
they expected. In commune consultant, intratecta subsistant, an in aperto
vagentur: nam ^bris vastisque tremoribus tecta nutabant, and quasi emota
sedibus suis, nunc huc, nun^ illuc a^ire, aut referri videbantur. Sub dio
rursus, quanquam levium exesorumque pumicum casus metuebatur: quod tamen
malorum collatio elezit --. Cervicalia capitibus imposita linteis constringunt.
Id munimentum adversus incidentia fuit. Plin. Ep. (...). 6. Ep. 16.

This was the beginning of that Great and terrible Day of the Lord, foretold by
the Prophet, wherewith the world was for a long time shaken by Fits, as it were
by a deadly Fever, as may appear from the like calamities in Trajans times,
related by Dion. Our Savior himself expounds the Prophets words not of One
Day, but Days; for there shall be in Those Days such tribulation, as was not
from the beginning of the Creation which God created, neither shall be. Mark
13. 19.
So terrible were these days, that, as our Savior in the next word adds,
except the Lord had made an end of them, they had quickly made an end of all
mankind. Even at that time the world by the Ordinary Course of Gods Justice
should have been destroyed, but He spared it at the instant prayers of his
Chosen, as he would have saved Sodom after Judgment was gone out, had there
been but a few such Faithful men in it, as in the fore mentioned times the
world had many. So merciful is our God, so loving unto all the works of his
hands, that his Son cannot come to Judgment so long as he shall find faith
upon the earth. Whosoever, says the Prophet, shall call upon the name of the
Lord, shall be saved; yea, he shall save others, as our Blessed Savior more
fully foretells what the Prophet saw but in part: Except that The Lord had
shortened those days, no flesh should be saved: but for the Elects sake which
he has chosen, Mark 13. 20.
He has shortened those days. Other Prophesies there be of those times, which
seem to intimate a final destruction of all Flesh without delay: and so, no
doubt, the Prophets themselves conceived of the world, as Jonah did of Nineve,
which he looked should instantly have perished upon the Expiration of the time
he had foretold. Wrath they had seen go out from the Lord, of force enough to
have dissolved the Frame of Nature, but could not usually foresee either the
Number of the Faithful, or the dispositions of men's hearts upon their Summons:
but This Great Prophet, who only foresaw all things, not only foretells the
Calamities or Judgments due unto the world, but withal foresees the Number of
the Elect, their inclination to hearty prayers and Repentance, by which he knew
the fierce Wrath of God, whose representation the Prophet saw, should be
diverted from the world; that his stroke should be a little broken.

Vide C^* (...) ad De^num.
Out of such Fathers as lived in the Ages following, it is evident the
Calamities of these times had been such, as did threaten the worlds end; many
relics of that grievous disease, wherewith the world was sick almost unto
death, remained until Saint Cyprians time. But as Jerusalems Plagues did
Prognosticate the Storms of Gods Wrath which were shortly after to be showred
upon the Nations; so these Castaway Jews prefigure the Heathnish Temper: of
whom that saying of our Savior holds as true, They are like unto children
sitting in the market place, and crying one to another, and saying; Luke. 32.
we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned unto you, and
ye have not wept.

In our Saviors time, God invited them with Peace and Plenty, which they
foolishly attribute to their gods, or their own Policy: after his Death he
threatens them with the former Calamities, all which they Dixisti per nos
fieri, and quod nobis debeant imputari omnia ista, quibus nunc mundus quatitur
and urgetur; quod dii vestria nobis non colatur. Cyprian* ad Demet.
falsely ascribe, as the Superstitious in like cases usually do, to the
Alteration of Religion and the decay of Idolship.

Would God, the temper of this present Age were not much worse then either the
Jews or Gentiles was; not such as did threaten the Final Destruction of the
World, from which Faith has utterly perished. But of this Argument, as far as
befits Christian Sobriety to enquire, by Gods Assistance, in its proper place.
Thus much in this place I have added, to persuade the Reader, that For ought
any man knows, or for any precedent Sign can be expected, it may This Night
sound to Judgment: Watch we therefore, and pray continually, that we may be
Counted Worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and that we
may stand before The Son of Man.



9 Thus much of the Prophecies concerning Hierusalems Destruction, and the
Signs of those Times. Ere we return to survey the Jews estate since, it shall
not be amiss to Note, how upon the Expiration of their Interest in Gods
promises, confirmed unto their father Isaac, the Seed of Ismael began to enter
upon the other Moiety of his Promise made to Abraham.

CAP. XXV.
That the Saracens are the true Sons of Ismael: Of their Conditions and Manners
Answerable to Moses Prophecy.

1 THat the sons of Isaac and Ismael (for more then 3000 years after their
Fathers Death, in Countries almost as many Miles distant from their Original
Seat, whither scarce any other Asiaticks come) should Kithe each other with as
little Scruple as if they were Full Cousin Germans, to me has seemed an
Argument, That the Lord had appointed Both, for Continual Signs unto the
Nations: the more, whiles I consider with what Difficulty of Search, Variety of
Conjectures, and Uncertainty of Resolution the best Antiquaries amongst the
Natural Inhabitants of those Countries assign either their first Planters
there, or the Regions whence they came.

2 But howsoever such as we call Saracens, are best known to the modern Jews of
Spain by the name of Ismaelites; yet in these later days (disposed to quarrel
with former Ages) some begin to Suspect, others to Contradict the Common
received Opinion, as well concerning the Saracens natural descent from Hagar
and Ismael, as their pretended Original from Sarah, Abraham's lawful Wife. Unto
which bold Assertion, or needless Scruple, though utterly devoid of all
Ground, either of Reason or Authority, we are thus far beholden; it has
occasioned us to seek the Ground of the contrary out of Antiquity, as well
Secular as Ecclesiastic: Whose pregnant Consonancy with the Sacred Oracles is
Pertinent to this Present, Necessary for Subsequent Discourse, in it self
neither unpleasant, nor unprofitable to the Judicious Christian Reader.

3 Of Abraham's Base Seed, some (in Scripture) are denominate from their Mother,
known by the name of Hagarens; Others from her Son, their father, are called So
these Two are distinguished 1 Chronicles. 27. 30, 31.
Ismaelites: some take their names from his Sons, as Kedar, Duma, Naphish, 1 Chronicles. 5. 19.
Jetur, etc. Not any people in Scripture (to my remembrance) take their name
from Nebaioth his eldest Son: Which adds probability to Goropius Becanus in
Hispanicis.
their Opinion, who think such as the Heathen called Na^athaei, were in
Scriptures termed Ismaelites, as sole Heirs to their first Progenitors Name:
Their seat was in the best part of Arabia Petraea, near unto the Midianites, as
is probable from the Story of Joseph; who in one place, is said to be sold unto
the Ismaelites, in another, to the Midianites, these being near Neighbors, as
it seems, and Copartners in Traffic. As the Nabathaeans are not mentioned in
Scripture, so neither do I find the name of Ismael in any Ancient Heathen
Writer: All of them I think being of Strabo his mind, who (Book 16.)
professes; That he omits the Ancient name of the Arabians, partly because in
his time they were out of Use, partly for the Harshnesse of their
Pronunciation; unto which Exception the name of Ismael was most obnoxious.

4 The Seat of such as the Scripture calls Hagarens, was in the Desert Arabia,
betwixt Gilead and Euphrates, as we may gather from 1 Chronicles. 5. 9, 1^. This
people were called by the Heathen [(...)] Agraei, (a name more consonant to
their name in Hebrew [(...)] then the Latin Hagareni) rightly placed by
Ptolomey in the Desert Arabia, and by Strabo (Book 16.) in that very place To
wit, next unto the Chaulotaeans or inhabitants of Havilah.
which the Scripture makes the Eastern Bounds of Ismaels Posterity; their
Metropolis or chief City in later times was This name [Atreni] it seems was
peculiar to the inhabitants of A*tra, the chief City of the Agarens or
Agraeans: as Petrae was the Metropolis of the Nabathaeans, so that the Atreni
and Agareni differ as the Petraeni and Nabathaei.
Atra, or Atrae, and the Inhabitants thereof Atreni, unless both Dion and
Herodian either mistook, or have been mistaken to have written Atreni for
Agreni. But to omit the particular denomination of Ismaels Seed, they were best
known to Ancient Heathens from the manner of their habitation in Caelius
Augustinus Caelius Augustinus Curio, in his Historia Saracenica, speaks of a
City called Scene (perhaps it should be Scenae) in Arabia Desarta. And Strabo
in his 16. Book (of Casauhons Edit. page 648.) Tells of Scenae: (...).
Tents: and Scenitae Arabes was a name General, and (I think) Equivalent to his
Race, unless perhaps the Midianites or Idumaeans might share with them in this
Name, as they were partakers of their Quality: which is not so to be
appropriated unto either, as if they had neither House or Town; for the Tents
of Kedar are most famous in Scripture, yet says the Prophet, Let the
Wilderness and the Cities thereof lift up their voice, the Towns that Kedar
does inhabit* Isaiah 42. 11. Nor did he mean as many Tents as would make a
Town; for even in Moses time they had their places of defense, as appears Genesis
25. 16. These be the sons of Ismael, and these be their Names, by their Towns
and by their Castles, twelve Princes of their Nations, or rather twelve Heads
of so many several Houses, Tribes, or Clans; which kind of Regiment they
continued, till four hundred years after Christ. And the Heathen Writers, both
Greek and Latin, better express Moses words in the forecited place [(...)]
then sundry Modern Interpreters do; who call them Dukes or Princes, being to
the Strabo lib. 16* in descript. Syriae, and lib. 2.
Grecians (...), to the Latins Phylarchi Arabum, or to the later Writers
Saracenorum, albeit Ammian. Marcell. lib. 23.
some Latin Writers call them Reguli Saracenorum.

5 The proof of our intended Conclusion depends upon these two Premises; The
First, That the Saraceni were the same people whom the Ancients call the
Scenitae Arabes, as is expressly avouched by Ammianus Marcellinus in sundry
Lib. 23. Scenitae Arabes quos Saracenos posteritas appellavit.
places, and every one will acknowledge, that compares the Whom the Ancient
Writers call Phylarchi Arabum, the later call Phylarchi Saracenorum, as appears
by Sextus Rufus, and Jornandes. Montes Armeniae, primum per Lucullum Romana
arma viderunt; per quem and Osroene and Saracenorum Phylarchi devi^^ Romany se
dediderunt. Jornandes lib 1. So he calls them by anticipation, as in Scripture
places are often times called by those names which were best known in the Writers
time; not by the names which they bare in those Ancient times of which they
write. So likewise, Sextus Rusus in his Breviary of the Roman story, speaking
of the Consuls time, mentions the Saracens; albeit no mention is made of them
or their Phylarchi, by any Roman that lived within 200 years of Pompeys
Conquests.
Ancient and later Romans, writing the same Stories. The Second, That the
Scenitae Arabes were the seed of Ismael; which does appear by the Identity of
their Habitation, Condition, and Quality.

6 First, it is evident out of Pliny and (...). Strabo l. 2. Ed. Casaub. p.
130. Et lib. 16. Syria Orientem verse terminatur Euphrate and Arabibus Scenitis.
Strabo, That the Scenitae Arabes were seated Eastward about the river
Euphrates, noisome neighbors to Caldaea and Mesopotamia; some part whereof in
Strabo his time they inhabited: on the West part they bordered upon Egypt and
Ethiopia: So Ammianus Marcellinus in his 22 Book, describing the Situation of
Egypt, says, Egyptia Gens, qua Orientem e regione prospicit, Elephantinam and
Meroen urbes Aethiopum, and Cata-dupos rubrumque Pelagus and Scenitas
praetenditur Arabas, quos Saracenos nunc apellamus. Amm. Marcell. lib. 22.
It bordered on the East upon the Cataracts of Nilus, and the Scenitae Arabes,
whom now we call Saracens. And in his 14 Book, describin the situation of the
Saracens, he makes Assyria their border on the East, and the confines of
Blemyae and the Cataracts of Nilus on the West. And Moses Genesis 25. says,
The sons of Ismael dwell from Shur, which is toward Egypt, unto Havilah, which
is toward Ashur, in the way from Egypt thither. This land of Havilah, or
(according to the Orthographie of the Hebrew) Chavilah, Famous in Scripture for
Gold, retained the same name in Lib. 16. initio. descript. Arabiae.
Strabo's time; the inhabitants called by him Chaulotaeans, next neighbors to
the Hagarens, or Agraei, whose country Severus suspected to have had good store
of Gold.

The description of the Saracens Situation and conditions (...) of Ammianus
Marcellinus, in his 14 Book, compared with Moses Characters of Ismael, and his
Prophecy of his Posterity, Genesis 25. 18. and Genesis 16. 6. and 12. Saraceni nec
amici nobis unquam nec habendi [alii legunt, nec Hosts optandi] ultro citroqoe
discursantes, quicquid inveniri poterat, momento temporis parvi vastabant,
milvorum rapaci vitae similes; qui si praedam despexerint celsius, volatu
rapiunt celeri, aut si impetrarint non immorantur. Super quorum moribus pauca
expediam. Apud has gentes, quarum initium ab Affyriis ad Nili Cataractas
porrigitur and confinia Blemyarum, omnes pari (...) sunt Bellatores, seminudi,
coloratis Sagulis pube tenus amicti, equorum adjumento pernicium, graciliumque
camelorum per diversa reptantes in tranquillis vel turbidis rebus. Nec eorum
quisquam aliquando stivam apprehendit, vel arborem celit, aut arva subigendo
quaeritat victum, sed errant semper per spatia long lateque distenta, sine
lare, sine sedibus fixis aut legibus, nec idem perferunt diutius Coelum, aut
tractus unius soli illis unquam placet, vita est illis semper in fuga,
uxoresque Mercenariae conductae ad tempus ex pacto: atque ut sit species
matrimonii, dotis nomine futura conjunx tra tam vel Hastam and tabernaculum
offert marito, post statum diem si id elegerit discessura: incredibile est, quo
ardore apud eos in Venerem u^erque sexus solvitur. Ita autem quoad vixerint,
late palantur, ut alibi mulier nubat, in loco pariat alio, liberosque procul
educet, nulla copia quiescendi permissa. Victus universis Caro ferina est,
lactisque abundans copia, qua sustentantur, (...) multiplices, and si quae
alites capi per aucupium possunt. Et plerosque nos vidimus frumenti usum and
vini penitus igno^^^^. Hactenus de natione perniciosa.
If Amm. Marcellinus had but known how fully Moses had prevented him in his
Observations of these Saracens, (gathered from his Experience of their
behavior) many hundred years before the Romans had heard of such a people; nay
ere they themselves were any Nation; it would perhaps have proved him to have
thought better of Moses writings, and worse of his master (...) for oppugning
them. And if neither Love, nor Fear of God, or true Religion, me thinks,
natural civil Modesty should enforce men to Believe His Report of things past,
that can so clearly point out the nature of men many hundred years before they
come into the world. For so we must esteem Moses words of Ismael and Hagar,
though Historically verified in their persons, yet withal a Typical Prophecy
of their Posterities Conditions. And it is a demonstrative Argument, That their
wildness was foretold by His Spirit, that only can command Nature, and
prescribe limits to the free thoughts of man, in that this Progeny (throughout
so many hundred generations) vary no more from their first Progenitors agrest
and fierce qualities, then the wild Plants of the Forest, never accustomed to
Human Culture, do from the Trees whence they are propagate.

8 Ismael, as Moses tells us, was begotten of Hagar an Egyptian hireling* See
the last note, out of Am. Marc.
The Matrimony of Saracen women in Ammianus his time was Mercenary, and upon
compact for a time. Hagar conceived Ismael in Abraham's house, but ready to
bring him forth in the Wilderness, whither he and she were sent again, after
her return unto her Mistress: The Saracen women of Ammianus his time Marry in
one place, Bear children in another, and Bring them up in a third far distant;
never permitted to live in rest: and in show of matrimony, they bring a Spear
and a Tent for their dowry, being indeed a perfect Emblem of their mercenary
roveing life: for these they may by Covenant take with them at the end of their
service, and be packing from their Masters to seek their food in the
Wilderness, as their Mother Hag^ taught them. Who would think, but that it
were more likely one should die rather of hunger then thirst in the
Wilderness? Or who could imagine, that Abraham (unless directed by some secret
instinct, presaging that rude and sharking life whereunto this wild slips
progeny was ordained could suffer Ismael and Hagar to go to the Wilderness out
of his house, which God had blessed with all manner of store, only furnished
with a little Bread, and a Bottle of Water, so quickly spent, that the Child
had almost died for thirst, before God did provide him more. This did portend,
that his Pos^erity should be pinched with like Penury, scant of water (their
best drink) straitning their Territories (as (...). (...) lib. 16. p. 765.
Strabo tells us) in Arabia; and after they had enlarged the bounds which Moses
set them, (...). Idem, p. 74^.
even in Mesopotam^ it self, they are confined to dry and barren places; nor
could the Prophe, Isaiah 13. 20. From which place we (...) gather that such as
the An^nt Writers of sacred story would have termed Hagarens or Ismaelites were
called by later, Arabians: (...) is it (...) after (...) (...) (if at all) to
mention the Ismaelites or Hagarens; The Name of the Arabians being then e^ to
the (...)* if we take them generally, as may be gathered likewise from Josephus
in sundry places, amongst others, from his 13* (...) after of his (...) (...)
(...) of Antiquities.
better express the future Barrenness of Babylon, and the Regions about, then
by Intimating it such, as the Sons of Desolation, which sought their food out
of Flint, should not be able to Inhabit. That Water, many years after Strabo's
time, was the Scenite Arabians best, or only Drink, appears from Tu^tibus iis
qui a Saracenis victi fuerunt, and dicentibus, Vinum (...) (...) (...), ^quit,
illi qui vos vincunt Aquam b^^unt. Vide A^lium Spartian: in Pescennio Nigro.
Pescennius Nigers Reply unto his Soldiers, pretending lack of Wine as cause
of their lack of Courage, or faint Service, You may be ashamed (faith he) of
this Excuse, whereas they that foyl you, are but Water-drinkers. And Ammianus
says, he knew very many of them in his time, that neither knew use of Wine nor
Corn. Moses describing the manner of Ismaels life, said he was an Archer in the
Wilderness. None of the Saracens, if we may believe Ammianus, did ever set his
hand to the Plough but got their living for the most part by their The Sara^^n^
have been famous for their Artillary throughout all their Generations.
Bow. For as were they, such was their meat, wild Flesh or Venison, Herbs or
Milk, or such wild Fowls as the Wilderness did afford, and they could catch.
For their own Wildness he compares them to Kites, ready to spy a prey, but so
untame withal, that they would not stay by it, as Crows or other ravenous
Birds do by Carrion, but presently fled with what they caught unto their nests.
So notoriously was their Wildness incorporated into their Nature, that the
more Tame they grew, the less right they seemed to have unto their names, as
Strabo intimates.

9 Yet did they not more fully resemble Ismael and Hagars Conditions, then
preposterously imitate Abraham's Rites, or Religion. Their Father Ismael was
about thirteen years old when God established his Covenant with Abraham: and
for this reason not Isaacu^ octavo mox die circumcidu^t, qui mos adhuc Judaeis
durat, ut post ^otidem dies circumcisione^ celebrent --. Arabes vero post
decimu^ tertium annu^ id faciunt. Ismael enim generis eorum author, Abrahamo e
concubina natus, post tantum temporis est circumcisus. Josephus Antiq. l. 1. c.
12, and 13. This custom was continued by the Saracens of Spain and Africa.
circumcised until that Age: the Saracens Lud. vives De. verit. Fid. l. 4. c.
12. Says, the Saracens Circumcise their children at 14 years old. The Turks, I
know not whether upon ignorance of Ismaels age, at the time of his
Circumcision, or upon other occasions, (perhaps mistaking years for days)
Circumcise their children at eight years old. Philip. Lonicer. tom. 1. l. 2.
part 2. cap. 24.
till this day circumcise not their children before that time; when as they
might with as good reason defer it till about the hundredth year of their age,
because Abraham was thereabouts when he first received this Seal of Gods
Covenant* Abraham erected Altars, and Jacob anointed the stone, in the place
where God had appeared to him: the Saracens from these or like Traditions,
Celebrate their Sacrifices Saracenis autem (quandoquidem and ipsi de ea re
aliquid dicere velle videntur) sufficiat ad confusionem quod in eremo lapidi
inanimato sacrificia faciant, acclamentque hanc vocem Chob^r, quod a patribus
acceptum per puerilia Mysteria and Fes^a peragant. Synodus Nicena secunda.
Action quarta in Epist. Germani Episc. ad Thom. Episc. Claudiopolios. The Jews
and Saracens had objected worshipping of Images to the Christians of that Age,
and this Synod uses this Apology better beseeming a scolding butter-quean
then such as should be Reverend Fathers; their testimonies notwithstanding we
may admit without Prejudice to that Controversy betwixt us and them.
Unto a stone with Apish and Childish Solemnities. God commanded Moses
(ignorant belike of that religious and decent custom which his Forefathers in
like cases used) to put off his shoes, when he was to tread on Holy Ground;
Which Rite, was afterward observed by the Jews in their more Solemn Vows, and
the Nunc quoque Man i and Saraceni, ejusmodique genus hominum, templa, in
quibus Sacra facturi sunt, non ingrediuntur nisi Calceis depositis. Gyraldus de
Symb. Pythag.
Saracens to this day have their Nudipedalia sacrificia. Abraham, if we may
believe Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1. c. 8 Vide Hieron. in vita Hilarionis. Et Riberam
in quint. Amos. numero. 72. Of the occasions of these Saracens Idolatry, and
preposterous Imitation of the Patriarchs, vide Sozomen. lib. 6. c. 38.
Josephus from his sober Contemplation of the Heaven and Stars, began to detest
the Idolatry of the Heathen, and to adore that Divine Providence, by which
these supposed Gods were guided: the Saracens falling back to Heathenism, adore
Lucifer or the morning Star; and from their Forefathers no doubt the Israelites
learned this Idolatry in the Wilderness. And as I should conjecture their
habitation in Tents, and wandering life was not continued, throughout so many
generations, so much upon Necessity, as in Imitation of Abraham's using Tents,
necessary in that time for him, that would Journey throughout so many Countries
as he was enforced to do.

CAP. XXVI.
The Beginning and Progress of ISMAELS Greatness.

1 THe chief strength of Ismaels Sons in Ancient time did consist in Artillery,
as we may gather from the Prophet, Isaiah 21. 16. Yet a year according to the
years of an hireling, and all the glory of Kedar shall fail, and the residue of
the number of the strong Archers of the sons of Kedar shall be few: for the
Lord God of Israel has spoken it. Though the plague here threatened by the
Assyrians did overtake them: yet as Saint Jerome notes, they escaped the rod of
Gods wrath, better then most of their neighbors, by reason of their speedy
removal from place to place, most of them such as were never out of their
dwelling, whilst they had Tents, and Camels, and Wastes to range in.
Afterward they continued troublesome neighbors unto Syria, until it was
annexed to the Roman Empire, by whose valor the strength of their Strabo. lib.
16
Archers was again diminished, and the Reign of their Phylarchi cut short. But
their Country first brought into the Form of a Province by Trajan, in whose
time the Hagarens, (so soon are they weary of Civil Subjection) begun to revolt
and for ought I find, were never brought again to perform perfect obedience
unto the Roman or any other people.

2 Their City says Dion, was neither great nor rich, yet had it Zoars
privilege: He that preserved the one from the Storms of Fire and Brimstone,
Lege histor. apud Dion. l. 68.
which devoured far greater neighbour-Cities, did guard the other against the
violence of two most Potent Emperors, who had overrun the mightiest Kingdoms
of the Earth. The Heathen thought the Sun, to whom their City was consecrated,
did protect it. But can they show us any Prophecy of Old, given by Phoebus for
this peoples good? we can show them the express promise of Abraham's God, more
then two thousand years before, for making Them and their Brethren a Mighty
Nation Let the Atheist judge, whether their Gods Arm was shortened, or whether
His Miracles, which the Scripture tells us were wrought for the sons of the
Freewoman, whilst they followed their Fathers steps, can seem incredible,
being compared with the wonderful deliverance of the Agarens, the sons of the
Pond-woman, from Trajan and Severus, both Besieging them in Person. The soil
about their City was barren, and when Trajan besieged it very hot; so that the
violence of the siege could not be long. These Signs the Politicians could
assign of Trajans ill success. Put whence was it, that as often as the City was
assaulted the Seuldiers were annoyed with Lightnings Thunders Whirl-windes and
Hail* affrighted or dazzled with the apparition of Rain-Bows? whence was it that
Flies should corrupt and spoil their meat, whilst they did eat it? by these
and the like means, wonderful in the Heathens sight, was Trajan forced to give
over the siege; which he had followed, not without great danger of his life, by
coming within these strong Archers shot in viewing the City, shortly after, (as
if he had fought before with men, but now against God) falling into a disease,
whereof he died.

3 About Eighty years after, the Emperor Severus, disdaining (as Trajan had
See Dion. lib. 75. where he calls Them Arteni.
done) that these Hagarens should stand out still against the Romans, when all
the rest about them had yielded, being repulsed with loss of Men and Munition,
made great preparation for the second Assault, in which (after great loss of
his Soldiers) having overthrown part of the City-wall, he caused the Retreat
to be sounded in Policy, hoping the besieged would have come to entreat for
Peace and Liberty, which he was not minded to grant, but upon Condition they
would bewray the hidden Treasure supposed to be Consecrated to the Sun. But
they continued resolute a whole day, giving no intimation of any Treaty for
Peace. The Soldiers in the mean time were so discontented, that on the morrow
following, the Europaeans before most resolute, would not enter at the Breach:
and the Syrians, enforced to undertake the service, had a grievous Repulse. So,
says Dion, God delivered the Lib. 79.
City, recalling the Soldiers by Severus, when they might have entered, and
restraining Severus the second day by the Soldiers backwardness. The Conquest
after this breach, was in Martial Esteem so easy, that one of his Captains
confidently undertook to Effect it, without the hazard of any other man's life
besides so he might have but 550. Europaean Soldiers assigned him. To which
fair Profer the Emperor (as pettish as they had been peevish) in a distracted
Chafe replied: But where shall I find so many Soldiers? and so departed into
Palestina. Thus are the proud Assaults of greatest Monarchs, in their height of
strength, but like the Billows of a swelling Tide, which break over the banks,
and immediately fall again. The Almighty has set bounds to both, which they
must not pass; and under his protection may Ismael rest, as secure from the
Roman Forces, to whom he had given all the Regions round about them, as Edom
did from the Israelites, when they slew mighty Kings, and cast out far greater
Neighbour-nations. It is probable that these Hagarens, after their good
succes^e against Trajan and Severus, did propagate their Name to all the sons
of Ismael; as whole nations in like cases take new Denominations from the
Ringleaders unto Revolt. Lib. 6. Cap. 38.
Sozomen and Saint Comment. in 21. Isa. and 25 Ezech.
Hierom, both living shortly after this people was generally known by the name
of Saracens, avouch without question, (what they could have given reason for,
had they foreseen Posterities Incredulity) They usurped the Name of Sarah, in
hope to extinguish that note of Bastardy, imported in their for*mer Name of
Hagarens: as great men's Bastards in few descents, will attempt the changing of
their Ignominious Coat. And in all Ecclesiastic writers, the names of Saracens
or Hagarens, are used promiscuously as Equivalent; which argues that the name
of Hagarens had sometimes been common to all the race of Ismael, not
appropriate to the Agraei or such as the Scripture calls Hagarites.

4 It is evident out of Ammianus, that the name of Saracens was not Ancient.
The first certain mention of it is in Ptolomey: who describes a Region called
Saracene in the West part of Ismaels Territories, as they are described by
Moses, and a people, called Saraceni in the wealthy Arabia, near unto the
mountains, which the Scenitae inhabit. Whether the Fertility of the Soil, might
make them scorn their former Name, as it would cause them loath their Ancient
Seat: or whether given, or taken upon other occasions: the whole Progeny as
well in the desert Arabia as elsewhere was willing to make the Benefit of it,
as an Argument to persuade the world they were Freeborn, and true Heirs of
that Promise whence the Jews were fallen. For Mahomet, as all writers agree,
used this plausible Etymology as a fair Color to countenance his Foul
Blasphemies: and a Ibi ab Saracenis coepta est Oration, quae commiserationem
efflagitaret. Co^mune^ esse Deum quem utrique colerent, ritu^ diversum. Illis
Abraham esse generis principium, quod a Sa^a geniti Saraceni dicantur, fratres
esse, communi praeditos humanitate, sub uno patre Deo, humanarum rerum
varietate jam se victos saepe ante victores. Krantzius Saxon. l. 7. c 12.
Grave Relator of Truth, not accustomed to make Speeches for dead men to utter,
brings in the later Saracens in the Siege of Torutum (which was a mile from
Tire) using their Name derived from Sarah, as an argument to persuade their
true descent from Abraham, for whose sake they hoped for Favor at Christians
hands. But they could not so easily change their Nature, as their Name: the
greater they grow in might, the more exactly they fulfill that Prophecy of
Ismael, And he shall be a Wild Man, his hand shall be against every man, and
every man's hand against Him. For a long time they continued, like Forward, but
poor Gamesters, not able to Set at more then One at once, and that for no great
Stake, without some to bear their part; until at length by their Treacherous
Shuffling from Side to Side, and Banding sometimes with one, sometimes another
against some third, they grew so flush, that they durst Set at All, and take
Asia, Europe, and Africa to Task at once.

5 Sometimes they took part with Mithridate, and other Eastern nations, against
Lucullus and Pompey, and yet ready to join with Pompey against the Jews. Some
of them again were for the Parthians against the Romans, others for the Romans
against the Parthians, some now for the one, then for the other as Alchandonius
and Osr^enus Dioni, aliis Arabs, quanqua^ and Osroeni Arabes origin,
Mesoporamiae incolae
Augarus before mentioned. Some again for Pescennius Niger against Severus,
others against Pescennius, afterward one while for the Persian, and another
while for the Romans, as in the times of Constantius and Julianus. (...) ^gera
gradiens manu in statione quadam sub pellibus mansit, ubi Saracenorum reguli
gentium genibus supplices (...), oblata ex auro Corona, tanquam mundi nation
unique suarum Dominum adorarunt, suscepti gratanter ut ad furta bello^
adpositi. Ammian. Marcell. l. 23.
The later of whom they Reverenced most of any Roman; and yet at length, not
satisfied in their Expectations, Hos Saracenos ideo pati(...) ^^se stos, quod
Salatia M^^eraque pl^tima a Juliano ad similitudi^ temporis accipe^^ ve^^ti,
questique apud cum, solum audierant Imperatorem belli^^sum and vigilantem,
Ferrum habere non Aurum. Ammian. lib. 25
revolting from him. Afterward, they serve under the Romans against the
Goths: and yet while the Goths and other Barbarous people, clasp with the
Roman Eagle in the West, These foul Harpies pluck off her Train in the East;
and not therewith content take their flight toward the West to snatch the meat
out of the other Bussards mouth, and beat them one after another from the prey
which they had seized on in Spain and Africa; attempting the like in France,
Greece, and Germany; dis-pluming the Breasts, and oft-times ready to devour the
very Heart, even Italy and Rome it self. A naked S^ issuing from his own
company, set upon a Body of Goths, Slew one, set his mouth to the wound, and
sucked the Blood. So says A^. Marcellinus, in the end of His Last Book.


6 Finally, as Ismael began first to give proof of his might, when Isaac^
strength begun to fail, so can we scarce name and place where Isaacs Seed have
been scattered, whither the dread of Ismaels has not followed them: that such
Christians, as would not suffer the miserable Estate of the one to sink into
their souls, nor learn to fear Gods Judgments showed upon Them, might
apprehend the other, as present Executioners of like Woe and Vengeance upon
Themselves. It is well observed by the Author of the Tripartite work, Touching
the Sacred War (annexed to the Council of Lateran) that the Persecution of
Christians by the Saracen, has been every way greater and more grievous
without interruption, then all the Persecutions under the Roman Emperors, or
any Foreign Enemies. These provocations by this Foolish Nation, witness the
Truth of Gods threatenings to the Ancient Jews, and that our pride of heart has
been like theirs: for the asswaging whereof his pleasure has been, To bring
the most wicked of the Heathen to possess ou^ houses, and to defile the Holy
Places. According to their Judgment has he judged the most part of
Christendom. Such Servility as the Jews suffered under the Creeks and
Asiaticks, have They endured under the Saracen, and the Turk who is but a
Proselyte of Ismael and Heir by adoption of that promise. Genesis 17. 20. I will
multiply him exceedingly, and I will make a great nation of him. Besides his
participation with him in the Covenant of Circumcision, (the best Pledge and
ground of Ismaels greatness) the Manners and Conditions of the Turks and
Saracens have great Affinity; The Turk also is a Wild Man, yea this is the
Signification of his Name (as Uterque in ^ne suae historiae Arabs likewise is
as much as homo ag^^stis, or incul tus. And Arabia, as much as ^a agrestis and
inculta: in which al things gr^w promi^^^ously. And if I mistake not, only the
(...)late (...) parts of that Coun^, which we call Arabia, (...) so called in
S^^red Story.
Chalcocondylas and I onicer expound it.) But though both Turks and Saracens by
Christians continuance in their Fathers sins have been perpetual Scourges of
Christendom; yet has God at sundry times given us manifest Signs of Help laid
up in store, so that we would turn to him with our whole hearts. The sirange
and almost Incredible, though most undoubted Victories, which Christians
sometimes had over them, do lively represent the Miraculous Victories of the
Jews over the Heathen, related in Scriptures. To omit others, It might be
remembered as an Irrefragable Witness as well of the multitude of Gods Mercies
toward us, as of Ismaels Posterity, that ^.
Three Hundred and Eighty Thousand of them should be slain all in one day by
one Christian General. ^.
Unless the Lord had raised us up a Gedeon then, he only knows how quickly
these parts of Christendom might have been Rebaptized in their Blood, and born
the name of Saracens ever after. And, as a German writer well observes, the
French Kings might well brook that Title of Christianissimi, from that
Admirable Exploit of Carolus Martellus ^.
, the next means under Gods Providence that other parts of Europe had not
Saracen Tyrants instead of Christian Princes. Of such particular Experiments,
as the Histories of Turks and Saracens afford, answerable to the Prophecies in
Scripture concerning them, we shall have fitter occasion to speak hereafter.

CAP. XXVII.
The Persecutions of the Jews by Trajan: and the Desolation of their Country by
Adrian: their Scattering through other Nations, Foretold by Moses.

1 THough the Greatness of the Jews Former Plagues under Vespasian had made
their number less in their own land; yet Egypt, Cyrene, and Cyprus, had too
many of those Snakes within their Bowels, until their deadly Stings, procuring
others, did provoke their own Destruction. In the later end of Trajans Reign,
the Manner of their Outrageous Massacres, practiced upon both The Jews did eat
their Flesh* Besmeared Themselves with their Blood Wore their skins. Sawed them
asunder. Cast them to Beasts. Made them Kill one another, etc. Dion. l. 68. in
Fine.
Greeks and Romans in the forementioned Countries, was as Heinous, as the Facts
themselves; though these Heinous beyond all Credence, if not related by most
credible and most unpartial Writers. Besides the particular Butcheries which
they committed throughout Egypt; About Cyrene these Jews did slay two hundred
thousand; and in Cyprus two hundred and fifty thousand. The Lord (no doubt) had
smitten them, as he had threatened Deuteronomy. 28. 28. with this Madness and Blindness
of heart, that they might hereby provoke this Puissant Emperors Indignation;
which otherwise would have slept, but now pursues them throughout his
Dominions, not as Enemies, or Rebels of the Empire, but as Noxious Creatures to
Humane Society, with Revenge suting to their former Outrages. Dion. ibid.
Partly for the Cyprians better Security in time to come, partly in Memory of
their former Misery, and these Jews Infamy; It is publicly inacted, that no
Jew, though driven by Tempest thither, should presume to set foot within their
Coast, upon pain of present execution, as already condemned by his very
Appearance on that Soil, which had been tainted with the deadly Venom of his
Countrymen.

2 But lest Posterity, little respective of Jewish Affairs (through negligence
of the Roman Writers) should forget, or, from the inconsiderate frailty of
Humane Nature, less observe these two most grievous Persecutions of the Jews
then was behoveful for Testification of Moses, or Christ's Prophecies, and
Confirmation of Christian Faith: In Adrians time, (like Traitors that had
fainted upon the rack before their full Confession taken) they are recovered to
greater Torture. And lest the Nations in that, or Ages following, should not
acknowledge them to have been such a Mighty People, as the sacred Story makes
them: they are made a Spectacle to the world again, to show their Natural
Strength by their grievous lingering pains in dying. This was that which Moses
had said Deuteronomy. 28. 59. The Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the
plagues of thy seed, great plagues and of long continuance, sore diseases, and
of long durance. Yet their Destruction now, a^ at both times (always) before,
was from their own Procurement. For Adrian, causing new Aelia built by him
where Jerusalem stood, to be inhabited by others, Christians as well as Jews,
and permitting the use of their Country-religion to all: the Jews began first
to Repine while Adrian was near, afterward to Mutiny upon his departure out of
these Eastern Provinces.

3 The Fresh memory of their former Desolation, made their strength seem
little, and the Apprehension of their weakness made the Romans Care for
preventing new dangers, less then otherwise it might, and in reason should
have been. But as men Environed with Darkness, have great advantage of such as
stand in the Light; and presumption of good-casting in the beginning bring
such, as intend the after-game well, to better possibility of winning the
stake: so these Jews, partly through the Romans Confidence of their strength,
partly by their own Secrecy in meeting, security of harbor in Caves and Dens
purposely dug in the earth, and diligent providing necessaries for war; from
little and contemptible beginnings gather such strength and resolution, that
they can be content to set the Whole Stock upon it, offering Battle unto the
choicest Warriors of the Empire, to Hadrianus optimo quos ^^duces adver su eos
mittit, quorum prin^^s ^uit Julius ^eve^us q^i ex (...) (...), con (...) Ju^^o^
(...) (...) etc. Dion. Hist. Romans ^i 69.
Julius Severus that noble General himself, called to this Service (such was
the danger) out of this Island of Britain. And albeit the Romans in the end had
the Victory without Controversy, (...) ^uo qu^ ex ^oma^ complu^es in ^o ^^llo.
Q^m Hadrianus, cum ^^ribere^ ad ^e^^tum, non est (...) illo ^dio, quo uti ^^pe
(...) con^u eve^^nt: Si Vo^ Liberique (...) valet^^, ^ene est* ^go qu^dem and
Ex (...) Valemus. Dion. Ib them.
yet would they not have wished many Triumphs at the same price. This peoples
last conflict with death and destruction now seizing upon them, may witness to
the world, that they had been a principal part of it, now so generally and
deeply affected with their last pangs. For as this judicious and unpartial
writer says; The whole world, in a manner, was shaken with this commotion of
the Jews. Dion. 69. Book.

4 But as the Preacher observes, that riches are oftentimes reserved to the
owners for their evil: So these Jews Extraordinary strength was given them for
like Destruction. The greater danger their Mutiny had occasioned to the Empire,
the greater was the Emperors Severity in punishing their Rebellion past the
greater, his care to prevent the like in time to come. In battles and
skirmishes were slain of this people 580000. besides an infinite number,
consumed with famine and diseases, during the time of this lingering war,
protracted of purpose by the Romans, not willing to try it out in open field
with such a forlorn desperate multitude. Now as Deuteronomy. 28. 62.
Moses had expressly foretold, and Julius Severus nulla ex part ausus est
aperte cu^ hostibus congredi, ^itudine ipsoru^ atque desperatione cognita, sed
eos singu* (...) militum legato^umque numero aliquo adoriens, ^ns at(...) (...)
^s, (...) quidem, sed minore cum periculo, and ad^erere and exhaurire, and
exscindere potuit, ut pauci adm^dum evaserint, (...) ^ arces muni^, vicique
celeberri^i atque nobilissimi nongenti octoginta quinq^e funditus (...) (...)*
(...) sunt in (...) ^que hominum quingenta octoginta ^illia: ^um autem qui
^ame, (...), and igni ^ no^ potuit, it^ ut omni^ pen^ Judae^ deserta relicta
^ueri^. Dion. Hist. R^m. lib. 69.
Dion (living not long after this time) Emphatically notes, They were left Few
in number, their land laid waste, fifty of their strongest Munitions utterly
razed, 985 of their chief and most populous Towns sacked and consumed by fire.

5 This Mighty Destruction of these Jews, and general Desolation of their
Country by Romans, and their Tributaries of these Western Countries, (...)
(...) (...) ^^th Sp^ds by B^^th, Julius Seve^us was called to their destruction
out of this Island, wherein Vespasian (...) ^ Services. Their ^nsigns (being
Eagles) were as Emblems of their S^^f^nesse to execute Gods (...) ^ in this
place by (...) Inspira^ion, alludes unto the Roman Eagles.
a people strange and perhaps unheard of to their Ancestors: are Everlasting
Monuments of the truth of Moses his Prophecy, Deuteronomy. 28. 49. The Lord shall
bring a nation upon thee from far, even from the end of the world, flying swift
as an Eagle; a nation whose tongue thou shall not understand: a nation of a
fierce countenance, which will not regard the person of the old, nor have
compassion of the young. The same shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the
fruit of thy land, until thou be destroyed; and he shall leave thee neither
wheat, wine, or oil, neither the increase of thy kine, nor the flocks of thy
sheep, until he have brought thee to naught. And he shall besiege thee in all
thy Cities, until thy high and strong walls fall down, wherein thou trustest, in
all the land: and he shall besiege thee in all thy cities throughout thy land,
which the Lord thy God, has given thee. Thus at length Judah as well as
Israel, has ceased to be a Nation not without Manifest Signs Signs foreshewing
Juries (...)* (...) (...), recorded by Dion. l. ^9. and others.
foreshewing their Fatal Expiration. Solomon's Sepulcher, which they held in
greatest Honor, a little before this War, did fall asunder of its own accord;
as if it would have signified unto them, that Gods covenant, made with Solomon
for Judah's peace and restoration, was now utterly void, and finally Cancelled
by its Rupture and Fall. Wolves and Hyena's did howl throughout their Streets,
and devour this People in the Fields: these are the Lords Messengers of Woe and
vengeance to this ungratious seed, whose Fathers had killed and stoned his
Prophets, sent unto them for their good. Yet is not the wrath of the Lord
ceased, but his hand is stretched out against them still. For Jornandes. de
Regn. success. (in 8o) p. 103. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. ex Aristone Pellaeo.
Adrian, after this strange Desolation, by public Decree ratified with the
Senates consent, prohibits any Jew to come within the view of Jury. This he did
only in a Politic respect, lest the sight of their native Soil might inspire
this People with some fresh desperate Resolutions, but herein made, though
unwittingly, Gods Angel to keep, by his powerful sword, this wicked Progeny of
those rebellious and Ungratious Husbandmen, that had killed their Lords
Firstborn, out of that Pardise, which he had set them to dress and keep. The
same mighty Lord, having now (as it were) Disparked the place which he had
walled and fenced about, and graced with many Charters of greatest Privileges,
does by his Arm, stretched out against them still, scatter the Relics of this
Rascal Herd throughout all the Nations under heaven. So as this Remnant (left
by Adrian) and their race, have been as the Game, which Gods judgments have
held in perpetual Chase for this Fifteen hundred years.

6 Thus are Gods Judgments executed upon this People; according to the order
and course of Moses his Sentence, pronounced against them almost two thousand
years before. For after he had foretold that Paucity, whereunto this last War
had brought them, Deuteronomy. 28. 62. he adds immediately, verse. 63. As the Lord
has rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you; so he will rejoice
over you to destroy, and bring you to naught: and ye shall be rooted out of the
land, whither thou go to possess it: and the Lord shall scatter thee
amongst all people, from the one end of the world to the other. Quos vero
Hadrianus in eo bello Judaeos cepit, in Hispania^ exulatum ^isit, (haec fuit
decima ^orum Captivitas;) porro ex eo ^empore, ad soelicissima usque tempor^
Catholicorum regum Ferdinandi and Isabellae, atque eti^ Emanu^lis invicti
Portugal* liae regis publicae in Hispania Judaeoru^ Synagogae ^u* ere. Jo.
Vasaeus, Chron. Hispan. An^. Chri^^i. 137. vide Pe^. Ant. Beuter. (...). 10. c.
19.
Such as were Captivate in this War, were transplanted by Adrian into Spain,
his native Country: where they had their Synagogues since his, until Ferdinando
and Isabels time. Of their ill rest there, and in other of these Western
Nations, (foretold by Moses in the very next words) we are now to treat: but
first to advertise the Reader. S^ (...) C^er of the History of the sacred War
complains. N^lli mirum erat, nos rerum per Judaeam gestarum no^itia desti(...),
ob Ro^^norum tum in Judaeos tu^ in Christianos invidia^, quorum quidem tempore,
and devotionem and pietatem, ^am quandam persuasionem credebant. Nulla igi^ur
eorum ratione habita, nec mentionem de his ha^ere digna^^ (...). Add qu^d qui
Syr^ae praefectus erat, hanc qu^que viribus, opibus, armis, militibus exutam,
regebat. Cumque Chri(...) (...) pace quam bello magis accresceret, tumultu
nunquam inclaruit Judaea, neminem Imperatorum seditione nobili(...). ^l. Joh^n.
Herold. lib. 1. cap. 15. de Contin. Bell. Sacr^.
That the state of these Jews, from this time until the Expiration of the Roman
Empire, cannot easily be gathered from any Roman Writers; who seldom vouchsafe
the Jews or Christians any mention, unless enforced thereunto by some such
Famous War or Mutiny, as fell out in Vespasians, Trajans, or Adrians time; or
by some other event redounding to the Romans glory; whereas Jury after this
time, was not famous for any tumult, till Romes Captivity; the Jews wanted
strength, and Christians willing minds, to erect any Emperors praise by their
Seditions. So that, whatsoever Calamity, Either of Them suffered by the Romans,
was past over by Roman Writers, as private wrongs not worthy of Registring in
their Annals.

7 Why Roman Writers make no mention of our Savior Christ (...) his Acts.
No marvail then, if they took no notice of our Savior, or his acts, all
tending to Peace and Loyalty. For as Tacitus notes, Tacit. Lib. 5. Histor. Ergo
abolendo rumori Nero subdidit reos, and quaesitiss^mis poen^s affecit, quos per
(...) ^^visos, v^lgus Christianos appellabat. Auctor nominis ejus Christus,
qui, Tiberio imperante, per procuratorem ^tium Pilatum supplicio affectus erat.
Tacit. Annal. Li* 1.
Judaea was most quiet in Tiberius time; which was the best news the Romans
cared to hea^ thence: only Tacitus spleen to Christians (it seems) had made him
inquisitive of their first Original, whose Author he acknowledges to have been
one Christ, put to death by Pontius Pilate, in the reign of Tiberius.

8 The estate of these Jews in general, between Adrians and Honorius time may
be gathered out of the Reverend Fathers of the Primitive Church; who usually
stopped the Heathens or Blasphemous Athiests mouths, by proposing their
condition, then known unto all the world, for such as our Savior had foretold.
But these Reverend Fathers observations, and such scattered testimonies of
their estate and quality, as can be gathered out of Roman Writers, during that
flourishing age of Fathers, and continuance of the Roman Empire, will come in
more fitly in the Article of our Saviors Passion.

CAP. XXVIII.
Of the Jews estate after the Dissolution of the Roman Empire, generally
throughout Europe, until their coming into England.

1 AFter the dissolution of the Roman Empire, they had some hopes of taking
root under the shelter of Tunc temp^^s, Gallia^^m Epi^copi, sacros ordines non
nisi pretio and quaestu conferehant; uti ne hodie quidem faciunt: and Jud^i,
genus hominum coelo quoque ipsi invisum, Christians mancipia ^debant, Gregorio
utcunque non placebar, etc. Papirius Mass^n. lib. 1. Annal. Franco^um p. 63.
Theodebert and Theodorick, Kings of a great part of France, and other
Provinces, then annexed to that Kingdom. And whilst the Bishops of those
Countries made merchandise of sacred Orders, these Jews purchased Christians
for their Bondslaves; until Gregory the Great, by his Fatherly Admonitions and
reproof, wrought a Reformation of these two foul Enormities, and open Scandals
of Christianity. Their number after was much increased throughout most parts in
France, by their sudden decrease in Spain, caused by Sisebodus King of the
Goths, and Vide Cran^zium, lib. 4. Succiae, cap. 33.
Lord of that Country; who had urged them to profession of Christian Religion,
or perpetual exile from his Dominions, Such as made choice of Banishment,
before Baptism, fled in troops into France: where in short time, they and their
Countrymen, there residing before, had as hard entertainment under Dagobert,
though peaceably admitted at the first. Paul. Aemil in Dagoberto.
Some think the Fame, and Honor, which the Goth had purchased amongst
Christians by his late Fact, did inflame the Franck with a zealous desire of
like glory: others from more particular information of Ancient Writers, as well
Heraclius cum ^it^ris abunde esset instructus, ad ultimiun Astrologus
c^^icitur. Agnoscen^ itaque in signis side^u^, unp^rium ^^u^ a circumci^a gente
vastan* dum, and autumans id de Judaeis suisse praemonstratum, per internuntios
Dagobertum rogavit, Regem Francorum, ut ounct^^ Judaic^ ^ qui in Provinciis
illi subjectis mancbant, Christianos fieri praeciperet, eos vero qui nollent
aut exilio aut morte dam^ati. Quod Dagobertus volens effecit, omnes qui
nolnerint Baptisma suscipere, procul a finibus eliminans Franci^ P^ Heraclio
non de Judaeis, sed de Sa^^cenis fuerat praeostensum. Aimoinus sive Annonius,
lib. 4. cap. 22.
French as Vide Hisp^n Taraphae (Bound up with Vas^us) etc. in Sisebuto. I
suppose Sisebodus in Crantzius, and Sisebutus in Tarapha and Vas^us, a^e the
sarn^. As also that Egica a succeeding King, or Egican, in Vasaeus, and Egyta
in Tarapha, be the same.
Spanish, refer the Original of both Persecutions unto Heraclius the Emperor;
who seeking his Fates in the Stars, pulls down Gods Judgments from heaven upon
these Jews, scattered from the East to West. By this means, he had learned
(whether by mere skill in Astrology, or otherwise, is not now to be disputed)
That the wings of his Empire should be clipped by a Circumcised people. This
foreknowledge, howsoever gotten, was not given him for his Good (for his Fears
came upon him, whence he least suspected;) but for these Jews Mischief: for, he
deeming Them the likeliest, or the only men, that could bring his Fates upon
him, inserts the former Persecution as a condition of peace, then concluded
between him and Sisebutu, afterward prevails with Dagobert, for enforcing all
the Jews throughout his Dominions, either to renounce Circumcision, France, or
their Lives. And no doubt, but he, that could prevail thus far with these
western Kings, did also deal effectually with other Soveraignties of Europe,
nearer unto his Imperial Seat, for disinabling of this Nation from effecting
what he feared: much more would he seek their Extirpation, or Conversion,
throughout his own proper Dominions. And so I find his persecution of the Jews
recorded, by such as wrote his life, Judaeos etiam invitos ad Baptismum
compulit, Matheseos studiis operam dedit, haruspiciis and praestigiis daemonum
fidem adhibuit. Append, Aur. Victoris.
as one of the chief Memorables in his Reign: which confirms their report,
though otherwise Authentic, who refer the two former Persecutions, under the
Goth and Frank, unto the occasions above mentioned.

2 Shortly after, the Progeny of such as had been enforced to Baptism by Hoc
tempore Judaei perfidi non solum tunicam sacri Baptismatis, quam susceperant,
macul runt: Sed e^ia contra Regem regnumque conspirate au* si sunt, in quos
haec poena statuta, ut omnibus suis rebus nudati, tam ipsi perfidi, quam uxores
eorum and filii, ac reliqua posteritas per cunctas Hispaniarum Provincias,
servituti subjacerent perpetuae, manerentque usquequaque dispersi. Praeterea
quicunque eosdem Judaeos in servitutem reciperent, in nullo eos permitterent
rituum suorum ceremonias celebrare aut colere. Filii vero eorum ab aetatis anno
Septimo, nullam cum parentibus suis habitationem, aut societatem habere
permitterentur, sed fidelissimis Christianis a ^iendi traderentur, and filiae
eorum ac filii Christianis in matrimonium darentur, ne infidelium patrum suorum
Semitas quibusibet occasionibus iterare possent. Vasoeus in Chron. Hispan.
anno. 694.
Sisebutus, for their revolt from Christ, and conspiracy against Egica (his
Anointed) and his Kingdom, were adjudged to perpetual Servitude, throughout all
the Provinces belonging to Spain: prohibited the use of their rites and
Ceremonies, not permitted to inhabit together; but, as if the Lord had used the
Land of Jury as a Marl-pit, to fat the Soil of this Nation where his Vine was
planted; after he had lead forth the Jews thither in heaps, he scatters their
heaps over the whole sur-face of the Land. All Parents not suffered to commerce
with their children at all, after the seventh year of their age, committed by
public Decree to the Education of Christians, appointed in riper years to be
given in marriage unto their Sons and Daughters; that so the succession of
infidelity might be abolished. But Christian Princes consultations prevail as
little for their good, as Pharaohs policy for their Forefathers harm: they
must multiply, that Gods plagues may be multiplied upon them. This last here
mentioned, in their estimation not the least, though otherwise intended by the
state of Spain, was by the disposition of the divine providence brought to
pass, that another prophecy of Moses might be fulfilled: Thy Sons and thy
Daughters shall be given unto another people; and thine eyes shall still look
for them, even till they fall out; and there shall be no power in thy hand.
Deuteronomy. 28. 32.

3 Of their Estate from this Accident, till three hundred years after, nothing
memorable has come unto my reading: dishonorable it was, in that their name,
throughout this time, seems quite put out; miserable we may presume it, in
that their wonted curse is not expired, but rather increased in ages following,
in which we have express, distinct, undoubted, records.

4 About the year one thousand, they were so vexed throughout most parts of
Europe, that, as Moses had foretold, and Judaei ea tempestate, in pluribus
Europae locis graviter vexati, quid agerent, aut quo se verterent nesciebant,
etc. Papir* Massonus ex Glabro.
my Author (little thinking of Moses speeches) expressly notes, They could find
no rest. A company of them, seated about Orleans, out of their Divelish Policy,
address an Embassageto to the Prince of Babylon, advertising him, that the
Christians in these Western parts were joining forces to assault him, hoping
hereby to make him invade Christendom, by whose broils they expected, either
better security from wonted dangers, or fitter opportunity of fishing for gain
in troubled streams. But the tenor of their Embassage being either known, or
suspected by the Christians, the Ambassador upon his return was called in
question, convict, and sentenced to the Faggot. Nor could the heinousness of
the Fact be expiated by his death; the rest of his Countrymen (generally
presumed to be as treacherous, when occasion served) were made away, without
any Formal course of Law, by Fire, Water, Sword, or what instrument of death
came next to hand; This fury of Christians raging against them, as far as the
fame of their villainy was spread, which was quickly blazed throughout Europe.

5 Ere this time Ismael was come to his full growth, and his posterity having
prosecuted their old broken title to the Land of Promise, through their
division had left the possession of it to the Turk: and so far is Isaacs seed
from all hope of possessing the good things thereof, that the very love which
Christians, the true seed of Abraham, bare unto these Lovely dwellings of
Jacob, breeds his ungratious posterities Woe, unto whom the inheritance
belonged. For no expedition, either made, or intended by Christians for
recovering Jewry from the Turk and Saracens, but brings one Plague or other
upon the Jew; so provident is this People, to procure their own mischief, and
as it were to anticipate Gods Judgments upon themselves, by such Devices as
their former Embassage, whose effect was to hasten the Sacred War: which in the
Age following, undertaken upon other occasions, more then doubles all their
wonted miseries. For it being intended against the Turk and Saracen, these
other Infidels were apprehended as a fit subject for such Soldiers, as were
indeed bent for Asia and the Holy Land, to practice licentious hostile Outrages
upon, by the way. Others again made a show of setting forward against the Turks
or Saracens of Asia. intending indeed only to spoil the Jews of Europe; Unto
which purpose that worthy Edict of the Claremont Council ministered this
occasion.

6 Aventinus Bpo^r^m Anna^^um lib^o q^iu^^. P. 361. ^^ Germani^s c^litus voce
edita (^ta ^^adic^n^) D^us ^ult, ^alliis, ^^spa^^s, Pa^^^an^^s, l^a^i^, ^ ^^^^^
^s ho^^i^ vis, ^s prase^^^ Tet^at^^^, ^, ^ E^* ^pi, Sa^^^ ^^l, Mona^hi,
f^mi^^^ac^^ta, ^^ves, op^^ices, ag^^cola, ^, muli^r^^^^ cum c^^i^, ^ cum ^
^^mp^^, cont^berniis, uxori^us, liberis, pradiis, aratro, in Asiam gregatim
migrant; sub specie religionis (ita sunt huma^^n^landa ^ ^mp^n^ pe^p^^ant.
Anserem praeferunt spiritum sanctum esse. Carolum Magnum revixisse prae^.
The joint consent of Bishops and others there assembled, testified aloud in
these Terms, Deus vult, Deus vult, having found (as it seems) some lavish
commendations, as if it had been the Voice of God, and not of Man, brought
forth a Rumor of a voice from heaven, calling Europaeans into Asia: The report
was not so vain, as the people of those times credulous. For beside such as
were appointed, or would have been approved by the Council, huge multitudes of
all sorts, conditions and sexes, run like Hounds to the false Hallow; some
pretending the Holy Ghosts presence in visible shape. Amongst the rest one
E^^cho quoque Dynast^ cum Rheni accolis unde oriundus erat, ad Pannoniam
processit. lique omnes ^ ^ogo relig^^ nis nos^^^ ^i^^^re conantur, Philosophiam
nostram recipere recusantes Compilant, bonis omnibus ^ agunt, domibus climinant
atque contrucidant. Duodecim tum millia Judaeorum in nostra regine ^ in Annals
relatum est.
Emicho, with a great band of his Countrymen gathered from the banks of Rhein,
having ranged as far as Hungary, and there either despairing of his hoped prey
in Asia, or only using this expedition, generally countenanced by Christian
Princes, as a fair pretense to catch some Booty nearer home, falls upon the
Jews about that Country, compelling them either to live Christians, or die.
Besides the spoil of their goods, twelve thousand of their persons were slain
by Emicho, and his accomplices, as the Annals of these Countries do testify. The
like had been practiced a little before by one Codescalcus a Dutch Priest; who
had persuaded the King of Hungary, that it was a charitable deed to kill these
uncharitable Jews, until his beastly life did discredit his doctrine, and
Christians begun to feel the harms of such licentious Pilgrimages, after the
Jews being exhausted, could not satisfy his, and his followers greedy
appetites.

7 About the same Age, Per id tempus Judaei in Gallia and German a re^um suarum
sedem ac domicilium non pauci habebant; Petrus Cluniacensis literas ad
Ludovicum scripsit quae extant; iis laudat consilium regis de bello pro
Christianis adversus Arabes Persasque suscipiendo: deinde, exposita Judaeorum
perfidia atque improbitate, Auseratur air, vel maxima ex part imminuatur
Judaicarum divitiarum maleparta pinguedo, and Christianu^ exercitus, qui ut
Saracenos expugner, pecuniis, vel terris propriis, Christi domini sui amore,
non parcit, Judaeorum thesauris tam pessime acquisitis non parcat, reservetur
eis vita, auferatur pecunia. Serviant populis Christianis, etiam ipsis invitis,
divitiae Judaeorum. Crudelior in eos Rodulphus Vilis Monachus fuit, etc.
Papitius Massonus libro tertio in Ludovico septimo. p. 244.
Petrus Cluniacens^s directs a Parenetical discourse unto Lewis the French
King, for furtherance of his intended Expedition against the Saracens; showing
him withal a ready means of maintaining his army, making the perfidious Jews
purchase their lives with loss of their goods. But more vehement, if not more
Jewish, was Rodulphus Vilis the German Monk, delivering it in Sermons as sound
Doctrine, throughout both Germanies, that for the better supply of the sacred
war, (which Christians he thought were bound in conscience to undertake) the
Jews, being as great enemies to Christianity as the Saracens were, might not
only be robbed of all their goods, but ought to be put to death by Christians;
as a good Omen to their future success against the Saracens. And unless Saint
Bernard, with other grave Divines of that Age, had sounded a Counter-blast to
this Furious Doctrine, both by mouth and pen; this Monks prescript had been
practiced generally throughout Germany, ready enough to hold on as* she had
begun to evacuate her self of Jewish blood, always apprehended by that people
as the worst humor in their body politic: Many such general Massacres have
been intended against them in diverse Countries; but God still raised up one or
other to solicit their Cause, because Why the Lord would not have the Jews
utterly destroyed.
he has an ear continually unto the Psalmists Petition, not so much for Theirs
as Christians good; Slay them not lest my people forget it, but scatter them
abroad by thy power, Psalm. 59. 11. Unless God had given them such trembling
hearts, and sorrowful minds (as Moses had foretold) through Germany, France,
and other Countries, they had not been scattered so soon through this Island;
whither they were first brought from France, by him that brought many
grievances thence unto this Nation. But the evil which he intended, has God
turned to our good. For Gods Israel planted here until this day, may hear and
fear his Heavy Judgment, manifested upon these Jews in the time of our
forefathers; albeit at their first coming they found some breathing from their
wonted persecutions. But so prodigious is all appearance of prosperity, in such
as God has cursed, that these Jews hopes of ease and welfare, are an
infallible Symptom of great distemper in the public state wherein they live.
Twice only I find in all the Legend of their wandering, they had obtained some
freedom, and hopes of flourishing in the Lands where they were scattered: once
in France, in the time of Theodebert and Theoderick, when sacred orders (as you
heard before) were set to sale; Once in England, under William Rufus, whose
conditions were such, that whosoever would give enough, might have whatsoever
lay in his power to grant. Their estate in England, during other three Kings
reign until Richard the first, yields little matter of observation: this people
hate had not as yet broken out against them, but was all this time in
gathering; and after their first planting here they were to have a time to
bring forth fruit for others to eat, a time to gather wealth for others to
spend, as Moses had foretold.

8 Most miserable in the mean time was their estate throughout the Eastern
Empire, as one of their own Writers, (Benjamin Tudelensis who went on
Pilgrimage to visit his Countrymen, wheresoever dispersed throughout the
world) complains of their Nulli J^ urbem habitant, exclusi enim ab ^ aq^^^um,
atque ^^ter illud and So phiae ^que in urbem i^e per^ idque n^go^^ and
commercii causa: ^ qu^ cum magistris cong^ discipulis, inter quos prima, (...)
Abdias and Aaron ^ and Eliakim gubernator; ^ vestium seric^um, quam^ sunt,
i^que ditissimi. Nulli ^ S^lomonem Aegytium M^ cujus o^^^cio Judaei r^c^^antur,
^ ^olantur, quam gravem sentiunt: o^ enim invisi sunt Graecis Jud^i omnes,
nullo bonorum ac malorum discrimine; propter coriarios, qui dum ^ ^mpuram aquam
in plateas, ^ ^^^undent: ideoque omnes ^ p^^^untur, atque in plateis vapu^an^,
and coguntur violenter ins^rvite. Verum Jud^i ipsi (...), ut dixi, sunt,
vitique boni ac misericordes, ^ observatores, qui captivitatis mise^ ammo.
Benjamin Tudelensis in Iti^. p. 31.
general hard usage amongst the Graecians, instancing in such as were seated
about Constantinople, within whose walls they might not come, but upon occasion
of public commerce or business; in which case they were allowed passage only
by Boat, having their habitation, as it were, in an Island. Amongst two
thousand of this servile Congregation there residing, not one permitted to come
on horseback, save only Solomon the Emperors Physician; whose exaltation
(perhaps not fourteen handfuls above ground) was held as a publik grace of the
whole Nation, the chief solace of that miserable and servile usage, which all
the rest, without difference, good or bad, did sustain, daily beat and scourged
in the open streets. Yet must we believe this Relator; That these Jews were
wealthy, good and merciful men, observant of the Law, such as could patiently
endure this miserable captivity. But Patience perforce, according to the
Proverb, is no Patience. If GOD had granted them ability, or opportunity, they
had quickly showed their Jewish minds by Jewish actions. And why he keeps
them The Fulfilling of Samuels Prophecy in the Jews living after our Saviors
death. ^ 8. 18.
continually under, unwilling to hear their cry, though They cannot, we
Christians may easily perceive the cause. For so his Prophet Samuel had
foretold; And ye shall cry out at that day, because of your King whom ye have
chosen you; and the Lord will not hear you at that day. Which words, Joh^.
Baptista de (...) ^.
as a learned convert Jew rightly observes, were not fulfilled in Samuels
time; whose opinions may be fortified by these reasons.

9 Samuels authority over that people, was not so strictly linked with GODS,
but that they might reject the one for their present Judge, still retaining the
other for their supreme Lord: and who can deny, that the God of their Fathers
did rule over them in David's, Solomon's, Jehoshaphats and Ezekiahs times? Sin no
doubt they did in abandoning Gods Priest and Prophet, to follow the fashions of
other Nations, in submitting themselves unto a King. And Samuel, like a good
Physician, forewarneth them of that incurable disease, which this new-fangle
and intemperate act did even then Prognosticate: whose Fatal Crisis
notwithstanding did not ensue, until they (overgrown with desperate, wilful,
and intemperate malice) had rejected Hint with open mouth, who was both Priest
and Prophet, and their lawful King; whose kingdom was not of this world, whose
Sovereignty was so united with the divine Majesty, that ^
in casting him away, they could not but cast off God, that he should not reign
over them.

10 Again, before that time, God always heard their cry, and redeemed them
from all Foreign Bondage; and such as Samuel there describes, was neither
general, nor perpetual under their own Kings: neither did the best of such use
any, nor the worst all, or most part of the natural Israelites, in such sort as
he there threatens; yet all the miseries there threatened, 1 Samuel 8. 11, 12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. have been since accomplished in full measure if I may so
speak, in length, breadth, and profundity. First, this Servi^^^y has been
extended over All the Nation, without exception. Secondly, the continuance of
it has been exceeding long and perpetual without interruption; and so must
continue until they confess their forefathers rebellion, and acknowledge him
for their King, whom rejecting, they rejected God; for he that will not so
honor the Son, cannot Honor the Father as King. Lastly, those marks of
servility, set forth by Samuel, have been so deeply imprinted in this
generation rejected of GOD, that his Prophecy compared with Modern Histories
concerning them, will seem but as Painted Wounded men in a cloth of Arrasse, to
the bleeding relics of a scattered, vanquished army. For neither under any
Caesar, (though they made choice of Caesar for their King) nor under any other
Kings or States, have they lived as Freedenizons, capable of public Office or
Honor: the best of them are but as slaves, prohibited to use the meanest of
Christians so: The most of them, as Samuel foretold, are admitted in
Commonwealths, for manual services or other handy-crafts employments; Captains
I think none of them have been; unless perhaps in some desperate services:
many of them in greater Cities are suffered to follow Merchandise, that they
may serve the State as Spunges; always surer to be squeezed for the moisture
they have sucked, then to be nourished by it: Sundry of them are curious,
Artificers, and profess ingenious Trades; like silly Silkworms, permitted to
exercise their skill in precious stuff, to fill Princes Coffers, and find their
Countries clothing.

11 The possession offields and Vineyards, has not been so usual amongst this
people, as their spoil amongst such as possessed any: so this Jew relates it
as a special prerogative of Ex Na^^ona proficiscitur lex in omnes nationes* ubi
sapientes sunt and magni and suspiciendi imprimis Calonymus Filius Theodori
bonae memoriae ex semine David recta genealogia, qui praedia and fundos habet a
principibus regio nis, nullius hominis vi^ aut impetu^ metuentia. Benjamin. Tu
delens. in Iti^ p. 14.
Calonymus, the son of Theodorus (both in their life-times) chief of the
Synagogue in Narbona, and lineally descended (as he pretends) from David,
that he might quietly possess the fruits of his grounds. The Princes, it
seems, of that and like places, did take other Jews fields and vineyards, and
best Olive trees, and gave them unto their servants, rather tything then taking
the tenth of their seed and Vineyards; for that usually was the Jews part, the
other nine (as Samuel foretold, 1 Samuel 8. Est urbs eni^ ipsa Them magna and
sr^ quens. Hor^ regio inter montes qui septe ntrionales dicuntur, sedecim
dierum iti^ re protenditur, urbibus magnis and m^ nitis^^mis e^ culta, nul^
loque exter^ gentis jug^ subdita. Un prodeuntes incolae fini^ mas and ren^
tiores etia^ gentes diri^ unt omnes quotquot (...) usque ad A^ bes; qui^ ipsis
^oedus bent. Iden p. 75.
14, 15, 16.) fell unto Princes Officers lot.

12 But the greater these dispersed sons os Isaac Servility was, the more it
commends the fidelity of Gods word concerning the sons of Rechab, who, as
this Author relates, live united in form of a Kingdom or Nation, not subject
to any foreign yoke; rather able to offend their neighbors, then likely to
receive harms from them. Their estate to this Authors days continued such, as
they themselves acknowledged unto Jeremy; Only experience (it seems) had
taught them to build Cities, for their better security against the incursion of
forrainers, which was not against their oath, in case of necessity, as
appears from Jeremy 35. 9, 10, 11, 12. Because in other points, they have
obeyed the commandment of Jonadab their Father, and kept his precepts, and done
according to all that he had commanded them; therefore Jonadab has not wanted
a man to stand before him until this day; that is, their estate has continued,
such as their Father left them, much better then the estate of Abraham's Sons by
Sarah; Though this Jew at his return to Paris, then flourishing with all manner
of Arts and Sciences, found his Countrymen mavelous great Students in
Divinity, and in much better state then might be expected to continue any long
time.

13 Jews the seventh, albeit instigated thereto (as was said before) had not
shorn them so near upon his Expedition to the Holy Land, but that they might
bear Fleece again for his Son to pluck off. Their Synagogues had remained still
beautified; and their private wealth, either before his death The persecu of
the Jew France (...) Philippus gustus.
much increased, or in his time not much impaired. But Almighty GOD, who in
Testimony of his rejoicing to do them good, had raised up Cyrus to Balthazars
Throne to release their Nation from that Captivity, which Nabuchad-nezzar had
brought upon them; to give the world as perfect a proof of his Rejoicing over
them to destroy them, and bring them to naught, Deuteronomy. 28. 63. did Advance
Philippus Augustus An. (...) K^ O^ vici (...) ^pus apud R^ Christianis molestos
esse, primum debita omnibus remisit, deinde fundos eorum and res noc ^ Masson.
lib. 3. Annal. Franc. initio. Phil. Aug. p. 250.
, son unto the former Jews, unto the Crown of France, to defeat the Jews
throughout that Kingdom, in an instant, of all their former hopes. No sooner
was he enthroned King, but presently he gives forth his Edict; That their
Synagogues should be spoiled of all Donatives and ornaments belonging to them:
and, informed of the grievances which Christians sustained by them, grants a
general Release of all debts due unto them from Christians, consiscating all
their lands and immovable goods. This was done that Moses his prophecy might
be fulfilled in part, Deuteronomy. 28. 30, 31, 33. Thou shall build an house, and not
dwell therein; thou shall plant a Vineyard, but shall not eat the fruit
thereof. Thine Ox shall be slain before thine eyes, but thou shall not eat
thereof: Thine Ass shall be violently taken away before thy face, and shall
not be restored unto thee: Thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and no
man shall rescue them for thee: the fruit of thy I and, and all thy labors
shall a people which thou know not, eat; And thou shall never but suffer
wrong and violence always.

CAP. XXIX.
Of the fulfilling other particular Prophecies of Moses in the Jews
persecutions, in England, Germany, France and Spain.

1 THat they should not once or twice, in this or that Age, in some one or few
Kingdoms only, but always, in every place, where they have come since their
rooting out of their own Land, suffer such wrong and violence; must needs be
thought to have proceeded, rather from Divine Justice, then man's Injustice,
which could not but have varied with the diversity of times and places, and the
several dispositions of parties, amongst whom in this their long Pilgrimage
they have lived. And yet this brief Enumeration (following) of their particular
spoils, and hard usages, since Philippus Augustus time, throughout the most
civil and best governed States of Europe, will abundantly confirm the truth of
Moses general Induction, in the place now cited, Thou shall never but suffer
wrong and violence always. To begin with their persecutions in this Land.

2 Had Henry (the eldest son of Henry the second) (who was ^
present at the forenamed French Kings Coronation, acquainted with these
severe Edicts against the Jews) lived to enjoy the Crown of England after his
Father, as he was entitled King with him: the grievous wrongs and violence,
immediately after befalling these Jews throughout this Kingdom, had been
ascribed to this politic imitation of the French King his Brother; at least
men would have thought, they had been done by his sufferance or connivence. But
God had taken him away, and yet these Jews Entreaty continues much worse under
Richard the first, who never intended them like harm; only upon his Coronation
day, (with his Reign begins their Woe, which ends not till their final
Extirpation hence) not willing to be beholden unto them for their presents, or
(as some think) partly afraid lest admitted to his presence, they might
practice some Sorcery upon his body, he gave command that no Jew should come
either within the Church, where he was Crowned, ^or the Palace where he was to
dine. But they desirous to present him with some gift in hope to have their
Charters, and other Privileges, granted by other Kings, confirmed by him,
press in at the Palace gate amongst others, making (perhaps) more have but
worse speed; one of them receiving a blow for his forwardness by one of the
Kings servants, who might well justify the fact by the Kings command to keep
them out. The people about the gate apprehend the matter so, as if this Jew had
been beat by the Kings commandment, and so they thought might all the rest of
that crew: and hence fall upon them with such weapons as they could find, as it
was easy to find bats to beat these doggish Jews, home to their kennels, where
they found but silly shelter: For albeit their houses were strong, yet the rage
of the people was too great against them. With the multitude the former rumor
was enlarged, that it was the Kings pleasure to have all the Jews destroyed:
And, as the Axiom is, Men's own desires are quickly believed. So far more apt
they were to apprehend this rumor as true, then to examine whether it were true
or no, that the Lord chief Justice and other Officers, sent from the King to
appease the tumult, were more likely to catch harm themselves, then to free
these Jews from present danger: some of whose houses now flaming gave the
people light to spoil and rifle others in the dark. For so violently were they
set to wrong them, and eat their labors, that they could not be satisfied from
dinner time on the one day, to two a clock on the other: many of these Jews in
the mean time being roasted, or smothered with their goods; other leaping out of
the fire fell upon their enemies weapons. Although the outrage was such, as in
a peaceable state might seem intolerable; yet was the hainousness of the
offense quite swallowed up by the multitude of the offenders. But as the
English escapt unpunished: so the Jews were not amended, by their correction.
Their Stubbornness, as the Scripture tells me, did first procure their
Blindness, and their Blindness becoming Hereditarie has confirmed their
Stubbornness to posterity.

3 The former violence which they suffered, would have been a sufficient The
Brutish Stupidity of the Jews.
Caveat to any people in the world besides, to have carried themselves with
more moderation in a strange land: but not the flies so stupid and senseless
in discerning the causes of their smart, as this people is. Their
perfidiousnesse and daily sucking of Christians blood, had made them most
odious in this, as in other Lands; and though a number of them be Massacred to
day for like attempts; yet the rest are as ready again to morrow to seize upon
every sore, either to exhaust the relics of life from such as are shrunk in
their estate, by cruel exactions, and damned usurie; or else to intrude
themselves, as wedges or instruments of divisions, into every breach that shall
appear amongst Christians, or between them and others. In which practice they
have been continually crushed. Finally, their general carriage is so odious and
preposterous, that, Albeit the CHRISTIAN Magistrates conspire together for
their good, they themselves will certainly provoke their own misery.

4 The lamentable death of those Jews in London had purchased pity Their
Massac in Lin in No folk.
and compassion toward the rest, (as the Kings Proclamation for their peace
and security did witness) but their Brethren of Lin can not abstain from
offering that violence, from which the King had privileged them, to one of
their own lineage, for becoming a Christian; attempting forcible entrance into
the Church, whither he had fled for Sanctuary. Unless they had thus riotously
violated the Kings peace, the Christians had not assemble^ together, and the
Inhabitants were afraid at all to meddle with them. But (...) God had provided,
that a great company of Foreign Mariners should (...) pair unto this mutiny;
who moved with indignity of the attempt, could not content themselves with the
rescue of the Convert (at the first perhaps only intended) but assault these
mutinous Jews, through fear repairing to their houses; which the other first
rifle, then burn together with their owners, departing unpunished with spoil.

5 The end of the Kings Proclamation being once frustrate, by this strange
Accident, though not purposely or directly violated by the inhabitants of this
place; his subjects elsewhere are willing enough to imitate the Fact, without
any occasion of like wrongs, offered by the Jews only upon opportunity of
doing violence by the Kings absence, and the present mustering of Soldiers for
the Holy Land; upon whom, transported hence, their partners in evil, here at
home remaining, might post over the whole blame of the fact, of part whereof no
doubt his Soldiers had been guilty. The like massacres of these Jews ensued
at Stamford, at Lincoln,, and S. Edmundsbury shortly after; but of all others,
most memorable and lamentable was that, which in the same Lent befell them at
York.

6 The Jews there dwelling had heard by this time, what had been done unto
their brethren in London, and Lin, and see now the like or greater violence
intended against themselves: so that as Moses in the forecited place, Deuteronomy.
28. 34. adds; They became mad for the sight of their wrong and The Horrible
Conspiracy of the Jews against their own souls in York.
violence, which their eyes did see. One of their learned Rabbines persuades
four hundred of his company, besieged with him in a strong Tower by a furious
multitude, to prove themselves (such as the world had long taken them, and were
now persecuted for) right Cutthroats indeed, rather then fall into their
enemies hands; himself confirming his doctrine by his example, in cutting his
wives throat first, then his childrens, and lastly by killing himself. The
residue of the four hundred, which he had persuaded unto this unnatural and
Jewish Act, not only willing to imitate him herein, would before their death
have enforced many others, that would not yield unto this Rabbines advice, to a
more violent death, had they not conveyed themselves into a strong Turret,
within the main Tower, which defended them from the flames that consumed their
goods. And yet these poor souls, that had escaped their fellows violence, were
born to suffer thelike of their Christian Enemies; to their shame, who had
promised them life, upon condition they would yield themselves, and become
Christians; which whether they meant in heart or no as they promised, he that
tries the secrets of all hearts does know. Sure I am, their professed
Christian enemies did turn Jews in heart, that treacherously killed them before
any trial made of their sincerity toward Christ.

7 All these wrongs and violences were committed only by the people, much
against the Magistrates minds; but hereafter the supreme Magistrates, Kings
themselves (as if they had learned wit of their subjects) took the Monopoly of
wronging the Jews into their own hands. To omit what Richard the first had done
unto them, their hard usage under King John, Henry the third, and Edward the
first, Yet were (...) worth enquitie Whether such as have been transported out
of Spain or other Countries of Europe were not sent into Egypt; or what
entertainment they find there. They came out of Egypt without Ships, for the
Sea gave them passage. Deuteronomy. 28. 68. The (...)port of their persecutions about
this time in Spain made them (...)(...) to redeem th^n peace. Vide Matthew. Paris.
makes me think, that Moses, in the last words of his often mentioned Prophecy
Deuteronomy. 28. spoke in his language that said, Patria est ubicunque been est: so as
England, and every place in Europe, wherein their condition of life has been
more hard and burdensome, then their forefathers had been in Egypt, may be said
to be that Egypt, whereunto the Lord had threatened to bring them again by
ships. King John's exactions were so grievous, that they had rather suffer then
do what he commanded, many of them being imprisoned and tortured before they
would yield what he demanded. What an intolerable thing was it, for a private
man in those times to pay Vide orationem Pontificis Judaeoru^, suorum
calamitates deplorantis apud. Mat. Paris. Aaron the Jew paid Hen. 3. 30200
marks. Hollingsh. Anno 1250. p 242. The French King persecuted them at the same
time a^ miserably, a^ Matthew Paris intimates.
ten thousand marks, for refusal of which that poor Jew of Bristow was so
pitifully used? But with God it was just, to punish him by his own greediness
of gain; for unless his money had been as dear to him, as meat to such as make
Their Belly Their God, he would have let his Gold go, before he had lost Seven
Teeth o^ne.

8 King Henry the third, first demands the third part of all their movables
for his supplies; then punished them grievously by the purse, for a murder
secretly committed by them; and thirdly makes them buy their miserable peace by
the third part of what was left: Finally, he brought them to such extreme
poverty, that his brother, to whom he let them out to farm, could (it seems)
make nothing of them; and so they were freed from this brutish servitude (as
Moses in the forecited place had foretold) for want of a Buyer. The King
surely did not so much pity them, as he did himself and his posterity, who
should have gotten nothing of them, if the bargain with his brother had gone
forward: whereas his Successor, Edward the first, accounted their goods as his
own, and for Non-payment of what he demanded, the whole generation scattered
throughout this Land, were shut up in one night, where they enjoyed no day,
until they had fined at the Kings pleasure; who yet perhaps did recover but as
much as he and his subjects were endamaged, by two hundred and odd of their
Countrymen, all condemned some eight years before for circumcising,
counterfeiting, and washing his coin. This King, albeit their wealth under him
was much diminished, had this advantage of his predecessors. The English,
desirous to have them banished, and they, as willing to spite the English by
their staying here, were both forward to purchase their contrary desires by
large offers to the King, until the English at last did outvie them, by a
fifteenth, which the Parliament granted for their utter avoidance of this Land;
so much welcomer was their room then company.

9 All their immovable goods, with their Obligations and Bills of debt were
confiscated: Thus (as Moses says) they had builded houses, but could not dwell
therein, Vineyards they had planted which they could not carry with them, never
to return hither again, they nor their seed to eat of their fruit: yea, even
the gold and coin, with other riches which they were permitted to transport,
were reserved to many of their owners evil. The Sea which gave their
forefathers passage from Egypt, did swallow up a great number of those
wealthiest Jews at their departure out of this Land. And, howsoever both his
Fact that exposed them to danger was most Impious, and his speeches Scurtilous,
in turning them off to pray to Moses, when he might have saved them, yet if we
consider the concurse of circumstances, and opportunity tempting him,
otherwise ill disposed unto this fact, his profane jesting at their miserable
death was a sensible document of the Almighties rejoicing to destroy them and
bring them to naught.

10 During this time of their abode here (which was two hundred and Of these
Je^ Massacres in Germany, a ter their B nishment out England, or bout that ti^
odd years) their general persecutions throughout Germany (that have come unto
my reading) were not so rife, as in the ages following. Avent. B^ or. Annaliu
lib. 7. p. 44
In the year 128^ (in which they had been generally imprisoned throughout this
land) they had stabbed a child, throughout his whole body, with needles, at
Munchen in Bavere, taking his blood in a basin; to use it, as the suspicion was
then, in sacrifice, for stanching that issue of blood, wherewith this people
(Christians know why) is continually pestered. These butchers were detected by
the Drover, an old Hagge, taken in the very manner, while she was stealing a
second for the same purpose. The body of the former being found out by her
directions, the fresh print of infinite wounds filled with gore, imploring
vengeance, as it were with so many watery and blubber^ eyes, did so enrage the
multitude, that they could not expect the Judges sentence, but fall immediately
upon these Jews, notwithstanding the Princes servants, and their chief
Magistrates earnest endeavors to appease the tumult conveying as many Jews as
they could into their Synagogue, which the people burning with fury, set on
fire, and with it burned an hundred and eighty Jews.

11 Yet this was but as a little flash in the fire-pan to that general fury,
which the people of this and other Countries of Germany did discharge upon
Aventinus lib. 7. Boior. Annalium.
this cursed seed about ten years after. The Alarm to this Bloody Fact was a
Rumor, true or false, by Gods disposition a means to bring destruction upon
them whom he rejoiced to destroy; as soon condemned by the multitude, as
accused for stealing away the consecrated Host, as they term it, and amongst
other indignities, for braying it in a Mortar, until it bled again. One
Rindeflaish, of what spirit God knows, by profession a Husbandman (whether one
of the raisers of this rumor, or only taking opportunity upon it blazed abroad
by others) proclaims that he was sent from heaven to destroy the Jews,
wheresoever scattered upon the face of the earth: and with that conjuring
acclamation, As many as bare any love to Christ, or wished the safety and
welfare of Christendom, let them follow him, gets so many followers, that
through eight or nine Cities, named by mine Author, and many others omitted,
they rob, spoil and kill these Jews, now become as obstinate and stubborn as
the others were violent. For after they had gathered their goods and household
stuff together, lest the Christians should be any better by it, or they
themselves by Christians, that would have enforced them to Baptism, the men
with their Wives and Children cast themselves into the fire, and so perish with
their ill gotten goods. The Signs of the time with which in particular we are
not acquainted, did fully persuade both Priest and People, that all was done by
Gods special appointment: and Aventinus himself says, Iram divinam fuisse
necesse est; because the Emperor, most desirous to revenge their wrongs, was
enforced to give place to this persuasion, and dissemble his grief. The
magistrates of Regineburgh (the ancient Metropolis of Bevere) with much ado
persuaded their people to forbear execution of their wrath, and expect more
certain warrants from heaven for their proceedings.

12 Superest ultimus Philippi annus: illo, lep^osos, Jud^osque in Gallia
vexatos constat, propter sulpic^^nem vene^^ in poteos (...) --. Au^^^^^ (...)
(nulla expectat^ judicii forma) igni illos cremante* Papirius Massonus. l. 3.
Fran. Annal. in Philippo Longo* p. 3^
Not many years after this their general calamity throughout Bevere* and old
France, they and the Lepers conspire to poison the Fountain throughout the
French Kingdom, and are both made away on heaps by the people, dying for the
most part by the contrary element, without any con^ viction or arraignment,
which forty of them Idem Ibidem
imprisoned at Vitrie in Camp^ nie, did wisely prevent, by killing themselves
all in one Gaol. So cunnin^ ly does the Almighty plot their overthrow, ever
since he became their en^my, that it is often times hard to say, Whether man's
purposes for their goo^ or evil, bring greater plagues upon them. Not fifteen
years before t^ time, Uno die Judaei ^ota Francia capti, bonis eorum fisco
addictis, regni finibus excedere jussi ^ (...) Masson. lib. 3. Annal^^m
Francoru^* p. 363.
Philip the Fair had apprehended all the Jews throughout his domin^ons in one
day, robbed them of their goods, and rid his land of them. About ten years
after this their banishment by public Edict (not five years before the late
mentioned persecution) Idem Papir. in vita Ludovici. Hutini p. 372.
Jews the tenth, son to this Philip, intending their good, revokes his Fathers
Edict for their perpetual banishment, and brought them back again into France;
where these malefactors were, by the appointment of God, to suffer just
punishment for their villainies there committed by their Fathers and them, and
their bodies serving for fuel to the flame, prepared by God to purge the air,
which their blaspemous mouths had polluted.

13 Aventinus lib. septimo Annalium Boior.
The like plagues, but far more general, from like provocation, did befall them,
about the year 1337. and the times ensuing, till 1348. The like plague befell
them at Prage: about the year 1389. for the like contumely offered by their
children to the Host (as they term it) Incensis domibus, f^inae cum parvulis
se sua sponte injecerunt incendio, ne probris Christianorum expositae ad
extremum necarentur. Krantzius Wandalorum Hist. l. 9. c. 23.
They hoped Christian religion should have died in the wars between the
Emperor and the Pope; the state of Christendom, they saw deeply endangered in
these civil broils: and they according to their Jewish Policy, seek to thrust
it over head and ears in Blood, poisoning the Fountains throughout Germany,
offering like violence to the Sacraments as they had done before; and by this
just provocation were so dealt withal by one Hartmannus and his accomplices, as
they had been used some forty years ago by Rindeslaish. The rehearsal of all
particular outrages committed against them, during the time of the Pope and
Emperors variance, would take up more room in this Discourse, then all the
rest hitherto reckoned. Vide H. Mutium and Bertoldum Presbyt. Constant.
Most memorable is that of the Jews, inhabiting Worms; who, persecuted by the
people, implore the Bishops intercession for their safety: the conditions of
their peace, procured by him, were to be washed from their sins; and having
respite given to deliberate upon the point, they pollute themselves with their
own blood, without returning any further answer to the Bishop that had
interceded for them.

14 This and the like Barbarous impiety, committed by others of this cursed
race at Vitrie, almost forty, at York, above an hundred years before, cannot be
ascribed to the Revolutions of the Heavens, or successive Reign of some unruly
Stars; all of them were from His Will, in whom there is no shadow of change. In
these last Massacres, as in the former, the Magistrates in many places had
minds willing enough to save them, but durst not venture their bodily presence
for their rescue. Albeit the manner of the Christians proceeding against them
be usually such, as none but Jews would justify; yet this is an evident
Argument, that the Lord of lords, and King of kings has ordained them to
suffer wrong, whom the greatest powers, in such civil States as Germany,
France, and England are, cannot right. For although the Palsgrave, with some
others inclining unto them, had taken their protection upon them in these last
Persecutions; yet even this pity, whether true or pretended, did cause their
further wrongs, by grievous exactions, for maintaining the war begun in their
defense. So strangely does the wisdom of God bring that to pass, which his
servant Moses had foretold, Deuteronomy. 28. 29. Thou shall not prosper in thy ways,
thou shall never but be oppressed with wrong, and be polled evermore, and no
man shall succor thee. Even ^r it self by their distempered appetites is
turned into Sorrow. Though all Christian Kings and States should conspire
together for their weal; yet (as I said before) they will conceive mischief,
and bring forth their own destruction, by ^ing out into such shameful Acts, as
deserve grievous punishment in sight of God and man. So in the Krantzius. lib.
10. Wandal. cap. 18.
year 1410. they go about their wonted practice of crucifying, a Christian
child in contumely of our Savior Christ; but their intent being known before
they had opportunity of acting it, the Marquess of Misna, and Land-grave of
Turing find room enough for their coin in their cossers, but leave none for
them, stripped naked of all they had within any part of their dominions. Or if
they do sometimes that which in it self is good, they do it with such malicious
minds, that God gives them but the reward of wickedness: Krantzius. lib
(...). Saxon. cap. (...).
So in the year 1421. for furnishing the poor Christians of Bohemia with money
and munition against their Antichristian persecutors, they were generally
imprisoned throughout Bevere, quite bereft of all their money and coin, and
lastly banished all the dominions belonging to Frederick Duke of that Province.
Nor does their in bred spite to Christians, or their plagues due thereunto
wear out in that age. For, in the year 1497. they were burnt at Krantzius
(...). lib. 14. cap. 1^. The like facts and (...) of the Jews, at ^, are
related to the same Krantzius (...). 8. Wa^d^^ cap. 8. ^ Of these Jews estate
in (...) and Portugal ^ Emanuelis.
Stenneberge in the Province of Stargardia, for their wonted violence, and
indignities offered to the blessed Eucharist.

15 Thus much of their estate in England, France, and Germany, until the year
1500. Of their estate in Germany since, if God permit elsewhere, because it
yields matter of distinct observation from the former. Now briefly to acquaint
the Reader with so much of their affairs in Spain, as may testify some other
parts of Moses his prophecy in the forementioned place. In the year 1482. the
measure of their iniquity was grown so full, that this land could not bear it:
and they themselves become so abominable to Ferdinand, and Isabel his Queen,
that none of this seed must stay within their dominions, unless they will
become Christians, as sundry of larger possessions amongst them in outward
Profession did, the rest were scattered thence into other Countries, most into
Portugal, welcome for their money to sojourn there a certain time: after which
as many as were found in Portugal, were there to remain as slaves unto the
King, such as would, were to be transported at his cost and charges. The King
himself (unless Orosius be partial for him) was careful to perform his
promise, to secure them of peace during their abode, and of safe passage at the
time appointed. But the Mariners having once gotten them aboard, did make
their ships as so many prisons, or houses of torture, to wrest wealth out of
their hands, lengthning the time by circular and unnecessarie turnings, back
and forth, until the Jews had quite spent all their provision, afterward
enforced to buy their food, and other necessaries of the Mariners, at what
rate they pleased. And, not content with spoil of their goods, they abuse the
bodies of their wives and daughters to their lust, not pleasant enough, unless
sauced with other contumelies, and indignities practiced upon their Fathers and
Husbands. Finally by these mariners, too much thinking that their passengers
were Jews, and might be used accordingly, they forget that they themselves were
Christians, and stain that sacred profession with all manner of base villainy
and impiety. Partly through this delay in shipping over the first company,
partly, through the abuses done unto them, so shameful, that the fame thereof
was brought unto their fellows ears by the wind, which served the Mariners
back to Portugal: the later sort remaining in expectation of safe passage,
either could not, or would not be transported at the day appointed, and so by
their staying become captives to John then King of Portugal. But Emanuel his
successor, not long after sets them free, using all other fair means to bring
them unto Christ, until Ferdinand and Isabel his confederates, solicit these
ill-thriving plants ejection The Jews ^ Portugal, (...) their ^.
out of Portugal, as unfit to settle in any Christian soil. After long
debatement with his counselors for their exile or stay, the fresh examples of
their expulsion by so many other Christian Kings and Princes did move Emanuel
to their imitation. So that either they must avoid his dominions by a certain
day, or else remain there either freemen in Christ, or slaves and Captives
unto him: as many of them did against their wills, not able to provide
themselves of shipping, having but one port at last allowed them for their
passage: whereas at the first promulgation of the Kings Edict against them,
they had choice of three. The greatness of their number, best appearing by
their confluence about the day appointed for their passage, moved the good King
with compassion, to see so many thousand souls should desperately run the ways
of death; and seeing no hope of diseasoning the old and withered stocks, fit
fuel for everlasting flames, he was the more desirous to recover some of their
young and tender grafts, by watering them with the water of grace: and for this
purpose gives strict commandment, that all their children under fourteen years
of age should be taken from their Jewish parents, and trained up in the School
of Christ. This sudden and unexpected divorce, though intended in compassion of
the children, brought greater misery on the Parents, then if their own flesh
had been torn from their bones. There a man (so his heart would have served
him) might have seen silly infants haled from their mothers breasts, more
willing to embrace death, then part with them; And yet for pity, (lest their
hands by holding fast, might prove their childrens racks) suffering them to be
drawn out of their tender Embracements, with far more grief and sorrow of
heart, then they had been brought out of the womb; Fathers enclasping their
sons and daughters, willing to die in their arms, had these beat off (as hoopes
from vessels which they environ) from their childrens bodies, and either broken
or benumbed with blows. A voice was heard through Portugal, surpassing that in
Ramah, nothing but mourning, and weeping, and lamentation, many a Leah blearing
her eyes with weeping for her children, and would not be comforted; Men and
women filling the heavens with more hideous outcries then the Egyptians did at
their Forefathers departure out of Egypt: when the Firstborn of every Family,
throughout the land, was slain at midnight. But these were bereft at once of
all their loving children, in the open Sun. Many of them, not able either to
rescue or dispatch their own bowels, become mad with the sight that their eyes
had seen, and killed themselves: Others, having better opportunity, account it
a part of their happiness, to be able to prevent their childrens washing in
the sacred Font, by drowning them in draw-wels and ditches. In both these
calamities, at the two forementioned transportations, we may see those
Prophecies of Moses exactly fulfilled, Deuteronomy. 28. 30. Thou shall betroth a wife,
and another man shall lie with her. And again verse 32. Thy sons and thy
daughters shall be given unto another people, and thine eyes shall fail at the
sight every day, and there shall be no power in thy hand. Many Moors,
professing Mahumetism, were transported from Portugal the same time, but had no
such violence offered them: what was the reason? God would have a manifest
distinction between this and other people. The Barbarous Moors had some power
in their hands, and the Portugals abstain from like usage of them: lest the
report coming to the African Mahumetans ears, might have moved them to avenge
their wrongs upon poor Christians, living amongst them. But these Jews no where
had any Nation, none to avenge their grievous wrong, which the Lord God of
their Forefathers had ordained they should suffer, at all times, in all places
wheresoever they have come, without redress.

16 Nor do their Fates change with their Name or Profession. For what violence
was ever offered to any of this race like to that which these late converts
Christened Hebrews, (but still Jews in misfortunes) suffered in The latentable
Massacre of these Jews at Lisbon: and the natural Consequence of Monkish
devotion toward Christ's Image therein represented. Osorius lib. 4. de rebus
gestis Emanuelis.
Lisbon, in the year 1506. Two thousand massacred in three days space; many
not suffered to die of deadly wounds, were dragged by their mangled limbs into
the market place, where the bodies of the living and slain, with others half
alive half dead, were burnt together on heaps. The Spectacle was so horrible,
that it quite astonished the rest of this miserable progeny, at other times as
desperately set to suffer, as Monks furiously to inflict any torture. Parents
durst not mourn for children, nor children sigh for their parents, though each
haled in others sight to the place of torments, lest these significations of
their grief and sorrow might bewray them to be of the tormented kindred, with
whom the least suspicion of alliance, was sufficient to make them inherit like
plagues, ere the breath was out of their predecessors bodies. Ingens eo die
stupor adeo mise^^i^ gentis sensus oppresserat, ut ne lamentari quidem cladem
illam, and deplorate miseriam su^ possent. Qui se oc^bant, quamvis filios aut
patentes suos ad supplicium abripi viderent, ne lugubri gemitu proderentur,
vocem emittere non (...). Sic a eos me^ tus exanimaverat, ut vivi non multum a
mortuor^ similitudine distarent. Osorius de rebus g^^ Emanuelis lib. 4.
Osorius description of these distressed souls perplexity, showed in their
gesture and carriage during this Massacre, may serve, albeit he meant nothing
less, as a Paraphrase upon the last words of Moses often-mentioned Prophecy.
There (that is in the utmost parts of the earth) the Lord shall give thee a
trembling heart, and a sorrowful mind, and thy life shall hang before thee. The
disposition of the Divine Providence in affording opportunity to this
licentious outrage was much what like to that, described before in Lin. A
great part of these Tragical Actors were German and French mariners, which had
repaired to Lisbon for other traffic, but returned home unpunished, burdened
with the spoil of these Hebrews goods, but more heavily laden with guilt of
their blood: albeit their souls were not so deeply died therewith as the Lisbon
Monks, who had instigated them and others to this Butchery, inflamed themselves
with this furious zeal only by an unseasonable speech of one poor Hebrew
apprehended by the other as derogatorie to our Savior. For whilst the others,
by long gazing upon the picture of his wounded side, through a glass took the
reflex of light, thence cast upon their dazzled eyes, for a Miracle, the silly
Hebrew, whether openly to contradict, or unawares (uttering to some bystanders
what he thought) bewrayed his incredulity, How a piece of dry wood should
work Miracles.

17 Whilst I read so many Christened souls, thus Butchered like Beasts for ones
denial of divine Honor to a livelesse Image, I could not but pause with my
self; and now I must commend it to the Christian Readers consideration, whether
that part of Moses prophecy, and there thou shall serve other Gods, which thou
have not known, nor thy Fathers, Wood and Stone, may not be understood Deuteronomy.
28. 36, 64.
of the convert Jews throughout the Popes Dominions, thus often times urged to
commit Idolatry with stocks and stones, upon more Tyrannical terms, if they
gainsay, then their Forefathers were either by the Assyrian, Caldaean,
Egyptian, Roman, or any whosoever had led them Captive out of their land. If
the Monkish Apologizer reply: There is a great difference between the Heathen
Idol, and their Image worship: I grant the Idolatry is of a diverse kind: and
so it seems Moses meant when he threatened this people, that after their final
transplantation by Adrian, and their scattering through Spain, and these
Western Countries, They should serve such Gods as their Fathers had not known.
For this peoples Forefathers, before Moses time and after, had known the
Heathen gods too well. If the Romanist yet rejoyn, that in worshipping Christ's
Image, they worship Christ, I will not deny, but he may think so: for so the
Jews thought they honored Moses, because they honored the Letter of his Law.
But, to omit other reasons, this and other like outrageous Facts, committed
upon as light occasions, shall convince their nice School-distinctions of foul
error, and turn their lies with such violence into their throat, that (as
Saint Augustine interprets the Psalmist of these Jews) It shall even break their
teeth in their mouths. For if the zeal Psalm. 58. 6.
these Monks of Lisbon bare unto this Image, had been directed unto Christ,
they had in some good measure been transformed into the similitude of His
gentle, meek, and merciful disposition. It was Wbod-worship doubtless which
had made them so mad and furious: It was their continual adoring of stones,
which had turned their hearts of flesh into hearts more full of fire then the
flint, and harder then the hardest Adamant. But of the effects of Monkish pity
toward Christ or the Crucifix, as also of the Jesuits doctrine concerning
Image Worship, elsewhere if God permit. Thus much of these Jews estate from
time to time, may suffice for our intended purpose, to be further collected in
the Chapter following.

CAP. XXX.
General collections out of the particular Histories before mentioned: the
strange dispositions of the Jews: and Gods Judgments upon them, all Testifying
the Truth of Divine Oracles.

1 I Cannot but approve Gens perfida, agens quod solet mus in pera etc. Crantz.
Libro Undecimo, Saxon. cap. 7.
Crantzius his judgment of these Jews, That they are a perfidious and wicked
people, worthy to be spewed out of the confines of Christendom, as many Princes
have expelled them their Dominions. But as the same author observes, howsoever
Christian Governors (as the world now counts Christians) are most Opposite in
outward show to the Religion which they profess: yet they agree too well with
them in their love unto this worlds god; By whose means these Jews, after they
have been expelled one country, find admission into some other, or else into
the same again; as they did into France whence they were expelled by the
Father, and brought in again by the Son; and into Abierunt hoc anno ex hac
part Judaei, Pii 5. Pontificis max. jussu, qui acerrimo diplomate exterminari
illos ex ecclesiasticae ditionis Civitatibus mandaverat. Quanqua^ enim illos
tolerabat Ecclesia, miserata illorum vicem, ut Christianis freque^ti illorum
aspectu, Christi Dei mors, versaretur ob oculos; and Judaei Christianorum
exemplis, ac doctrina, ad amplectendam Christianae fidei veritatem, quam
reliquias Israel, iuxta divini vatis oraculum, accepturas, constat,
incitarentur: i qua, fi ablegarentur ad alienos, longius multo abessent: Tamen,
cum, and usuris gravibus exigendis, and latronibus furi^que etiam rerum
Ecclesiasticarum recipiendis, magicis artibus, ac lenociniis mulierum
exercendis, illorum impietas (...) ^o processisset, ut pro communi omnium
incolumitate expediret, tanti vim morbi celeri remedio coercere, omnino (...)
tejiciendos ex civitatibus decrevit. Hieron. Rubeus. lib. 11. hist. Raven.
Ravenna whence banished (for their combination with thieves and robbers, and
sacrilegious persons, for Sorceries or Magical charms, in winning women to
their own or others lust) by Pius Quintus in the year 1568. they were recalled
by Sixtus Quintus in the year 1587. As if the former of these Kings and Popes
had cast their hooks into another man's liberties, and their successors had
drawn them, when they had caught the prey. For so in truth these Jews are like
roving Hounds or Spaniels, which catch a prey wheresoever they come, and carry
it unto any Prince, or Potentate, that will give them Harbor. They never stand
upon better terms with any Prince, or people, then notorious or cunning
malefactors do with grave Judges, or great Statesmen; Who oft-times wink at
such villainies as they hate, for some further purpose. Nor could these Jews
ever hitherto purchase their ease and quiet, as they have often done their
admission into diverse countries. Since their rooting out of their own land,
they have continued as Hares Hunted from their seat; no sooner find they any
place of habitation in these ends of the world, but the cry of Gods Judgments
straight pursues them. If for a time they may seem to gather strength, or to
recover themselves from that faintnes of heart: it is but to take their Feeze
(or Rise) with greater force to their Break-neck. In the pits, which they dig
for Christians, are their own feet always taken. The best advantages which
they can epsy and entertain with greediness for their good, are but baits,
laid by the Almighties hand to entrap them ^ and whilst his Judgments hunt
them one way, and they take another t^ escape them in the very places
(whereunto they fly for refuge, as Fox^ chased do to their holes) is the
Fatal Gin set for their Souls; as appears out of the Histories here set down,
which are but so many Experiments of M^ his rule, Dent. 28. ve se 65, 66, 67.
Also among these Nations, thou shall ^ nonst, neither shall the sole of thy
foot have rest: for the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart, sinking
eyes, and a sorrowful mind. And thy life shall hang before thee, and thou shall
fear both day and night, and shall have no assurance of thy life. In the
morning thou shall say, would God it were evening, and at evening t^ shall say,
would God it were morning. For the fear of thine heart which thou shall fear,
and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.

2 But as no money could hitherto purchase their peace, and security from
calamities: so neither could their calamities, though continually mos Of the ^
some ^ which ^ Moses and the Prophets..
grievous, redeem their estimation in the world, nor all the blood of their ^
(though their Massacres have been numberless) till these times, allay much less
extinguish that hateful and loathsome conceit, which most men have entertained
of them. To ascribe all this to their forefathers sins against our Savior is
true, but too general to give satisfaction in all particular doubts which their
estate might minister. For why the children should inherit their fathers curse,
without continuance in like sins, is a point which admits no resolution Again,
why This People above all other creatures should continue their devilisa temper
still, having tried such change of air, diversity of soils, conversing among so
many severally-disposed people, seems yet more strange. I have read of trees,
leaving their poison with their native soil, by transplantation bringing forth
edible and wholesome fruit; Wolves in few generations will become as kind as
dogs. Lions and Bears by often presence of men grow more tame; generally beasts
of most wild nature by often housing will come near the nature of domestic
creatures. Rude Idiots by frequent intercourse with men of better fashion, in
time will take some tincture of civility and discretion. Of all sensible
creatures only the Jew, in so many descents, after so many grievous
corrections, for his own, and his Forefathers sins, can no more leave his
Jewish disposition, then the Leopard can his spots. It further increased my
admiration, why the whole Progeny being utterly banished this Land above three
hundred years ago, their memory should still remain for a pattern of mischievous
minds, either apt to do, or sit to suffer any violence: The very name of a Jew
serving this people as a perfect measure, either to notify the Height of
Impiety in the Agent, or to found the depth and bottom of an abject,
worthless, forlorn condition in any Patient. Better we cannot express most
cutthroat dealing then Thus, None but a Jew would have done so: Lower we
cannot prize any one of most abject Condition, then by comparing him to a Jew.
For so in common speech we exaggerate Enormous wrongs, done to the most odious
or despised amongst us, This had been Enough for a Jew to suffer, or I would
not have done so to a Jew. All these Plagues are come upon them, for continuing
in their Forefathers steps; and To make their Creator the Author of their
villainous minds, were Impiety: His word endures for ever, Perditio tua ex te, O
Israel. Yet, is it possible that any people, endued with the light of reason,
should continue so obstinate and obdurate, as willingly to deserve all men's
hate they have to deal with? I know not better how to resolve this doubt, then
our Apostle did his, of their forefathers unbelief, after so many Miracles
wrought amongst them: Therefore (says he) could they not believe, because
Esayas says, He has blinded their eyes, etc. John 12. verse 39. and 40.
Therefore must I say, they could not but continue hateful and opprobrious
amongst all people with whom they have conversed, Such speeches do not import
an Absolute Cause of the thing, but of our instruction or persuasion concerning
it.
because Moses had said, Deuteronomy. 28. 37. Thou shall be a Wonder, a Proverb, and a
common Talk among all people, whither the Lord shall carry thee. So likewise
had Jeremy 24. verse 9. I will give them for a Terrible Plague to all the
Kingdoms of the earth; for a reproach, and for a Proverb, for a common talk,
and for a curse, in all places where I shall cast them. If any man then further
ask, Why Israel is cut off from the Land which God had given him, and made a
Proverb, and a common talk amongst all people; God himself has taught us how
to answer, Because they have forsaken the Lord their God, which brought their
fathers out of the Land of Egypt, etc. This the Lord himself foretold, and gave
them warning of, even when he specified the Articles of his Covenant, made with
Solomon for their peace, 1 Kings chap. 9. verse. 6, 7, 8, 9. These Authorities
may suffice, to stay all such doubts as might arise from curious enquiring
after the causes of these peoples incessant misery; which cannot seem strange,
because foretold; nor unjust, in that they were born to more extraordinary
prosperity; from which being fallen, by following their own ungracious ways,
they are now reserved, as Pharaoh after many admonitions was, for Marks or
Butts, against whom the arrows of Gods wrath and vengeance must be shot, to the
terror of others, and manifestation of his power.

3 These grounds supposed, the Consideration of their many and Cruel Massacres,
their often spoiling and robbing, and other outrages, which, according to the
forecited Prophecies of them, they continually suffer, would the Atheist but
lay it to his Heart, would wring thence, what the Divine Oracles have uttered;
that this had been a people appointed to destruction, never suffered to
multiply unto a Nation; as if God had used them as men do wild Beasts, nursing
only so many of them, as may make sport by their destruction. So likewise
their continual wandering up and down in the world, without any rest, does
abundantly witness; that albeit they bare the shape and nature of men, yet are
they no natural part of the World; but have the same proportion in the Civil
body, or Society of Mankind, that bad humors have in our natural and material
bodies; Which by course of nature should be expelled her confines, but, being
retained, run from joint to joint, and lastly breed some grievous swellings in
the extreme parts. And, amongst other most tried and demonstrative Experiments
of Moses often-mentioned Prophecy; this is not the least; that Spain and
Portugal, for these later years, have been the chief receptacle of these Jews:
as if Hercules Pillars, accounted by the Ancients the utmost ends of the World,
were not the full period of their peregrination Westward, whom the Lord had
threatened, Deuteronomie 28. verse 64. to scatter amongst all people, from the
one end of the World unto the other. There they have been in greatest abundance
for many years, as it were expecting a wind for their passage to some place
more distant from their native Country. And who knows whether that Prophecy,
Deuteronomie 28. verse 41. Thou shall beget Sons and Daughters, but shall not
have them; for they shall go into captivity: has not been fulfilled, in the
Jews inhabiting that Kingdom? Whether many of their Stock, whom Emanuel
detained in Portugal, have not been transported since into America? or whether
many of the Spanish Colonies, have not a mixture of Jewish Progeny in them?
Nay, who knows, whether the West Indies were not discovered, partly, or
especially for this purpose, that the sound of these Preachers, unto whom God
has appointed no set Diocese, might go out into all Lands with the Sun, and
their words unto the ends of the world, until they return unto the place whence
they were scattered? But these conjectures I leave to be confuted or confirmed
by future times, desirous to prosecute briefly some observations of their
fore-passed miseries, not yet ended.

4 As Gods judgments upon this people have had no end, so neither have the
grounds or motives of Christian Belief any limits; every degree of their fall
is a step unto our rising. Enough it were to condemn the whole Christian world
of Infidelity, if it should not be rapt with Admiration of Gods mercy toward
us, as it is manifested only in his severity toward them. But if, unto their
perpetual grievous calamities here recounted, we add their like continual
stubbornness of heart, we shall prove our selves more stiff-necked then this
people it self, unless we take up Christ's yoke and follow him; under which only
we shall find that ease and rest unto our souls, which they have wanted ever
since his death, and without repentance, must want everlastingly. Angels, Men,
and Devils, yea all the world may clearly see, that the God of their Fathers
has cast them off; that they have born no Signs or Badges of his Ancient
wonted favors, whilst innumerable grievous marks and skars of his fearful
indignation against their Fathers still remain unhealed in the children, after
more generations, then their Ancestors Seat of prosperity had been in the
promised Land. And yet even these later, as all the former, since their
scattering thence, continue their boastings of their prerogatives, as if they
were his only chosen people. A grievous distemper of body and mind has run in
their blood for almost 1600 years; the children still infected with their
fathers disease; all raving and talking, like men in a Phrenzie, As if they
were Wisdoms Firstborn, and Heirs of Happiness. This their unrelenting
stubbornness is an irrefragable Argument, That they are the degenerate seed of
faithful Abraham. For, Stubbornness is but a strong A comparison of the ^ Jews
^ with the steadfastness of Abraham's faith.
Hope malignified, or (as we say) grown wild and out of kind. If the Scripture
had not described His Nature and quality with His Name, we might have known by
these modern Jews, that their First Progenitour had been a Man of strong Hopes,
against all Hopes in the sight of men: But these go further, continuing stiff
in their persuasions of Gods favor toward them, contrary unto the grounds of
Hopes, either in the sight of God or man, insolent in confidence, even whilst
they are at the very brink of deepest despair. Abraham looked for a Son, after
the chiefest strength of his body was decayed, and Sarah his wife by course of
Nature past all possibility of conceiving: but His Hopes were assuredly
grounded upon His Faithfulness which had promised the same: These hope for a
Messiah, after the Fullness of time is past and gone, and their Country, being
the Land of his Nativitie, covered with Barrenness and desolation; without all
grounds of hope, quite contrary to the predictions of GODS Prophets, whom they
believe in gross; after whose meaning They groap as palpably now in the
Sunshine of their Messiahs glory, already revealed, as if it were in Egyptian
darkness. Yet even the fullness of that joy, which most of them do look for in
the days of their Messiah (were their hopes of his coming as probable as they
are impossible) could not in reason support any other men's nature, to sustain
that Perpetual violence, disgrace, and torture, which they endure throughout so
many successions, in this wearisome time of their Expectation. Abraham was
approved of God, for his readiness to sacrifice his son Isaac at his command.
These his degenerate Sons have crucified the Son of Abraham's God; and for their
infidelity and disobedience, have been cast out of that good Land, which was
given to Abraham and his righteous seed; and for their stubbornness in like
practices, their posterity continue Exiles, and Vagabonds from the same, not
to this day willing to offer up the sacrifice of a contrite heart, for their
disobedience past, but rather (adding thirst to drunkenness) Bless themselves,
when they hear the words of that Curse, promising peace unto themselves, though
they walk Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
on according to the stubbornness of their Forefathers hearts. Their own
desires they will not break. But Vide Socratem lib. 7. cap. 16. Krantzium lib.
10. Wandalorum c. 18. Papiriu^ Masson. lib. 3. p. 335. ex Villaneo. Vide
Hollinshead. An. 40 Hen. 3. and alibi. At Prage in the year 1240. (or
thereabout) they crucified a Christian. Die Sacra Parasceves. Krantzius lib. 7.
Wandalorum c. 40.
Christian Children they can be well content to Sacrifice, kill, and mangle
throughout all ages, wheresoever they come, as their often practices in
England, France, and Germany, witness; and the Jews of Lincoln, executed at
London for this crime, did confess to be a solemn practice, as often as they
could conveniently come by their prey. Thus out of the mouths of Infants and
Children, will God have his praise erected still: Their Blood has sealed, and
their Cries proclaimed the truth of our Saviors words, that these Jews are of
their Father the Devil, and the lusts of their Father they will do (John 8.
44.) He was a murderer from the beginning, and always delighted much in such
Sacrifices, as were most displeasing unto God.

5 If Christian Sobriety did not teach us to acknowledge Gods judgments
always just, although the manner of his Justice can not be apprehended, much
less exemplified to ordinary capacities, by the wisest of the Sons of men: the
consideration of these Jews perpetual temper would half persuade us, that the
souls of such, as had either procured, consented unto, or approved our Saviors
and his Apostles death, had been Sent from Hell by course, into the bodies of
these Jews here scattered in these Western parts, as so many Messengers from
the dead, to show the malignant heat of those Everlasting flames, by their
unquenchable thirst of innocent blood. But neither does Scripture warrant, nor
natural Reason enforce such suppositions, either for acquitting Gods Severity
upon this people from injustice, or His Goodness from suspicion of being the
Author of their villainous minds, though he be the sole Creator, as well of
theirs as their godly forefathers souls. For these their wicked posterities
plagues are just, because their souls, which he has made, will not receive
correction by their own, or their fathers plagues continually inflicted upon
them since our Saviors death; but still, as it were, Hunt out Gods judgments,
which lie perpetually in wait for them, by treading in their Ungratious
predecessors steps. In one word, Though the God of their Fathers have made
their souls; yet they make Pride of heart, Inveterate custom, Examples of
their progenitors, Their God. For us Christians, let us admire the wisdom of
our gracious God, that so disposes our enemies mischievous minds unto our
good; rather then enquire, how their villainies can stand with his justice. This
their unsatiable desire of Crucifying them, unto whom the Kingdom of heaven
belongs, does confirm our Faith, in that Main Article of their Fathers
crucifying The Lord of Glory. And (no doubt) but God, in his All-seeing wisdom,
has permitted the like hellish temper to remain in all Generations of these
Jews, that the former most Horrible, and otherwise almost Incredible Act, with
the Actors Devilish Malice, might be more lively and sensibly represented to
all posterities, which had not seen or known them by Experience. And Gods
Judgments upon these Modern Jews, for their Forefathers sins, hereby may
appear most just, in that they make them their won by Imitation: plainly
testifying to the world, that They would do as their Forefathers had done, if
the same Tragedy of Christ's Passion were to be acted our again; yea, in as
much as they practice the like upon his living members, They are guilty, as well
as their Forefathers, of His Death.

6 Generally, the outward carriage, and inward temper of these modern Jews are
such, as all that have any Experience of them, may perceive the Excellent
qualities of their worthy Progenitors, and the extraordinary Prerogatives
whence they are fallen, as sensibly and undoubtedly, as we can know by the
Lees, or corrupt remainder of any Liquor, what the virtue and strength thereof
was in its Prime. The present Depression of this People, below all others
amongst whom they live, rightly taken, does give us the true Excess of their
Exaltation, in former times above the Nations, as perfectly as the Elevation of
the Pole which we see, does give us the degrees of the others Occultation.
Finally, if we compare the Estate of such as lived in Tullies times, with these
Modern Jews estate lately mentioned; the great prosperity of their Ancestors
under Joshuah, Judges, David and Solomon, may be gathered from these
differences as exactly, and as clearly, as the third proportionable number out
of two others already known. This is that Golden Rule, whose practice I would
commend to all young Students. For, from the known differences of their Estate
from time to time, we may be led unto the perfect knowledge of Gods Power and
Providence, of his Mercy and Bounty to such as love him, of his Judgments upon
such as Hate him, and transgress his Laws. Finally, nothing in Scripture can
seem Incredible, if men would consider the wonderful exaltation, and depression
of this People.

7 This admirable difference between the true Israelites of old, and Vide Ezah.
6.
these Modern perfidious Jews, is most lively represented unto us in that
Parable of diverse Figs, which Jeremiah saw Jerem. 24. 1, 2. The Lord showed me,
and behold two baskets of Figs were set before the Temple of the Lord: one
basket very good Figs, like the Figs that are first ripe, and the other very
naughty Figs, which could not be eaten, they were so evil. No man, I hope, will
challenge me, for extending this Text beyond its literal sense. One part of
which, by the Prophets own exposition, is to be understood of such as were led
captive by Nebuchadnezzar, signified by the good figs: the other of Zedechiah,
with the residue of Jerusalem, and them that dwelt in the Land of Egypt,
represented by the bad figs. My Prophet indeed applies it only unto them of his
own time; of whom I confess it was Literally meant: but not, only of them; but
more principally, more fully and directly, of the Jews, about, or since our
Saviors time, and his Apostles, or their followers. The parable, with the
consequence thereof, is true of both* in as much as both are particulars,
contained under that general division, which Vide (...) cap (...)^^gr. (...).
Moses had made of Blessings and Cursings to befall this people in diverse
measures, according to their constancy in good, or stubbornness in evil. Unto
this General Prediction the Prophets do still frame their prophecies, as
Corollaries or Appendices; and so must they be applied by us, not only to the
present times wherein they wrote, but to the times of the Messiah, in which
both Moses his general, and the Prophets particular prophecies were more fully
accomplished, then in any age before. That which Jeremy in the third Verse of
that same Chapter said of the Figs. was true of this people in all Ages: The
good amongst them were very good, the naughty always very naughty: but the
difference greater betwixt the better sort of the Ancient, and the worse of
later, then betwixt the best and worst of such as lived in the middle Age;
greatest of all betwixt the good and bad, in our Saviors time, or immediately
after. These words again of the Prophet, verse 6. and 7. are altogether as
Literally, more peculiarly meant of Christ's Apostles, and Disciples, then of
Nehemiah and Zerubbabel, and the rest which returned from the captivity of
Babylon: For I will set mine eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them
again to this Land, and I will build them, and I will plant them, and not root
them out, and I will give them a heart to know me, that I am the Lord, and they
shall be my people: and I will be their God; for they shall return unto me with
their whole heart. So is that curse, Verse 9, 10. more fully verified of the
Jews, about, or after our Savior Christ's time, then of Zedechiah, and his
accomplices: I will even give them for a terrible plague to all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, and for a reproach, and for a proverb, for a common talk, and for a
curse in all places, where I shall cast them. And I will send the sword, the
famine, and the pestilence among them, till they be consumed out of the Land
that I gave unto them and to their Fathers. In like sort I must needs with all
Orthodoxal Antiquity, not contradicted for more then a thousand years,
acknowledge the Psalmists prayer, Psalm 59. to have been more directly meant,
at least more notably fulfilled, in the Jews of later times, then of his
enemies amongst whom he lived; Slay them not, O God, lest my people forget it;
but scatter them abroad by thy power, and put them down O Lord our shield, for
the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips; and let them be taken in
their pride, even for their perjury and lies which they speak. The infallible
grounds of thus interpreting these two places, and the like, shall be
fortified, (GOD willing) when I come unto the Prophecies concerning Christ's
Incarnation, Passion, or Exaltation; My warrant at this time, for the later
here alleged, shall be the end of the Psalmists wish, verse 13. Consume them
in thy wrath, consume them, that they be no more: and let them know that God
rules in Jacob unto the ends of the world. Their strange Massacres in these
ends of the world, whither they have been scattered, do better confirm our
Faith of Gods Providence, and Mercy toward us, then David's Enemies exile, and
scattering, did his people, of Gods favor toward him and them. And it is to
be observed, that he says not, Let them know in Jacob, that God rules unto
the ends of the world. For we the adopted sons of Abraham, though living in
these extreme parts of the world, which he never knew, are the true Jacob; and
the natural sons of Abraham according to the flesh, though living in the
Promised Land, have no inheritance in Jacob; All are Jews. So does he, which
sits upon the Circles of the Heavens, weigh all the kingdoms of the earth as in
a Balance, debasing some, and advancing others at his pleasure: and so does
the Light of his Gods Favors to the Ancient Israelites Paralleled by like
Blessings upon the Gentiles.
gracious Countenance toward any Land or People, change or set, in Revolution
of Times, as the Aspect of Stars does unto such as compass the Earth. And yet,
as the same observation of the Suns motion from contrary Tropicks to the Line,
serves our English in Summer, and the Navigators of opposite Climes in Winter:
So is the same light of Gods countenance, which shone upon the Jews, before,
turned to the Gentiles, after the fullness of time. Abraham had the Promise of
Canaan often renewed unto him; but neither he, nor his posterity possessed it,
until the fullness of the Canaanites iniquity were accomplished. We Gentiles
had the promises of being Engrafted into Israel, as it were, conveyed unto us
in the building of the Second Temple, and afterward renewed in the Translation
of these Sacred Writings (the Instruments of our inheritance) into the Greek
tongue, but were not partakers of the blessings of Jacob, until the Iniquity
of Abraham's Posterity, according to the flesh, was full. Again, as the
Canaanites were not utterly destroyed, albeit the Israelites were commanded so
to do; but some relics were reserved in the promised land to a good purpose,
by the wisdom of God: so neither were these Jews utterly extinguished, but a
remnant was scattered abroad amongst the Gentiles, that they might know Gods
mercy toward them by his judgments upon the other; and though Christian
Princes have often received them, upon as unjust respects, as the Israelites did
permit the Canaanites to dwell amongst them, yet God has still rectified their
Error, and turned their evil Imaginations to the great good of his Chosen.
Gods favors toward them of old, and us of late, might be thus paralleled in
many points: and, as Moses made nothing about the Ark, but according to the
Exodus 25. 40. Heb. 8. 5
fashion that was showed him in the Mount: so is there no Event or Alteration
of moment under the Gospel, but had a pattern in the Law and Prophets. The
Celestial observations which were taken for these Israelites good, might
continually serve for the direction of the Gentile, if he would observe the
several signs of diverse Ages, as Mariners use diverse Constellations in diverse
Latitudes, and gaze not always upon the same Pole. The Matthew. 16. 3. Luke 12.
54.
ignorance in discerning the Signs of Times, was a Symptom of the Jews
Hypocrisy, and cause of his continual shipwreck in Faith. For suffering the
Fullness of time (where he and the Gentiles should have met as at the Equator)
to pass away without Correction of his course or due observation of the sudden
change of Heavens aspect; he lost the sight of his wonted Signs, and since
wanders up and down, as Mariners destitute of their Card, deprived of all
sight, either of Sun, Moon, or Stars: or rather, like blind men groaping their
way without any Ocular direction: yet even this Their blindness, is, or The
Jews (...) is an especial Light unto the Gentile.
may be a Better Light, and direction unto us, then their wonted sight and
skill in Scriptures could afford us. First, this might teach the wisest amongst
us, not to be High minded, but Fear; seeing wisdom has perished from the
wisest of mankind, even from Gods own chosen people. Secondly, this palpable
blind Obstinacy, which has befallen Israel, might persuade us Christians
(were not we blind also) to use that Method, which God himself did think most
sit, for planting true Faith in tender hearts. Christian parents, whether
Bodily or Spiritual, should be as careful to instruct their children what the
Lord had done unto these Jews, as the Israelites should have been, to tell
their sons, what God had done unto Pharaoh. His Hardness of heart, was nothing
to their Stubbornness: Egyptian Darkness was as noontide to their Blindness;
all the Plagues and Sores of Egypt, were but Flea-bitings to Gods fearful Marks
upon these Jews: yet is all this come upon them, that the Fullness of the
Gentiles might come in. With a more mighty hand has God brought us out of the
Romans 11. 25.
shadow of death, and Dominions of Satan, then he brought the Israelites out of
Egypt, out of the house of Bondage: with a more powerful, and harder stretched
out Arm, has he scattered these Jews among all people, from the one end of the
world to the other, then he brought the frogs, flies, and caterpillars into
Egypt. And it should be as a token in our hands, and as frontlets between our
childrens eyes, that the Lord has redeemed us through a mighty hand. ^4, (...).
When Israel departed out of Egypt, the Egyptian did not furnish him with
weapons for his defense, or Apologies for his departure. These Jews scattered
abroad, are made such Messengers as Uriah was, of their own destruction,
bearing records against themselves, but sealed up from their sight; holding
Moses their chief Accuser, in greatest Honor; or to follow that faithful
follower of Christ, S. Augustine in his Similitude to this purpose: although
these Jews be desperately blind themselves, yet they carry those
Looking-glasses before them, which long since put out their eyes by their too
much gazing on them, so as now they can hold them only in their hands, or turn
their faces toward them, not able to discern their misshapen visages in them;
but we Gentiles which come after them, do herein go before them, that we may
clearly see their Deformity, and Hideous blindness, first caused by the
glorious beams of the Divine Majesty shining in these sacred fountains,
whilst they used them as (as Narcissus did his Well, or little Babes do Books
with fair Pictures) only to solace themselves with representation of their
Godly Forefathers Beauty, set out in them in freshest colors; not as
Looking-glasses to discover, much less to reform what was amiss in
themselves, whom they in the pride of their hearts still presumed to be in all
points like their worthy Ancestors.

8 If unto all their miseries throughout so many Ages, we add their perpetual
Stupidity and Deadness of Heart to all works of the Spirit; if to this again
we add their Incomparable Zeal and Courage, in preserving the Letter of the
Law; and lay all unto our hearts: what is it we can imagine, the Lord could have
none unto his vineyard, that he has not done to it? He has commanded Esaias 5.
4, 6.
the clouds not to rain upon the natural branches, that the abundant fatness of
the root might be wholly communicate to us Gentiles, by nature wild grafts. He
has laid his vineyard in Israel waste, and left the hill of Sion his wonted
joy, More desolate then the mountains of Gilboah, that the dew of all his
heavenly blessings might descend upon the valleys of the Nations. Let us not
therefore tempt the Lord our God, in asking further Signs for confirmation of
our Faith: for no Sign can be given us, Equivalent to this Desolation of the
Jews. Such as the days of Jerusalem were in her distress, such we know (but
how far more grievous, we cannot conceive) the Day of Judgment shall be; even
a Day of wrath, and a Day of vengeance; An end of days, and an end of comfort;
a beginning of an endless night of sorrow, troubles, woe, and miseries to the
wicked. Such as the condition The Desolation of the Jews the most Effectual
Sign for confirming Christian Faith. Levit. 16. 44.
of these Jews has been, for more then fifteen hundred years; such shall the
state of unbelievers be without end, without all rest or security from danger,
disgrace, and torture, ten thousand times more dreadful and insufferable, then
what the others at any times have feared or felt. What else has been verified
of them, as in the Type; must be fulfilled in unbelievers, as in the Body or
substance. These shall fear both night and day, and shall have no assurance of
their life; but in stead thereof, an inevitable perpetuity of most grievous
death. In the morning they shall say, Would God it were evening; and at evening
they shall say, Would GOD it were morning, and wish that Time might be no more,
or that no days of joy had ever been; that all their mirth had been exchanged
for sorrow, even whilst it was first conceived within their breast, that so no
memory of sweet delights or pleasures past, might add gall unto the
bitterness of their present grief, nor minister oil unto that unquenchable
flame wherein they fry. Thus much of Gods extraordinary mercies and judgments
toward these Jews, and of the Experiments which their Estate from time to time
has afforded for the establishing of our Assent to Scriptures.

9 Particular judgments upon any Land or People, as remarkable and perspicuous
to common sense, as heretofore have been, we are not in this Age to expect. The
approach of this general and fearful judgment, we may justly think, does
swallow up the most of them, as great plagues usually drink up all other
diseases. The conversion of these Jews we may probably expect, as the chief
Sign of later times; only this last part of Moses prophecy. Leviticus chapter
26. 44. has not been as yet fulfilled, ^ut must be in due time, for so he
says, Yet notwithstanding this (even ^ the plagues and curses which he had
threatened, and we have seen ful^d in these Jews) when they shall be in the land
of their enemies, I will not cast them away, neither will I abhor them, to
destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them: For I am the Lord
their GOD: But I will remember for them, the Covenant of old when I brought
them out of the land of Egypt, that I might be their God: I am the Lord. And
the continuation of their former plagues seems much interrupted, the plagues
themselves much mitigated, in this last Age (since the Gospel has been again
revealed) as if their misery were almost expired, and the day of their
redemption drawing nigh. Yet would I request such as with me hold their general
conversion, before the end of all things, as a truth probably grounded on GODS
word; not to put that evil day far from them, as if it could not take them
unawares, un^l GODS promise to this people be accomplished. For, (were that the
point now in hand) I could (me thinks) As probably gather out of Scriptures,
that their conversion shall be sudden, As at all, and such as many parts of the
world shall not so soon hear of, by Authentic reports or uncontrollable
relation, as sensibly see at our general meeting before our Judge.

10 Like Experiments might be drawn from the Revolutions or Alterations of
other states, often times wrought by such causes* as are without the reach of
Policy, but most consonant to the Rules of Scriptures; or from the
Verification of such rules, in Gods Judgments upon private persons. But these
observations cannot be made so evident to ordinary Readers, before the doctrine
of Gods providence be unfolded. Wherefore I must refer them partly to that
place, partly to others of my Labors, which have been most plentiful in this
Argument. Only that mutation in our deliverance from the Servitude of the
Romish Church, may not be omitted. For, if we compare it with the Israelites
departure A Parallel of the Israelites deliverance from Egyptian, and Ours from
Rome Babrlonish Ihraldom.
out of Egypt: the manner of Gods Providence exemplified at large by Moses in
the former, is as a perfect rule to discern the same power in the later; and
the fresh Experiment of the later confirms unto our consciences the truth of
the History concerning the former. God from the spoils of the Egyptians
furnished the Israelites with all things necessary for their journey; the same
God had revived the study of Tongues, and revealed the Art of Printing, a
little before our forefathers departed out of Babylon, that they should not
come away empty, but well furnished to wage war with their Enemies, whom they
had robbed of their chief Jewels, leaving small store of polite literature, or
skill in Scriptures amongst them; though they have increased their Faculties
that way since. If we diligently view the disposition of Gods Providence before
those times, we cannot but acknowledge, that it was the same power that first
caused light to shine out of darkness, which then renewed the face of the
earth again, and brought the light of ingenious and sacred Literature forth of
the Chaos of Barbarity, obscurity, and fruitless curiosity, wherein it had been
long enclosed. It is (me thinks) a pleasant Contemplation to observe how the
Worthies of the Age precedent did bestir themselves in gathering and dressing
Armor, not used for many hundred years before, no man knowing for what
purpose, until the great Commander of heaven and earth gives our his Commission
to the Captains of his Host, for invading his enemy, the Man of Sin. Little
did that noble, religious, and learned King Alphonsus, or Laurentius de
Medicis, with such like, think of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Bucer Melancthon,
or other Champions departure from the Romish Church, when they gave such
countenance to Polite learning and learned men, from whom these had their
skill: yea, These Men Themselves, and their Fellows did little think of such
Projects, as God by them after effected, when they first began to use those
weapons, by which they finally foiled their mighty adversaries* Again, we have
as it were, a fresh Print of Gods dealing with Pharaoh, in his like proceedings
against the Pope. Pharaoh being delivered over to the stubbornness of his own
Heart, had it so hardened at last, that he desperately ^oseth both life and
kingdom, whilst he wrangles with the Israelites for their Cattle. The Popes
heart likewise was so far hardened for his former pride, and so strangely
besotted with the sweetness of his own Cup, that he cannot forgo the very
dreggs, but will have all swallowed down, even Indulgences themselves; that so
the Lords Name might be glorified in his shameful overthrow. Unless it had
been for such a notorious and palpable blindness of heart, in retaining that
more then Heathenish and Idolatrous Abomination; the just causes of Luthers
revolt had not been so manifest to the world, nor others departure from the
Romish Church so general. All this, as it was the Lords doing, so ought it to
seem wonderful in our eyes. For in this our deliverance was manifested the self
same Power, Wisdom, and Providence, for the steadfast acknowledgement of which,
all the former miracles in Egypt had been wrought; then necessary to the
Israelites, but not to our Forefathers, who had believed the truth of Moses
Miracles; instructed by the rules of Gods providence in them manifested, to
discern the same infinite power and wisdom in their own deliverance: the manner
of which was truly miraculous, as Interim si Pontificii omnino cum Judaeis
signu^ habere velint, accipiant hoc, quod nos su^ rhi miraculi loco habcmus,
unicum virum eumque miserum Monachum, absque omni mundana vi, Romanorum
Pontificum tyrannidem, quae tot seculis non tantum potentissimis Regibus, sed
and Toti Orbi Formidabilis fuit, opp^gnasse, superesse, prostravisse, juxta
Elegantissimos versiculos: Harmon. Evangel. cap. 59.
Cheninitius well answered the Papist Jew-like requiring signs or miracles for
Luthers doctrine, which had the same signs to confirm it, that Christianity it
self first had.

Vir sine vi ferri, vi verbi, and inermibus armis,
Vir sine re, sine spe, contudit orbis opes.
Sans dint of sword, by strength of word,
And armlesse harmless pains;
A wealthlesse wight, hopeless in sight,
Has crash'd Romes golden veins.
11 Luthers success was apprehended by the worldly wise men of those times as
impossible, as the predictions of Pharaohs overthrow by Moses, would have been
to such in that Age, as knew not the Will or Power of God. And Albertus Dolebat
sanctissimo viro non solum vitam eorum, quibus religionis confessio mandata
erat, nefariis sceleribus inquinari, sed serpere etiam in religionem maximos
errores. Ideo de illis everte^dis plurimum laborabat: Sed quod tandem ^dcsct
r^pae authoritatem, quousque processisset, and diffideret, ne unos homo tanto
negotio par esset, de seipso spem ^, and opravit, ut omnes docti viri
conjunctis studiis papam in ordinem redigerent. Idem dixit, quum paulo ante ^,
inf^^^ us, Lutheri propositiones de indulgentiis vidisset. Lurherum in bonam
causam ingressum esse, sed unius ^ vires nihil valere ad tantam pontificis
potentiam infringendam, quae nimium invaluif^e^. Et lectis and appro^
propofitionibus Luth^^i, exclamasse fertur, Frater, etc. Johan. Wolf. in
prafat. ad Kranizii opera.
Krantzius, a man, as of an excellent Spirit, so of far greater place and
authority in Germany then Luther was, and one, that from as earnest detestation
of the Romish Churches pride and insolences, notified as great a desire of
reformation* as Luther had; yet thought he should but have lost his labor in
oppugning that greatness whereto it was grown. The same Bishop, a little
before his death being made acquainted with Luthers purpose; after approbation
of his good intents to reform the abuse of Indulgences, burst out into these
despairing Speeches of his good success: Frater, frater, abi in cel^^^, and
dic; Miserere mei, Deus. Brother, Brother, get into thy cell, and take up a
Psalm of mercy.

12 Would God the Incredulity and careless carriage of the Israelites after
their mighty deliverance, had not been too lively represented by the like in
most reformed Churches. When that generation was gathered to their fathers,
would God another had not risen after them, which neither knew the Lord nor the
works which he had done for Israel, Judge. 2. 10. A generation as much addicted
unto Sacrilege, as abhorring Idols, Romans 2. 22. dishonouring GOD by polluting
that law of Liberty, wherein they gloried.

Lib. 1. SECT. IV. Pars. 2.
Of Experiments in our selves, and the right framing of Belief, as well unto
the several parts as unto the whole Canon of Scriptures.

THough these we now treat of, be the surest Pledges of divine Truths, without
which all Observations of former Experiments, are but like Assurances well
drawn, but never Sealed: yet are they least of all communicable unto others. He
that has tried them may rejoice in them, as of That Good Treasure hid in the
Field, which he that has found, can be content to sell all that he has, and
Buy the Field wherein it is: that is, (to moralize that Parable for good
Students use) he can be content to addict himself wholly or principally unto
this study, suffering others to discourse of such matters as they most delight
and glory in; Sealing his own mouth with that Hebrew Proverb, Secretum meum
mihi. It shall suffice then, to set down some general Admonitions, for the
finding of this Hidden Manna: albeit thus much cannot be so well performed in
this place, seeing the search hereof is not so easy or certain without the
doctrine of Gods Providence; and the matter or Subject of the most or best
Experiments in this kind, belong unto particular Articles of this Creed, to be
prosecuted in their proper place, according to the Method used in these general
Introductions, by comparing divine Oracles with the Experiments answerable unto
them.

CAP. XXXI.
Showing the Facility and use of the proposed Method by Instance in some, whose
Belief unto Divine Oracles has been confirmed by Experiments answerable unto
them.

1 THe Method is such as the Simplest Christian may easily learn, and the
greatest Professors need not to contemn. For S. Peter himself, that S. Peter's
Belief of known Or^d^^ ^ns^me^^ E^p^.
great Doctor of the Circumcision, did profit much by this Practice. He had
often heard, that God was no Accepter of Persons. This truth was acknowledged
by Elihu, who had never heard, nor read the written law of God: He accepts
not the person of Princes, and regards not the rich more then the poor: J^^
34 19.
for they be all the work of his hands. The like has the Wise man from the
same reason: He that is Lord over all, will spare no person, neither shall he
fear Wisd. 6. 7.
any greatness: for he has made the small and great, and cares for all
alike. The same in substance is often repeated in the Book of Life: and no man
could deny it, that had heard it but once proposed, if he did acknowledge God
for the Creator of all. Notwithstanding the fresh Experiment of Gods calling
Cornelius to Christian Faith, comfirmed S. Peter in the right Belief of Divine
Oracles to this effect: and as it seems, taught him the true meaning of that
place, Deuteronomy. 10. 16. Circumcise therefore the fore skin of your heart (as if he
had said, Glory not in the circumcision of the flesh) and harden your necks no
more: for the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of lords, a great God,
Mighty, and Terrible, which accepts no persons. From this place alone, the
proud Jews might have learned, that the Lord was God of the Gentiles as well as
of Them: and, from the Abundance of his inward Faith, enlarged by the
forementioned Experiment, S. Peter burst out into these Speeches: Of Acts 10.
34.
a truth, I perceive that God is no accepter of persons: but in every Nation,
he that fears him, is accepted with him.

2 The same Method the Lord himself has commended unto us in many places of
Scripture, wondering often times at the dullness of his peoples hearts, that
could not from the Experiments of His Power, Might, and Majesty, showed in
them, or for them, acknowledge those Principles of Faith which Moses commended
unto them in writing: O (says he) that they were wise, then would they
understand this; they would consider their later end: how should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight; except their strong God had sold
them, and the Lord had shut them up. And again, Eehold now, for I am He, and
Deuteronomy. 32. 29, 30, 39.
there is no Gods with me. Why should they Believe this? They were to take none
for gods, but such as could do the works of God. What were these? Such as God
avoucheth of himself in the next words: I kill, and I give life; I wound, and I
make whole; neither is there any that can deliver out of my band. These, and
like Effects, specified in the former place, often manifested amongst this
People, might have taught them the truth of the former Oracle, albeit Moses had
been Silent. For so the Finger of God, manifested in Naamans, the Syrian Naaman
without the written word, by Experiment, confirmed in the truth of what was
written in the word. 2 Kings 5. 15.
Generals cure (which was but one part of the former effects appropriated unto
God) did write this divine Oracle as distinctly in his heart, as Moses had done
it in the Book of the Law. For after he was cleansed (from his leprosy) he
turned again to the man of God, he and all his company, and came and stood
before him, and said; Behold, now I know there is no God in all the world, but
in israel: And again, thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt
sacrifice, nor offering, unto any other God, save unto the Lord. This was as
much, as if he had said: Behold now, for the Lord is He, and there is no other
Gods with Him: He wounds, and he makes whole. Verse 17.


3 If the cure of Leprosy, contrary to Humane Expectation, could so distinctly
write this divine Oracle in an uncircumcised Aramites heart, without any pattern
or written Copy, whence to take it out: how much more may the Lord expect,
that the like Experiments in our selves should imprint his Oracles already
written, by Moses and other his Servants of old, in our hearts and consciences,
that have these paterns of Naaman and others registered to our hands,
admonishing us to be observant in this kind? But alas, we are all by nature
sick of a more dangerous leprosy, then Naaman knew: and yet the most of us far
sicker of Naamans Pride, then of his leprosy.. If Gods Ministers shall
admonish the curious Artists, or Athenian wits of our times, as Elisha his
Prophet did Naaman: they reply with Naaman in their hearts: We looked they
should have called upon the name of the Lord, their God, and made us New Men in
an Instant: and now they bid us wash our selves again and again in the water of
life, and be clean. Are not the Ancient Fountains of Greece (that nurse of
Arts, and Mother of Eloquence) and the pleasant Rivers of Italy (the School of
delicate modern Wits) better then all the waters of Israel? Are not Tullie and
Aristotle as learned as Moses, and the Prophets? Thus they depart from us in
displeasure.

4 But if the Lord should command us greater things for our temporal
Preferment, or for the avoidance of corporal Death or torture: would we not do
them? How much rather then, when he says unto us, Wash your selves often in
the Holy Fountain, the Well of life, and ye shall be clean, even from those
sores, which otherwise will torment both body and soul eternally? Yea, but many
read the Scriptures again and again, and daily hear the word Preached
publicly, and yet prove no purer, in life and action then their Neighbors.
The reason is, because they hear or read them negligently; not comparing their
Rules with Experiments daily incident to their course of life: their
preparation and resolution are not proportionable to the weight and consequence
of this sacred Business; their Industry and alacrity in observing and
practizing the prescripts commended to their Meditations by their Pastors, do
in no wise so far exceed their care and diligence in worldly matters, as the
dignity of these Heavenly Mysteries surpasses the pleasures or commodities of
this brickle earthly life: and not thus Prepared to Hear, or Read the
Scriptures; to Hear is to Contemn, to Read is to Profane them: even the often
repetition of the words of life, without due reverence and attention, breeds an
insensibility or deadness in men's souls. Yet should not such men's want of
Sense breed Infidelity in others: rather this Experience of so much hearing,
and little doing Gods will, may confirm the truth of his word, concerning such
Teachers and Hearers: Many in our times, not Monks and Friars only, but of
their stern Opposites, not a Few, Having a (...) of godliness, but denying the
power thereof, crept into houses, and lead captive simple 2 Timothy 3. 5, 6, 7.
Women, laden with sins, and lead with diverse lusts, ever hearing, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. And as the Philosopher said of his
moral Auditors Indocilitie, that it skilled not whether he were Young or of
Youthful affections: so is it not the difference of Sex but resolution, that
makes a good Scholar or non proficient in the School of our Savior JESUS
CHRIST. Many men have weak and Womanish, and many women, Manly, and Heroic
resolutions, toward God and godliness.

5 The infirmity which vexed the religious Hanna, was not so grievous Be^
effects of Experiments less wonderful in Anna.
as that of Naamans: she was in our corrupt language, as many honest women at
this day are, by nature Barren; or, if we would speak as the Prophet did in the
right language of Canaan, the Lord had made her barren: weary she was of her
own; and, according to the ordinary course of nature, she saw no hope of being
the author of life to others. Yet in this her distress she prayed unto the
Lord her God, and he granted her desire. From this Experiment of Gods Power,
though not altogether so remarkable in ordinary estimation as Naamans cure,
she fully conceives not only the truth of the former Oracle, acknowledged by
Naaman (but more Emphatically expressed by her, There 1 Samuel 2. 2.
is none Holy as the Lord; yea, there is none besides thee, and there is no God
like our God;) nor that other Attribute only of Wounding, or making whole (so
lively uttered, verse. 6. The Lord kills, and makes alive; brings down to
the grave, and raises up:) but Gods Word, planted in her heart by her fresh
Experience, grows up like a grain of Mustard Seed, and brancheth it self into a
faithful acknowledgement of most of his Attributes: The Lord is a God of
knowledge, and by him enterprises are established; the Bow and the mighty men
are broken, and the weak have girded themselves with strength: they that were
full, are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no more hired, so that the
barren has born seven, and she that has born many children, is feeble: the
Lord makes poor, and makes rich; bringethlow, and exalts: he raises up the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the dunghill, to set them
among Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory: for the Pillars of
the earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them; He will keep the
feet of his Saints, and the wicked shall be silent in darkness; for in his own
Might shall no man be strong. Nor does it contain it self within the bounds of
ordinary Belief, but works in her heart like new wine, filling it not only with
Songs of Joy and Triumph over her envious Enemies, Mine heart rejoices in the
Lord, my mouth is enlarged over my enemies, because I rejoice in thy salvation;
but also with the Divine Spirit of De Prophetia Hannae, vide Augustinu^, lib.
17. de Civ. Dei, c. 4.
Prophecy: The Lords adversaries shall be destroyed, and out of Heaven shall he
thunder upon them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give
power unto his King, and exalt the horn of his Anointed. verse 10.

6 The like docilitie was in the blessed Virgin, of whom perhaps Annah was the
Type: both of them verified that saying, Verbum sapientisat est, One Different
Operations of like Experiments in diverse parties, with their causes.
Experiment taught them more then five hundred would do most of us: The reason
was, because their hearts were so much better prepared. For, as heat in some
bodies, by reason of the indisposition of the matter, causes heat and nothing
else; in some scarce that; in others brings forth life, and fashioneth all the
Organs and Instruments thereof: so Experiments of Gods power, in some men's
hearts, breed only a persuasion of his Might or operation in that particular,
as in those foolish 1 Kings 20. verse. 23.
Aramites, who, vanquished in Battle by the Israelites whom he favored,
questioned whether he were a God as well of the Valleys as of the Mountains; in
others, the same or less Apprehension of his Power or Presence, begets
life, and fashioneth this image in their hearts, which thence will show it self
unto others in such ample and entire Confession of his Attributes, as Hannah
and the blessed Virgin uttered. Some again are so ill disposed and indocile,
that the whole Moral Law of God might sooner be engraven in hardest Marble or
Flint, then any one precept imprinted in their hearts by such wonderful
Documents of his Power, as would teach the godly in an instant both the Law and
Prophets. Imagine some men in our days had been cured by like means of such a
malady as Naaman was; or some women blessed from above with fruit of their
wombes, after so long sterilitie, as Hannah endured. Who could expect, that one
of ten in either Sex should return to give like thanks to God in the presence
of his Priests or Prophets? Were Elisha now living, he must be wary to work his
cure by his bare word (and so perhaps he should be censured for a Sorcerer) in
any case, he might not use the waters of Jordan, or other like second causes:
otherwise curious wits would find out some hidden or secret virtue caused in
them (at least for the time being) by some unusual, but Benign ^^^ect of some
Planet or Constellation in whose right they should be entitled either full
Owners, or Copartners of that glory, which Naaman ascribed wholly unto God. And
poor Hannah, in this Politic Age, should not be so much praised for her
devotion or good skill in divine Poesy, as pitied for a good H^^^st
wel-meaning silly Soul, that did attribute more to God then was his due, upon
ignorance of Alterations wrought in her Body by natural causes. For it is not
the custom of our Times to mark so much the ordering or disposition, as the
particular or present operation of such Agents. If any thing fall out amiss,
we bid a Plague upon ill Fortune, or curse mischance: if ought aright, we
applaud our own or others Wits that have been employed in the business, or
perhaps thank God for Fashion sake, that we had Good Luck. He is to us, in our
good success, as a friend that lives far off; who, we presume, wishes well to
such projects as he knows in general we are about, being unacquainted with the
particular means that must effect them, or no principal Agent in their
contrivance. Hence do not I marvel (though many do) if such men in our times,
as reap the fruits of the fields which God has blessed, in greatest Abundance,
make no conscience of returning the Tenth part to him that gave the whole; when
as not one of a thousand, either in heart or deed, or out of any distinct or
clear apprehension of his power or efficacy, or true resolution of all effects
into the First Fountain whence they flow, does attribute so much as the Tenth,
nay as the Hundredth part to Gods doing in any Event, wherein the industry of
man or operation of second Causes are apparent. We speak like Christians of
matters past, recorded in Scripture; but in our discourses of modern affairs,
our Paganismes and more then Heathenish Solecismes bewray the Infidelity of
our thoughts and resolutions. And albeit we all disclaim Manes Heresy, that
held one Creator of the matter, and another of more pure and better substances;
yet are we infected, for the most part, with a Spice of his madness, in making
Material Agents the Authors of some effects; and the Divine Power, of others.
Nor can I herein excuse the School-divines themselves, ancient or modern,
domestic or forain; the best of them (in my judgment) either greatly erred in
assigning the subordination of Second Causes to the First; or else are much
defective, in deriving their actions or operations immediately from Him, who is
the First and Last in every action that is not evil, the Only Cause of all
good unto men: as shall appear (God willing) in the Article of his Providence,
and some other Treatises pertinent unto it, wherein I shall, by his assistance,
make good these two Assertions: The One, that modern events, and Dispositions
of present times, are as apt to confirm men's Faith now living, as the Miracles
of former would be, were they now in use, or as they were to instruct that age
wherein they were wrought; The Second, that The Infidelity of such in this age,
as are strongly persuaded they love Christ with their heart, and yet give no
more then most men do unto his fathers providence, may be greater then theirs
that never heard of either, or equal unto the Jews that did persecute him.

7 Until the Article of the divine Providence, and that other of the Godhead
General directions for the right making of Experiments in our selves.
be unfolded, these General directions for Experiments in this kind must
suffice. First, that every man diligently observe his course of life, and
survey the circumstances precedent or consequent to every action of greater
importance that he undertakes, or events of moment that befall him. Secondly,
that he search whether the whole frame or composition of occurrents be not
such, as cannot be attributed to any natural, but unto some secret and
invisible Cause; or whether some cause or occasions precedent be not such, as
the Scripture has already allotted the like events unto. Would men apply their
minds unto this study, Experience would teach them (what from enumeration of
particulars may be proved by discourse) That there is no estate on earth, nor
business in Christendom this day on foet, but have a ruled cause in Scripture
for their issue and success. Nor is there any prescript of our Savior, his
Evangelists, or Apostles, but his people might have a Probatum of it, either in
themselves or others; so they would refer themselves wholly into his hands, and
rely as fully upon his prescripts, as becomes such distressed Patients upon so
Admirable The causes why so many in ^ur dares have little (...) (...)
Experience of the truth of divine (...).
a Physician.

8 But many who like well of Christ for their Physician, loath his medicines
for the Ministers his Apothecaries sake, and say of us, as Nathanael said of
him; Can there any good thing come from these silly Galilaeans? They will not
with Nathanael come near and See, but keep aloof. And what marvel, if spiritual
diseases abound, where there be spiritual medicines plenty, when the flock, be
they never so Soul-sick, come only in such sort to their Pastors, as if a sick
man should go to a Physick-Lecture for the recovery of his health, where the
Professor, it may be, reads learnedly of the nature of Consumptions, when the
Patient is desperately sick of a Pleurisy; or discourses accurately of the
Plethora or Athletical constitution, when his Auditor (poor soul) languisheth
of an Atrophie? Most are ashamed to consult us (as good patients in bodily
maladies always do their Physicians) in any particulars, concerning the nature
of their peculiar griefs: so as we can apply no medicine to any but what may as
well befit every disease. Whereas, were we thoroughly acquainted with their
several maladies, or the dispositions of their minds, the prescript might be
such, or so applied, as every man might think the medicine had been made of
purpose for his Soul; and, finding his secret thoughts with the Original causes
of his Malady discovered, the Crisis truly Prognosticated, he could not but
acknowledge; that he who gave this prescript, and taught this Art, did search
the very secrets of men's hearts and reins, and knew the inward temper of his
Soul, better then Hippocrates or Galen did the constitution of men's Bodies.
Finally, would men learn to be true Patients, that is, would they take up
Christ's yoke, and become humble and meek, and observe but for a while such a
Gentle and moderate Diet, as from our Saviors practice and doctrine might be
prescribed by their spiritual Physicians upon better notice of their several
dispositions, they would in short time, out of their inward Experience of that
uncouth rest and ease, which by thus doing their souls should find, believe
with their hearts, and with their mouths confess, that these were rules of
Life, which could not possibly have come from any other, but from that Divine
Aesculapius himself, the only Son, yea the Wisdom of the only Wise, Invisible,
and Immortal God. The more unlikely the means of recovering spiritual health
may seem to natural reason, before men try them, the more forcible would their
good success and issue be, for establishing true and lively Faith. But such as
can, from these or like Experiments, subscribe unto main particular Truths
contained in Scripture, and acknowledge them as divine, may be uncertain of
their Number, or Extent; doubt they may of the number of Books wherein the like
are to be sought: and again, in those books which are acknowledged to contain
many divine Revelations and Dictates of the holy Spirit, they may doubt whether
many other prescripts, neither of like use, nor authority, have not been
inserted by men.

CAP. XXXII.
Containing a brief Resolution of Doubts concerning the Extent of the general
Canon, or the number of its integral parts.

1 THe full resolution of the former doubt or rather Controversy, concerning
the number of Canonical books, exceeds the limits of this present Treatise, and
depends as much as any question this day controversed, upon the testimonies of
Antiquity. The order of Jesuits shall be confounded, and Reynoldes raised to
life again, ere his learned Works, lately come forth upon this Argument (albeit
unfinished to his mind, whilst he was living) (...) confuted by the Romanists:
Or, if any of the Jesuitish Society, or that other late upstart Congregation,
will be so desperate as to adventure their Honor in Bellarmine, or other of
their foiled Champions rescue, they shall be expected in the Lists before they
be prepared to entertain the Challenge, by one of that deceased Worthies
Shield-bearers in his life time: whose judgment in all good learning I know for
sound; his observation in this kind, choice; his industry great; his
resolution to encounter all Antagonists, such as will not relent. For
satisfaction of the ordinary Reader, I briefly answer.

2 First, that this is no controversy of Faith, nor need it to trouble any
Christian man's Conscience, that we and the Papists differ about the Authority
of some Books; it rather ought to confirm his Faith, that men disagreeing so
much in many opinions, so opposite in their affections, should so well agree
about the number of no fewer then two and twenty Canonical Books of the old
Testament. Had their authority only been Human, or left to the choice of men,
whether they should be allowed or rejected, many that now admit them, would
reject them, because opposite Religions did embrace them. That all sorts of
Protestants, Papists, and The testimonies of the Ancient Israelites and modern
Jews for the Canon of the old Testament is most Authentic. For even those A^
Fathers which our adversaries allege to ackknowledg some more Books for
Canonical then our Church does; did it only upon this Error, that they thought
there had been more in the Canon of the Hebrew, upon whose testimonies they
relied; as will be made clear against the Papists.
Jews do receive them, is an infallible Argument, that he who is Lord of all,
did commend them to all. Nor does our Church so disclaim all which the Romans
above these two and twenty admit, as if it were a point of faith to hold there
were no more: it only admits no more into the same Rank and Order with the
former, because we have no such, warrant of faith or sure Experiments so to do.
Many of them discover themselves to be Apocryphal: and albeit some of them can
very hardly, or not at all, be discerned for such by their Style, Character, or
dissonancie to Canonical Scriptures; yet, that none of them indeed are, or can
be admitted for Canonical, without manifest tempting of God, is evident from
what has been observed before, concerning Gods unspeakable providence in
making the Blinded and Perfidious Jews, (Christ's and our bitterest enemies)
such trusty Feoffees for making over the Assurances of Life unto us. For,
seeing by them he commended unto us, only so many Books of the old Testament,
as our Church acknowledges: this is an intallible Argument, that His will was,
we should admit no more; Had any more been written, before the re-edifying of
the Temple by Zerubbabel, no doubt the Jews would have admitted them into their
Canon. For all such as should be written after; the Prophet Malachie, who is
the last of their Canon, had left this caveat in the last words of his
prophecy for not admitting them; Remember the law of Moses my servant, which I
commanded to him in Horeb, in all Israel, with the statutes and judgments: as
if he had said, You must content your selves with His Writings, and such as you
have already, Consonant to his; for any others of equal Authority you may not
expect, until the Expectation of the Gentiles come. For no Prophet shall arise
until that time, as he intimates in the last words, Behold, I will send you
Eliah the Prophet, before the coming of the great and fearful day of the Lord:
and he shall turn the hearts (...) ^at, M^. 11. 1^. (...) be (...) ph^ ^^^nem,
etc. That is, their writin^* were the compl^at (...) of (...) and infallible
means of salva^ion until John. Yet can it not be proved, that any Book held by
our Church for A^al, (...) contained either under the Law (...) Pro^^^ts, (...)
the Historical books of the Hebrew Canon are. Evident it is that the b^^ks
(...) (...) and M^s were writ since M^l^chies time: from whom till John no
Prophet was to be expected, ^ut Mos^^ (...) ((...) by (...) recorded in
Histories and prophetical commentaries till Malachies time Inclusive) was to be
the immediat^ (...) for d^ning the Great ^roph^^. See Lib. 2. c. 17. numb. 3.
and 4. and l. 1. c. 17.
of the fathers unto the children, and the hearts of the children to their
fathers, lest (...) come and smite the earth with cursing. The Ministry of
others for converting souls, he supposed should be but ordinary, by the
Exposition of the Law and Prophets: and the Authority of such (writ they as
much as they listed could not be Authentic or Canonical.

3 Some others again of reformed Churches in these our times, have from the
example of Antiquity, doubted of the authority of some Books in the new
Testament: as of The divine Authority of Some Books in the new Testament,
especially the Apocalypse, doubted of by the Ancient, brought to light in later
times.
Jude, of James, the second of Peter, and some others. Which doubt is now
diminished by their continuance in the sacred Canon so long time, not without
manifest documents of GODS providence in preserving them, whose pleasure (it
may seem) was to have these Books, of whom the Ancients most doubted, fenced
and guarded on the one side, by S. Paul's Epistles, and other Canonical
Scriptures (never called in question by any, but absurd and foolish Heretics,
whose humorous opinions herein died with themselves;) and on the other, by the
Book of the Apocalypse: of whose Authority though many of the Ancient for the
time being, doubted; yet He that was before all times did foresee, that it
should in later times manifest it self to be ^is work, by Events answerable to
the Prophecies contained in it. And, albeit many Apocryphal Books have been
stamped with Divine Titles, and ob^uded upon the Church as Canonical, whilst
she was in her Infancy, and the sacred Canon newly constitute: yet the divine
Spirit, by which it was written, has wrought them out, as new wine does such
filth or grossness as mingle with it whilst the grapes are trodden. S. John's
Adjuration in the conclusion of that Book has not only terrified all for
adding unto, or diminishing it ^elf: but has been, as it were, a Seal unto the
rest of this Sacred Volume of the new Testament, as Malachies prophecy was to
the old; the whole Canon it self, consisting both of the Old and New, continues
still as the Ark of God; and all other Counterfeits as Dagon.

4 Were not our Roman adversaries Doctrine concerning the general principles of
Faith, an Invention devised of purpose by Satan to obliterate all print ^r
impression of Gods providence in governing his Church, out of men's hearts: how
were it possible for any man endued with reason to be so far overgrown with
Frenzy as not to conceive their own folly and madness, in avouch^g we cannot
know what books are Canonical, what not, but by the Infallible Testimony of the
present Romish Church But of those impieties at large hereafter. I will now only
infer part of their Conclusion, which they still labor, but never shall be able
to prove, from Premises which they never dreamt of. For Wherein the Testimony
of the Rimish Church in discerning some Canonical Books is most available.
(...) profess among others, this is not the least reason I have to hold the
Apocalypse for Canonical Scripture, because the Romish Church does so esteem
it. Nor could reformed Churches Belief of its Authority be so strong unless
that Church had not denied, but openly acknowledged it for Canonical Scripture.
As the same Beams of the Sun reach from heaven to earth, and from one end of
the world to another; so do the same rays of Gods power extend themselves from
generation to generation, always alike conspicuous to such as are Illuminate
by His Spirit: for who, thus Illuminate, can acknowledge his providence in
making the Jews so careful to preserve the old Testament; and not as clearly
discern the same in constraining the Romish Church to give her supposed
infallible Testimony of the Apocalypse? Doubtless, if that Book had been the
work of man, it had been more violently used by that Church of late, then ever
the new Testrment has been by the Jewish Synagogue, or any Heretic by the
Romanists, seeing it has said far more against them, then any whom they
account for such, ever did. But God, who ^ade Pharaohs Daughter a second mother
unto Moses, whom he had ap^ted to bring destruction afterward upon her Fathers
house and King^^m, has made the Romish Church of old, a Dry Nurse to preserve
this Book (whose meaning she knew not, that it might bring desolation upon her
self (...) her children, in time to come. For by the breath of the Lord shall
she be destroyed; her doom is already read by S. John; and the Lord of late
has entangled her in her own snare, whilst she was drawing it to catch
others. Her childrens Brags of their mothers Infallibility, wherewith they hale
most silly sou^ to them, were too far spread before the Trent council, too
commodious to b^ called in on a sudden. Had they then begun to deny the
Authority of this Boo^ (though then pronouncing their mothers woe more openly
then any Prophecies of old had done the ensuing desolations of the Jews) every
child (...) have caught hold on this string, that this Church (as they suppose)
alway^^ the same, never obnoxious to any error, had in former time
acknowledgeed it for Authentic and divine: albeit (no question) but many of
them sinc^ have wished from their hearts that their forefathers had used the
same, as Seraiah did Jeremiahs books which he wrote against Babylon, Jer. 51.
that bot^ it, and all memory of it, had been drowned in the Bottom of the
deepest se^* and a millstone thrown upon it by Gods Angel, that it never might
rise up again to interrupt their whorish mothers beastly pleasures, by
discovering her filthy nakedness daily more and more. For conclusion of this
point for this present: That this and other Canonical books had been long
preserved or rather imprisoned by the Romish Church in darkness and ignorance,
until the Almighty gave his voice, and caused them to speak in every tongue
throughout these parts of the world; does no more argue her to have been the
true and Catholic Church, then Moses Education in Pharaohs Court, during the
time of his Infancy or Nonage, does argue the Egyptian Courtiers to have been
Gods chosen People.

CAP. XXXIII.
A brief direction for preventing Scruples and resolving doubts, concerning
particular Sentences or passages in the Canon of Scripture.

UNto the second demand, [How we know this or that Sentence in any For of
Canonical Scripture, to have been from God, Not inserted by man] Some perhaps
would say this must be known by the Spirit. Which indeed is the Briefest Answer
that can be given: but such as would require a long Apology for its Truth, or
at least a large Explication in what Sense it were true, if any man durst be so
bold as to reply upon it. How our firm Assent to some Principal mat ters
revealed in Scriptures, (...) our Faith unto their whole Canon.
Consequently, to our former Principles, we may Answer, That our full and
undoubted Assent unto some Principal Parts, does bind us unto the Whole Frame
of Scriptures. (...) you will say, we Believe such special parts, from
undoubted Experience (...) their Truth in our hearts, and without This our
Belief of them could not be (...) steadfast: how then shall we steadfastly
believe those parts, of whose div^ truth we have no such Experiments? for of
every Sentence in Scripture, w^ suppose few or none can have any: Yet even unto
those parts whereof we have no Experiments in particular, we do adhere by our
Former Faith because ou^ Souls and Consciences are as it were tied and fastened
unto other Parts where with they are conjoined, as the pinning and nailing of
two plain bodies in some few parts, does make them stick close together in all
so as the one cannot b^ pulled from the other in any part, whilst their
fastening, holds. It will be r^plied, that this Similitude would hold together,
if one part of Canonical Scripture were so firmly or naturally united to
another, as the diverse portions (...) one and the same continuate or Solid Body
are: but seeing it is evident (...) so they are not, who can warrant the
contrary, but that a Sentence or Pe^ od, perhaps a whole Page, might have been
Foisted into the Canon by some Scribe or other? Here we must retire unto our
First Hold or Principles of Faith. For if we sted fastly Believe from
Experiments or otherwise, that some principal parts of Scripture have come from
God, and that the same are sure Pledges for man's good, the only means of his
Salvation: this Doctrine or Experience of Gods Providence once fully
established, will establish our Faith and Assent unto other parts of his Word,
whereof (should we take them alone) we could have no such Experiments. For he
that knows God, or his Providence aright; knows this withal, that he will
not suffer us to be tempted above our strength. And once having had Experience
of his Mercies past, we cannot, without Injury to his Divine Majesty, but in
Confidence of it, Believe and Hope, that his All-seeing Wisdom and Almighty
Power will still (maugre the spite of Death, Hell, Satan, and their Agents)
preserve his Sacred Word sincere without admixture of any profane, false, or
humane Inventions that might overthrow, or pervert our Faith begun. Hereto we
may refer all former Documents of His Care and Providence in preserving the
Canon of our Faith from the Tyranny of such, as sought utterly to deface it;
and the Treachery of others, who sought to corrupt it. And it ought to be no
little motive unto us, thus to think: when we see Austin, Gregory, and other of
the Ancient writers, either maimed, or mangled, or purged of their best Blood,
where they make against the Romish Church; or else her untruths fathered upon
Them, by her shameless sons, in places where they are silent for her: and yet
this Sacred Volume untouched and incorrupt, by any violence offered to it by
that Church; only it has lost its natural Beauty and Complexion, by long
durance in that homely and vulgar Prison; whereunto they have confined it.

2 But as from these and like Documents of Gods Care and Providence in
preserving it, and of His Love and Favor toward us, we conceive Faith and
sure Hope, that he will not suffer us to be tempted with doubts of this nature,
above our strength: so must we be as far from tempting Him, by these or like
unnecessary, unseasonable curious Demands. How should we know This or That
Clause or Sentence (if we should find them alone) to be Gods word? Why might
not an Heretic of malice have forged, or a Scribe through negligence altered
them? It should suffice that they have been commended to us not alone, but
accompanied with such Oracles as we have already Entertained for Divine. And if
any Doubt shall happen to arise, we must rely upon that Oracle, of whose truth
every true Christian has, and all that would be such, may have sure Trial.
Deus cum tentatione simul vires dabit: God with the Temptation will give Issue;
yea, Joyful Issue to such Temptations as he suffers to be suggested by Others,
Not unto such as we thrust our selves into by our needless Curiosity. When we
are called unto the search of truth by Satan or his Instruments Objections
against it, the Lord will give us better reasons for our own or others
Satisfactions, then yet we know of, or should be able to find, but by the
conduct of his untempted Providence.

CAP. XXXIV.
Concluding the First Book with some Brief Admonition to the Reader.

TO conclude this Treatise, as it was begun. The greater the Reward proposed to
the faithful Practice, or the Punishment threatened to the Neglect of these
divine Oracles: the greater is the Madness of many men in our time, who in
contemplative Studies, whose Principal End is delight, can under go long toil,
and great pains, never attaining to exact Knowledge but by Believing their
Instructors, and taking many Theoremes and Conclusions upon Trust, before they
can make Infallible Trial of their Truth,: and yet in matters of their
Salvation, which cannot be exactly Known, but only Believed in this life, and
whose Belief must be got by Practice, not by Discourse, demand Evidence of
Truth, and infallible Demonstration, before they will vouchsafe to Believe or
adventure their pains on their Practice; and finally, so Demean themselves in
speech and resolution, as if God Almighty should think himself highly graced,
and our Savior, his Son, much beholden to them, that they should Deign to be
his Scholars, sooner then Mahomets, or Machiavels. But we that are his
Messengers must not debase His Word, nor Disparage our Calling, by Wooing them
upon such Terms, or professing to show them the Truth before they be willing to
learn it: One first Principle whereof is this, That such as will seek, may find
starting holes enough to run out of Christ's Fold, and escape his Mercies
proffered in his Church. And as many reasons are daily brought, sufficient to
persuade a Right-disposed understanding of the Truth of Scriptures: so no
Argument can be found of force enough to convince a Froward Will, or persuade
perverse Affections. These are they which make a many altogether incapable of
any Moral, most of all, of any Divine Truth; and must be laid aside at the
first Entrance into the School of Christ, and continually kept under by the Rod
of his Judgments and Terrors of that Dreadful Day. Unto such as account these
Consequents less dreadful, or their dread less probable, then that they
should (for a time at least) lay aside all Perversitie of will, or Humor of
Contradiction, to make sure trial of those divine Oracles for their Good; we
can apply no other Medicine, but that of Saint John: He that is Filthy let him
be Filthy still. Rev. 22. 11.

2. Thus much of general Inducements to Belief. In the Observation and Use of
all these and others of what kind soever, we must implore the Assistance of
Gods Spirit, who only works True and lively Faith, but (ordinarily) by these
or like means. These Scriptures are as the Rule or Method prescribing us our
Diet and Order of life: these Experiments joined with it are as Nutriment: and
the Spirit of God digesteth all to our Health and Strength. Without It all
other means or matters, of best Observation, are but as good Meat to weak or
corrupt Stomachs: With It, every Experiment of our own or others Estate, taken
according to the rules of Scriptures, does nourish and strengthen Faith, and
preserve our spiritual Health. Many in our days uncessantly blame their
Brethrens Backwardness to Entertain the Spirit, or rely upon it only; being
more Blameworthy themselves for being too forward in Believing Every Spirit,
and seeking to This is that Circle which the Adversary (...) as a Counter^ to
us, whilst we seek to overthrow their Circular ^. The Objects (...) may justly
be (...) upon the Enthusiast, but not on Our Church as shall appear in the
(...) Section of the Second Book.
discern Canonical from Apocryphal Scriptures by the Spirit, and again to Try
True from False Spirits, by the Scriptures, without serious Observation and
settled Examination of Experiments answerable unto sacred Rules. Such men's
fervent Zeal unto the Letter of the Gospel is like an hot Stomach accustomed to
light meats, which increase Appetite more then Strength, and fill the body
rather with bad Humors then good Blood.

3 The Spirit no doubt speaks often unto us when we attend not; but we must not
presume to understand His Suggestions by His immediate Voice or Presence; only
by His Fruits, and the inward Testimony of an appeased Conscience (which he
alone can work) must we know him. He that seeks (as Ignatius Profici^^tibus (ut
admonet P. noster Ignatius L. Exercit. de dignosc. spirit.) Spiritus malus se
dure, implacide and violenter, quasi cum strepitu quodam, ut imber in saxa
decidens, infundit. Bonus vero iisdem leniter, placide and suaviter, sicut aqua
irrorat spongiam. Illis vero qui in deterius proficiunt, experientia docet,
contra evenire. Delrius disquisit. Magic. lib. 4. cap. 1. q. 3. sect. 6.
Ignatius Loyola taught his sons) to discern Him without more ado, by his
manner of breathing, may instead of him be troubled with an unwelcome Guest,
always ready to invite himself where he sees preparation made for his Better,
and one (I am persuaded) that has learned more kinds of Salutations then
Loyola knew of, able to fill empty Breasts or shallow Heads unsettled in Truth,
with such pleasant, mild, and gentle Blasts, as are apt to breed strong
persuasions of more then Angelical Inspirations.

4 God grant the carriage of ensuing Times may argue these Admonitions
needless: which further to prosecute, in respect of times late past and now
present, could not be unseasonable; but thus much by the way must now suffice
me, purposed hereafter (if God permit) to Treat of the Trial of Spirits, and
certain apprehension of inherent Faith: about the general means of whose
production, and establishment, the Question; most controversed in these days,
^s: Whether beside the Testification of Gods Spirit, which (as all agree) must
(by these late mentioned or other means) work Faith in our hearts: the
Testimony or authority of others besides our selves, be necessary, either for
ascertaining our Apprehension of the Spirit thus working, or for assuring the
truth of Experiments wrought by it in our Souls? or if no other besides the
testimony of Gods Spirit and our own Conscience, be necessary, either after
their Sentence given or whilst they give it, How far the Authority or
Ministry of men is necessary or behoveful, either for bringing us acquainted
with the Spirit of God, or for the assistance and direction of our Conscience
in giving right Sentence of the Truth or true meaning of Gods word? Of these
questions and others subordinate to them, we are to dispute at large in the
Books following.

How far the Ministry of Men is Necessary for PLANTING True Christian Faith;
and retaining the Unity of It PLANTED.
The Second Book of Comments upon the CREED.
AS in the first Intention, so after some Prosecution of this long work; my
purpose was, to refer the full Examination of the Romish Churches pretended
Authority in matters Spiritual, unto the Article of the Catholic Church:
Which (with those three others of the Holy Ghost, Communion of Saints, and
forgiveness of Sins, for more exact Methods sake, and continuation of matters,
in nature, and sacred writ, most united) I have reserved for the last place, in
this Frame of Christian Belief: annexing the Articles of the Bodies
resurrection, and Everlasting life, unto that of Final Judgment, whereon these
Two have most Immediate and most direct Dependence.

2 But, after the Platform was cast, and matter for Structure prepared; upon
evident discovery of the Jesuits Treachery, in setting up the Pope as a secret
Competitor with the Blessed Trinity, for Absolute Sovereignty over men's Souls;
(and for this purpose continually plotting, to have the Doctrine of their
Churches Infallibility planted as low and deep, as the very first and
Fundamental Principles of Belief:) albeit in laying the former Foundations, I
had come to ground firm enough (if free from undermining) to bear all I meant
to build upon it: I was, notwithstanding, in this place constrained to Bare the
whole Foundation, and all about it, unto the very Rock, on whose strength it
stands; lest this late dismal Invention (concerning the Popes Infallibility)
might prove as a Powder Plot to blow up the whole Edifice of Christian Faith;
as it certainly will, if men suffer it to be once planted in their Hearts and
Consciences. The Jesuits speculative Positions of their Churches transcendent
Authority, are as the Train, the Popes Thunderbolts as the Match, to set the
whole World on Combustion, unless his Lordly Designs, (though in matters of
Faith, and greatest moment) be put in execution, without Question or demur: as
shall (God prospering these proceedings) most clearly appear in the sequel of
this discourse:

Wherein are to be discussed 1 Their Objections against us; the Points of
Difference betwixt us; with the Positive Grounds of Truth maintained by us. 2
The Inconveniences of their Positions: Erection of tripple Blasphemy by the
overthrow of Christianity. 3 The Original Causes of their Error in this; and
such erroncous Persuasions, as held by them in other Points, not descried by
us, prove secret Temptations for others to follow them, or serve as previal
Dispositions, for their Agents to work upon. 4 The possible Means and
particular Manner, how Orthodoxal may be distinguished from Heretical Doctrine,
or the Life-working Sense of Scriptures from Artificial Glosses.


These Points discussed, and the Positive Grounds of Christian Faith cleared,
as well against the open Assaults of the professed Atheists, as the secret
Attempts of undermining Papists: we may with better security proceed to raise
the Foundation, (laid in the first general Part of the first Book) to the
height intended.

SECT. I.
What Obedience is due to Gods Word, what to his Messengers.

THe whole Scripture (says the Apostle) is given by inspiration 2 Timothy 3. 16.
of God, and is profitable to Teach, to Reprove, to Correct, and to Instruct in
Righteousness, that the Man of God may be absolute, being made perfect unto
all good works. What or whom, he means by The Man of God, is not agreed upon by
all that acknowledge his words in the sense he meant them, most Infallible and
Authentic. Some hereby understand only such men as Timothy was, Ministers of
Gods word, or Prophets of the new Testament; and so briefly elude all Arguments
hence drawn to prove the sufficiency of Scriptures, for being the Absolute rule
of Faith, at least to All, as well unlearned as learned. Yet should they in all
reason (might Gods Word rule their Reason) grant them to be such, unto all such
as Timothy was, public Teachers, men conversant in, or consecrated unto,
Sacred Studies; but even This they deny as well as the Former, the former in
their opinion be more absurd for us to affirm, especially holding the Hebrew
text only Authentic. Briefly, they charge us with debasing Peter, for
advancing Paul; or rather for coloring or adorning our pretended sense of
Paul's Words, that is, for giving too little to Peter's Successors, or the
Church; too much to Scriptures; too little to Spiritual, too much to Lay men.

2 These are plausible Pretenses, and sweet Baits to stop the mouths, and
mussle the pens of Clergymen in reformed Churches; unto most of whom, as they
object) besides the Spiritual Sword, little or nothing is left for their just
defense against the Insolences of rude, illiterate, profane Laics. And yet,
who more earnest then they in this Cause, against the Church, against
themselves? yet certain it is, that no man can be truly for himself, unless he
be first of all for Truth it self, of which he that gains the greatest share,
(what other detriment or disparagement soever in the mean time he sustain) in
the end speeds always best. And seeing To Lie or teach amiss, is a matter
altogether impossible to Omnipotency it self: to be able and willing withal
to defend a Falsehood, or set fair colors on foul Causes, is rather Impotencie
then Ability: Hence was that, quicquid possumus pro veritate possumus. Seeing
by Truth we live our Spiritual Life: to weaken it for strengthening our Temporal
Hopes, can never rightly be accounted any true effect of Power, but an
infallible Argument of great and desperate Imbecillitie.

3 For these Reasons, since I consecrated my labors to the search of Divine
Truth, my mind has been most set to find it out in this present Controversy;
whereon, most others of Moment chiefly depend. And, as unto the Romanist it is
(though falsely) termed the Catholic, so should it be unto us, to all that love
the Name of Christ, The very Christian Cause: a Cause, with which the
Adversaries Fortunes, our Faith: their Temporal, our Spiritual Estate and Hopes
must stand or fall: a Cause whose Truth and Strength on our part, will
evidently appear, If we first examine what the Antichristian Adversary can
oppose against it.

CAP. I.
The Sum of the Romanists Exceptions against the Scriptures.

1 THeir Objections against Scriptures spring from this double Root: The One,
that They are no sufficient Rule of Faith, but Many Things are to be Believed,
which are not taught in Them. The Second, that albeit they were the complete
Rule of Faith; yet could they not be known of us, but by the Authority of the
Church, so that all the former Directions for establishing our Assent unto the
Scriptures, as unto the Words of God Himself, were vain, seeing this cannot be
attained unto, but by relying upon Christ's visible Church.

The former of these two Fountains, or Roots of Error, I am not here to meddle
with: elsewhere we shall. That the Scriptures teach All Points of Faith set
down in this Creed, they cannot deny, or if they would, it shall appear in
their several Explications: So that the Scripture, rightly understood, is a
competent Rule for the Articles herein contained. Let us then see whether the
Sense or Meaning of these Scriptures, which both They and We hold for
Canonical, may not be Known, Understood, and fully Assented unto, Immediately,
and in themselves, without relying upon any visible Church or Congregation of
men, from whose Doctrine we must frame our Belief without distrust of Error,
or Examination of their Decrees, with any intention to reform them, or swarve
from them.

2 That the Scripture is not the Rule whereon Private Men, especially
Unlearned, ought to rely in matters of Faith; from these general Reasons, or
Topics, The Romanists 1. Objection set down here, is answered in the next
Chap. etc.
they seek to persuade us. First, admitting the Scriptures to be Infallible in
themselves, and so consequently to all such as can perfectly understand them in
the Language wherein they were written: yet to such as understand not that
Language, they can be no Infallible Rule, because they are to them a Rule only
as they are Translated: but no Unlearned man can be sure that they are
translated aright, according to the true Intent and meaning of the Holy Ghost:
for if any man do infallibly Believe this, and build his Faith hereupon, then
is his Faith grounded upon the Infallibility of This or That man's Skill in
Translating; whereof he that is Unlearned, can have no sufficient Argument,
neither out of Scripture, nor from Reason. Nay, Reason teaches us that in
matters of ordinary capacity most men are obnoxious to brrour: and the most
Skilful may have his escapes in a long Work: For, -- Opere in longo sas est
obrepere somnum, -- Aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus: A man may sometimes take
Homer napping, even in that Art whereof he was Master: much more may the
greatest Linguist living (in a Work of so great Difficulty as the Translation
of the Bible, not another Man's (though that more easy to err in, then a man's
Own) but the Work or Dictates of the Holy Ghost) prove an Homer, but a blind
Guide unto the blind. Many things he cannot See, and many things he may
Oversee; And how then can any man Assure himself, that in those Places whereon
we should build our Faith, he has not gone besides the Line, unless we will
admit an Insallible Authority in the Church, to assure us that such a
Translation does not err.

3 Again, This (...) is answered Chap. 19, ^c. (...). 2.
in those very Translations wherein they agree; Luther gathers one Sense,
Calvin another; every Heretic may pretend a secret Meaning of his Private
Spirit. Who shall either secure the People distracted by Dissensions amongst
the Learned, or the Learned thus dissenting, unless the Infallible Authority
of the Church? This is R^(...) and an s^ Chap. ^.
Finally, without such an Infallible Authority, Controversies will daily grow:
and unless It be established, they can never be composed, seeing every man
will draw in the Scriptures as a Party, to countenance or abett his Opinion,
how bad soever. Answered Chap. 12.
The Ground of all which Inconveniences (though the Sectaries cannot see it) is
the natural Obscurity and Difficulty of the Scriptures. These are the main
Springs, or first Fountains, whence the Adversaries Eloquence in this Argument
flows. And it will be but one labor to stop up These, and his Mouth. Or
granting them passage, we may draw his invention against us dry, by turning
their course upon himself.

CAP. II.
The former Objection (as far as it concerns illiterate and Laymen) retorted
and answered.

1 IF to suppose such an Authority, were sufficient to confirm any Translation,
or secure the world of sincere Translations, or to allay all Controversies
arising about the true Sense and Meaning of Scriptures: we were very Impious to
deny it. But, if we have Just Cause to suspect, that such as contend for it,
have but Put this Infallible Authority, as the Astronomers have Supposed; Some,
Epicycles and Eccentricks; Some, the motion of the Earth; to salve their
Phenomena, which otherwise might seem Irregular: We may, I trust, Examine:
First, Whether the Supposal of this Infallible Authority, in the Church, do
salve the former Inconvenience: Secondly, whether greater Inconveniences will
not follow upon the putting of it, then are the supposed Mischiefs, for the
Avoidance of which this Infallible Principle was invented, and is by the
Favorites of this Art, sought to be established and persuaded.

2 ^
That this supposed Infallible Authority of the Church visible does no way
salve the Inconveniences objected against our Positions, is hence evident. As
the Scriptures themselves were written in a Tongue not common, nor understood
of all Nations, but of some few: so likewise the Decrees of this visible
Church, concerning the Authority of Translations, are written in a Tongue
neither common to all, nor proper at this day to any unlearned Multitude, but
to the Learned only. Sometime they were written in Greek: but, in later years,
all in Latin, or some other Tongue (at the least) not common to all Christians:
for no such can this day be found. Nor is the Pope, (or his Cardinals) able to
speak properly and truly every Language in the Christian world, of which he
challenges the Supremacy. He Would be the Universal Head indeed: but he has
not, nor dare he profess he has, an Universal Tongue, whereby he may fully
instruct every Person Tot vero tra^slationes, mutationes, sinc gravissimo
periculo and inco^modo non fierent. Nam non semper inveniun cur idonei in
terpretes: atque ita multi errores co^mitterentur qui non possint postea sacile
tolli Cum neque Pontifices, neque Concilia de tot linguis judicare possint.
Bellarm. lib. 2. de verbo Dei. cap. 15. in Fin.
throughout the Christian world, in his own natural, known mother Tongue. For
Bellarmin brings this as an argument why the Bible should not be translated
into modern Tongues, because if into one, why not into another: and the Pope
(as he confesses) cannot understand all.

3 Tell me then, you that seek to bring the unlearned Lay-sort of men to seek
shelter under the Infallible Authority of the Romish Church: how can you
assure them what is the very true Meaning of that Church? They understand not
the Language wherein her Decisions were written. What then? must they
infallibly, and under pain of Damnation, Believe that you do not Err in your
Translations of them? or must they steadfastly Believe, that you Interpret Her
Decrees aright? Nay even those Decrees, which you hold Infallible, condemn all
private Interpretation of them: and your greatest Clerks daily dissent about
the Meaning of the Trent-Councel in sundry Points. Yet, unless the Lay people
can steadfastly Believe, that you Interpret the Churches Sentence aright: your
supposed Rule of the Churches Infallibility in confirming Translations or
Senses of Scripture, can neither be a Rule Infallible, nor any way Profitable
unto them. For it has no other Effect upon their souls, save only Belief: Were
their Objections against us pertinent: not the Popes Infallibility, but the
Priests and Jesuits, Honesty or Fidelity, should be the Rule of mose Lay
Papasts Faith.
and they have no other Means to know that this which they must Believe is the
Churches Sentence, but your Report: then can they not be any more certain of
the Churches Mind in this or that point, then they are of your Skill or
Fidelity; neither of which can be to them the Infallible Rule of Faith. For,
if they should be thus Infallibly persuaded of your Skill or Fidelity: then
were their good Persuasion of you, the Ground and Rule of their Faith; and so
they must Believe that you neither did, nor could Err in this Relation;
Whereas your own Doctrine is, That even the Learned among you may Err: and
you cannot deny, but that it is possible for the Honestest Jusuite, either to
Lie, or Equivocate. Otherwise, your Infallibility in not Erring, were greater
then your Popes or Churches: for they both may Err unless they speak ex
Cathedra. Now, whether the Pope speak this or that ex Cathedra, or whether he
speak or write to all or no is not known to any of the common People in these
Northern Countries, but only by your Report: which if it be not Infallible, and
as free from Error as the Pope himself, the People must still stagger in
Faith. Nor do I see any possible Remedy: unless every man should take a
Pilgrimage to Rome, or unless you would bring the Pope throughout these
Countries, as men use Monsters or strange Sights. Yet, how should they be
certain that this is the Pope, rather then some Counterfeit? or how should they
know Rome, but by others? Or can you hope to salve this Inconvenience by an
Implicit or Hypothetical Faith? as, that it were enough for the Lay people to
Believe absolutely and steadfastly, that the Pope, or Church cannot Err: but to
believe your Report or Informations of his Sentence in doubtful Cases, only
Conditionally; if it be the Popes Mind: if otherwise we will be free to recall
our present Belief. This is all which I can imagine any of you can say for your
selves. And may not we, I pray you, say as much, if thus much would serve for
us? Might not we by the self same Reason teach the People to admit of
Translations, but only Conditionally, as far forth as they shall be persuaded
that this was the Meaning of the Scripture or the Word of God? For
Questionless, it is more certain that God cannot Err, then that the Pope
cannot. And it is more necessary un^o Christian Belief to hold, that God the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost neither can, nor will speak a Lie: then that the
Pope cannot, or will not teach us amiss. That the Pope and his Cardinals do
arrogate thus much unto themselves, is more then the Lay and unlearned People
can tell, but only by yours and others Relation: But that the God of Heaven
neither can, nor will Teach amiss, is a Principle not controversed by any that
thinks there is a God.

4 Let it then first be granted, That God is freer from Error, from Deceiving,
or being Deceived in Points of Faith, or matters of Man's Salvation, then the
Pope is, although he speak ex Cathedra. From this Position it follows most
directly and most immediately, that if the Lay unlearned People of this Land
have as good Means and better, to know that these Books of Scrpture are Gods
own Words, then they can have to know that this or that Canon in any Council
was confirmed by the Popes teaching ex Cathedra: then must the same People
Believe the One more steadfastly then the Other; to wit, Gods Word, as it is
read unto them in our Church, more steadfastly then the Popes Interpretations,
Injunctions, or Decrees. Let us compare the Means of knowing Both. First, if
the Popes Decrees be a certain Means of knowing any Truth: they are as certain
a Means of knowing those Scriptures which our Church admits, to be Gods Word,
as of any thing else; for the Pope and his Council Council. Trident. Sessione
quarta.
have avoucht Them for Such, although they add some more then we acknowledge.

5 If the worst then should fall out that can be imagined; as if we had Reason
to despair of all other Translations save only of the Vulgar, yet that it were
the Word of God we might know, if by no other Means, yet by Consent of the
Romish Church; and all the People of this Land might be as certain of this
Decree, as of any the Pope can give. But take the same Scripture as it is
Translated into our English, the People may be as certain that it is the Word
of God, as they can be that the Trent Council was Lawfully called, or by the
Pope confirmed, yea much more certain. The Jesuits may tell them, that these
very words (being first englished) were spoken in the Trent-Councel, and
confirmed by the Pope. Why should they believe it? Because they avouch it
seriously, whom they think able to understand Latin? Suppose not only one, or
two, or three, but the whole Assembly of our Clergy tells the same People, that
these (reciting the Points of our Salvation are the very Words of God Himself;
and are for Substance all one in the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and English. What
Difference can you here imagine? That the Trent-Councel decreed thus, the
modern Jesuits have it but from Tradition of this Age: That God spoke thus, we
have the Consent of all Ages. Yea, but it is easier to render the
Trent-Councels Meaning out of Latin, then the Meaning of Gods Word out of
Hebrew or Greek. Whether it be so or no, the unlearned People cannot tell, but
by hearsay: yet, if we would take the Vulgar Latin, this foolish Objection were
none: for It is as easy to be Rendered, as the Trent-Councel; and if the
Trent-Councel be true, It is the Word of God. All then is equal concerning the
Difficulties, that may arise from the Skill, or Ignorance of the Translators of
the one or other; the Popes Decrees, or Scripture. Our Ministers know to Render
the Meaning of Scripture as well as yours do the Meaning of the Councels. Let
us now see whether it be as likely, that our Ministers Fidelity in telling
them as they are persuaded, and as they Believe themselves, be not to be
presumed as Great. To call this in Question were extreme Impudency and
Uncivilitie, especially seeing we Teach, that the people should be thoroughly
instructed in the Truth: whereas you hold it for good Christian Policy, to
hold them in Ignorance. Our permitting the free Use of Scriptures to all does
free us from all suspicion of Imposture of Guile: of which in the Jesuit or
learned Papist the denail of like Liberty, is a foul Presumption. Further, let
us examine, whether from the Matter or Manner of the Popes Decrees, there can be
any Argument drawn to persuade the People that these are his Decrees and no
other Man's: more then can be gathered from the Matter and Manner of Scripture
Phrase, to persuade a man that these are Gods, and can be no Man's Words: And
Here certainly we have infinite Advantage of Granting the Pope to be as
infallible as God himself: yet were not his Decrees related by his messengers
to be so much believed, as Gods written Word, received by us and them, because
it is more free from suspicion of Forgerie, then they can be; harder to be
Counterfeited, then they are.
you. For no man of Sense or Reason, but must needs suffer himself to be
persuaded, that it is a far easier matter to Counterfeit the Decrees of the
Lateran or Trent-Councel, or the Popes Writs, Interpretations, or
Determinations: then Artificially to imitate the Invincible and Majestical Word
of God, either for the Matter or the Manner.

6 The Sequel is this, that if the Scriptures received by us, be obnoxious to
any the least Suspicion of being Forged: then from the same Reasons, much more
liable to the same Suspicion are those which we account the Popes Decrees, and
therefore in respect of us, much less to be Believed; although otherwise we
should grant the Pope Decrees (which without controversy were his Decrees
indeed) to be as Infallible as the Eternal and Immutable Decrees of the
Almighty. Gods Word oft-times unto Atheists has discovered it self by the
Majesty of Style and Sublimitie of Matter, to be more then Human, and
therefore Divine, not able to imitated by any lying Spirit. If any Jesuit will
deny this: let him make trial of Imitation in the Prophecy of Isaias, the
Beginning of S. John's Gospel, the Relation of Joseph and his Brethrens
Dialogues, the Book of Job, etc. The Majesty of Speech and other Excellencies
which appears in them (especially if we consider the Time, wherein most of them
were written) does argue a Divine Spirit: in whose Imitation the most accurate
Writers of later Ages, (albeit no man writes excellently but from some Beam of
Divine Illumination in the Faculty) are but Apish, if we read the same
Scriptures in the Tongue wherein they were written, or in sundry modern Tongues
capable of the Divine Splendour which shines in the Original; with which the
Latin (especially in Prose) has greatest Disproportion of all Learned or
copious Tongues. As for the Popes Decrees they bewray themselves both for the
Matter and Manner, to be only Human, and therefore easy to be imitated by the
Spirit of Man, subject to many Errors. Nor does the Pope challenge to himself
the gift of Prophecy, but only of legal Decisions: which are no otherwise
written, then many write, and contain no deeper nor more Supernatural Matter,
then many may invent: most of them usually penned in a base and barbarous
Logic Phrase: his Style at the best is not peculiar, his Character easy to be
counterfeited by any man that can pen a Proclamation, or frame an Instrument in
Civil Courts.

7 To recollect what has been said. First, seeing God is more to be Believed
then Men; secondly, seeing we have better Arguments to persuade the People that
these Scriptures daily read in our Church, are Gods own Words, then the Priests
and Jesuits have, that the Tidings which they bring from beyond Sea are the
Popes or Churches Decrees or Sentence: we may and ought Teach them to rely
immediately upon Gods Word preached or read unto them, as the surest and most
Infallible Rule of Faith, the most lively, most effectual, and most forcible
Means of their Salvation. Or if the Jesuits will teach them to Believe the
Popes Decrees given ex Cathedra, or the Churches Opinion indefinitely taken
Fide divina, by Infallible Faith; but the Jesuits or Priests Expositions or
Translations of them, only Conditionally, and with this Limitation, [If so they
be the Pope or Churches Decrees:] we may in like sort with far greater Reason,
teach the People to Believe the Scriptures or the Word of God absolutely, and
our Translations or Expositions of it but Conditionally or with Limitation, so
far as they are Consonant to the Word of God. Seeing it is as probable, that we
may expound Gods Word as rightly and sincerely, as the other can the Church or
Popes Edicts; we have better Reason to exact this conditional Obedience and
Assent, in the Virtue and Authority of Gods Word, which we make the Rule of
Faith; then they can have to exact the like Obedience by Virtue of the Pope or
Churches Edict, which is to them the Mistress of Faith. For it is more certain
to any man living, that Gods Word is most Infallibly True, then that the Pope
cannot Err. Wherefore if the Absolute Belief of the Popes Infallibility, and
Conditional Belief of the Jesuits or Priests his Messengers Fidelity or
Skill, be sufficient to Salvation: much more may the Absolute Belief or Assent
unto the Infallibility of Gods Word, and such Conditional and limited Belief of
his Ministers Fidelity, be sufficient for the Salvation of his People: who, as
has been proved, cannot be more certain that the Romish Church says This or
That, then we can be of Gods Word. For they never hear the Church or Pope
speak, but in Jesuits or Priests Mouths. And although they knew he said just
so as those say: yet may a man doubt in Modesty, whether the Popes Words be
always Infallible; but of the Infallibility of Gods Word, can no man doubt.

8 And Here I cannot but much wonder at the preposterous courses of these
Romanists, who holding an Implicit Faith of Believing as the Church Believes,
(in many Points) to be sufficient unto Salvation: will yet fasten this
implicit Faith upon the present Church of Rome, and not refer it rather unto
that Church as it was under S. Peter's Jurisdiction and Government. For if
Universalitie be (as they contend) a sure Note of undoubted Truth: then must it
needs be more undoubtedly True, that S. Peter could not Err in Matters of
Faith, then that this present Romish Pope and his Cardinals cannot so Err. For
all Papists hold this as True of S. Peter, as of this present Pope: and all
Protestants hold it True of S. Peter, not in the present Pope: and so did all
the Fathers without controversy hold it most True, that S. Peter did not teach
amiss in his Apostolical Writings. So that Universalitie is much greater for
S. Peter, then for this Pope that now is, or the next that shall be.

9 For these Reasons (fully consonant to their own Positions) all Papists
methinks, in Reason, should make the same Difference in their Estimate of S.
Peter and later Popes, which a French Cardinal (as the Tradition is at Durham)
once made betwixt S. Cuthbert and venerable Bede. Abeit S. Cuthbert was
accounted the greater Saint amongst them, whose greater Benefactour he had
been, (in which respect they brought the Cardinal first unto S. Cuthberts
Tomb:) yet, because he knew him not so well, but only by their Report, he
prays very warily; Sancte Cuthberte, si Sanctus es, or a pro me. But,
afterward brought unto Bedes Tomb then in the Consistory; because he had been
Famous in Foreign Nations, from the Commendations of less partial Antiquity:
he fell to his prayers without Ifs and Ands; Vener abilis Beda, quia tu Sanctus
es, or a pro me.

10 Proprotional to this Caution in this French-mans Prayers, should every
modern Papist limit his Belief of the present Popes Infallibility in respect
of S. Peter's; And say thus in his heart: As for S. Peter, I know he Believed
and Taught aright: And I beseech God I may Believe as he Believed, and that my
Soul may come whither his is gone: as for this present Pope, if he believe as
S. Peter did, and be likely to follow him in LIfe and Death, I pray God I may
Believe as he Believes, and do as he Teaches; but otherwise (believe me) I
would be very loath to pin my Belief upon his Sleeve, lest happily he run
Headlong to Hell to that which should have drawn me up to Heaven: For in this
Life I walk by Faith, and by Faith I must ascend Thither, if I ever come There;
and therefore I dare not fasten my Belief upon any Man, whom I would be loath
to follow in his Course of Life. But most surely might this Implicit Faith be
fastened upon Gods written Word, contained in the Writings of Moses, the
Prophets, Apostles and Evangelists. We know, O Lord, that Thou have Taught them
All Truth that is Necessary for thy Church to know. And our Adversaries
confess, that thy Word uttered by Them, (rightly understood) is the most sure
Rule of Faith: for by This they seek to establish the Infallibility of the
Church and Pope. They themselves speak aright, by their own Confession, where
they speak consonantly unto it. Wherefore the safest Course for us must be, to
search out the True Sense and Meaning of it: which is as easy for us, as them
to find, as in the Process of these Meditations, God willing, shall appear.

11 A brief Answer to the Objection concerning the Illiterate. In what Sense
the Scripture or written Word may be said to be the Rule of their Faith-see
chap. 11. parag. 3. and 4. How far such are to rely upon their Instructors
Authority, see chap. 8.
Unto the main Objection, concerning the Means of knowing Scripture to be
Scripture, we have partly answered (or rather prevented it) in the first
Treatise: and throughout this whole intended discourse we shall (God willing)
explicate the former general Means or Motives, as also bring other peculiar
Inducements for the establishing of True Faith, unto the particular Articles in
this Creed contained. For the present Difficulty, concerning the Rule of
Illiterate Laymens Faith, or such as understand not those Languages in which
the Holy Ghost did write: we answer briefly, That the Language, Tongue, or
Dialect, is but the Vesture of Truth; the Truth it self for substance, is one
and the same in all Languages. And the Holy See chap. 16.
Spirit, who instructed the first Messengers of the Gospel with the true sense
and knowledge of the Truths therein revealed, and furnished them with Diversity
of Tongues to utter them to the capacity of diverse Nations: can, and does,
throughout all succeeding Ages, continue his gifts, whether of Tongues or
others, whatsoever are necessary, for conveying the true sense and meaning of
saving Truth already taught, immediately to the Hearts of all such, in every
Nation, as are not, The want of skill in sacred tongues in former ages was for
their ingratitude toward God, and loving of Darkness more then Light. For the
like reasons were the Scriptures to the Jews (as to our Forefathers they had
for a long time been) as a sealed Book See chap. 13. parag. 3, 4, 5.
for their sin judged unworthy of his society: of all such, as resist not His
Motions, to follow the Lusts of the Flesh. And as for men altogether
Illiterate, that cannot read the Scripture in any Tongue, we do not hold them
bound (nor indeed are any) to Believe absolutely or expressly, every Clause or
sentence in the sacred Canon, to be the Infallible Oracle of Gods Spirit,
otherwise then Lib. 1. cap. 34.
is before expressed: but unto the several Matters or substance of Truth,
contained in the principal Parts thereof, their souls and Spirits are so surely
tied and fastened, that they can say to their own Concences. Wheresoever these
men that teach us these good Lessons learned the same themselves, most certain
it is, that Originally they came from God and by the gracious Providence of
that God (whose Goodness they so often mention) are they now come to us.

Such are, the Rules or Testimonies of Gods Providence, the Doctrines or real
truths of Ori^il Sin, of our Misery by Nature, and Freedom by Grace: Such are,
the Articles of Christ's Passion, and the Effects thereof; of the Resurrection,
and Life everlasting. Unto These, and other Points of like Nature and
Consequence, every true Christian Soul, endued with Reason and Discourse, gives
a full a firm and absolute Assent, directly and immediately fastened upon these
Truths themselves, not tied or held unto them by any Authority of Man. For
albeit true and steadfast Belief of these Fundamental Points might be as scant,
as the true Worship of God seemed to be unto Flias in his days yet every
Faithful Soul must thus resolve: Thus mu^ (...) g^ eth de (...). Theol. ^ cap ^
(...). Ad ^ omnes (...), (...) the doc^^ru^^, ^ ad^o an^cli ^^^lo^um mihi
a^^rue^t oppo^^^^ (...), quod (...) de ten^ m^a lab^fa^tare^ur. (...) ^a Paul^
Apo^^oli ^iptom illud, Licet nos ^nt Angelus, etc. Gal ^^ v. 8. C^^sequently
he^eunto he proves the last Resolution of Faith not to be into the V^^a^^^ or
Infallibility of the Church, taxing Sco^^s, Gabri^l, and Dur^^^, (as the margin
tells us:) But his ^ g^d against all sa^^h as male the Churches ^lity the
Rule of ^ shall be ^hewed God ^ Lib. ^ Sect. ^. See l. 2. Cap. 10.
Though all the World besides my self should worship Baal, and follow after
other Gods: yet will I follow the God of Heaven, in whom our Fathers trusted,
and on whose Providence who so re^es shall never fall. So likewise must every
Christian, both in Heart resolve* and Cutwardly profess with Peter, (but with
unfa^^ed prayers for better Succes^ and diligent Endeavors by his Example to
beware of all Presumption:) Though the World beside my self should ab^ure
Christ, and admit of Mahomet for their Mediator: yet would not I follow so
great a Multitude to so great an Evil, but always cleave unto the cruci^ied
Christ my only Savior and Redeemer who, I know, is both Able and Willing to
save all such as follow him, both in Life and Death. So again, though all the
subtlety and wisdom of Hell* the World, and Flesh, should jointly bend their
Force, and stretch Invention to overthrow the glorious Hope of our Resurrection
from the dead: yet every Faithful Christ an must here resolve with Job, and out
of his Believing Heart profess* I am sure that my Redeemer lives, and he shall
stand the last on the earth: and though after my skin this Body be destroyed,
yet shall I see God in my Plesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall
behold, and none other for me. Job 19. 25. As we hope to see Christ with our
own eyes immediately and directly in his Person not by any other men's eyes: so
must we in this life steadfastly believe, and fasten our Faith upon those Points
and Articles, which are Necessary for the a^taining of this sight of Christ,
In and For Themselves, not from any Authority or Testimony of Men, upon which
we must rely; for this were to see with the eyes of others Faith, not with our
own.

12 Many other Points there be, not of like Necessity or Consequence, which
unto men, specially altogether unlearned* or otherwi^e of less capacity, may be
proposed as the Infallible Oracles of God: unto some of which it is not lawful
for them to give so absolute, and firm irrevocable As^ent, as they must do unto
the former, because they cannot discern the Truth of them in it self, or for it
self, or with their own eyes, as (it is supposed) they did the Truth of the
former.

CAP. III.
The general Heads of Agreements, or Differences, betwixt us and the Papists in
this Argument.

1 A^ the Di^^iculties in this Argument may be reduced to these Three Heads*
First, How we can know, whether God has spoken any thing or no unto his
Church. Secondly, What the Extent of his Word or Speech is; as whether All he
has spoken be Written, or some Unwritten; or how we may know amongst Books
written, which are written by Him, which not. Likewise of Unwritten Verities,
which are Divine, which Counterfeit. Thirdly, How we know the Sense and Meaning
of Gods Word, whether Written or Unwritten.

2 These Difficulties are common to the Jews, Turks, Christians, and all
Heretics whatsoever: All which agree in this main Principle, That whatsoever
God has said or shall say at any time, is most undoubtedly and infallibly True.

3 But for this present, we must dismiss all Questions about the Number or
Sufficiency of Canonical Books, or Necessity of Traditions. For these are
without the lists of our proposed Method. All the Professors, either of
reformed, or Romish Religion, agree in this Principle: That certain Books,
(which both acknowledge) do contain in them, the undoubted, and infallible Word
of God.

4 The first Point of Breach or Difference betwixt us and the Papist, is, The
First Breach be^wixt us.
concerning the Means how a Christian man may be in Conscience persuaded, (as
steadfastly and infallibly as is necessary unto Salvation) That these Books
(whose Authority none of them deny, but both outwardly acknowledge) are
indeed Gods Words.

5 The second Point of Difference (admitting the steadfast and infallible Belief
The Second.
of the former) is, concerning the Means, how every Christian man may be in
Conscience persuaded, as infallibly as is necessary to his Salvation, of the
true Sense and Meaning of these Books jointly acknowledged, and steadfastly
believed of both.

6 Our Agreement concerning the Necessity of Ministerial Function, for the
planting of Faith.
In the Means or Manner, how we come to Believe both these Points steadfastly
and infallibly, we agree again in this Principle: That neither of the former
Points, can (ordinarily) be fully and steadfastly Believed, without the
Ministry, Asseveration, Proposal, or instructions of men appointed by God,
for the begetting of Faith and Belief in others hearts; both of us agree, that
this Faith must come by Hearing of the Divine Word.

7 Concerning the Authority of Preachers, or men thus appointed for the
begetting of Faith, the Question again is Twofold.

8 First, whether this Authority be primarily, or in some peculiar sort,
annexed to any peculiar Men or Company of Men distinct from others by
Prerogative The points of Difference betwixt us, about the Prer^gative of
Pastors, and the man's of their beg^tti^g Faith in others.
of Place, Pre-eminence of Succession, and from him or them to be derived unto
all others set apart for this Ministry; or whether the Ministry of any men,
of what Place or Society soever, whom God has called to this Function, and
enabled for the same, be sufficient for the begetting of true Faith, without
any others Confirmation, or Approbation of their Doctrine.

9 Secondly it is questioned, how this Ministry of Man, which is necessarily
supposed (ordinarily) both for knowing the Word of God, and the true Meaning of
it, becomes available for the begetting of true Belief in either point. In
whomsoever the Authority of this Ministerial Function be, the Question is;
whether it perform thus much, only by Proposing or Expounding the Word, which
is Infallible, or by their Infallible Proposal or Exposition of it, that is:
whether for the attaining of true Belief in both Points mentioned we must rely
infallibly upon the Infallible Word of God only; or partly upon it, and partly
upon the Infallibility of such as expound it unto us. Or in other words thus:
whether the Authority or Infallibility of any Man's Doctrine or Asseveration
concerning these Scriptures, or their true Sense, be as infallibly to be
Believed as those Scriptures themselves are, or that Sense of them, which the
spirit of God has wrought in our Hearts, by sure and undoubted Experience.

10 These are the principal Roots and Fountains of Difference between Other ^
^chcs of the for (...) Di^ferences.
us, concerning our present Controversy, whence issue and spring these
following: First, Whether Christ (whose Authority both acknowledge for
Infallible) has left any Public Judge of these Scriptures which both receive,
or of their right Sense and Meaning, from whose Sentence we may not appeal; or
whether all, to whom this Ministry of Faith is committed, be but Expositors of
Divine Scriptures, so as their Expositions may by all faithful Christians be
examined. Hence arises that other Question, whether the Scriptures be the
Infallible Rule of Faith. If Scripture admit any Judge, then is it no Rule of
Faith: If all Doctrines are to be examined by Scripture, then is it a perfect
Rule.

11 Our Adversaries* especially later Jesuits, Positions are these. The (...)
Romans (...).
Infallible Authority of the present Church, that is, of some visible Company
of living Men, must be as absolutely Believed of all Christians as any Oracle
of God: and hence would they bind all such as pro^esse the Catholic Faith, in
all Causes concerning the Oracles or Word of God, to yield the same Obedience
unto Decrees and Constitutions of the Church, which is due unto these Oracles
themselves, even to such of them as all Faithful Hearts do undoubtedly know to
be Gods written Word.

12 The Reasons pretended for this absolute Obedience, to be performed unto the
Church or visible Company of Men, are drawn from the Insufficiency of
Scripture; either for notifying it self to be the Word of God, or the true
Sense and Meaning of it self. Consequently to these Objections, they stiffly
maintain, That the Infallible Authority of the present Church, is the mos^
sure, most safe undoubted Rule in all Doubts or Controversies of Faith, or in
all Points concerning these Oracles of God: by which we may certainly know
Both; without which we cannot possibly know either, which are the Oracles of
God, which not, or what is the true Sense and Meaning of such as are received
for his Oracles: one of the especial Consequents of these Assertions is, That
this Churches Decisions or Decrees may not be examined by Scriptures.

13 Our Churches Assertions concerning the knowledge of Gods Word in general is
thus As Gods Word is in it self Infallible, so it may be infallibly
apprehended, Our Churches Assertions c^ntradictory to the f^^mer.
and Believed by every Christian, unto whom he vouchsafes to speak, after what
manner soever he speak unto him* Yea whatsoever is necessary for any man to
Believe, the same must be infallibly written in his heart: and on it once
written there he must immediately rely, not upon any other Authority
concerning it.

14 Or if we speak of Gods written Word, our former general Assertion may be
restrained thus.

15 We are not bound to Believe the Authority of the Church, or visible
Compani^ of any living men, either concerning the Truth or true Sense of Divine
Oracles written, so steadfastly and absolutely, as we are bound to Believe the
Divine written Oracles themselves. Consequently to this Assertion we affirm.

16. The the In^allible Rule whereupon every Christian, in matters of written
Verities absolutely and finally, (without all appeal, condition* or
reservation) is to rely, must be the Divine written Oracles themselves; some
of which every Christian has written in his Heart by the finger of Gods
Spirit, and Believes immediately In and For themselves, not for any Authority
of Men; and these to him must be the Rule, for examining all other Doctrines,
and trying any Masters of Faith.

But because most in our days, in Matters of Faith, and Christian Obedience,
miss the Celestial Mean, and fall into one of the two extremes: It shall not
be amiss, while we seek to divert their course from Sylla, to admonish lest
they make shipwreck in Charybdis.

CAP. IV.
Showing the Mean betwixt the two Extremities.; the one in Excess, proper to
the Papists; the other in Defect, proper to the Anti-papist.

1 IT is a Rule in Logic, that Two contrary Propositions (for their form) may
be both False; And hence it is, that many Controversers of our times, (either
in love to the Cause they defend, or heat of contention) not content only to
Contradict, but desirous to be most Contrary to their Adversaries, fall into
Error with them. No Controversy (almost) of greater moment this day extant,
but yields Experiments of this Observation, though none more plentiful then
this in hand, concerning the visible Churches Authority, or Obedience due to
Spiritual Pastors.

2 The s^st ^^^tremitie held by the Papis^^.
The Papists on the one side demand Infallible Assent, and illimited Obedience
unto whatsoever the Church shall propose, without examination of her Doctrine,
or appeal; which is indeed (as we shall afterward prove) to takeaway all the
Authority of Gods Word and to erect the present Churches Consistory above
Moses, and S. Peter's Chair. The second held by the Anti-papists.
On the other side, sundry by profession Protestants, in eagerness of
opposition to the Papists, affirm, that the Church, or Spiritual Pastors must
then only be Believed, then only be Obeyed, when they give Sentence according
to the Evident, and Express Law of God, made evident to the Hearts, and
Consciences of such, as must Believe and Obey them. And this, in one word, is
to take away all Authority of Spiritual Pastors, and to deprive them of all
Obedience, unto whom (doubtless) God, by his written Word, has given some
special Authority and Right, to exact some peculiar Obedience of their Flock.

Now if the Pastor be then only to be Obeyed, when he brings evident Commission
out of Scripture, for those particulars, unto which he demands Belief or
Obedience; what Obedience do men perform unto Him, more then to any other man
whomsoever? For whosoever he be that can show us the express undoubted command
of God, it must be Obeyed of all: but whilst it is thus Obeyed, It only, not
He that shows it unto us, is Obeyed. And if this were all the Obedience which
I owe unto others, I were no more bound to Believe, or Obey any other man, then
he is bound to Obey or Believe me: the Flock no more bound to Obey their
Pastors, then the Pastors them. Yet certainly God, who has set Kingdoms in
order, is not the Author of such Confusion in the Spiritual Regiment of his
Church.

3 Seeing then, it is most certain that the Romanists do foully Err, let us
see how their Error may be fully Contradicted, not strive to be most Contrary
unto them, but rather to seek out the mean between these two Erroneous Extremes.

4 Infallible Assent, and illimited, unreserved Obedience we may not perform to
the present Church, or any visible Company of Men; but to the Scripture only,
made known, and evident to our Consciences. This Assertion is directly, and
fully Contradictorie unto the Papists.

5 Conditional Assent, and cautionary Obedience we may and must perform to our
spiritual Pastors, Overseers, and Governors, albeit we see not express
Commission out of Scripture, to warrant these Particulars, whereunto ^.
they demand Assent or Obedience. It is sufficient that they have their general
Commission for Obedience, expressly contained in Scripture. This Assertion
directly Contradicts the other Extreme, or contrary Assertion, and of all the
three only does not Contradict the Word of God, which expressly teaches, that
Some peculiar Obedience is due unto Spiritual Governors. Unless we hold, that
when Christ ascended on High, and led Captivity captive, his Donation of
Spiritual Authority, was but a donation of bare Titles, without Realities
answering unto them. To some He gave to be Aposiles, to some Prophets, some
Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians. 4. 11. Though Prophesying in
some degree has ceast, and the Eminency of Apostleship ^.
be dead with the Apostles; yet Pastors remain, and Teachers must continue in
Christ's Church unto the Worlds end. If Pastors we be, then must we have our
shepherds Staff: if Teachers, a Rod to keep our Scholars in awe. The same
Apostle from these grounds thus exhorts the flock. Obey them that have the
oversight of you, and Submit your selves: for they watch for your Souls, as
they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief,
for that is unprofitable for you, Heb. 13. 17. What manner of Submission, or
what kind of Obedience does he here exact? Only Spiritual will the carnal
Gospeller reply. But what manner of Obedience is this Spiritual? the least of
all others? It is doubtless in their esteem, which fear no loss, but what is
sensible for the present, nor know not the Virtue of any thing, but what is
palpable: unto all such, to be Spiritual, is all one as to be Invisible, and to
be Invisible, is all one as not to Be at all. This is the last Resolution of
most men's Conceit of all Spiritual Authority in our times. But such such as
dread the Majesty of that Invisible God, and fear to grieve his Holy Spirit
will be most afraid of contemning Spiritual Authority. Disobedience to it,
though in a Prince, is as hateful to the King of Kings as the sin of
Witchcraft: for no Subject is more bound to Obey his Prince in Civil Actions,
than his Pastors in Spiritual. He that said, touch not mine Anointed, said
also, do my Prophets no harm. Of Princes it is said by the Apostle Romans 13.
He that resists them, resists God. To Pastors it was said, (by the Wisdom
of God by whom Princes reign) Luke 10. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, he that despises you, despises me, and he
that despises me, despises him that sent me, and elsewhere, Joh. (...). 23.
(...) hose sins ye remit, they are remitted, whose sins ye retain, they are
retained. These are Prerogatives of Priests, and were not esteemed as words of
Course, or Formality, in the Ancient and Primitive Church. It was the just fear
of Disobedience in the Flock, which first gave occasion to Pastors, to usurp
this Tyranny over them, which now they practice. For as Idolatry V^d^l^ 1 cap.
12.
and Superstition could not have increased so much in the old World, unless
there had been evident Documents of a Divine Power in Ages Precedent: So
neither could this extreme Tyranny over Christ's flock have been either usurped
in the middle, or continued to the later Ages of the Christian world, unless
the Flock had made it a main matter of Conscience to Disobey their Pastors, and
Overseers, whose Authority they knew from those places of Scripture, then well
expounded by the Practice of Holy Men, to be exceedding great.

6 Saint Peter foresaw, that this Antichristian Authority was likely to spring
from the Peoples Reverent Conceit of their Pastors Authority: and because the
Fock was bound most strictly to Obey them, he wills the Pastors not to be too
Lordly in their Commands. 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.
Feed the flock of God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind: Not as
though ye were Lords over Gods Heritage, but that ye may be Ensamples to the
flock. So does Saint Paul, Acts 20. 28, 29.
Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock, whereof the Holy
Ghost has made you Overseers to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood: for I know this, that after me departing shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Unless the Flock,
for their parts, had been bound to strict Obedience, Usurpation of Lordship
over them had not been so easy, especially when there was no Power beside the
Pastoral staff to keep them under: nor could their Pastors have had any such
opportunity to attempt it, as might justly occasion these Caveats from these
two Apostles, which by their moderate Carriage had prescribed a contrary
Example to their Successors. Easy it had been for the Flock to have spared
themselves, or kept aloof from such merciless Overseers: whose Designs,
though they could not with safe Consciences contemn, Avoid they might, by
circumspect and careful attending to other true Shepherds voices, who by their
skill in Scriptures, and true knowledge of the Apostles Rules, knew how to
limit the former large Commission, directed to Pastors, after they begun to
degenerate into Wolves. For this cause, neither of these Apostles direct these
Admonitions to their flock, as if it were permitted them to limit their
Obedience at their pleasure, but unto their Pastors. And Saint Peter in the
words immediately following this Admonition unto Pastors, exhorts the Flock
unto Obedience, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Likewise ye younger, Submit your selves unto the Elders; without any the least
intimation, that they might Disobey, as soon as the other began to Dominier.
Not that the flock may not refuse to Obey their Overseers in some Cases; but
our Apostles did foresee, that the People would be always most prone to
disobedience, upon less Occasions then was requisite: and yet Disobedience,
unless upon evident, and just Occasions, he knew to be as dangerous, as blind
Obedience in matters Unlawful; the one usually is the forerunner of
Superstition and Idolatry; the other the Mother of carnal Security, Schism,
and Infidelity. And, according to our Apostles fear, did it fall out in the
Church of God. The first Mischief, which befell her in her Prime, was from the
want of due Reverence, and awful regard of Ecclesiastic Injunctions, and
Constitutions. Hence did Heresies spring in such abundance; Satan had sown
their seeds in proud hearts; and the Civil Magistrates facility to countenance
every prating Discontent, or Forth-putting Vocalist, in preaching what he list,
though contrary to his Governors Constitutions, was as the Spring-Sun to
cherish and bring them forth. And as the Romish Church, upon the depression of
such rebellious Spirits, did raise her self above all that is called GOD: So in
truth it cannot be denied, but that many in reformed Congregations, by seeking
to cure her Diseases, have cast the Church of God into a Relapse of her former
Sickness: which was the Usurpation of too much Liberty in her children. For
the Avoidance whereof, we are now, as God has enabled us, to Advise.

CAP. V.
Of the Diversity of human Actions: The Original of their Lawfulness,
Unlawfulness, or Indifferency: Which without question, belong to the proper
Subject of Obedience, which not.

1 OF the Subordination of Spiritual Governors amongst themselves, we shall
have fitter occasion elsewhere to treat: Now we are to enquire the limits and
Bounds of Spiritual Authority in general, only so far forth as it concerns
the rectifying of their Belief, who are bound to Obey.

2 Out of the places before alleged, these Truths necessarily and immediately
flow. There is some peculiar Authority in the Priesthood, or Ministers, which
is not to be found in other men. This Authority in them, is as essentially
Subordinate to Christ, as the Authority of any other Magistrates is, unto the
Principality, or Soveraigntie, of that Nation wherein they live. Disobedience
unto Spiritual Governors, does redound as directly and fully unto Christ's, as
disobedience to inferior Magistrates does unto the Princes or Supreme
Governors dishonor: For he that hears Christ's Messengers, hears Him; he
that despises Them despises Him: and yet it is as Evident again in some Cases
they may be Disobeyed. The difficulty is in which they are to be Obeyed, in
which not; or in one word, What is the proper Subject of Obedience due unto
them.

3 ^.
All Obedience is seen, either in doing what is Commanded, or abstaining from
what is forbidden; all Disobedience in refusing to do what is Commanded, and
doing that which is forbidden by Superiors, or Men in Authority. Things
commanded or forbidden are of three sorts, either Good in themselves, and
required, or else simply Bad and prohibited by the Law of God or Nature; or
finally Indifferent, neither Commanded, nor forbidden by either of the former
Laws. Again, of Good things, some are better, some less Good. And so of Evil,
some are more, some less Evil Things Indifferent only admit no degrees; but
our Persuasion of their Indifferency, as also of the two other kinds, may be
stronger or weaker. Pe^ Pure (...) M^^^.
Our Persuasion in all three kinds may be Pure or Mixed. Our Persuasion of any
kind, is then Pure, when there is no surmise or Persuasion of any contrary
Quality in the Action to be undertaken; then Mixed, when we are partly
Persuaded, that it is of this or that Nature, but not without some Surmise or
Probability, that it may be of another Quality* ^*
The Mixture of our Persuasion likewise may be diverse. Sometimes we may be
strongly persuaded, that the Matter enjoined is Good, and yet have some weak
Persuasion or Surmise, that it is Evil, or contrariwise. Sometimes we may have
an equal persuasion both ways, and think it as probably Good as Evil.
Sometimes we may have a strong Persuasion, that it is indifferent; and a weak,
that it is Good or Evil, or contrariwise. Sometimes we may have a weak
Persuasion, or Conjecture, that it may be a great Good, and a strong Persuasion
that it is but a little Evil, or contrariwise. Sometimes a strong Persuasion
that it is a thing ^ndifferent, and yet some surmise, that it is a great Evil,
or great Good. Finally, as the Good or Evil apprehended by us; so our
apprehension or Persuasion of the^ Truth, or the Truth of that Indifferency,
which is found in some Actions, may be divided into as many Degrees as we
please: from the Multiplicity of whose different Combination, the Variety of
Human Actions (if we would descend to Mathematical mensurations of our
Conceits, or calculate every scruple, which Curiosity of Speculation might
breed in matters of Practice) may be in a manner Infinite. But because most men
measure matters of Conscience, as they do Commodities of little worth, only
Grosso modo; for our present purpose, it will suffice to suppose three degrees
of Good, and three of Evil, and as many of our Persuasions concerning the
Lawfulness, Unlawfulness, or Indifferency of our Actions.

4 Of Things Good in themselves, or so Apprehended by us, without any Suspicion
or scruple of Evil in them, there is no Question. Every man's Conscience has
Authority sufficient to enjoin their Practice, and other Authority is scarce
seen in the Substance of such Actions. For seeing the Good it self is to be
done, one time or other, in some Measure, only the Alacrity of doing it being
enjoined; in what Time or Measure it is to be done, or other like
Circumstances, do properly come within the Subject of Obedience.

5 Concerning pure persuasion of things Indifferent likewise, there is no
Difficulty of moment. For no man that understands what he says, will once
deny, that every lawful Governor is to be Obeyed, in things acknowledged for
merely Indifferent. Only this Question may be made, Whether things Indifferent
in the general, or unto many, or most men at ordinary times, be Indifferent in
the individual, to this or that particular man, at some peculiar Seasons?
Either he makes no Conscience of his ways, or else he is Besides himself, that
denies Obedience unto any Lawful Magistrate: save only in such matters as at
that time seem Unlawful for him to do, though Indifferent in the general, or at
other Seasons, or to other men. Hence arises the first degree of Difference
betwixt Governors and private Persons, That in things acknowledged for
Indifferent unto us, at this very instant, we are not bound to follow private
men's Advice; But a Magistrates or Governors Command we are in Conscience to
Obey, and to make choice of whether part He shall appoint.

6 If we speak of private Resolutions concerning things evil: This Rule in
general is most Certain; Whilst we are persuaded, that any Action is Evil, The
Rule of private Resolutions in matters apprehended as merely Evil.
without any Conceit or Persuasion of Good in the same, the adventuring upon it
is Desperate, and the performance of it Unlawful. And yet, as he that
exchangeth a Commodity worth eleven shillings, for another not worth five,
sustains greater loss, then he that has a Crown taken from him, without any
thing in liew thereof: so may a man oft-times wrong his own Soul and Conscience
more, by undertaking Actions which have some Show or Probability In what Case
some matters apprehended as merely evil, may be undertaken with less danger,
then others which are partly apprehended as Evil, partly as Good.
of Goodness in them, then in undertaking others, which have none, but are
only apprehended as evil. This false out only and always then, when the
Difference between the Greatness or Probabilities of the evil feared in the
one, and the Goodness hoped in the other Action, is greater then the Quantity
or Probability of the former evil, which admitted no mixed Apprehension of
Good. The Reason is plain, because the Mixture of good does only recompense so
many degrees of evil as it self contains of good. Now if in the Actions of
equally mixed Persuasions, the Proportion between the evil and good be such, as
is between eleven and five; the overplus of the evil will be as six; and so
shall it make that Action, wherein it is, worse, then that which has but five
degrees or parts of evil, albeit without all Mixture of any contrary
Persuasion, or Conceit of good. But always where the evils feared are equal,
and the Probabilities of their ensuing likewise equal: any mixed Apprehension of
some good probably incident to the one, not to the other, does make the Action
whereto it is incident, less evil, according to the degrees, either of the
good apprehended, or of our Probabilities that it may be accomplished: and yet
shall the Action still be evil, as long as the evil which we Fear is greater
then the good which we can Hope for; or, (these being equal) the Probabilities
greater, that the evil should fall out, then the good. For if to prefer a less
good before a greater, be evil, much more to adventure upon a great evil, in
hope of a lesser good; most of all to adventure upon any great or probable
evil, without Probability of any good to countervail it in the choice.

7 Concerning mixed Persivasions of good and evil, this Rule is general for
private Resolutions. Wheresoever the Probabilities or Persuasions of the
Goodness ^
of any Action, are as great, as the Persuasions and Probabilities of the Evil
that may ensue, and the Measure of the Goodness apprehended, as great as the
Quantity of the Evil feared: a man of his own private accord may as safely
adventure upon the Action, as the Omission of it, referring the Event to Gods
Providence, which favors positive Actions, more then Privations; Works
rather then Idleness; and the following of that which is Good, more then
abstinence from Evil. A Lawful Governors Command, whether Spiritual or
Temporal must in this Case rule all private Choice, either for doing or
omitting it: the Case is all one, as in things merely Indifferent; for here is
an Indifferency of Persuasions. These Rules are evident in private Resolutions.

8 All the Difficulty concerning the Subject of Obedience unto Governors, The
chief point of Difficults ^ing the (...) of Obedience.
is, either in pure Persuasions of the evil, that may be in Matters Commanded,
without any Probability of Good, or else where the mixture of Persuasions is
unequal, in respect of the evil feared, or lastly, where (supposing the
Probabilities of good and evil are equal) the Quantity of the evil which men
Fear, is greater then the Quantity of the good which they Hope: The Points of
Difficulty are especially Two.

9 First, whether Injunction of Public Authority may oversway any degree of
our private Persuasions, concerning the Unlawfulness of any Opinion or Action;
as, whether we may safely adventure upon such Actions, or embrace such
Opinions, as we our selves judge Evil, without any show or conceit of Good: or
such as we are more strongly persuaded, that they are evil, then good: or such,
wherein the evil which we Fear, seems greater, then it can be recompensed with
the good, which we can Hope for; though it were as likely to ensue.

10 Secondly, if Public Authority may over-sway any at all, what kind of
private Persuasions these Be, or how far they may be overswayed by it.

CAP. VI.
That sincere Obedience unto lawful Authority makes sundry Actions Lawful and
Good, which, without it, would be altogether Unlawful and Evil.

1 MAny in our days are persuaded, that no Injunction of Authority ought to
move us to any thing, which privately we deem Evil, either Absolutely, or Unto
us. Obedience, in matters Lawful, they acknowledge to be good, and acceptable in
the sight of God: but the goodness of it not so great as may warrant our
undertaking Actions, either suspected for unlawful, or already condemned for
such, in the Consistory of our private Conscience: for this, in their opinion,
were to do Evil that Good might ensue.

2 But here men should consider, that many Actions may be Evil, whilst
undertaken by private Men, upon private Motions, which are not Evil, once
allowed or enjoined by Authority; not that any Authority can make that which
is Evil, Good: but that it may add some Circumstance or Motive, whereby the
same Action, which barely considered, was Evil before, may now by this Addition
or Alteration, become not Evil, because not altogether the same. For Abraham,
upon private Instigation or secular Motives, to have killed his Son, had been
hideous and monstrous Cruelty, one of the greatest Breaches imaginable of the
Law of Nature: but being appointed by God so to do, to have killed his Son had
been no Manslaughter. Not that God in this particular did (as some speak)
Dispense with the Law of Nature: for dispensation had made his Action or
purpose, only not Unlawful; whereas Gods Abraham non solum non est culpatus
crudelitatis crimine, verum etiam laudabus est nomine pietatis, quod voluit
filium nequaquam scelerate, sed obedienter occidere. Aug. de civit. Dei. lib.
1. Cap. 21. Spontaneus metus execrabils, Deo jubente Landabilis. Aug. contra
Faust. Man. l. 22. c. 73.
Commandment did, not only exempt his Resolution from that Precept, Thou shall
not Kill, but placed it in the highest rank of Goodness. For he had done
better in killing his Son, upon this Motive, then in saving of his enemies
Life, out of his private Resolution, or Goodness of Nature. Most true it is
(for a Prophet said it) of the general, Abraham's Obedience made that Action,
which without it had been worse then Murder, to be better then Sacrifice. How
far the former Instance serves to infer the Conclusion proposed.
Obedience is better then Sacrifice: the truth whereof was most undoubtedly
most perspicuous, in this particular, by which that very Action, which
otherwise had been most cruel Murder, became more acceptable in the sight of
God, then any Sacrifice that ever was offered, save only That, wherein greater
Obedience, then Abraham here intended was here actually performed.

3 But some (perhaps) will here demand, what Argument can be drawn from
Obedience unto Divine Supreme Authority, for justifying Obedience unto
Subordinate Powers, in Matters, which, in our private estimation, we deem
Unlawful? Shall we equalize Man with God, or Humane Authority with Divine? No,
but we should know, that all Lawful Powers are from God, and he that resists
them, resists the Authority of Divine Power. Abraham's Warrant for killing
his Son, was more Authentic and express, then we can have for any particular
Action, which we privately conceive as evil: but not more Authentic and
express, then many Divine Precepts for obedience unto lawful Governors are. As
his Warrant was better, so had his Action without it been more desperate, then
such as superior powers usually impose upon inferiors. The former Instance
then was brought, principally, to mitigate the Rigor of their Preciseness, who
stiffly maintain, That no Obedience can legitimate such Actions, as, without it,
would be evil; but all must be performed only in matters presupposed Good and
Lawful, or at least acknowledged for Indifferent unto Private Men, before
enjoined by Public Authority. The Contradictorie to which universal Negative
appears most true, in this particular Affirmative of Abraham's Resolution and
Obedience: from which we may further Argue thus. As the immediate interposition
of Divine Authority made that Action Holy and Religious, which otherwise had
been barbarously Impious: so may the interposition of Authority, derived from
God, make some Actions, which, barely considered, would be apparently Evil,
Desperate, or Doubtful, to be Honest, Good, and Lawful. To beat one that is Sui
Juris, at his own disposition, and in his right mind, against; or one that is
not such, with his Consent; were insolent Wrong: Because, we have no Power over
the one; the other none over himself, to Authorize such usage of his Body.
What would it be then, in private Men, to beat such as they know for Gods
Ambassadors, though requested by them so to do; when as the very Request might
seem to argue some present Distemper, or Distraction of Mind? No doubt, but he
that refused to smite his Neighbor Prophet (whether Elisha or some other: the
story is in the first of Kings) ^.
did not only pretend, but truly had some scruple of Conscience, left he should
offend, either that general Law of not doing Wrong unto his Neighbor, or that
peculiar Precept, Do my Prophets no harm: and yet for his Disobedience to the
Prophets command became a Sacrifice to the Lion. But he that took the Prophets
Authority for his Warrant, though he smote, and in smiting wounded him, yet
did he not hurt his own Conscience a whit, but rather by thus doing, preserved
it whole, notwithstanding the former Precept of doing Gods Prophets no harm. To
rifle a Spanish ship, upon private Quarrels, were Piracie in an English
Navigator, to kill a Spaniard, Murder; but suppose the Kings Majesty, upon
Wrong done, by that Nation to our State, not satisfied; should grant his
letters of Mart: to rob them of their Goods were no Piracie, to take away their
Lives no Murder: yet were the out ward Action in both Cases the same, but the
circumstances diverse, and the party that now undertakes it, has better
Motives then before he had.

4 Many Instances might be brought unto this purpose, all evidently evincing
thus much in general, That sundry Actions, which undertaken out of private
Choice, would be Wicked, (because we conceive in them some Evil, without any
conceit of possible good to set against it) may by Injunction of public
Authority become Lawful to us; because we have new Motives and better Warrants
for to do them; nor can our adventure upon such Actions be censured for
Desperate, as before it might well have been. For first, whilst Men of skill
and judgment, appointed by God to Advise in such Matters, are otherwise
persuaded then we in private are: the Rule of Christian Modesty binds us to
suspect our own Persuasion, and consequently, to think there may be some Good
even in that Action wherein heretofore we thought was not; wherein as yet we
our selves see none, yet may safely persuade our selves that others see, either
more Good or less Evil. And unto this Persuasion we must add this
Consideration also: That Performance of Obedience it self is a good and
acceptable Action in the sight of God. Or to come nearer the Point.

5 The goodness of our sincere Obedience alone is not a Consequent only of ^
the Action but either an essential part, or such a Circumstance, or Motive
precedent, as brings a new ^ssence for it concomitant; whereby the Evil (which
we, out of private Persuasions, fear) may be countervailed, as well as if we
did conceive some good probably included in the very Object of the Action it
self, which might be equivalent to the Evil feared. At the least then, some
Actions, which privately we would avoid as altogether Evil, may upon the former
Motives be as lawfully undertaken, as those which we hold, as probably Good, as
Evil.

6 But, as every Conceit of any Good is not sufficient to countervail all
Conceit of Evil, which may appear in the same matter: so neither may all
Authority countervail every private Persuasion, in any man; but the greater,
or more public, the Authority is, the more should it prevail with all private
Persons, for the undertaking of such Actions, as otherwise would seem Unlawful.
The like may be said of the danger, or scandal, which might arise from the
Example of our Disobedience, or non performance of Obedience. The greater the
Harm is, likely to ensue such Neglect of Obedience, the more we are bound to be
less scrupulous in Obeying, for these are not mere Consequents of the Action.
The Reason why men often mistake them for such, is, because they distinguish
not between the real Harms themselves, or scandalous Events, which follow the
Action, and the serious Forecast of their Danger. For as the Means are
precedent to the real Assequution of the End, and yet the Intention of the End
does always go before the right Choice of Means, and as it were, seasons them
for the Production of what we intend: so albeit the real Events or Harms be
mere Consequents, yet the mature and prudent forecast of Danger, likely to
follow any Action or Resolution, must be admitted into the Consultation
precedent, and ought to sway our Consciences, according to every degree of
their Probabilities unpartially conceived, as well as if we were as probably
persuaded of so many degrees of inherent goodness in the Action it self, or
its essential Object. For the Avoidance of any Evil equally probable, is as
good as the Attaining of an equal good. If the danger which we justly fear may
follow our Neglect of Obedience, whether in things Forbidden or Commanded, be
as great as the Evil, which (upon like Probability) we conceive in the very
Action it self; it should make us as willing to do what we are Commanded, as to
refuse: albeit we set apart the goodness, which may arise from the mere Act of
Obedience it self.

7 That both goodness of mere Obedience, as Obedience, and also the danger of
Evil likely to ensue our denial thereof, are either Essential Parts of the
Object, or such Internal Motives precedent, as may raise a new Form in the
Action: may be gathered from what has been said before, of things Indifferent.
For the Injunction of Authority, as none (I think) will deny, makes Some
Obedience may after that evil which appears in some Actions: because any
Obedience (though in the lowest degree) does make Actions which without it were
indifferent, to be truly good.
things which to have done, or not to have done, was before Indifferent, now
not to be such, but Necessary and good. So as, not only the Obedience is to be
thought good, but the very Action wherein Obedience is seen, though before
Indifferent, is now inherently good, and the Omission of it would be in it self
Evil, and not by Consequent only. For Obedience either is, or causes, a new
Form or Essential Difference, which does as it were sublimate the outward
Action, to an higher Nature and Quality then it was capable of before. For the
same Reason may this goodness of Obedience, and the due Consideration of
Harms, which may follow its Refusal, make such Actions, as before had been Evil
for us out of private Resolutions to have undertaken, not to be any more Evil,
but Good. The Difficulty only is, what private Doubts or Dislikes may be
countervailed by public Authority: or what certain Rule may be given when
they may, and when they may not.

8 General Rules in this Case are very hard to be given, because the
Circumstances To give precise Rules what Actions may of evil become good by
Obedience, is very difficult.
may be many and diverse. The Authority may be greater or less: so may their
Dislike that are to perform Obedience be of the things enjoined. The Injunction
likewise may be more or less Peremptory. Sometimes it may seem to resemble
rather an Advice, then absolute Command: sometimes rather to Adjure, then
Command: Sometimes the Parties in Authority may be of less, and the parties of
whom Obedience is exacted, of greater Reach, and deeper Insight in those
matters, whereunto Obedience is enjoined, according to the Diversity of the
Subject of Obedience, which sometime may be such, wherein men of Experience or
Practice are to be most Believed, wherein Concurrence of Judgments and
Multitude of Voices may argue more Truth: Sometimes the Subject of Obedience,
may be matters of abstruse Speculation, wherein one man of profound Judgment
is more to be Believed, then five hundred but of ordinary Capacity. For as
things Visible, but far Distant, so matters of abstruse Speculation, cannot be
discerned by multitude of Eyes, but by clearness of Sight; and as he that
could discern ships in the Carthaginian, from the Lilibaean haven, saw more
then all Xerxes Army could in like Distance: so does it often fall out, that
some one profound Judicious Contemplator sees clearly that Truth, which all the
Wits of the same Age had not been able without him to discover. Such men may
sin in obeying Authority, whereunto others in yielding Obedience, sin not;
because they can discern the Unlawfulness of the Command it self better than
others. But unless a man can justly plead this, or some other like peculiar
Reason or Privilege, it is a very suspicious and dangerous Case to Disobey
lawful Authority, (whether Spiritual or Temporal) in such matters as he thinks
others of his own Rank may with safe Conscience Obey, or in such matters,
whereunto he sees many men, by his own Confession of great Judgment and
Integrity of Life, yielding Obedience with alacrity. For if thus he think of
them, he cannot but suspect himself and his Persuasions of Error; nay he cannot
be otherwise persuaded, but that the Commandment, or public Injunction of
Authority, is not absolutely against Gods Commandment; for so it could not be
Obeyed, with safe Conscience, by men of Skill and Integrity. A certain Rule when
Authority may be dis^eyed, without whole of (...) (...) is alwa^es more (...)
then Sa^e.
And this I take to be the safest general Rule that can be given in this Case:
Not to consider the particular Matters enjoined, with such of their
Circumstances, or Consequences as we out of our private Imaginations conceive,
or fear; so much, as the general Form of public Injunction, as it indistinctly
concerns All. If we can truly discern the Law or public Act it self to be
against Gods Law, and such as will lay a Necessity upon us of transgressing
Gods Commandments, if we yield Obedience to particulars enjoined by it: Our
Apostles have already answered for us, It is better to Obey God then Men.
Christ had commanded them to preach A^is 4. 19.
the Gospel: The Priests and other Governors forbid them to preach Christ.
Here was a Contradiction in the Laws themselves. But GOD Commands us to Obey
the Powers ordained by him; and their Commandments are particular Branches of
Gods General Commandments for this purpose: and he that Disobeyeth them,
Disobeyeth God, unless their Commandments be contrary to some other of Gods
Commandments. And it is a Course as preposterous as dangerous, to Disobey
Authority, because we dislike the things Commanded by it, in respect of our
selves, or upon some Persuasion peculiar to us, not common to All. For seeing
Obedience is Gods express Commandment; yea seeing We can no more Obey, than
Love God, whom we have not seen, but by obeying our Superiors whom we have
seen: True Spiritual Obedience, were it rightly planted in our hearts, would
bind us, rather to like Well of the things Commanded for Authorities ^
sake, than to Disobey Authority for the private dislike of them. Both our
Disobedience to the one, and Dislike of the other, are unwarrantable, unless
we can truly derive them from some formal Contradiction or Opposition, betwixt
the public or general Injunction of Superiors, and express Law of the most
High.

9 It will be replied, That albeit the general Form of public Injunction be
not absolutely Unlawful, nor the things enjoined (for this reason) essentially
or necessarily Evil: yet are these most Unexpedient, and may be grand Occasions
of great Evil.

He that is thus Persuaded, might as far as became his Place, dissuade any
Public Act concerning such Matters; and yet withal was bound to consider,
whether the Want of such an Act might not Occasion as great Evils, as he fears
may follow the Practice of such Obedience as it commands: or whether other
might not as probably foresee some equivalent ^ood, which he sees not. But
after such Acts are publicly made, and Obedience duly demanded In vi^i^m
ducit culpae ^uga si caret ar^e. As we may not do evil that good may ensue, so
may we not omit any good, lest evil might happen thereon; and yet Obedience by
all men's consent is good. Thus from an unnecessary fear of the former, men fall
into the later, (which is but a Siyler Sin) by denying Obedience which in it
self is good, for fear lest they should give occasion of evil.
he that denies it upon fear only of some Evil that may follow, does give
great Occasion to others of Committing that Evil, which he himself by this
Refusal certainly Commits, he opens the gap to that Capital Mischief of public
Societies, Anarchie and Disobedience. In Doubts of this Nature, it will
abundantly suffice to make sincere Protestation in the sight of God, or if need
require, before Men, that we undertake not such Actions upon any private liking
of the things enjoined, but only upon sincere respect of performing Obedience
to Superiors, whom God has appointed to make Laws for Us, but not Us to
appoint them what Laws they should make, nor to Judge of their Equity being
made, save only where the Form of the Commandment is contrary to some of Gods
Commandments, so as the particulars enjoined become thereby essentially and
necessarily Evil. In such Case, the Laws of Superiors are already Judged and
Condemned by Gods Law, by which whilst they stand Uncondemned they shall
condemn us for Disobedience both to Gods Laws and Them albeit we stand in
Doubt, whether that which they enjoin, would not be most unlawful for us to
do, if we were left unto our Private Choice. For seeing the Case stands in
Controversy betwixt Us and our Superiors: we should do as we are Commanded by
them, and refer the final Decision to the Supreme Judge, whether they do well
or ill in making such Laws, as to us may seem to be Occasions of Evil, but
whether they shall prove so or no, he best Knows, that only can prevent the
Danger. We, as I said before, might Advise if we were thereunto called, for the
Mitigation or Abrogating of such Laws, but Judge or condemn them, by the
Probabilities or Fears of their Consequents we may not, but only where they are
already judged by the Law of God. What private man is there, that knows the
secret Intents or Purposes of the State, in most Actions of public Service?
Can any man doubt but that a great many often fear some dangerous Consequents of
those Services wherein they are employed? Why then do most men think themselves
bound to Obey the State, against their private Doubts or Fears? Thus much S.
Aust in takes as granted by all. For he brings in these words following to
infer a Conclusion denied by his Adversary. Vir justus, si forte sub rege
homine etiam sacrilego militet, recte potest illo jubente bellare, civicae
pacis ordin^m serva^s. Cui, quod jubetur, vel, non esse contra Dei praecep^um
c^rtum est, vel, utrum sit, certum non est: ita ut forrasse term regem faciat
iniquitas imperandi, innocentem autem militem ostendat ordo serviendi. Aug. l.
22. contra Faustum Manich^. cap. 75.
It is enough that we know such Businesses (as for example, Wars with
forrainers) not to be Unlawful in the general, and the Determinations of
Wars, or like Business, to be referred to the King and his Council: but
whether this or that War be justly undertaken by them or no; common Soldiers,
nay Captains are not to judge, nor to detract Obedience, albeit they suspect
the Lawfulness of the Quarrel, or could wish for peace if they were in place
to determine of such matters. But if the whole State should command promiscuous
use of Women, adultery, murder of our brethren uncondemned by Law,
blasphemy, or the like: such commandments were not to be obeyed, but we are
rather bound to suffer death our selves, than to be their instruments in such
actions: for here is a direct Contradiction, betwixt the form of such laws, and
the Laws of God.

10 What has been spoken of Authority in general, applied to Spiritual
Authority.
From what has hitherto been delivered, we may collect, That Superiors, or
men in Authority are to be obeyed in such Points, as their Inferiors are not
at leisure to examine or not of capacity to discern, or not of Power, or
Place, to determine whether they be lawful or no. Thus much at the least is
common to all absolute Authority, of what kind soever. And from the former
Places alleged, containing the Commission of Priests or Ministers, it is most
evident, That the lawful Pastor or spiritual Overseer, has as absolute
Authority to demand Belief or Obedience in Christ's, as any Civil Mastrate has
to demand Temporal Obedience in the State or Princes Name: And if any of
Christ's Fold deny Obedience, or appeal from his Pastor, without just and
evident Reason, he does thereby deny Christ, and endanger his own Soul, as much
as he does his Body that resists a Lawful Magistrate, when he is charged by
him in his Princes Name to Obey. And as in temporal Causes, if a man appeal
without just Occasions, from an inferior Court to a higher, he is not thereby
freed, but rather to be returned to the inferior Court from which he appealed,
or to be censured (besides his other facts,) for his unlawful Appeal: so
likewise, such as upon pretense of Ignorance in Gods Word, or liberty of
Conscience appeal from ordinary Ministers to Christ the chief Shepherd, are not
thereby presently acquitted, but stand still liable to the Censure of their
Pastors, either to Bind them if they continue Obstinate, as well for this their
Disobedience in appealing from them, as for their other Sins; or to Loose and
remit their Sins, if they repent. For God has appointed his Ministers to
govern his Church, and Governors are to be Obeyed in that they are Governors,
unless such as are to perform Obedience, do perfectly know, or have Reasons
(such as they would not be afraid to tender to Christ in that dreadful Day,)
to suspect, that their Pastors in their Commands, go beyond their Commission,
or the express Laws and Ordinances of Christ Jesus, the Supreme Governor and
Commander both of Pastor and People.

11 But many men are often times strongly persuaded, that the very form of ^.
the Law or their Superiors Injunctions, are Opposite unto Gods Laws, when in
Truth they are not. And hence they think they deny Obedience upon Sinc^^ity and
Conscience, when indeed they do not, but in both Cases are merely blinded by
Affection. The Question is, whether denying Obedience upon such Persuasions,
they do well or ill? That the Persuasion is Evil, is without controversy. The
Difficulty is, whether (the Persuasion remaining in full strength, without any
mixture of Suspicion, or Apprehension of their Error,) they add a new sin
of Disobedience, besides the sinfulness of their Erroneous persuasion, or that
Habitual Affection whence it springs: that is, whether they should do better in
Obeying against the full strength of their Persuasion, or in Disobeying,
whilst it remains? If they Obey, they sin against their Consciences, and
prefer the Laws of Man before Gods: If they do better in Disobeying, it may
s^em an unhappie Error, which exempts them from the Yoke of Obedience,
whereunto the Orthodox are subject. The answer is easy; Whosoever shall deny
Obeaience upon such Persuasions, does commit Disobedience actually: Not that it
were better for him to Obey, (supposing the strength of his Persuasion to the
contrary) but he actually Sins in that he suffers not the strength of his
Persuasion to be broken by the stroke of Authority, but rather suffers it to
confront Authority: So that his Sin (if we will speak precisely) ^.
consists only in the exercise of his former Persuasion, or in the Motion of
his Habitual Assection: not in any proper Act of that peculiar Habit or Vice,
which we call Disobedience. That whereunto he stands bound by Authority, is to
abjure his former Persuasion, that he may with safe conscience Obey: or (to
speak more distinctly,) he is not bound immediately to Obey in the particulars
now enjoined, nor to renounce his Persuasion without more ado, but to enter
into his own Soul and Conscience, to examine the Grounds or Motives of his
Persuasion, to rate his own Wit and Judgment at its due Worth and no higher,
to renounce all Self-conceit, or Jealousies of Disparagement, in yielding to
that he had formerly impugned, that so he may sincerely and uncorruptedly Judge
of the Truth proposed, and esteem aright of Authority, and others Worth that
yield unto it. If we would sincerely Obey in these Points, which are the
immediate and first Principles of true Christian Obedience, the Grounds of
erroneous Persuasions would quickly fail: so as we should be always ready to
Obey in the particulars, whereunto Obedience was justly demanded. But of the
Grounds, Occasions of erroneous Persuasions, and their Remedies, by Gods
Assistance, more at large in the Article of the Godhead, and some other
Treatises of Christian Faith.

CAP. VII.
What Actions are properly said to be not of Faith, in the Apostles Sense: What
manner of Doubt it is which makes them such.

1 AGainst all that has been hitherto delivered concerning this Point, That
happily may be yet Objected, which has always bred greatest Scruple for
yielding Obedience in doubtful Cases. For our Apostle says: Romans 14. 23.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: But whilst men Obey Spiritual Governors,
in those particulars, for which they show no Scripture, This Obedience is not
of faith, (for Faith is always Ruled by the Word:) Ergo, this Obedience is
sinful, even in this respect alone, that it has not the Word for its Warrant,
but much more if we doubt whether the things enjoined be Good or Bad: for
Doubting breeds Condemnation as our Apostle in the same place gathers. He
that Doubts is condemned if he eat, because he eats not of faith.

2 Unto the former part of this Objection, the Answer is easy and brief:
Seeing Gods Word Commands Obedience in general unto Spiritual Pastors, and that
in most express terms; It does warrant our Obedience in particulars, which
are not forbidden by the same Word. But for clearing of the later Objection,
because this place of Saint Paul is as often urged to as little purpose, as any
other in the whole Book of God besides, it shall not be amiss to consider.
First in what Sense it is true; Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. Secondly,
what manner of Do^bt it is, that makes a thing to be not of faith, in that
sense which our Apostle means.

3 Three diverse Meanings of this phrase, not of Faith. The first Meaning.
A thing may be said to be of Faith three ways. First, strictly and properly,
That is said to be ex Fide, of faith, which is an Act or exercise of the Habit
or Virtue of faith, as to believe in God, in Christ, or to Assent unto any
Article in the Creed. In this Sense, no man I think does urge this place of our
Apostle: Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. For then all Deeds of Charity
should be sinful, seeing they are no Acts or exercises of the Habit of Faith,
but of Charity, which is a distinct Habit from Faith, according to best
Divines: nor can we properly say, that such works flow from Faith, as the fruit
does from the root, seeing Charity is no branch of faith, but a Coaeval stem
of infused sanctifying Grace, the common Root to both. Such Acts then may be
said to be of Faith, only because the Doctrine of Faith enjoins them, and the
Habit or Virtue of Faith inclines the Soul unto them, and moves Charity unto
the exercise of them. And this is the second Sense or Meaning The second
Meaning.
of the speech, ex fide, of faith: that is, those things are said to be of
faith, or to proceed from faith, which are commanded by the Doctrine of faith,
or unto which we are inclined or moved by the Habit or Virtue of Faith. But
neither is it always true, Whatsoever is not of faith in this sense, is sin.
For so no Recreation, no Merriment, not Eating and Drinking, with many other
Works both of Reason and Nature, generally nothing merely Indifferent could be
truly of faith: at the least at this or that Time. How then are not all these
sinful, seeing they are not of faith, in none of the former Senses, being
neither Acts of Faith, nor enjoined by the Doctrine of Faith? This necessarily
enforces us to seek a third Signification of the former words.

4 Thirdly then, that is said to be not of Faith, whatsoever is not warrantable
^
by the Doctrine of faith, whatsoever Conscience, or the Virtue of faith, being
consult^ countenance or allow, but rather dissuade. And in this Sense, all that
may be said to be ex file, of faith, whatsoever is warrantable by the Doctrine
of Faith whatsoever Faith, Conscience, or the Law of Reason and Nature can
approve or allow of, either Absolutely, or at that Present whilst they are
undertaken, albeit they do not enjoin them, or impell us unto them (at the
least) for that Season. As for example; If a man, free from necessary
Employments of his Calling, should ride half a score of miles to be merry with
his honest friend: this were neither an act of faith, nor an exercise enjoynea
by faith, and yet truly of faith, in our Apostles Sense, and no way Sinful,
because warrantable by the Doctrine of faith: Neither Faith, nor Conscience,
nor Law of Nature would condemn him for so doing. But if his dearest Friend lay
on his Deathbed, and did expect some comfort by his Presence: his Absence upon
such light Occasions would be sinful, because it could not be of Faith.
Neither the doctrine of Faith, nor the Law of Reason, could countenance such an
Action. Such resolutions may properly be said, Not of Faith, because they
cannot proceed but from some Inclination, or disposition, opposite to the Habit
of true Faith, and the dictates of Natural well disposed, much more of
sanctified Conscience. Suppose some man's Conscience were so scrupulous, as to
doubt whether he might ride so far to be merry with his friend, when he had
no urgent Occasions to withdraw him; and another so confident, and fully
persuaded in his mind, as to make no question whether he should meet his
friend in a Plaguie house, or when his own Father lay a dying. The Question is,
whether of these two does sin the more? or if both do not sin, whether of
them is freed from sin, and by what means? The former, as is supposed, doubts
of the Action, and yet does it: the other does the like, but worse, and
doubts not. If that Journey which in it self is Lawful, (supposing the
former Case) becomes unlawful to the one, because he doubts it is Unlawful:
then may the others confident Persuasion make his expedition Lavvfull unto him,
although in it self (supposing the Case above mentioned) it were Unlawful. For
who can give any Reason, why Confidence of Persuasion may not as well
legitimate what otherwise is Unlawful, as Doubt, or Scruple illegitimate that
which otherwise were Lawful and Warrantable. So that, according to these
Grounds, the former party above mentioned should Sin, not the Later. And our
Apostles Speeches (unless they admit some restraint,) will infer thus much. ^.
I Know and am Persuaded through the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing Unclean
of it self: but unto him that J^ageth (...) anything to be unclean, to him it
is unclean. And again; This man esteems one day above another day, another
man counts every day alike: let every man be fully persuad^d in his Mind: as
if he added, and then there is no danger. And yet if we should but consult
natural reason; who could deny, that he that made an idle Journey whereby he
might endanger his own, or neglect his Fathers life, did ^n most grievously;
albeit he were most fully Persuaded to the contrary: yea the stronger his
Persuasion were, the greater his Sin. On the contrary he that should undertake
the like Journey, having no serious Occasions to withdraw him, if the Truth be
rightly scanned, did not Sin at all, unless perhaps in Doubting whether he
Sinned or no. For every Doubt of what we do, does not make our Action sinful,
or not of Faith: which is now to be discussed.

5 If that Speech of our Apostle, He that doubts is condemned if he eat, were
to be universally understood of all Doubts, or all Actions: we should never
have an End of Doubting, nor any Beginning of many good and most necessary
Works. The effects of such Scrupulosities as our Apostles Rule universally
understood, would necessarily breed, are contrary to the Analogic of Faith.
This very Persuasion, were it thoroughly and generally planted in all men's
Hearts, were enough to bring all States to utter Anarchie, and to set the whole
World in combustion. For what Enterprise is there of greater moment, but diverse
Men will be of diverse Minds, concerning the Lawfulness or Unlawfulness of it?
Who could not by this Exception excuse himself from performance of necessary
Allegiance or Service? If the Kings Majesty should wage War against the
Spaniard, he that were addicted to their Religion might reply, I should be as
willing as another to do my King and Country any Service, but I Doubt whether
I may afford him my goods to the hurt and damage of Roman Catholics: the
Cause I am afraid is most Unlawful, and will bring Gods Plague upon this Land,
therefore I may not hazard my Life in it, nor adventure to shed the innocent
blood of our Holy Mother the Churches Children. The like might a Lutheran say,
if War should fall out betwixt our State and the Saxons; or if with some other
reformed Churches, the like might be said by most in our Land: Finally, there
would be continual Distraction in the mannaging of all public Affairs. But
such scrupulous demurs in Civil Matters, are either seldom made, or quickly
answered by the Temporal Sword. And are they less dangerous in Cases as
little doubtful, (wherein the Consequents feared are of no less moment) when
they are given to the chief Mannagers of our spiritual Warfare, in times
wherein Disobedience threatens dissolution of Christ's Army, that must fight
his Battles against Satan and the Man of Sin? Is the Authority of Binding and
Loosing, Opening and Shutting the Kingdom of Heaven, less than the Authority
of Life and Death, or the disposing Powers of Temporal Goods? What should be
the Reason then that every Scruple should be held sufficient to deny Obedience
(in matters of greatest Consequence) unto Spiritual, more than Temporal
Authority? Denial of Obedience upon Scruple, yea even the scruple or doubt it
self, may be not of Faith, as well as the positive Action, of whose Lawfulness
they doubt: whence the Objection, which many draw from the Apostles Rule, is
most forcible against themselves.
Out of doubt, that Rule of Saint Paul does no more Warrant the one than the
other. The true Reason is: most men fear Temporal Censures, more than either
Gods or His, an ordinary Goal, more than Hell: and had rather be Door-keepers
in great Men's Houses, than glorified Saints in Heaven; but of this hereafter.
To proceed then with our Apostles Rule. Were it universally to be understood,
it would bring all Christian Souls into such perpetual, miserable, inextricable
Perplexities, as they should always live in suspense, and scarce Resolve upon
any thing. For his Rule holds as true in the Omission of what should be done,
as in the Commission of what we think should not be done. Suppose then thy
Pastor Commands thee to Obey in this or that Particular, which he verily
thinks, either necessary to be undertaken by all Christian, at all or most
times; or else most Expedient for thy Souls health, the setting forth of Gods
Glory, or the Good of others, at this present. But thou art contrary-minded,
and doubtest whether thou may do it Lawfully or no. Why? because thou have
no Warrant for it out of Scripture, or because he brings no necessary Reasons
why thou should do it, but bare Probabilities, which cannot oversway that
Doubt, which thou have framed unto thy Conscience. But he can show thee
express Commandment out of Scripture, that thou should Obey Him. Thou will
say; in things Lawful only. This he avoucheth to be such; Thou deniest it. He
can show thee again express words of Scripture, that thou should not be
wise in thine own conceit, but be willing to learn of thy Pastor, Who is the
Messenger of the Lord of hosts, at whose mouth thou should seek the Law,
and on whom, as our Apostle says, thou do depend. Tell me then, first, by
what Place of Scripture thy Disobedience in this particular can be Warranted?
How can thou choose but Doubt, whether thy denial of Obedience be of Faith or
no, seeing Gods Word Commands thee, in general terms, to Obey, and no where
wills thee to Disobey in this particular. Or if thou think thou have some
general Warrant for Disobedience, because thou supposest this particular to be
Unlawful: yet how can thou but doubt, whether thou have learned the Precepts
of Christian Modesty as thou should? Whether thou have learned to deny thy
Self, and thy Assections? whether thou have learned to reverence thy Pastor as
Gods Messenger, not taking any offense at his Person? Finally, whether thou
have abandoned all such delights and desires, as usually are the Grounds of
false Persuasion, and Impediments of sincere Obedience? If thou can not be
fully and truly resolved in these, then must thou doubt, (whether thou will or
no) whether thy doubt or scruple it self be of Faith or Conscience, or of
Humor only. And if thou can not but doubt herein, then may thou assure thy
self, that thy denial of Obedience is not of Faith, and therefore Sinful: if
the Apostles Rule (as thou supposest) were universally true, that whosoever
does any thing, of whose Lawfulness he doubts, does Sin, because he does it
not of Faith. ^
But I dare not deny, but that sundry of Christ's Flock may sometimes either
deny, or perform Obedience unto their Pastors, not without doubt or scruple
whether they should do so or no, and yet not Sin in either. In performing
Obedience they Sin not, unless the doubt be very great or probable, and the
Evil which they conceive in the Action Extraordinary. Again, in denying
Obedience they Sin not, albeit they doubt whether they should do so or no: if
the Evil, which upon mature deliberation and serious forecast they much
suspect, be Extraordinary, such as cannot be recompensed by the Goodness,
which appears in the Act of Obedience, nor in the Fruits of the Action it self,
which their Pastor proposes, as a Motive to undertake it. According to those
Grounds must our Apostles speech be limited. He that Doubts is Condemned if
he eat, because he eats not of Faith.

6 What then? Is every man that eats any thing, which he Doubts whether ^
it were better for him not to eat, straight Condemned? God forbid. He that
has such a tender Infants squeamish Conscience, as to think thus, had need to
have a very ancient, grave, wise, and moderate Stomach: and it were sit he
never came at any Feast, or Table, furnished with variety of dishes.

7 But for a direct Answer to our Apostles Speech. It must be granted, that
they of whom he speaks, did Sin in eating when they Doubted. For if they had
been as fully persuaded in their Minds, as the Apostle himself, and sunchie
others of their Brethren were, they had not Sinned in eating the self same
meat: yet for all this they sinned not in eating (simply) when they Doubted,
but in eating Such Meats when they doubted: Other meats they might have eaten
with little or no Offense; albeit with more Uncertainty, whether it had been
better for them to eat or no. Nor was it so much a positive Doubt, as rather a
Ra hnesse, or want of settled Resolution, in many of them, which made them Sin;
as may appear from the Circumstance of the Place: yet was this eating not only
a Sin, but a most Grievous Sin, in all that did eat such Meats, without a
constant and wel-grounded Resolution. Both the Sin, and the extraordinary
Grievousnesse of it, did hence arise: they had eaten of things sacrificed to
Idols, or other Meats, (in their Judgment) accursed by the Law, which they
suspected not only to be Unlawful to be eaten, but Doubted whether in eating
them they should not be partakers of the Table of Devils, initiated to the
Sacraments of Idolatry, or separated from the Israel of God, or finally become
Apostata's from Faith, and the Holy Doctrine. As on the one side, the evil
which they feared was extraordinarily grievous, and the Reasons of their fear
such as could not easily be cast off, but would be always likely to breed
Despair after the Action were past, albeit many of them did shake off all doubt
for the present: so on the other part, there was not quid pro quo, not the
least possible Surmise of performing any degree of any good or acceptable
Service in the sight of God, by their eating. For, as Saint Paul in the same
place notes: The Kingdom of God is not Meat or Drink, but Righteousness and
Peace, whosoever in these, (as if he had said, not in eating and drinking)
Serves Christ, is Acceptable unto God, and is Approved of Men. Those then of
whom he there spoke, accounting it a chief part of their Righteousness to
abstain from all Unclean things, their danger in eating was in Quantity
exceeding Great, and for the Quality Spiritual: their Loss in abstaining from
such meats (being provided of others) was in Quantity as Nothing, and for the
Quality merely Corporal. Wherefore thus to have eaten, with the least Scruple
of such grievous Danger, was worse then Esau' s alienating of his Birthright
for a Mess of Pottage. And albeit they had Doubted today, and grown Resolute
tomorrow, upon no better Motives then the bare examples of others; or in an
Humor or Braverie, because they would not Doubt any longer, but use their
Liberty as others did: yet had such Resolutions been deadly. For Opinions of
this nature may not be cast off in a Moment, nor may a man adventure upon a
Doubt of such fearful Consequence, but upon great Motives of some Spiritual
good; the Probabilities of attaining which may countervail the evil feared: or
upon serious deliberation, and perspicuous discovery of their former Error,
and causeless Scruple. From these grounds did our Apostle infer that
exhortation. Let every man be fully persuaded in his Mind. He exacteth not this
Fullness of Persuasion in Matters of Verse (...).
ordinary Consequence; Too much Curiosity in them always occasioneth less
Diligence or Circumspection, then were requisite for establishing our minds
with true Faith, in Points of greatest Moment: nor did he mean such Fullness of
Persuasion, hot Spirits usually enforce upon themselves, without mature and
sober deliberation. For such Resolutions, albeit they may seem most strong, as
indeed they are for the time exceeding stiff: yet are they easily to be
undermined by Satan, the inward Temptations of the Flesh, or other Occurrents;
and after once they begin to fail, such as lean most unto them, fall so much
the more Headlong into deepest Despair, by how much they have been stronger or
higher Pitched; as it seems some of these, to whom he writes, had been too bold
in eating, and were afterward tortured by the Sting of Conscience. The end of
our Apostles Exhortation was This: Seeing their Persuasions, concerning the
Unlawfulness of such Meats, had been (as it were) bred up with the parties
Doubting, they should in no Case adventure upon the contrary Practice, but upon
long and wel-setled Resolution, grounded upon a sincere and clear Manifestation
of their former Error. For as the Physicians of our Bodies do not always
apply such Medicines, as they know most forcible to expel the present Disease,
if the same be contrary to our former long accustomed Diet, (for vitiosae
Consuetudini indulgendum est, there must a ca^e be had that a Custom, though
depraved, be not too violently thwarted, or too suddenly broken off:) so
likewise must skilful Physicians of the Soul, not seek so much to expel
inveterate Opinions, (though Erroneous) by present force of strongest
Arguments, or eager Exhortations; but rather suffer them to wear out their
strength by little and little, never infusing contrary Persuasions, but
mi^igated and qualified, and that sparingly, as Opportunity shall serve.
Otherwise, what one says of Nature her self,

Expellas furcalicet, usque recurret:
Though with strong hand she be out-thrown,
She still repairs unto her own:
will prove true of that altera natura, inveterate Custom. It, suddenly
expulsed, will one time or other retire as violently: and so shall the Relapse
be much worse then the Disease it self.

8 For these Reasons did they also offend most grievously, who by their Example
or Instigation, did cause their weak Brethren to eat such Meats as they made
this Conscience of: for so they caused them, for whom Christ Jesus See 1 Cor.
8. (...) R^m* 14. 15.
died, to perish for their Meats sake, as it is verse 15. Whereas the loss of
Meat, or Life it self, should, by the Rule of Charity, be accounted Gain in
respect of our Brethrens inestimable Danger, which may ensue upon such Actions.
Better it were we should suffer our selves to starve for Meat, and so procure
our own Corporal, then occasion their Eternal Death by our Example; so says
our Apostle: If Meat offend my Brother, I will eat no Meat while the world 1
(...). 8. 13. 1 (...) 9. 15.
stands that I may not offend my Brother. It were better for me to die, then
that any man should make my rejoicing vain. Nor did our Apostle in this place
speak Hyperbolically, or more then he meant to have Performed, if he had been
called to such a trial of his Resolution, as some of his Forefathers had been.
So we read, when Antiochus's Officers, out of great love (as they esteemed it)
unto the good old man, had permitted Eleazar one of the principal Scribes to
make choice of such flesh as he would, and might safely eat by his Country
Laws; only requesting him to dissemble by his silence, 2 (...). 6. 21, 22, 23,
24, etc.
As though he had eaten the things appointed by the King, even the Flesh of his
Idols Sacrifices: Albeit he might have had Life upon this condition: yet he
confidently answered: and willed them straight ways to send him to the grave.
For it becomes not our Age (said he) to dissemble* whereby many young persons
might think, that Eleazar being fourscore years old and ten, were now gone to
another Religion: and so through mine Hypocrisy (for a little time of a
transitory Life) they might be deceived by me, and I should procure
malediction, and reproach to mine old Age. This eating, which he refused, could
never have been of Faith, that is, no way Warrantable, by the Doctrine or
Principles of Faith, which had taught him the contrary: as he well expressed in
the next words following: for though I were now delivered from the Torments of
Men, yet could I not escape the Hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead.
Wherefore I will now change this Life manfully, and will show my self such as
mine Age requires.

9 And it should be considered, that the Parties of whom our ^
Apostle speaks in the forementioned place, were never enjoined by any Lawful
Superiors, either Civil or Ecclesiastic, to eat such Meats as they made
scruple of: yea the very original or fountain of their Scruple, was from the
express Law of God, denouncing fearful Judgments against all such, as
polluted themselves with Unclean Meats: so that their eating, albeit solemnly
enjoined by the greatest Powers on earth, could not fall within the Subject of
true Obedience, because the Laws injoyning it (as they conceived) stood
actually condemned, by the express Law of God to the contrary, in defense
whereof, many of their Ancestors had exposed their Bodies to most grievous
Tortures, and the refusal of such Meats, as they made Scruple of, had been
always accounted the justest Title of glorious Martyrdom amongst the Jews. And
albeit these Laws concerning Unclean Meats were indeed Antiquated at the
Alteration of the Priesthood; yet should we not marvail, if at the first
planting of the Gospel, many good Christians did make great Conscience of
eating such Meats as were forbidden by them, when S. Peter himself, long after
our Saviors Ascension, durst scarce take Gods own word against his written
Law, then not Abrogated (as he supposed) in this Case. For when there came a
voice unto him, Acts 10. 13.
saying, Arise Peter, kill and eat, Peter said, Not so Lord, for I have never
eaten any thing that is Polluted, or Unclean. And the voice came unto him again
the second time, saying, the things that God has purified do not thou account
Polluted. Nor was Peter, as it seems, yet fully satisfied, for it is added in
the next words: This was so done thrice, and the vessel was drawn up again into
Heaven. All these Circumstances abundantly evince, that it was not the bare
Doubt or Scruple, but the Quality of the things doubted of, and the inveterate
Opinion, or abominable Conceit, which the Jews, or other of their Instruction,
had of the Meats themselves, that made their eating to be This Phrase includes
a Contrariery ^r Opposition unto Faith as (...) and many like Phrases, as usual
in the Hebrew Dialect, as the (...) compounds immitis, immisericors, etc*
(...), so far from being of Faith, that it rather seemed to overthrow it. Had
the excess of the Danger they feared been less, or had there been any
ordinary Possibility of any proportionable Good to set against it: their Sin in
eating had been less, albeit the Grounds of their Scruple had been greater, or
their Persuasions one way or other less settled.

10 Albeit this Exposition of our Apostle, may seem strange and new to many
honest and well disposed Minds in our Church: yet in truth, the manner of the
deduction only is new, the Doctrine it self is generally held by all Divines,
though not expressly in Conclusion, yet in the Premises, wherein it is
essentially contained, and may be most evidently deduced; Thus.

11 The former Interpretation necessarily follows from Grounds of Divinity
acknowledged by all.
All Sin consists, either in preferring none before some, the less before a
greater, or a Corporal before a Spiritual Good: the Heinousness of Sin in the
excess of difference, betwixt the true good neglected, and the seeming good
embraced, which is either absolutely evil, or else a far less good, which in
competition with the greater good is likewise to be accounted evil. Now, if
whatsoever be not of Faith be a Sin, then by the former Rules it is a Sin,
because a less good is preferred before a greater, or some evil chosen without
any proportionable good, that might serve as a sufficient Recompense. But if
the nature of all Actual Sin consist in one of these two: It is questionable,
how or in what case, Doubting or Scruple of what we do, does make our Actions
Sinful. How S^^uples, or Dou^t of what ^, con^ur to (...) ^ur A^ Sinful.
Briefly, it is an External Cause, or Circumstance, concurring to the making of
a Sinful Action, not any essential part, or internal Circumstance of the Sin it
self once caused. And it thus concurs only, when that which in it self is Evil,
or proves so in the event, would not be ^vil unto us, unless we had some doubt
or scruple, that is, some Notice or Apprehension of it as Evil: In such Cases
indeed we should not Sin, unless we had formerly doubted: but to speak
exactly, we do not sin, because we do what we doubt of but because in doing As
when the Evil (...), is greater th^n any G^^d that can be ^^ped.
some Actions, when we Doubt, we exactly prefer Evil before Good; which
otherwise we should not, albeit we did the self same Action* For it could not
be Evil to us, without the Apprehension of its Nature, so as the Apprehension
of it concurs to the making of it Evil. And because in all Doubts or Scruples,
there is some Apprehension of Evil: therefore when we Doubt* in Cases above
mentioned, our Actions are not of Faith, but Sinful. But if either we could be
fully persuaded to the contrary; that is, if we could out of sincerity of
Conscience, and settled Judgment discern that very thing which either we our
selves sometimes did, or others yet, Apprehend as Evil, not to be truly Evil:
the same Action, which before had been, shall not be now sinful unto us:
because we now prefer not Evil before Good. Or again, albeit the thing were in
it self Evil, (being prohibited by some positive Law) but we upon invincible or
unculpable Ignorance, did not Apprehend it for such: we should not actually sin
in doing it, because in this Case, we could not truly be c^nsured for
preferring Evil before Good (seeing the Apprehension makes it evil to us)
albe^t we did prefer that which was evil, before that which was good. As for
example: If a Pro^^^yte should have eaten Swines Flesh, being altogether
ignorant (not by his own, but the Priests Negligence) of the Israelites Law to
the contrary: he had done that which was evil, because forbidden by the Law,
but not Malum non mal^.
ill, because he had no Apprehension of it as evil, but did eat it without all
scruple, as well as the strong in Faith did in S. Paul's time. As doubting, in
those Cases wherein we have an Apprehension of some excess of evil, makes men's
Actions not to be of Faith; and want of doubt, (so all other Circumstances be
observed) makes them to be according unto Faith: so it oft-times falls out, that
such as nothing Doubt whether they do ill or no, do Sin far more then such, as
^.
not without great Scruple of Conscience make the same sinis^er Ch^ice. For,
oft-times the Causes why men make no scruple, or why they Apprehend not the
evil which they do are such, as will necessarily make their Actions worse, then
if they had doubted, and yet had done the same. This Rule holds always true,
when the Cause, why men doubt not of their Actions, is some inordinate desire
of Gain, Pleasure, or other like corrupt Affection, or some strong Humor of
Contradiction: not steadfast or wel-grounded Resolution, not pure Simplicity* or
invincible Ignorance, not occasioned by default or Negl^gence in our Vocation.
If scruple either has not been conceived, or else expelled upon these later
Motives, our Actions are thereby Justifiable or excusable: but where strength
of inordinate Affection or desire, either expels or impairs a scruple (of some
excessive evil) which has been conceived (though amiss) or hinders the
conceiving of some such doubt or scruple, in matters whose Unlawfulness might
well be doubted of, or rather might clearly be discerned, and ought with
Resolution to be avoided: there the Action is so much the more sinful, as the
scruple is less, or their Confidence or Boldness that undertake it greater.
The difference betwixt him that in this case doubts, and him that doubts
not, is altogether such as Moralists acknowledge betwixt the Actions of
Intemperate and Incontinent men.

CAP. VIII.
Who most transgress our Apostles former Rule: with Directions for squaring
our Actions unto it or other Rules of Faith.

1 FRom what has been said in this Point we may safely gather, that none in
our days so much transgress, as those that persuade themseves, they most
precisely keep this Rule of our Apostle, which indeed was the Rule of
Conscience, and of Nature. They of all others transgress it most, that make no
Scruple of denying Obedience, but confidently adventure upon any Course of
life, against their Pastors serious Admonitions, for their Spiritual Good. For
whosoever does any thing for his own private commodity, or bodily Good, which
(though he Doubt not) might upon due Examination, and Attention to his Pastor,
seem Doubtful whether it may not endanger his Soul, or impair his Spiritual
Estate, does in so doing, Sin against his own Soul, and wound his Conscience:
because there is no Proportion between the Good which he seeks, and the Evil
which he might justly fear. Hoc itaque de uno (...) genere non edendo, ubi a
liorum tan^a copia subj^ceba^, ^am leve praecep^u^ ad observandu^, tam (...) ad
memoria ^nendum. (^^i p^ nondum volunta^i c^pid^tas resist* ^at, quod de poena
tra^sgressionis postea subsecu^u^ est) tanto majore injusti^a viola^u^ est, q^
sacili^^e possit obs^ (...)* Aug. de ^iv. Dei. lib. 14. cap. 12.
Such Actions too well resemble our first Parents Sin, who preferred the mo
mentary Pleasures of their licorish Taste, before the Perpetuity of their
Estate in Paradise, wherein did grow much better Fruit then that they so
greedily longed for. And we may as truly say, that our first Parents were
condemned for eating, as those that doubted of the Lawfulness of what they eat.
They did not eat of Faith more then the others but less: although they were
Persuaded, that God rather had dealt hardly with them in Forbidding them to
eat, then that they should give just Offense to God in Eating. But the bolder
they were, the greater was their Sin, and less of Faith, nay most against
Faith: because their incontinent Desires had expelled all fear, and made them
confident.

2 The best Method to square our Actions to the Rule of Faith, would be This.
First, to be rightly instructed and persuaded in what order, or rank of
Goodness, Obedience to Spiritual Governors ought to be placed. Secondly,
(having found out the true Nature and Quality, and due Estimation of Obedience
in general) to account the degrees of Goodness, which appear in this or that
particular Act of Obedience And these are to be taken, according to the
Generality, or Soveraigntie of the Authority commanding, or according to the
Manner, and Tenor of the Command or Charge it self; as, those Commands are to
be Obeyed with more alacrity, (although they proceed from the same, or equal
Authority) in which obedience is demanded upon stricter, or more adjuring
Terms, or wherein the zealous desires of Men in Authority are either more fully
and significantly expressed to all, or more lively intimated unto us in
particular.

3 Thirdly, to calculate the Inconvenience, or Scandals that may arise from our
Disobedience. For albeit we might deny Obedience in sundry particulars* with
far safer Consciences then others could, yea, although it were Indifferent for
us (as perhaps in diverse Cases it is to some men) to perform or deny Obedience:
This is a Point, which I am ^e^swad^d, (...) have (...) then had been (...), as
not considering that our Apostles Rule might be violated, as well by the
Omission of some Actions, (...) by the (...) of others, or that the same
Offense might be given to weak and tender Consciences, by emboldning them to
de^y ^ (...) was given in our Apostles time, by emboldning them to eat of
things suspected for unlawful. Nor can we d^ubt b^^ many i^ (...) time have
made Scruple of matters enjoined by lawful Authority, only from the Example of
others whom they ^.
yet we should always have an especial Care, that we embolden not others, (who
have not the like Motives, or cannot be so well Persuaded to do the like, by
our Example. For so we may commit the self same Sin, which they that were
strong in Faith did, by causing others to eat such Meats, as they either made
Scruple of before they eat, or else were upbraided by then Consciences after
they had eaten: And (as I intimated before) unless Discobedience be upon
evident, and well grounded Resolutions, it is as dangerous a Sin as a man can
practice, and of all Sins that are, it is most properly said to be (...) not of
Faith, Seeing Faith and Obedience (amongst all other Virtues) are of most
strict Alliance. Neither is there any breach or defect of Faith, but in some
Disobedience or other; no Sin, but in Disobedience to the Rule of Faith. Which
later (God willing) shall afterward more plainly appear.

4 Lastly, we are diligently to consider the Hopes, or Probabilities of
Goodness either inherent, or consequent to the Actions themselves, which are
to be undertaken.

5 All these Considerations must be put in opposite balance to our Doubts, or
Fears of Evil, whether inherent or consequent to the same Actions, or Matters
enjoined, if we were left to our own Choice; or to the Probabilities, or
Jealousies, which we may have, that the Form of public Command is contrary to
Gods Law. Although for Doubts or Scruples conceived out of private dislike to
the things enjoined only because we see no express Warrant for them out of
Scripture, or because they go against our Consciences: we need not so much to
oppose former Considerations to over sway them, as seek to extirpate them. For
after the interposition of Authority, we may rather suspect that these doubts
are not of Faith, but of Humor, unless we can derive them from some
Opposition, betwixt the public Edicts injoyning Obedience, and the Law of God,
which must be presumed to Countenance, as long as it does not Contradict,
Superiors Injuctions, because it gives Authority and Commission to make them.
Every Doubt, or Scruple, that such Edicts are formally or directly Contrary to
Gods Law, is not sufficient to deny Obedience unto them: nor do Spiritual
Governors, in demanding Obedience to such as their Inferiors suspect to be
against Gods Law, oppose Human Authority to Divine, or desire men to Obey Them
rather then God, as some frivolously have Objected. Indeed the least
Probability or Suspicion of Disobeying God, should make us refuse to Obey Man,
in case our Disobedience unto man redounded only to Man, and not to God. But in
as much as Christ has said He that bears You, hears Me, Disobedience unto
Spiritual governors is Disobedience unto Christ, yea unto God. And therefore
Obedience may not be denied unto such, but upon great and weighty Motives, and
serious Examination of such Reasons, as move us to think, that their Edicts are
contrary, or opposite to Gods Laws. Otherwise we should prefer a conjectural
Conceit, or Surmise of Obeying God rather then Man, before a greater
Probability of Obeying God by Obeying Man. For it is certain in general, that
men in Spiritual Authority should be Obeyed, and that in Obeying Them we Obey
God: but uncertain and conjectural, (according to our Supposition) whether in
this particular they should be disobeyed, and therefore uncertain, whether God,
by our denial of Obedience, should be Disobeyed or Obeyed.

6 ^
Albeit I must confess, there must a difference be put betwixt the immediate
and direct disobeying of Gods express Laws, resulting from Obedience unto Man's
Laws that are opposite unto them; and the disobeying of Gods Laws mediately or
by consequence; that is, by disobeying Men's Laws, whose Authority is derived
from them. As if a private man should Obey a public Magistrate commanding him,
or his Pastor persuading him, under some fair pretense to tell a lie, or
prejudice his neighbor by false reports, he does immediately and directly
Disobey the ninth Commandment by thus Obeying Man. And this Sin may justly seem
greater, then his that should deny Obedience to public Authority in such
Matters, as are by it commended unto him for Good, and as much tending unto
Gods Glory as the former did to his Dishonor; but yet such as the party
denying Obedience is not so persuaded of, nor has any such particular
express, or immediate Law of God for doing this, as the other had for not
doing the former. This later then disobeyes Gods Law, which commands Obedience
to Authority in lawful matters; but not so directly, and immediately, as the
former did the ninth Commandment. Wherefore the former Sins are worse in their
kind; the worst of them is worse then the worst of the later; the least of the
former, worse then the least of the later kind: Hard to determine what Degrees
of fear, lost we should, ^yobeyng: ans Law, ^ boy Gods I a^^t immediately,
ought ^ ill fear of disobeying Man's Laws, whose Authority in general is from
Gods.
but in what degree or proportion they are worse is hard to define, and
therefore a very difficult point to determine, what degrees of probabilities, or
what Measure of Fear, lest we should disobey Gods Laws immediately, and
directly, by Obeying, Man's that seem opposite unto them, should oversway our
general certainty, that Gods Deputies on earth are to be Obeyed, or our
Habitual Inclination to Christian Obedience grounded hereon. Most certain we
are, that they must be Obeyed in all lawful cases or where their Laws are not
opposite unto Gods: and if we were certain, that theirs were contrary to Gods
Laws, we are as certain, by the Doctrine of Faith that they should be
disobeied. But when we doubt whether their degrees be against Gods Laws, we
cannot but doubt, and doubting Fear, lest we should disobey God directly in
Obeying them. And by the former Reasons, it is evident, that if the doubt were
equal on both sides; that is, were it as probable that their Commands are
against Gods as not: we were bound in Conscience not to Obey them; because we
should commit a greater Sin in Obeying them, if they were indeed opposite, then
we should in disobeying them, supposing they were not opposite or contrary to
Gods Laws. For in the one Case we should Disobey Gods laws directly and
immediately: in the other only mediately, and by consequence. Now of two Evils
equally probable, the less must be adventured upon, and the greater more
eschewed.

7 Yet Sometimes by disobeying Man's In unctious we may d^ Gods Laws both me^
and immediately.
oft-times again it may fall out, that the things commanded by public
Authority, may be in themselves very Good, and commanded, at least in their
universal, by some particular Law of God. As if a Spiritual Governor, should
in the name of Christ command, or adjure a man (otherwise backward, and fearing
the face of great men) to witness the truth for his poor Neighbors Good: If
Obedience in this Case were denied, both Gods particular Commandment should be
immediately and directly transgressed, and that general Law also be
transgressed by consequence, which commands Obedience to Gods Ministers, or
Ambassadors. And it is all one, whether the matter enjoyed be actually known
for such as I have said, unto the Party denying Obedience: or might have been
known upon due examination, and supposal of his former Obedience to his Pastor
in other points. The further prosecution of these matters I leave unto the
learned, that purposely write of Jurisdiction; Whereof by Gods assistance,
according to the talent which God has given us, in the Article of the
Catholic Church. It may suffice, for our present purpose, to have showed, that
it is not every Doubt, or Scruple of the Unlawfulness of Superiors Commands,
that can warrant denial of Obedience to them: and that all Inferiors are bound
to a sober, diligent, and unpartial Examination of their own Hearts, and
Consciences: to a resolute denial, or abandoning of their own Affections, or
desires, that they may be more fit to discern the Truth it self, and more
sincerly weigh the Consequence of their Superiors Admonitions, before they can
plead the Liberty of Conscience, for rejecting them, or appealing from them.

8 Whether any such Opposition, as I have spoken of, can probably be found
between any express Law of God, and our Churches public Injunctions of such
Rites and Ceremonies, as many painful Laborers in Gods Harvest have made
scruple of, or whether such scruples have been first conceived upon probable
discovery of such Opposition, after such serious and due Examination, I leave
it to their Consciences that have made, or do make them: beseeching God for the
Good of his Church, and his Glory sake to inspire many of their Hearts but with
this Cogitation; Whether were more likely, That they themselves should commit
any Act of Insidelity or Popery, by continuance in their Pastoral charge, upon
such terms as many of their religious and learned Brethren do: or whether
Atheism and Insidelitie should increase abundantly throughout this Land by
their silence. Many of them I know have held the things enjoined not absoutely
evil, but suspicions, occasions of evil. And could we in such Cases unsually
take but half that pains, in seeking to prevent the particular evils, which
public Acts, (we fear) may occasion, as we do in censuring them for
inconsiderate, or occasions of evil, or finally, as we do in breeding
Jealousies of their Unlawfulness: the evils which we fear, would not fall out
half so fast, as by this means they do; besides that, the Unity of Faith should
always be faster kept, in the stricter Bond of Love; and true Obedience in
things essentially Good, and necessary for the preservation of Gods Church,
would be more plentiful and cheerful.

9 But my Purpose in this place was, only to search out the Limits of true
Obedience unto Spiritual Authority in general, so far as it concerns the
rectifying of their Faith, or edification in Manners, who are to be governed
and instructed by it. None of them can justly pretend, (ordinarily) any scruple
That the Goodness of Obedience, by our Apostles Rule, (whatsoever is not of
Faith is Sin) ought to move men unto such conditional Assent and Obedience unto
their Pastors as has been mentioned.
of such consequence as Inferior Ministers may. If they could but duly
consider, and unpartially esteem the Goodness which accompanies Obedience
(which is better then sacrifice) and the evil of Disobedience, (which is as the
Sin of Witchcraft) these two laid together would be more then equivalent to any
evil that Laymen, or Inferiors, usually conceive in such Actions, as they
deny Obedience in unto their Pastors. Nay in this unbelieving Age, wherein it
is more to be Complemental then Religious, it is thought an answer good enough,
so it be complementally performed unto their Pastors: We would do as you
Advise, or Enjoin us, in Christ's Name, if we certainly knew that it were
Christ's Will, or agreeable to Gods Word. Whereas in truth, in giving such
Answers, when neither they certainly know, nor are careful to learn, whether
their Advise be contrary to Gods Word or no, they sin directly against
Christian Faith, advancing their own Humors above Gods Word, which commands
Obedience unto Pastors, preferring the Liberty of their unruly Wills before the
safety of their Consciences. And it is preposterous to plead Ignorance of Gods
Will before them, whose Instructions therein they are bound duly to Hear, and
hearing to Obey, until they can light on better, or find them false, upon
serious and due examination: that is, They must Obey them not absolutely and
irrevocably, but with Limitation and Caution. And questionless if men did
infallibly Believe, or absolutely from their hearts Obey, that which they
undoubtedly know to be Gods Will: they would never make question, but that, for
which they have Presumptions that it is part of Gods Will, or that, which is
commended unto them for his Will, by such as he has appointed to be Messengers
of the same, should be conditionally Believed and without caution Obeyed,
especially when it is delivered solemnly upon deliberation, and premeditation,
or out of that place whence he has appointed them to learn his Will. Did not
Priests (as the Proverb is) forget that ever they were Clerks, or such as take
themselves for great proficients, that they were sometimes Novices in the
School of Christ; they might remember how they came unto that absolute and
infallible Belief of those Christian Principles, by which they hope for
Salvation, by entertaining this conditional Belief, which we speak of, and by
yielding like Obedience unto Divine Truths, now fully, but at the first
imperfectly, known for such. And albeit such general Articles of Christian
Faith, as are necessary for all to Believe, neither increase, nor diminish
their Number: yet if we descend unto the Diversity of men's Estates and
Callings, and Difference of Time and Place: Christian Faith receives perpetual
increase, not only in its proper Strength, or as we say by way of Intention,
but in extent also unto many particulars, either directly contained (though not
so easy to be discerned) as essential parts under the former general
Principles, or else annexed unto them collaterally as limbs or borders.
Besides, all Christian Duties, or Matters of Practice, are not promiscuously
fir for every Time or Place, but must be severally proportioned to their
diversity. Again, the same duties, (I mean of the same kind) must be performed
in different measure, according to the different exigence of Time, Place,
Persons, or other Occurrents. In all these and many more respects is this
conditional Assent, and Obedience unto Pastors most necessary. And ere men can
retain steadfastly that which is best, they must make trial of all, or many
things of different kinds: and yet trial of Spiritual Medicines without
Spiritual Physicians prescripts, is so much more dangerous to ordinary men's
Souls, then like trial of Physick-conclusions is to their Bodies, by how much
such men are more ignorant of the state of their Souls, then of their Bodies.
The necessity and use of what has been delivered concerning Obedience in
general, will appear in sundry points to be discust hereafter. In respect of
which (especially of that point concerning the manner, how we may know the
Sense of Scriptures, and that concerning the nature of Christians Faith) some
further unfolding of this Conditional Assent and Obedience will be likewise
necessary.

CAP. IX.
Of the Nature, Use, Conditions, or Properties of Conditional Assent or
Obedience.

1 THe first step in the way to Life, is from this Infallible Ground of Nature;
Whatsoever God has revealed concerning Matters of Man's Salvation, is most
True, and by all means to be Obeyed. This Principle All Men absolutely capable
of Reason, acknowledging a God, do Believe: and from their absolute Belief
hereof they yield a conditional Obedience, and Reverence unto those Books which
we call Scripture. From the trial of whose Truth, we rise a step or degree
higher, and undoubtedly acknowledge Certain General Principles contained in
Scripture, (without whose Belief no man ordinarily can be saved) for the
Oracles of God, or Divine Revelations: and unto them we yield absolute
Obedience. This second step brings men within the Lists, or Borders of
Christianity, where no Christian man is to set up his Rest. Even the meanest
that bears that Name, once come to years of discretion, or capable of
Instruction, must hold on his Progress still, thus resolving with himself:
Though I must be as a Child for Innocence, yet not in knowledge of Gods Will:
A shame it were I should always be a Babe in that Profession, which of All is
only Necessary; a (...) should accustom my self to Milk, for this were to
nourish unexpert (...) in the Word of Righteousness. A Christian I was from my
Cradle, and now as (...) a Christian as a Man: but ^
strong Meat is fit for them that are of Age, which have (or should have) their
W^^s exercised through long (...), to ^ (...) Good from Evil: ^
Not the fundamental Principles of Christian Religion only, without which
none can be saved: not be that has professed Christi^ but an hour. These are
Grounds which once surely lai^, must (as the Apostle speaks) be ^
left that we may be led on to perfection, not always ha^mering upon the
foundation of Repentance from ^^ad works, of Faith toward God, or of (...), of
Laying on of hands, of the Resurrection from the dead, and of eternal
judgment, but seaking to Build upon these, whatsoever is b^^ating present
times or seasons, (...) may make our Ele^^ion sure. And th^r, who laid the
former foundations (...) (...) heart, seek yet my farther Edification in many
Points, of whose Truth (...) Conscience as yet has no such firm Persuasion or
lively taste as it now has of the former: but is so affected toward these
later, as it was to the other before better acquaintance with them. Should I
for this Reason, forthwith deny Obedence to my Instructors? or withdraw Assent
from matters proposed by them? God forbid: For he has Comman 'ed all, not
ex^epting me, to Obey their Overseers in the Lord* Must we Obey them whilst
they Plant, and may we Disobey them whilst they Water? how then can I expect,
that God should give Increase unto that faith which they have planted in my
heart? heretofore I trusted them, and I found their Sayings true, even the
Oracles of the Living God: All which I so esteem, as I had rather (...) this
present World, than utterly disclaim any, which upon like trial, might prove
such. What if I know not this Particular to be such? I may in good time, be as
well Persuaded of it, as of the former; if so I will vouchsafe to make like
trial of it, by sincere religious Obedience.

2 Nor does the greater steadfastness, or Infallibility of the Point believed,
necessarily exact either Obedience of an higher Nature, or more intention, or
Alacrity in the Act, than may without Offense be performed, unto some other
Points of Doctrine less Infallible, or less evident to their Consciences, who
must Obey. Infallibility of it self exacts only a more full and absolute Title
over our Obedience, than Probabilities or Presumptions can expect. For that
which is infallibly, and absolutely Believed for a Divine Truth, exacts such
Obedience, (both for Quality and Degree,) as is conformable to the Nature of
the thing proposed, without all Limitation, Condition, or Reservation: that is
Perpetual and absolute Allegiance. That which is but probably, or conditionally
assented unto as Divine Truth, (whatsoever the Nature of the thing proposed,
the End or Consequence pretended, or Exigences of other circumstances be,) can
exact only conditional, or cautionarie Obedience: yet Obedience, for the
quality, suitable to the Nature of the thing proposed, and for the Alacrity,
or Intention of the Act* proportionable to the End or Consequence pretended,
and avouched by Gods Ambassadors. So that if they commend it unto us, as sit
to be entertained in some higher rank of Goodness, or as most necessary for
the present time, albeit we our selves do not apprehend the same as expressly
commanded by God: yet may we perform Obedience, both as sincere for the
Quality, and entire for Degree, as we do unto some other things, which we
steadfastly Believe to be commanded in Gods Word. But we must not tender our
Obedience under the same style or title. Absolute Obedience, of what kind
soever, we may not yield unto it, until it be absolutely known for Gods Will.
When it is once known for Such, we must absolutely yield up the same Obedience,
which before was but conditionally yielded: as a man may pay the same sum
upon caution, before he be thoroughly persuaded of the demanders Right unto it,
which after his Right be fully known, he paies absolutely. In this Case, these
four things must be considered.

3 First, the Assurance or Probability which we can have, that the Thing
proposed Four Points to be considered for the rectifying or right framing of
our Assent unto Truths proposed.
is Gods Word. Which sometimes may be grounded upon Reasons, (either
communicated unto us by our Pastor or others, or conceived by our selves,) as
well as upon Authority: sometimes all the Assurance, which men of less
Capacity can have, is only from the Pastors Authority. Secondly, the Title,
or pretended Nature of the Truth Proposed. Thirdly, the Act or Quality of
Obedience. Fourthly, the Manner or limitation of our Obedience.

4 The Act or quality of our Obedience, (so we be more probably persuaded that
it is Gods Word, than otherwise, or know nothing to the contrary) must be
proportioned to the Title or Nature of the thing proposed, which is commended
unto us as a spiritual Good. So that our Obedience must be Religious and
Spiritual, not merely Civil: although our best Motive, why we hold it to be a
Divine Oracle, or Spiritual Good, be the Authority of our Teacher, which is
but Humane; But now he exacts not Obedience to His own Authority, but unto
Gods Word, (as he affirms:) which because we know is Divine, therefore we must
yield religious Obedience to it; and therefore religious, albeit conditional
Obedience unto this Precept, which we probably know to be Divine, and assent
unto Conditionally as such. The Act of our Obedience in this particular, must
proceed from the same Habit, from which our Acts of Obedience unto such Truths,
as we infalliblie Believe for Divine, do: for even this very Act, is performed
primarilie and absolutely to Gods Word in general, unto which we owe Religious
and Spiritual Obedience: and unto this Particular (enjoined by our Pastor) only
secondarilie, and upon supposition that it is Part of Gods Word. So as if the
Particular by him enjoined, should in the event prove no part of Gods Word: yet
obeying it only upon the former Motives, it might be truly said, we had
obeyed Gods Word, not it; as he that shows kindness to a Stranger, upon
presumption that he is a Brother or Alliance of his dear and familiar Friend,
albeit he were mistaken herein, may be said to have done a friendly Office,
rather to his known Acquaintance, for whose sake he used the Stranger kindly,
than unto the Stranger himself thus kindly used upon a mistake. But albeit the
Quality be such, as Gods Word absolutely known requires: yet the Manner of our
Obedience must be limited by the degrees of Probability, or moral Certainty,
which we have of this Particular, that it is Gods Oracle. Where the
Probabilities are less, and the Inducements for Belief of this Particular
weaker, there the condition of our Assent, and reservation of our Obedience
must be more express: that is, we must stand further off from yielding
absolute, and be more inclined to renounce this present conditional Obedience
(which we yet perform) upon lesser Motives to the contrary, then we would, if
our Probabilities for Believing it were greater. Where the Probabilities, or
Inducements for Belief of this particular, are greater and stronger, there we
must the more incline unto absolute and ^cable Obedience, or Assent unto the
same Particular: and be more unreadie, or unwilling to recall our Assent, or
renounce our Obedience, but upon greater and more evident Reasons. Only there
we are to six our Belief absolutely; Only there we may safely, undoubtedly,
and fully pass over our ^ull and absolute Obedience unto it, without all
condition, limitation o^ or reservation: when the Truth of it shall be as fully
confirmed, and manifested to our Consciences, as the others are, unto which we
have formerly yielded absolute* Obedience, without appeal or reservation: or
when we can as clearly dis^ and as steadfastly Believe, the Consonancie of this
Particular with the formers, as we can the formers with Gods Word.

5 And whereas we said before, that the only Motives which some men have to
Believe the Sense and meaning of sundry Doctrines, (necessary perhaps unto them
in particular at some seasons, when God shall call them to some extraordinary
Point of Obedience) might be the Authority of their Teachers: this Authority
may be greater or less, according to the Quality of the Minister or
Spiritual Governor. As the World goes now adays, this Function is committed
to some, in whose Mouth the Word of God, or any good Doctrine, may rather seem
to lose its Virtue and Power, than ^is any way bind men to Obedience, unless
besides his Commendation of what he proposes, they have other Motives to
persuade them, that it is Gods Word, or wholesome Doctrine. If the Minister,
who should carry Gods Message, be such a one as Sir Thomas Moore jested upon,
that he would not for any good hear him say the Creed, le^t he should take it
for a Lie commi^ out of his Mouth: It is doubtful what the People should do in
such a Case, albeit he exact Obedience upon their Vow in Baptism, if they have
no other Motive but his Authority. Yet for all this, it is not best to be too
bold in contemning his Admonitions, or Adjurations, unless they be apparantlie
False. In this Case, others more sincere and skillful, or such as have
Authority to examine his Doctrine, should be consulted, His may not be
neglected in all particulars, upon a general prejudice of his lewdness or
simplicity. For though his life be bad, yet may his Meditations for that
present, wherein he publicly speaks, be good and fruitful unto them, so they
will yield due Obedience to his Doctrine. And although a man should know a
Constable, or some greater Officer, that pretends Commission from the King, to
be a notorious lying Knave, or treacherous Companion: yet were it not the
safest way to tell him he lied, when he charged him to Obey him in the Kings
Name, nor to make a scoff of his Authority, or reply he would not believe he
had any, because he might abuse himself, and it, at other times: If so he do at
this time, he may answer it before his betters hereafter: but in the mean
while, it were best for the Party commanded to Obey him, until he be certain,
that he did either fain Authority, where he had none, or else abuse it in this
particular. He that should yield Obedience, being thus (perhaps wrongfully)
charged in the Kings Name, (so he yield it for this Reason, and upon this
Condition:) shall not be thought guilty of disloyalty, albeit he be hereby
brought to commit some fact, di(...) to his Majesty, or public Peace. For the
fault in this Case, must be returned upon the Author: if so the Party obeying
did not know it to be simply unlawful, and against the Kings Peace, or had no
opportunity of consulting other public Officers, but has been abused, by the
craft and ^unning of the other, who has concealed his end, intention, or other
circumstance which made the Fact unlawful. It is enough to disclaim his former
Obedience when he knows the Truth. And if Officers should not be Obeyed in the
Kings Name, until men sought the Truth, whether they had a lawful Commission,
or but a counterfeit, or whether they did not go beyond their Commission: the
Kings Majesty should want a great deal of necessary Service, and the
Commonweal be at an ill pass for continuance of public Peace. Did most men
fear God, as much as Men; or the Son of man, the Judge of quick and dead, as
much as earthly Judges: they would not so often withdraw their neck from the
yoke of Christian Obedience, (being charged to undertake it in Christ's Name,
and as they would answer it at that dreadful Day,) upon such silly Exceptions
against the Meannesse, Baseness, or Lewdness of the Ministers person. Be he
as they list to make him for his Life, it has pleased God to make him his
Messenger, his Officer to demand Obedience of them. And shall it serve their
turn to say, we will not Believe that God sent him with this Message, or sure
he goes beyond his Commission: when they know nothing to the contrary; but
only will take Occasion from his Person, to discredit his Doctrine, if it
control them in the pursuit of worldly Affairs? And God knows for whose sake
it is: we all may fear, it is especially for the Infidelity and Disloyalty of
this People toward him, and their disobedience to his Messengers, that he
sends them such idle, foolish, or lewd Pastors, as they have in many places.
Because the Laity of this Land are so prone and headstrong to cast off
Christ's Yoke, and to deny due Obedience to his Faithful Ministers: he
therefore sets such Watchmen over them in many places, as they shall have no
lust to Obey in any thing that they shall propose unto them, but harden their
hearts in Infidelity and Disobedience. Albeit I should prosecute this Point a
great deal further, I should not much digress from my main Purpose and drift,
which God he knows is no other, but to bring home silly Souls from yielding
this blind Obedience to the Roman foreign Yoke. For the diverting of which from
this Lands and Peoples necks, I know no better Means, than to take up Christ's
Yoke upon us. For questionless, this open ^alapert scoffing Disobedience to
all Ecclesiastic Power now openly professed by the meanest, and countenanced
by many great ones of the Laity, is the sin, which to all that know Gods
Judgments, or have been observant to look into the days of our Visitation,
cries lowdest in the Almighties ears, (more loud by much than Friars, Monks,
and Jesuits Prayers do,) for Gods Vengeance upon this Land: for vengeance to
be executed by no other than our sworn, inveterate, malicious Enemies; by no
other Grievances, than by the doubled grievances of the long enraged Romanists
Iron-yoak, which is now prepared for us ten times more heavy and irksome, than
was that which our Forefathers have born. It were hard to determine, whether
Atheis^ and Infidelity amongst professed Protestants, or Superstition and
Idolatry amongst the Papists, have more increased thorowout this Land in later
years: or, whether the Romish Priests and Jesuits have been more industrious,
and earnest to sow the Seeds of the one, than sundry which oppose themselves
most eagerly against them, have been to Foster and cherish the other: both
perhaps, (unto their seeming) for a good Intent: neither intending either
Mischief expressly and directly: For so the reluctation of Conscience would have
abated their Endeavors: nor could Idolatry, or Infidelity have grown so fast,
had their Foster-fathers seen them in their proper shape. But both have masked
in sheeps clothing, both had their faces covered with zeal.

6 Sure, if there be degrees of Malignancie in Hellish Chosts, the most potent
Factions of most Malignant Spirits, thorowout the Infernal Anarchie, (the one
upon emulation of the others Might or Abilities in doing Evil) strive for Glory
by doing greatest Mischief in this Land. The one part has made choice of their
fairest Means, by soliciting, partly desperate Discontents, partly, silly
Souls (under pretense of Ancient Catholic Religion) to Superstition, and
Idolatry: the other, by driving proud and disobedient Minds, upon their
deadly dislike of Popish Tyranny, to cast off the Yoke of Christian Obedience,
and under pretense of Christian Liberty, to rush headlong into Hypocrisy,
Atheism, or Infidelity. For even where the best and most industrious Ministers
are, thorowout this Land, how scarce is this Christian Obedience to be found?
Let the Pastors skill and Sincerity be never so great, let him tell his flock,
for whose Souls he must answer, that they must do Thus and Thus, if they will
be saved: they can be diligent perhaps to hear him, and say he spoke exceeding
well. [i. e.] Very ill of others (as they conjecture) but not of them or their
Adherents: If for his good Lessons in the Pulpit he have good words returned at
Table, he sees the best fruits of his labor. For if one of his Flock shall
have an advantage against his Neighbor or have picked a Quarrel with his
Lease; or let a Gentleman be disposed to put off his Tenants, or inhance their
Rents to their utter undoing: let any, gengle, or mean, have but good hope to
make his own great Gain by some others Loss: Here if we try him, and charge
him upon his Allegiance unto Christ to remit his Hold, to let go all Advantage,
and be good unto his Fellow Servants, or poor Brother, these are matters the
Minister must meddle no more with than an other man, the Law can determine
whether he do Right, or Wrong, and this Case belongs properly unto the Lawyer.
As if the Power of Gods Spirit, or Authority of his Ministers, did consist
only in Words, and required no other Obedience, than a formal speculative
Assent unto their general Doctrine, not a full Resignation of men's Wills, or
hearty Submission of Affections, unto such Rules as they shall prescribe, for
the preservation of a good and upright Conscience in particular Actions, or
intercourse of Humane Affairs. Or if one of a thousand will be so good as to
grant that he is to Obey the Precepts of Christ, before the Customs of our
Common Law, or other Civil Courts: yet even the best of such, when it comes to
Points of private Commodity, will dispense with his Pastor, and reply: I
would do as you admonish me, if I saw any express Command for it in Gods Word,
or any evident Necessity that should bind me to renounce that Right, which Law
does give me: but for ought I can perceive, I may prosecute my Right in this
present Case, with a safe Conscience, and you do not know all particular
Circumstances, which belong unto this matter; if you did, or were in my Case, I
am persuaded you would be of my Mind. This although it be the only shelter,
under which the Infidelity of later Ages takes its rest, the only Dormitory
wherein Hypocrisy sleeps profoundly, and never dreams of further Danger: yet
is it a most silly Excuse, and shameless Apology, in the judgment of any
that knows, or knowing rightly esteems, the Principles of Christianity. For,
suppose thou see no Evidence, that Christ has commanded thee to confess his
Name in this particular, does the law lay any necessity upon thee, to make thee
prosecute thy supposed Right? If it did charge thee upon pain of Death so to
do, thou have some pretense to Obey it; albeit thou should fear him more,
that could Condemn thee, and the Interpreters of it, to everlasting Death: but
the Law does leave it to thy Choice, whether thou will use the Benefit of it,
or no: and thy Pastor upon penalty of incurring Christ's displeasure, commands
thee, that thou use it not. Thou reply, Thou see no Evidence that Christ
Commands thee. But do thou absolutely and infallibly know, that he does not
call thee at this time, to try thy Obedience in this Particular? If thou can
out of sincerity of Heart, and Evidence of Truth, fully inform thy Conscience
in this Negative (so the End of thy proceedings be good,) thou may be the
bolder to disclaim thy Pastors Summons. If thou can not, how will thou
answer thy Judge, when thou shall appear before him, why thou out of the
Stubbornness of thy Heart, did more respect thy private Gain, than his
heaviest displeasure? For suppose thy hope of Gain were great, (as it is
usually to such as thou art, more great than certain) yet cannot the
greatness, and certainty of it, countervail the least danger of incurring His
Wrath, nor could the certainty of worldly Gain counterpoise, much less
oversway, the least surmise or probability of incurring thy Souls destruction,
unless thy Mind had been set more on Gold, than upon thy God, more inclined to
private Commodity and Self-love, than unto Christ thy Redeemer. Or shall thy
answer stand for good in his sight, when thou shall say unto his Messenger: It
is more then I know, that Christ Commands me? Then should the damned be
justified at the Day of Judgment, when they shall truly reply, they knew not
that ever Christ did supplicate unto them sub forma panperis. Most of them, we
may safely swear, had less Probabilities to Believe this in their life time,
than thou have now to persuade thee of this particular: although thy Pastors,
Authority, and frequent Admonitions were set aside; which make thee so much
the more Inexcusable. For thou might have known by him, that God had
Commanded thee as much, unless thy bad Desires had made thee Blind. But
neither shall theirs, or thy Ignorance herein help. For Ignorance which is bred
of bad Desires, corrupt Affections, or greedy Appetites, brings forth hardness
of Heart, and Infidelity: so that seeing, thou shall not see, and hearing, thou
shall not hear, nor understand the Warnings for thy Peace, because thou have
formerlie shut thine ears at thy Pastors Admonitions, or Raged at his just
Reproof. And the Law of God binds thy Soul, upon greater penalty, and better
hopes, than all Laws in the World besides could bind thy Body, even upon of
everlasting Life, and penalty of everlasting Death, to lay aside all
Self-love, all worldly Desire, for the finding out of the true sense and
meaning of it, as well as to Obey it, when thou know it. And when any point
of Doctrine or Practice, either in general or particular, is commended to thee
by thy Pastor, Gods Word does bind thee to search, with all Sobriety, and
Modesty, the Truth and force of all Motives, Inducements, or Probabilities
which he shall suggest unto thee; all private respect laid aside, lest thou
become a partial Judge of evil thoughts: and if thou can not find better
Resolution, it binds thee to rely upon his Authority. And even in this again,
Gods Word (so perfect a Rule is it) does rule thy thoughts, to discern the
Fidelity, Sincerity, or Authority of thy Teacher.

Unto such as approve themselves, as Saint Paul did 2 Cor. 4. 2.
to every man's Conscience in the sight of God, or to such as make not a
Merchandise of the Word of God, but speak in Christ as of sincerity, and as of
God in the sight of God: 2 Cor. 2 17.
Christian People are bound to yield greater Obedience. Generally, unto such
as, in their Lives, express those Characters of faithful Dispensers, set down
by Saint Paul, and other Penmen of Gods Word, every Auditor is bound to yield
greater Obedience, than unto others, in Points wherein he has no other Motives
to Believe, beside his Pastors Authority. For this is a dictate of common
reason, and cannot but command the Assent of every sanctified Mind; That such
Men are most likely to have the Meaning of Gods Spirit, which walk according to
Gods Spirit, and seek not their own Gain, Glory, or pleasure, but Christ's
Glory, his Will, and peoples Good: and such again are most likely to use
greatest sincerity in delivering the Truth, which they know, without partiality
or respect of persons. Again, men are bound (caeteris paribus) to Believe them
best, and Obey them most, of whose skill, and sincerity in dispensing the
Mysteries of faith, they have had most comfortable, and spiritual Experience.
For the Article of Gods providence binds us hereto, and wills us to reverence
our Fathers in Christ, either such as (by his Word) first begot faith, or
nourished it in us, more then others.

Thus much concerning this point, I have thought good to insert in this place,
because the true and sincere Practice of Obedience, according to that measure
of Truth, or Belief which men have, though but imperfect, is the excellentest
Means, for attaining the clear sight of Divine Truth, and that perfect Measure
of sanctifying Belief, which in this life can be looked for, as shall (God
willing) afterward appear.

CAP. X.
Wherein this Conditional Belief differs from the Romans implicit Faith.
That the one is, the other, not subordinate to Gods Word, or Rule of Faith.

1 AS this Opinion of conditional Assent unto Divine Truths, not absolutely
known for such, holds the Mean betwixt the two Extremes, or contrary Errors
above mentioned: So is this conditional Assent it self a Mean, betwixt that
absolute Belief, which all acknowledge to be necessary in some principal
Points of Christian Faith, and that implicit Belief, which the Romish Church
exacts in all points whatsoever. Our Assent unto many Articles of Faith, is
actually and expressly absolute. The implicit Belief of the Romanists is but
potentially, or rather vertually, and implicitly absolute: This conditional
Belief, hitherto mentioned, not so much as potentially, much less implicitly,
or virtually absolute. That properly is Believed by an implicit Faith, which
is not actually, and expressly Assented unto in the particular: What (...) Faith
is.
but yet is so essentially and immediately contained in some general Article,
or Point of Faith absolutely or expressly Believed, that this Particular
likewise is Assented unto in gross, whilst we Assent to it, and may be as
absolutely as expressly, and distinctly Assented unto, as the General, when it
is once explicated and unfolded. In this Sense we say, the Conclusion is
implicitly contained in the Premises, the Corollarie in the Theorem, or the
immediate Consequent in his necessary Antecedent. For he that grants One of
these absolutely, must upon the same terms grant the Other, at the first
proposal of it unto him. But this conditional, or reservative Belief may be of
such Points, as are not certainly, and infallibly contained in any Principle of
Faith, absolutely, expressly, actually, or infallibly acknowledged; much less
so essentually, and immediately contained in any, that a man cannot absolutely
grant it, but he must absolutely Believe them. And albeit off-times, they may
be infallibly deduced from known undoubted Principles of Faith, yet is not the
deduction so immediate, as can be made clear, and evident to all Capacities, at
least not at the first sight, without any further increase of Knowledge in
Spiritual Matters. And before the deduction be made as evivident, and
apprehended asinfallible, as are the general Articles whence they are deduced,
the Particulars deduced from them may not be so infallibly and absolutely
Believed, as the Generals are. The Papists, besides their Explicit Belief of
some few main Points, demand an Implicit Belief of as many Particulars as the
Church shall propose: so as whatsoever the Church shall propose, with them once
proposed, admits no conditional Belief: all must be Absolute, albeit the
parties Believing cannot discern any necessary, or probable deduction of the
particulars, from general Points absolutely and expressly believed. It is enough
that they know them to be proposed by the Church. For once Believing,
Whatsoever the Church says is most Infallible, (which is the main Article of
Roman Faith) no man can deny any particular proposed by it to be infallible,
more then he can deny the Conclusion for certain, after he has granted the
Premises for such. Consequently to these Positions, they make the Visible
Church the Rule and A Speech well beseeming the servants of the great Whore.
Mistress of men's Faith, as they speak. For albeit a man at this present think
otherwise of many Points of greatest Moment, then the Church or Pope does, or
though he think not at all of many things, which they in time may propose unto
him: yet after they have proposed, either a contrary Opinion to that which his
Conscience tells him is Gods Word, or a new and strange Position, which he never
thought of, he must without more ado, Believe both absolutely and expressly, and
so finally, retract, extend, enlarge, abridge, direct and frame his Faith,
according to that Rule or Standard, which they shall set him. Hence (God
willing) shall appear That the Faith of modern Papists cannot be resolved into
the Scriptures or the first Truth.
the Madness of some great Scholars among them, who holding the Church to be
such a Rule of Faith, would persuade us, (if we would be so simple) that their
last Resolution of Faith is, not into the Churches Authority, but into the
Scripture. For nothing can be resolved beyond it rule, and to make the Churches
authority such an absolute, authentic, unquestionable rule of faith, as the
Papists do, and withal to seek the resolution of any point of faith further
then it, or to derive it from Scripture, does argue such a medley of Folly and
Impiety, as if some gullish Gentleman, desirous to prove the Antiquity of his
House, should draw his Pedigree from Adams great Grandfather, and yet hold the
Records of Moses for most undoubted and true, which affirm Adam to have been
the first Progenitour of all Mankind. Whether they seek to resolve their Faith
into the Scriptures acknowledged by us and them, or into other Unwritten
Revelations, pretended for Divine Truths, their Folly will still appear the
same, so long as they hold that impious and blasphemous Opinion, making the
Churches Authority such a Rule of Faith, as has been said. Their Injuries and
Contumelies unto Gods written Oracles (as has heretofore been intimated) are
especially Two. First, they deny them to be any entire Rule, for the number of
Precepts. Secondly, they make those very Precepts, which are acknowledged for
Divine, insufficient for the establishment of true Faith unto themselves,
without the Churches Authority. We acknowledge them, every way sufficient for
the Edification of Christ's Church in Faith and Manners: and consequently both
to our Positions, and the Truth, we teach, that all Matters of Faith, must be
finally resolved into these Divine written Verities, which for this reason we
acknowledge the only Infallible Rule of Faith: The Meaning of which Assertion
is here to be further explicated, that so the Truth may be maintained against
their Objections.

CAP. XI.
In what Sense we hold the Scriptures to be the Rule of Faith.

1 WHen we affirm, that the Scriptures are the only infallible Rule in matters
of Faith and Christian Obedience, we understand such a Rule in those matters,
as Aristotle's Organon may be said of Logic: supposing it were sound, and free
from all suspicion of Error in every point, and contained in it all the
general and undoubted Principles, from which all true Forms of Argumentation
must be deduced, and into which all must be finally Resolved. To illustrate
this Truth by a known Practice. Our younger Students are bound to yield their
absolute Assent unto Aristotle's Authority, in matters of Logic: but not unto
any Interpreter, that shall pretend it, save only when he shall make evident
unto them, that this was Aristotle's Meaning. And while they so only, and no
otherwise yield their Assent, they yield it wholly and immediately unto
Aristotle, not to the Interpreter, although by his Means they came to know
Aristotle's Meaning; which once known, without any further confirmation of other
Testimony or Authority, commands their Obedience and Assent. But ere they can
fully Assent unto this great Master, or thoroughly perceive his Meaning, they
must conditionally Assent unto their private Tutors, or other Expositors, and
take his Sense and Meaning upon their Trust, and Credit. In like manner (say
we) in all Matters, Doctrines, or Controversies of Faith, and Christian
Obedience, we are bound to yield our Assent, directly, absolutely, and finally
unto the Authority of Scriptures only: not unto any Doctor, Expositor, or
other whosoever he be, that shall pretend Authority out of Scripture over our
Faith, save only when he shall make it clear, and evident unto us, that his
Opinion is the true Meaning of the Scripture. And thus yielding our absolute
Assent unto the Truth explained by him, we yield it not to him, but unto the
Author of Truth, whose Words we hold to be Infallible in whose Mouths soever;
and once known to be His words, they need not the Testimony or Authority of
him, that did bring us to the true Knowledge of them. And before we be brought
to see their Truth with our own eyes, and feel it by our sense, (by the effects
or experiments of it upon our own Souls) we are to limit our Assent and
Obedience, as it is set down before) according to the Probabilities, or
unpartial Inducements, which we have of the Expositors Skill, and Sincerity, in
dispensing Divine Mysteries. And these Motives or Inducements, which we have of
his Skill and Sincerity, must be framed according to the Rules or Precepts of
Scripture, not according to our Affections, or Humors: we may not think him
most to be Believed, that is in highest Place, or has the greatest stroke in
other Affairs. For as the Faith of Christ, so must our Persuasion of the
faithful Dispensers, or skilful Seeds-men of Faith, be had without respect of
persons.

2 If we yield Assent or Obedience unto any Expositor, or other, otherwise then
upon these Conditions and Limitations, then, as we said before, whilst we
yielded absolute Obedience unto his doctrine that persuaded us to true Belief,
because we perceived that which he spoke to be the Word of God, we did not
yield it unto him, but unto Gods Word, delivered and made known unto us by him:
so here again by the same Reason (only inverted) it will evidently follow, that
if we Believe any man's Doctrines or Decisions, to be the Word of God, because
he speaks it, or because we hold his Words to be infallible, we do not truly
and properly Believe the Word of God, (suppose his doctrine were the Word of
God) but his Words and Infallibility only. Hence again it follows, that if we
yield the same absolute and undoubted Assent unto his Authority, which we
would do unto Gods Word immediately known in it self, and for it self; or rely
upon his Infallibility in expounding Gods Word, as fully as he does upon the
Word, (which it is supposed he knows immediately in it self, and for it self:)
by doing thus we rob God of his Honor, giving that unto Man, which is only due
to Him. For the Infallibility of this Teacher has the same Proportion to all
that thus absolutely Believe him, as the Infallibility of the Godhead has
unto him; his Words the same Proportion, to all other men's Faith, that Gods
Word has unto his. Gods Word is the Rule of his and his Words must be the Rule
of all other men's Faith. Or, to speak more properly, God must be a God only to
him, and he a God to all other men.

3 Here it will be demanded, how men, altogether Illiterate, can examine any
Doctrine by Scriptures? In what Sense the Scriptures may be said the Rule of
men's Faith altogether illiterate.
If they cannot Read them, how shall they Examine any thing by them? not
examining the Points of Faith by them, how can they be said to be the Rule of
their Faith? In such a Sense as Aristotle's Works (supposing them only
Authentic, and all his Opposites counterfeits or new-fangles) may be said to
be the Rule of Blind-mens Logic; for albeit they cannot read his works, yet
are they capable of his general and undoubted rules, seeing they have (as well
as other men) a natural faculty of discerning Truth from Falsehood, and can
distinguish betwixt rules derived from the pure Fountain of Truth in that kind;
and Precepts drawn from conjectural, erroneous, and corrupt Surmises of shallow
Brains; if both be distinctly proposed unto them. And the rules of Truth once
fully apprehended and embraced, serve as a Touchstone to discern all
Consequences and Conclusions, which shall be suggested unto them by others: so
as they will admit of nothing for sound and true Logic, but what may be
resolved into the former, or some other Principles, which they can
perspicuously and immediately discern, to have been drawn from the Fountain of
Truth, by the same natural Faculty or Ability, by which they did discern the
former: for the faculty will still be like affected with all Principles, of
like Nature, Use and Perspicuity. In like sort must the first and general
Principles of Faith be derived from Scriptures, (the only pure fountain of
Supernatural Truths) unto all illiterate hearts, by the Ministry of the
learned. For Hearts, though Illiterate, once illuminated by Gods Spirit, are as
apt to discern Spiritual Principles, from falsehood or carnal Conjectures, as
the natural Man is to discern natural Truths, from Errors of the same kind.
And these general and fundamental Principles of Faith, engrafted in their
hearts, serve as infallible rules, for discerning the Consonancie or
Dissonancie of such Particulars, as shall be suggested unto them; as shall (God
willing) hereafter be declared: nor may they without Injury to Gods Spirit or
inward Grace, admit any other precepts into the same rank or society with
these, but either upon evident and distinct deduction from them, or sure
Experiments of their like Spiritual fruit and Use, for the amendment of Life,
and procuring that peace of Conscience, which no Natural Man can conceive, much
less can it be caused by mere Natural precepts. For we suppose (what
afterward will manifest it self) that all Truths necessary for men to Believe,
have a distinct relish from all falsehood, or other unnecessary or superfluous
Truths: and may be known by their fruit, so men will be careful to preserve the
Sincerity of their Spiritual Taste.

4 Gods written Word then, is the only pure Fountain and Rule of Faith: yet not
such immediately unto all as it is written, but the Learned, or Spiritual
Instructors only, whose Hearts and Consciences must be ruled by it, as in all
(...) scriptu.
other spiritual duties, so especially (as they are Instructors) in this; That
they may not commend any Truths, or principles of faith, unto the illiterate,
but such as are expressly contained in Gods written Word, or (at least) are in
substance the self same with these written Truths. If the Unlearned, through
Gods just Judgment, absolutely admit of other principles, and equalize them
with these: such shall lead them into Error, and pervert their faith. If they
doubt of any man's Doctrine, whether it be truly Spiritual, or consonant to the
foundation of faith, they may appeal to Scriptures, as they shall be expounded
to them by others. Finally, they are tied to no visible Company of men, whom
they must under pain of damnation follow: but for their Souls Health, they may
try every Spiritual Physician. If they will be Humorous, they may, but at their
own peril, both for Temporal Punishment in this life, and for Eternal in the
life to come.

5 For conclusion; the Scripture according to our doctrine, and the general
Consent of Reformed Churches, is the only Infallible rule of faith, in both
respects or conditions of a Perfect Rule. First, in that it contains all the
principles of faith, and points of salvation: So that no Visible Church on
earth may commend any doctrine to others, as a doctrine of Faith, unless it be
commended to them for such by the Scriptures, by which every ones doctrine,
that acknowledges God for his Lord, must be examined, as by a Law
uncontrollable. Secondly, in that these principles of faith, are plainly,
perspicuously and distinctly, set down to the Capacities of all that faithfully
follow their practical rules most plain, most perspicuous, and easy, to all
capable of any rule or reason: So that this Sacred Canon needs no Associate, no
Addition of any Authority as equally infallible, nor more perspicuous then it
self, to supply what it wants; only the Ministry of men skilful, and
industrious in the search, or Exposition of it, is to be supposed. And all
these (be they never so excellent and well conversant in them) are unto
Scriptures but as the ordinary Expositors of Classick and Authentic Books are
unto the chief Authors or Inventors of the science contained in them: Supposing
that the first Authors were men of extraordinary and infallible skill, and their
Expositors (as they usually are) but of ordinary Capacity, or Experience in
those faculties.

6 Finally, the Books of Scriptures are to be reputed a more absolute Rule for
all Matters of Faith and Divine Mysteries, then any Books or Writings The
Prerogative of Scriptures, in respect of Faith, above all other Rules, in
respect of Arts or Sciences.
of men are, for natural sciences or secular professions, as in sundry other
Respects, so in This, that they give as more facile, so more infallible
directions, for finding out their true Sense and Meaning, then any other
Writings do, or Writers could have done, who, though present, could not be so
fully Assistant, but cannot so much as afford their presence, to their
Expositours in the search of Truths, rather professed then fully conceived,
much less infallibly taught by them: whereas the Spirit of Truth which first
did dictate, is every where present, always Assistant to such as seriously and
sincerely seek the Truth contained in these Divine Oracles, conducting them
from Knowledge to Knowledge, both by all such Means as Artists have for
increasing their skill, and by other Means extraordinary, such as none in any
other Faculty can have, nor any may hope for in the Search of Scriptures, but
only such as Delight in, and Meditate upon them Day and Night.

SECT. II.
That the pretended Obscurity of Scriptures is no just Exception, why they
should not be acknowledged the absolute Rule of Faith, which is the
Mother-Objection of the Romanist.

CAP. XII.
How far it may be granted the Scriptures are Obscure; with some Premonitions
for the right state of the Question.

1 IT is first to be supposed, that these Scriptures, for whose Sovereignty
over our Souls we plead against the pretended Authority of the Romish Church,
were given by God, for the Instruction of all succeeding Ages, for all sorts of
Men in every Age, for all Degrees, or diverse Measures of his other Gifts in all
several sorts or Conditions of Men. This diversity of Ages, and Conditions of
Men in several Callings, who so well considers, may at the first sight easily
discover our Adversaries Willingness to wrangle in this point: whose usual
practice, (as if they meant to cast a Mist before the weak-sighted Readers
eyes) is, to pick out here and there some places of Scriptures, more Hard and
difficult, then Necessary or requisite to be understood of Every man, perhaps,
of Any man in this Age. The Knowledge of all, or any of which, notwithstanding,
those that live after us, (though otherwise, peradventure, men of far meaner
gifts, then many in this present Age) shall not therefore need to give for lost
or desperate, when they shall be called unto this Search. For God has
appointed, as for every thing else, so for the Revelation of his Word, certain
and peculiar Times and Seasons. Daniel, though full of the Spirit of Prophecy,
and one that during the Reign of Nebuchadnezzar, and Balthazar his son, had (as
it were) continually traveled of Revelations concerning the Estate of Gods
Church, and the affairs of foreign Kingdoms for many generations to come: yet
knew not the approaching Time of his peoples deliverance from Captivity, until
the first year of Darius, son of Ahashuerosh. And this he learned by Books.
Dan. 9. 2.
even in the first year of his Reign, I Daniel understood by Books the number
of the years, whereof the Lord had spoken unto Jeremiah the Prophet, that he
would accomplish seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem. And of his own
Revelation he says: Dan 12. 4.
And Daniel was commanded to shut up his words, and seal up his book unto the
end of the Time, or as some read (unto the appointed Time:) and then many shall
run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased. For at the Time appointed, as
he intimates in the words following, others though no Prophets were to know
more of this Prophecy then the Prophet did himself. Then I heard it, but I
understood it not: then said I, O my Lord what shall be the end of these
things? And he said, Go thy way Daniel: for the words are closed up and sealed
till the end of the Time.

2 The Prophets of later Ages did see Revelations of matters, which had been
hid from the Ancient Seers. And as it fared with them in the Succession of
Visions, immediately inspired from God, not framed in imitation of any
precedent written Word, but to be then first written for posterities
instruction: some saw one Vision, some another, always such were seen by the
present Prophet as most concerned the present Times. So fares it still with the
^.
Ministers of Gods Church, and Christian people throughout all succeeding Ages,
wherein Visions have failed, and only the written stories of former Visions are
reserved for perpetual Direction: Some part of Gods Will con ained in Scripture
is revealed in one Age, some in another; always that which is most necessary
for the present Time, is most easy to be understood by the Faithful then
living, so they seek the Meaning of it as they should, not upon Curiosity of
knowing Mysteries for the Rarit^ of that Skill, but for the Edifying of Christ's
Church, which is sometimes out of Reparations in one Point, sometimes in
another: for which case God suffers the Knowledge of sundry places to grow
and increase, according to the necessity of the present Times, nourishing (as
it were) a continual Spring, for repairing or beautifying of his Temple.

3 For this reason, those places which seem most plain and easy unto us, might
be more hard and difficult to such in former Times, as should have sought their
Meaning too Curiously; yea it might have been Curiosity in that Age, to have
sought half so much Knowledge in them as we now see at the first Sight, because
the Time of their Revelation, now is, was not then come.

4 It is but a silly Shift for our Adversaries to say, that some of the Ancient
Fathers did otherwise interpret the Apocalypse, then our men do: the perfect ^.
Interpretation and Knowledge of which Book, more peculiarly concerns this
later, then that flourishing Age of Ancient Fathers, most of all these days
wherein we live, in which the true and perfect Meaning of it, were most likely
to be Revealed, as (God be praised) in good measure it has been, and daily
shall be more and more, unless the daily increase of our Sins deserve the
contrary. Many Godly men, yea Disciples in our Saviors time, were ignorant of
sundry Mysteries, which since his Glorification have been communicated to the
meanest of his Flock by the Holy Spirit, who never fails to Reveal Gods Will,
either by extraordinary or ordinary Means, so men be not negligent to enquire
after it by lawful Means. For God is as far from partial respect of Ages as of
persons; so the persons of several Ages respect his Word alike, and as they
should.

5 The like Observation we may take, from the diversity of Place or Nations.
As the Knowledge of Jeremies Prophecies did more concern the State ^.
of Judah under Jehoiachim and Zedekiah, then the Prophecy of Isaias, or some
more ancient Prophet did: so in this our Age, the knowledge of some one Part of
either their Prophecies, and the manner of Judah his progress (in their times)
to her Overthrow, may more concern this our Land, then the knowledge of some
other Parts of the same or other Prophets. And yet those other whose Knowledge
concerns us less, may at this instant concern some other Land or People more.
Always, the gracious Providence of our God directs the study and industry of
all that love him to the search of those Points, which most concern them; but
suffers the endeavors of such, as by their Transgressions have procured his
Wrath, to run at random, never seeking after those things which belong unto
their Peace, until his Judgments overtake them.

6 These Collections are no Paradoxes, but Truths, probable enough of
themselves to win the Assent of sober and unpartial minds, so capable of
external Fortification, as they may easily be made evident and strong enough to
convince the froward minds of such as delight most in Contradiction. From their
Truth supposed (which we are ready to make good against all Gainsayers) it
necessarily follows, that this Question about the Scriptures Obscurity, or
Perspicuitie, cannot be universally meant of all, and every Part of The
Question concerning the Obscurity or Difficulty of Scriptures, cannot be meant
of all Scriptures* in respect of all Ages, or all Men.
Scripture in respect of all Persons and Ages: as whether no Part be obscure or
difficult to all, or any this day living. For, from this diversity of Ages, we
may easily discern some things kept secret from the Ancient Patriarchs, by the
Wisdom of God made manifest unto us: and some things again, by the disposition
of the Divine Providence, become obscure and difficult unto us, which were more
manifest unto them; as the particulars concerning the Mystery of Man's
Redemption, were more obscure to them then us; although the Mystery it self
was, in some sort, Revealed to them, in the Prophetical and Mosaical Writings.
So likewise all the Prophetical Predictions or Prelusions unto the time of
Grace, are better and more distinctly known of us then them; because the
express Knowledge of these particulars more concerns us that have lived since,
then those that lived before the fullness of Time. So the Israelites Judaical
Constitutions, their Types and Ceremonies, were much more plain and easy unto
them, then us: because the knowledge of these Matters, if we speak of their
Judicial Law, more concerned theirs then any other State, as their Types and
Ceremonies, did their Persons, unto whom the Messiah was to be pourtraied or
shadowed out, more then any in this present or other precedent Age, since he
was manifested in our Flesh and substance. The knowledge of the Moral Law, the
End and Scope thereof (the Observation of Gods Commandments, and Doctrine of
Repentance after their Transgression) was equally Perspicuous to both, because
equally Necessary, most necessary to both for their Salvation.

7 Again, from the diverse Conditions of men living in the same Age, this ^rs
degrees of Scriptures Per^, arising from the Diversity of men's Conditions or
Callings.
Resolution is most evident, and most certain. The same Portion of Scripture
may be difficult unto some sort of men, and easy unto others, without any
prejudice to their sufficiency, for being the perfect and infallible Rule of
Faith to all. For, what we said before of diverse Ages, we may conclude again of
diverse sorts or Conditions of Men. Sundry places are more Necessary, and
requisite to be understood of this or that sort, and other places of others:
nor are all places necessary for the one to know, requisite for men of another
Condition or Calling to search into. Thus the Knowledge of many places is
necessary for him that is a public Reader, Teacher, Instructor, or general
Overseer of Gods Flock: which to search into, or laboriously to examine, would
be Curiosity in him that had no such Calling, especially if engaged to any
other, which might justly challenge the greatest portion in his best
endeavors, or take up the most part of his choicer hours for study.

8 In this Assertion we avouch no more then our Adversaries must of Necessity
grant, and expressly do acknowledge in their supposed infallible Rule: which
they do not suppose should be alike plain and easy, to all sorts or Conditions
of men, in all points. They would judge it damnable presumption for the most
learned amongst their Laity, to profess as great skill in the Canons of their
Church, as their Cardinals, Bishops, Abbats, or other principal Members of it,
either have, or make show of; a great presumption of Heresy in any of their
Flock, to discuss the Meaning of their Decretals, as accurately as their
Canonists, or sift other Mysteries of their Religion, as narrowly as the
Casuists do. Should one of their greatest Philosophers, that were no
Clergyman, or professed Divine, profess he knew the Meaning of that Canon in
the Trent-Councel: ^.
Sacramenta conferunt gratiam ex opere operato, as well as Soto, Valentian, or
Vasques did, Suarez or other their greatest Schoolmen in Spain or Italy now
living do: it would breed as dangerous a Quarrel in their Inquisition, as if he
had entered comparison with a Rabbin in a Jewish Synagogue, for skill in
expounding Moses Law.

9 That the Scriptures therefore may be said a sufficient Rule of Faith, and
Christian Carriage, to all sorts or Conditions of Men, it is sufficient that
every Christian man of what sort or Condition soever, may have the general and
necessary Points of Catholic Faith, and such Particulars as belong unto a
Christian and Religious Carriage in his own Vocation, perspicuously and plainly
set down in them. And no doubt but it was Gods Will, to have them in matters
concerning one calling not so facile unto such as were of another Profession:
that every man might hence learn Sobriety, and be occasioned to seek, if not
only, yet principally, after the true Sense and Meaning of those Scriptures,
which either necessarily concern all, or must direct him in that Christian
Course of life whereunto his God has called him. But shall this Difficulty of
some Parts (which arises from the Diversity of Vocations) be thought any
hinderance, why the whole Canon of Scripture should not be a perfect Rule to
all in their several Vocations? Suppose some universal Artist, or complete
Cyclopedian, should set out an absolute System, or Rule for all secular
sciences: it would be ridiculous exception to say, his Works could be no
perfect Rule for young Grammarians, Rhetoricians, Logicians, or Moralists,
because he had some difficult Mathematical Questions, or abstruse Metaphysical
discourses, which would require a grounded scholars serious Pains, and long
search, to understand them thoroughly: and if he should admonish young students,
to begin first with those common and easy Arts, and not to meddle with the
other, until they had made good trial of their Wit and Industry in the former:
this would be a good token of a perfect Teacher, and one sit to rule our Course
in all those studies which he professes. And yet the Scriptures (which the
Jesuits would not have acknowledged for the rule of Christian Life) besides
all the infallible rules of Life, and salvation (common to all) admonish every
man to seek after the Knowledge of such things as are most for Edifying, or
most besitting his particular Calling.

10 And even in S. Paul's Epistles, (which are the Common Places of our
Adversaries invention in this Argument) after he comes to direct his speeches,
^.
(as in the later end of them usualy he does) unto Masters of Families,
servants or the like or generally where he speaks of any Christian duty,
(either private or public) his Rules are as plain and easy to all men in this
Age, as they were to those Householders, or servants, or the like, unto whom
they were first directed. So plain and easy they are unto all Ages, and so
familiar, especially to men of meaner Place, that I much doubt whether the Pope
himself, and all his Cardinals, were able in this present Age to speak so
plainly unto the Capacity, or so familiarly to the Experience of men of their
Quality unto whom he wrote. For, setting aside the absolute Truth and
Infallibility of his Doctrines; his manner of delivering them is so familiar,
so lowly, so heartily humble, so natural and so well befitting such men's
disposition in their sober thoughts, as were impossible for the Pope to attain
unto or imitate, unless he would abjure his triple Crown, and abstract himself
from all Court state or ^.
solace, unless he would, for seven years, addict himself unto Familiarity,
with such men in a Pastoral Charge. It was was an excellent Admonition of one
of their Cardinals (if I mistake not, and would to God our Church would herein
be admonished by him) to begin always with the later end of S. Paul's Epistles.
For once well experienced in them, we should easily attain unto the true sense
and meaning of the former Parts, which usually are doctrinal, and therefore
more difficult then the later. Yet the true reason of those difficulties in the
former Parts containing doctrine, is, because he wrote them against the
disputers of that Age, especially the Jews. Even in this Age they are only seen
in matters that concern learned Expositors of Scriptures, not necessary for
private and unlearned persons to know. And the especial reason, why his
doctrine in some Epistles (as in the Epistle to the Romans) seems obscure,
difficult, and intricate, is, because learned men of later Times have too much
followed the Authorities of men in former Ages, who had examined S. Paul's
doctrine, according to the rule or Phrase of those Arts or Faculties, with
which they were best acquainted, or else had measured his Controversy with the
Jews, by the Oppositions or Contentions of the Age wherein they lived. Were
this Partiality unto some famous men's Authority (which indeed is made a chief
rule in expounding Scriptures, even by many such, as in words, are most earnest
to have Scriptures the only rule of Faith) once laid aside, and the rules of
Faith, elsewhere most perspicuously and plainly set down by S. Paul,
unpartially scan ned: his Doctrine in that Epistle would be so perspicuous and
easy unto the Learned, as it might by them be made plain enough and
unoffensive to the Unlearned. For the light of Truth, elsewhere delivered by
this Lamp of the Gentiles (might it be admitted as a Rule, against some
Expositions of that Epistle) would direct men's steps to avoid those stumbling
Blocks, which many have fallen upon. But to conclude this Assertion; their
Difficulty (take them as they are) is no just Exception against this Part of
Scripture: because it remains difficult still, even for this reason, that it is
held generally for difficult, and is not made a rule, indeed for our
directions; but other men's Opinions or Conjectures concerning it are taken for
an Authentic Rubric, by whose level only we must aim at our Apostles Meaning,
from which we may not, without imputations of Irregularitie, swerve in the
decision of Points (to say no worse) as now they are made hard and knottie.

11 Thirdly, from the diversity of Capacities, or different Measure of
Scripture more or less difficult, to men of the same Profession, from the
different Measure of their natural Capacities or Gods Gifts bestowed upon them.
Gods Gifts, in men of the same Profession, we may safely conclude, that the
difficulty of the same Portion of Scriptures unto some, and Facility and
Perspicuity unto others of like Profession, cannot justly impeach them of
greater Obscurity then befits the infallible rule as well of theirs as of all
other men's Faith, in their several Vocations. For as men's Callings are diverse,
and Gods Gifts to men in their diverse Callings in nature and quality
different, so likewise is the Measure of his like gifts, to men in the same
calling not one and the same. To some he gives more Knowledge, to others less:
yet all he commands, not to presume above that which is Written, and every man
to limit his desires of knowing that which is Written, by the distinct Measure
of Gods Gifts in himself, not to affect or presume of such skill as they have,
unto whom God has given a greater Talent. And besides this, that the Scripture
is the inexhaustible storehouse, ^hence all men have their several Measures of
Divine Knowledge, as well he that has most as he that has least: even in this
again it is a perfect rule, that it commands all sapere, idque ad sobrietatem,
to be wise according to that Measure of Knowledge which God has given them,
and not to seek to know, at least, not to say, why should I not know as much as
any other of any Profession? For this were Pride and Arrogancy (the fatal
enemies of all true Christian Knowledge) if so his Gifts be less then others.
And for the avoidance of these main Obstacles of Christian Knowledge, or true
Interpretation of Scriptures, the Scripture has commanded every man to think
better of others, than of himself, and not to be wise in his own conceit.

12 ^.
From the former General will follow this Particular: Albeit some Parts of
Scripture be very obscure unto some; the same perspicuous unto other Ministers,
or Preachers of the Word: yet may the whole Canon be the infallible Rule of
Faith unto both, according to the diverse Measure of their Gifts, rightly and
unpartially taken. If the one either fail in the Exposition of sundry Places,
which the other rightly expounds, or cannot apprehend so much in them, as the
other does: he is in Sobriety of Spirit bound to acknowledge his own
Infirmity, and content himself with that knowledge, which is contained within
the Measure of Gods Gifts bestowed upon himself: and this again he is to take
by the same Rule. So that the Scriptures are a perfect Rule to both, to all;
for Direction in the search of Divine Knowledge, for limitation of men's desires
whiles they seek it, or Conceit of what they have gotten. That they do not so
thoroughly instruct or furnish some, as others, (though all men of God) for exact
performance of their Ministerial function; can be no argument of their
Insufficiency, to make all such in their Place and Order competently Wise unto
Salvation, more than it would be to prove E^clides Elements (or other more
absolute Mathematical Work) an insufficient and imperfect Rule for instructing
Surveyours or other Practical Mathematicians, (whose skill lies only in
measuring Triangles, Circles, or other plain or solid Bodies) because
containing many Questions of higher Nature, and greater Difficulty, (as of the
Circles, Quadrature, of Lines or Numbers Surd, or Asymmetral) well befitting
the exercise of speculatorie, learned Mathematical Wits.

CAP. XIII.
The true state of the Question about the Scriptures Obscurity, or Perspicuity:
unto what Men, and for what Causes they are Obscure.

1 THe Question then must be; Whether the Scriptures be an absolute Rule of
Christian Faith and Manners to every Man in his Vocation and Order, according
to the Measure of Gods Gifts bestowed upon him? We affirm, It is such to all.
None are so cunning, none so excellent, or expert in Divine Mysteries, but must
take it for a Rule, beyond whose Bounds they may not pass, from which they
daily may learn more, none so silly, but may thence learn enough for their
Salvation, so they will be Ruled by it. And yet even of those Points which are
perspicuously set down to the diverse Capacities of Men in the same or several
Professions, the Question is not; Whether any can fully comprehend their entire
Meaning? Certain it is, In this life they cannot. But neither will our
Adversaries, (I hope) avouch, that the infallible Authority of their Church
can make us so comprehend the full meaning of Mysteries contained, either in
Scriptures, or her pretended unwritten Traditions. Of Scriptures the best
learned Christian may say with the Heathen Socrates: Hoc unum scio, me nihil
scire, I know this one thing, that I know nothing; Nothing as I should, or as
fully as I then shall, when I shall know as I am known: for in this life, we
know but in part, and ^.
we prop^ in part.

2 Lastly, even in respect of Places (though containing Points of Salvation)
only thus imperfectly known (though as perspicuous and clear as can be
required the Rule of Faith should be) the Question is not, whether they be very
Obscure, and Difficult unto some, or unto the Major part of Mankind: if we
consider them as they are, or may be, not as they should or might be, that is,
if we consider them as disobedient to the Truth known, or careless to amend
their lives by this light of Scripture. For unto all such as hate it, this very
light it self proves an occasion of falling. Nor could any thing be more
plainly or perspicuously set down in any other Rule of Faith imaginable, than
this very Point we now handle, is in Scriptures, to wit, that such Parts of
them, as contain matters necessary to Salvation, are most easy to some, most
hard to others. And albeit they might, through the Iniquity of Mankind, prove
difficult to all, or impossible to be understood of most now living (living as
for the most part we do) yet were this Difficulty or Impossibility of
understanding them aright (upon these Suppositions) no hindrance at all, why
they should not be a complete Rule of Faith, to all no just reason for
admitting any infallible Authority besides theirs.

3 For of such as admit any Authority equivalent to theirs, it must be This is
a Point to be obs^ved, because the Weakness and (...) of all our Ad(...)
Ar(...)* will (...) a (...)* if (...) be (...) (...), (...) ^^all (...) by the
particulars in this and the next Section.
further demanded; whether the Infallibility of it, can take away that
Blindness of heart, which by Gods just Judgment, lights upon all such as
detain the knowledge of God or his sacred Word in Unrighteousness? If, for
their sins, God punish them with this spiritual darkness, in discerning his
Will revealed in his written Word: no other infallible Authority (as we
suppose) can take away those scales from their eyes, which hinder their sight
in the means of their Salvation. If men have been called to this Light, and
prefer Darkness before it: either they must receive sight and direction from
it again, or continue still in ignorance and the shadow of death; but does God
look up all or most men's eyes in such darkness? No, for this blindness (by
our Doctrine) befalls only such, as have deserved it by the forementioned sins,
which once removed by Repentance, the Rule of Life shall inlighten them;
unrepented of; no other Rule or Authority shall teach them the way to Life.

4 Since we thus grant, that the Scriptures may be Obscure to most men by their
own default, but perspicuous to others free from like fault or Demerit: it
remains, we further enquire whether the same Scriptures do not most plainly set
down: First, the Causes why they are so Obscure to some, and Perspicuous to
others: Secondly, the Remedy or means how their Obscurity or difficulty may be
prevented. If they plainly teach these two Points, this is a sure Argument that
they are, if not, that they cannot be, so excellent a Rule of Faith as we
acknowledge them. For this very Point, [That the Scriptures, in respect of
diverse Persons, are Obscure and Perspicuous, though Obscure to none but
through their own Default] is a Principle of Christian Faith, and therefore
must be plainly set down in the absolute complete Rule of Faith. And (to omit
others in their due place to be inserted) what can be more perspicuonsly
taught, either by Scriptures or other Writings than this Truth, God Prove. 3.
34. James. 4. 6. 1 Pet. (...). 5.
gives grace to the Humble, and resists the proud? or this, (...) 29. 14. 1
Cor. 1 19. and 1 Cor. 3. 19.
He will confound the Wisdom of the Wise, or such as Glory in their Wisdom?
These and like Rules of Gods Justice in punishing the proud and disobedient,
hold as true in the search of Scripture, as in any other matter, yea especially
herein. Thus were the Scribes and Pharisees (men of extraordinary skill in
Scriptures) blinded in the most necessary Points of their Salvation, though
most plainly set down in Scriptures. For what could be more plainly set down
then many Testimonies of their Messiah? Many places of far greater Difficulty
they could with Dexterity unfold: how chanced it then they are so Blinded in
the other? They were scattered in the proud Imagination of their hearts, and
glorious conceits of their Prerogatives in being Mosis Successors: and in
their stead, simple and illiterate, but humble and meek spirited Men, raised
up, to be infallible Teachers of the Gentiles, to unfold those Mysteries of
Man's Redemption, (which the Scribes and Pharisees could not see) with evidence
of Truth to enlighten the silly and ignorant, and convince the Consciences of
their learned proud Oppugners. By their Ministry, Prophetical and Mosaical
Mysteries became a Light unto the Gentile, whose life had been in the shadow of
death: whilst a Veil was laid before the hearts of the most learned Jews, so
that even whilst the Sun of Righteousness, which enlightens every man that
comes into the World, did arise in their coast, and ascend unto their Zenith,
they groap their way, as men that walk in dangerous Paths by dark-night.

5 Was the Scripture therefore no Rule of Faith unto these Jews to whom it was
so Dishcult and Obscure? Or is it not most evident, that this Blindness did
therefore come upon Israel, because they hated this Light being carried away
with Loud cries of Templum Domini, Templum Domini, as the Papists now are with
The Church, The Church: And for words of supposed Disgrace offered to It (only
upon a Surmise that Christ had said, he would destroy and build It up again)
brought to seek the destruction of the Glory of It, even of the Lord of Glory.
Thou that would make others beleave the Pope is such, do thou believe the
Scriptures to be Infallible? How is it then, whilst thou read Gods
Judgments upon thy Brother Jew, thou do not tremble and quake, lest the
Lord smite thee also (thou painted wall) with like Blindness? seeing thou have
justified thy brother Pharisees stubborn Pride, wilful Arrogancy, and witting
Blasphemy in oppugning Scriptures. And as for all such, whose hearts can be
touched with the terror of Gods Judgments upon others, in fear and reverence
I request them to consider well; whether one of the greatest Roman Doctors, ^
were not taken with more than Jewish madness in mistaking Scripture in it
self most plain and easy, who to prove the Scriptures Obscurity to be such as
in this respect it could not be the Rule of Faith, alleges for his proof that
place of the Prophet. And the vision of them all is become unto you, as the
word of a Book that is sealed up, which they deliver to one that can read,
saying, Read this, I pray thee, then shall he say, I cannot for it is sealed.

6 The Prophet relates it as a wonder, that they should not be able to discern
the Truth. What Truth? an obscure or hidden Truth, Impossible to be understood?
This had been a wonderful Wonder indeed, that men should not be able to
understand that, which was Impossible to be understood. Wherein then was the
true Wonder seen? In this, that they, whose eyes had formerly been illuminated,
by the evidence and clearness of the Divine Truth, revealed by Gods Messenger,
should not be able to discern the same, still alike clear and perspicuous; but
now to be shut up from their eyes, as appears by the similitude of the sealed
Book, whose Character was legible enough, but yet not able to be read whilst
sealed? A man might as well prove the Sun to be dark, because Polyphemus, after
(...) had put out his eye, could not see it; as the Scriptures by this place to
be Obscure. The Prophets words entire are these. ^.
Stay your selves and Wonder, they are blind, and make you blind; they are
drunken, but not with wine, they stagger, but not with drink. For the Lord has
covered you with a spirit of slumber, and has shut up your eyes: The Prophets
and your chief Seers has he covered. And the vision of them all is become unto
you, etc. And more plainly. Esaias 29. 9, 10, etc. ver. 13.
Therefore the Lord said, because this people come near me with their mouth,
and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart from me: and their
fear toward me was taught by the precepts of men (does he not mean the Blind
Obedience of Modern Papists, as well as ancient Jews?) Therefore behold, I will
do a mavelous work in this People, even a mavelous work and a wonder. For
the Wisdom of the wise men shall perish, and the understanding of the prudent
man shall be hid. The Lord himself foretells it as a wonder, that this People
should be so ignorant in the Word of God: and yet will the Jesuit make us
believe, the Word of God is so Obscure that it cannot be unto us the Rule of
Faith, when as without the knowledge and light of it, (not which it has in it
self, but which it communicates to us,) there is no Vision, no Knowledge in the
Visible Church, but such wonderful Darkness as the Prophet here describes.

7 Let the Reader here give sentence with me, whether it were not wonderful
Jewish Blindness, or wilful Blasphemy in Velamen quod ipse Paulus (2. Cor.
3. 15.) assi^mat usque in hodiernum diem, cum legitur Moses, esse positum supra
cor Judaeorum: profecto textum (ut ita dicam) bona ex part est ex difficultate
Scripturarum illarum. Valent. tom. 3. in Aquin. disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 7.
parag. 4. He adds immediately. Hoc enim (ut antea monuimus) est, scripturam
essedifficilem, ejusmodi eam esse, and tam multa, ut illa intelligatur,
requ^ri, ut proclive fuerit Judaeis, and (...) aliis omnibus, non percipere
veram ejus sententiam: quod quia dare nobis coguntur, velint, nolint, s^cta^ij,
recte ac (...) inde concludimus, communem illam regulam and magistram fidei,
quam necesse est, esse propositam fidelibus (...), non esse scripturam; cum non
sit cognitu facilis ipsis hominibus. Huc and illud Isaiae. 29. pertinet
Valentian, so confidently to avouch, that the Veil which Saint Paul says is
laid before the Jews hearts, was woven (a great part) out of the Difficulty of
Scriptures, such Scriptures, as the Sectaries (so he terms us) contend about:
and for proof of this Blasphemous Assertion to bring the forecited place. Ere
their allegations of this or like places, brought to prove the Scriptures
Difficulty or Obscurity can be pertinent, they must (according to the state of
the Question already proposed) first prove this Obscurity or Difficulty to be
perpetual and ordinary, not inflicted as a punishment upon Hypocrites, or
such as love Darkness more than Light. And this they never shall be able; this
one place alleged by Valentian most evidently proves the contrary. For this
was an extraordinary and miraculous Judgment upon these Jews, for their
Hypocrisy, as appears, Verses the thirteen and fourteen. And unto such as they
were, weacknowledge the Scriptures, by the just Judgment of God, to be most
Difficult still; but deny such Difficulties to be any Bar, why they should not
be the complete Rule of Faith. If the Jesuits will avouch the contrary: Let
them tell us whether any other Rule could in this case supply their defect, be
it unwritten Tradition, or viva vox infallibilis authoritatis, the infallible
teaching or preaching of the visible Church or Pope. This (I presume) they will
be ashamed to affirm. So our Savior expounds it, Matthew. 15. verse 8, 9. O
Hypocrites Esaias prophesied well of you saying, This People, etc. using the
words before cited out of the 13. verse of Esaias; cap. 29. Out of both places it
appears that their Hypocrisy and disobedience is the Truth known, caused this
Blindness: and what the Prophet threatened ver. 14. our Savior ratifieth, Mat.
15. ver. 12, 13, 14. For when his Disciples said unto him, Perceivest thou not
that the Pharis^es are offended in hearing this saying? He answered, Every
plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted up; let them
alone, they be blind leaders of the blind, and if the blind lead the blind,
both shall fall into the ditch. So the Prophet had said in the 14. ver. The
wisdom of their wise men (to wit the Pharisees) shall perish, and the
understanding of the prudent shall be hid, and in the 9. verse, They are blind
and make you blind. For this cause our Savior in the forementioned place
calls not them as be did the multitude, to hear and understand, verse 10. Nor
expounds the Parable unto them, as he did to his Disciples verse 15.
For this Prophecy was fulfilled of the Pharisees which lived in our Saviors
time, and heard him preach the Doctrine of Salvation, as plainly as the Pope
can do: yet neither could his Doctrine, nor Miracles win them to his Father.
Why could they not? Because they had, as the Papists now have (though not so
openly) disclaimed the Scriptures for the Rule of their Faith, and did follow
the Precepts or Traditions of Men; and God (as we said before has so de reed
that such as neglect the Truth known, or love Darkness more than Light, should
be given over to this reprobate sense; that the more evident the Truth is, the
more hateful it should be to them: as the hate of these Scribe, and Pharisees
to our Savior was greater then their fore-elders had been to the Prophets,
because the light of his Doctrine was greater, his Reprehensions more sharp,
and their deeds and Hypocrisy worse than their Fathers. No marvail then, if it
be so hard a matter to recover a learned Papist, or make a Jesuit recant his
error in this Point, seeing they are farther gone in this Jewish disease of
contemning Gods Word, following Traditions, and Precepts of Men, for the Rule
of their Faith, than these Jews themselves were; not likely therefore they
would have yielded to our Savior himself, if they had lived in his time. Nor
should the ingenious Reader think we Hyperbolize or over-lash, when we charge
them with deeper Blasphemy in this Point, than these Jews were guilty of: as
if this were strange, seeing they are such great Scholars, and profess that
they love Christ as well as we: for so would these Jews boast of their
Antiquity and skill in Scriptures, and thought that they loved God, and his
Servant Moses, as well as Christ and his Apostles did. But it was Gods purpose
to confound the Wisdom of the worldly-wise: of the Scribes and Pharisees then,
and of the learned Priests and Jesuits now.

CAP. XIV.
How men must be Qualified, ere they can understand Scriptures aright: that the
Pope is not so Qualified.

1 OUt of the forementioned places it is Evident, that Gods Word (otherwise
plain and perspicuous) was hidden from this Peoples eyes for their Hypocrisy;
and the same Blindness continues still in their Posterity for continuing in
like sin. But can it be proved as evidently, by any other place of Scripture,
that unto such as do the Will of God, and Practice according to his Precepts,
the same Word shall be plain and easy, so far as is necessary for their
Salvation? Yes, Infinite places may be brought to this Purpose. And lest any
man should except against the Extent of such bountiful promises, as if they
included some condition of Learning, great dexterity of Wit, or the like,
whereof many men are not capable: Our Savior Christ adds the universal Note;
J^hn 7. 17.
If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be of
God, or whether I speak of my self. If Any Man will do his Will: Not if any man
will learn the learned Tongues, or study the Scribes and Pharisees Comments,
which this people supposed to have been the only, (as they were good) Means,
for understanding Scriptures aright, whilst subordinate to this principal
Condition here mentioned by our Savior. The occasion of the Multitudes
admiring his Doctrine, was that He, who had never been Scholar to their
Rabbis, should be so expert in Scriptures [as it is Verse the fifteenth.] Our
Saviors reply to this their Doubt conceived by way of admiration. [in the
sixteenth Verse] is, that he had his Learning from God, and not from Man: My
Doctrine is not mine, but his that sent me. And as he was taught by his Father,
to deliver and teach the heavenly Doctrine, so might the simplest, and most
unlearned amongst them, be likewise taught of God to discern whether his
Doctrine were of God, or whether he spoke of himself; If they would do the Will
of God, and seek his Glory, not their own, as Christ did not seek his own
Glory, but his that sent him. Yet might these Jews have brought the same
Exceptions against our Saviors Rule for discerning Doctrines, which the
Papists now bring against the Scriptures, why they should not be the infallible
Rule of Faith; as shall appear hereafter. In the mean time whom shall we
believe, the Modern Jesuit, who will swear one thing sitting, and the contrary
standing; or Christ Jesus, whose Word (as he himself) remains, yesterday, to
day, the same for ever? Our Savior fully confirms this Truth unto us, which
the Psalmist had before in effect delivered, Psalm. 25. ver. 14. The secret of
the Lord is revealed unto them that fear him: and his Covenant to give them
understanding, and verse. 9. Them that be Meek will he guide in judgment, and
teach the Humble his way, vide etia^ verse. 10. and 12. This evidently confuteth
their folly, who think or rather say; our Savior spoke in this place of his
own peculiar Doctrine and Authority. Albeit Canus (amongst others) might be
excused (by such as would salve his credit) by the common Answer, non locutus
est ex sua sententia, as appears by the manner of his reply Lib. 2. de Loc.
Theol. cap. 8.
Even at this day, (as well as at that time, when he spoke this Oracle) if any
man will do the Will of God, (which sent him:) he, amidst the Variety of men's
Opinions concerning matters of Faith, shall know of the Doctrine, whether it be
of God, or whether Men speak of themselves, without recourse unto the
infallible Authority of such as sit in Peter's Chair: who are to Peter, but as
unto Moses the Scribes and Pharisees were, unto whom Gods Church in Jewrie,
about our Saviors time, was not much beholden for Doctrines of Faith, or
Decisions of Doubts, concerning the Truth of Scriptures, or principal Mysteries
taught by Moses.

2 Will you hear what Bellarmine (the only Champion that ever Rome had, for
eluding evident Authorities of Scripture) could answer unto this place? Non hoc
dicit Dominus ut ostendat omnes viros bonos per se intelligere posse omnia loca
Scripturarum: sed ut doceat viros probos carere quibusdam impedimentis, propter
quae alij quidem nec per se, nec per alios, fidei veritatem intelligere
possunt, ut Johan. 5. 44. Luke 16. 14. Bellarm. Tom. 1. Lib. 3. cap. 10. Canus
in his first Answer to this place seems willing to assent unto the Truth.
Concedi^us inquit, liberaliter doctrinam cusque in sua vita and statu
necessariam, illi fore perspectam and cognitam, qui fecerit voluntatem Dei.
Sicut enim gustus been affectus differentias saporum facile discernit, sic
animi optima affectio facit, ut homo doctrinam Dei ad salutem necessariam
discernat ab errore contrario qui ex Deo non est. Quae vero Ecclesiae sunt
communia, nec ad judicium, nec ad fidem spectant singulorum, ea non a quovis
discerni and judicari possunt, quantumcunque is Dei faciat voluntatem. In his
second Answer he bewrayes a willingness to dissent from us, or perhaps a fear,
not to say somewhat against us: and therefore, to such as will not be satisfied
with the former, he gives a second Answer in effect, the same with Bellarmines.
We ^ay admit both their Conclusions, without harm to our Cause. From that which
Canus grants of private men, (both in his Answer to the second and third
Argument) we may conclude against him thus. As God gives them the Spirit of
discerning true from false Doctrine, in Points necessary to Salvation, without
all respects of persons: so likewise will be, by his Providence, direct the
learned or spiritual Overseers in every Nation (without respecting Person,
Place, or other P^gative) for discerning Apocryphal from Canonical Books. Nor
is there any more Reason to appropriate their Discretion to the Pope, or
Clergy of Rome, more then to appropriate the gift of discerning Truth from
Falsehood in Points re^ to Salvation, to their Servants. V. Can. Lib. 2. de Loc.
Theol. Cap. 8. Responsione ad secundum and ter^.
Our Lord and Savior did not intena in this speech to show us that all honest
minded men might understand every place of Scripture by themselves: but to
teach us that good men are free from diverse such Impediments, as dis-enable
others for understanding the true Doctrine of Faith, either by themselves, or
by others help. For some became incapable of true Faith by pride and desire of
worldly honor, others by covetousness. All these things heard the Pharisees
also which were covetous, and they mocked him.

3 That all honest-minded men should be able to understand all Places of
Scriptures, we never affirmed; that without the Ministry or help of others
they should (ordinarily) understand any aright, we never taught. This
notwithstanding we constantly avouch. Without this Condition of doing Gods
Will, not men, otherwise furnished with the best Gifts of Art and Nature, can
ever be competently qualified for spiritual Instructors: By performing it, the
simple and illiterate shall be made capable of good Instructions, and enabled
to discern true Doctrine from false. By our Saviors Rule in the very next
words (more infallible than any other pretended Infallibility can be) we may
discern the Pope, of all others to be no true, much less any infallible
Teacher, unless of Lies and Antichristian deceit. For he that seeks his own
glory (as what Pope is there does not so? many seek the Popedom by their
predecessors blood) he speaks of himself; not the Word of him, whose Viear he
boasts himself to be.

4 To place the Apostle S. Paul's Authority next in sile unto our Saviors. R^m.
12. 2. V^^n which place He whom Bellarmin ^ excellent Inter^^te^^ of later ^
says thus. Per (...) ^^vationem ^ per ^idem in Christum accepistis, ^ ut sic
^eddamini ap^ quid a vobis (...) per to^ at Deus. Quid gratum sit benepla^ Deo.
Simile quiddam d^cet ^ Prebant^s quid sit (...) placitum Deo. ^ cupiditates
ca^nis no^^^ae, ^ n^i, ut in actionibus nostris in^ voluntas Dei: sed quod
nostro ^ a^rider, interp^ in id esse vo^ Dei. S^ in (...) ^. Vide annotat. ^
Be^a ad paragraph. 5.
Fashion not your selves (says he unto his beloved Romans) like unto this
present world: but be ye changed by the nenewing of your mind, that ye may
prove what is the good Will of God, and acceptable and perfect. Being fashioned
like unto the present World, they were altogether disproportionable unto the
Kingdom of heaven, incapable of heavenly Mysteries; but being renewed in their
minds; they might prove, taste, and rel^ aright the Meaning of Gods Word
revealed. Of such as disanul the Scriptures for being the Rule of Faith, and
transfer this Canonical Dignity upon the Pope, I would gladly be resolved,
whether this his Holiness Infallibility, can take away the Veil, which is laid
before the Jews hearts, or this Desire which raigns in most men, of fashioning
themselves unto this present World; whether he can in all such, as profess
Christianity, root out those Lusts and Concupiscences, those (corneae fibrae)
stiff and stubborn heart strings, as are the very the eeds whereof this Veil
is made, which makes the Scriptures so Difficult, and so eclipseth their Light
in respect of men. If he cannot, well may he make them understand or believe
his own Decrees; but never rightly apprehend, or steadfastly embrace the
Spiritual Mysteries of their Salvation: That Rule of S. Paul's is still most
infallible. The Natural or Carnal Man is altogether incapable of the things of
Gods Spirit; of those things, which are in themselves most evident: Neither can
be know them. If you will not believe his Authority as infallible, he gives you
a Reason for the truth of the Conclusion, for they are spiritually discerned.
Is it then the Popes Infallibility, or the framing of our lives according to
Gods holy Word, that must purge the Errors of our young and wanton days, and
make us cease to be homines (...) Natural or Carnal men, and become Spiritual?
If the Popes infallibility cannot perform this, to what use does it serve? The
Scriptures will be difficult still, and their sense insipid to such as have not
their hearts thus cleansed. If without his Infallibility, (by the Industry of
faithful Pastors, attentive Hearing, and serious Meditation of his sacred
Word) our lives may be amended, and we of Carnal men become Spiritual: we shall
discern the things of God, what is his Will and mercy toward us in Christ: we
shall know of every Doctrine necessary unto our Salvation, whether it be of God
or no: much better then the Pope and his Cardinals can do, if they be Carnals.
For our Apostle adds, ^
The Spiritual man judges or discerns all things, and is judged of none. The
sense of which words some of your Schoolmen much mistake, when they hence
gather, that the Pope may judge Princes: but the Spirituality (so in common
talk we call the Clergy) may not be judged by any Temporal or Lay Power. Our
Apostle means, (nor will a learned Interpreter though a Papist deny it) that in
matters of Faith, and in the Truth of Divine Mysteries, the truly spiritual,
(that is, such as are renewed in the inner man, not such as bear the Name or
Title of Spiritual men in their corrupt language) see and understand those
things, which the Wisdom of God has hidden from the wisest, and most glorious
Teachers of the World, from all Carnal men, of what Gifts soever they may be in
other matters; as appears by our Apostles Discourse in that place. Which
Doctrine of our Apostle how truly it is verified in the wise men of Rome, the
Jesuits I mean, (to give them what by our Proverb we are bound to give their
Master, their due) men of famous industry and excellent reach, in all subtle
and profound Arts: but how ignorant and besotted in matters of Faith, and
Mysteries of man's Salvation, their Doctrine in this present Controversy, being
compared with this Axiom of our Apostle, may abundantly witness, to the
Astonishment of all sober-minded Christian Readers.

5 They cannot deny, That matters of Faith and Christian Life, the Mysteries of
man's Salvation, are matters belonging to the Spirit of God; and that a lewd,
naughty, ambitious, luxurious man, an Heretic, is homo (...) a Carnal Man,
they will not offer to call in question. Again, that many of their Popes be
such, as I have said (naughty, wicked, luxurious men) they openly confess.
Some of them grant that Denique quod Honorius and nonnulli alii Pontifices in
errorem lapsi fuisse dicuntur (quanquam de nullo prorsus satis compertum est,
pertinaciter erravisse) id quidem utcunque res habeat, non nisi ad privatum
attiner personarum vitium: atque adeo nihil nobis obstare potest, ut qui non
tam ipsas personas, quam authoritatem illam Apostolicae sedis in definiendo
defendimus, si^ supra, Augustini etiam exemplo, respondebamus. Valent. Tan. 3.
Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. Punct. 7. Paragr. 41. Casu. 11.
Honorius was an Heretic. Valentianus loco citato. Ad fidelitatem Dei erga
Ecclesiam speciat, ut impediret in eo casu, quo minus per Pontificem illum
controversia falso definiretur. Id quod facere Deus possit aut Pontificem de
medio tollendo, ne ipse, sed successor potius rem decerneret; aut interna
mentis illustratione, vel alio aliquo modo Pontificem ab errore revocando.
Neque vero (...) providentia Dei in similibus casibus miraculosa esset
consenda, ^^d esset potius quidam effectus ejus legis ordinatiae, qua Deus per
promissiones de veritate factas, sese obstriuxit Ecclesiae. Ac ^ hujus rei
exemplum illud proferri potest, quod cum Joannes xxij. existimare^, sanctorum
animas ante diem ^udicii divinam essentiam non videre, idque eo tempore, quo in
Ecclesia (sicut Canus etiam lib. 6. de locis Theologicis. cap. ult. ad 1.
argument. notavit.) nondum erat satis explicata haec controversia, and ad rem
definiendam sese compararet, prinsquam id faceret, e vita excessit, and
Benedictus successor contrariam sententiam definivit. Homines Animales cum
additamento.
Valentian will not dispute this particular de facto, whether he were one or
no, but that the Pope or Popes may hold Heretical Opinions he grants: albeit
thus tainted with Heresy they cannot propose their Heresies ex Cathedra, to be
Believed by others; (believe Valentian herein who list:) for God by his
Providence would prevent this Mischief. But howsoever; the Pope and his
Cardinals may (by their own Confession) be Carnal Men with a witness. Now S.
Paul says plainly, Homo animalis non potest cognoscere ea quoe sunt Spiritus
Dei. Quis autem carnalis and animalis homo non per phantasmata sui cordis
evagetur, and constituat sibi Deum, qualis ei pro suo carnali sensu placuerit,
atque ita credit tantum long aliter quam Deus est, quantum a veritate vanitas
distert. Veristimam quippe sententiam dixit Apostolus, plenus lumine veritatis.
Animalu, inqu^t, hom^, non percipit quae sunt spiritus Dei. Et tamen de iis
faec dicebat, quos jam ^uisse baptiza^os ipse manifestat. Beda in hunc locum ex
Augustino. l. 3. de Baptismo. This Opposition betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh,
is (as we say in Schools) Formal, or directly contrary: so as this Rule and
that other late mentioned (Romans 12.) hold as true in the Pope as in any. If he
fashion himself as much to this, he is as disproportioned to the world to come,
as any other: If he be as Carnal as other men, he is altogether as incompetent
a Judge of things belonging to the Spirit of God, as others are, whosoever.
Beda in the same place adds: Ad animales pertinet vetus Testamentum, ad ad
spirituales novum --. Veteris a^tem Sacramenta ce^averunt, sed concupiscentiae
tales non ce^^averunt. In illis enim sunt, quos Apostolus jam per Sacramentum
novi ^, adhuc tamen dicit animales, non posse percipere qu^ sunt Spiritus Dei.
No Carnal or Natural man can conceive the things of the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2. 14. (for this indefinite Proposition in materia necessaria may have this
Universal Note, Homo animalis non potest cognoscere, no Carnal Man can
perceive.) The Jesuits affirm the Contradictory unto S. Paul's Doctrine, as an
undoubted Article of Faith. The Pope (say they) albeit homo animalis though a
most wicked man, though otherwise an Heretic, the worst of Carnal Men) cannot
but discern the things that belong unto the Spirit, all the Mysteries of Man's
Redemption, all points whatsoever necessary to Man's Salvation. For he cannot
err in deciding such Matters if he speak ex Cathedra. More unhappy man
Honorius, more Fools have the whole generation been, that ever would shut their
mouths, or cease to speak ex Cathedra even to the last gasp.

6 That sund^y lewd and wicked men may learnedly discourse of spiritual
matters, and deduce necessary Consequents out of Truths supposed or commonly
received for Divine, in such Points No ^al ^, or Desire habi^uate, but harbor
^, ^f the Soul be well searched, or ^ directly crossed; as shall ^ hereafter
appear; so that men of ^, ^^ly conceive well, either of such Spi^ ^ot directly
opposite to their peculiar ^ else of such General^es, as may be prosecuted ^ to
their Affections.
as contradict not their Affections or tempt them not to become partial Judges
of evil thoughts: that we are to reverence and obey Gods Word, manifested to
our Consciences, though by their Ministry, we deny not. But that such wicked
Monsters of Mankind, as many of their Popes have been, and may be should so
conceive and discern all the Principles and Grounds of Faith, be so familiarly
intimate with the Holy Spirit, that their Decrees, (in matters which concern
their own Pomp and Glory, in matters whose loss would breed their Temporal
Ruin) should be held for the inf^llible Oracles of God, the only Rule of
Faith* for all other Christians to rely upon continually: thus to deny the
infallible presence, or illumination of Gods Spirit, to all faithful and godly
men throughout the world, and to appropriate it to a succession of such sons of
Belial as their own Writers picture out unto us in their Legends of Popes
lives, is a Blaspemy against the Godhead, (I pray God it prove not so The
matter of ^ against the Holy Ghost, was their ^, in wh^m he rested, with an
unclean ^ Ma^k cha* 3. verse. 22. and ^0. The ^ (if I may so speak) of that Sin
in them was ^ of that conceit, against the Evidence of ^; Christ's Life and
Actions bearing ^ of his Sanctification by the Blessed Spirit. The ^ in the
Jew, and modern Jesuit, is all ^ self same impiety, only inverted, to say
(...) think the De^il is Author of Goodness, or the Holy G^ ^f (...), t^ make
the Devil a Familiar of the S^n ^, and the Son of Satan an Associate of the
Holy Spirit. Whether the Popes Works do not oft-times as truly ^ his Impurity,
as Christ did his Sanctity, The Ad^ will scarce question. I will not conclude,
but God (...) the ^suites Pa^asitical E^comio^s of their Popes Sa^red
Authority, ^e not wilful, as were the Jews De^ of our Savior.
against the Holy Ghost) of such huge and ugly shape, that I much marvail, how
it could possibly creep into any Jesuits pen, being scarce able (I think) to
get out of the wide, vast, gaping mouth of Hell it self, in whose intrails it
was conceived. Was it more in heat of Passion (perhaps) to say, that the Devil
was a Familiar of the Son of God, then to teach it as an Article of Faith, that
the Holy and Eternal Spirit is a perpetual Associate, an infallible Assistant,
or familiar Companion of Satan's Firstborn, of Conjurers* Inchanters or
incarnate Devils? was it so horrible and infamous a Crime in Simon Magu^, to
offer to buy the Gifts of the Holy Ghost? and is it less sin in such as he
was, Conjurers, Sorcerers, to seek after as great, or greater spiritual
Prerogatives, (as great as S. Peter had) by the same Means that he did? Is it
no sin for the Jesuits, to beg this as a Postulatum, or main Axiom of Faith,
that whatsoever the Pope (such a Pope as has gotten his triple Crown, and
spiritual Power by Simony) shall decree ex Cathedra, should be esteemed and
reverenced as the Dictates of the Holy Ghost? Did that old Magus want wit to
insert this Condition to his request, that whomsoever he should lay his hands
upon [ex Cathedra] he might receive the Holy Ghost? Might not S. Peter have
conferred this That the (...) has no such a^s^lute Authority, (...) from S.
Peter, p^^ved ^y S^.
extraordinary Gift as well upon him, as he did his Infallibility upon the Pope?
Simon did not desire the Monopoly of bestowing the Holy Ghost, but could have
been content to have shared with others in this Prerogative; ^
Give me also this power. But his Brother in wickedness, the Romish Levi, of
what spirit soever he be, must have this Prerogative alone, that whatsoever he
shall speak, must be the Oracle of the Holy Spirit. Is it more to have the Holy
Ghost attend on Simon Magus hands, but not on them alone, then to have him tied
only unto the Popes Tongue or Pen? The spiritual Prerogative which he sought,
and that which the Pope usurps, are (on the Popes part at least) equal. The
Manner or Means of seeking them, in both alike, the same. For we hear in the
corner of the world, wherein we live, that your Elections of men into Peter's
Chair, do not go gratis. I confess I do not believe the Corruption of your
Clergy so firmly, as I do the Articles of my Creed, because I have not express
Warrant for it out of this Sacred Canon, which I make the Rule of my Faith: but
ere you can make us Believe the Popes Infallibility, as an Article of Faith,
you must make evident Proof to the contrary: you must make it clear by
Testimony from above, that neither any State of Italy, or foreign Prince, does
make request or suit unto your Cardinals, that his Kinsman, his Countryman, or
Favorite may be elected Pope before another. We have far greater reason to
believe, that such Offers are both made and taken, then to think that, if a
foreign Prince or domestic Potentate should offer a Cardinal some thousands of
Ducates for his voice, he would answer, (like one that would be Peter's
Successor in sincerity) Acts 8. 20.
Thy money perish with thee, that think the Gift of the Holy Ghost can be
bought with money.

7 Yet if the Cardinal take any gift upon this Condition, or respect any
Princes favor in such Election; his and the parties sin soliciting him hereto,
is altogether as great as Simons was. For the request is in effect thus much:
Let such a man have this Prerogative, that on whomsoever he shall lay his
Curse, to whomsoever he shall impart his Blessing, the one shall be accursed,
the other blessed from above; whatsoever he shall determine in any Controversy
shall be the Dictate of the Holy Ghost. And he that yields his voice upon such
conditions; does take upon him, to bestow that upon the Pope, which S. Peter
denied to Simon Magus: The Pope thus chosen, does usurp that, as bestowed upon
him, which Simon Magus did seek; his Practice and Profession is continually as
villainous as Simons desires were, when he sought after this; his Blessings are
no better then Simons Charms.

8 It is no marvail if the Jesuits be so eager in this Argument; or the
politic Papists so forward to disclaim the Scriptures, for the Rule of
Christian Faith. For if men should so esteem of them in heart and deed, those
few Rules out of them already alleged, would quickly descry the Pope and
Clergy of Rome, (I mean their Cardinals and Statesmen) to be of all others the
most incompetent Judges, either of Scripture-sense, or Controversies in
Religion thence depending: Or were the Use of Scriptures freely permitted to
their Laics, without the Glosses and false representations of the Jesuits,
Priests or Friars, they might quickly see, that the silliest Soul among them,
might sooner be partaker of the Life-working sense, then their great Statesmen
can be, if so they would frame their lives, according to the known Rules
thereof, better then such great ones do. For Silliness or simplicity of Wit or
understanding, does not so much hinder, as Singleness of Heart, or Sincerity
of Conscience further men, in the search of Truth necessary ^o their own
Salvation. That Promise of our Savior, (Habenti dabitur) Mark 4 24, 25. And he
said unto them, take heed what ye hear, with what measure you mete, it shall be
measured unto you, and unto you that hear more shall be given. For unto him
that has shall be given, and from him that has not shall be taken away, even
that he has.
has its proper place, and peculiar force in this Point. Whosoever he be that
yields Sincere Obedience unto the least part of Gods Word known, to him shall be
given greater Knowledge. And of such is the Prophets Speech most true, Jer. 31.
34.
They shall be all Taught of God, from the greatest to the least. As well the
mean Scholars and silliest souls, as the greatest and wisest Doctors.
Apostolus autem spiri^^ sancto (...) scientiam tunc prodesse, cum chari^as
inest: sine hac autem inf^are, id est, in superbiam (...) extollere. Augustine.
lib. 9. de Civit. Dei cap 20. The like Affection in the Pope or Clergy of Rome
makes them arr^gate (...) unto themselves in this business of establishing
Belief. That which S. Austin adds in the same place seems (...) (...) of
them. Est ergo in daemonibus scientia sine charitate: and ideo tam (...)
religionis servitutem, quam vero Deo deberi sciunt, sibi sategerint exhi^eri,
and quantum (...), and apud quos poss^^t, adhuc agunt. And again. Contra
superbiam porro Daemonum, qua pro meritis possidebatur genus humanum* Dei
humilitas quae in forma servi appa^uit, quantam virtutem habeat, anim^ hominum
nesciunt, immunditia elationis (...), daemonibus similes superbia non scientia.
For with great worldly Wisdom there is always great Pride, the greatest
Adversary to true and sanctified Christian Knowledge: and the best sort of
Secular Learning puffs up. All the skill which men so minded can attain unto
i^ Heavenly matters, is but like Lessons got by rote. It must be quite
forgotten, at least utterly renounced and laid aside, before we can be admitted
into the School of Christ, in which all in this life are but parvuli, petties,
or children, for their simplicity and harmless minds, for Lowliness and
Nullity of self-conceit. Hence says our Apostle, The first of the Co^th. 3.
Chapt. verse. 18. Vid. J^b 37. verse. 24.
If any man think himself wise, let him become a fool, that he may may learn
wisdom aright: And our Savior Christ says unto his disciples, Mat. 18. 3.
except ye be converted and become like little children, ye shall not enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, that is, they cannot be capable of this Heavenly
Doctrine. For true and sanctifying Grace must be ingrafted in this harmless
simplicity, and child-like Disposition.

9 It is the Nature and Property of Gods Word to be plain and facile unto (...)
Simpli^ity (such as the (...) meant when he said O^e officium simplex est) and
Plain Dealing are Qualities best Symbolizing with the inte^nal Propriety of
Scriptures. Psalm. 19. 7.
such as are of Disposition semblable to it; as to the sincere of heart, single
in life, and plain in dealing: but obscure and difficult unto the worldly-wise.
The simplicity of It, and the subtilty of the Politician, or secular Artist,
parallel as ill, as a straight Rule or Square with a distorted crooked stick:
The testimony of the Lord (says the Psalmist) is sure, and gives wisdom to
the Simple. The word (...) Mat. 11. 25.
in the Original silly or credulous, such as in worldly affairs are more easy
to be deceived, then apt to deceive: and is rendered by the Septuagint (...)
parvuli, which word it pleased our Savior to use, when he intimates this
Perspicuity of Gods Word unto such little ones, I thank thee O father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of
understanding, and have opened them unto Babes. It is so, O father, because thy
good pleasure was Such. Such as in this whole discourse we have supposed, (and
this place does prove:) that is, Such as had decreed that the Doctrine of Life
should be most difficult and hard to proud, disobedient, or craftily-minded
men, but most perspicuous (because to be revealed by God) unto such little
ones. And again, (lest any man should presume upon his Wisdom, or Dexterity of
Wit) he tells us expressly, no man knows the Father, but the Son, and he to
whom the Son will reveal him. And his Will is, Verse. 27.
to reveal himself, and his Word unto all, and only such as we have said, to
little Ones, or such as become little Children, casting off the burden of Age,
which has brought such Faintness and weariness upon their Souls, that they
cannot hope for any good success in the Course which tends to everlasting
Life, until they be disburthened of all former Cares. And hence in the next
verse his words are general, [Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy
laden.] So they will take up his Yoke, which is easy, and his Burden which is
light, he will free them from all the grievances and discommodities of their
former Yoke, learning but this one Lesson of Humility and Meekness of him, it
will teach them all the rest; for by it they shall find rest unto their Souls:
which, Christ will refresh, not as the Pope does with Anathema's, binding unto
Negatives, but with the true taste of this Water of Life.

10 Nor will O^ if they ^.
any of our Adversaries (I hope) be so perverse, as to say, our Saviors
Doctrine in this place did hold true only for that time, wherein the Knowledge
of Christ, and Doctrine of his Gospel was to be first published. For such
perversity would bewray so great ignorance in Scriptures, and little experience
in the course of Christianity, as they would be ashamed to be suspected of. For
who sees not this Opposition between worldly wisdom, and heavenly knowledge to
continue still in their several Professors throughout all Ages. Nor can any man
be sure, his Faith is not humorous or Hypocritical, unless he be transformed
into such a little One, as Christ here speaks of* and have true Humility surely
planted in his heart. This is the Fundamental or first Principle, whereinto
Faith must be resolved: even all those Graces or Pledges of Gods favor whereon
most rely in trial of their Spiritual Estate, must be apparently seated in this
Lowliness, and Simplicity, or else every man through the Multiplicity, and
Subtilty of his own heart, shall be over-seen in his persuasions.

11 A lively Experiment of our Saviors Doctrine, and our Assertion in this
point, we have in S. Ins^ (i^quit) ani^ (...) in scriptu^as sacras, (...) vide^
quales (...). Et ^cce v^ deo rem non compe^ta^ ^uperbis, neque ^ humil^m, ^
dedigna^ar esse parvulus, and fastu turgidus mihi grandis esse videbar. Aug.
lib. 3. Confess. cap. 5.
Austin, as himself witnesses: I purposed to look into the sacred Scriptures,
that I might see what manner of Writings they were. And ^o (...) light on a
matter altogether hid from the proud, and yet not laid open unto children, in
progress lowly, in process or issue stately, and wrapped in mysteries:
Finally such as my quality made me incapable of entrance unto it. For the
property of it was to grow up with little ones, but I disdained to be a little
one, and swollen with fastuous conceit, in mine own eyes I seemed a great one.
Here An v^ro ^^lli^s ^tatis re^, ab hoc tumore vitiorum vacuum esse, eorumque
^ulig^e velatum cor, in^^ar Judae^, non (...), sed (...) (...) ac docilem
discipulum ad hujusmodi Spiritus sancti disciplinam capessenda^^, Valentian
Tom. (...). ^ Purct. 7. Sect. 4.
Valentian (^ucking poison out of this reverend Fathers Honey) demands
importunatly, whether it be a matter of no difficulty, to procure our freedom
from this tumor of viciousness. To have our hearts purged from that Soot
which is as the Jewish veil unto them. And finally, whether it be so easy a
matter, (as we to his seeming, make it) to become Humble and meek, without
which virtues the Scriptures were obscure and difficult unto S. Austin
supposes the Scriptures to contain in them the Words of Life, ^ut intimates ^
which either the Scripture should become more plain, or the saving Truth which
they taught be otherwise ^ then only by practicing such Rules as the Scriptures
prescribe, for their right understanding, whence ^ R^ Doctor may again appear.
See the second part of this last Folly, in the annotations unto the third ^
Sixteenth Chapter.
Austin himself, otherwise A man of excellent wit.

12 Me thinks this cumbersom Jesuits choleric strain, and Foolhardy
passionate carriage in this whole Controversy, does lively resemble a Strong
Sturdy Lubber, that had thrust himself unawares into a Quarrel, which he is no
way able to make good; yet so stubborn, that he will not give over, but fights,
and winks, and cries, (and hit he miss he) lays about him. For can any man
think, he sees where these fierce Blows would light? As much as we have said,
is most clear out of this very place of Austin, which he would throw upon us.
Most clear it is, that unto such as follow our Saviors Method, set down
before, that is, unto such as will become like little Children, and begin (as it
were) anew again; the Scripture (which for the present seems hard to all far
entered into the Worlds School) is perspicuous, clear, and easy to be learned.
^ut whether it (...) hard to become Such a One, or whether it be a difficult
matter to lay aside all Pride, and Self-conceit, is no part of the Point now in
question, nothing at all to this intended Purpose. To Man, no doubt, it is most
Hard, or rather altogether Impossible. But what it is to man once made partaker
of the Grace of God, and Power of his Spirit, let Christ Jesus the Fountain of
Grace be Judge. He has told us that ^
his Yoke is easy, and his Furthen light. Or will they reply, that his Yoke is
easy indeed to bear, when it is taken up, but hard to take up. Our Saviors
next words imply the contrary: but of this Question we shall take occasion
hereafter. Only now I say the Jesuits of all other are most incapable of this
Plea. For they hold ^ree-Wil in men, whereby they may Assent unto Grace
offered: and if men have Free Will and Christ offer his Grace unto such, as use
it well, the learning of Humility, and taking up his Yoke will be easy through
Grace, though impossible to Nature. But let this Question concerning Grace and
Free Will, stand still, as it does in Controversy, betwixt us and them, and the
Lutherans. This is granted by all; that if Christ grant his grace to all that
will endeavor to follow his Precepts, then it is easy to all, to learn this
first Lesson of Christianity, Lowliness, and Meekness, the Rudiments of true
Knowledge in Scripture, without which all other Learning in them is but Verbal.
As this is confessed by all, so would I be resolved by any Jesuit, whether, if
it be Christ's pleasure to deny his Grace to any, it be not altogether
impossible for him to learn this Lesson perfectly, or to become a good
Proficient in the School of Christ, although the Pope, their supposed
infallible Teacher, should vouchsase to Catechize him ex Cathedra. What has
this Jesuit got then, by his fierce objecting this difficulty of learning
Humility, for to make the Scriptures seem Obscure? If the same Obscurity, the
same Impossibility of understanding them aright, still remain, albeit the Pope
himself, should stretch his plenary Power, to illustrate them with his
infallible Authority.

13 Or will it not be more hard for the Pope (being so highly placed in Secular
Honor and Dignity as he is) to stoop so low as a little Child for Lowliness
of mind, then it will be for us poor and silly men. If it be more hard for him,
then us so to do, we are more likely to become better Scholars in Christ's
school, then his infallible Holiness: more likely to be more certain of the
true sense or meaning of Scriptures then he can be, much more certain (in all
necessary Points) hereof, then he can be of his Infallibility. For this Lesson
of true Humility must of necessity be learned, ere we can proceed in the true
Knowledge of these Mysteries. Suppose this be a very hard Lesson to learn, yet
(caeteris paribus) it will be harder as men's Places are higher, or their
dignities greater: hardest of all to men of highest Place and greatest
Dignities, especially if their advancements to such Preeminencies be (as many
Popes and Cardinals have been) per saltum, or ab extremo in extremum sine
medio, like lazy Beggars suddenly mounted on stately steeds: shall then this
Difficulty late objected deprive these Scriptures of this Dignity, which we
plead for? Shall this debar them from being the infallible Rule of Faith? or
rather do they not, in giving this very Rule of learning Humility, and thus
forewarning of their Impossibility to be understood without it, approve
themselves to be an excellent Rule of Faith; a more excellent Rule for these
superexcellent Divine Mysteries, then any other Rules are for ordinary, petty,
or trivial Arts? For suppose Bellarmine, or any other more exquisite, though he
an excellent Teacher of the Hebrew Tongue, should in his Grammar have given
this Caveat (easy to be confirmed by sound Reason and Experience) that
whosoever would become perfect in that Language, should begin his study in his
younger days, before he were engaged to subtle or profounder Studies, or given
to deep meditations of Realties, otherwise it would be very hard for him, to
descend again unto Grammar Rules, and begin like a Schoolboy to conn
Declensions, Conjugations, without which, and many other petty Rules about
altering of Vowels, he could never hope to be an absolute Hebrician: Had
Bellarmin set down these or like Caveats more at (...), should this Admonition
be accounted any just Exception, why his Grammar (otherwise supposed
Authentic) should not be a perfect Rule for learning Hebrew? or must we for
this reason have stretched our wits to invent some infallible Teacher of Hebrew
for such men? I am sure he that should have found the truth of his Admonitions
by Experience in himself, or Observation in others, would commend his Judgment
herein, and think so much better of his Grammar, or wish that he himself had
known, or others would observe these Admonitions, whiles they were young, and
rather use Bellarmin then Experience, for their Schoolmaster in this point.

14 Doubtless it is for want of acquainting Youth, and Childhood with the
former Rules of Scripture, which make the Scripture generally either seem
Obscure or Difficult, or causes men mistake them seeming evident. For when
they are grown to man's Estate, or be embarked in worldly Affairs, or invested
in secular dignities, before they have studied Scriptures, or practiced the
former Precepts: this seeming difficulty, either moves them to seek for other
Rules, more easy to their Capacity, or not to care for any Rule of Faith at
all, or else to transform this which God has given for reforming his Image in
them, into the nature of their corrupt Affections. Were this Lesson of becoming
like little Children, thoroughly planted in our hearts, when we were Children:
true Knowledge in other parts of Scriptures would grow with us, and Faith (once
planted in Humility, while our hearts were tender, and easy to be wrought upon
by this plain and easy Precept) albeit at the first but like a Grain of
mustard seed, yet having got the start of Pride, and desire of secular glory in
the Spring, should afterward flourish in all heavenly Knowledge, and fructify
in every good and acceptable Work, without the husbandry, lopping, or pruning
of an infallible Teacher. But if we, either through our own Wilfulness, or
Parents Negligence, have perverted the Ways of our Youth, that they will not
parallel this straight and easy Rule, shall Gods Righteousness be prejudiced
by our Iniquity? shall not his Ways (this Way of Life) be equal, because our
Ways be unequal? Must we become like Seneca's blind Woman, who accused every
place, wherein she could not see, for being too dark: must the Scriptures for
our Blindness of heart, be thought Obscure? not in themselves (says the
Jesuit) but unto us: how unto us? or unto which of us? only to such as are
therefore become Blind, because they have not in time, been made acquainted
with this Light. For otherwise the Scriptures were written to Enlighten us, not
themselves, or such as wrote them. And unto such, as are Blinded in their own
desires, Difficult they are and Obscure, without any respect of Persons: to the
Pope, as well as to any meaner Man, not more Proud, or Carnal then He. Thus we
see our Adversaries cannot offer one Blow against us in this point, but we can
make it fall more heavy upon themselves. And well were it, if their Objections
did light heavy only upon the Objecters themselves, for they have deserved it.
But here I must entreat the Christian Reader to consider well upon whom their
usual Objections of Scriptures Obscurity are most likely to fall: Upon us, for
whose good they were given; Or upon God the Father who gave them; his Son that
partly spoke them; his Holy Spirit who only taught them; his Prophets,
Apostles, Evangelists, or other his blessed Ministers which wrote them.

CAP. XV.
The Romanisis Objections against the Scriptures for being Obscure do more
directly impeach their first Author and his Messengers their Penmen, then us,
or the Cause in hand.

1 THat these Scriptures (which our Church holds Canonical, and we now maintain
to be the Rule of Faith) were given for the good of Christ's Church, or
Multitude of faithful men throughout the World, our Adversaries will not deny:
or if they would, the Scriptures, which expressly to deny they dare not, bear
evident Testimony hereof. Infinite places are brought to this purpose, by such
as handle that Question, Whether the written Word contain all Points necessary
to Salvation.

2 Saint John says he wrote his Gospel that we might Believe. By what T^ P^
such as observe the former Rules) proved from the End why they were writter,
and the Evangelists careful endea^ to make them plain.
Authority did he undertake, by whose Assistance did he perform this Work?
Undertaken it was by Gods appointment, effected by the assistance of his
Eternal Spirit, to the end we might Believe the Truth: what Truth? That which
he wrote concerning the Mysteries of man's Salvation. But how far did he intend,
this our Belief of such Mysteries should be set forward by his pen: Unto the
first Rudiments only, or unto the midway of our Course to Heaven? Questionless
unto the utmost Period of all our Hopes: for he wrote these things that we
might Believe; (...) 20 31.
yea so believe in Christ as by Believing we might have Life through his Name.
Was he assisted by the Eternal Spirit, who then perfectly knew the several
tempers, and capacities of evey Age? And did he by his direction aim at the
perfect Belief of succeeding Ages, as the end and scope of all his Writings?
And yet did he write so obscurely, that he could not be understood of them, for
whose good he wrote? Out of Controversy his desire was to be understood of
all, for he envied no man Knowledge, nor taught he the Faith of our glorious
Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons. (...) 2. 1.
He wished that not the great Agrippa's, or some few choice ones only, but all
that should hear or read his Writings to the Worlds end, might be, not almost,
but altogether such as he was, Faithful Believers. From his fervent desire of
so happy an end as the Salvation of all, he so earnestly sought the only
correspondent Means, to wit, Posterities full instruction in the Mysteries
thereto belonging. And for better Symbolizing with the ignorant, or men (as
most of us are) of duller capacity in such profound Mysteries: his Paraphrase
upon our Saviors speeches, is oft-times so copious, as would be censured for
polixity or Tautology in an Artist. But seeing the common salvation of others,
not his own Applause, was the thing he sought, he disdains not to repeat the
same thing, sometimes in the same, otherwhiles in different words, becoming in
speech as his fellow 1 (...). 9. 22.
Apostle was in Carriage, All unto all, that he might at leastwise, of every
sort gain some: oft-times ^
solicitous to prevent all occasion of mistaking our Saviors Meaning, though
in matters wherein Ignorance could not be deadly, nor Error so easy or
dangerous, as in those other Profundities of greatest moment, which he so
dilates and works upon, as if he would have them transparent to all Christian
eyes.

2 Do not all the Evangelists aim at the same end? do they not in as plain
(...) as they could devise, or we would wish, divulge to all the world the true
Sense and Meaning of our Saviors Parables, which neither the promiscuous
Multitude, to whom he spoke, nor his select Disciples or Apostles themselves
(until they were privately instructed) understood aright, as they themselves
testify: so little ashamed are they to confess their own, so they may hereby
expel or prevent like, ignorance, in others. Tell me: were not our Saviors
Parables expounded by his blessed mouth, as plain Rules of Life as may (without
prejudice to his all sufficiency) be expected from any other man's? Are not his
similitudes (wherein notwithstanding are wrapped the greatest Mysteries of the
Kingdom) drawn from such matters of common Use, as cannot change whilst Nature
remains the same? for the most part so plain and easy, as will apply themselves
to the attentive, or wel-exercised in Moralities? Strange it seemed unto our
Savior that his Disciples should not at the first proposal understand them.
Mark. 4. 13. Mat. 15. 16.
Perceive ye not this Parable? how should you then understand all other
Parables? Yet happy were they, that they were not ashamed to bewray their
Ignorance, by asking when they doubted, though in a point of little Difficulty.
This good desire of progress in their course begun, brought them within the
Hemisphere of that glorious light, whereby they were enabled afterward to
discern the greatest Mysteries of the Kingdom. And unto their Question
concerning the meaning of that great Parable of the Sower, which is one of the
Fundamental Rules of Life; Our Savior immediately replies Mark. 4. 11. These
words confirm the Truth of the state of the Question proposed by us.
To you it is given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God: but unto them
that are without, all thing are done in Parables, that they hearing may hear,
and not understand, lest at any time they should turn, and their sins should be
forgiven them.

4 Had our Evangelists only set out the Text and concealed the Comment, it
might have ministered matter of suspicion, whether all Christians throughout all
generations, whilst this Gospel shall endure, should be taught of God from the
greatest to the least of them; or, whether Christ had not appointed some great
infallible Teacher as his Vicar general to supply the same place successively
in the Church, that he himself had born amongst his Disciples; One, on whose
living Voice all the Flock, besides, were in all Doubts or Difficulties to rely
as the Apostles did on Christ's in the unfolding of this Parable. But seeing
they have plainly revealed to us in writing, what was revealed to them
(concerning the Meaning of this and other Parables of greatest Use) from our
blessed Saviors Mouth; Their written Relations of these mysteries with their
Expositions must be of the same Use and Authority unto us, as Christ's living
Words were unto them. And as they were not to repair unto any other but their
Master alone John. 6. 68.
for the Word of Eternal Life; not to omit any other infallible Teacher for
declaration of his Meaning: so may not any Christian to this day infallibly
rely upon any man's Expositions of his Words, already expounded by himself, and
related by his Apostles; these laid up like precious seed in our hearts, the
diligent labors of Gods ordinary Ministers only supposed, would bring forth
the true and perfect Knowledge of other Precepts of life, in abundance,
competent to every man in his rank and order.

5 For seeing what our Savior imparted to his Disciples in private, is now by
Gods Providence plainly communicate unto us. This is an Argument beyond
exception, that we are not in their Case, who in that Parable are said to be
Without, but of their Number to whom it is given to know the Mysteries of the
Kingdom of God; unless we will in Life and manners imitate Hypocrites rather
then Christ's Disciples. And lest we should prove like these Jews, which having
ears to hear would not hear, though Mark. 4. 9.
invited thereto by our Savior: our Evangelists inculcate again and again the
Causes of this Dullness in hearing, or conceiving what is heard, or Averseness
from the Truth in some sort conceived. They tell us, the Jews, sometimes for
John 5. 44. and 12. 42.
Ambition, sometimes for Luke 16. 14.
Convetousnesse, John 8 39. Matthew. 3. 9.
generally, for Presumption, Pride, and Hypocrisy, in saying they had Abraham
for their Father, did make themselves incapable of saving Knowledge. To what
purpose do men, guided by the Spirit of God, inclucate these or like
Admonitions so often? That the growth of such carnal Assections might in all
succeeding Ages be prevented: That Christian Parents, fore warned by the
lamentable Issue of this stubbornness in Abraham's Seed, might teach their
Children these heavenly Lessons, which had been so distasteful to the Jews,
before these or other inveterate Humors had brought them to the same or like
Distemper. For, (as I observed before, and this Parable directly proves) might
celestial Seed take root in Childrens hearts before these Secular Weeds sprung
up: their Souls should continually receive Blessing from God, and daily drink
in these Streams of Life, which found no entrance into such Jewish barren Soil,
as did bear nothing but Thorns and Brambles, whose end was to be burned, as
altogether unworthy of more Hebr. 6. 8.
watering.

6 Shall either the World, Devil, or Flesh, be able to breed the least
Suspicion in any Christian Heart; whether God who enabled the Apostles and
Evangelists to speak so plainly to the Capacity of all sorts of men, in every
Nation, cannot either by increasing internal Docilitie in succeeding Ages, or
sublevating their dull Capacity by facility and plenty of external Means,
repair whatsoever the Injuries of time might detract from the Perspicuitie of
Writings Apostolical, or Evangelical. So that although the decay of Dialects,
absoluteness of Phrase, or Alterations of Customs, (whereunto they allude as
well known then, because in use) might breed some difficulty unto Posterity:
yet (unless true Faith be decayed with them, or all Characters of Gods
Providence worn out of our hearts) how can we distrust, whether, He, by whose
Wisdom, as well Divine Mysteries unheard before, as skill to utter them in
every Language, were extraordinarily and immediately infused into illiterate
Souls, without the help or Ministry of Man; cannot or will not, by his good
Blessing upon our endeavors in the ordinary Course of attaining skill in
Sacred Tongues, continue the use of Tongues and all other good Means
whatsoever, necessary or expedient, either for our right understanding, or
communicating, the infallible Truth already taught, without any others
infallible Assistance besides his, who can teach us as infallibly by Means in
themselves not infallible, as he has done others without any Means at all. To
doubt of Gods Providence in this Point, were to doubt whether he were the same
God still: and if the same, he will (albeit by other Means) perform the same
Effects still; unless the sins of the Christian World deserve the contrary,
and pull that Blindness, which (in our Saviors time) reigned in those Jews,
upon themselves, by like Hardness of heart, Pride, or Hypocrisy. And if so
they do, what shall this supposed Infallibility of the Pope avail? Is his
Teaching more infallible then Christ's was? shall he Loose, where God has
Bound? shall he disanull what the Almighty has ratisied? shall he make the
Scriptures clear to them, before whose hearts the Lord has laid a Veil? Or
shall he give Sight, where he that made the eye has called for Blindness? Oh
that they could remember this who have forgotten their God and cannot see, that
whosoever accuses the Scriptures of Disheultie or Obscurity, does indict the
Omnipotent of Impotencie, in not being able to perform what by his Apostles he
intended.

CAP. XVI.
That all the Pretenses of Scriptures Obscurity are but Mists and Vapors
rising from the Corruption of the flesh, and may by the pure Light of
Scriptures rightly applied, easily be dispelled.

1 UNto this and all Demands of like nature [if the Scriptures be not Obscure,
how chances it, that so many find such Difficulties in them, even in those
places, which seem to contain in them matters of Faith?] The Answer is already
given: It was the Almighties good pleasure to Decree, that the Scriptures
should be plain and easy to such as faithfully practice their most plain and
easy Precepts, but hard and difficult to be understood aright of such as
Wilfully transgress them, or knowing them to be Gods Word, do not glorify
them as his Word: Most difficult, most impossible to be understood of such as
acknowledging by what Spirit they were written, yet renounce their Authority,
or disclaim them for the Rule of their Faith. All such, though for the
clearness of their understanding in other Speculations they may seem to have
Angelical Heads, yet for Divine Mysteries, have but Jewish or obscure Hearts:
and being Blinded in their minds they imagine the Scripture whereon they look
to be Obscure. This Answer notwithstanding, though most true, will not satisfy
all. For seeing this Blindness in most men is not Voluntary, at the least, not
Wilful or affected, the Captions will yet demand; How shall they help it? The
Scriptures plainly teach, how, they may be helped. What can be more plain then
that Rule: James 1. 5.
If any man want Wisdom, let him ask of God: Yea, many do so, and yet go
without it. So they must as the Scripture tells us, if they ask amiss. Does
the Scripture then serve as a straight Rule to direct them, how they should ask
aright? Yes. For what Rule can be more plain then that of Saint John. 1 Job. 3.
22.
Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his Commandments, and
do those things which are pleasing in his sight. The Promise indeed is plain,
but the Condition hard: for the first thing we would ask of God, is Grace to
keep his Commandments. But what hope have sinners to receive this, seeing he
hears only such as keep his Commandments? Will this, or any other Rule of
Scripture help us out of this Labyrinth? It will not fail us, nor forsake us.
For if we have but a desire to amend our lives, Christ's words are as plain, as
forcible, Matt. 12. 20.
He quenches not smoking flix, a bruised reed he will not break. And this is
his Commandment, that we try the Truth of this and other like Sayings of
Comfort by relying upon his mercy; or, if we do but seek after Repentance, we
do that which is pleasing in his sight; For he is not pleased in the death of a
sinner, but rejoices at his Repentance. If we be wanting to our selves in the
Practice of these Rules, the Popes infallible Authority shall never be able to
supply our Negligence; his Blessing, where God has laid his Curse, shall do as
little good, as Balaams endeavor to Curse the Israclites did them harm, whom
God had Blessed. Observing the former Precepts well, the Word of God, which
these men (belike out of their own Experience) challenge of Obscurity, should
be ^sd ^ 1^ 5.
a Lantern unto our feet, and a Light unto our paths, as it was unto David's.

2 For the Readers further Satisfaction, may it please him but unpartially to
consider what two of the most-learned. Jesuits, in matters of modern
Controverses, could answer unto this last place of the Psalmist. (...) would
have two strings to his deceitful and broken Bow. (...) says he, it may be
answered, that the Psalmist speaks not of all Scriptures, but of the
Commandments only. If this answer of his could stand for good, it would serve
as a new Supporter to our former Assertion grounded on our Saviors words in
the seventh of John. For thus the Commandments (...) not be Obscure, but a
Lantern unto our feet, and if we follow them, they will be (as I have showed
before) a perfect Light unto us, to discern tro* Doctrine from false. And in
this respect, all good Commandments (not the Decalogue, or these Ten only)
are properly a Light, whereby we may clearly know as to avoid Evil, so to
discern that which is Good. And by this Light was David conducted unto that
true Wisdom which his enemies wanted. By thy Comman dements thou have made me
wiser then mine enemies. But ^ ^^mpar^ns Apostolus Petrus, habemus, inquit,
certiorem P^ l^c^^uae l^centi in obscuro loco. Quod itaque hi^ air, ^ verb^m
es^ q^od scrip^uris sanctis omnibus continetur. Aug. ^ The (...) into thy w^nds
sh^weth light, and gives understanding ^ Precepts I have g^tt^n understanding:
therefore I have all the wave ^ D^^^ine. A m^^datis ^uis intellexi. Aliud est
mandata ^ q^^d al^ud ^e signi^icet intellexisse a mandatis Dei^ quod ^ ad ear^m
(...) in intelligenti^m q^as concupi^e^it ^ D^ ^inus ^het came tibi, (...)
quisquam ^ ^^pien^ perve^, quam cap^re ^ sed quae ^it ^.
what reason had Bellarmine to think, that David in the forementioned verse
should mean the Commandments only. For there he says plainly, thy Word
(...), which is much more general then (...) Corrmandements, or Testimonies:
yet David says, That he had more understanding then all his Teachers, not the
infallible Teacher that sat (if any such there were) in Moses Chair excepted.
So that his Commandments are a Light, his Testimonies a Light and his Word a
Light. And the best (...), as well Theirs, as Ours, take these words, (...)
(...), Commandments, Words, promiseuously thorowout this whole Psalm. Any one
of these (most of all the most general of all Words) s^gnisie at least all
Scripture which serves for man's Direction, in the way of Life.

3 None can be restrained to the Decalogue only. This Bellarmine saw well
enough. Wherefore his second Answer is; It may (it must) be granted, that he
speaks of all, or rather of the whole Scripture. But the Scriptures, says he,
are called a Lantern and a Light, non quia facile intelligantur, not because
they are Perspicuous and easy to be understood, sed quia intellects cum
fuerint illustrant mentem, but because when they are understood, they
Illuminate the Mind or Understanding. This much we have said before, and still
do grant, that the Scriptures are not plain and easy unto All live they as
they (...) nor do they shine unto Such, as are Blinded in the Pride, Vanity,
or Corruption of their Hearts: yet a Light in themselves, and a Light to all
that Love not Dark^ more than Light. A Light, not after they are understood,
for a David got true understaning by their Light: whose Property is, as well
to thew the way how to avoid that Blindness, which causes them to seem
obscure, as to illuminate the clear-sighted. For as by the Sun we see what
Bodies are (...) transparent or penetrable by its light: so by Scriputres we
discern what be the Obstacles that hinder the intromission of their Splendor,
(in it self, and for it self most apparent) into our Hearts. And the Glimpse of
their (...) Beams, appearing through the Chinks and ruptures of that Veil of
Corruption, which Nature has woven about the eyesight of our Souls, does
enlighten us so far as we begin to desire the Veils removal, that we may have a
full fruition of their mavelous and comfortable Light: as men in the Morning
after long and irksom Darkness (unless desirous with the sluggard in the
Proverbs to have a little more sleep) are occasioned to open their Windows,
when they see the Sunbeams appear in at the Chinks. My meaning is, those
Precepts whereof I spoke before [to learn Humility and Meekness, Gods
Threatenings to sinners, his sweet Promises to the Penitent, to pray for Wisdom
from above, and infinite other like] are so Perspicuous and clear that they
cannot but find entrance into Enveiled, if not withal maliciously Wilful or
sluggish Hearts: and finding entrance, cannot but suggest Considerations Romans
13. 11, 12, 13.
what their former Life has been, and whereunto their now professed Hopes do
call them, that now it is time they should arise from sleep, seeing Salvation
draws nearer then when they first Believed, that the Night is past, and the
Day at hand, therefore time to cast away the works of Darkness, and put on the
armor of Light, to walk honestly as in the Day, not in Gluttory and
Drunkenness, neither in Chambering and Wantonness, nor in Strife and Envy.
Unto Hearts thus prepared the Scriptures need no other Commendation then their
own, no infallible Proposers Authority to illustrate or confirm their Truth,
more then the Sun does a more glorious Star to manifest his Brightness unto
men endued with perfect sight. For unto such as walk like Children of the
Gospels Light, nothing necessary to their Souls health can be hid in
Darkness; not the Day of Destruction, which shall come as a snare upon other
Inhabitants of the earth, can 1 Thessalonians. 5. 2.
steal upon them as a thief in the night.

4 But unto Infidels, Haughty, and Proud-minded men, unto such as delight in
Sin, and love to sleep in sinful Pleasures, unto such as scorn to be
controlled in their Courses the Light of Gods Word, if it once shine, or send
some scattered Rays into their hearts, it shines not so again, for they draw a
Curtain, and spread the Veil, lest further intromission of such Beams might
interrupt their pleasant sleep. This did Luther well teach (had he been as well
understood) that the Scripture was only Obscure or difficult unto Infidels or
proud minds. But Bellarmine Bell lib 3 de verbo Dei. c. 1.
replies, At certe David non erat superbus aut infidelis: Surely David was
neither a proud man, nor an Infidel, and yet the Scripture was Obscure and
difficult to him. Let him be accounted both, that thinks David was either, a
proud man or an Infidel. But the Question is not whether he were, but what was
the Cause he was not such: was it not Psalm 19* (...) Psalm. 119. 104.
the Perfection of Gods Law which did convert his soul? was it not the
Certainty of Gods Testimonies that gave Wisdom unto his Simplicity? Yes, by
these Precepts he had gotten understanding, to have all the ways of Falsehood.
Verse 92.
And except that Law had been his delight, he had perished in his Affliction.
Psalm. 19. 8.
How then does Bellarmine prove that Law was Obscure to him, which as he
himself confesses Videbat I utherus posse (...), u^^de (...) tot
controvers^ae, si scriptura est tam clara: duo effugia excogitavit; u^um, quod
Scriptura, etiamsi alicu^i sit ob^cura, tamen illud idem alibi clare proponit.
Al^^rum, quod Scriptura, licet per se cla i^sima, tam^n s^p^r^is and
i^fidel^^us sit obscura ob eorum coecitatem, and pravum affectum. Addit
Brenti^s in p^oleg: Coutra Pe^^um a Soto, re^^ium ^st^gium, quod etiam interdum
sit obscura, propter ph^ases alienae lingu^, id est, Hebraicae and Grae^ae,
tamen (...) ^ju^ (...) sir. Q^^ sententia manifesto salsa est: nam scriptura
ipsa de sua difficultate atque of scuritate testimonium (...). Psl. 119. Danihi
intellectum, and scrutabor legem ^^am. Ibid. Revela oculos meos, and
considerabo mirabilia de lege (...). (...). Faci^m ^ illumina super servum
tuum, and doce me justificationes tuas. Et certe David noverat totam
scripturam, q^ae (...), and noverat phrases linguae Hebraicae, nec erat
superbus aut ^nfidelis. Bella^m lib. 3. de verbo Dei c^p 1. (...) would ^ the
Scriptures to be obscure, because David praye^ to God for the right
understanding of them. And V^lent an (...) persuade us to rely upon the
Churches infallible Authority, because it is a hard matter to pray unto God
(as S A^gu^) for the gift of Interpretation. His words are these: Q^id autem
precatio ad Deum pro sap^entiae interpretati^ (...)? An exigua difficultes est
and pie and per^everanter illud cum eodem Augustino lib. 11. Couse^^ Cap 2
ora^^: Domine attend, etc. Valent. tom. 3. disp. 1. quast 1. pu^ct. 7. paragr.
4. These words of Valentian immediately sollow his sormer obser^^tion upon S.
Austin, noted Paragr. 11. chap. 14.
had given Light unto his eyes. If it were not, why did he pray to God to
understand it? Then I perceive the Jesuits drift in this present Controversy
is to establish a Rule of Faith, so easy and infallible as might direct in all
the ways of Truth without Prayer to God, or any help from Heaven Such a one it
seems, they desire as all might understand at the first sight, though living as
luxuriously as their Popes, or minding worldly matters as much as their
Cardinals: Nili velint nimium esse ^aeci, unless they would, as Valentian
speaks, desire to be Blind.

5 Surely more blind then Beetles must they be that can suffer themselves to be
persuaded, that ever God or Christ would have a Rule for man's direction in the
Mysteries of Salvation, so plain and easy, as he should not need to be
beholden to his Maker and Redeemer, for the true and perfect understanding of
it. This is a Wisdom and Gift, which comes only from above, and must be daily
and earnestly sought for at the hands of God: who (we may rest assured) will be
always more ready to grant our Petitions herein with less changes. then the
Pope to give his Decisions in a doubtful Case. ^ad David ask a this Wisdom of
him that sat in Moses Chair, we might suspect the Pope, might be sued unto.
But David's God is our God, his Lord, our Christ, our Redeemer and has spoken
more plainly unto us then unto David, who yet by his meditations on Gods
written Laws, added Light to Moses Writings, as later Prophets have done to his
All which in respect of the Gospels Brightness are but as Lights shining in
dark places: yet even the least conspicuous amongst them; Such, as will give
manifest evidence against us to our eternal Condemnation, if we seek this
Wisdom from any others then Christ's, his Prophets and Apostles Doctrine, by any
other Means or Mediatourship, then David did his, From Gods Law written by
Moses.

6 Let us now see what Valentian can say unto the forecited ^ 119. ^.
Testimony, and to that ^ 1. ^
other like unto it. [We have also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the
which ye do well that ye take heed as unto a ^.
Light that shines in a ^k place, until the day dawn, and the Day Star
arises in your hearts] ^.
It is true (says the Doctor) the word of God is a Light, and this Light is
clear and illuminates the eyes. But it must be considered, how it comes to
enlighten our eyes: Do you su pos that it effects this, in as much as every man
does comprehend it, within the (...) of his private wit, or industry, as it
were in a little bushel? Nothing less. But ^ it, as it is placed in the
Authority of the Catholic Church, as in a Candlestick, where it may give Light
to all that are in the house. For we shall show (says he) ^ place, that this
Authority of the Church is the living Judge and Mistress of ^th. (...)
therefore is it necessary, that she should carry this Light, which is cont^
Holy W^it, and show it unto all, that associate themselves to her, and remain ^
bosom; although they be unlearned men, and such as are not able by themselves
to behold this Light, as it is contained in the Scriptures as in a Lanthorn.

^ sit hoc (...) non in se modo lucidum, verum etiam (ut reglus Propheta. Psalm.
18. dicet) ^ qua (...) ^squisque ingenii proprii a^que industriae suae fi^i^u,
illud (...) q^am (...) ^ sed quaten^s est divinitus in Eccles^ae Catholicae
Authori^^^^ ^ qui in d^mo sunt, Matthew. 5. Hanc enim Eccl^s^^ Auth^ fidei vivam:
idcirco nec^sse est, ut (...) illud fidei, quod ^endat omnibus, qui ad eam
agg^, in ^aque ^ent, li^ illud, ut in ipsis literis sanctis tanquam in luce^^a
contin^^ur. (...). ^ 4.
7 He that could find in his heart to spend his groat, or go a mile to see a
Camel dance a Jigge; let him but lay his finger on his mouth, that he spoil not
the Pageant with immoderate laughing, and he may (without any further cost, or
pains) be partaker of as pretty a Sport, to see a grand demure* School-Divine,
laying aside his wonted habit of Metaphysical Proof, turned Doctor Similitude
on a sudden, and swaggering it in the Metaphorical Cut. For what one joint or
strain is there, in this long laborious vast Similitude, that does any way
incline unto the least semblance of Truth: or can be drawn, to illustrate any
such Meaning, as this man intended; or any way to break the force of our
Writers Arguments drawn from the forecited places? For, first, what Semblance
is there between a private man's Interpretation, or Comprehension of
Scripture-sence, and the putting of a Light or Candle under a Bushel? For what
though some one, some few, or more such men, will apprehend this or that to be
the full Meaning of some controversed place in Scripture? I am (by our Churches
Doctrine) no more bound to Believe them, then I am to Believe the Pope of Rome,
whom I never saw, nor knew. I am bound to Believe neither of them more, then if
they should tell me, that the whole Light of that candle which shines alike to
all, were only comprehended in their eyes. For by our Doctrine I may behold
the same Light of Scriptures, which they do, as freely as they; Judge of it by
mine own eyes and Sense as well as they; not only submit my Sense and
judgment unto theirs. But if we should (as this ^esuite would have us) permit
the judgment of all Scripture-sence, wholly and irrevocably unto the Pope and
his Cardinals; as if their Consistory were the complete Hemisphere, or rather
the (...) sphere, the whole sphere wherein this heavenly Lamp does shine: then
indeed we should see no more of its Light, then we could of a Candle put under
a Bushel, or locked up in some close Room; In which Case we might Believe
others, that it did shine there still, but whether it did so or no, we could
not Judge by our own eyes. And in like manner would this Doctor persuade us,
that we should judge of this Light of Scriptures, only by the Testimony or
Authority of such, as see it shine in the Consistory at Rome, not with our
own eyes. Had the Lord permitted but one grain of good wit to have remained in
this Bushel of Bran; not Impudency in grain could without Plushing have
offered to accuse our Church for hiding the Light of Scriptures under a
Bushel; when as we contend, the free Use of it should be permitted to the
whole Congregation. But he disputes of the Light, as Blind men may of Colors.
He lived at Ingolstade, and the Light of Gods Word was at Rome locked up within
the compass of the Consistory, so that he could not see to make his
comparison of it. Secondly, what Proportion is there between the Churches
Authority, (such Authority as he claims for his Church) and a Candlestick? Let
the Consistory be supposed the Candlestick, wherein the word of God does shine
as a Light or Candle. Does it indeed shine there? unto whom? To all that will
associate themselves to that Church? Come then, let every man exhort his
Neighbor to repair to the Mountain of the Lord. Shall we there immediately see
the Truth of Scriptures, clearly and distinctly with our own eyes, because the
Pope, or Trent-Councel holds out unto us the Books of Canonical Scripture? May
private Spirits discern their true Sense in matters of Faith, as clearly as if
they were a Light indeed to thee? Oh no, you quite mistake his meaning, in
making such Collections; Let Valentian explicate himself in the end of this
fourth Paragraph.

8 ^quam Ecclesia sententiam al^q^am ex Scriptura colligit, scripturan que
proinde, ut est a se secun^um Apostolic^m traditionem ^ntell^cta, c^^tr^^iis
er^us opponit: s^ a improbitas est, aliquid pr^^erea d^siderare in ejusmodi
scripturae vel autho^ita^e, v^l inte^p^etatione, q^^cunque id fiat ^ive di^tis
^ive obscu^i^atis praetextu. Q^ae (...) scriptura per authorita^^m Ecclesia
commenda(...), explica^ue, ea jam h^c ipso and maxim (...) authentica, and
^ple^di^ (...) clarissi^ que (...), tanquam (...), vide(...) (ut supra
expo^eban us) posita super candela^^um. Tom. 3. disp. (...). q^aest. 1. punct.
7. par^graph. 4.
After the Church has once gathered any Opinion out of Scriptures, and
thereupon opposes the Scripture (thus understood by it, according to the
Apostolical Tradition) unto contrary Errors: It is extreme Impiety and
wickedness to desire any more, (either concerning the Authority or
Interpretation of that parcel of Scripture) under what Pretense soever, of
Difficulty, Obscurity or the like. To that Scripture (I pray mark his words
well) which is commended and expounded unto us by the Authority of the Church,
that Scripture now (ea jam) even for this Reason (hoc ipso) is most Authentic,
and shines most splendently, mojt clearly, like a Light, videlicet, as we have
formerly expounded put upon a Candlestick: Nay in good sooth just like a
Candlestick put upon a Light or Candle. For in this Country wherein we live,
we see the Candlestick by virtue of the Light, not the Light by means or virtue
of the Candlestick. And yet if your Church be the Candlestick, as you suppose,
and the Scripture the Light (as you expressly acknowledge:) we must by your
Doctrine discern the Light of Scriptures, only by the Commendation,
Explication, or Illumination of your Church, the Candlestick. And this
Illumination is only her bare Asseveration, for Scriptures she seldom expounds,
but only by Negatives or Anathemas. The best Correction that can be made of
this untoward, crooked, unwieldly Similitude, would be this: whereas this
Doctor supposes the Pope to be the Church, and says further, necesse est ut
lumen illud si dei quod in divinis literis splendet praeser at Ecclesia: Let
him put lucem for lumen and so the Pope (being by his Assertion the Church) may
be truly called Lucifer. And then, as, when Cloth shrinks in the wetting, men
shape their Garments accordingly, making sometimes a Jerkin of that which was
intended for a Jacket: so out of this unhandsome ill-spun similitude, which was
marred in the making, we may frame a shorter, which will hold exceeding well, on
this fashion: Even as Satan, being the Prince of Darkness, does to men's
seeming transform him self into an Angel of Light: Just so does the Roman
Lucifer, being (by Valentians Confession) but the Candlestick, labor to
transform him self into the Light it self; and would be taken for such a Light
or Candle, as should make the very Light of Heaven it self (Gods Word) to shine
most splendently and clearly by the glorious Beams of his Majestical
Infallibility once cast upon it. For otherwise, unless the Supernatural Glory
of his Infallibility do infuse Light, or add fresh Luster to this Light, or
Lantern of Truth, the Candlestick naturally gives no increase of perspicuity to
the Light or Candle, Which will shine as clear in a private Man's hands, (so he
will take the pains to hold it) as in a Public Candlestick. But that which ^.
I would have the serious Reader to observe especially, is this Speech of his;
Scripture, as once commended unto us, or expounded by the Churches Authority
becomes thereby most Authentic, and shines most clearly, and most splendently.
For this same Doctor, (if a Doctor may be said the same, affirming and denying
the same) in the beginning of that Dispute would gladly shuffle so, as he
should not be taken with that Trick, which will discredit their Cause for ever,
and descry their villainous Blasphemy in this Doctrine of their Churches
Authority. There he would persuade us, that he does not allow of this Speech,
[I believe this or that to be a Divine Revelation, because the Church does tell
me so:] or of this; [the Church is the Cause, why I believe the Divine
Revelations:] whereas this Speech of his, (Quae Scriptura per Authoritatem)
does infer the Authority of the Church to be the very principal, and immediate
Cause of our Assent unto Scriptures.

9 Secondly, I would have the sober Christian Reader to observe, what an
unhallowed and unchristian Conceit it is, to admit the Scriptures for a
Lantern, and yet to affirm that Christians cannot behold the Light therein
contained, but only as the Church of Rome does hold it out, what is this else,
but to call the People from the marvailous Light Yet have the Papists in times
of Darkness born the People in hand that the Bible was the Holy Mount which no
man might approach but the Priest
of the Gospel, unto the fearful Lightnings of the Law? And to make the Pope
that Mediator, which the People implicitly did request Exodus 20. 18.
when they desired that Moses might speak to them, not God. If we be in Christ,
then are we not called into Mount Sinai, to burning Fire, Blindness,
Darkness, and Tempests; this Light of the Gospel is not environed with a
fearful Cloud, or Smoke, threatening Destruction if we should go up into the
Mount to hear the Lord himself speak: we have an Advocate with the Father, and
need not look for a Moses to go up for us, while we stand trembling a far off.
For as our Apostle tells us, Heb. 12. 22. We are come unto the Mount Sion, and
to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the company of
innumerable Angels, and to the congregation of the firstborn, which are
written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just and
perfect men, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Testament, and to the blood
of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that of Abel. What is the
Consequence or Effect of this our Calling? Our Apostle makes this Inference,
verse 25. See therefore that ye despise not him that speaks. Whom did he
mean? The Pope, or Cardinals? But they would be but of like Authority as Moses
was? but he that Speaks untous, is of far greater. For so our Apostle
collects, See that ye despise not him that speaks: for if they escape not,
which refused him, that spoke on Earth, much more shall we not escape, if we
turn away from him which speaks from Heaven. The Israelites I suppose had
despised Moses, if they had admitted any other infallible Teacher besides him,
whilst he was alive, or believed any other, as well as his Writings, after his
death, but only so far forth, as they could discern their Words to be consonant
unto his. If Moses Writings were to these Jews a plain Rule of Faith, then much
more must Christ's Word, registered by his Apostles and Evangelists, by the Rule
of Faith unto us. That Moses Doctrine was their Rule of Faith, a Rule most
plain and easy, these places following abundantly testify.

CAP. XVII.
That the Mosaical Writings were a most perfect Rule, plain and easy to the
Ancient Israelites.

1 SO perfect Directions had Moses left for Posterities perpetual instruction,
that a great The Author of the ^8. Psalm. v. 3, and 4.
Prophet in later Ages, desirous to bring Gods people into the right Paths
which their Fathers had forsaken, and for this purpose professing to impart to
them whatsoever he had heard or learned, from his godly Ancestors: does but
trace out the Print of Moses footsteps, almost obliterate and overgrown by the
sloth and negligence of former Times, wherein every man had trod what way he
liked best. And though the same Prophet descend to later Ages, as low as
David's; Yet he proceeds still by the same Rule, relating nothing but such
Historical Events or Experiments as confirm the Truth of Moses divine
Predictions, such as are yet extant in Canonical Scriptures. So perfect and
absolute in his judgment, was that Part of the Old Testament which then was
written, to instruct, not only the Men such as he was, but every Child of God;
that he presumes not to know or teach more them in It was written. And thus
much this people should have done by Moses Precept, without a Prophet for their
Remembrancer. ^.
And these Words which I command thee this day, shall be in thine heart. And
thou shall rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them
when thou tarriest in thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when the
liesi down, and when thou risest up. And thou shall bind them for a Sign upon
thine hand, and they shall be as Frontlets between thine eyes. Also thou shall
write them upon the posts of thine house, and upon thy gates. And again S^t
your hearts unto all the Words, which I command you this day, that you may
command them unto your children, that they may observe, and do all the Words of
this Law. For it is no vain Word concerning you, but it is your Life: and by
this Word you shall prolong your days.

2 Questionless they that were bound to observe, and do this Law, were bound
to know it; and yet Moses refers them not to his Successor, as if it were so
obscure, that it could not possibly be known without his Infallibility; but on
the contrary, he supposes it so plain and easy, that every Father might
instruct his Son in it, and every Mother her Daughter. It was their own daily
Experience of the fruits and benefits in Obeying, of their harms and plagues in
Disobeying his Precepts, which was to seal their Truth unto their Consciences.
For without such Observation, without squaring their Lives, and comparing their
Thoughts, and Actions unto this straight and plain Rule, all other Testimonies
of men, or Authorities of their most infallible Teachers were in vain. The
Miracles which they had seen to day, were quite forgotten ere nine days after.
Nor could their Persuasions, or conceit of Moses Infallibility, serve them for
any Rule, when they had shaken off these inward Cogitations, and measured not
the Truth of his Predictions by Experiments. In their Temptations they were as
ready to disclaim Moses, as always they were to distrust God whose mighty
Wonders they had seen. To what use then did the sight of all Gods Wonders, or
of Miracles wrought by Moses serve? Motives they were necessary and excellent
to incline their stubborn hearts to use this Law of God for their Rule, in all
their Actions and proceedings: and to cause them set their hearts unto it, as
Moses in his ^.
last Words commands them. For this Law, as he had told them ^.
before, was in their Hearts.

3 Would any man that does fear the Lord, or reverence his Word, but set his
heart to read over this Book of Deuteronomy, or the one hundred and nineteenth
with sundry other Psalms, but with ordinary Observation or attention, (that so
the Character of Gods Spirit, so lively imprinted in them, might be as an
Amulet to prevent the Jesuits Enchantments:) It would be impossible for all
the wit of Men or Angels, ever to fasten the least suspicion on his thoughts,
whether the Ancient Faithful Israelites did take this Law of Moses for their
Infallible Rule in all their proceedings. For nothing can be made more evident,
then this Truth is in it self; That the Israelites Swarving from this Rule, was
the Cause of their departure from their God; and the Occasion, or Cause of
their Swarving from it, was this devilish Persuasion, which Satan suggested to
them then, (as the Jesuits do unto the Christian People now:) That this Law
was too Obscure, too Hard, too Difficult to be understood: no complete Rule for
their actions, without Traditions, or ^.
relying upon their Priests or Men in chief Authority. This Hypocrisy Moses
did well foresee would be the beginning of all their Miseries, the very
Watchword to Apostasy. For which Cause he labors so seriously to prevent it.
Deuteronomy 30. 14. For this Commandment which I set before thee this day, is not hid
from thee, neither far off, but the Word is very near unto thee, even in thy
mouth, and in thy heart, to do it. How was it in their Mouths and in their
Hearts, when it was so obscure, and difficult unto them, after Moses Death? It
was in their Hearts, and in their Posterity too, had they set their hearts to
it. But as it is true, Pars sanitatis est velle sanari, It is a part of Health
to be willing to be healed; so was it here Pars morbi, nolle sanari, more then
a part of this their grievous Disease, (their Blindness of heart) was their
pronenesse to be persuaded that this Word or Doctrine, which Moses here taught
was too Obscure, and Difficult for them to follow. They first began (as the
Jesuits do) to pick Quarrels with God: for which their Stubbornness he gave
them over to their hearts desire: And this his Sacred Word, which should have
been a Lantern unto their feet, and a Light unto their paths, as it was to
David's, became a stumbling Block, and a Stone of offense, 1 Cor. 1. 23. What
was the reason? By their swarving from this plain and straight Rule their ways
became crooked, and their actions unjust. And it is the Observation of the wise
Son of Sirach. Eccle. 39. 24
As Gods ways are right, and plain unto the just, so are they stumbling Blocks
unto the wicked. Not Moses himself, had he been then alive, could have made
this, or any other true Rule of Faith, plain unto these Jews, whilst they
remained perverse and stubborn. And had they (without Moses, or any infallible
Teachers help) cast off this Crookedness of heart, Moses his infallible
Doctrine had still remained easy, straight and plain unto them. For it was in
their Hearts, though hid and smothered in the Wrinkles of their crooked Hearts.
In our Saviors time, they will not assent unto the Word written, nor unto the
Eternal Word, unto which all the Writings of the Prophets gave Testimony,
unless they may see a John 6. 30.
Sign; What was the Cause? They had not laid Moses Commandments to their
hearts. For John 5. 46.
had they (from their hearts) Quod vero su^j^^git Malachias, Mementote legis
Moi^i servi mei qua^ mandavi ei in Ch^reb ad o^^em Israel: pr^cepta and judicia
opp^rtune comme^orat, post decl^^atum (...) ^ inter observato^es l^^is contemp^
discrimen: si^^l etiam u^ discant leg^^ (...) (...), and (...) in (...) (...)
(...) q^^m judicem faci^nd^ est inter bonos and malos ipsa discretio. Non enim
s^^s^ra idem Dominu^ ait Judais, si ^e (...) Moisi, crederetis and mihi. De
meenim ille scripsit: Carnaliter quippe accipiendo leg^m, and ejus ^ stium
figuras esse nescientes in illa murmura co^ruerunt, ut dicere auderent: (...)
^st qui (...) D^^ ^t quid amplius quia cus^ mandata ejus, and quia ambulavimus
simplices ante ^aciem Do^ August. de (...) Dei lib. 20. cap. 28.
Believed Moses, they had Believed 1 Cor. 1. 22.
Christ. For all whose Miracles, wrought for their good, in their sight and
presence, they cannot or will not see, that his Words were The Words of Eternal
Life, as Peter confesses, John 6. 68. Nor would any Jesuit have acknowledged
as much, had be been in their place. For why should he? Any other might say, he
had the Spirit of God, and that he was the Messiah; and what if Peter one of
his Fellows, late a Fisherman, did confess him? The Scribes and Pharisees,
principal Members of the visible Church, deny him to be their Messiah. And how
should they know his Words to be the Word of God, unless the Church had
confirmed them? If Christ himself should have said in their hearing as he did
to the Jews, John 5. 46. Moses wrote of me, consider his Doctrine, and lay it
to your hearts: A Jesuit would have replied, You say Moses wrote of you; But
how shall we know that he meant you? Moses is dead, and says nothing, and they
that sit in his Chair say otherwise. And verily the Scribes and Pharisees had
far greater Probabilities to plead for the Infallibility of that Chair, then
the Jesuits can have for their Popes: who, had they been in the others place,
could have coined more matter out of that one saying of our Savior, Mat. 23.
2. Sedent in Cathedra Mosis, for the Scribes and Pharisees infallible
Authority, then all the Papists in the world have been able to extract out of
all the Scriptures that are or can be urged, for the Pope or Church of Romes
Infallibility.

4 The Scribes and Pharisees (though no way comparable to the ^esuites, for
cunning in painting rotten, or subtilty in oppugning Causes true and and) could
urge for themselves, against such as confessed Christ, that none of the Rulers,
nor of the Pharisees did Believe in him; but only a Cursed Crew of such as knew
not the Law, John 7. 48. They could Object the Law was obscure, and the
interpretation of it did belong to them. But could these pretenses excuse the
people for not obeying Christ's Doctrine? You will say (perhaps) they could not
be excused, because Christ's Miracles were so many and manifest. These were
somewhat indeed, if Christ had been their Accuser. But our ^.
Savior says plainly, that he would not accuse them to his Father. And for
this cause he would not work many Miracles amongst such as were not moved with
the like already wrought, lest he should increase their Sins. If Christ did
not, who then had reason to accuse them? Moses as it is in the same place, did:
Moses, in whom they trusted and on whom they fastened their Implicit Faith:
Moses, of whom they thought and said, We will Believe as he Believed: Moses,
whose Doctrine they (to their seeming) stood as stiffly for, against Christ's new
Doctrine, (as they supposed) as the Jesuits do for the Catholic Church (as
they think) against Heretics and Sectaries as they term us. Why then is Moses,
whom thus they honored, become their chief Accuser? because while they did
Believe on him, only for Tradition, or from pretense of Succession, or for the
dignity of their Temple, Church, or Nation, they did not indeed Believe Him,
nor his Doctrine. For had they Believed his Doctrine, they had Believed Christ;
For he wrote of Christ. So he might (thinks the Jesuit and yet write so
obscurely of him as his Writings could be no Rule of Faith to the Jews without
the Visible Churches Authority. Yea rather they should and might have been a
Rule unto them for their good, against the Visible Churches Authority, and now
remain a Rule or Law against both, to their just condemnation because the
Doctrine of Christ was so plainly and clearly set down in these writings had
they set their hearts unto them. Even the Knowledge of Christ, the Word of life
it self was in their mouths and in their hearts. For that Commandment which
Moses there gave them, was That Word of Faith, which S. Paul the infallible
Teacher of the Gentiles did preach as he himself testifies, Romans 10. 8. If any
man ask how this Place was so easy to be understood, of Christ; or how by the
doctrine of Moses Law, the doctrine of the Gospel might have been manifested to
their Consciences: my Answer is already set down in our Saviors Words; Had
they done Gods Will (revealed unto them in that Law) they should have known
Christ's Doctrine to have been of God.

5 Had they, according to the prescript of Moses Law, repented them of their
Sins from the bottom of their Hearts, the Lord had blotted all their Wickedness
out of His remembrance. And their hearts once purged of Wickedness would have
exulted in his presence that had made them whole; Faith would have fastened
upon his Person though never seen before. ^.
Not the Moon more apt to receive the Sunbeams cast upon it, then these Jews
hearts to have shined with the Glory of Christ, had they cast away all Pride,
and Self-conceit, or the Glory of their Nation: but unto them, (as now they
are, and long time have been) swollen with Pride, and full of Hypocrisy,
Christ's Glory is but as clear Light to sore or dim-sighted eyes: They wink with
their eyes, lest they should be offended with the Splendour of it. This Doctrine
of Christ, and Knowledge of Scriptures in points of Faith, shall be most
obscure to us, if we follow them in their foolish pretenses of their Visible
Church: most clear, perspicuous, and easy, if we lay Moses Commandments to our
hearts. For Truth Inherent must be as the eyesight, to discern all other
things of like nature.

CAP. XVIII.
Concluding this Controversy according to the state proposed, with the
testimony of Saint Paul.

1 WE may conclude this Point with our 2 Cor. 4. 3. 4.
Apostle; Si Evangelium nostrum tectum est, iis qui pereunt tectum est: in
quibus Deus hujus saeculi excaecavit mentes, id est, infidelibus, ne irradiat
eos lumen Evangelii gloriae Christi, qui est imago Dei. If the Gospel be
Obscure, or rather hid, (For it is a Light, obscure it cannot be. God forgive
me if I used that speech, save only in our Adversaries persons) It is hid only
to such as have the eyes of their mind Blinded by Satan, the God of this World.
Of which Number, may we not (without breach of Charity) think he was one, who
seeing the light and evidence of this place, would not see it; but thought it a
sufficient Answer to say Bellarm. lib. 3. de v^. Dei. ca^ 2. Re^p. ad. 5. ^rg.
The reas^n why (...) with his ^ellows and many other great Sch^l^ars besides,
make such Hyp^iti^al Glasses of S^ plainly teaching what they deny, is their
not considering that the same inordinate Affections which made the Jews to
reject the very ^orical Truth or Letter of the G^spel, makes such as admit it,
content themselves with it only, never locking into the Meaning of the Spirit,
if (...) once contradict their Desi^es. Of this ^alla^^ in the 3. Sect of the
4. bo^k.
Aposiolus non loquitur de intelligentia Scripturarum, sed de cognitione and
side in Christum; The Apostle speaks not of understanding Scriptures, but of
Knowing and Believing in Christ. It is well the Jesuit had so much Modesty in
him as to grant this later, that he spoke at the least of Knowing Christ. For
if the knowledge of Christ be so clear to the godly and elect, then are the
Scriptures clear too, so far as concerns their Faith. For S. Paul wrote this,
and all his Epistles, only to this end, that men might truly come to the
Knowledge of Christ. But he meant of a perfect and true Knowledge, not such as
Bellarmine (when he gave this Answer) dreamed of; ut neque sit puer, neque anus
Christiana, quae non sciat Christum natum, and incarnatum fuisse. Saint Paul's
Cospel was sufficiently known (in this man's Sense of his words) because there
is neither Christian child, nor old wife, but knows that Christ was incarnate
and born. Too many I fear of his, and his fellows catechizing, know Christ no
otherwise, then old Wives, or little Children know ordinary matters or Stories
past, that is, only by old Wives Tales, lying Legends, or Tradition. And on
this fashion, and better, did the Jews Know Moses, and Believed on him; yet did
they neither Know Him, nor his Doctrine, as they should have done, nor in such
a Sense, as the Scripture uses this word Knowledge. Such as he would have us
content our selves withal is rather blindness then Knowledge, and makes a man
never a whit the better Christian, but a greater Hypocrite.

2 Let Bellarmines Answer stand thus far for true, that the Knowing of Christ,
and Belief of the Gospel, are manifest to all, that are not given over to
Jewish Blindness. And what it is to Know Christ, or believe the Gospel in
Saint Paul's Phrase, (by Gods assistance) we shall further explicate in the
Articles following. To Know Christ was all Saint Paul desired, because it
contained all Knowledge of Scriptures: and whether Saint Paul did not desire to
Know Scriptures, or whether he had not his Desire herein, (...) Christian
Consciences judge.

3 And because I must conclude this Point, (as I promised) with this Testimony
of Saint Paul: Beloved Christian whosoever thou art, that shall read these
Meditations, ask Counsel of thine own Heart, Consult with thy Conscience,
consider well, and give Sentence betwixt me and this Romish Doctor, what kind
of Knowledge Saint Paul here meant: whether an Implicit or Hear (...)
Knowledge of Christ and his Kingdom in gross, or an express, distinct, true
Knowledge (raised from Moses and the Prophets consonancy with the Gospel, of
Scriptures necessary to Men's Salvation in their several Courses of life. I
(...) not wrong thy Judgment so much, as to seek Arguments, or Authorities of
Expositors, for thy information in this plain undoubted ca^e. It shall sussice
to rehearse the Words of that Law, about whose Sense we now contend, and by
which we must be tried; from the twelfth verse of the third, to the sixth verse
of the fourth Chapter of the second to the Corinthians.

4 Seeing then we have such trust, we use great Boldness of Speech, and we are
not as Moses, which put a Veil upon his face, that the Children of Israel
should not look unto the end of that which should be abolished. Therefore their
minds are hardened. For until this day remains the same Covering untaken away
in the reading of the Old Testament. Yet was the Old Testament the only
Scripture in those times easy to be understood, but for this Veil. And this
Veil (as the Apostle adds, verse the fourteenth) put away these Scriptures then
which were so difficult to the Jew, are Easy to all that are in Christ, by
whose death the Veil was rent, and that Light which shone on Moses face as the
Sun upon the Eastern sky in the dawning, was fully manifested to the
Inhabitants of the earth since the Sun of righteousness did appear. For the
publishing of the Gospel is the putting away of the former Veil. But for the
Jews even until this day (says the Apostle) When Moses is read, the Veil is
laid over their hearts. Nevertheless when their hearts shall be turned unto
the Lord, the Veil shall be taken away. For this Doctrine of Saint Paul (as
often 2 (...). 3. 15. 16.
has been said) was in their Hearts, and in their mouths, Deuteronomy. 30. 14.

The Apostle concludes, Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of 7.
the Lord is, there is Liberty: Liberty indeed in respect of that Servitude
which was under the Law; then they were Servants because they knew not their
Masters will, John 15. 15. but since the Ministry of the New Testament, We all
behold as in a Mirror, the Glory of the Lord with open face. Verse 18. Out of
our Apostles discourse, this is most evident, that it was the Glory of his
Ministry, and Evidence of Doctrine which made him so consident, in the
execution of this Function. God (says he) has made us able Ministers of the
New Testament, not of the Letter, but of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3. 6. And this,
compared with the Ministry of the Old, did far exceed it in Glory and
Perspicuity, as he proves from the sixth verse to the eighteenth.

5 The judicious Reader, though not admonished, would of his own accord observe
how the Apostle takes Clearness and Perspicuity as an Adjunct of the New
Testament's Glory; the ^
Jesuits quite contrary would make the Scriptures Dignity and Majesty Mother
of Difficulty and Obscurity. But because it was so much more glorious and
perspicuous then the Ministry of the Old Testament was, The Apostle infers, 2
Cor. 4. 1, 2. Therefore, seeing we have this Ministry of the New Testament,
(so glorious and perspi^uous) as we have received mercy, we faint not; but have
cast off the cloak of shame, and walk not in craftiness, neither handle we the
Word of God deceitfully (for why should any when it will approve it self) but
in declaration of the Truth approve our selves to every man's Conscience in the
sight of God. What Proof could he make to their Consciences, but only from the
Evidence of that Truth which he taught, and his Sincerity in teaching it? These
two would bind all such as made any conscience of their ways to admit his
Doctrine. Whence he infers in the very next words, verse 3. If then our Gospel
be bid, etc. Briefly refuting all the Romanists Objections in this Argument,
before they were conceived, punctim, even to an hairs breadth, For this would
have been their common place, had they lived in Saint Paul's time. You may boast
and say your Doctrine of the New Testament is evident and manifest, but what
wise man will believe you, when a great many, as good Scholars as your self,
think the contrary most true. Unto this Objection of the Jews then, of the
Jesuits now, of Satan both now and then, and always frequent in the mouth of
Hell, our Apostle answers directly, (as from his Doctrine we have done all the
Jesuits Arguments.) If the Gospel be hid, (as indeed to some (too many) it is)
Yet it is hid only to them that perish, whose Minds the God of this World has
blinded, that the glorious Gospel of Christ, which is the Image of God, should
not shine unto them.

6 The Gospel then did shine, yet not to Blinded eyes; to whom then? only to
such as were endued with the Spirit of Liberty: seeing the New Testament, as he
said, was the Ministry of the Spirit, of which these Jews were not partakers;
because they followed the Letter or Outside of the Law, and had Moses Writings,
(as children, Lessons they understand not) at their Tongues end, not in their
Hearts.

SECT. III.
That The continual practice of Heretics in urging Scriptures to establish
Heresy; and the diversity of opinions amongst the Learned about the Sense of
Them, is no just Exception, why They should not be acknowledged as the Sole,
Entire, and Complete Rule of Faith.

OUt of the former Discourse their other Objections are almost answered
already: and they be especially Two. The first, If the Scriptures be plain and
easy, how comes it to pass, that there should be such Contentions amongst the
Learned about them? Or whence is it, that every Heretic is so forward to urge
Scriptures for his Opinion even to the Death? The Second lies (as it were) in
the womb of this, (as this did in the former's) and drawn out in its proper
shape, is thus. There can be no certain Means of taking up controversies or
contentions in the Church, but only by admitting an Infallible Authority for
deciding all controversies viva voce, seeing the Scripture is always made a
party on all sides, in such contentions.

2 In the former Objection they indict the Scriptures as the Principal: in the
later, our Church, as an Abetter of such Quarrels and Contentions as it breeds.
For our Church we shall answer in the next: for Gods Word in this present
Section.

CAP. XIX.
Containing the true State of the Question, with the Adversaries General
Objections against the Truth.

1 IT cannot be denied, that always there have been, and always will
continue, Contentions amongst learned men in Points of Faith or Doctrine, or
about the true Sense or Meaning of Scriptures, in these and other Cases. For
thus much these Scriptures themselves do plainly witness, Opor^ esse haereses.
For there must be Heresies, even among you, that they which are approved 1 Cor.
11. 19. (...) (...). (...). (...).
among you, might be known. But the Question is not whether there have been,
now are, or always shall continue many Contentions about the Sense of
Scripture: but First, Whether the Scriptures have not plainly set down the
original Causes and nurses of such Contentions, and the Means how to avoid
them, (so men will be ruled by them) most plain for this purpose: or, Secondly,
Whether, not submitting their wills, desires and affections unto these plain and
perspicuous Rules of life, this supposed Infallible Rule of the Romish Church
can prevent, remove, or compose all such Contentions, according to the Truth,
and cause men steadfastly hold the Unity of Faith in the Bond of Peace.

3 The Causes of Contentions about the Sense of Scriptures, are ^ 14. 4 James 4
3.
the very same with the forementioned, which made the Scriptures unto sundry
seem Obscure; or the same, which make men to mistake their true Sense and
Meaning. For even these Wars and Contentions whereof we speak (specially these)
arise from Lusts, which sight in our members: we lust and have not, we envy and
have indignation, and cannot obtain: we fight and war, and got nothing, (not
the Truth which we seek) because we ask it not. Do not such as contends most
about the true Sense, ask it most? does not every Heretic, the earnester he
is, profess that he prays for the Truth so much the more servently? yea, but
such men receive not that which they so earnestly ask because they ask it
amiss. They desire skill in Scripture to advance their own Conceits and
maintain their foolish and carnal Affections, otherwise asking they should
have, and seeking they should find, especially the true Sense and Mat. 7. (...).
Meaning of Gods Word, which must instruct us, how to frame all our other
Petitions unto God aright.

4 These and infinite like places we acknowledge, plainly declaring the Causes
of Contentions, and as many more, (some of which shall be here and there
inserted) directing us how to avoid all occasions of stri^e and debate. Both
which if we observe, Contentions will quickly cease; Which, those not observed,
must increase, as a just punishment of Truth neglected, co^icted or low
esteemed, notwithstanding the best endeavors of any Authority upon earth
imaginable to the contrary.

5 But some perhaps will demand, Is there no use of Humane Authority in this
Case? yes; As for the begetting of true and lively Faith, we supose the
live-voice of an Ordinary Ministry as the Organ, whereby the written Word must
be conveyed to our Spirits: so for retaining the Unity of this Faith in the
Bond of Peace, for suppressing or preventing all Occasions of Schisms,
Heresies, or Contentions; we acknowledge the necessary Use of a Lawful
Magistracy, yet no infallibility in either. The proper end and use of Both is
to espouse men's The true Use of the Magistracy and Ministry for avoiding
Schisms and Contentions.
Souls with an indissoluble knot of Love and Loyalty unto the written Word,
the only Infallible Rule of that Faith whereby they live: The One, by unfolding
the general Points or Maxims of Christian Faith: The other, by constraining
them, at least, to a civil Practice of undoubted Principles acknowledged by
all; and inhibiting such Courses as the Moral Precepts of this Canon have
defected for Causes and Nurses of Contention. Our Adversaries, whether out of
wilful malice or oversight, or out of both, (according to the diversities of
their tempers) have taken occasion to traduce our Churches Doctrine, as if it
admitted no Means for preventing or composing Contentions, but only the bare
letter of Scripture: Whereas we all teach that the written Word is the only
Means Infallible, not the only Means Simply, for effecting Both. Nor does it
skill how necessary either Ministerial Expositions, or Juridical Decisions be,
for bringing us unto, or retaining us in, the Unity of the Truth professed:
for not Necessity of Means, but Infallibility of Direction is the proper,
unseparable Condition of the Rule of Faith. And seeing Gods Word only endures
for ever, and therefore only is Infallible: it must be the Sole Rule of Faith,
how many or how necessary soever the Means be, that must bring us to the true
Knowledge of it.

6 Valentian and Saero-boscus think it all One, to acknowledge no
Ecclesiastical The Grosnesse of our Adversaries Exceptions being a branch of
their general Extremity mentioned, cap. 4. sect. 1. further to be prosecuted,
lib. 3. sect. 3. cap. 11.
Authority or use of Ministry, and not to acknowledge an Infallibility in
Both. But this is a Position devoid both of Sense and Reason. For, As our
Senses, though of themselves only capable of particular and Material Objects,
subject to change and contingencie, are the necessary and only ordinary Means
whereby our Intellective Faculty is brought to apprehend Universal and
immaterial Principles, whose Truth is necessary, everlasting and immutable. So
may the Ministry and Magistracy, though both in themselves fallible and
obnoxious to Errors, be the necessary and only ordinary Means, whereby we are
brought (as it were by a sensible Induction) to the infallible Acknowledgement
of the supernatural, divine, eternal Truths, which are the proper Object of the
illuminated or spiritual; as immaterial and universal Principles are of the
natural understanding; which shall (God willing) be declared hereafter. In this
place I only thought good to forewarn the Reader of this Hiatus in our
Adversaries Collections: whereunto the blind and ignorant English Papist, led
by such blinded foreign Guides as Valentian and Sacro-^os^^^ (who either did
not, or would not know, what our Church in this Point does hold) fall headlong
in the very first entrance of this dispute.

7 But in this, as in the former Question, it shall not be amiss to propose
our Adversaries principal Arguments and Exceptions against our Churches
Doctrine, in admitting the Scripture for the Rule of Faith. And I would request
any man, that is able to judge of the force and strength of an Argument, to
read the best learned, and most esteemed of our Adversaries, for the further
confirmation of this Truth which we teach. Against which, some (who have not
sought into their Writings) may happily imagine, that much more has or might
be said by any of them, then can be found in all their Writings. Whereas
Bellarmine and Valentia two excellent Scholars, and most judicious Divines,
(where their wits were their own) and all other good Writers of their side,
whom I could hitherto meet with, by reason of the Barrenness of their matter,
and shallow unsettled Foundation of their Infallible Church, have performed as
good service to our Cause in this present Controversy, as that Roman Orator,
famous for his Unskilfulnesse in Augustus his time, did to the Parties whom he
accused; I would to God (said the Emperor) this fo^lish Fellow had accused my
gallerie, (which had been long in building) for then it had been absolved, that
is, according to the use of this word in Latin, finished long ere this. In this
Case we have his wish. And for the edification of mine own Faith in this Point,
I must (out of the sincerity of a good Conscience,) profess, I would not for
any good on earth, but Bellarmine, Valentian, and other grand Patrones or
plausible Advocates of the Popes Cause, (especially Valentian) had taken such
earnest pains in accusing our Churches Doctrine; for they have most clearly
acquitted it, in that we may justly presume there can be no more said against
it. And whether all they have said or can say, be ought, I leave it to the
judicious Readers judgment: I will set down some of their Objections, and then
prosecute their general Topic, or forms of their Arguments, whence all
particulars, which in this Case they can bring, must receive their whole
strength.

8 Omnes ^^rreti^^ qui scriptur^m au^ recipient, ipsas sibi videntur fectam,
cum su^s potius ^ectentur ^ Aug. epist. 222. ad Consentuur.
All Heretics (says Saint Augustine) which admit the Authority of Scriptures
(for some rejected all or most parts of the Sacred Canon) seem^ themselves to
follow the Scriptures, when as indeed they follow their own Errors. ^.
Nor do Heresies (says the same Father in another place) and other naughty^
Opinions, which ensnare men's Souls, spring from any other Root then this, That
the right sense of Scripture conceivea amiss, and yet so conceived, is boldly
and rashly avouched.

9 And in another book of Augustine, it is said (Valentian would have the saying
well observed, as it shall be to his shame,) ^.
That Heretics do not cor-rupt only the obscure and difficult, but even the
plain and easy places of Scriptures; and ^ cum admonuit ut ab ijs tanquam a
falsis prophetis caveremus. -- Videntur prophet, sunt character and quasi
externa species, sed prophetae ^ externa specie non ostendunt nobis genuinam S.
S. sententiam, led ad^ collocatas, tanquam abominationem (ut eleganter Origenes
(...) ^) (...) loco sancto. Eadem de causa vocantur lupi tapaces, qui
vestimentis induti sunt ovi^^ Va^ Disputat. 1. quaest. (...) pun^ paragr. 6.
our Savior Christ (as this Writer adds) did intimate how obnoxious the
Evangelical Doctrine was to this corruption by Heretics, when he forewarned
us, to beware of false Prophets. Heretics, says he, seem to be Prophets,
because they make a fair show of Scripture-phrases, which are as the Character
or external sha^e of heavenly Doctrine. But Prophets they are not, because
under the out ^ard show of heavenly words they manifest not the native sense
and meaning of the Holy Ghost, but their own adulterate, corrupt Opinions,
sacrilegiously invested by them in sacrea phrase, as it were the abomination of
desolation standing in the Holy place, as Origin cl^gantly notes, Hom. 29. in
Matt. By the same Analogy are they called ravening Wolves, being arrayed in
sheeps clothing, etc.

10 These and like places are brought by Valentian (as the title and conclusion
of that Paragraph show) to this purpose: That Haec ideo recitavi, ut quoniam
universi (...) ^in suam ^ionem ^icut D. Petrus inquit depravant. (2 Pet. 3.)
Intel^ ce^te non in ^tam esse universalem illam, and ad salutem hominum
accommodissimam authoritatem, totius fide^, quam inqu^mus. Valent. loc. ci^at.
seeing all Heretics may and do easily pervert the Scriptures, as Saint Peter
says, to their own d^struction: We should hence be instructed, that this
universal Authority, and most beho^^vefull for the Salvation of all, which we
seek as the common Judge in all Points of Faith, cannot (...) seated in the
Scripture alone.

11 Another Mark whereat these fiery Darts do usual aim, is; to fasten the
conceit of Heresy upon our Church, seeing it has always been the practice
of Heretics, to cover their wicked imaginations with sacred phrase, and, as
Lyrinensis says, to inter -- sperse or straw their depraved Opinions with the
(...) and fragrant Sentences of Scripture as with some precious spice, lest the
exha^ation of their native smell might bewray their corruption to the Reader.
This is a Common place trodden almost bare by the English pamphleting Papist,
who learns the Articles of his Roman Creed, and general heads of Controversies
betwixt us, with their usual Arguments or Exceptions against our Doctrine, no
otherwise then the Fiddler does his Song; holding it sufficient for his part, to
afford a Mimicks face, scurrilous style, or Apish gesture, unto the ^nventions
of Bellarmin, Valentian, or some foreign Jesuits Brain. And as it is hard for
us to speak, though in general terms, against any Sin in a Country -- Parish,
but one or other will persuade himself that we aim at his overthwart-Neighbour,
unto whom, perhaps, our reproofs are less appliable, then unto him that thus
applies them: so is it very easy for this Mimical crew to persuade the
ignorant or discontented People, that every Minister, whose person or
behavior, upon what respect soever, they dislike, is the very man meant by the
Ancient Father and our Savior in the former general Allegations; if he use but
the phrase of Scripture, not the Character of that foreign Beast; Whereas their
Objections duly examined can hurt none but the Objectors.

CAP. XX.
That the former Objections (and all of like kind, drawn from the Cunning
Practice of Heretics, in coloring false Opinions by Scripture (are most
forcible to confirm ours, and confound the Adversaries Doctrine.

1 MUster they as many Authorities or Experiments of this Rank, as they list,
we know the strength and nature of their weapons. They are dangerous indeed to
such as have not put on the Breast Plate of Righteousness or Shield of Faith:
but yet (God be praised) as sharp at the one end as at the other, and they had
need to be wary, how, and against whom they use them. For beaten back directly
by the Defendants, they may be as fair to kill the Thrower, at the rebound, as
Them against whom they were first intended. For proof hereof, look how easily
we can retort all they have thrown at us, upon themselves. It has been the
practice of Heretics (say they) to misinterpret Scriptures, and pretend their
Authority for countenancing errors. This wounds not us, except we were naked
of all Syllogistical Armor of proof. For they should prove (if they will
conclude ought to our prejudice) that none but Heretics have used Scriptures
Authority to confirm their Opinions. For if Orthodox and truly religious
Writers, in the best and flourishing ages of the Church, have been as Copious
and Industrious, in citing Authorities of Scriptures for their Opinions, as
Heretics: this Argument proves nothing against us, why we may not be
Orthodoxes and true Catholics, as well as Heretics. That this has been the
practice of Heretics we acknowledge; and having received this their Blow, we
can return their own weapons upon them, with greater probability of better
speed.

2 Our appealing to Scriptures (...) no s^^h Presumption of Heresy in us, as
the refusal of trial by them, is of Antichristianism in the Adversary.
It has been the practice of sundry Heretics, never of any Orthodox, to
refuse their trial by Scripture, and flee unto Traditions. It has been the
continual practice of most monstrous and blasphemous Impostors, of false
Messiahs, and such as oppose themselves against Christ; of Mahomet, and such
like, to plead the infallible Assistance of the Holy Ghost, and a Supreme
Authority over others, without subjection to any trial, either by Scripture or
other Means. If most of them have failed in getting so many steadfast followers,
as the Pope now has, and for many years has had: it is most likely this was
either because their Heresies were more open, and more easy to be descried; or
they less cunning in countenancing them by Scriptures, Antiquity, or other
plausible shows of Custom, Tradition, or the like. For we all know, that
Antichrists greatness must grow by the multitude 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.
of his resolute followers, that God shall send them (be they never so many)
strong delusions, that they should believe lies; that his coming is by the
working of Satham (who can urge Scripture as cunningly to maintain Falsehood as
any Heretic,) and by all power, and signs, and lying wonders. So that it will
be hard to discover or prevent his coming, unless men be very cunning and
expert in these Scriptures, the Rule of Truth, the only Light, whereby all
falsehood must be discovered.

3 That they may once for all know, how little we fear their force, we will set
our Bodies so as they shall not miss them, and prepare our selves to take the
full strength and Dint of all their strokes. The Heretics of old time (say
they) have urged Scriptures for their Doctrine vehemently and copiously: we
will give them better hold, and help them to press this Point a little harder;
They did urge Scriptures most cunningly, most subtly, and hereby deceived
many, yea almost staggered the very Elect. What if they did? so would Pharaohs
Enchanters have obstupisied most of the Israelite beside Moses and Aaron: but
did their cunning juggling prejudice the truth of Moses Miracles? or did he
neglect to manifest the Power of God, for fear lest he should be censured for
such a one, as they were, only more cuning in his Craft? Their wicked cunning
served as a foyl so to set forth his heavenly skill, as the Enchanters
themselves could not but see the Finger of God in his working: herein more
ingenuous then the modern Jesuits; who in so clear a Point as this, we now
dispute, after so many foyls as they have taken, will not acknowledge the force
of that Scripture in themselves; Magnaest veritas and praevalet. The Reason is,
because they will not come into the open Court, to try their Skill before
unpartiall Judges.

4 The Devil, we all know, did urge the Scripture to our Savior, with great
skill and dexterity. Had he been the only follower or first founder of this
practice, or the first of all we had read of, we should have been until we had
found some better example and warrant for it) as much afraid to have imitated
him herein, as that scrupulous Monk was to wear his Hood; because he thought
the Devil had been the first that ever had worn one, being usually painted in
that habit, when he came to tempt our Savior Christ, and that Story he thought
in all likelie-hood, to be as Ancient as the first Hood. But with what Weapon
did our Savior vanquish Satan, that had set upon him with Scripture? did he
charge him sub poena anathematis to be silent? or did he crave the Churches
peace under pain of greater penalties? or did he appeal unto the infallible
Authority, or Supreme Tribunal of the Jewish Church? did he except against him
for using an unlawful, Heretical weapon^ can you deny that he foiled him with
these very weapons, wherewith we now contend, that all Heretics (Satan's
followers) are to be assaulted and repulsed, ere they can be lawfully foiled
and quite overthrown? And here I would beseech all s^ber-minded Christians,
even as they love our Savior Christ. ^he chief Captain of the Lords Host, the
Author and finisher of our Faith) and as they hate Satan himself (the Head
and Prince of all Gods, Christ's, and our enemies) to consider these subsequent
Reasons well, and weighed is Instance in the quiet, calm, and settled motions of
their hearts.

5 If Satan can thus teach Heretics, and other his like wicked Instruments,
such great skill and cunning in Scriptures, as they can thereby countenance
Errors, What advantage the Orthodoxes have of Heretics in trial of
Controversies by Scriptures.
and deceive others with a show of Godliness: why should we not hold it as a
principal Article of our Faith, that Christ Jesus is able to instruct his
chosen Immediately, in the true Sense and Meaning of the same Scriptures, so as
they may hereby grow skilful enough, to retain such as love the Truth in the
knowledge of Truth, and defend themselves and others against the oppositions of
Heretics, although they bring their Arguments out of Scripture. For First, we
know, and believe that Christ is stronger then Satan; for he has bound that
strong man; Secondly, that he is better skilled in Scripture: for after his
first entrance into his Prophetical or Sacerdotal Function, he Matthew. 4. Joh.
22. 13. Now shall the Prince of this world be cast out.
put him hereby to flight, and at his Passion threw him out of his hold.
Satan's strength since that time has been less; and Christ's Power greater; so
that in his strength we may be stronger then all Satan's followers. Thirdly, we
know that the Scripture is in it self much more favorable unto Truth, then
unto Falsehood: and (caeteris paribus) far more apt to confirm true Religion,
and instruct in Points of Faith, then to establish Heresy, or fill the World
with Errors? only the sons of Darkness have been wiser in their generation,
then such as should be, or (in some measure) are the sons of Light. And if
Heretics may seem to have had the better sometimes of the Orthodox, in trying
Controversies by Scripture; this doubtless was for no other reason but only
this: Their alacrity and industry in searching Scriptures for maintenance of
Errors, was greater then the others for establishment and confirmation of the
Truth; otherwise, as we said before, the Truth is more consonant to the purity
and integrity of Sacred Writ, then any Falsehood (though never so fair in show)
can be: And Christ Jesus is more powerful, and more skillful, more able and
more willing to assist and strengthen such as follow him, then Satan is to
enable his wicked Instruments. Seeing then by these Scriptures he The Arguments
pro^^sed in the last chapter can have no Ground, to prove ought against us, but
this: Satan is more powerful or skillful in Scriptures then Christ; or more
ready to help his Instruments then Christ to assist his Chosen.
has crushed Satan's head, and put him to flight; why should his faithful
followers despair, by the same Weapons, to foyl and slay Satan's servants, so
they will be as industrious to use them, as the others are to abuse them. Nor
will you (I hope) deny that Christ is present perpetually to his true Church,
as well as Satan is to Heretics. Say then what you can or dare, why ye should
think it strange or impossible, that he should teach all faithful Souls the
true Sense and Meaning of his Word, immediately by his Blessed Spirit, working
with the Ministry of Saints, (without a Vicar general on earth;) as well as
Satan does Heretics the counterfeit sense or false but fair-seeming Meaning
of it immediately by himself, or his wicked spirits. For we never heard that
Satan had any Vicar general, by whom he teaches Heretics all their cunning,
unless this be the Pope: which if he be, then is he not Vicar general unto
Christ.

6 Seeing, (beloved Christians) we are compassed about with such a cloud of
Witnesses, whereof not one, without open Infidelity can be impeached: let us
not disdain to take the practice of Christ Jesus, the Author and Finisher of
our Faith, as a Pattern well befitting our imitation. Not to be as industrious
in searching the inward Sense and secret Meaning, as Heretics, in urging the
outward letter of the Law; were not to follow the footsteps of a victorious
Lord, most good and gracious to his followers, with as great alacrity, as
vanquished Satan's, wicked instruments do his: both (if not detested by us, as
the foulest shame, that in this life can befall us) will breed our everlasting
Confusion, in the life to come.

7 That I may dispute with such as make a jest of Scriptures, according to
their childish folly; if by this means I might possibly cure their Impiety:
Tell us I pray, ye Doctors of Rome, many of whom I know to be men of learning
wit, and spirit, and for this reason (as I should think) more unwilling to make
your selves palpablie ridiculous, to every child or novice in Arts (howsoever,
unto all sorts you strive to make Christ's Practice such:) Tell us what is your
Counsel in this choice? Shall we forsake Christ, Our, us Saint Peter's b^st
Master, to become Scholars unto your Staphilus, or Ho^ C^? who (if their
reports be true) did sooner put the Devil to silence with this Doctrine of your
Churches Infallibility, then Christ did, for all his Scriptures; for the
Devil, as the ^
Evangelist tells us, departed not from our Savior before the Third Blow, Avoid
Satan, able to abide the Coalier, but Two, or rather one a little doubled, I
believe as the Church believes, and the Church believes as I believe. So much
by your Doctrine does the Devil fear the very Name of your Church, though in a
Coaliers mouth, more then the Word of God, albeit uttered by the Son of God
himself.

8 But we know the Proverb too well, Like to like, Children and ignorant people
are not ignorant, that the Devil will be commanded, by such as study the
black-Art: no marvail if he suffer himself upon good terms to be put down by a
Coalier. And as I will not peremptorily deny, but the Story might be true: so
questionless such as most believe it, mightily mistake the true cause of
Satan's sudden silence, for the truer the Story were, the likelier were it, he
should hold his peace, as soon as he heard the Coalier believe as he would have
him. This is a Catechism in it kind so perfect and absolute, so well suiting to
the old Serpents purpose; that if Hell might have a general vacancie from all
other employments, for time as long as has been since Lu^^sers fall; not all
the Powers therein could devise what one word might be added, what detracted;
unless perhaps they would express what the Coalier happily understood, [I
believe as the Church Romish believes, and the Church Romish as I believe]
whose Consequence is, Both shall believe whatsoever Hell would have them. The
use of such rustic weapons, as these, was perhaps on your part not unnecessary
in that rude World: wherein Lindan's Panoplie went for approved harness, or
Ecchius Bolts for good Artillery; but should you use the like now, every Punie
in our Schools that knows but how to manage an Argument, (of which God be
praised we have enough for a whole Army) shall match your great Goliath,
whilst they thus keep aloof, and lay your stoutest Champions in the dust, by
returning their own or like shot upon them.

CAP. XXI.
The pretended Excellency of the supposed Roman Rule, for composing
Controversies, impeached by the frequencie of Heresies in the Primitive Church,
and the imperfection of that Union, whereof since that time they so much boast.

1 BUt let us leave off skirmishing afar off and come a little nearer to the
Point. You are content to join with us in This, That it has been the Practice
of Heretics from time to time, to stand much upon the Authority of Scriptures;
Then were not Luther and Calvin, the first, that ever made this Odious
Comparison betwixt Gods Word and the Popes, Nay you will nor deny but this
Practice of urging Scripture was most frequent, and the Truth most troubled
hereby in the Primitive Church. If a man might ask you, where was this your
supposed Infallibility then? in the swadling-clouts or unborn? If then unborn,
it is too young to make younger Brethren of all Congregations else; too young
to cause Christian Kings and Emperors subject their Crowns unto your upstart
Mitre: If then born, albeit but in its Infancy: yet such an Herculean Power,
as you profess yours to be, which puts an (...) to all Christian men's thoughts
in Points of Faith, (for to this purpose your Controversors cite that place of
Scripture, as your Vulgar reads it, Verba Sapientum sunt tanquam clavi in altum
fixi per Magistrorum consilium, conscripta and a Pastore Uno data; viz. the
Pope, istis amplius Fili mi ne requires) might in all congruitie have taken
Hercules Motto for its Word, Cunarum labor est angues superasse mearum: though
it had lain then sleeping in the Cradle, yet might it, (were it such as you
would make it) easily have crushed this Seed of Serpents in the very nest,
wherein they bred, and not have suffered them to grow up to flying Dragons, to
pester the World far and near with their deadly poison.

2 I would have you here to consider this Incongruity well, which I must
farther prosecute in the next Dispute. You plead the necessity of your Churches
Infallibility for composing all Contentions and variety of Opinions about
Scripture-sense, and yet we evidently see (which you cannot deny) that such
bitter Contentions, and dangerous varieties of Opinions about Scripture-sense,
were most rife, most eagerly prosecuted, and maintained, when this Title of
your Churches Infallibility (if it were just) might have been best known, and
soonest assented unto. For That the Fathers, if we take the li^erall plain
Gra^matical Sense of their words, attribute as much to Scriptures as we do, our
adversaries cannot deny. May we not then safely think, they meant what their
words naturally import? No, Valentian has found out a Mystical Interpretation
of them. Tom. 3. disp. 1. qu^st. 1. punct. 7. paragr. 5. Quen admodum quando
uni Personae divinae al qua perfectio divinitatis absoluta tribuitur,
intelligunt Theologi, ab ejus perfectionis communione creaturas tantum excludi,
non autem Personas alias divinas quae sunt ejusdem naturae: Ita Sancti Patres
sicubi Scripturae authoritatem solam ad fidei q^^stiones finiendas valere
significant: Ecclesiae certe authoritatem, quam item pro divina habent, and
quam ipsa nobis commendat Scriptura, minime excludunt, sed alia five
testimonia, five argumenta, quae sint tantum humana. Nam si non ita
intelligerent, profecto nunquam illi in controversiis fidei, ipsa per se
authoritate Ecclesiasticae traditionis ad probandum ^^rentur. At utuntor ea
ipsi frequentissime and utendum esse docent. As the non consequence of this
Collection, so how f^r the Fathers did urge the Churches Authority, how the
most pregnant Speeches that can be found in any of their Writings must be ^ted,
will easily appear, if we consider the Two former distinctions: The one between
the Infallible Rule of Faith, and the Mems or Motives inducing us to Believe:
The other between that Conditional Assent, which in Cases doubtful we must
give to the Vi^ Church, and that Absolute Belief, which is only due unto
Scriptures: The Fathers used the Churches Authority against He^, as we do
theirs against Novelists, not as a Rule whereby finally to examine or determine
Divine Truths, but as a (...) to bridle presumptuous gainsaying Opinions
generally received or supposed for true, by men of sincerity and skill in
Divine Mysteries.
sure, the Ancient Fathers who had learned Christian Obedience, always ready
to give honor, where honor was due, would most willingly have acknowledged,
so absolute a Soveraigntie, and could have been glad to have used the Benefits
of it, to have spared themselves a great deal of trouble and pains, if it could
have been proved then to have been such an excellent Mean, for allaying all
Contentions amongst the Learned. The Pope was much to blame, to let Athanasuis
suffer such pains, exile, and abuse by the Arian faction, in the defense of the
Truth, if his Infallibility could have composed the Quarrel. Austin has been
famous throughout all Generations since, for his learned Labors against the
Pelagian Heresy; Cyril for his accurate Confutation of Nestorius, and yet the
Scripture was the best Weapon they knew. Neither of them did ever appeal to the
Popes Infallibility, not the Popes themselves which then lived would have used
any other Rule but Scripture, for their own defense.

3 Your usual Argumentis, that unless God had left such an infallible
Authority as might take up all Controversies; he had not sufficiently provided
for his Church. Then, by your consent, he left such an Authority, as was
sufficient to perform this good service to it. To whom then did he commit it?
To the Sea of Rome say you. How chances it your fore-elders did not put it in
practice, and make the Power of it better known? This Blame you cannot lay
(...) the Almighty; for he, for his part, (by your confession) provided
abundantly for the Peace and Quiet of his Church. And yet it seems the Church
was ill provided for, when Schisms and Heresies sprung so fast. This therefore
was your Churches fault, that bore this Spiritual Sword in vain and world not
use it; when the Christian world stood most in need of it, for the (...)
Decision of Controversies. So then although we should grant you that your
Church had sometimes the Birthright, amongst all the Israel of God: y^^ might
we justly say of it, as old Israel said of Reuben his eldest son, Thy ^^nity is
gone; and we were to seek this Supreme Authority, (if God had given any such
Supremacy to any) in some other Tribe which were likely to use it better.

4 ^.
If you reply, your Churches Authority in composing Controversies amongst the
learned has been better known since that flourishing Ag^^ learned and
religious Fathers; and since it has been so well known and acknowledged,
Heresies have been more thin sown, then before; few or (...) till Luther arose
daring to confront the Church or Popes Authority, with Scripture:) You give us
hereby just cause to suspect, that Heresy had get the upper hand of Truth, for
the Multitude of followers; that there had been a general Combination in
Falsehood till Luther brake it. For if sundry (...) the Ancient Heretics, with
whose Doctrine the Primitive Church was pester^ could under pretense of
Scripture, have got into Supreme Authority; or (...) established their
Propositions, framed (as they thought out of Gods Word) with strength of
Temporal Sword, as Mahomet did his: It were great Simplicity to think, that
they could not have been content, to have let the Scriptures sleep, or have
threatened all with Death and Destruction, that should have urged them to the
prejudice of their Opinions, especially of such Opinions as did concern their
Dignity For all Falsehood and Spiritual Blindness hates this Light, and could
either wish it put out, or them utterly extinct that Object it to them. As he
that has wound himself into another Inheritance by some quirk in Law or
Captious clause not well understood, would not be much offended to have all
Evidences of primary Copies either burnt or buried, even That by which he got
it, if It, upon better Consideration or more indifferent hearing, were likely
to overthrow his Title.

5 And if we may guess at the course of Satan's Policy, in watching his
Opportunities to effect his purpose by the customary fashion of secular
Politicians (his Scholars) in like Cases, most probable it is, that after
these Bro^'s of Dissension about the Gospel of Peace so frequent in the
Primitive Church, the great Calamities, and bodily Affliction which followed
thereon; most men grew weary of their Spiritual Warfare, and became slothful in
the search of Scriptures, the only Armory for all munition, in this kind of
war. Every man afterward, in the fresh memory of the Church their Mothers
bleeding Wounds, and the Desolation which had ensued these furious Bro^'s,
became more tractable to entertain conditions of Peace: and Satan himself, who
had sown the seeds of all the former Dissension, after he saw all or most weary
of war, was content to turn Peacemaker for his own advantage. These were as
the first Preparations for laying the Foundations of the my^^cal ^ of the other
differing but as the resolution of Quicksilver into ^. The City of (...)
likewise (...) all God willing elsewhere appear) ^, the other the daughter,
each evidents (...) the (...) ^) why the ^ Rome with the name of ^ Romish
filthiness.
^abel, in whose erection, the Marner, Method, and Circumstances of the formers
dissolution are all inverted. The Building of the first was hindered by the
Confusion of Tongues, or the Division of one Language into many; whence insued
the scattering of the People throughout the earth: the second Genesis 11. 7.
was finished by the Concourse of diverse People, and the Composition or
Confusion of different Languages. For (as In the beginning of his Hermathena.
Goropius acutely observes) the present temper of modern Italian, Spanish,
French (we may add of our English) Dialects, was from the mixture of the Roman
and Barbarous Tongues whilst the natural inhabitants of these Countries,
(before accustomed to the Roman Language) and the Barbarians which at that time
overran them, were enforced to imitate each other in their words and manner of
speech, that they might be the better understood in matters of The reason why
our old English participates most of Buttery-hatch-Latin.
necessary Commerce or ordinary Contracts. And this is the true reason why our
Ancient English Latinisms are not as the Latin Graecisms, which were derived by
Art and Imitation from clear Helicon extracted from the purest Roman; but from
Latin of the base and vulgar stamp. This Confusion of the Latin and other
barbarous Tongues, was but a Type or picture of confounding the Ancient true
Roman Religion with barbarous Heresies, Heathenish Rites, and several kinds of
Paganisms; whilst the That such was the disposition of the Romans at that
time, as would easily condescended to admit a mixture of Paganism, may appear
out of S. Au^^ius ^st books de Civitate Dei, and Salv^anus de providentia.
Romans, who had already begun to distaste the Truth, As may appear out of some
works going under the name of Gregory the great, and Gregory of ^owers History.
sought by lying Legends and false Wonders, to please the gross Palate of the
Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, Alans, Franks and Saxons: and they again here-with
delighted were content to imitate the other in sundry sacred and religious
Rites, so as neither kept their Ancient Religion, but all embraced this mixture
or new confused Mass. And, to speak properly, that Unity whereof the Adversary
so much boasts, since that flourishing Age of Fathers, wherein Contentions were
so rife, and the Roman Church no better esteemed then some of her sisters, was
not a Positive Consent in the sincere Truth, wrought by the Spirit of God, (as
a perfect Homogeneal mixture by true and lively heat) but rather a bare
Negation of actual Dissension, caused by a dull Confusion of the dregs of
Error, coagulate and congealed together by Ignorance, Carelessness Sloth,
Negligence, and want of zeal to the Truth.

6 And after this Composal was once so wrought, that men had felt some
intermission of public Dissension which they feared most: such as were
industrious in the search, or would have been expert in the Knowledge of
Scriptures, were esteemed of but as Soldiers in the time of Peace and ease,
always Our Church was in the Romish Synag^gue as a little portion of sine
Gold, in a great mass of D^osse, until the flames of Persecution severed it and
made it conspieuous.
suspected lest they should raise new Broils; And for this reason, debarred of
free access unto this Armory. But how soever the Practice of examining the
Churches Authority by Scripture, was for many generations rare, till Luther
arose; yet during all this time, that of our Apostle (Acts 14. 17.) was in this
Case most true (...) GOD did not leave himself without a Witness. In all these
ages he had his Martyrs who in the fervency of their Zeal earnestly sought the
dissolution of the coagulated Mass and extraction of Celestial Quintessences
therein buried; offering their Bodies as fuel to the flames of persecutions
that were to effect it.

7 Nor can you in reason demand we should give particular Instances of The
miserable and shameful Persecution of ^o.
such Martyrs in every Age. For no man of sense but will easily conceive that
your Church would seek by all means possible to obliterate their Fame and
Memory upon whose Bodies she had exercised such extreme Tyranny, left their
Example might encourage Posterity to like Resolutions. Unless DRIFDO had
(unawares I think) acquainted me with the Provost of STENELDA'S Epistle to S.
BERNARD, I had not known either your Cruelty against the Albigence's (or
Picards, as I suppose) or their Constancy, in suffering Tortures in themselves
most grievous, yet attended with Usages as disgraceful; both for the manner or
form of Proceeding, as injuriously inflicted, as the ground or matter of
Accusations brought against them were unjust and impious. The Provosts Epistle
was to this effect.

8 I would gladly be resolved (Holy Father) might I enjoy your presence, whence
it is that in Heretics, the Devils members, there should be so great
Resolution for defense of their Heresies, as the like can scarce be found in
very religious and faithful Christians. There are (says he) amongst us,
Heretics which put no confidence in the Suffrages of men deceased, or Prayers
of Saint: Fastings and other afflictions of the Body usually undertaken for
Sin, are not in their Opinion Jam olim ante annos 400. Prapositus quidam
venerandus Steneldensis interropabat Deatum ^ vellum inquit, ^^ite, Sancte
pater, si p^^sens ^ cis (...) membris tanta fortitudo in sua haeresi, quanta
vix reperitur etiam in valde religiosis Christi fidelibus. ^ (...), apud nos
Haeretici, qui in sustragiis mortuorum and orationibus sanctorum non confidunt:
(mark the ^) ^mia caeterasque afflictiones quae pro peccatis fiunt, ajunt
justis non esse necessaria: purgatorium ign^ concedunt: altari Corpus Christi
sieri negant: Ecclesiam apud se esse dicunt, non habentes agros neque ^. Novin
us etiam ex istis nonnullos esse raptos a populis nimio zelo permotis, and
nobis invitis in ignem patros and ^; qui tormentum ignis non solum in
patientia, sed and cum laetitia introierunt. Vellem igitur scire, Sancte pater,
unde in Diaboli memb it tanta fortitudo. Driedo Lib. 4. de Eccles. dog. and
scrip. cap. 5.
necessary to the righteous: Purgatory after death they acknowledge none,
Denying the making of our Lords Body in the Sacrament of the Altar; the Church
they affirm to be amongst them, having neither fields nor possessions. Of such
we have known diverse, by the multitude, misled with too much zeal, violently
haled again our will unto the flame; whose Torments they not only endured with
patience, but entertained with joy. I would therefore be resolved by you, (Holy
Father) whence so great Resolution, in the Devils members, should spring.

9 No question but this Provost which esteemed no better of them, then as of
Heretics or Satan's members, did relate the worst Opinions then known to be
held by them: and yet, He (as I would have the Reader note living in their
time, lays no such odious Tenants to their charge, as those that lived long
after, or were employed by the Romish State, to write against Wickliff, Husse
or Jerome of Prage, have charged them and their followers with. Driedo tells us,
he finds no direct Answer by way of Epistle or writing unto this venerable man's
demand in particular. But out of S. Bernards Doctrine elsewhere delivered
concerning like Heretics, he finds this Resolution, Nihil simile haber
constantia Ma^tyrum, and pertinacia hareticorum, quia in illis pietas, in istis
duritia cordus contemptu^ mortis operatur. Bernardus Han. 66. in Canticum Can^.
The Constancy of Martyrs has no affinity with the Stubbornness of Heretics;
Piety breeds contempt of Death in the one, Hardness of heart in the other.
Such good minded men as S. Bernard, I think had least to do in the Examination
of such men, most obnoxious to misinformation in the particulars of their
carriage: with which the Civil Magistrates of France, though Romish Catholics,
better acquainted, have given them laudable Testimonies for their honest and
religious Lives: and whether these mentioned by that Provost were such, as S.
Bernard spoke against, in the place late cited, is more then Driedo knew.
Howsoever, in matters of this nature it is most true, Bernardus non vidit
omnia, being as easy in his life time to be abused by crafty Politicians, as
his Authority is now by modern Jesuits. He, that will believe these men were
such Heretics as Driedo would make them, only because Driedo says so, may
easily be persuaded that their Resolution did not spring so much from true and
lively Faith, as from Humorous Obstinacy or stubborn Pride. But while we
consider all Circumstances well, (though many we take from your Relation, who
in this Case relate nothing so well, and truly as you should) we have just
cause to think they were not Heretics, but men rightly Religious, fearing God
more then men, and more observant of his Laws then of humane Traditions. For at
this time, as the Glory, the temporal Power and Authority of your Church was
exceeding Great, so were the Hopes of these poor souls, less, either of
purchasing Glory by contradicting, or private Gains by disobeying your Decrees.
To attempt the one was the readiest way to procure their utter Disgrace; the
other, an infallible provocation of greatest Danger. Your Church had the whole
Multitude of Nations as ready at her beck to applaud your cruel designs against
them, as the Highpriests and Elders had the Jewish People to approve our
Saviors Condemnation. The manner of their Tortures, accompanied with such
certainty of Ignominy and Disgrace, were dreadful to the settled and deliberate
cogitations of Flesh and Blood; their Memory (for ought they could in human
probability foresee) was either to sleep with their Bodies, and lie buried in
their ashes, or (if surviving them) to be perpetually scourged by the
scurrilous pens and tongues of their bitter Adversaries. No hope they had of
being Canonized for Saints: in the vehement desire whereof some in your Church
have solicited the procurement of their own violent death, by others hands.

10 All these and many other like circumstances whiles we consider, ye may brag
of the Multitude and Universality as a Note of the true Church, and we will
easily grant you to have been at that time far more in number, then these silly
Sheep; whose admirable Constancy nevertheless in the heat of such extreme
Tyranny, and always matched with such harmless Simplicity, does make us
think, that albeit you were the greater, yet these were that little Flock unto
whose hearts, our Savior, by his holy Spirit of comfort had said, Fear not,
for it is your Fathers will to give you a Kingdom, lands and possessions (as
your Adversaries truly object) here on earth, ye have had none. But the Loss
is little, or rather your Gain exceeding great. For these, because these you
have forsaken for the Gospels sake and mine, you shall receive lands and
possessions an hundred fold with life everlasting in the world to come. These
Heretics, some of you (I imagine) would say, albeit they might pretend
Scriptures for the Rule of Faith, yet would not be ruled by Scriptures when
they were evidently brought against them. For your evidence of Scripture, to
prove these Points there mentioned, we know them well enough; for some of them
you profess Tradition only.

CAP. XXII.
That our Adversaries Objections do not so much infringe, as their Practice
confirms the Sufficiency of Scriptures for composing the greatest Controversies
in Religion.

1 BUt suppose many Heretics (your selves for example) will not submit their
minds unto the Evidence of Scripture? what Remedy? who can help it? Their
Condemnation is just, and Vengeance is Gods, he will repay. Man it behooveth to
see evidently, that they contemn or abuse Scripture, before he adventure to
iinflict Punishment upon them for it, lest otherwise he become an intruder into
the Almighties Tribunal. But if the Evidence of Scripture will not, what else
shall recall such from Error?

2 Besides the former general Allegations, let us see what more can be said,
why the Scriptures may not be the most effectual, and infallible Rule, that can
be imagined to guide men in the way of Truth. ^ qu^ ad judicand^s on nes fidei
quaestiones divinitus est (...), procul dubio est accon^ (...) ad cogn^ s^^ndos
and Cavebdos (...) on nes fidei contratios. Scriptura sacra sic composita est,
ut experientia etiam doceat, eam per se solam, non (...) regulum accommodatam
esse ad decl^^andos errores, qu^ arcano Dei judicio esse velut lapidem
ostensionis, ^ia ^ pedibus insipientiu^, ut qui veliut ^a sola niti sacitin^e
impingant and errent, Valent. Tom. 3. disp ^ Sect 6.
The Authority (says Valentian) ordained by God for determining all Questions
of Faith, is without all question most apt to discern and prevent all The like
blasphenous Speeches he iterates, in the very next paragraph.
Errors contrary to Faith. Why may not the Authority of Scripture be accounted
such? The Scripture, says be, is so framed, (yet was it God that framed it) as
Experience may also teach us; It seems his Meaning as that the Scripture by
Gods just judgment, is a Snare to all such as rely infallibly upon it alone,
even because they rely upon it alone.
that of it self alone it is so far from being a fit Rule for avoiding all
Errors, that by the secret judgment of God it is a stumbling Block, and as a
Snare to the feet of the unwise, so that such as will rely upon it alone, may
soon trip or tr^^^ awry.

3 The Reader must lay the Blame where it is due, if these indefatigable
mouths of blasphemies reiterating the like absurd Impieties so often, enforce me
often to oppose the same or like Answers to them. Such an Occasion as Gods
Creatures were of Idolatry, the Scriptures we grant may be of Heresy. For of
Gods good Creatures, wherewith the idolatrous Heathen polluted themselves, the
wise man speaks in that place whereto Valentian alludes. And such an Occasion
should this infallible Way of the Romish Church pretended for avoiding, be of
breeding Heresies, were it any of Gods Ways, of which the wise son of Syrach
says indefinitely: They are stumbling Blocks to the wicked; so was the Way of
Life, the Gospel it self even whilst proposed and avouched by S. Peter and S.
Paul. The Question then must be, For what The place cited by (...) Wisd. 14.
10, 11.
Cause the Scriptures are a Snare to some men's feet: because they admit and
embrace them, for their Rule of Life? If thus either Valentians Ghost, or any
Jesuit now alive, dare avouch, I say no more then the Archangel said to Satan,
The Lord rebuke thee. Only unto the unwise, and wilfully wicked because Such,
the Mediator and Savior of the world, Salus ipsa, Salvation it Self, was a
Stone of offense: and unto all such, not Scripture, nor any of Gods Ways
serves as a Rule to save, but to condemn them.

4 This is the Article then, upon which the Jesuit must once again be
examined; whether unto such, as are by Gods just Judgments decreed to
Destruction, and given over by his Holy Spirit to believe Lies, and follow
lying Traditions, or Fables of man's invention, the Popes infallible Authority
can be a Rule of Life, or saving Faith? If it can, then we will grant it, to be
a more infallible Rule then Scripture; because able to control Gods immutable
Decree: if it cannot (as none without open and presumptuous Blasphemy will say,
it can) then is it no more effectual for to reclaim men from Errors, then the
Scriptures are, nor does it any ways supply their want. If they will not
believe Moses and the Prophets, says our Savior, neither will Luke 16. 31.
they be persuaded though one were raised from the dead: why So? Because God
has decreed this Word, as the only Means of Salvation to such, as have been
partakers of it: and such as refuse this, are given over by his Spirit, to the
Stubbornness of their own hearts: shall then the Popes Infallibility make such
believe? By what Means? Are his words more effectual then the Words of Life?
Are his Bulls able to withstand the Decrees of the Almighty? Or are his Curses
to the disobedient more terrible, then the everlasting Woes pronounced by our
Savior Christ and his Prophets? more piercing then the Relation of Hell-pains
by a messenger from the dead? By your Churches continual Practice I should
guess this would be your reply, (for there is no other left) that the Pope can
constrain men to subscribe to his Decrees, by Fire and Sword. This might
command their Hands or Tongues, but not their Minds. For the Jesuits would
teach such as feared the smart of their fleshly members, to cosen their
Conscience for saving their Bodies, with this distinction, Juravi lingua,
mentem injuratam gero. And if fire and sword be the best Weapons of spiritual
Warfare, or unrelenting Persecutions the ensigns of infallible Authority, then
the greater Tyrants may be always the more infallible Teachers: But these
Weapons by your best writers consent, ye may not use against any but such as
are already admitted into Christ's Fold: Quae foris sunt, judicabit Deus: Such
as are without, God will So the Council of Trent it self declares Sess. 14.
cap. 2.
judge: The Pope may such as are within, in what manner, for what Cause, he
please, not liable to any account, whether in so doing he do right or wrong.
Let the fruits of our Practice then witness, whether, what is by you objected
to us for using our Saviors language, may not by fit Analogy be verified of
your selves in this point, whether We or Ye be the men of whom our Savior gave
the world warning, when he told, Of false Prophets outwardly appearing in
sheeps clothing being inwardly ravening Wolves. Unto such as are by us won to
the Gospel we grant that Christian Liberty after, which before their Conversion
we promised. Your Factors abroad, (as in the Indies or Japan) appear to men in
sheeps clothing, making fair promises of the glorious Gospel of Christ, and
the Liberty of the Son of God, but inwardly (as in Italy, Spain, or generally
within your own Folds) are ravening Wolves. Or to sit you with an Emblem
essentially parallel to your nature and custom, ye are (...) inversi, Men
abroad, and Wolves at your own home. For whiles you seek to convert an Alien,
you magnify the Doctrine of the Gospel, your speech is fair, your whistle
pleasant, and your feeding sweet and good; if ye mention the Popes Authority,
it is moderately, and urged in that style, (...), Peter feed my lambs: but when
ye have John 21. 16.
once drawn these lambs within your hurdles, ye change your note, and turn into
your proper shape, then you cry with ravenous mouths, (...): That is as you
interpret, Rule my sheep, or, Petre macta, manduca, kill and eat. Now all the
pretended glorious Promises of the Gospel, or large hopes of Liberty, which you
had given them before, are suddenly contracted in these two main Commandments,
the chief Supporters of your Religion, on which your Law and Gospel hang: If
any thing be proposed to be Believed, Believe or be burnt: If to be Acted, Do
or die.

5 But as I was saying, such kind of Weapons must be used only toward such, as
are admitted unto Christ's Fold: unto them the Popes Authority must be a Rule,
for they must be ruled by his iron Rod. But let us suppose, a Christian (either
well minded Protestant or Papist) a Jew, or Mahumetan, all zealous in their
kind, and of carriage moderate, should meet together: in some Principles of
Belief they all agree, all acknowledge the old Testament to be the Word of God,
but differ in the true Sense and Meaning of it. What means would you prescribe
to win either of these two Unbelievers to the Truth? I am sure ye would not
begin with the Popes Authority. Were it not the readiest way to win a
Mahumetan, to show him, that the greatness of that kingdom in which he
glories, was ordained by God to punish the Christian world, as Nebuchadnezzars
was to plague the Jews, and should decay, would Christians amend? and (the
strength of his affection to the prosperity of that Empire abated) to propose
the carnal Affection of Mabomet, and his Religion, most of which is lothsom to
the ears of such as have any notion of any Religion; whereas the Purity of
Christ's Gospel is such, as a sober mind once therewith acquainted would
Reverence, albeit he could not obey.

6 This or the like Method is used by sundry learned Papists to di^ Mahumetium.
If they reply that they first seek to make them acknowledge the Scriptures,
that they may thence learn to rely upon the Popes Infallibility: they utterly
deface their own pretended Glory, in converting To (...) P^ the ^ toward
Confusion of Ge^sm and Christianity which cannot symbolize, or rather their in
perfect ^ (...), (...) as the ^ is (...) then (...) of the Ingredients taken
apart; Thus Lodovicus Vives ^ of (...) Au^n. (lib. 14. De civi ate Dei. cap.
18. (...) ^ terr^na civitas lici ^ (...) and (...) (such Vives) non (...)
prohibit^: quem ex legibus de con^ D^. 25. (...) Augustious testatur es^e jure
civili v^^^te Ron (...) (...) permisa, quae ^ div^^s. H^^ illi nol^^t, qui
(...) gentili^ em (...) and co^ Cheistianismo laborant, ^ impatiente n^
Christianis^um ^ent.
so many Aliens unto the Faith. For all this pains in such as follow this
supposed Method, is but to purchase a double portion in the Pharisees Woe, For ^
passing Sea and I and to make others of their profession. The Pharisees, in
such Conversions, did as it were ^uadrate the measure of Proselytes sins:
multiplying Gentilism by Pharisaism: The Jesuits make up the ^ul C^ (...) they
produce Mahumetism, which is but a medley of Gentilism and Judai^m, into
Jesuitism, which is the sublimation of Pharisaism, mixed with malignant Atheism.

For it is impossible that this Conversion should abolish the form or essential
Quality of the Mahumetans former carnal corrupt Religion: but rather intend the
bad temper of it, by superaddition of this second in quality more malignant.
And yet for the effecting of this Change, they make Christ lesus, their
crucified Lord and God, but a Stale for the advancement of His Kingdom, that
(by their own confession) may be for life and manners, far worse then Mahomet.
Suppose then a convert-Mahumetan should know what manner of men most of their
Popes be: how could he choose but either repent of his Conversion, or turn
treacherous Atheist; to out-^^e the Jesuit in such villainous Gulleries, as
this; So (...) in his ^ such matters (...) M^^h^^n (...) and hi^ Success^u^s,
as a m^^ night ^ had ^ed (...) (...)(...) It is ^ I^ in ^, and not a^mit the
same as good against themselves, many of whose Popes, (by their ^ the most ^ of
then, that have been, or may be, they all ^ M^hon^^. Sed illis as triplex ^i^ca
siontem suit, then ^ that can ^ut (...) object int^mpe^ancy to Luthe^, or
Infa^^y to ^ and ^sation) and u^ge their forged Blemishes to the ^ life, Death,
or Doctrine, as their Catholic Religion ^ it ^ad) might any w^^ prejudice
ours: the inti^ty of their ^ ssity utterly ^ ethe^^ Religion.
wherein he uses Mahomets beastly life as an Argument to dissuade his
followers from his Religion: and yet uses the Word of God, whose Sanctity both
acknowledge, but as a bait to bring men on to fasten their Faith upon a more
de^es^able Son of Perdition. This were indeed the best way to harden the
Mahumetan in his preposterous Belief: That Mahomet, (though as we object a
notorious Impostor) might be sent from God to win the world unto that Truth by
the sword, whereunto Christ could not bring it by his godly Life and most
essectual kind of Preaching. And I do not see, what else, but this or the like
Conclusion, can with any probability be gathered from any Arguments brought by
the Papists, to prove the necessity of the Popes or their corrupt Churches
infallible Authority, for supplying the defect of Christ and his Apostles
Writings. Finally, to bring either Mahu^^etan or Pagan to acknowledge the Truth
of the New Testament, or Christ for their Savior, that they might afterward
rely upon such men, is but to lead them into the entry of the Kingdom of
Heaven, that they may finally shut the door on them, when they have one foot
within it: which is indeed the sole, entire, formal effect of this supposed
Infallible Key. But my good liking of industry, (though of our greatest
Adversary) in this slothful Age, makes me hope, (God grant I fail not in my
hopes) that in remote Countries, whose air is not pestered with the noisome and
Ioathsom Scent of Rome their Mothers whoredom, even Jesuits are inspired with
more pure and hallowed Cogitations; and that they use not Valentian, Bellarmin
or others of their Italianated fellows By Gods good Providence for the poor
Indians (...), it was, no doubt that the Spanish Catechists did not use this
which we call the A^^s^les C^^ed, (...) they might have been th^^e (...)s^ to
over(...) in th^^ (...) (...) ^ of the ^ mentioned in that Creed or confession
which they following Aquinas have used, as Josephus A^^s^a complains. l. 5. de
pr^^aranda Ind. Salute cap. 7. De sancta vero Ecclesia articulus a vulgaribus
catechistis fere omittitur, ^^usam (...) (...)nor, quod in mysteriis Fidei
explicandis, non tam Symboli Apostolici seriem sequantur, quam usitatam ^
^^st^ibutionem articulorum fidei in septem ad divinitatem pertinentes, and
toridem ad h^^anitatem, etc.
Methods in cat^chising Converts: or if they do, yet God, I trust, will be
merciful unto such poor souls as thus adore the Pope, not knowing what manner
of Creature he is, but rather in charity presume him for such in the Concrete
as the Jesuits make him in the Abstract, even a second-Christ or Holiness it
self.

7 Were not the best Method to win the Jew, to compare the Prophecies of the
Old Testament with the History of the New, and Experiments of Gods judgments
upon that nation? Some John (...) was converted by this Method, as he himself
expressly witnesses in his Epistle to his Countrymen, whom he well hoped to
win by his labors in this kind: the best use he knew of the Popes Authority,
was such as is incident to ordinary ^agistra^^, (whether Civil or
Ecclesiastic) only to constrain the Jews to read his Book (as our Laws bind
Papists to hear Sermons) and for this purpose he entreats the Cardinal, unto
whom he dedicated his labors to solicit thus much at the Popes hands. ^ ut
Ecclesia authoritatem habeat discernendi verba Dei a verbis hominum, sensum Dei
ab humano sensu non h^ Canus, lib. 5. cap. 5. post medium. Quod si aliam
authoritatem praeter scripturam necesse est esse infallibilem, Quae doceat id
quod in fide est maximum, nempe scripturae ipsius doctrinam esse in universum
divinam: profecto est insania (sane editions have, insamia, but falsely as I
think) non credere illam ipsam authoritatem infallibiliter item docere, qu^
(...) s^nt^ntia (...)jusmodi divinae doctrinae. Valentianus loco saepius
citato, paragrapho. 5.
Jews have been brought unto the Truth by these means, who have done the Church
of Christ excellent service in the exposition of Prophecies, concerning Christ
laboring to win their Countrymen unto him by comparing the Old Testament with
the New. If the Scripture may be a Rule, to compose the diversity of these
Opinions, most repugnant amongst themselves, may it not much more be a Rule to
compose all Controversies amongst professed Christians, who agree in far more
Principles of Faith, and Rules of Scripture, then the former did, if Christians
would be as soberly affected, and not stand upon the Authorities and Customs
of men, the special Obstacle that keeps the Jews from Christianity?

8 It is usual with your Writers to argue thus, We cannot know Scriptures to be
the Scriptures, but by the Authority of the Church; therefore we cannot know
the true Sense and Meaning of them, but by the infallible Authority of the
same. The Antecedent of which Argument, as we have partly showed, and hereafter
(God willing) shall show to be most false: so for the Argument it self I only
now say, that it may be far more probably inverted upon you, thus. The Jews may
come to acknowledge the New Testament for the very Cospel of their Messiah, and
to Believe in heart, and Profess with their mouths the Mysteries therein
contained, by sober and diligent comparing them with the Prophecies of the Old,
without the infallible Authority of your Church: therefore they may know the
true sense and meaning of the Gospel, in all Points necessary to salvation,
without any such infallible Authority. For it is a matter of far less
Difficulty, for any man of sense and reason, to deduce particular Conclusions
from general and evident Principles, then to find out the general and
fundamental Principles, by natural Notions, or other Principles: And therefore
more easy for any such man to resolve his Conscience in particular Points of
Faith or Christian Obedience, after he has found out the Foundation of
Christian Faith, (to wit Chr^ Jesus crucified, raised from the dead, and other
general Dictates of Faith in the Apostolical Writings) then to come unto the
acknowledgement, and Belief of these fundamental Points themselves, from the
broken knowledge (such as the Jews have) of the Old Testament. And thus it
evidently follows, that if the Old Testament be a Rule unto the Jews, for
finding out the Truth of the New, much more may the New, once acknowledged by
them, and admitted of equal Authority with the Old, be a perfect Rule for them
in matters of Salvation. And if these Scriptures are, or may be a Rule to the
Jews, (if they will believe them) then must they be a Rule to all Christians
that Believe them. No Christian I hope will deny, but that the Old Testament is
the Rule of the Jews: For the unbelieving Jews shall be condemned in what part
of the world soever, for not following this Rule, which God has commended and
made known unto them, not for not acknowledging the Popes Infallibility, of
which many of them never heard. And if the Old Testament be such to them, much
more must the whole Canon be unto us such a Rule: and if we die in misbelief or
infidelity, we shall be judged by this Rule of Gods Law and Gospel, which we
transgressed, not by the Popes Decrees or Expositions of it. That many,
Christians by profession, err in Points of Faith, or mistake the true Sense
and Meaning of it, or pervert it to their Destruction, proceeds from their
Ingratitude toward God that gave it, and for their delight in Falsehood. Which
is the reason why these Jews mistake the true Meaning of the Old Testament.

9 If any of our Adversaries here demand, how chances it so many Jews err in
the Foundation of Faith, if the Scripture be such an infallible Rule? he must
be content to resolve me in the like Question: How chances it, so many Jews
live unconverted in Spain and Italy, and other places, either in the Popes
Dominions, or where his Authority is established, if the Infallibility of his
Authority, or their Church, be such an excellent Rule? If they reply, the Jews
might believe all Points of Roman Catholic Faith aright, so they would admit
their Church as Judge or Mistress of Faith: the Jews might with as good reason
rejoyn: so might the Romans believe all Points of Judaism, would they
acknowledge this supposed Infallibility of Doctrine to be in their Rabbinical
Expositions, not in the Popes Determinations. But the Romanist, I suppose,
would desire a Sign ere he believed them herein: and are we less bound by the
Rule of Faith, to desire some tolerable satisfaction to these reasons
following, ere we believe them in this Point, as prejudicial in our judgment
to Religion in general, as Subscription to Rabbinical Doctrine is unto Chistian
Verity.

10 The Jews admit the Old Testaments Authority as undoubtedly as the Jesuits
do the Popes: yet it enlightens not their hearts. What is the Reason? Because
that Part of Scripture is so obscure? So Valentian (and such as follow him) in
all congruity must say; yea he has said it: ^.
That Veil which Saint Paul says is put before the hearts of Jews that they
cannot behold the Glory of the Gospel (as the Apostle there argues) is woven
for the most part of the Difficulties of Scriptures. Nor do the Jews only deny
the New Testament to be infallible, but bitterly inveigh against it as
erroneous and contradictory to the Old. What is the Cause? Is it not that which
Valentian elsewhere assigns? The Scripture alone (that is in his language,
without the infallible Avouchment of their Church) is so far from ending all
Controversies of Faith, that it rather occasions Controversies and Dissentions
in Doctrines of Faith. If to the Jew, through his default, the Writings of
Moses and the Prophets be so obscure: add your infallible Key to open his
heart to them, or them to it. If by this obscurity they minister matter of
Contentation, or their Sense mistaken exasperate Jewish malice against
Christians: Interpose your Humane Authority inspired from above, to allay the
fervency of their distempered Zeal.

11 You acknowledge this Obscurity and other objected Insufficiencies
(disinabling the Scripture for ruling or judging men's Faith) to arise from the
frailty or viciousness of Humane Nature, and hence you plead your Churches
Infallibility as necessary and all-sufficient to supply these defects incident
unto Scripture, not in it self, but in respect of us. Your Churches Authority
then (at the least adjoined to Scripture) should make men (otherwise subject to
the former Infirmities or vicious Dispositions) capable of Heavenly Doctrine.
Tell us then distinctly: Can it, or can it not make all, or most, or such as
the Scriptures do not, Believe aright? If this it cannot do adjoining to
Scriptures: it is by your own Objections against them, a Rule as unsufficient,
as you would make them without it. If it can make all, or most, or such as
Scripture alone does not, Believe aright; this it must effect, either by
removing or not removing those Diseases or Infirmities of Humane Nature, which
Scriptures without it cannot cure.

12 First, if it could remove that Temper which makes the Jew a more
unprofitable Hearer of Scripture, then young Gallants are of stoical moral
discipline, your Church is guilty of wilful malice and murder of souls that
will not apply this infallible Key, able of it self to open that Veil of
Adamant, wherewith the Jews hearts are so masked, that neither the light of
Mosaical, Prophetical, Apostolical, or Evangelical Writings can find entrance
unto them. Secondly, albeit this supposed infallible Authority could remove the
former Veil, yet were it not in this respect to be acknowledged an infallible
Rule of Faith, but rather an ordinary and necessary Means, (such as we
acknowledge the lawful Magistracy or Ministry to be) for squaring or
proportioning men's frail or exorbitant Affections, the better to parallel with
Gods word, the most exact, inerrable, and all-sufficient Rule of Faith, even by
your consent: were it not for this Infirmity or vicious Disposition of man's
Nature, which (as you likewise acknowledge) is the sole Cause why the
Scriptures are Obscure and minister matter of Contention.

13 But our Adversaries attribute not any such virtue to their infallible Rule,
as to make a fool wise, the lascivious chaste, the drunkard sober, a knave
honest, the impudent modest, or ambitious lowly: for even the Pope himself, in
whose bosom this Rule lodges, may harbor these and like vices in his breast:
He may (by his own followers Consession) be as incorrigible for bad Life and
Manners, as infallible for matters of Doctrine. Seeing then their supposed Rule
cannot remove those Impediments which detain the Jews with other Infidels and
Heretics from the Truth: can it make men Believe aright whilst They remain?
If it can: it is of greater force then either our Saviors Authority or skill in
Scriptures. Neither of which, not all his travels and best endeavors here on
earth, though infinitely surpassing any pains the Pope is willing to take,
could instruct the Jews in the Doctrine of Faith, whilst their carnal
Affections remained in strength. How can ye Believe, (says he, who spoke as
never man spoke, and had wrought those Works none other John 5. 44.
could) which receive honor one of another, and seek not the honor that
comes (...) God alone?

14 To conclude then, If the Infidelity of the Jews be any just exception, why
Scriptures cannot be the perfect Rule of Faith: this Exception will disinable
the Roman Churches infallible Authority, for being such a Rule. But if the
general Error of the Jews, in the very main Foundation of Religion, be no just
Exception, why either the Scripture according to us, or the Churches Authority
according to them, should not be the Rule of Faith: then cannot the Errors of
Heretics, or variety of Opinions about the sense and Meaning of particular
places of less moment, impeach the sufficiency of Scripture, for performing
all that is required by either Party in their supposed absolute Rule. For it
shall, God willing be made evident in due place, that the self same Affections
(only different in degree, sometimes not so much) which caused the Jews
Insidelitie in our Saviors time, are the only roots and fountains of Heresies
and Dissentions throughout all Ages.

15 And as elsewhere is already proved, wheresoever the habitual Affection for
degree and quality is, the Heresy or Insidelitie is likewise the same, even
in such as hold contrary Opinions, and would perhaps maintain their
contrariety unto death: for, as, many, strongly persuaded of their Belief in
Christ, shall go for Infidels in that last day: so may such, as think
themselves Orthodoxes, be tainted with the contrary Heresy which they
impugn, if subject to the same Affections which did breed it. But for us to
account such as make profession of Christianity, Insidels, or such as
subscribe to Orthodoxal Doctrine, Heretics, would be injurious and unlawful:
not because the former Assertion indesinitely taken is not warrantable; but
because no man can precisely discern the Indentitie of inward Affection save he
alone that knows the secrets of all hearts. Thus all the Blasts of vain
Doctrine they can oppose unto the Truth we maintain, do in the issue fasten the
roots of Faith once rightly planted, howsoever they may shake the timorous or
faint-hearted Christian, or cause the weak in Faith, not cleaving to Scripture
as their only infallible Rule, and sure Supporter, dangerously to reel and
stagger. But though they fall, yet Gods Word shall never fail to approve it
self a most perfect Rule, besides others, in these Two respects: First, in that
none can fail in that course which it prescribes, or fall away from Faith, but
by such means as the Jew has done, the true Causes of whose Apostacy, and
incredulity it has expressly foretold, and fully registered to Posterity:
Secondly, because such as it does not, no other Rule, Means, or Authority
possible either in the earth, or in the region below the earth, shall ever win
to true Christian Faith.

CAP. XXIII.
The Suffficiencie of Scriptures for Final Determination of Controversies in
Religion, proved by our Saviors and his Apostles Authority and Practice.

1 NOr will They be ruled by an Angel from Heaven, That will not obey the live
Voice of the Son of God; whose Miracles, whilst he lived here on earth, joined
with his Doctrine, we will suppose, were of as much force (if the Jesuit will
grant no more) as the Popes Proposal of Scriptures to beget Faith, or convince
gainsayers of Truth. The Jews were of diverse Opinions about his Doctrine:
Some said he was a good man, Others said. No, but he deceives the People, he
gives them a Rule (as you heard / before) how to discern it. If any man will do
his will, he shall know of the Doctrine, etc. This Joh. 7. 12, and verse 17.
contents them not, albeit he had done many and good works amongst them
sufficient to have manifested his Divine Authority unto such as had never heard
of Moses or a Messiah to come: Nay, they go about to kill him for those works,
which bare Testimony of his Worth, and as they thought, had Warrant of
Scripture for so doing, because he did them on the Sabbath day. Here Christ is
of one Opinion, the Jews of another concerning the Sense of Scripture: Who
shall judge? or by what Rule must their contrary Doctrine be tried? By Christ's
infallible Authority? they admit it not: By extraordinary and miraculous
Works? they persecute him for his Miracles already wrought for their peoples
good. Does Christ here leave them, because destitute of a Rule to recall them?
If he had none, how shall the Pope (by his own challenge but his Vicar) have
any to convince his Adversaries? It Christ submit his Divine Doctrine to any
other Rule, how dare the Pope deny submission of his to the same? What Rule
then was left? Only the Scripture, which both (...) acknowledge. They pretend
Moses Law concerning Sabbath-breach why he should die: unto their false
interpretation of this, our Savior opposed the true meaning of another
Mosaical Scripture. Moses forbad Murder as well as Sabbath-day-breaking: and
yet they seek to kill Christ, only for Fealing a man upon the Sabbath Day, so
forgetful are they of the One, and so partially addicted to the Other. But how
shall they know, that to make a man whole upon the Sabbath, was not to break
it, and violate Moses Law? This our Savior makes evident unto them, by
exposition of that Law; and their own Custom, which, continued from the first
promulgation was a good interpretation of it. Moses says our Savior, gave
unto you Circumcision (not John 7. 22.
because it is of Moses but of the Fathers) and ye on the Sabbath Day
circumcise a man. If a man on the Sabbath Day receive Circumcision, that the
Law of Moses should not be broken, be ye angry with me, because I have made a
man every whit whole (...) the Sabbath Day? Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge righteous judgment. Thus was Scripture applied to their
Conscience, the last and final Rule by which they stand or fall: and is
always a Light either bringing men to see their own Salvation, or putting out
their wonted sight, in token of their Condemnation to utter darkness. And
Christ's last words in that Controversy, Judge not according to the appearance,
are likewise a written Rule of Scripture: Deuteronomy. 1. v. 16, and 17.
so absolute a Rule is this Sacred Word of God, (by our Saviors consent and
practice) both to inform the Understanding, and to moderate Affection which
makes us blind.

2 The same Method our Savior uses in a like dispute, with the last Clause
whereof if we compare the Romanists Doctrine in this Controversie' it may
appear in some sort the same: Theirs is our Saviors indeed, but quite
inverted, truly Antichristian. They teach we cannot know Mosaical or other
Scriptures, but by the Popes infallible Proposal: The great infallible Teacher
tells the Jews, they could not Believe him, or know his Doctrine though Proposed
by him mouth to mouth, because they had not Believed Moses Writings. If ye
believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my Words? Joh. 5. ver 41.
yet Christ's Words registered by his Apostles and Evangelists must be at the
least of like force and use to us, as Mosaical Writings were then to the Jews.
Our Conclusion therefore is invincible: If Moses Doctrine alone were a Rule to
try Christ's Controversies with the Jews, then must it and Christ conjoined, be
the Rule whereby all Christians Controversies must be tried. From the
Opportunity of this place, the judicious Reader, though not admonished, would
observe, that our Adversaries, unless possessed with Jewish frenzy, or
fantastic madness (diseases causing men usually misdeem other for such as
they most are, but least think themselves) could not possibly account it a part
of folly in us, Qui ficti potest, ut quae doctrina tam (...) ab hominibus
adulteratur ut in patt^ in ominum e^ rorum adva^, eadem si^ acc^mmoda^issnia,
apposi^ssi^ ^que re^a ad ^eijc^^ dum omnes omnino (...): Non maris hoc (...)
stare potest qua^ si quis diceret, illud esse accommodatissimum remed^^m ad
(...) vid^n sum, ex quo accideret omnes cacutire quicunque ^i^rent caci.
Valentian loco ^aepius citat. p^ragr. 6.
to make the WRITTEN WORD sole Umpire in all Controversies of Religion, though
not impossible to be thus perverted by these Jews; or others of Jewish
disposition, as are all Heretics more or less. For we will give their
imaginations a years respite to rove about, upon condition they will then
return an answer, what Rule, either written or unwritten, can possibly be
imagined, which would not be perverted: what Authority, either living or dead,
which would not be either disclaimed, abused, or contemned by men so minded as
these Jews, who in the live presence of the Son of God, the heir of all things,
by whom the world was made, and must be judged, thus sought to Patronage the
Murder of his Royal Person, by the Authority of his Fathers Word, unto whose
Sense they thought themselves as strictly tied as any Papist to the Council of
Trent. The Heretics with whom Non est mitum si Pelagi any dicta nostra in
sensus quos volunt de^o^quere conantur: quando de Scriptur is sanctis, non ubi
obscure aliquid dictum est, sed ubi clara and aporta sunt testimonia, id sacere
con^u^ verunt, more quidem ^run etiam ^tum, Augustine li. 2. de Nupt. and
concupise. cap 31. This was the place which Valentian (as wa^ in the ^ter of
this (...)) (...) prove the Insufficiency of Scriptures for composing
Controversies, would have observed. The Reader, I doubt not, will ^ sha^e ^th,
or ^^th, that either could not or would not see ho^ easily these men would have
wrested the Trent Council, ^ Rule they can imagine. (...) restraining such
evident perverseness we acknowledge the necessity of a lawful Magistratie, ^
in this or like does to way argue an absolute Infallibility in determining all
Cases of Controversies.
Saint Augustine had to deal, strangely wrested his words against a plain and
natural meaning. Though so they had done the Bishops of Rome, or any others
then living, not disdaining to call God his Lord: their practice had not seemed
strange to this reverend Father: for he knew the Servant was not above his
Master, and therefore could not expect his or any man's should be free from any
such wrong or violence which he saw offered to Gods Word.

3 Our Savior in the forecited Controversies saw well how earnestly the Jews
were set to pervert Scriptures for their purpose, how glad to find any pretense
out of them either to justify their dislike of his Doctrine, or wreak their
malice upon his Person. Reason he had as great to distaste their practice herein
as the Pope himself can have to inveigh against Heretics for the like. Neither
is there any person now living, against whom any intention of Harm can be more
heinous then the intention of Murder against him, nor any sort of men (unless
the Jesuits, Spanish Inquisitors, or such as they suborn) so cruelly bent as
these Jews were, to seek blood under a show of love to pure immaculate
Religion. Yet does not our Savior accuse the Scriptures (though capable of so
grievous and dangerous misconstruction) of Obscurity or Difficulty, or of
being any way the Occasion of Jewish Heresy, or his persecution thence caused:
nor does he dissuade those very men, which had thence sucked this poisonous
Doctrine, much less others from reading, but exhorts them in truth and deed,
not in word and fancy only, to rely on Scriptures as the Rule of Salvation.
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think, (and that rightly) to have
Eternal Life, Joh 5. 9. Not intimating the least necessity of any external
Authority infallibly to direct them, he plainly teaches it was the internal
distorture of their proud affections, which had disproportioned their minds to
this straight Rule, and disinabled them for attaining true Belief, which never
can be rightly raised but by this square and line.

4 It was not then the reading of Scriptures which caused them mistake their
meaning and persecute Him, but the not reading of them as they should. Err
they did, not knowing the Scriptures, and know them they did not, because they
did not read them thoroughly, sincerely, searching out their inward Meaning. And
thus to read them afresh, as our Savior prescribed them, (laying aside
ambitious desires) was the only Remedy for to cure that distemper which they
had incurred by reading them amiss. It were a mad kind of counsel (better
befitting a Witch or cunning woman, then a wise man) to dissuade one from using
Medicines prescribed him by men of skill, because he had incurred some
dangerous disease, by taking the like out of his own humor, or in a fancy
either without or contrary to the prescript of professed Physicians: yet such
and no better our Adversaries advice heretofore has been: and the strength of
all their Arguments in the Point now in hand to this day continues this: We
must not make Scriptures the Rule of Faith, because many Heresies have sprung
thence, and great Dissensions grown in the Church, whiles one follows one
Sense, and another the contrary. Whereas in truth the only Antidote against
Contentions, Schisms, and Heresies, is to read them attentively, and with such
preparation as they prescribe; as Gal. 5. 26.
not to be desirous of vain glory, not to provoke or envy one another: 1 Pet.
2. 12.
To lay aside all malicionsnesse, guile, dissimulation, and evil speaking, like
new born babes desiring the sincere milk of the Word, whereby we must grow,
Romans 12. 2.
not fashioning our selves according to this present world, etc.

5 These were delivered as sovereign Remedies against all Epidemical diseases
of the Soul, by Physicians, as Both acknowledge, most Infallible. For better
unfolding, and more seasonable applying of these and infinite other like
Aphorisms of life, we admit variety of Commentators: but are as far from
suffering any, of whose spirit we have no proof, (especially any not ready to
submit the trial of his Receipts, unto these sacred Principles and Experiments
answerable to them.) And good reason the poorest Creature living should tender
the eternal Welfare of his Soul, as much as the Pope does the transitory health
of his Body.
to try what Conclusions he list upon our souls, as the Pope would be from
taking what Potions soever any English Emperick should prescribe, though
disclaiming all examinations of his prescripts by Galen, Hippocrates,
Paracelsus, or any other Ancient or Modern well esteemed Physicians Rules.

6 If since this late invention of the Popes Infallibility, our Adversaries do
not now, as heretofore, condemn all Reading Scriptures simply: what marvel?
Vide lib. 1. cap. 10. par. 2.
For as Satan after once God had spoken to the world by his Son, began to
change his old note, and sought to imitate the Gospels style, by writing his
Heresies as God did his new Covenants in men's hearts: So in later Ages, since
the Almighty gave his Word in every language, and the number of Preachers has
been greatly multiplied, the old Serpent permits the Jesuits and his other
Instruments to translate, expound, and Preach the Gospel to the ignorant. And
in opposition to the practice of Reformed Churches, the lay Roman Catholic may
now behold, yea read the Words of Life. What difference then can any make
betwixt theirs and our Doctrine in this Point? such as in times past was
betwixt true Miracles wrought by the singer of God, and Diabolical Wonderments,
all which later were usually wrought to idle purposes, and by some apish trick
or other bewrayed their Authors sinister intendments: The Popes drift in
permitting his ^aitie to lock into the Holy Scriptures and behold the Majesty
of God speaking in them (a matter heretofore held as dangerous for them as for
the Israelites in time past to have approached the Holy Mount) is just like the
Devils in carrying our Savior into a high Mountain to show him all the King^
of the earth, and the glory of them. The condition annexed to the Popes
Donative is the self same with that the Devil ad^ed (...) his profer, All these
will I give unto thee if thou will fall down and worship me. For none may enjoy
Scriptures but with double acknowledgement of absolute Homage unto the Pope as
the sole and supreme Judge of all Controversies concerning them: (...) whom all
Right unto the Means of their Salvation must be derived. Which kind of Worship
is altogether as de^^g^uory to Gods ^as that which Satan demanded of our
Savior, or any other Idolatry that is or has been, as shall (God willing)
here^ appear.
So does the cunning restraint of this Liberty late granted to the Roman
Laics great in show, bewray who was the Author of this Plot, and what his
purpose. Some merry Devil sure is minded to make Hell sport, by putting this
gull upon the learned Papist, his Instrument to put the like upon the ignorant;
who now at length may read the Scriptures, but with absolute submission of
their Interpretation to his Instructors, who may not take any receipt thence,
but according to their supreme Infallible Physicians prescripts, which may not
be examined by any Rule of Gods written or unwritten Word: nor may any man call
his skill in question, much less condemn him of Imposture, by the lamentable
issue and dismal success of his Practices* Should men upon like terms be
admitted to read Galen or Hippocrates, and yet the Monopoly of Medicines
permitted to some one Emperick or Apothecarie, not liable to any account,
whether his confections were made according to the Rules of Physic Art or no:
They might be in greater danger of poisoning, then if these grand Physicians
had never written: for that might be prescribed them, by such an authentic
Mountebank, as a Cordial, which the other had detected for Poison. So should
the Christian World, might the Jesuits plea prevail, be continually at the
Popes Courtesy, whether they should embrace that Sense of Scriptures which
Christ and his Apostles have condemned for the Doctrine of Devils, as the
Oracles of the living God, and food for their Souls.

7 But some man more indifferent would here perhaps interpose: Though theirs be
bad, do you prescribe us any better Method of Health* Your former counsel to
practice the Apostles Rules, is, as if a man should say to one sick of a
dangerous disease, Expel the bad humor and you shall be well. Yet as we said
before, Est pars sanitatis velle sanari, To desire the ex^pation of such
Affections as hinder our proficiencie in the School of Christ, or knowledge of
his precepts, is a good step to health. The Scriptures are the words of life
containing Medicines as well as Meat, and must purge our Souls of carnal
Affections, as Physic does the body of bad Humors: They teach withal what
Abstinence must be used ere we can be capable of that spiritual Welfare, which
they promise to the Soul of such as follow their Prescriptions. And because our
natural Corruption cannot be assuaged, much less expelled, but by their force
or virtue, which is not always manifested upon the first Receipt; we are to
come unto them with such reverence, as the Moralist did to Meditations of
Virtue, Vacua and sobria mente: in sobriety of Spirit, not in the heat,
abundance, or actual motion of such Affections as hinder their operation upon
our Souls; as men usually take Physic upon a fasting and quiet stomach,
although Pestered with bad humors, which yet cannot be extirpate but by
Physic; nor by Physic, if ministered in the actual motion, heat, or raging of
such humors. If a man have but this desire, to be rid of such Affections as
breed this distemper in his Soul, or work a distaste of the Word of Life, he is
capable of that Promise, Habents dabitur, and shall in good time see his desire
augmented, whose increase will bring forth greater fervencie in prayer; and
prayers, if fervent, though in men subject to such infirmities avail much, and
shall in the end be heard to (...) full. And, as well in thankful duty to the
Redeemer of Mankind for his gracious Promises, as in hope of being further
partakers of the Blessings promised; Every one that hears Gods Word, ought,
and such as hear it a right, will, as often as they seek recovery of their
spiritual Health by it, or such Means as it prescribes, abstain from all
occasions and occurrents that may increase, provoke, or strengthen such
Affections as hinder the operations of it upon their Souls. For even ^
Nature taught the Cynick to account surfeiting and intemperate diet madness
in the Heathen, whiles they sacrificed for Health. If any have erred in hearing
Gods Word amiss, or in the unseasonable applying of Sacred Prescripts: these
Errors must be recalled by further consultation with their dispensors, by more
diligent search and better instruction in other parts of this Method of Life.

8 Saint Peter knew many ignorant and unstable Souls had perverted some hand
places of S. Paul's Epistles, as they had other Scriptures, to their own
destruction. Did he therefore advise them to whom he thus wrote not to seek
their Salvation out of Saint Paul's Epistles, but with absolute submission of
their judgment, to his, and his successors Prescripts? Or does he not seek to
establish them in that Doctrine which Saint Paul had taught, according to the
wisdom given him, in all his Epistles. Or can any endued with reason doubt,
whether Saint Paul himself did not expect his Writings should be a Rule of
Faith to all that read them, without continuance either of his own or others
actual Infallible Proposal of them? He had protested once for all, Gal 1 v 8.
From this place Valentian after his (...) manner, would force an Argument to
prove the necessity of a perpetual infallible Authority to denounce viva voce
the like Anathema's against Heretics. Whereas S. Paul's words, if we consider
all Circumstances, do exclude any such infallible Authority or Judge of his
Meaning or other Scripture by which he supposed all other Doctrines should be
examined. And as a learned Papist well observes upon these words of S. Paul to
Timothy, The scriptures are able to make thee wise unto salvation (2 Timothy 3.
15.) The Scriptures which he had learned (to wit the Old Testament) might
perform the same to him in his absence which S. Paul had done in his presence;
as he says, sine schola Simonis, as we may add, ^ne schola Papae, without the
Popes cursing or blessing. Vide Sasbout in 2. ad Timoth. cap. 3.
Though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach unto you otherwise then that we
have preached unto you, let him be accursed. He had said before, and yet says
he now again, If any man preach unto you otherwise then ye have received, let
him be accursed. For he had taught them, as their own Conscience might
witness, the Doctrine of God and not man, as he intimates in the next words.

9 Either Saint Paul is not Authentic in this protestation, or else all stand
accursed by it, that dare absolutely admit any Doctrine though from an Angels
mouth, but upon due examination and sure trial, whether consonant or contrary
to what Saint Paul has left in writing. His meaning notwithstanding in many
places as his fellow-Apostle witnesses, was much perverted. And seeing what
was past could not be amended, it seemed necessary to Saint Peter to admonish
others, lest they should be entangled in like error. But what means had he
left to prevent this perverting of Scriptures in them? Either none besides or
none so good, as diligent Reading or Hearing the written Word: For such was
this Epistle, which for their Admonition he now wrote, and was desirous,
questionless, all of them should with attention hear or read, lest they also
might be plucked away with the error of the wicked, and fall from their wo^ted
steadfastness, from which others had already fallen; For what reason? Because
they were unlearned: Unlearned? In what Faculty? In the Scriptures no doubt.
For Saint Peter himself was learned only in them, and would not vouchsafe the
Secular Arts of that time (standing in opposition unto the Gospel) this
glorious Title of learning. And is want of learning and knowledge in
Scriptures, the cause of falling from Faith, and former steadfastness? And yet
must men abstain from reading them, because they are obscure to such blinded
Guides, or may minister matter of Contention to contentious Spirits, or
occasion of Error to the erverse? Must we be ignorant in Them, and expert in
Other means of That there is no danger can come by reading Scriptures for which
the scriptures have not present remedy.
Faith; Because Ignorance and want of learning in them causes Errors in Faith
and what other Means soever of men's Salvation? Quis furor hic (shall I say) ne
moriare, mort; or rather, no possis ^tare, perire? Must we abstain from our
spiritual Food, and so ^evi ably starve, because some others by unreasonable or
intemperate taking of it have incurred, what? Diseases indeed very grievous;
Yet such as might easily have been cured or prevented had the diseased been
more accustomed to feed upon those plain and (...) Prescripts usual in the
later parts of Saint Paul's Epistles, as (for example amongst others upon that
most General: Romans 12. 3.
Through the grace of God, (...) given unto me (I say) to every one that is
among you, that no man presume to an unstand above that which is meet to
understand, but that he understand according to ^^^riety, as God has dealt to
every man the Measure of Faith.

10 From careful and assiduous Attention unto this and other like Elementarie
Precepts, those unlearned but presumptuous Readers of Saint (...) Epistles
might quickly have grown so wise and well learned in Scriptures, as not to have
meddled with these (...) so soon, at least not so much, rather contenting
themselves while such they were, like newborn Babes with (...) Milk, as much
better for their weak digestion then his strong Meat; so the same Apostle had
else where expressly written for their instruction, (...) not presumed to know
above that which was written. E^^ed they had then (...) the Truth, and fallen
away from their former steadfastness, not so much by (...) lowing the hard and
difficult, as by not following the plain and easy places of (...) Paul, able
to have conducted them from Knowledge to Knowledge, whose (...) (...) (could
they with patience have expected it,) might in good time (...) (...) ^ the
former Difficulties.

Instances enough have been, more might be brought, to evince the general
Conclusion intimated in the State of the Question before proposed. There is no
Occasion or Temptation which may move men to obstinate mistaking or perverting
Scriptures to a^et Contentions, but the Scriptures one where or other have a
Remedy as easy as sovereign prescribed against it, so men would be diligent
to seek, or resolute to apply it found, in their Practice or Course of life. If
some Spiders from the forementioned, or like difficult Places, have sucked
poison; yet other parts of the same Canon teach us to lay aside the Spiders
temperature, even 1 (...) 2. 1.
all Maliciousness, Gal. (...). (...).
all Envy, (...) (...). 16. and 4. 5.
all Indignation or Contention. Though sundry as subtilas Serpents have been
mistaken in the Interpretation of some, or have inverted others, yet some third
Place teaches us to join the Doves Innocence to the Serpents subtlety; and
unto both adding the Bees Industry, these very Places, whence others sucked
Poison, shall afford us Henie. For the Word of God is in it self, and unto us
(if we be not Spiders to our selves) ^
sweeter then Honey, and the Honey comb.

CAP. XXIV.
That all their Objections, drawn from Dissentions amongst the learned or the
Uncertainty of private Spirits, either conclude nothing of what they inten
(...) or else more then they mean, or (at the least) dare avouch against Gods
Prophets and Faithful People of old.

1 IT is a sure Argument, the Truth on our part is exceeding great, in that all
Objections, hitherto brought by our Adversaries (as it usually falls out in
men more eagerly set to offend others then defend themselves, though otherwise
unequally matched) conclude, Aut nihil, Aut (...), ^thing, or too much, or all
for us against the Objectors. But especially whilst (...) seek to (...) the
Sufficiency of our supposed Rule, by Dissentions thence oc^ (...) amongst the
learned, or such as should be Guides of others; as their Pr(...) are curtailed,
and will not touch the Points they aim at, so the Conclusion which they would
shuffle in, not inferred from the Premises, is above measure, over-lashing.
First, they fail, in avouching that indefinitely of all, which Wherein our
Adversaries Proofs come short of what they aim at.
is true only of some Parts of Scriptures. For many are so perspicuous and
plain, as they minister no matter of Contention, no, not to the most
contentious Spirits professing our or their Religion. These, well learned and
laid up in men's hearts, engaged in other particular Controversies, would be an
excellent Light to many other Places, which for want of this Method to most of
both sides either seem Obscure, or of the same suite their several Dispositions
are. But to omit particular Causes of Heresies or Heretics perverting
Scriptures (else where to be prosecuted) The most general and Primary is the
quite contrary to that which our Adversaries assign.

2 They except against Scripture, and say it cannot be the Rule of Faith, nor
ought to be so taken of all Christians, because it is so Obscure, and apt to
breed Contentions among such as rely upon it. We have sufficiently proved that
all Obscurities, all Contentions about the Sense of Scriptures in points of
Moment, arise hence; Because we do not admit of it for our only Rule;
Partiality either unto our own or others Opinion is the only cause of
Contention amongst men, and Dissension from the Truth, even amongst such as a
knowledge the Scripture for their Rule of Faith: for it is one thing to say
they make it, another indeed to make it or use it as the Rule of Faith, in
their Practice or Course of Life. Whence our Adversaries Objections drawn (...)
Contentions amongst reformed Churches are easily answered. For these are not
occasioned by relying upon the Scripture, but because sundry in reformed
Churches do in Deed, as the Papists both in Deed and Word, disclaim it for the
Rule of Faith.
all Affection to men's persons state or dignity, all private Quarrels laid
apart. If the Jesuit could prove it should either continue Obscure in points
of Faith, or minister matter of Contention to such as conform their lives to
the Elementary Rules or easy Precepts therein contained: their Arguments were
to some purpose. But while this they neither can nor go about to prove; they
shall only prove themselves ridiculous Atheists, albeit we grant them all they
desire, about the Variety of Opinions (even in places of greatest Moment) among
the learned. For, whatsoever they can object to us, either concerning the
Variety of Opinions amongst the learned, or such Distraction as might follow
thereon in the simple and illiterate, will conclude as much, both against that
Certainty the Ancient Prophets themselves had of their own Visions, and the
steadfastness of Wherein their Conclusions overreach.
that Belief which the faithful amongst Gods People gave unto their Predictions
or Prophecies. First it is evident from the Story of Ahab, that lying Spirits
did counterfeit Visions then, as the Spirit of Error does now the Spirit of
Truth; So as the false Prophets had strange Delusions and Appearances, as well
as the true their divine Illuminations; whence the Contention amongst the
professed Prophets themselves was as great as any now amongst the learned
Interpreters of Prophecies or other Scriptures. And from this Contention
amongst the Prophets the unlearned, or rather all in that people not Prophets,
were, by the Romanist Objections against us, (were they pertinent) to waver and
halt between the contrariety of Illuminations and Visions, professed as well by
the false Prophets, as the true. These Seducing Spirits hopes were not so
desperate as to make them leave their womed trade, even in Saint Cyprians time.
Spiritus insinceri and vagi, qui postea quam terrenis vitiis immersi sunt, and
a vigore coelesti terreno contagio recesserunt, (...) desmunt perditi perdere,
and depravati errorem pravitatis insundere. Ho^ and poetae daemonas vocant, and
Socrates in^ se and regi ad arbitrium damonis predicabat-. Hi ergo spiritus sub
statuis atque imaginibus consecratis delight (...). H^ (...) suo vatum pectora
inspirant, extorum fibras animant, avium volatus gubernant, sorts regunt,
oracula efficitu^ salsa veris semper involvunt: nam and fallentur and fallunt,
vitam turbant, (...) inquietant. (...) quod Idola Di^^^osunt. Thus he spoke of
his own experience, as he adds: nec aliud his ^rudium est, quam a Deo homines
avocare, and ad (...) (...) sui ab intellectu verae religionis avertere: and
cum sint ipsi poenales, quaerere quas ad (...) comi^es, qu^^ ^ en soul fecerint
errore participes. Hi tamen adjurati per Deum verum a nobis, statim cedunt, and
fatentur, and de (...) (...) extre coguntur. These were the effects of Christ's
triumph over Satan sure pledges that the strong man was (...) cast cut. And the
like power had not been so manifest before among the Sons of men.
Nor will any Jesuit (I think) be so bold as to deny (lest every man might
perceive him to deny more, then possibly he could know) that those lying
Spirits in the mouths of Ahabs Prophets, were then as cunning in imitating
true Revelations, as now in counterfeiting Orthodoxal Interpretations of Truth
revealed. Or if this they call in question, let them resolve us why Idolatry in
those Ages, wherein true Prophets flourished most, should be as frequent and
various, as Heresies in later times, wherein the preaching of the Gospel is
most plentiful. The true Reason whereof as we suppose is this: These lying
Spirits were alike apt to imitate Gods several manner of speaking (whether by
means ordinary or extraordinary) in diverse Ages. At all times, if we compare
either their native Capacity or acquired skill with our own, though in matters
wherein we have been most conversant: if to their sag^y we add their malicious
Temper and eager Desires of doing ill, which always add an Edge unto Wit in
mischievous Invention: In all these they so far exceed the sons of seduced
Adam, that unless the Almighty did either (...) us by his Holy Spirit, or
restrain them in the exercise of their skill (especially in Spiritual matters,
wherewith the natural man has no acquaintance;) who could, in any Age, be able
to discern their Juggling, much less, to avoid their snares, always suited to
the present season? Notwithstanding most evident it is, that in Ahabs as in all
other times, tainted with the like or a quivalent Sins, the Almighty gives them
leave to do their worst; to practice with such cunning in every kind, as leaves
men, so disposed as these false Prophets were, (until they amend) no more
possibility of distinguishing Devilish Suggestions from Divine Oracles, then
Ahab had (without repentance) to escape his doom read by Elias and Michaiah.
For he had not fallen, unless his Prophets had been first seduced; Their
Error therefore was by Gods just judgment, as Fatal as his Fall; both
absolutely inevitable upon supposition of their obstinate Disobedience to the
undoubted Mandates of Gods written Law. Thus no one tittle of our Adversaries
Objections (how the learned should be sure of their interpretations, when
others as learned as they are as strongly persuaded to the contrary) but is as
directly opposite unto the Certainty of true Prophets Revelations; seeing many,
yea most of that Profession, and (in the judgment of man) men of better gifts
and places then such as proved true Prophets, were otherwise persuaded; usually
such as the people esteemed best, strangeliest deluded.

3 That from this Variety of Opinions amongst the Prophets about their
Illuminations, others not endued with the gift of Prophecy were in the self
same case, the unlearned people throughout the Christian world are in,
wheresoever or whenever Dissentions arise amongst the learned, admits no
question but amongst wranglers. For albeit the excellent Brightness of Divine
Truth did necessarily imprint an infallible Evidence in their apprehension, to
whom it was immediately by Means extraordinary revealed; yet could they not
communicate this Evidence or Certainty unto the people, but by preaching the
Word revealed, after the self same manner we do. Yea sometime it was only
communicated unto them by the ^.
Ministry of others, no Prophets. Here let any Jesuit, or other Patron of the
Romish Churches Cause, answer me to these Demands. First, whether the People
were not bound to believe the true Prophesies (either delivered by the Prophets
own mouths, or read by others, or directed to them in writing) to be the Word
of GOD; and to reject the contrary Doctrine of false Prophets, as Delusions?
Secondly, whether, if the ordinary People of those times could by any
Christians, though private men in later, may not by the same Means, distinguish
the Word of God (being in like sort read, or expounded or preached unto them)
from the Word of Man? The Word remains still the same; the Truth of it better
confirmed unto the World, by the continuance of it in power and strength
throughout all Ages intermediate, wherein Gods Spirit (by which it was first
manifested to the Prophets, and written in the Peoples hearts) has been more
plentiful then before, especially since the Revelation of the Gospel; most
plentiful in this present (if I may so speak) the second time of Grace. Our
Argument then stands good (A fortiori) If every private man amongst GODS People
of Old might and ought Believe, and believing Obey, his Word revealed to
others, only read or expounded unto him, rejecting all contrary or erroneous
Doctrines; the People of this Age must do the like: and all Objections possible
against the judgment of modern private Spirits, conclude as much against all
private persons of Ancient times: For, their Means of knowing the Prophets
Illuminations or Visions were ordinary; such as we have now; liable to all
exceptions that can be made against our knowledge or persuasion of the true
Sense of Scripture; But neither theirs nor our Imbecility in knowing, or
Facility of erring, was or is any just Exception why the Scripture should not
be a Rule to both. Albeit all the Papists Arguments might be urged with far
greater probability against them who were to Believe Prophetical Writings
first. For more easy it is to Assent unto Particulars contained in a general
Canon already established by the approbation of former Ages and confirmed by
joint consent of Parties most adverse and contrary in the interpretation of
several parcels; then to admit the general Canon it self for the undoubted Word
of GOD, or yield obedience to the Particulars therein contained. Yet were the
Ancient people bound to admit the Prophecy of Isaias, Jeremiah, as the
undoubted Word of God; albeit unknown to their Ancestors, but only in the
generality of Moses doctrine: much more (as we conclude) may Christians, now
living, assent unto the true expositions or particular contents of these
Prophesies, or other Scriptures; of whose absolute Truth in general they do not
doubt, and of whose (...) articulars they may now behold the sundry Opinions
and Expositions of diverse Ages.

4 To press the former Arguments more fully paralleled to our present
Controversy, a little farther: I would demand of any Jesuit, whether the Word
of God taught by the Prophets, (who were to win credit by their skill, not
presumed skilful for their Authority in the Church, or credit in Commonweal)
or the definitive sentence of the Highpriests or others in eminent place, were
to be the Rule of Isreal's Faith? Whether the Peoples distraction in following
some one false Prophet, some another, fewest of all, the true Prophets, most,
their Highpriests and men in Authority; might exempt any from acknowledgement
of such Prophesies, as in the issue proved Divine, for the Rule of their
Belief? If that People, either upon the Variety of Opinions, or the Authority
of the Priests or others, might reject the Word of God, either preached unto
them by the Prophets or read by others; or appeal from It to any visible
company of men; on whose decrees they might safely rely: then may the Romanists
with some probability teach men to rely upon the decrees of their Church, for
their infallible Rule, not upon Scriptures only. But if the People of those
times were bound to rely upon MOSES Law and the Prophets Writings, against all
the World besides, albeit jointly conspiring to teach them otherwise, though
with Glozes and pretenses of Moses Authority: then much more must these
Writings be of like Authority unto us. And all the Mimical Objections which the
Jesuits can frame to this or like purpose [If the Scripture be the Rule of
Faith, and must be discerned by private Spirits, how comes it to pass that
Calvin expounds it one way, Luther another, Zwinglius a third, and yet all
think they have the Spirit?] are the very same in effect, with the false
Prophet Zedekiah's Exception against Michaiah, 1 Kings 22. 24.
When went the Spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee?

5 Zeclekiah had four hundred more of his opinion; and this People had been
very dull, if conscious of their own factious greatness, they could not have
pleaded all the Papists Arguments against Michaiah; all that can be drawn from
the Universality or Authority of the Church: All which have mere ignorance or
incogitancy of a Divine Providence for their Root, but branch themselves in
their after-grouth into positive Atheism, and contradictious Infidelity. First
their Authors (the Priests and Jesuits) err, not knowing the Scriptures nor
the Power of God, able to lead men unto Life, by this written Way, though
narrow and private, yet straight and plain: Afterward (as if they were Satan's
sworn Takers, or authorized Purveyo^^s to furnish Hell with guests) observing
some, who rather idly wish or loosly profer, then seriously purpose or
earnestly strive, to enter in at the straight Gate, either sail in their first
Adventures, or finally miscarry; they watch hence all opportunities of haling
Passengers to their broad beaten Catholic Way, which almost all heretofore
have gone, as they brag, wherein a blind man, so he will follow his Guide,
cannot easily trip; so I think, until both come at the very Pit-brink of
Destruction, whereunto it tends directly and infallibly. But is this your
Catholic Way more plain or better beaten then rebellious Isreal's or Judahs
was? Could not these also (whilst backed by their blinded Guides) have mocked
at private Spirits, and bestowed Titles upon Gods true Servants, (because in
number fewest and most opposite to their Prelates) as foul and odious, as
Sectaries, Schismatics, or Heretics? Or did these willingly and wittingly go
astray, as knowing their ways to be the ways of death? (...) 5. 15.
Therefore my people is gone into captivity (says the Lord) because they had
no knowledge. Ignorance, the Nurse of your Devotion, was the true Mother of
their Superstition and Idolatry: yet was this want of Knowledge, which thus
proved the fertile Seed of all their ensuing Misery, the native Fruit of their
former Negligence in not practicing the known Precepts of Moses Law. And
because increase of Ignorance in Gods Word did breed in them a greater delight
of hearing Lies, and pleasant things, then the Truth, he gave them their Lust,
as he had done their Forefathers Quails in his displeasure. (...). 1^. (...)*
(...)* (...)*
Son of man (says the Lord unto his Prophet) these men have set up their Idols
in their heart, and put the stumbling Block of their Iniquity before their
face: should I, being required, answer them? Therefore say unto them, Thus
says the Lord God, Every man of the House of Israel, that sets up his (...)
in his heart, and puts the stumbling Block of his Iniquity before his face,
and comes to the Prophet, I the Lord will answer him that comes, according to
the multitude of his Idols: That I may take the House of Israel in their own
heart, because they are all departed from me through their Idols.

6 This evidently proves, that unless the Moral Law be duly practiced, and
those stumbling Blocks which the wicked set before their faces removed: to seek
after such a facile, inerrable Rule, as the Papists have framed for direction
in points of Faith, is, to solicit a snare for their own Souls, as no doubt God
gave the Romans, for their distaste of his Word and that longing after Genulism ^
before mentioned, this broken Reed, whereon to this day they rely, as he had
done the Israelites a King in his wrath. And though in every Age, since the
Goths and Vandals overran the Empire, God has raised up some poor Michaiah to
withstand their state-Prelates: Yet those lying Spirits, which possessed Ahabs
Prophets, have ever born greatest sway in that Church, seducing Princes and
People, as they had done Ahab, by multitude of Voices, to their own
Destruction. That the Romanists can produce men of great fame and note through
many Generations for their defense in some one point or other, it skils not
much. For as God, in This Law of Deuteronomie holds true in proportion
throughout al Ages. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams,
and give thee a sign or wonder, (And the sign and the wonder which he has told
thee, come to Pass) saying, Let us (...) after other Gods which thou have not
known, and let us serve them, Thou shall not ^ea^ken to the words of that
Prophet, or unto that Dreamer of dreams* for the Lord your God, proves you to
know whether ye love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your
soul, Deuteronomy. 13. 1.
times past, suffered Prophets or Dreamers to take opportunity, from their
strange Predictions, of enticing his people to Idolatry, forbidden by his
written Law: so in every Age, his Providence permits men of excellent Gifts,
and great skill in Scriptures, to have, yea to seek to establish their
plansible Errors under pretenses of Revelations, secret Assistance, or
abundant measure of his Spirit; that by this means he may try our Fidelity in
searching Scriptures, and Diligence in trying Spirits, as he did the Israelites
by such presumptions of Divine Prophesies, or Visions. And if amongst this
great Variety of Opinions I might deliver mine, as freely as I willingly submit
it to each sober Prophets Censure, (much more to the Correction of my lawful
Superiors) I should (for ought I yet see to the contrary) avouch; first, that
no Christian in any Age, but is often put upon his Trial Whether he love God or
the great Ones of this world more? Whether he will Confess or Deny Christ
before men? Secondly, That, during these days of Peace and Security which we
now enjoy, our Acquital or Condemnation in both the Two former main
Interrogatories, stands especially, upon our abandoning or abetting their
Errors, in some points of Danger, whose Worth in others we justly admire. So
much addicted are we, for the most part, to such men's persons, as have been
Gods Instruments for our good, that upon often experience of those wholesome
Medicines wherewith their shops are plentifully furnished, we swallow down
whatsoever there we find: when as perhaps the disease they had to deal with, or
some other circumstances of the time, were such, as required an extraordinary
Medicine, which whilst we administer without mixture of like Ingredients, or
not upon the same Occasions, we may chance to poison both our selves and our
Patients. Others of us again are so much accustomed to politic Observation,
that we commonly make no other trial of Divine Truths, then by some such
forinsecal form of proceeding, as is used in secular Inquisitions; wherein
determinations go by calculation of most Voices. But unless the Lord did
suffer us to have plausible shows and goodly inducements in the worlds sight,
for Believing that which is contrary unto Truth; our Faith should not be
sincere, nor as an Armor of proof to resist all temptations; seeing there is
no man almost but is apt by Nature to follow a multitude, to do that which
public Laws have judged evil, much more to think or Believe as most men, or
men most esteemed, do. On the contrary, if we look into our Calling, 1. Cor. 1.
26.
Not many wise men after the flesh, not many noble are chosen of God. Such as
are His, ought to be like Him in this, that they see not as men (not as Natural
men, be they never so many) see, nor judge not as they judge.

7 The stay whereupon they, as in all other Difficulties, so especially in this
Trial of Spirits, must rely, is his Providence; which in time will bring the
Truth to light, and daily diffuseth the odor of life, able, (were not our
Senses dull or prepossessed with the fragrant Smell of earthly Pleasures) to
lead us to that invisible Truth which in this life we must follow not by View,
but by Faith. Yet not by Faith, if we take the Jesuits for our Guides who in
this present Controversy play false Huntsmen, always seeking to bring us from
the Prints of Gods Providence, unto the Paths and footsteps of Men, that have
corrupted their ways; casting the form of secular Proceeding before our eyes,
so to withdraw us from following him who has sweetened the 21 wherein we
breath, with the words of Eternal Life. If men would be so mad, as to frame
their lives according to their Doctrine; Hell it self could not wish a more
Devilish Means to make men Christians in conceit and At heists or Infideis in
heart. And yet besides the Impiety of all other kinds of Heresies or
Infidelities that are or have been; this of theirs is the most palpably absurd,
and most contradictory to the Rules of Reason and Principles of Arts received
by all, For if the Arguments they bring against us conclude any thing at all,
they conclude as much against all Certainty of secular or natural Sciences.

8 And because (whether purposely, or as mere Instruments managed by Satan, to
what use they know not) they still labor to make civil Modesty but a mask for
Infidelity; rightly judging though to a wrong end) ingenuous Humility and men's
lowly conceits of their own worth the fittest disposition, whence utter
distrust of Gods Favor toward such poor Creatures, as men so minded deem
themselves, can be wrought; and if once wrought and deeply planted in soft
minds or humble hearts, the only sure Foundation, whence they can hope to raise
their Blind Implicit Faith: It shall not be amiss, whilst we prosecute the
second Branch of their immoderate Folly, last mentioned to discover withal,
and partly dissolve, The Snares which they have set for the Simple and
Ingenuous.

CAP. XXV.
How far, upon what terms or grounds, we may with Modesty dissent from the
Ancient, or others of more excellent Gifts then our selves: That our
Adversaries Arguments impeach as much the Certainty of Human Sciences as of
private Spirits.

1 LEt it be granted, that many Places of great Moment are diversely expounded
by learned men: what will hence follow? That not the greatest Scholars in
reformed Churches can be as sure of their true Sense and Meaning, as the Pope?
Not, unless you first can make it evident, that Learning or Subtility of wit
is the only Means, whereby the true sense of Scriptures can be found out. And
this being proved; you must assure us that the Pope is always better learned
then others; otherwise he may fail as well as they. Or if you admit not Learning
for the only Means of distinguishing Doctrines, as indeed it is not; yet must
you secure the world, that the Pope has all those other good Qualifications,
whose want caused the learned to err. Or if you require neither one nor other
of these, you must prove that the best Gifts of God, the peculiar Attribute of
whose Glory, is, to be no Respecter of persons) are infallibly entailed to a
certain succession of men, without all respect of Learning, Wit, or Honesty.
Lastly you must prove that the Holy Ghost was a Private Spirit, and might err,
when he said, The Lord gives Grace to the Humble, Or, the Law of the Lord,
Wisdom unto the Simple: And that our Saviors words, Ventus spirat ubi vult,
did not import, (as he meant) that his Spirit might enlighten whom he pleased:
For if all these and that Deus cujus vult miseretur, be true; who can hinder
Him or His Spirit to open the eyes of some less learned, to behold clearly the
true Sense and Meaning of that Scripture, wherein many excellent Writers have
either erred or been overseen? or who can hinder God (if these places be true)
to reveal his Will to little ones, and keep it secret from the wise, and
mighty, because it is his pleasure so to do? and that for this end, that men
should learn to rely upon his Mercy, and Providence; not upon the Authority or
Skill of Men. Or who can hinder his Omnipotency even in this Age to make his
Power seen in our Weakness? If this his Power be not limited now: then may he
still both reveal the true Sense and Meaning of his Word in some points, unto
men of less Capacity in others; and furnish them with ability too, for
demonstrating by Evidence of Argument, and surest Grounds of Reason unto
others, that this sense must needs be the true sense, and that all other
Interpretations given of the same places, by men otherwise excellent for their
Learning and Skill in Scripture, cannot stand with those Principles of
Christian Faith, which all sorts of Believers steadfastly Believe. Must such a
man, or those to whom God reveals the Truth by his Ministry, doubt of the
Evidence of the Truth revealed, and mistrust Gods Word; because others as
learned, or more learned then either he that has the Truth revealed unto him
first, or they that take it from him, are of another mind? He must verily by
this Objection. For a Jesuit would say, Why should he not think others as
likely to have the Spirit, as himself? Let him esteem of them, as far better
Scholars and men endued with as great, or greater Measure of Gods Spirit then
himself; for so the Scripture teaches us not to be wise in our own conceit,
Phil. 2. 3.
but to think better of others then of our selves. And again, 1 Cor. 14. 32.
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

2 And yet both these Rules concern the greatest Scholars, and most skilful
Interpreters in some degree, as well as the meanest. For none is so absolutely
good, none so far exceeds another; but in part may be exceeded by him. Nor does
this Christian Modesty, which the Scripture thus teaches, bind any Christian
soul, or ingenuous mind, to such absolute servility, as the Objection must
enforce upon all, if it prove ought: For there is no ingenuous man, especially
of meaner gifts, but will in heart, and conscience acknowledge many, both
Ancient and modern, for far more excellent Scholars then himself: and yet be
fully persuaded in Conscience, that in sundry particulars he has the Truth on
his side which they oppugn; and the true sense of Gods Spirit in some points
wherein they have erred, or were ignorant. For neither will an indefinite
Proposition, in matters whose revelation depends upon the free Will and Liberty
of Gods Spirit, and are in respect of us contingent, infer every particular:
nor will one or sew particulars in any point infer an Universal Proposition, or
such as we call vera ut plurimum true for the most part. Now to say and
believe, that such a man is a better Scholar and of far more excellent gifts,
is but indefinite, not infinite, for the extent of his Scholarship, or gifts
beyond mine: Wherefore it will not hence follow, that he is a better Scholar, or
interpreter in this, albeit he be so in many, or in most other particulars;
much less will it follow, that I am a better Scholar or interpreter then he,
because I am better seen in this one, or few particulars. The Consequence, or
Corollary of which two Assertions, is again as evident: [I may without breach
of Modesty think I have the Truth on my side in sundry particulars, against him
that is far better seen in Scriptures, and other Sciences, then my self.] For
albeit he were much better seen in both then he is: yet are his gifts measured
as well as mine; although God has given him a greater measure of such gifts,
then me. Wherefore, as I would willingly yield unto him in infinite others; so
may I safely dissent from him in this or ^r particulars, that are contained in
the small measure of Gods gifts upon me; without any just censure of Arrogance,
or breach of Modesty, for entering the lists of Comparison with him absolutely.
For now we are to be compared but in this one, or few Cases; not according to
the whole measure of Gods gifts in us; which I acknowledge far greater in him,
and reverence him as my Superior for them. And as I acknowledge him absolutely
for my better, so is he in these particulars, in some sort, to yield
Superiority unto me. Christian Modesty teaches every man not to be hasty, or
rash, in gainsaying the Doctrine of the Ancient or other men of Worth; but
rather binds him to diligence in examination of the Truth, to use deliberation
in gainsaying the Opinions of men better learned then himself. But
Christianity it self binds all Christians, not to believe men's Authority
against their own Consciences; nor to admit of their Doctrines for Rules of
Faith, be they never so excellent, unless they can discern them to be the
Doctrine of that great Prophet. Cui DEUS non admetitur Spiritum: He cannot fail
in any thing, and whatsoever He says, or what his SPIRIT shall witness to my
Spirit to have proceeded from Him, I am bound to Believe. But for men to whom
God gives his Spirit but in measure, albeit in great measure, because I cannot
know the particulars unto which it extends, I neither may absolutely refuse,
nor absolutely admit their doctrines for true, until I see perfectly, how they
agree with, or disagree from his Doctrine, of whose Fullness we have all
received. And even the Truth of their Writings, to whom he has given his gifts
in great measure, I am to examine, by their Consonancy unto that small measure
of his undoubted gifts in my self, so far as they concern my self or others
committed to my charge. And in the confidence of Gods Promises, for the
increase of Faith and Grace, to all such as use them aright, every Christian in
sobriety of spirit may by the Principles of Faith, planted by Gods singer in
his heart, examine the Sentences, and Decrees of the wisest men on earth: to
approve them, if he can discern them for true; to confute them, if false; to
suspend his judgment, and limit the terms of his disobedience unto them, if
doubtful; and finally to admit or reject them, according to the degrees of
their Probability or Improbability, which he upon sober, diligent, and
unpartial search directed and continued in reverence of Gods Word, and sincere
love of Truth, shall find in them.

3 All the Arguments which they can heap up from the Variety of Opinions
amongst the learned (albeit they could make a Catalogue of Confusion in this
kind, as long as the tower of Babel was high) can only prove thus much; That no
man (especially no man endued with the gift of interpreting) may That this
(...) ^ the (...) should rather move all (...) Christians to (...) all in ^
(...) of men then to rely upon any.
rely upon any other man's Opinions, Expositions, or Decrees, without further
examination of them: but only upon the Scripture it self, which never varieth
from it self, nor from the Truth; for this cause to be admitted as the only
Infallible Rule of all Divine Truths, whereunto every man must conform his
Belief and Persuasions. For even this Variety of Opinions, about the particular
Sense or Meaning of this Canon of Truth, amongst such, as jointly acknowledge
the Infallibility of it in general, is a sufficient Reason to disclaim any man's
Authority for the Rule of Faith: seeing Experience shows such Variety, and
Partiality in them; and the general Foundation of Faith, (held by all thus
dissenting) binds every man to Believe, that the Scripture is not subject to
any of these Inconveniences. This undoubted certainty of it, when it is rightly
understood and perceived, should encourage all to seek out the right Sense and
Meaning of it, (which once found, is by all men's consent the surest foundation
of Faith, for by our Adversaries consent it is the Ground of the Churches Faith
(and where they cannot presently attain unto it, to suspend their judgments,
and not to follow men's Authorities (but only in Particulars, whose Generals
are contained in Scripture) lest they may lead them against the true Sense and
Meaning of it. And if men generally should have no other Ground but man's
Authority, or Believe this or that to be the Meaning of Scripture because such
a man or company of men does tell him so: besides his wronging of Gods Spirit
herein, he should also wrong many other men, oft-times far better learned, and
skillful in Scriptures, more dear in the sight of God, and better acquainted
with his Spirit, then are they, on whose Authority he relies. Every one to
whom God has given a wise heart, and Power in Scripture, might justly
challenge him of Partiality and Disobedience, in not giving as much to his
Authority, as to the former. But as the Truth, revealed unto him by the
meanest of Gods Servants, binds his Conscience to Believe it: so the Variety
of other men's Opinions, (be it never so great, the Authors and Favorers of
them never so well learned, never so stiff and confident in maintaining them,)
ought to be no Motive, either to dissuade him from assenting unto the Truth
known, or to discourage him in the industrious and sober search of it, by such
good Means as God has appointed for his Calling. For there has been as great
Variety of Opinions in other Sciences and Faculties, as in Divinity: yet no
later Jesuit, nor other learned Papists, that I have read or heard of, for
these diverse hundred years, have sought to prove, that no man can be certain
he knows any thing, because many think they know that which they do not. Or if
any Jesuit will renounce Aristotle, and revive the old Academicks Opinion,
[That there can be no certainty of any thing, but only an Opinion:] our
Universities shall be ready to answer him, albeit hereby they should disenable
their supposed infallible Rule as much as ours. In the mean time, holding
Aristotle's Doctrine, about the certainty of Sciences for true, they answer
themselves in all they can Object against us in this Point. For they neither
deny a Certainty in secular Arts, because many err: nor do they persuade
young students in their Schools, to give over their studious and industrious
searching into speculative Sciences, because many have taken much pains in them
to little purpose: Nor do they hold it sufficient for good scholars in such
matters, to rely wholly on other men's judgments, without any trial of
Conclusions, or examination of Arguments, according to the Principles of those
Sciences which they have professed. In a word, the Variety of Opinions has
not yet occasioned them to create a Pope of Arts, and secular sciences, albeit
such a Creature were (by their Arguments) much more necessary, or (at least)
less harmefull in those Faculties, then in matters of Religion. For in them we
have no promise for the assistance of a secret Teacher, the true Illuminator of
our souls, whose Authority is as infallible, as the Spirit of Truth. Aristotle
takes it for an infallible token that there is a Certainty to be had in
Sciences, because all men think themselves certain in their Persuasions of
things that may be known: as well those that know not the Truth, but only
think they know it, as those that know it indeed. If Aristotle's Argument (which
the Jesuits so acknowledge,) be good: then is their Argument in this Cause
most absurd. Many men (say they) persuade themselves they know the right sense
of sundry places in Scripture, when they do not, therefore no man, no private
man, no man but the Pope, (qui neque Deus est neque homo,) by any search or
industry, can be sure that he has it. Whereas by Aristotle's reason,) which
indeed is a Rule of Reason) the contrary rather follows, That there is a
Certainty to be had concerning the Truth and true sense of Scripture by all
such as seek it aright) because even such as err, and seek it amiss, are
strongly persuaded of their Certainty in it. From the same Topic do the
Schoolmen and other judicious Contemplators prove a Certainty of true and
perfect Bliss, able alone to satiate the greedy Appetite, and stay the
unconstant longing of man's Soal, because even misereants and such as
indefatigablie hold on like Dromedaries in those ungracious Courses which in
wiser Heathens sight lead directly unto Infalicitie and true Misery, cannot
cast away all conceit of Happiness from which they wander but rather suppose
it to be seated in those sensual Pleasures which they follow. Yet would our
Adversaries Arguments disprove all Certainty in apprehension of true
Happiness with greater proba^ then they can impeach the assurance of private
Spirits in any other point-of Faith, as might (to omit other reasons) be proved
by this one; Because some of their Popes (none of which as they suppose can
err in ordinary matters of Faith) never have any taste or apprehension of true
Happiness.

4 Of the manner of knowing the true Sense of Scripture, occasion will be given
us in the last part of this Discourse: of the Impediments which trouble most
men in this search, and of the Original of all Errors in Divine Mrters, and the
Means to avoid them, we shall speak, by Gods assistance, in the Article of the
Godhead. Thus much may now suffice, that no man ought to be disinayed in
seeking, or despair to find the true Sense and Meaning of Scriptures, in all
Points necessary for him in his Calling, because other men, much more expert
in all kind of Learning then himself, have foully erred in this search, and
finally missed of that they sought. For out of the Rules of Scripture already
set down, when such Temptations shall arise in our breasts, we may quell them
thus. They who have gone astray, were much better learned then I in all kind of
Knowledge: It may be they were hence more confident of their Gifts; for
scientia inslat, their excellent Knowledge might puss them up with
self-conceit; and he that is wisest of all has said, I will destroy the Wisdom
of the Wise, and the understanding of the Pruden: ^ 14.
shall be bid: it may be, as they were exceeding Wise, so they much gloried in
their Wisdom: but I will seek to glory only in the Lord, of whom I have
received every good Gift I have, and will always esteem this best, which shall
teach me not to rejoice above that which is meet in any other: As they were
Prudent, so it may be they were Proud, and the Scripture says: Deus resistat
superbis, God resisieth the Proud and such as trust too much to their own
conceit. As for me I will not be high-minded, but fear, for the same Scripture
tells me, Deus dat gratiam humilibus, yea grace to understand the true Sense and
Meaning of his gracious Promises made in Christ. And in confidence of them, I
will continue these my daily Prayers: Lord grant me true, unfeigned, Christian
Humility, and with it, grace, to know the wonderful things of thy Law. Others
have erred, of far more excellent natural parts, even men of deepest reach and
surest Observation. It may be, as their Wits were stronger, and their
Understandings riper: so their Wills were unrulier, and their Desires or
Affections greener. But O Lord break the stubbornness of my Will, purify my
Heart, and renew a right Spirit within me: so shall I see thee, and thy
goodness in thy Word, which shall enlighten me to teach thy Waves unto the
wicked, and convert sinners unto thee: so shall thy Law, thy perfect Law,
convert my Soul, for thy Testimonies are sure, and give Wisdom to the Simple.
Yea but they ^.
who first instructed me in thy Word, do dissent from me in the interpretation
of it. It may be they have not followed those Rules which thou taughtest them,
Lord give me grace to meditate aright upon thy Testimonies, so shall I have
more understanding then my Teachers. But what if the most reverend and Ancient
Fathers of former times were of a contrary mind? O Lord they were Psalm. 119. 99.
faithful servants in the House, and yet faithful but as Servants, not as thy
Son: and it may be thou did suffer those thy worthy Servants to go awry, to
try whether I thy most unworthy Servant would forsake the footsteps of thine
anointed Son to Heb. 3. 5. Psalm. 119. 100
follow them: but Lord teach me thy Statutes, so shall I (in this point wherein
I differ from them) have more understanding then the Ancient. Thy Name has
been already glorisied in their many excellent Gifts, all which they received
of thy bounteous hand: and it may be that now it is thy pleasure, in this
present Difficulty, to ordain thy praise out of such Infants mouths as mine.
They out of this thy fertile and goodly field have gathered many years
Provision for thy great Household thy Church, but yet either let somewhat fall,
or left much behind, which may be sufficient for us thy poor Servants to glean
after them, either for our own private use, or for that small flock which thou
have set us to feed. And let all sober-hearted Christians judge, yea let God
that searches the very heart and reins, and Christ Jesus the Judge of all
mankind, give judgment out of his Throne, whether in reasoning thus, we are
more injurious to the Ancient Fathers deceased, then they unto the Ancient of
days, and Father of the World to come, in denying the free Gifts and Graces of
his Holy Spirit, unto succeeding, as well as former Ages. We reverence the
Fathers as men endued with an especial measure of his Grace, as men that have
left many excellent Writings behind them, fit for the instructions of later
Ages as well as former: They will not honor God as much. For their Arguments
conclude, if any thing, Him to have been a gracious God, and his Spirit a Guide
only of some few Generations of old: but in this present, and all late past,
They make him a God, his Spirit a Guide, and his Word a Rule, only of the
Pope, who must be the only God, the only Guide, and his Decisions about
Scripture the only Rule of all other men's Faith, yea a Rule of Scripture it
self, as shall afterward appear.

SECT. IV.
The last of the three main Objections (before proposed) which was concerning
our supposed defective Means for composing Controversies, or retaining the
unity of Faith, fully answered and retorted: That the Roman Faith has no
Foundation.

THE last Objection is: Our Church has no Means of taking up Controversies,
seeing we permit the Use of Scriptures unto all, and every man to follow that
Sense of them which he likes best. We do indeed permit every man to satisfy
his own Conscience in matters of Salvation, and God forbid (for by his Apostles
he has forbidden) we should usurp any Supreme Lordship or absolute Dominion
over their Faith. Yet a Christian Obedience unto Pastors we require in the
Flock: unpossible in our judgment, to be performed aright, unless undertaken
more for Conscience then for fear of Punishment. And, as Obedience, if not
framed by Conscience, can never be sincere, so Conscience, unless regulated by
the Sacred Canon, man needs be erroneous, and always relish more of
Superstition then Religion. The Gospel we ever esteemed as a gladsom Message of
Peace and Salvation: and do we, by seeking to square men's thoughts and
affections unto it, prepare their hearts to deadly War? It is, we know, and
you deny not, the Fountain of Life, apt to season the waters of Marah and
Meribah, a Medicine able to allay all bitterness of Contention, and qualify
the poisonous roots of Strife; and do we, by setting it open for fainting Souls
to quench their thirst, dig pits of Destruction for them to fall into? The
Scriptures in general we have proved to be a plain and facile Rule, a Light
unto men's feet, and a Lantern unto their paths: and do we, by permitting the
free Use of it to all, first explicated and unfolded by the Dispensers of
Divine Mysteries, lay Stumbling Blocks in their way not possible to be descried
or avoided, or spread a snare to catch their Souls in Darkness? we permit
every man to follow that Sense or Meaning of it which his Conscience hketh
best: but we permit no man to frame the liking of his Conscience to his Lust;
we teach the contrary as a Principle of Faith and Christian Obedience. If any
disobedient Spirits list to contend, where they should perform. Obedience, we
know the Church of God has no such Custom: all such Contentions we detest,
and labor, as much as you, by all Means lawful, to quell: The same Internal
Means [Gods Word] are alike free to both, but more used by us which rely more
upon them: all the Difficulty is about Means External.

CAP. XXVI.
Containing the true state of the Question, or a Comparison between the Romish
Church and ours, for their Means of preventing or Composing Controversies.

1 THe Question them must be, first, whether we can as well discern such as
read Scriptures, as you, such as read your Church Decrees, with Contentious
minds. Secondly, whether we have Means as forcible and effectual as you have
any to reform them, or stay the spreading Contagion of their Heresy. To begin
with the later.

2 Such as you discern to be contentious, or to dissent from that Doctrine ^
which you conceive or teach for true, you threaten, with what? The Pope or
Churches Curse. Such as we discern to breed Contentions amongst us, or
Dissentions from that Truth, which we in Conscience think all ought to
profess, we threaten with Death and Damnation, and the terror of that
Dreadfull-Day which shall accomplish that we denounced ^
against all (...) by whom Offenses come. Will not the continual preaching of
this Doctrine be as forcible to deter a man from sowing Sedition, as the
Anniversarie Solemnity of the Popes Curse? Will men Believe a Jesuit from the
Pope, when they will not Believe Moses, and the Prophets, nor Christ Jesus
himself? But you will say, although men will not be kept in Order with Peter's
Keves, yet will they dread Paul's Sword: or rather if they will not dread the
fire of Hell, which must but long hence torment their Souls, yet will they
stand in awe of the faggot always ready in your Church for plaguing Heretics.
If this were the best Means to stop men's mouths, from professing what they are
in Conscience persuaded the Scripture tells them: The Fundamental Points of
Christianity had never been known either to you or us; Christian Religion it
self had been martyred with Christ's Martyrs. But as their Ashes was the
fertilest Soil, wherein the seed of the Gospel could be sown: so was the long
and cruel Oppression of such as dissented from your Church, as a ^opting or
pruning to cause ours flourish, and has at length set the Israel of God at
liberty from Egyptian Slavery.

3 But supposing this violent Course, upon great exigence of circumstances
either in the Matter, Manner, or Times of Contentions, to be both lawful and
expedient: yet could not the ordinary Practice of it be more effectual to
restrain men from contradicting, then it might be to enforce them to oppugn
the Truth. It might, according to the diverse dispositions of such as manage
it, be a Means, one way or other alike forcible, either to retain men in
Heresy, Idolatry, and Infidelity, or in the Unity of true and livelie
Faith: albeit Fear alone may make men perfect Heretics or Infidels, but not
inwardly or sincerely Faithful.

4 And as for our Church, albeit she search not so narrowly into the secrets of
every man's conscience, nor be so tyrannically jealous of every Word that might
be ill interpreted, nor so outragiously cruel in punishing known dissension
from her, or discovered Error: yet (God be praised) she has Paul's Sword as
well as yours, which our Magistrate bears not in vain, but can unsheath it,
when need requires, against such as are open and evident abetters of
Contentions, unless perhaps you will except, that it has not been so much
exercised in cutting you off from amongst us, (who are the Ringleaders of all
division, debate, and Trouble in our Church,) as it might be according to your
Doctrine. If in the Practice of this coactive Authority over contentious
Spirits, there be any fault, God amend it, for in our Churches Doctrine
concerning this Point there is none: and God grant our Magistrates may Practice
as our faithful Pastors teach: whose Doctrine is, that this External as well
as the Internal Power is given for Edification, not for destruction, and must
be directed by the same Rule; that the Use and Practice of it must be limited
by the End, that the End of it is by Injunction of things Good, and Prohibition
of Evil, to proportion men's Actions and Conversations to the Rule of Faith, and
Law of God, that so every member of the Commonwealth, thus wrought and
fashioned by the coactive Power, may be more easily transformed into a member
of Christ, as being more apt and pliable for the Word of Life to work upon. Nor
are we so precisely wedded to any determinate course for quelling or preventing
contentious Schisms or Heresies, but we may admit what other soever time shall
detect more effectual for attaining the former End; unto which our love is
such, as will not suffer us dislike any Means allied to it, though having
affinity with your Church: Part of whose external discipline we are not
ashamed to use unto good, because by you abused to bad and wicked Purposes. But
for your Churches Practice in the use of your best Means for avoiding all
Contentions, you plead no Infallibility: therein you may fail as well as we,
and the Question now is about our Doctrine.

5 Out of that which has been said, our Means for punishing such as we know to
be contentious appears as good as yours, whose use so far as we like it, is as
free for us as for your selves; let us now see whether we have Means as good,
or as infallible as yours, to discern who are contentious.

6 For the Popes Infallibility whether it be any or no, we are anon to
enquire, and we may not in this place give you leave to prejudice our Church
with the supposal of it. Nor do your selves make this discretion of conten^ous
Spirits any essential part thereof. That our means for ^iscerning the ^^^ginal
Causes o^ O^ (...) of Con^ns are fully ^^ui ^a^^nt to the Romish Churches.


7 None of you (that I have read) does attribute any Prophetical Spirit to the
Pope in this Case, as if he could descrie the storms of Contentions which might
cause shipwreck of Faith, before they arise, as far off as E^ did the Rain,
when it first began to gather into a cloud like a man's hand. The excellency of
his Infallibility, by your own Positions (if I mistake not* consists in the
decisions of Controversies brought unto him, not in the discovery or finding
out of such, as breed Contention. But does he vouch safe to decide all
Controversies that arise in his Dominions, albeit brought unto him? Vix vacat
exiguis rebus adesse Jovi.
The exercise of this Dominus Deus vester plenarie Power, is much like the use
of the Heathen Gods upon the old Roman Stage.

Nec Deus intersit, nisi nodus vindice dignus
Inciderit --
Unless it be to loose some Gordian knot
The Popes decision is not easily got.
And where it is got, it goes no farther then to the just and infallible
censure of the Opinion it self, in punishing the Authors or abetters of
adjudged Heresies or Schisms: he may err as well as we, because herein he
goes but by* the Information of private men, who neither are so absolute^y
Holy, but they may prove partial, nor so Wise and skillful always but they may
err in their Information, especially where it goes successively from ear to
ear, and from one Country Dialect to another, (as drink from vessel to vessel)
always losing some part of its proper and native Sapor, so that it may relish
otherwise to his Holiness mouth, then it did at the first setting abroach by
the Author.

8 And seeing the best Means to avoid Contention is the just punishment of them
that causelessly cause them: your Churches Authority, being herein so much more
obnoxious to Error and Misinformation as her Diocese is larger, less
uniforme or more remote; is liable to many Exceptions, from which such little
ones, as she out of her greatness contemns, are free. Nor is the Question (as
you bear the simple in hand) betwixt Public and Private Spirits, but between
your private men and ours; as whether yours can better disc^^^ who are
contentious thorowout your vast Precincts, then ours, who are such amongst us
at home. That no man should dissent from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church
you all agree. Some of you dissent from it, (as most of their fellows think)
who yet will not profess; but rather seek to cloak their dissent, either with
colors of Consonance or pretended reasons of no Repugnance unto Catholic
Tenants. ^^lla^mi^. lib. 3. de justif. cap 3, 4. etc. disputes so eagerly
against this Bishop as might have (...) a Censur^ ^f Irregul^ty had ^e li^^^ in
his Di^^esse.
Catharinus will defend the Council of Trent, and yet hold Certainty of
Salvation. Soto and Bellarmin reprove him: but how could either of them discern
whether Catharinus had the true Meaning of the Trent Council or not? Catharinus
(I take it) had a Suffrage in making those Decrees, whereof neither Soto nor
Bellarmin were allowed, much less Authentic Interpreters: for the Popes Bull
Apostolica authoritate inhibemus omnibus, tam Ecclesiasticis personis,
cujuscunque sint ordinis, (...) and (...), q^^m ^ai^ is, quocunque honor, ac
potestate praeditis, Praelatis quidem sub interdicti ingressus Ecc^ que ^u^rint
sub e^communicationis latae sententiae poenis, ne quis sine authoritate nostra
audeat ullos (...) (...), glos^^s, annotationes, scholia, ullumve omnino
interpretationis genus super ipsius concili^ decretis quo^, a^^ quidquam
quocunque nomine, etiam sub praetextu majoris decretorum corroborationis, aut
executi^, ^ color, statuere. Bullae Pij quarti super confirmatione oecum.
gener. Council. Trident.
confirming that Council, prohibits all private Interpretations of it, yet has
not the Pope or any Public Authority since that time condemned Catharinus for
this dissension. How knew Maldo^atus censu^e of th^se men, for dissenting (as
he thinks) from their Church, is so sharp and pe^^^p^o^y, as might well have
caused Contention, should his writings have come into their hands. Impediunt
nos quo ^inus acriter and veheme^ter invehamur in haereticos, Catholici quidam,
qui, nescio qua imprudentia hereticis se junxerunt. Neminem nomino, n^minem
vi^latae accuso religionis: scio Catholicos, scio doctos, scio religiosos ac
probos viros esse, sed minime profecto util^m atque fidelem in hac re operam
Ecclesiae navaverunt. Quod contra Scripturae sensum, contra Patrum omnium inter
pretationem, contra tacitum, i^o minime tacitum, sed satis superque explicatum
consensum Ecclesiae dixerint atque contende^int hoc loco de Sacramento non agi,
quod ut Benignissime dicam est Temerarium, gravioribus condemnarem verbis nisi
crederem viros been Catholicos Errore magis animi quam vitio, in Haereticorum
sententiam impegisse. Maldonat. Comment. in sext. Johan.
Maldonate, that Jansenius, Hesselius, and others which deny that Christ's Words
in the sixth of John are to be understood of Sacramental eating, did vary from
the received Doctrine of your Church, and jump with Heretics? Difference
between your selves and us in this Point you shall never be able to assign
any. Tell us by what Means you can discern who dissent from your Canons; and
our Answer is ready: we can discern who dissent from ours by the same, if no
other were left us. This briefly may suffice for removal of Prejudices easy
to be wrought in such as compare not Particulars with Particulars, or consider
not the use of external Magistracy acknowledged by us, for punishing
Contentious Spirits, or our Means of discerning who are such: In both which
respects we are at least equal to the Romans.

CAP. XXVII.
That the Romish Church has most need of some excellent Means, for taking up
Contentions, because it necessarily breeds so many and so grievous.

1 FOr the main Point, as well about the Original of Contentions, and Schisms,
as incorrigible continuance in them, only this Difference I find, That we
permitting a sober search of Scriptures unto all, not binding any man's Faith to
the Judgment of man, leave a possibility to the learned of finding out, a
liberty unto all of professing the Truth found, for the health and life of
their Souls, without dread or danger to their Bodies. And seeing we bind no man
upon pain of damnation, to Believe any point of Doctrine, which is not plainly
and expressly set down in Scriptures: we minister no occasion of deadly
dissension unto any. For Contentions amongst our selves, they are rather
distempers then dangerous disease^, nor do they affect those parts of Religion
in which our spiritual Life is properly seated. Yet even these in later years
had been, and always would be fewer, and their danger less, were it not for
those Foxes which your Church suborns to bring firebrands into the Lords
Harvest. And even these your Foxes in this our Land, howsoever, for this
public Mischief against us, and the intended Combustion of our Church, their
Tails were tied together by your Churches knot; have yet whet their cankred
Teeth as eagerly, and opened their venomous Mouths as bitterly one against
another, as any (but they) could have done either against us or any creatures
living. But to leave private dissentions amongst your selves; your Church
prohibiting men the ingenuous search of Scriptures and free profession of their
Conscience, tying them to submit their Judgments at all adventure unto the
corrupt Doctrine of your Clergy: has set open a wide gap to such gross
Opinions, and monstrous Heresies, as no man, unless his judgment had been
surprised by your pretended Authority, or his Spiritual senses locked up in
superstition, sleep, and midnight darkness, would ever have assented unto,
much less have tolerated, when men were taught to hold them for Points of
Faith, as infallibly true as the Scripture it self, only because your Church
has proposed and practiced them.

2 Thus did your Doctrine and filthy Practice of Indulgences (to omit many more)
from some surmises of the Ancient, concerning a third place after this life; as
it were, from a small seed or kernel, by little and little come up to such a
mighty growth, that it violently rent, and tore asunder the main Walls of
Christ's Temple, and caused that irreparable breach and rupture, betwixt the
Southern and Northern parts of Christ's Church, established in this Western part
of the World. And albeit Cassander with diverse other learned men in your
Church, both before, and about* the time of the Trent-Councel, wished a
reformation of many Points maintained by you; hoping the Lutheran, and other
reformed Churches, would thereby be drawn to Unity with you again: yet what one
suspicious Opinion has that Council cleared, what bad amended, what harsh or
odious one has it mitigated? Nay, what Possibility has it left for the
amendment of any in Ages to come* amongst such as shall acknowledge that
Authority infallible, which has thundered out so many Anathema's to all
Gainsayers? Before it was lawful for Cassander and Cajetan, Fspenceus and
others, to show their dislike of your Doctrine, and signify their desires of
amendment; retaining some Relics or* fashion of men, that had been Freeborn,
not Slaves or Vassals to corrupt and dissolute Tyrants. They used their Liberty
of Speech even in those cases, wherein it is not now lawful for any in your
Church to mutter, no not so much as to sigh, or groan under that heavy Yoke,
which their Forefathers grudged to bear, whose weight and hardness
notwithstanding you still increase, whilst your upstart Statesmen the
Jesuits, (like Rehoboams greenheaded Counselors) daily seek to make your
Ecclesiastic Monarch^s little finger, greater then his Predecessors loins.

3 Some Jesuit or other happily would reply: Had Luther been quiet, the Church
had been still at such Peace and Unity, as it enjoyed for many years before.
What manner of Peace and Unity was that? Any other then such, as usually is
found in any political Argus-eyed Tyranny, before the sinews of it shrunk or
the ligaments be dissolved? where no man may move but he is seen, nor mutter
but he is heard; where the least secret signification of any desire of Freedom
in Speech, or Liberty in Action, is interpreted for open Mutiny, and the least
Motion unto Mutiny held matter sufficient for a cruel Death. These were the
Bonds of your Peace and Unity, in this point of your Ecclesiastic Monarchy.
As for your Peace in other speculative Points of less use or commodity to your
state, it was like the revellings, or drunken Consorts of Servants in their
night sportings, when the Master of the House is asleep in a retired room. Any
School-man might broach what Opinion he list, and make his Auditors drunk with
it, others might quarrel with him and them, in as uncivil sort as they list, so
no Weapon were drawn against the Popes Peace. Albeit in the mean time the
Scripture suffered as open Violence and Abuse, as Priscian does, when drunken
or dunstical Grammarians braul in extemporary Latin. As for your Cardinals and
Statesmen they were at league indeed, but it was foedissimum foedus, a League
solemnized with more then barbarous and heathe^sh sacrifice, with the blood of
many tho^sand silly Lambs, for whom the Lamb of God had sacrificed his precious
Body and Blood. What number of Hussits, Bohemians, Picardes, poor souls of
Lions were made a prey unto your Woolvish (I may not say Lions) teeth, seeing
as the Italian Poet argues, this Title so ill befits your Popes:

Nec cadit in turpes nobilis ir a feras:
No Lions they: for noble wrath
No place in such base creatures has.
But what Troops of such harmless souls were slain, burnt, and tormented, for
their longing after the Liberty of the Sons of God, nor we, nor you that live
this day can know, nor shall be known until the Register of the Book of life be
opened. And howsoever they went (as their Lord and Master the great Shepherd
of their souls had done before them) like sheep unto the slaughter, whilst
their friends and kinsfolks cries were drowned with your Jewish Melody, and joy
at their Destructions; yet we assure our selves, (and ye might dread Gods
further Judgment by the event) it was the Cry of their innocent Blood which
filled the Court of Heaven, and in a just revenge of their Oppression procured
Luthers Commission for Germanies Revolt. And yet say you, Luther was the Cause
of Dissension in Christ's Church: why so? Because he burst your former Unity,
whose only Bond was Hellish Tyranny. Of such a dissension, and of the breach
of such an Unity, we grant he was the Cause; and you have no just cause to
accuse him of dissension, or disobedience for it. For all kind of Unity is not
to be preferred before all kind of Dissension or Revolt. He that will not
dissent from any man, or society In this sense Christ is said to have come, not
to send Peace, but a Sword unto the World.
of men, upon any Occasion whatsoever, must live at perpetual Enmity with his
God, and War continually against his own Soul. For there is an Unity in
Rebellion, a Brotherhood in Mischief, a Society in Murder both of Body and
Soul. Wherefore unless you can prove your Cause or Title, for exacting such
absolute submission of men's souls, and spirits unto your Church, or Popes
Decrees, to be most just and warrantable by Commission from the Highest Power
in Heaven: Luther, and all that followed him, did well, in preferring a most
just, most necessary, and sacred War, before a most unjust, and
shamefully-execrable Peace: A Peace, no Peace, but a banding in open Rebellion
against the Supreme Lord of Heaven and Earth, and his Sacred Laws, given for
the perpetual Government of Mankind throughout their generations.

4 To press you a little with your Objections against us and our Doctrine,
That this very challenge of this insallible Authority of the R^mish Church for
ending all Controversies ^^th necessarily (...) the greatest Di^tion from it
that can be in all rel^gi^us minds.
for nourishing dissension: Our Church (say you) has no Means of taking up
Controversies aright. If this were true, yet (God be praised) it ministers no
just occasion of any dangerous Quarrel. But be ours, as it may be: has your
Church any better Means for composing Controversies of greatest moment, that
reign this day throughout the Christian World? Or does it not by this insolent,
proud, tyrannical claim of Soveraigntie, and imperial Umpiership over all other
Churches in all Controversies, give just cause of the greatest dissension, and
extremest Opposition, that can be imagined could be given in the Church of
Christ? The whole world besides cannot minister any like it. Nature and common
Reason teach us, that a man may with far safer Conscience take arms in defense
of his Life and Liberty, then in hope to avoid some petty loss or grievance or
to revenge some ordinary cause of private discontent: the Quarrel in the one,
(though with resistance unto our Adversaries blood) may be justifiable, which
in the other (albeit within the compass of less danger) were detestable. But
Grace does teach us this Equity, Skin for Skin, all that ever a man has, the
whole world (and more if he had it is to be spent in the defense of Faith, the
only seat of our Spiritual Life, or for the Liberty of our Conscience. You
alone teach, that all men should submit their Faith to your Decrees without
examination of them or appeal from them: we usurp no such Authority, either
over yours, or any men's Consciences. You challenge our Sovereign Lord, and all
his People, to be your ghosily Slaves: we only stand in our own defense: we
exact to such absolute Service, or Allegiance, either of you, or any other the
meanest Christian Church, no nor our Prince and Clergy of the natural members
of our own. They only seek (would God they sought aright in time) to keep them
short at home, whose long reach might hale over Sea your long-sought Tyranny
over this People of Brittany, happily now divided (Lord ever continue this
happy Division) from the Romish world. Unless your Means of taking up so great
Contentions (as hence in equity ought to arise) be so superexcellent, that it
can make amends where all is marred, (for which I cannot see what Means can be
sufficient, unless you either let your Suit fall, or prove your Title to be
most just by Arguments most Authentic and strong you evidently impose a
necessity of the greatest Contentions, and extremest Opposition that any abuse
or wrong, loss or danger, possibly to befall a Christian man (either as a Man
or Christian, either in things of this life or that other to come, either
concerning his very Life and Liberty whether Temporal or Spiritual or
whatsoever else is more dear unto him) can occasion of breed.

5 That which ye usually premise to work such a prejudice in credulous and
unsettled minds, as may make your slight pretenses of Reason or Scripture (to
be sifted anon) seem most firm and solid to ground you Infallibility upon, is,
the supposed Excellency of it, for taking up all Controversies in Religion, and
so of retaining Unity of Holy Catholic Faith in the Bond of Love, If indeed
it were so excellent for this purpose, you might rest contented with it, and
heartily thank God for it. Yea, but because you have this excellent Means,
which we have not, nor any like unto it, yours is the true Catholic Church,
and ours a congregation of Schismatics. What if we would invent the like?
would that serve to make ours a true Church? Or tell us, what Warrant have you
for inventing or establishing your supposed most excellent Order for taking up
Controversies? Was it from Heaven? or was it from Men? If from Heaven, we will
obey it; if from Men, we will imitate you in it, if we like it. But first let
us a little further examine it.

CAP. XXVIII.
That of two Senses, in which the Excellency of the Romish Churches pretended
Means for retaining the Unity of Faith, can only possibly be defended, The one
(from the former discourse) proved apparently False; The other, ^ self, as
palpably Ridiculous.

1 WHen you affirm the Infallibility of your Church to be so excellent a Means
for taking up all Controversies in Religion: you have ^ whether from the known
or possible fruits of the Romish Churches Means (so excellent, as is pretended)
^ Argument can be drawn to work a prejudicial conceit in men's minds, (That it
were ^ Authority to their Church) before they come to direct examination of the
main point (what ^ Scriptures.)
no choice of any other, but one of these two Meanings; Either you mean, It is
so excellent a means de facto, and does take up all Controversies: or else, it
would be such as might take up all, if all men would subscribe unto It.

2 If you take the former Sense or meaning: we can evidently take you (as we
say) with the very manner of Falsehood. For this claim of such Authority (as we
partly showed before) is the greatest eyesore to all faithful eyes that can be
imagined, and makes your Religion more irreconcilable to the Truth. And for
this Church of England, as in it some dissent from you in many Points, others
in fewer, some more in one, some more in another, so in this, of your Churches
Infallibility, all of us dissent from you most evidently, most eagerly, without
all hope of Reconcilement or agreement, unless you utterly disclaim the Title
in as plain terms as hitherto you have challenged it. Your dealing herein is as
absurdly impious and impiously insolent, as if any Christian Prince or State
should challenge another, as free and absolute as himself, for his Tributarie,
or Vassal, and traduce him for a seditious member of Christendom, because he
would not compose the Quarrel thus injuriously sought, with the surrender of
his Crown and Dignity.

3 Princes may conclude a Peace, for civil and free commerce of their People,
though professing sundry Religions: and they and their Clergy might perhaps
procure a mitigation of some other Points, now much in Controversy: but Though
all others might, yet This admits no terms of parley for any possible
Reconcilement. The natural Separation of this Island from those Countries
wherein this Doctrine is professed, shall serve as an everlasting Emblem of the
Inhabitants divided hearts at least in this Point of Religion: and let them, O
Lord, be cut off speedily from amongst us, and their Posterity transported
hence, never to enjoy again the least good thing this Land affords: let no
print of their Memory be extant so much as in a tree or stone within our Coast:
or let their Names by such as remain here after them be never mentioned, or
always to their endless shame; who living here amongst us will not imprint
these or like Wishes in their hearts and daily mention them in their Prayers,
Littora littoribus contraria, fluctibus undas,
Imprecor arma armis, pugnent ipsique nepotes.


Which words, though uttered in another case, applied to this, sound thus much
to all well-affected English or British ears,

Let our and for ain Coasts join battle in the Main,
Ere this foul blasphemy Great Britain ever stain.
Where never let it come, but floating in a flood
Of ours, our nephews, and their childrens childrens blood.
4 The Leaven of the Pharisees, whereof our Savior willed his Disciples to
beware, was sweet Bread in respect of this pestiferous Dough, whose poison is
so diffused througout the whole Body and Mass of Romish Religion, as it has
polluted every parcel therein, and makes even those particular Points to be
damnable in modern Papists, which in the Ancient holding them from other
Grounds, were pardonable. Such as held a kind of Purgatory, or third Place
after this life, Evangelical Counsels, Invocation of Saints, or the like,
because they thought the Scripture taught them, were deceived in these
particular Scriptures, but yet reserved their faithful Allegiance to Gods Word
in general. Nay, even those particular Errors and mistakings of the sense of
Scriptures, were witnesses and pledges of their Obedience unto the Scripture,
or Word of God; when they therefore Believed them, because they were
immediately persuaded in Conscience that the Scriptures (the Rule of their
Conscience) did teach them. But while you hold the same Opinions, not because
you are persuaded in Conscience (immediately ruled by Scripture) that they are
contained in Scripture, but because the Church, which as ye suppose cannot
err, does teach them; or to speak more plainly, whiles you your selves either
Believe, or teach others to Believe them or the Scriptures concerning them;
because the Church, whose Authority in this and all other Cases you
acknowledge for the infallible Rule of your Faith commands you so to do: you
hereby openly renounce your own, and solicit the the people to alienate their
Allegiance from God and his Word: and the passing over, or yielding up of
steadfast and absolute Assent unto any particular Point in your Religion, upon
these Grounds, is as evident a witness of high Treason, committed against GOD
by the party thus believing; a swearing of that Fealty, or Allegiance to a
pretended Vicegerent, or Deputy, which is only due to the Prince himself, would
be in a natural and sworn subject. Wherefore the supposed Infallibility of your
Church is no such excellent Means of taking up all Controversies, if your
meaning be in the former sense proposed. For it is so far from taking up all,
that it puts an Imposibility of having any betwixt you and as taken up, unless
you abjure it quite; for it makes all the rest of your Opinions deadly, to such
as steadfastly Believe it, or for it, them.

5 Your meaning then must be; That this Infallibility of your Church would be
an excellent Means for taking up all Controversies, if all men would subscribe
unto it. Indeed I must confess, there would soon be an end of all, or rather,
no controversies should ever be begun, if every man would resolve with himself,
not to dissent from others, but let them hold what they list, he would hold the
very same: or if all men would bind themselves to abide some one Man's, or a
Major part of some few or more determinate persons Determinations without more
ado. In this case one might say of his Judge, He shall determine for me; and
another might reply, nay but for my Opinion; the third might say, He shall
judge as I will have him; and the fourth reply, or rather as I will: and yet
never a one dissent from other, but all agree. All of them might have the
Judges Sentence at as absolute command, as the Shepherd had the Weather. For
every one might have him determine as he pleased, because all of them were fully
resolved to be pleased with whatsoever he should determine. If you dream of such
an Unity in Faith, or such a manner of composing Contentions; it must be
further disputed, whether this were not an open Dissension or solemn Compact
for moving a general Apostasy from the true Faith. And they that labor for
such an Union in points of Faith and Salvation, do in effect solicit the whole
Christian world to run hand in hand, but headlong, into open Insidelitie, lest
perhaps by breaking companies, some might slide into Schisms and Heresies.
Should the Ramists and Aristotelians, or generally all the Professors of
Secular Arts and Sciences in our Universities, bind themselves under penalty
of Expulsion, or by solemn Vow, never to swerve from the Bedle of beggars or
John-a-dogs his determinations, and resolutions in any point of Logic,
Philosophy, or Metaphysics; would this be a sweet match to take up all
Controversies, or Contentions between College and College, in our Schools?
were this so excellent a way, to retain the Unity of the Truth, and skill in
those Faculties? or rather the only ready way to make all bondslaves to
Error, Ignorance, and Falsehood? And yet might we, with more safety, delegate
greater Authority in these cases to every one, then we may to any living in
matters of Faith and Religion; over which, or over our selves in respect of
which we have no lawful Power or Authority. For this, and other Reasons, should
we be more afraid to subscribe unto any mortal man's Authority, as unto a Judge
most absolute and infallible, whose decrees we may not resist, from whose
Sentence we may not appeal in matters of Faith: then to refer our seves wholly
unto the sole Judgment of the meerest natural Fool living, in matters of
secular Learning and natural Knowledge. For, (besides the danger hence
accrewing to our selves) GOD our Creator, Christ our Redeemer, and the Holy
Spirit our Comforter and Instructor, have far greater interest in our Souls and
Consciences, then either Aristotle or Plato, or any other Philosopher, or
Philosophy it self has in our Opinions, or Persuasions.

6 But though Gratitude to our God could not move us; are those blessed hopes
of Immortality so little worth, as upon every light or no occasion we should
adventure their eternal loss? And yet idly, desperately, and frantickly,
adventure it we do, unless such as urge us with solemn subscription to this
more then Monarchical Supremacy over our souls (enstamped not with any Roman
Caesar's but Gods own Image and Superscription) can show us sufficient Warrant,
that thus to offer up not only the calves of our lips, but even our Faith (the
best Tribute our hearts can yield) wholly into Christ's pretended Vicars hands,
be not a witness of our Rebellion against Christ himself the Supreme Lord as
well of them, that challenge this Authority, as of us, of whom this servile
subjection is exacted. All the warrant or Evidence, which in this case they can
pretend, must either be drawn from the Rules of Reason or from the Scriptures,
the Rule (as we contend) of Faith; which for this reason may justly control
all pretended Rules of Natural Reason. And (as we have said before) if the Pope
be (as usually he is) but See (...) 14, ^ 5, etc.
homo (...) or (...) with a witness: then both Scripture and Reason teach us,
that he cannot perceive the things of God, nor the Meaning of his Spirit; for,
as our Apostle says, they are foolish unto him. And if they be foolish to him;
then is he as foolish a Judge of them, and of all things that must be
Spiritually discerned, as the meerest natural Idiot would be of natural
Philosophy, or other secular Arts or Sciences. Even to this one place of
Scripture, uttered by the Spirit of God, and the Ministry of that Apostle, no
sufficient Answer can be given, without the evident Testimony of the same
Spirit (under some Prophets, Apostles, or Evangelists hand) either mitigating
or restraining that sense which the words naturally import, and we collect:
whose Probability in it self, and Consonancy with other Scriptures, are so
great, that we stand bound by our general Allegiance, which we ow unto GODS
Spirit, to suspect all men for Incompetent Judges, or witnesses in matters
concerning GOD; unless we know certainly of what Spirit they are, or have
great Inducements to presume them of a better Spirit, and in more favor with
the Spirit of God, then they themselves report their Popes to be.

CAP. XXIX.
That their Arguments, drawn from convenience of Reason or pretended
Correspondency between Civil and Ecclesiastical Regiment, do prejudice
themselves, not us.

1 THat this is no general Dictate of common Reason or any part of the Law of
Nature, Reason and common Sense make evident: And we may rest assured hereof,
in that no Jesuit, nor other Stickler for the Popes Authority, has been so
impudent hitherto, as to avouch thus much. That there are some Probabilities,
or Conveniences, which in Reason might persuade any indifferent man, that
there must be some one Umpire, or Tribunal Seat, by whose Authority all
Controversies of Religion must be determined, Non ignora^at dens multas in
Ecclesia exorituras dis^icul^ates circa fidem; debuit igitur ju dicem alique^
(...) a provid^^ (...) iste (...) (...) non potest elle Scriptura, neque
Spir^aus revelans privatus, neque princeps saecularis; ig^tur princeps
Ecclesiasticus, aut solus aut cer^e cum co^silio and co^sensu Coepiscoporum.
Neque enim singitur neque singi potest aliquid aliud ad quod hoc judicium
pertinere posse videatur. Bellarm. lib. 3. de verbo Dei cap. 9.
BELLARMINE thus goes about to prove: GOD was not ignorant that many
Difficulties about Faith would arise in the Church, What then? In Reason then
he was to provide his Church of a Judge; suppose he were. But this Judge cannot
be the Scripture, nor any private revealing Spirit, nor any Secular: therefore
an Eccesiastical Prince which may determine such matters either of himself
alone, or at least, with the advice and consent of Bishops his Associates. N^
has any, yet as nor can any indeed imagine any other to whom the Judgment of
these things can possibly appertain.

2 That neither the Scripture, nor any private man, nor secular Prince is this
Judge, he labors to prove by Arguments, whose strength has been broken in the
former Discourses, concerning the Obscurity of Scriptures and the Varieties of
Interpretations. But how cunningly soever his sagacity may seem to have cast
about, he is at the same default Valentian and Sacroboscus were: all of them
overran the Sent by leaping from one Extreme to another, without search of the
Mean betwixt them: for they take it as granted, that we deny all living Judges
of Controversies, because we acknowledge no absolute Infallibility in any. Our
Assertion is; The Scripture is a Law or Rule most infallible, whereby every man
must judge himself; whereby such as are in lawful Authority may judge others
for not judging themselves by it; but not always infallibly. Nor can it stand
with the sobriety of Christian Wisdom to expect such a precise determination of
all Points disputed, much less disputable among the learned, as might bind all
men to an absolute Belief (whether explicit or implicit) of this or that
determinate sense, all others excluded. Notwithstanding the more conscious any
ordinary Judge is of his own or others Fallibility or Facility of erring
dangerously, if they should take upon them strictly to determine all Religious
doubts (much more all doubts) in matters of Religion, that might be moved: the
more infallibly may he rest assured that many cases of that Quality are very
doubtful; that in sundry, of many Opinions all to his knowledge possible, as
much may be as probably alleged for any one as for other. Now the true and
proper Use of an Ecclesiastic Judge or Magistracy, is, not only to punish
Oppugners of Truths, either evident in themselves and infallibly Believed of
all Christians, or generally received by the best and most unpartial Writers in
every Age; but, as well, to moderate men's carriage in Controversies of the
former nature; sometimes by restraining all peremptory Assertions one way or
other, all exasperating censures or contumelious contradictions (as in
difficulties aquipendent betwixt an equality of contrary Probabilities:)
sometimes (as in matters not so useful, or unto whose search the Signs of times
present do not solicit us) by enjoining a general Silence, that all may hearken
with better attention to GOD always speaking by the ordinary Course of his
Providence, albeit softly and leasurely, yet distinctly and audibly, to quiet
minds already instructed in that Heavenly knowledge, though not simply unto
all: for many of us can perfectly distinguish men's voices whiles they repeat
what in part we know; though not whiles they pronounce matters unheard before,
or altogether unknown to us.

3 By this it may appear, would our Adversaries make an equal comparison, that
God has better provided for his Christ's Church having by our Doctrine a most
infallable written Law, and living, though but fallible Ecclesiastic Judges,
is much better provided (...) in all matters Spiritual then Politic ^ties,
whose Laws as well as Judges are faluble, in matters C^vil.
Churches Regiment in matters Spiritual, then Commonweals in Temporal. First
the Scripture is a Rule, as all-sufficient for all such Businesses, as any
Temporal Laws could be for effecting their proper End, albeit we should suppose
the Lord had dictated them immediately, as he did the Scriptures. This our
Adversaries cannot deny, unless they doubt whether the eternal Spirit have as
great skill in Heavenly matters, as in Secular. For (as we showed before) he
moved Holy men to write the Scriptures, that we by them might attain eternal
life. Secondly, besides this most infallible Rule or Law, we admit an equal
Necessity of Ecclesiastical, and Temporal Judges, an equal Authority in both to
give Sentence viva voce. And albeit we deny any absolute Infallibility in
either, yet the Possibility of not erring we acknowledge so much greater in the
Judge Ecclesiastic, as his Directory Rule is more certain, and Authentical.
But here I must request these great Disputers of Rome (if their Frenzy ome but
by fits, and admit Lucida intervalla) one time or other, upon their good days,
or in their sober hours, (if God send them any) to bethink themselves well, what
manner of Judge they require in matters Civil or merely Secular? such an one as
cannot possibly err in judgment? one whom neither Ignorance, lewd Desires,
nor exorbitant Affections can cause to swerve, either from the undoubted Rules
of Natural or Civil Equity, the fundamental Laws of his Country, or the chief
Lawgivers true intent and meaning? If they willingly grant that our Civil
Magistracy, which they acknowledge lawful and necessary in its kind, may
sometimes judge wrongfully, in Causes by nature most determinable, by ordinary
course of Civil Justice; as for example, in condemning Priests and Jesuits: or
generally in matters of Life and Death: The utmost Bounds of all Christian
Obedience unto any Authority on earth is only to abide a peaceable ^ial before
the lawful Judges, patiently to embrace the Penalty inslicted, but not to think
about Penalties soever they shall (...) cause for which (...) be just or such
as shall sta^^ for good in the day of final Judgment; for so earthly Powers,
(...) (...) abs^lute Authority over our Souls, which is Gods (...) (...).
with what foreheads can they demand we should Believe the Pope or other
Ecclesiastic Judge cannot possibly give erroneous sentence in any matters of
Religion, many of which are of that nature as can admit no other use of
external or coactive Power, save only severe restraint of all precise
Determinations, or curious search one way or other? And to admit, though in
Cases merely Civil, such an absolute inerrable Tribunal, from whose censure no
man (though ready with patience to brook the execution of heaviest bodily doom
it could inflict) may so much as in the secrets of his Heart or Conscience so
far appeal, as to examine whether the determination be right or wrong; were
either secretly to deny, or openly to praeoccupate or prevent Christ's Final
Judgment: wherein even Supreme Judges shall be judged, and all forepast
decisions examined by the written Word, (which these men disclaim for any
Authentic Rule of Faith;) the Right approved, the Wrong reversed by Him, whose
peculiar Prerogative it is (though now usurped by the Pope) to put a Final End
to all controversies viva voce.

4 Notwithstanding, be it supposed for disputations sake, that God had
appointed such an Authentic Tribunal (as these Drunkards dream of) for
deciding matters of Religion: yet were it most gross to think (might Reason
alone without Scripture be admitted Judge) there should be but one Supreme
Tribunal for the whole Christian World. Even common Sense (were Reason
silenced) might instruct us, that it were much more convenient for every
several Kingdom, every free State or Society of men, to have such a
Consistory, or Supreme Tribunal amongst themselves. For by the means, might
all differences in Opinions be far sooner known, more narrowly sifted, and
present notice taken of every Circumstance, concerning their Occasions,
Progress, or Favorers; the controversy it self quicklier decided; the
Offenders more speedily punished; and the like occasions better avoided.
Whereas, for every Nation to resort to Rome, or for the Pope to send his
Legates into every corner of the Christian World, would procure great toil, and
long labor, with little success. The causers of contentions, or maintainers
of Heresies, might often die in their Sins, before the controversy were
examined, or the Truth so manifested, as might move their to Repentance, or
recantation of their Errors: the Information might be impertinent, partial,
imperfect or false: the Opinion, or supposed Herenr, being happily) first set
abroach in the presumed Heretics Country D^aleci, would be worse understood
of the Pope, whose Instruction in many principal Our Adversaries go int that a
Pr^vi^cial Council conjirmed by the Pope, is as authentic as a General,
wherein be were pres^^t, th^ugh a s^nt in the other, (...) ac^quainted with
particular Circumstances or car^^ag of the Connoversie. Much more availeable
should a Popes Confirmation of such Councels be, who were present and uel
acquainted with all Occasions or other Circumstances of the Con^orersie, or the
Division: Wherefore if Reason without Scripture might divide this Comrover sie,
it were more (...) to have a: many Popes as s^^eraly^ce Stat^^o or Monarchies.
circumstances must oft-times depend upon disagreeing hear-sayes, for his
Holiness sees no better, his Infallible-ship hears no farther in matters de
facto, then meaner men; his plenarie Power, even while he gives Sentence ex
cathedra, is not able to understand more Tongues, then many Linguists may in a
meaner seat; his Fatherhood understands none besides his Mother Tongue, so well
as the natural inhabitants of every Country do their own proper native
Language. Many such Inconveniences might be alleged, for which, (might we
choose what manner of Ecclesiastic Government God should appoint us) we should
make choice of a Supreme Judge in all causes Ecclesiastical at home, rather
then go to Rome to have them heard. If the Controversers were to go from
Norway, the Seas might be frozen, and the enemies possess the Land. The
passages from sundry other places might all be so stopped, as we should have
greater controversy in going to Rome, then that for which we were to go. Or if
the Election of men (for by man is the Pope elected) could give such
Infallibility to any: the manner of such Elections would be much more agreeable
to the Rules of Gods Providence, and the example of Christ's Apostles, if all
the Congregation, which was to rely upon his Infallibility, should first make
choice of some few most excellent and famous men, renowned for Learning and
Integrity; afterward all with one mind and one heart, pray unto the Lord to
show by lot which was the man, to whom he would undoubtedly vouchsafe this
infallible Assistance of his Holy Spirit. Thus (might Reason or common Sense
without Scripture be Judge what manner of Government were fittest for Christ's
Church) we could bring far greater Reasons for a multitude of Popes or
Ecclesiastical Monarchs, (for one at least in every Nation) then either our
Adversaries bring, or can be brought for one general Monarch over the Universal
Church Militant.

5 And albeit this challenged large extent of the Romish Churches Authority
over others, (were the Authority it self otherwise for the Quality moderate)
had been in former times not altogether so unreasonable: yet were it at this
day to be abandoned, as a turbulent device, apt for nothing so much as
perpetual disturbation of public Peace throughout Christendom, now divided
into so many several Soveraignties, and governed by so many absolute Princes,
or States, no way dependent one of another. And Bellarmin's Reasons, brought
for to prove the Monarchical government of the Church, would with far greater
Probabilities infer a conveniencie for a several Monarchical Government in
every particular State, then for one general Mono^rch over all. While the
Christian World was governed by one absolute Monarch or Emperor, and all the
peculiar customs or privileges of several Nations (like diverse members of the
same Body) conformable one to another, by their common subordination to one
supreme Imperial Law, the Virtue of a like Ecclesiastical Authority might have
been equally diffused throughout the whole Body thereof; as the splendour of
the Sun throughout the whole Hemisphere of the Air, and other aetherial and
celestial Bodies, all, though different in their particular Natures and
peculiar Properties, uniform for the transmission of Light. But after the
dissolution of the Christian Empire, and the constitution of several States and
Soveraignties, throughout Europe, all complete within themselves, and different
one from another in Laws and Customs: the transfusion of such an absolute
Ecclesiastic Authority through all, would be unequal, and make Christendom
like a Monster compact of many several entire Bodies made up in one, or like
some uglie living creature that had many Heads and but one Heart or Soul.

CAP. XXX.
That the final Trial of this Controversy must be by Scriptures: That the
Jesuits and modern Papists fierce oppugning all certainty of private Spirits
in discerning the Divine Truth of Scriptures, or their true Sense, has made
the Church their Mother utterly incapable of any plea by Scriptures, for
establishing her pretended Infallibility.

1 BUt what Christian heart could have suspected, that any man acknowledging
the infinite Majesty of an Omnipotent God, filling every place with his
Presence, ruling all things by his Power, and having every least Creature of
the World a world of Witnesses of his inconceivable Wisdom, and unspeakable
Providence over the Works of his own Hand; durst once have presumed to think,
much less have opened his mouth to utter, least of all have employed his pen
to proclaim, such foul Impiety to the world; as that a Power so infinite,
could not sufficiently provide for his Church in deciding matters of Faith,
(surpassing all reach of Reason) unless he had ordained some one Supreme
Tribunal Seat on earth; the Judges whereof should be but mortal men, whose
Bodies can be but in one place at once, whose Voices cannot reach without the
precincts of their Consistories; whereas the Law of this our God, (unto whose
sentence in matters of Faith we appeal) is, or might be (but for these our
Antiscripturian Adversares importunity) every where throughout the Christian
World dispersed: and, besides the external helps of an ordinary Ministry or
Magistracy: (alike common to all Nations) the Holy Spirit is every where
assistant to all such as seek him in the written Word by him revealed; whose
live-characters are as the prints or footsteps of his wonted Motions in Gods
Prophets, or Apostles hearts, by which the faithful may discern his approach or
Presence in their own. Nor will the Jesuits be so wilful (I hope) as to deny
that this Holy Spirit, who did dictate the Word to such as wrote it in these
material Tables, (having first written it in the fleshly Tables of their
Hear^ts) is able now also to write the same immediately in the Hearts of all
such as with fear and reverence prepare themselves for his fit and decent
entertainment. That this was possible to be performed by the Almighty Wisdom of
God, they would not (I know) deny, were this, (...) direct and plain terms,
made the main Controversy betwixt us. Albeit as much as we have charged them
withal, will most necessarily follow from their absurd, and lavishly
blasphemous Speeches, which in the heat of contention have distilled from their
pens in this present Controversy. But of the Possibility of Gods immediate
teaching every Christian Heart, or rather of the Probabilities, which may
induce all to rely immediately hereupon; we shall have occasion to discourse
hereafter. Let us now in sobriety of Spirit, rather dispute of Gods Will then
his Power: As whether there be any sure Argument to persuade us, that it was
his intent or purpose, either to instruct men in the true Sense of Scriptures,
or to take up all Controversies in matters of Faith, by this supposed
Infallibility of some visible Church. All this, and somewhat more our
Adversaries in this Point seriously avouch, and earnestly contend for. Let us
therefore briefly see, whether or no Gods Spirit has taught thus much. That
the Sense of Scriptures cannot be had without the Assistance or working of Gods
Spirit, both jointly acknowledge, They must be understood and interpreted,
says Convenit etiam inter nos and adversaries S^ intellig^ debere to Spiritu
quo factae sunt, id est. Spiritu sancto. Quod Apostolus Pe^ Epist. 2. cap. 1.
do et cum ait: Ho^ (...) intelligentes, quod omnis Prophetia Scripturae
propria interpretatione non sit. Non enim humana voluntate allata est aliquando
Peophe^a, sed Spirtu Sancto inspirati loquuti sunt Sancti Dei homines. Ubi B.
Petrus probat non debere exponi Scriptur as ex proptio ingenio, sed secundum
dictamen Spiritus Sancti, quia non sunt scriptae humano ingenio sed ex
inspiratione Spiritus Sancti. Bell. lib. 3. de verb. Dei cap. 3.
Bellarmin, by the same Spirit which wrote them; as he very well gathers out of
2 Pet. cap. 1. verse. 20. and 21.
Saint Peter. Tota igitur quaestio in ^o posita est, ubi sit iste Spiritus. Nos
enim existimamus hunc Spiritum, etsi multis privatis hominibus saepe
conceditur, tamen cetto inveniri in Ecclesia, id est in Concilio Episcoporum
confirmato a summo Ecclesiae totius Pastore, sive in sun mo Pastere cum
Concilio aliotum Pastorum. Bellarmin ibid. In this place, as he professes, he
will not dispute, whether the Pope alone, speaking ex Cathedra, be the Church;
for that he was to dispute of afterward, and he and all his fellows do and
must acknowledge it, as shall in due place be showed. That in this place he
grants the communication of that Spirit (by which the Scriptures were written)
unto private men, does not argue any agreement with us, but rather his
disagreement from some of Eis own profession, who urge the necessity of the
Churches Proposal so much and so far, that not Gods Prophets or others to whom
his Word was ^dinarily revealed, could without it be certain. Vide Bellar. lib.
3. de justif. cap. 3.
Whence likewise he well collects, that the whole difficulty in this Question
about taking up Controversies, and finding out the true Sense of Scriptures,
consists in this; where this Spirit is, and where the distressed Soul and
doubtful Conscience ought to seek it. In the Visible and Catholic Church,
says Bellarmin, and all the Modern Roman Catholics; that is (as they
interpret it,) in the Consistory of the Pope and Cardinals, or in the
Assembly of Bishops, or (as the Modern Jesuits will have it) in the Pope
alone speaking ex Cathedra.

3 Every man (say we) ought to seek the Spirit of God in his own Soul and
Conscience, being directed and ruled by the Sacred Word, which was revealed and
uttered by the same Spirit. This Word directs them in this search, and the
Spirit once found out, or rather finding them thus seeking him, establishes
their* Assent unto the Word already revealed and written, by imprinting the
same invisible Word, or the true Sense and Meaning of it in their Hearts.

4 Why this Spirit should be infallibly present to the Visible Church, all our
Adversaries uncessantly urge Scripture. I will not abuse the Readers patience
with allegation of the Places, which have been very fully answered by many of
our Church. That which I intend at this time, is. First, to debar them by their
own Grounds of this Plea of Scriptures, by showing their Absurdity, and folly,
in urging any Scripture at all for the proof of their A^lertion: And secondly,
to overthrow the Assertion it self by manifest proofs, that either their
Churches transcendent Authority (as it is now taught) must fall, or
Christianity cannot stand. To make way for our dearer passage in the former.

5 The Papists Assertions whence the proposed Conclusion is gathered. ^
They generally hold, That this Infallibility of the Visible Church consists
directly in this; That the Holy Ghost is infalliblie present to it, and gives
it the true Sense and Meaning of Scriptures: which he does not give to private
persons; whom in their judgments, he will not vouchsafe immediately to
instruct; so that his Dictates already revealed cannot be a Rule unto them,
because they want his infallible Assistance for their Exposition; and for the
same reason, Certain they cannot be without the Churches Authority that they
understand the Scripture aright.

6 This their Assertion being twofold, (for their Churches infallible
Expositions, and against all private Interpretations,) is grounded upon these
two Principles. They are to be Believed in exposition of Scriptures fide
divina, whom the Holy Ghost infallibly assists. They are not so to be Believed,
whom the Holy Ghost does not so assist. Whence what he said before will follow,
that no man, besides the Pope, may believe his own interpretations of
Scriptures: His, or the Churches, all must, nay all men must believe fide
divina, that the Church or Pope is in all Determinations infalliblie assisted
by the Holy Ghost. For if we were not bound to Believe their Infallibility
most infallibly, it could be no Rule of Faith, but might be rejected till we
see it evidently proved; whereas they contend it should be the Rule of Faith
unto all, and by their own confession a main Article of their Creed: but
(according to their Positions as we shall hereafter prove) the only Article of
Christian Faith. How destitute these their Assertions are of all Grounds of
Reason, or Rules of Nature, has been made evident. There remain only Two
Pillars possibly imaginable for supporting this pretended Infallibility,
Tradition and Scripture. Against Tradition all the Arguments they can heap
against the Certainty of Scriptures stand good; as shall hereafter (God
willing) be showed. That no Argument can be drawn from Scripture to their
succor, albeit the later Jesuits have earnestly sought to scrape a many (for
better then Scrapings are not the very best they bring) we are now to prove.

7 That our Belief of Scriptures Truth, and their true Sense (by what Means
soever we attain thereto) must be infallible, Both agree: The Means that must
infalliblie ascertain or prove their Divine Truth and true Meaning unto us (say
our Adversaries) is the Churches Infallibility, which likewise must be
infallibly Believed; otherwise it could not be the Rule of Faith, or Belief
infallible. It shall suffice here (once for all) to admonish the Reader, That
as often as we mention Belief of Scriptures or the Churches infallibility, in
this Dispute, we mean not any kind of Belief, but that only which is
infallible: so likewise, whiles we mention the Means or Proofs of either, we
understand only Means or Proofs infallible, whereon Faith may immediately
rely, as upon a Rule most sure and certain. In all these we demand nothing but
what our Adversaries most willingly grant. From their grant we argue thus.

8 If either the Scriptures can thus ascertain or prove the Churches
Infalibilitie, The general Points of Difficulty, how either the Church can
ascertain the Divine Truth of Scripture unto us, or the Scripture the Churches
infallible Authority.
or It the infallible Truth of Scriptures to our Souls: we must of necessity,
either Believe the one of these before the other, [The Churches Infalibility
before Scriptures, or Scriptures before It] or both together without all
prioritie of Belief, or praeexistent knowledge of the one, whence the Belief or
knowledge of the other must spring. The members of the Division are in the
Proposal actually two, but in the Disquisition will prove three: To begin with
the first.

9 If they say, we must believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, before we
(...) believe (...) (...) (...) of their Church: they overthrow their own, and
est ablish (...) Postions. For thus they make the Scripture a Rule of our
Faith, at the least ^
In this one Article of the Catholic Churches Infallibility; which, by this
Assertion, we may and ought infallibly to believe, because the Scriptures,
which we first infallibly believe, do teach and prove it. Hence private men
should be taught by the Holy Ghost, first to believe the Truth of Scriptures,
and for it the Churches Infallibility. Wherefore the Scripture must be the
immediate Rule of their Belief in the Article of the Churches Infallibility,
which to them is the general Rule of Faith; and so by consequence, the
Scriptures which to us are only the Rule of Earth, must be more then so to
them, even the Rule of their Rule of Faith. But if the Scriptures may be the
immediate and insallible Rule of their Belief in this one Article of the
Churches Infallibility; what reason possibly can be imagined, why they should
not be the infallible and immediate Rule of their Faith, in all other parts or
Articles of their Creed? For I call Heaven and Earth, Men and Angels, to
witness b^xt ours and the Romish Church, whether the Articles of Christ's
Incarnation, his Death, his Passion, his Burial, his Resurrection, his
Aseension, his Intercession for us, the Resurrection of the dead, and Life
everlasting, etc. be not to any man's Capacity in the World, much more plainly
set down in sundry places of Scripture, then the Infallibility of the present
Romish Church, in these words, Peter feed my sheep. Peter to thee (...) give
the ^s of Heaven. Thou art Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church. It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us, or in any place her sons can challenge
for it. Wherefore if the Holy Ghost teach us this Article of the Churches
Infallibility immediately, without the Churches infallible Authority, (which
as we now suppose must be proved from the Scriptures first infallibly
Believed:) then questionless he may and will immediately teach us the other
Articles of our Creed, and whatsoever necessary to Salvation, (which are more
plainly and perspicuously set down in Scriptures,) without the help or
assistance of the Churches infallible Authority, which it is supposed to teach
by places more doubtful.

10 Or if our Adversaries will hold it no Absurdity to say, that the Holy Ghost
may teach us the true Sense and Meaning of the forementioned places of
Scripture, which seem to make for the Infallibility of the Romish Church, as
Petre pasce oves, etc. immediately without the help or assistance of the
Churches Infallibility, (which is here the lesson supposed to be taught) and
refers all other Points of Faith or matters of Doctrine unto the Churches
teaching immediately: they are bound in Reason to show a Scripture for this
Assertion. And besides, they must (perforce) make the same comparison betwixt
the Holy Ghosts immediate teaching, and the Church or Popes immediate teaching,
which our Savior ^
Christ made between the Holy Ghosts extraordinary teaching which was to ensue
his Glorification, and his own immediate teaching before his Passion: and as
soon as the Holy Ghost has once taught us the Meaning of these places, which
make for the Churches Infallibility, that may be applied unto him in respect
of the Popes Supereminencie in teaching, which our Savior Christ spoke of
himself, and his own personal Instructions in the days of his Humility, in
respect of that (...) ^ed Comforters Illuminations to be bestowed in abundant
measure upon his Apostles, immediately upon his Ascension. For thus (by their
Assertions) that Holy Comforter, after that Lesson once taught, Tues Petr^,
should take his leave of faithful hearts in the same terms our Savior there
did of his Disciples: I tell you the Truth, it is expedient for you that I go
away. For if I go not away, the Comforter (that Infallible Teacher, on whose
Authority your Souls must rest,) will not come unto you, but if I depart I will
send him John 16. 7.
unto you: and again, Verse 12.
I have many things to say unto you, but ye cannot hear ^oem now: how^eit when
He is come that has the Spirit of Truth, (your infallible Teacher, whose
Tongue while he speaks ex Cathedra, I must attend) he will lead you unto all
Truth, for he shall not speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear be shall
speak, he shall glorify me, for he shall receive of me and show it unto you.
These words (I say) might be taken as a typical Prophecy of the Popes
Infallible Authority, (such a Prophecy of it I mean, as the History of the
Paschal Lamb was of Christ's Passion:) if they will hold the first member of the
former division; That the Holy Ghost does first teach us Infallibly to Believe
these Scriptures, which they urge for the Infallibility of their Church, and
having once made us infallibly to Believe them, refers us to the Churches
Infallibility, (taught and Believed by them) for the Rule of Faith in all
other Articles.

11 Sed quia hac non successit, alia aggredien lum est via; Let us now see, ^
whether they be like to find any better success, by following the second
member of the forementioned Division. (i.) If they should say, We must
infallibly Believe the Churches Infallibility in expounding Scriptures, or
Points of Faith, before we can infallibly Believe them to be the Word of God,
or to contain in them Doctrines of Faith. This indeed they must say, if they
hold their Churches Authority to be the Rule of Faith, or whereby infalliblie
to distinguish Divine Truth from Apocryphal.

12 Let us first take the Proposition supposed for Disputations sake; viz. [We
must believe the Churches Infallible Authority, before we can believe the
Scripture to be the Infallible Oracles of God.] Secondly, let us consider but
this one part of the Churches infallible Authority, which all the Modern
Papists acknowledge [That the Scriptures cannot be known infallibly to be the
Word of God, but by the confirmation of the present Church.] And let us see how
these two Assertions can stand together. By the first, the Churches infallible
Authority must be infalliblie Believed before Scriptures: By the second, (which
contains the chief part of the Churches Infallibility) the Scriptures cannot
be infallibly acknowledged, or believed to be the Word of God but upon former
supposal of Believing the Churches Infallibility confirming this Truth unto us.

13 Here let all, whose Brains are not intoxicate with the wine of Fornication,
pause a while, and contemplate what Babylonish giddiness has possessed their
Brains, that have run round about so long, (though always staggering,) in
urging Scriptures for to prove that, as an Article of Belief, which must be
infallibly Believed, before those places of Scriptures which they urge for it;
or else, nor they nor any other Scriptures can ever be steadfastly Believed to
be the Word of GOD, or to have sufficient Authority in them to cause steadfast
Belief unto that which they teach. For this is the Issue of all our Adversaries
Arguments in this Point* That such matters as are contained in Scriptures
cannot be steadfastly acknowledged, or Believed, for Supernatural or Divine
Truths, until they be confirmed by this Infallible Authority of the present
Church. Where again I would have the Reader call to mind, what was before
observed out of Bellarmines Positions; That this Infallibility of the Church
consists directly in this, that it is perpetually assisted by the Holy Ghost:
and it is all one with them, to say, We Believe the Churches infallible
Authority in matters of Faith, and to say, We Believe the Church is perpetually
assisted by the Holy Ghost: Again, (by all the later Jesuite^ Positions) it is
all one to say, We Believe the Church is perpetually assisted by the Holy Ghost
in determining matters of Faith, and to say, We Believe that the Pope, speaking
ex Cathedra, is assisted perpetually by the Holy Ghost in determining matters
of Faith.

14 Out of these Assertions compared with the Proposition supposed, [The
Churches infallibility must be Believed before Scripture, or other Articles of
Faith,] this will immediately and directly follow: We must Believe that the
Holy Ghost, the Supreme Judge of Scriptures and matters of Faith, does
infalliblie assist the Church, or Pope speaking ex Cathedra, before we can
Believe that there is an Holy Ghost. For this is one Article of Faith, taught
in Scriptures, which Scriptures (say our Adversaries) cannot be Believed, but
by the confirmation of the Churches Infallible Authority, and this infallible
Authority consists (as we said before) in this, that it is infallibly assisted
by the Holy Ghost: wherefore the Conclusion of this absurd Position is: That we
must first Believe the Holy Ghost is perpetually resident in the Popes breast,
or Consistory of Rome, before it can be Believed that there is an Holy Ghost,
or Divine Trinity in Heaven. If we consider the Practice of our Adversaries in
urging Scripture, to prove their Churches Infallibility to be the Rule of
Faith: they should in Reason admit the first member of the forementioned
Division, and hold that the Scriptures must be infallibly Believed for the Word
of God, before the Infallibility of the Church (which they seek to prove by
Scriptures,) can be infallibly Believed. But again, if we consider their
assertions concerning the Churches Infallibility, [That the Scriptures cannot
be known to be the Scriptures but by It, and that It is the Rule of Faith,]
they must of necessity admit the second member of the forecited Division, and
maintain, that the Churches Infallibility must infallibly be Believed, before
we can Believe the Scriptures to be the infallible Oracles of God: For Regula
semper est prior regulato; but the Churches Infallibility is the Rule of Faith
by their Positions, and to Believe the Scripture to be the infallible Oracles
of God, is a main Point of Faith, and necessary to Salvation: (...) Valen^ cap.
22.
for, This is the Jesuits principal Topic, to disprove the Scriptures
Sufficiency for being the Rule of Faith in all Points, because it contains
not this one Point, viz. that the Scriptures are the infallible Oracles of God.
It is hence evidently proved, that neither of the two first members of the
former Division can stand either with Reason, the Allegators Practice, or
Positions. For the first quite overthrows their Positions concerning their
Churches Infallible Authority. The second proves their Practice to be most
absurd, in urging Scriptures for to prove it. And yet the third member is of
all the three the most absurd, albeit not so dissonant to their Positions, or
Practice in this Point, because as are they, so is it, Senseless both; which
will evidently appear by the bare proposal of it. ^.


15 The third member was, That we must infallibly Believe the Scriptures to be
the Oracles of God, and the Churches Infallibilitic both together, without any
Prioritie of Time, order, or nature. First, if this Assertion be true: then
cannot the Churches Infallibility serve as a Rule to know the Scriptures to be
the Word of GOD infalliblie, because regula prior est regulato. But by this
Assertion there is no Priority in the Churches Infallibility, (their supposed
Rule,) in respect of our knowing, or Believing the Scriptures to be the Oracles
of GOD. Secondly, if the former Assertion be true: then neither can the
Scriptures prove the Churches Infallibility, nor the Churches Infallibility
prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God unto any Believer. For all Means or
Arguments of Proof, suppose a Prioritie in respect of the Parties unto whom
proof is to be made. And to say, that of two things, both Believed and known
together without any Priority, the one might prove the other, were as much, as
if we should say, that a thing might prove it self, and as we say in Schools to
prove idem per idem. For the very Reason why we cannot prove idem per idem, is,
because there is no Priority of knowledge in such Identitie: for otherwise,
where the thing proving, and the thing proved, are indeed the self same, yet if
there be a Priority of Conceits or Notions in the same thing, one of them will
sufficiently prove the other; as is evident in the Divine Attributes, none of
which are indeed really distinct from others, and yet may one of them prove
another, because in respect of us, one of them is better known then another,
and consequently being known may prove the other. But of such Attributes as are
neither better known then other, or where the terms are only diverse, without
Priority of Conceit or knowledge, there can be no proving of the one by the
other. For all discursive knowledge, (such as is all knowledge by way of Proof
or Syllogism,) must be ex praeexistente cognitione: And where one thing is
proved by another, that which proves must first be Believed; for the Belief of
the other must spring or arise from the Belief of it. If a man should go about
to prove that the Prince was sumptuously arrayed, because he was sumptuously
apparrelled or attired, the Proof would be ridiculous: seeing sumptuous
apparel, and sumptuous array in common speech are all one, and he that knows
the one, knows or believes the other. But if a man should say, the Prince was
sumptuously apparrelled, because he wore a suit of Tissue, or beset with Pearl,
the Proof were good, so it could be proved that he wore such a suit. For it is
sufficiently known to all, that such Attire is sumptuous: and therefore he that
can make proof that he was so attired, has sufficiently proved that he was
sumptuously arrayed. And thus, would our Adversaries admit, that either the
Scriptures were better known then the Infallibility of the Church; or the
Churches Infallibility better known then they; the one of them might be
brought to prove the other, without any fault in the manner or form of Proof;
howsoever their Assertions in the Proof of either would overthrow either their
own Positions, or the Principles of Faith, as appears in the two former parts
of our Division. But according to our Supposition in the third member, to wit,
[That the Churches Infallibility, and the Infallibility of Scripture, are
both alike known unto us, and neither Believed before other,] the very manner,
or form of proving one by the other, would be as ridiculous and absurd, as if
a man should prove costly apparel by sumptuous array: Or that one was costly
apparrelled, because he wore costly raiment.

16 The most of our Adversaries loving (in this Point) Darkness more than
Light, (like desperate Debtors, that keep strict reckoning what others owe
them, but are afraid to take an account of the Debts they owe,) never seek to
examine the particular Difficulties of their own Opinions, but think it
sufficient to cast stumbling Blocks before their feet, that will not hoodwink
themselves, that they may stand in need of leading by such blind Guides as
themselves. Yet Valentian, who had gone so far in searching the Valentians
attempted Evasion out of the enchanted Circle of Roman Faith, resuted.
Difficulties, and dangers of this darksome enchanted Way, until he had come
to see some Lightnings of these Objections here set down, at the first
representation of them is so affrighted, as if he had seen a night-walker or
Hobgoblin, that had put him so far out of his right mind, as he neither dare go
forwards, nor can he pray to God to bless him, or send him his Spirit to
conduct him safely back; but runs round with the Colliars Catechism in his
mouth, instead of a better Charm. His resolution is thus. Ut breviter quae
susius disputata sunt de resolutione fidei, colligamus, placet modum tradere
quo quis de fide inte^rogatus debeat respondere. Igitur siquis rogetur, v. g
Quare credat Deum esse trinum and unum? distinguat utrum viz. firmiter and
infallibiliter id credat; vel de causa ob quam acceptaverat eam fidem. Si
primum; respondeat, qui a Deus revelavit: Si rursus interrogetur unde cognoscat
Deum revelasse? respondeat se quidem non nosse id clare, credere tamen eadem
side infallibiliter, and id quidem non ob aliam revelationem: been tamen ob
infallibilem propositionem Ecclesiae, tanquam ob conditionem ad id credendum
requisitam. Si rursus, unde cognoscat propositionem Ecclesiae esse
infallibilem? similiter dicat; se cla^^ non nosse, credere tamen fide
infallibili ob revelationem Scripturae, testimonium perhibentis Ecclesiae: cui
revelationi non credit ob aliam revelationem, sed ob seipsam, quamvis ad hoc
ipsum opus sit Ecclesiae propositione ut condition requisita. Valent. tom. 3.
in Aquinat. Disp. 1. quaest. 1. punct. 1. Sect. 10.
That we may briefly collect the former large Disputes concerning the
resolution of Faith, it shall not be amiss to set down a form of answering to
such as demand a Reason of our Faith. If you be demanded (for example sake) why
you Believe a Trinity of Persons in one Godhead: First, distinguish whether the
Question be of your firm and infallible Belief of this Truth it self, or of the
cause which moved you to embrace this Belief. In the former Case the Answer
must be, Because God has revealed it: If it be demanded again how you know
that God has revealed it? the Answer must be, you know it not evidently, but
yet Believe so, by the same infallible Faith by which you Believed the Truth
revealed: and this not by an other Revelation, but by the Churches infallible
Proposal of it, which is a Condition necessary to such Belief. If yet it be
further questioned, how you know the Churches Proposal or avounching of this
Revelation to be infallible? your Answer must be again, that distinctly and
clearly you know not thus much, but yet Believe it as infallibly as the former,
and that for the Revelation of the Scripture, bearing Testimony of the Churches
Infallibility, which Revelation you Believe not by any other Revelation, but
for it self, although unto this very Belief the Churches Proposal be required
as a necessary Condition.

17 It cannot choose but be a great Motive to persuade any man (that does not
affect Blindness in this point) of the shallow and unstable Foundation of the
Romish Church: when he shall thus behold so skilful an Artificer as Valentian,
in laying the very Groundwork thereof, so gravelled in his own Objections,
that he fares like one that had fallen into a deep pit of loose sand, heaving
an offering with might and main to get out and go forwards, but being destitute
of all firm Ground, whereon to rest one part til the rest be raised, beats
himself blind with too much struggling in such a sandy soil. For surely, from
more then Egyptian or Sodomitish Blindness did that attempted Evasion of his
in the forementioned place proceed. Neque in sic responde^do erit aliquis
vitiosus circulus. Tum quia reve^atio propter quam dicitur credi infallibilitas
propositianis; and propasitio ob quam dicitur credi revelatio, non habent unum
and idem objectum, sed aliud and aliud. Objectum n. propositionis est ipsa
revelatio; objection autem revelationis est ipsa ve^redita; ut Deum esse trinum
and unum, aut propositionem Ecclesiae esse infallibilem. Tum quia, cum ex
revelatione redditur ratio credendi propositionem, reditur per causam
(revelatio enim est causa assensus fidei;) cum autem ex propositione Ecclesiae
redditur ratio credendi revelationem, ratio redditur non per causum credendi,
sed per conditionem ad id requisitam, and ita vitatur vitiasus circulus and
solum reditur ratio connexotum vicissim ex ipsismet connexis sub diversatione,
id quod omnino licet. Valent. ibid.
Nor do we commit any circular Fallacy in this form of answering, Partly,
because the Revelation, for which the Churches infallible Proposal is Believed,
and the Proposal for which the Revelation is Believed, have not one and the
same, but each it several Object. For the Object of the Churches Proposal is
the Revelation, but the Object of the Revelation is the Truth it self Believed,
as that there is one God and three Persons, or that the Churches Proposal is
infallible: Partly, because, when we assign the Revelation as a Reason why we
Believe the Churches Proposal, we give the Reason by the Cause, (for the
Revelation is the Cause of our assent or actual Belief) but when we assign the
Churches Proposal as a Reason why we Believe the Revelation, the Reason is not
assigned by the true Cause of our Belief, but by a Condition requisite
thereunto. And so this Juglers ring, or circular Fallacy is avoided, and only a
Reason is given of things connexed mutually from the things themselves connexed
under a diverse Reason or respect, which is no Legerdemain but fair play!

If the diverse Objects of the Divine Revelation, and the Churches
Infallibility, were the only Cause or Reason why we take this Resolution for
circular Proof, then this Exception of the diversity of their Objects, were to
some purpose. But we impeach this his Resolution of naughtiness, for the very
form or manner, because the Proof is idem per idem. And being so, alalbeit the
Object of the Divine Revelation and the Churches Proposal be diverse: yet is
this no sufficient Testimony to acquit it, unless they will affirm, that there
can be no circular Proof where the Object of the things mutually proved are
diverse, which if they universally affirm, (as without an Universal Affirmation
in this kind, there can be no Proof:) we shall as easily impeach this
Affirmation of open Falsehood, as their form of Argument of circular Fallacy.
For wheresoever any thing uncertain to us, is inferred by another thing alike
uncertain, and that other only proved by the former: there is a circular Proof,
albeit we should by this form of Argument seek to prove one thing by another,
whose object was quite contrary to the former. Nay although we should prove the
very diversity, or contrariety of the Objects in two several terms proposed, by
this or the like circular Form: yet were our Proof naught, albeit this same
diversity of Objects might be proved by some other lawful Form of Argument. For
the diversity or Identity of Objects in syllogistical terms, is merely
accidental to the nature of circular Proof, or inference of idem per idem.

18 To fit our Adversaries with a familiar Example, every way parallel to their
own Resolution in this point, (if they will acknowledge their own Valentians
Resolution for their own:) but more plain and easy to the Capacity of the
unlearned Reader. Suppose some ambitious Captain, or Courtier, (for whose
Integrity no man of place would promise much) should bring unto our King, or
some Statesman in this land, some foreign Princes (as the renowned King of
Denmarks) Letters commendatory, for his great sufficiency in good place in War
or State: I would request but any ordinary Reader well to consider, what matter
of resolution it would be, if with reverence I may suppose that either his
Majesty, or any Statesman in this land, in the bestowing of any such place of
worth, as this supposed messenger would sue for, might thus resolve: Surely the
King of Denmark is a renowned religious Prince, and one that wishes exceeding
well unto our King and State, and whatsoever he should write in any man's
commendations, for his advancement to such a place as this party makes suit
for, I dare not once call in question, lest I should seem to disparage his
Princely word: but how shall I know that these are his Letters, and no
counterfeit? If thus he should doubt, and yet finally rest content with this or
like suggestion; why? does not he say they are his true Letters, whose Fidelity
and Integrity the King in his Letters commends? no man in the world (I think)
of any ordinary experience, although he had never traverst the Schools to know
the meaning of a circular proof, but could perceive this resolution to be but
dolus circulatorius: and he that would be cozened with this or the like, by any
Traveller of what fashion soever, may easily be circumvented by any domestic
Pedlar, or circumforaneal Copes-mate. Yet is this resolution in every point the
self same with Valentians resolution, concerning the Roman Churches
Infallibility; and the Exception which here he brings, why this resolution of
his is none, may altogether as directly and fitly be brought to show, that this
supposed resolution is no circular resolution. First, let us parallel the
several parts of both resolutions. In that resolution of Faith which Falentian
brings, All Christians Believe, that whatsoever God says is true; and so in
this other resolution it is supposed that his Majesty or any of his Statesmen
firmly Believes, that whatsoever the King of Denmark writes or avoucheth in
matters of this nature, (as of civil Integrity, and Sufficiency for the
discharge of such an Office) is altogether true, and may not be suspected: yet
may they suspect whether he wrote thus much in this man's commendations, as
these Letters import, or no. And so says Valentian, and other Papists, all
Christians may suspect, (certain they cannot be) whether God wrote those looks
which we call Scripture or no. The Assurance which Christians in matters
concerning Faith, and Statesmen in this present case could have for their
security, is altogether the same. For the Statesman has no other reason to
persuade himself, that these are the King of Denmarks Letters, but only the
Report, Asseveration, or Testimony of this Messenger, whose preferment they
concern. And so likewise by the Papists Positions, no private Christian can
have any other certain Assurance, that these Scriptures are the Word of God,
but only the Testimony or Confirmation of the present Romish Church, whose
state and dignity they likewise seek to maintain by countenance of the
Scriptures, whose mis-interpretation did either first occasion, or not hinder
her rising to that height of temporal Dignity which she now enjoyes. Thus
finally it appears that all the reason or ground of Belief, which any Papist
following the Jesuits for their Instructors can have, must be the
Infallibility of the Romish Church, whose Infallibility therefore cannot be
proved out of Scripture, because the Scriptures by their Positions cannot be
infallibly proved to be Scriptures, or that authentic Word which only can
afford sure Proof in matters of Faith, but by this their Churches supposed
Authority. As for Valentians Exception, concerning the diverse Object of the
Churches Proposal, and the Divine Revelations by it proposed, the self same
Diversity of Object may be observed in the former instance of the counterfeit
Messenger, whose resolution in effect is thus; You must Believe these Letters,
because I commend them unto you in the King of Denmarks name, and you must
Believe me in commending them unto you because the King of Denmark, whose words
you trust in them, commends my trust and sidelity. To apply Valentians
Exception to this resolution; As the Object of that the Church proposes, or
rather of the Churches Proposal, is the Divine Revelation: so likewise is the
Object of this counterfeits Proposal the often mentioned Kings supposed
commendation of him. Again, as the object of the ^ivine Revelation is the Truth
Believed, [Veritas credita, ut Deum esse trinum and unum, aut propositionem
Ecclesiae esse in fallibilem; as that there is a Trinity in the Godhead, or,
the Churches Proposal is infallible:] So likewise the Object of the Kings
commendation in the other instance, is the Truth Believed, or that at least
which this Counterfeit exacts to be Believed as true, to wit, that he himself
is a man of excellent parts, and one that will use Fidelity as well in his Doings
as Sayings, and in a word, one, whose proposal in matters of State or War, is
as infallible as the Popes in matters of Faith. Yet notwithstanding that this
Counterfeits Proposal or Asseveration, which must be Believed from the Princes
commendation of him, which must be believed again from his Proposal, Non habent
unum and idem objectum, sed (...) and (...), have not one and the same Object:
yet is the former resolution ^; and so is Valentians resolution of his
Catholic Faith most ridiculously impious: For what other issue of such
dissolute resolutions can be expected, but that men who know no better, should
hereby be driven to suspect the Scriptures for Counterfeit, and the Catholic
Church (if the Roman were only the Catholic Church) of villainous Forgery, at
the least in those places of Scripture which she pretends for Proof of her own
Infallibility.

19 As for Valentians later Exception, why his Resolution should not be
Circular: it is more ridiculous then the former, most ridiculously false (to
omit other points) in this one, that he dare deny the Churches proposal by
their Doctrine to be the Cause, why we Believe the Divine Revelation, or rather
that these Scriptures which we have are Divine Revelations. For by their
Positions we cannot assure our selves, that the Scriptures are the Word of God,
by any other cause or reason, besides the Churches Authority: and therefore by
their Doctrine, the infallible Authority of their Church is the only Cause,
why we Believe this Sacred Canon of Scriptures, which we enjoy, to be Divine
Revelations, although it be no Cause by their Doctrine, why we Believe that in
general Divine Revelations are true. For this is a dictate of Nature, not
controversed betwixt us and them, or betwixt any who acknowledge a Divine
Power. And Valentian himself directly implies, that which he impudently denies
in the self-same period. For he grants, that Propositio Ecclesiae est ratio
credendi divinam revelationem; and In matters of Knowledge, or Belief, Reason
and Curse are Synonymal, and every Cause in (...) goes before the Effect. And
even when we demonstrate the Cause by its proper Effect, the Effect must needs
be first known to us, seeing it is the reason or Cause of our knowing the
Cause, though no Cause of the real Cause it self.
ratio eredendi, the Reason or Rule of Believing, must needs include in it a
precedent Cause of Belief, it cannot be only a Condition annexed thereto: but
of this point (God willing) hereafter.

20 Sacrobosous entangled in the former circle, and caught in his own share.
Sacroboscus, (who has followed Bellarmines and Valentians footsteps, as
faithfully as any ^rish Footman could his Master, though sometimes taking a
more compendious and smoother way, likely to entice pedestria ingenia, wits
either by nature dull, or novices in Arts and smatterers in Schoollearning, to
follow him, sooner then those great ones) has taken upon him to answer to this
Circle, in effect as Valentian does, save only that he has put more Tricks of
Art upon it, either to confound the judicious, or deceive the sample Reader.
Which here we shall not need to examine, because we purpose to unrid his mystical
Evasions in the next Dispute. In the end of his tract in defense of Bellarmin,
he frames his Objection, against both Valentian and his own Resolution: Sed
quaeris number quando quis credit ali quid propter authoritatem Ecclesiae,
necessaria^ sit pri^ ^pore vel saltem natura, formaliter, and explicit credat
ipsam Ecclesiam esse infallibilis authoritatis, quemadmodum (...) (...)
conclusion propter Pra^, necesse est ut prius assentiamur ipsis praemistis.
Respondeo, id minime (...) ^rium: nam actus fidei fer^ in suem objectum, modo
simplici, ut visus in suum: itaque sicut visus per spe(...) albi (v. g) vider
album, non videndo ipsam speciem, sic potest quis per Ecclesiae, authoritatem
credere, ita ut (...) prius formaliter and explicit credat Ecclesiae
Authoritatem. Christophorus a Sacrobosco Dubliniensis e Societ. Jesu. (...)
128, 139. A good examiner may know this fellow to be a Jesuit by his Answer,
so full stuffed with mental Reservations, (...) Evasions, and ambiguities. First
he will not resolve us whether men ordinarily must Believe the Church before
Scriptures: (...) a man may Believe the Scriptures, although he do not first
Believe the Church explicit or formally. And in the very next (...) be
impertinently adds that Believing the Scriptures we cannot but implicit and
vertually Believe the Church. Which are(...) that the Scriptures must be
Believed before the Church. But say, we could not Believe the one, but ^e must
upon equal terms (...) the other, this proves that neither could be any
infallible or effectual Means of Believing the other. For there is no man ^
twice 4 make 8, but knows as well twice 2 make 4, yet is neither a Means of
knowing the other, for both are immediately (...) of themselves. This shows the
impertinency of their Answer that matter they know not what, as if the
knowledge of points of (...) did resemble habitum principiorum, rather then
habitum conclusionis. If so they do, then cannot the Churches Infal(...) being
by their Positions a point of Faith, be any Means of knowing the Scriptures to
be Drvine, which is a main point of faith.
[Whether, in Believing the Church by Scriptures, and Scriptures By the Church,
the Belief of the one must in nature, (if not in time) go before the other.] He
thinks it not necessary that the one should be before the other, Nam actus
fidei fertur in suum objectum modo simplici, ut visus in suum. And therefore as
we see colors per species visibiles, by the visible shapes, or resemblances
which flow from them, not by seeing the visible shape before the colors: so do
we Believe the Scriptures by the Church, albe it we do not expressly and
formally Believe the Church before we believe the Scriptures. Quo teneam vultus
mutantem Protea nodo? In the former part of this his discourse the Visible
Church was unto Scriptures, as the ^
Light was unto Colors; now it is unto Scriptures, as visible Shapes are unto
Colors. What then? Do we not see visible shapes before Colors, nor Colors
before them? no. For we see no visible shapes at all, but by them Colors only
are brought into our sight: and we cannot see one before the other, if the one
we see not at all. And in like sense it were true, that we should not Believe
the Church before Scriptures, not Scriptures before we Believe the Church, if
we were not bound to Believe the one at all. But if we see one thing by another
which we likewise see, we must needs see that first by which we see the other:
and so if either we Believe the Scriptures by Believing the Church, or Believe
the Church by believing Scriptures, we must of necessity Believe the one
before the other. For that by which we Believe a thing is the Means of Belief,
and the Means of Belief must needs in nature and order go before Belief it
self. And if the Church be the Means of believing only in as much as we believe
it; or to speak more distinctly, if the believing the Church be the very Means
of believing the Scriptures: then must we needs believe the Church before we
believe the Scriptures. If our Adversaries affirm, that their Church is the
only infallible Means of believing Scriptures, in any other sort then by
believing it: let them in the name of God assign by what Means they will she can
make us believe the Scriptures, we shall not much contend; so they will not bind
us to believe this their Churches Decisions. Sacroboscus his comparison of the
Visible Church and visible This (...) of his does very well illustrate our
former ^ (Chap^. 12) concerning the Use of an ordinary ^. And the Visible
Church may ^ the shapes and resem^ are called visible, being indeed by na^ and
are visible only by external demonstrat^ ^ as much as they present colors to
(...) sight, ^ visible. Were they really visible, being received into our eyes,
they would hinder ^: of all colors: so does this admission of a real ^ in the
Church exclude all infallible Belief of ^.
Shapes, we admit thus far for good; that as unless there were such visible
Shapes* no Colors could be seen: so likewise, unless God had some Visible
Church on earth, men ordinarily could not see the Light of the Gospel. For it
is not ordinarily communicated to any, but by the Ministry of others, but
being communicated, we believe it in it self, and for it self, not by believing
others; as we see Colors in themselves and for themselves, not by seeing the
visible Shapes, by which they are presented or communicated unto our eyes. But
whether there be any Propriety between the belief of these two, [Church and
Scriptures,] according to our Adversaries Doctrine, or whether the belief of
the one be the cause of the Belief of the other, or in what sort the cause, and
what Inconveniences will follow thereon: we shall dispute hereafter.

21 Let them in the mean time illustrate the Manner, how we believe Scriptures
by the Church, as they please. Let it have the same proportion to Scriptures,
which the Light, or visible Shapes have unto Colors: they themselves make the
belief of Scriptures most uncertain, and for this reason seek to establish the
Infallibility of their Church for to assure us of the Truth of Scriptures. We
demand how ^ of their Churches Infallibility can possibly be proved? By Reason?
that is impossible, as you heard before. By Tradition* of whom? of such as may
err? that is, Jisdem sere argume^tis efficitur, neque solam traditione^ vi^
vocis eorum qui olim vita desuncti sunt, esse judicem sufficientem fidei, quae
valeat per (...) fine alia aliqua insallibili ac prae^te authoritate omnes
o^ino definite fidei quae^. Nam (...) (...) sicut de an thoritate i^sius (...)
nece^ (...) per aliquam ali^ au h^ritatem con^; i^^ etiam (...) auth^
traditionis, si^ quo^; revocetur in dubium. Non enim traditio loquitur etiam
ipsa clare and perspicue de sese; ut neque ipsa scriptura. Deinde, cum traditio
scriptis fere doctorum orthodoxorum in Ecclesia conservetur, quaestiones ac
dubia moveri possunt de (...) illius, sicut dubitatur saepe de sensu and mente
doctorum. Valentianus Tom. 3. Disp. 1. quaest. 1. de objecto sidei. punct. 7.
Sect. 12.
uncertain. Of the infallible Church? But her Infallibility is called in
question, and any Church may challenge this Prerogative, as well as theirs,
unless they can show a better Title. Without Revelation from above it is still
uncertain fide divina, whether we are to Believe any Churches Infallibility
concerning Scripture: Or if any, which of all. Revelations from above we
acknowledge none but the written Word: they acknowledge Traditions as well as
It, yet so as the Scriptures (by their Confession) are as certain as Tradition,
which they make equal only with the written Word acknowledged by us, not above
it. Wherefore, if the Scriptures be in themselves (by their Objections)
uncertain: then is Tradition as uncertain. What shall assure us of the Truth of
either? The infallible Church? But this can assure no man, unless he first
Believe it for certain and infallibly. What shall make it certain to us? The
Scriptures? But they are uncertain, say our Adversaries, and the Church must
confirm their certainty unto us. Though this Circle (wherein Valentian and
Sacroboscus have run giddie) were of force to raise up all the Spirits in Hell,
and though they raised should sift all the Jesuits Brains in the world: yet
should not all the invention of Man, with the help of Devils, be able to find
out the least Probability of avoiding the former Inconvenience. Nay they should
far sooner make ropes of the sand in the Adriatic Sea, so strong as would hale
Italy unto the Islands of Devils, before they could teach all the Jesuits in
the world so much Geometry, as to make one of these Uncertainties support
another.

CAP. XXXI.
The Unsufficiency of the Roman Rule of Faith, for effecting what it aims at,
albeit we grant all they demand: the ridiculous use thereof amongst such as do
acknowledge it.

1. WHen I was a Child (as our Apostle says) and spoke as a child, understood
as a child: I thought some great matters might be contained under those
Hyperbolical and swelling Titles of the Romish Church, wherewith mine ears
were often filled. And although I had been instructed to the contrary, yet
could I have wished her doctrine true, such was my Affection to her shape, as
it was falsely represented to my childish Fantasy. But after the Day Star had
shined in mine heart, the former Humor wherewith the eyesight of my infant
mind had been corrupted, was quickly dispelled. Once able to look more narrowly
into the subtilest of her School-mens Disputes, and examine her learned Clerks
Apologies for her, by the Gospels Light: I saw clearly, how by presenting mere
shows or shadows of Truth, they led weak-sighted Souls into Error, as it were
in a mist: in the beginning of their works usually inserting pretended Grounds
(here and there as they epsy occasion) of their intended Conclusions,
supported with some slight Reasons for the present; feeding us with
expectation of better Proofs, either in some other work or (a great way after)
in the same, which may stay our minds til we come at them, where they return us
back again to what is past, and that being now far off, and most particulars
out of mind, may seem not altogether nothing to such as will not take pains to
review it. And thus in fine, as the mist, so their Proofs seem every where
somewhat, til a man come near them, but then so vanish as he shall see nothing
of that he looked for.

2 Bellarmins books de verbo Dei, compared with those others of his de Romano
Pontifice, etc. and Valentians Analysis fidei will easily approve this
observation to him that shall read them through with Attention. Both of them in
the beginning of their works promising great matters made me expect some
extraordinary proof in the process, but finding them best at the first, always
ambitions in producing multitude of Allegations to little purpose, copious in
bestowing glorious Titles and Prerogatives upon their Holy Church, and yet
finally contracting her Universalitie and sacred Catholickship into one man's
breast, (who by their own Confession may be so carnally gross, that he cannot
draw any spiritual breath) their former goodly Encomions ending thus, made me
call to mind how crafty companions cozen children of what they love, or stay
their crying at what they dislike, by promising them some Gallant, ^ine,
G^^die, Trim, Goodly, Brave, Golden, New, Nothing. Such brave Epithets so
ravish a child's thoughts, as at the first hearing he parts with any thing he
has, or forbears to seek what otherwise he would have, in hope of such a gay
reward, never looking into the substance of what is promised, which was indeed
just nothing. With like bombast outsides do modern Priests and Jesuits
terrify silly souls* (men or women mere children in understanding) from all
communion with our Church, leading them through such, painted Forefronts, or
fained, but sightly Entrances, into their vast imaginary empty Paradise,
wherein grows nothing but forbidden Fruit. Though Volums they write huge and
large, and in the sublimity of their speculative imaginations, fetch Arguments
from beyond the Moon: yet unto him that has but the eye of ordinary Reason in
his head (not blinded by their juglings) their best Collections prove in the
end but like the drawing of a net spread far and wide in the open air, able to
retain nothing of what it had compadded; only such as looked a far off or had
brains so weak, or sight so ill disposed, as could not distinguish betwixt the
element of air and water, making more then an ordinary stir in fetching so huge
a draught, might happily suspect some goodly Catch.

3 Suppose we should grant that the Pope whiles he speaks ex cathedra ^
cannot err; who shall (I am sure no Jesuit or private Spirit can) without all
ambiguity and pretense of gainsaying determine directly and absolutely what it
is to spe^k ex cathedra? And it is not to be expected. that the Pope will ex
cathedra define what it is to define a thing ex cathedra, in such sort as shall
leave ^sion to excuse his Error if he should be urged with a Sentence ex
cathedra^ which to the Major part of professed Christians might seem doubtful
whether it were palpably erroneous or no. But suppose we knew directly and
authentically what it were to speak ex cathedra, and when the Pope did indeed
so speak, when not; (which no man can know ^
but only by hearsay, unless such as hear him give Sentence) yet what
Assurance can the Jesuits give unto the Christian World, that his Holiness
shall so determine or speak, as often as the Peace of Christ's Church or Weal of
Christendom shall require? That he shall speak de sacto ex cathedra, whenever
the Church stands in need of a Decision, the Papists themselves do not hold as
any part of his Infallibility, but only that he is able so to speak, when his
Infallibility will. And ^ on (...) ar^um^ntum. No man, in their judgment, can
or ought ^rain him to a ^cision* except he list. And seeing they affirm, he may
be an Heretic, or a Son of Satan; although it were true, he could not propose
an Heresy to be Believed; yet is there no show of Truth why he may not be so
maliciously bent, as he will not vouchsafe actually to determine that for Heresy
in others, which in his judgment, as he is a Doctor or private man, is very
orthodoxal; thus doing he should go against his own Conscience to give
Sentence. Gods Spirit as they say will guide his Tongue when or whilst he
speaks ex cathedra. But an evil Spirit may so work upon his Affections, that he
shall not come in good time so to speak, especially against that Opinion, which
in his private Conscience he holds for true. This I think none of them can deny.

4 Now whilst these doubts stand unsatisfied, and ye without further assurance
of his Infallibility in deciding Controversies, then only this Hypothetical or
conditional. [if he speaks ex cathedra] all the comfort, which the Christian
World (perplexed with the variety of Opinions and diversities of Sects) can
reap from these fair promises of the Jesuits concerning their Church or Popes
infallible Authority, is, but as if a man should say unto a Husbandman
(doubtful upon the uncertaintie of Weather, when to sow or reap) tush be of
good cheer you shall certainly know, what season is good, what not, for
Seed-time and Harvest, when the man in the Moon sets forth an Almanac. Veritas
hypotheticae propositionis (says old Javel) nihil ponit in crumena. Many die
with fewer pounds in their purses, then Arguments in their heads, sufficient to
prove the Truth of this conditional Proposition, If I had five thousand pounds
I should be a wealthy man. In like manner if this be all the assurance their
infallible Rule can afford us. [That a general Council, if lawfully assembled,
or the Pope if he speak ex cathedra, cannot possibly err.] The most
pestiferous and noisome Heresies that now infect the Church may (perhaps) be
quelled, some hundred years after all, now alive, be dead. When the Pope will
call a Council, or consult his Chair, GOD knows: what manner of Resolutions
were to be expected, if either should happen, we may conjecture by their wonted
Practice; which is thus.

5 After a Council is called, the Major part being made to serve their Makers
The politic Sophisines of the Papists in their Councels.
turn (for of Bishops the most must be the Popes new creatures) the rest must
subscribe to their Decrees; usually set forth, in the weather Wizards language,
and their sceptick Schoolmen appointed to riddle out some good meaning that
may save their Prelates Credit. In the mean time, the Pope and his Cardinals
may follow their pleasures, take their ease, and with it the dreaming Captains
Motto, Tot urbes capio dormiens ac vigilans. We take up as many Controversies,
we edify the Church as much, sleeping as waking. If no tolerable
interpretation of their doubtful Decisions can be found; yet a good sense must
be Believed; and private Spirits may not peremptorily avouch, that the Council
meant this or that, but only it meant the best, and this we take to be the
best, and therefore we think it meant thus, but with humble submission to their
infallible Authority. All this while the Sectaries (so they term us) must be
set to prove Negatives, as that there can be no true Meaning, in those
speeches, which may have twenty. But if out of their School-mens Wranglings
(who can better seek out then follow the truth found) any interpretation or
manner of Tenet can be found which may yield advantage to them, or prejudice to
their Adversaries; about some hundred years after, perhaps, (when they have
light on a Pope and Cardinals, whose wits and they once in their life-times
meet) a Decision may be had, upon this Opportunity of seeming advantage. And
yet the Catholic Church, during this hundred or perhaps two hundred years of
her silence, must be supposed to have held perpetually the self-same Tenet,
which this private man has bolted out of late; albeit neither he, nor any
particular member thereof, did know as much, yea though five heads of the
Church (and as many principal members) five successions of Popes, Cardinals,
and Bishops, have died in the mean time, no one of which in all their lives did
trouble their thoughts with any such matter: and whilst both their Schoolmens
private speculations, and their public Practice have witnessed the contrary.
Was the Doctrine of Justification and Merits held by any of their Doctors
heretofore, as the later Jesuits have refined them? Did any of their Popes and
Councels determine of their manner of Worshipping Images, as Vasquez has of
late? And yet (I think) if the Pope should be driven to a Decision of this
Question, he would define as Vasquez has done; so extraordinary is the
Approbation of his Apology for Imagery, as if It likewise were worthy of
Adoration. And if this Pope should so determine it, you must think that all his
Predecessors were of the same Opinion, if they had been asked; cundem sensum
tenuit semper matter Ecclesia.

6 But, what is most strange, That Church may for five, six, or twelve hundred
years and more, use a Translation justly suspicious, as for many other Reasons,
so for this, That of the diverse Authors thereof some we know not, others we
know too well: and yet when a Council after so long time shall meet, every man's
work found very authentic. ^.
Some learned Papists have been persuaded, that their vulgar Translators were
docti a Deo omnes, all assisted by the Holy Ghost in their Translations. But
Bellarmin thinks this Opinion too charitable, for so they must grant that
Theodotion the Heretic (the undoubted Author of some parts of that Edition)
was infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, If he were not, how is that part of
their Vulgar, which they have from him authentic and true? Though err he
might, as being a private man or rather a public Heretic. Dicimus tamen eum
non errasse in ea translatione quam approbavit Ecclesia, yet we say (says
Bellarmin, but I hope no wise man will so think) that he did not err in that
Translation which the Church has approved. I see then it is all one, whether
the Holy Ghost do assist the Translatour, whilst he is about his work, or the
Pope his Translation, after it be finished, and He dead: nor does it skill how
he were Qualified whilst he lived, either for Integrity, Wit or Learning: the
Cause is all one as in the Pope himself, who may as freely bestow this
particular gift, of not erring in Translations, upon whom he please without all
respect of good Qualities, as Saint Peter did that transcendent donative of
absolute Infallibility upon him and his Successors. Saint Jeroms Translation
had laudable Testimonies of Antiquity, yet not generally received in his time,
only prejudiced by the Newness of it, and Antiquity of the Italick. But whose
is the Vulgar, or how first came it in request? It is (says Bellarmine) partly
Lucians, partly Jeroms, partly Theodotions the Heretic, partly another he
knows not whose. Do we think ^ Theodotione, quaedam ex alio quodam interpret
innominato: stultum autem videtur dicere, Theod^, and etiam Hieronymum nusquam
errasse, cum ipse in cap. 19. Isaia dica^se ^^ra^^^. (...) ^. Non igitur
authors illos cano^izavit Ecclesia, sed tantum hanc versionem ^ in (...)
libratiorum e^ores reperiti, sed certos nos reddere vo^ in hac versione
interpretum errata. Bell. ibid. Why the Romish ^ so many sund^^ Authors, no
Cause can be given ^ that ^ the necessity of the middle Ages or times of ^ a
wa^ ^ct.
the Trent Council did examine every part of that translation? or did they know
as much as Bellarmin has confessed, that it should call so many Fathers, and
one Heretic amongst the rest? Doubtless this is a miraculous Power of their
Holy Church; that the Holy Ghost does but keep men from error whilst they are
living, but the Pope and his councels Infallibility can keep an Heretic (whom
they knew not living) from having erred after he is dead. And whereas the
Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth did but make Light shine out of
Darkness, the incomprehensible Omnipotence of the Popes Infallibility can
make Darkness Light, and Light Darkness. For otherwise, why might not the
Pope, and the Council, have yielded the assurance of their Omnipotent Spirit
unto some then living, for authentic Translation? Or why did they not admit
This Commentator having said as much as possibly could be said in defense of
the Vulgar Translation, altering the Hebrew Vowels for this purpose at his
pleasure, yet it seems the Errors discovered in it by him in his Comment
upon Esaias has hindered the setting forth of his other Commentaries upon the
Prophets, which for his part he had finished (as appears by the later part of
his Epistle (...) the Trent Fathers) so the Church would have approved them.
Quammobrem, si nostram operam Vobis sanctissimi patres, probari intellexero,
reliquos li^ quos habeo jam absolutos, propediem ^ sin minus, vestro judicio
admonitus recondam: ^ que satis erit, meum studium erga Christi (...) atque hoc
sanctissimum concilium sem^l (...) (...)tum.
Franc. Foreri^s Correction of the Vulgar for authentic, seeing his skill in
the Hebrew, and good will to the old Vulgar, was so great? The Reason sure, why
they would admit of this hodgepodge Translation before any better, was, (as I
have said) to show hereby the Popes Infallibility to be more then most
Omnipotent and Incomprehensible. They contend for the Vulgar, under the Title
of Hierom; and yet where it is evident that Hierom did not translate the
Psalms, which they use, they will not admit that Translation of them which is
every where extant, and without controversy is Hieroms own.

7 Yet thus much I perceive by Bellarmines Answer, That as an Heretic or
unknown Author may err in a Translation, because he is not infallibly assisted
by the Holy Ghost; but yet it must be Believed, that an Heretic did not err
in that Translation, which the Pope and Council has approved: So a Jesuit may
perhaps commit a Murder, because his order is not so holy as can warrant him
from falling into mortal Sin; but if it should please the Pope or Clergy of
Rome to interpret the sixth Commandment otherwise; we must Believe that no
Jesuit does commit any Murder in that manslaughter, or bloodshed, which the
Church approves, albeit he treacherously stab his Sovereign Lord the Lords
anointed. If it please the Pope, he may antedate his Pardon, or legitimate such
hellish brood, ere it come to light, as well as authenticate an Heretick's
Translation a thousand years after his bones be rotten. These are the sweet
fruits of this supposed infallible Rule of Faith and Manners; but of the
Villainies included in this Position, hereafter. I now only give the Reader
notice of the ridiculous Use of the same amongst themselves: For what a sweet
Decision was that concerning Grace and Free Will, but lately so eagerly
controversed in Spain, to the Vide (...) qu^z (...)one in (...)mum (...)
comment. ^n D. Th.
public scandal of that Church. First Silence was enjoined all for four years,
and afterward Vasquez set (as a brach) to hunt a prey for the Romish Lion to
take, if he could have rouzed any to his liking. Is this the Use of your
infallible Rule? Should Christians trouble the Turk with their Contentions, he
could decide as well on this fashion, as the Pope. The ^ (...) illos peragitur,
intermixtis etiam aliquando cantionibus Graecis. Epistolae, and Evangelium, quo
m^ extra chor^m in medio Ecclesiae astanti populo clara voce recitantur.
Conci^oribus (...), ^ intersuisse, ac Evangelii Epis^olar^mque verba quae
vernacula lingua reci^at sacrificulus audivis^^. ^ in suis Ecclesii^
o^stinatissime prohibent, dicunt enim se hoc modo ^arias haereses, and diversas
de fide ^ ex concionibus and subtilibus argumentis sophi^^icisque quaestionibus
oriuntur. Alex. Gwag^inus ^ d^s^iptione, c. 2.
Moscovite already has far surpassed him, in this kind of composing or rather
avoiding Controversies. For he not many years ago (how affected now, I cannot
tell) would have no preaching in his Dominions, lest Schisms and Heresies
might thereby be occasioned.

8 Were not the Consequences of this Opinion so commodious to the Roman Clergy
for matters of this life, and so prejudicial to all other good Christians Hopes
of attaining that other far better life: I should have thought that Valentian,
Bellarmin, and other such as have been most copious in this Argument, had but
sought to set out Commentum aliquo ^ ridiculum some artificial Foolerie, to
make the World sport. For what better merriment could an ingenious Student
wish, then in his hours of recreation, to descant upon their serious pains in
setting a show of Gravity upon idle foolish Arguments, as incapable of
Theological, as an Ape of Tragic, attire. But why should we consort with Hell,
which, no doubt, makes it self merry at these great Disputers Folly, thus
unwittingly employed to purchase the miserable solace of infernal Powers by
their own eternal Sorrow, without Repentance. As the Opinion it self is most
ridiculous to any unpartial judgment: so even for this reason is the
Consequence most lamentable, to any endued with Humane Affection. For what
greater or more just Occasion of most grievous Sorrow, could be presented to a
religious true English Heart, then to see so great a part of the Christian
World, especially so many of his Native Contrymen (for such ridiculous apish
Impostures and false pretenses of bringing Gods People under such a Government
in matters of Faith, as is usually in Secular States) increase old Isreal's
Rebellion, and incur their grievous Curse not yet expired, by casting off their
Redeemer, the Wisdom of God, and judge of quick and dead from being their King
or Supreme Judge of Controversies in Religion? For why should it seem uncouth
unto any Christian, that Christ himself, though sitting in his Throne of
majesty in Heaven, should be the only Supreme infallible Judge in all
Controversies, concerning his own or his Apostles Precepts, or Gods Laws in
general? ^
For who could justly except against us if we should say, That to most
Physicians through Europe, Hippocrates, or Galen, to Lawyers Justinian, were the
sole Authentic Judge? No Physician in any other Country exacts Subscription
to his Opinions of any living in this, further then upon examination they shall
prove consonant either to Galen, or Hippocrates, or be evidently grounded on
Reason. Or do we exclude all use or certainty of Juridical Decisions in matters
of Right and Wrong, though the Judges be but ordinary, because Lawyers have no
Authentic living Judge to determine, infallibly, of such Controversies as may
arise amongst themselves in speculative points of their Profession?

9 It is supposed that good Students in any Faculty have wit and art with
other good means for finding out their classick Authors Sentence alreddie
given, whose Writings in this respect may be truly said to be their followers
Judges, though every one of them be a private Judge in matters of Practice: Yet
is it a Paradox in us to say, Gods written Word is the Judge of such
Controversies as arise amongst professed Divines or Ecclesiastic Judges
themselves? What if all of them do not agree about the true Sense and Meaning
of that Word whereto all appeal? No more do Physicians always in their
interpretations of Hippocrates or Galen, yet have not their disagreements (for
ought I have read) bred Civil Wars in the Countries wherein they live, nor
does their variance bring any danger to wise-mens Bodies. but rather all
dangers are by this means discovered, and safer choice left others what
Opinions or Pr^ to follow, or refuse, or in what Cases it is most safe or
dangerous to adventure. Thus might Divines dispute without any danger to (...)
Souls, if the Romanists had not been so lavish in coining matter for
Contention, rather then in searching Scriptures for Edification of Christ's
Church: Or if the Laity would be as careful of their Spiritual as Bodily
Health, and not take their Physic blindfold at such Mountebanks hands as
Jesuits, Priests, and Seminaries be; who minister none but such as either
shall intoxicate the Brain, or inflame the Heart with preposterous zeal. Nor
should variance in Points of Doctrine amongst Divines, breed any danger or
disturbance to Common-weals, if they would not be Statists or Underminers of
States, as the Jesuits be. If their Contentions were for the manner uncivil,
or bitter, as are all contentions which the Jesuits breed: the Supreme
Magistrate, whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, might bind their Tongues and Pens
to good abearance; were it not for these Romish Wolves, which in Sheeps
clothing convey themselves into the Fold of Christ; and, once crept in, will
admit of no trial, but in the Lions Den, unto which they are sworn Purvevors;
for whose maintenance (like their Master that great Accuser of Gods Children)
they compass Sea and Land and fetch their range about the World.

10 Who can imagine any other Cause (besides this their insolent challenge of
Soveraigntie over all others Faith) why the Scripture might not be admitted
Judge over all Controversies of Divinity, much better then Hypocrates or Galen
of all Controversies in Physic, without any infallible Physician perpetually
resident in the World, to give sentence viva voce. It is no Paradox to hold,
that God, which made us these Souls, and gave the Scripture for their Health,
did much better know what was necessary for them, then either Hippocrates or
Galen did what was good and wholesome for men's Bodies, one hair of which they
neither made black or white. Even what they best knew, they knew not otherwise
to communicate unto Posterity then by these dumb Characters, or atramentarie
instructers. Whatsoever our Adversaries can urge to the prejudice of Scriptures
Sufficiency, or Ability of Gods Spirit; is true of these great Authors and
their Writings: all other Means of teaching though their dearest Scholars died
with them; now not able either to strengthen or consolidate the weak or shallow
brain, or illuminate darkened understandings; they cannot so much as take notice
of their Followers towardly pains and industry, or reward such as are most
devoted to their Memory, and use their Aphorisms, as infallible Rules of
Bodily life and health, with any blessing of Art or Nature. But our God lives
for ever, and knows best who are his, always ready to Reward such as love him.
And as there is none living but has received some Gift or other from him; so
has he promised to give more and more unto all such as well Use what he has
already given. If Nature be dulled, so it be not slothful withal in good
courses, he can sharpen it by Art: though both be defective; yet can he so
inflame the heart with Zeal, as it shall pierce more deeply into the Mysteries
of man's Salvation, then the acutest unregenerate Wit, that Nature yields, or
Art can fashion. His Spirit cannot be bound, but blows where he lists, and
gives life to whom he pleases, and can inlighten our minds to see that Truth
now written, which he taught others to Write for our good.

11 Physicians look not Hippocrates or Galen should stand on earth again
(Vessalius like) to read Anatomy-Lectures upon their Followers live-tongues, or
other instruments of breath and speech abused to debate and strife, or blowing
the coals of bitter Dissension about their Meaning. But we all look if we
Believe aright) that Christ Jesus, who has left us these his Sacred Laws, and
Legend of his most blessed Life, as a Pattern whereby to frame our own, free
from contention, peaceable, humble, and meek, will one day (after which shall
be no more) exact a strict account of every idle Word; much more will he punish
such Tongues or Pens, as have been continually set on fire by Hell with the
everlasting flames of that brimstone lake.

12 Were our exorbitant Affections brought within compass, by hope and fear
answerable to the Consequences of the former sweet Promises, made to such as
rightly use, and terrible Threats against all such as abuse, the good Means
ordained by God, for knowing his Will: his inf^ word^, from whose mouth soever
uttered, yea though but privately read with attentive silence, would instruct
us, how to demean our selves in the search of Truth; inform us how to direct,
fasten, or inhibit; finally how (in all Mysteries of our Salvation) to moderate
our Assent, much better then this supposed infallible Authority, residing
usually in men most like to Heathen Idols. Though Mouths they have (as they
pretend) infallible; yet fearce speak they once in two ages; whose words when
they are uttered portend more danger to the Christian World, then if brute
beasts should speak like men.

13 No Christian Commonwealth, but either has or might have good Laws for
composing Contentions, or establishing Unity in the study of Truth: To see
what should be done is never hard; would strength of Authority be as willing
to enforce men unto a Civil and orderly observation of Means known and
prescribed. Our Statutes are much more absolute and complete then Deuteronomy. 3^.
ver. 11, etc.
Isreal's were, when it was a sin to enquire after other Means either more easy
or effectual for their conduction unto that true Happiness, whereat all States
aim, but only such shall light on, as put these Sacred Laws in execution. It
is the common Error of all corrupted minds, to seek that far off which (as
the Lord told his people) is within them, even in their Hearts, and in their
Mouths, so they would be Doers not Hearers only of the Law. Many Heathens
have used such diligent care and unrelenting Resolution for just execution of
their defective and erroneous Laws, as would the coactive Power, every where
resident where Christianity is professed, use the like for establishing an
uniform and unpartial, though but an external and civil Practice of the ten
Commandments and other Sacred Moral Precepts, of whose Truth no Christian
doubts, about whose Meaning, nor Protestant, nor Papist, nor any Sect this day
living, do, or can contend: fallible Judges might effect, what the Papists
pretend, as infalliblie, as if every particular Congregation had such a true
infallible Teacher as they falsely deem or fain their Pope, to catechize them
ex cathedra thrice a week. For who could better resolve us in all Points of
Moment, or retain our hearts in Unity of Faith, then Truth it self, once
clearly seen or made known unto us: yet is it in it self, much brighter then
the Sun we daily see; which it likewise herein exceeds, That whilst Gods Word
endures amongst us, it still remains above our Horizon, and cannot set: only
gross and foggie Interpositions (raised from exhalation of such foul Lusts and
reeking sins, as severe unpartial execution of known Laws might easily
restrain.) usually eclipse or hide it from us. Such as are not so Eagle-sighted
as to behold the brightness of every Divine Truth in it proper Sphere, might
yet safely behold the reflection of it in one part or other of the sacred
Fountain, were it not troubled with the muddy conceits of unsettled and unquiet
Frains; or were not such men oftentimes in great places, as minding nothing but
earthly things, always mingle filth and clay with the Chrystal-streams of the
Water of Life. Happy is that man of God, that in this turbulent Age, can, in
points of greatest moment, see the Divine Truth himself; small hope have any of
causing others to see it, whilst carnal minds may every where without fear of
Punishment, but not without terror of such Ecclesiastic Power as shall
control them, foam out their own shame, and overcast the face of Heaven,
(whence Light should come unto their Souls) with blasphemous unhallowed Breath:
whilst dunghill-Sinks may be suffered to evaporate the abundance of that
inward Filth, (which is lodged in their hearts) as it were of purpose to choke
the good Spirit of God, whilst it seeks to breath in others Mouths whose
Breasts it has inspired with Grace.

14 In brief (lest my Adversary should challenge me of Partiality,) As the
Means which our Church from Gods Word prescribes for establishing men's hearts
in the Unity of true Faith, (were the execution of known Laws any way
correspondent,) might (as is said) infallibly effect what the Papists falsely
pretend: so in truth it cannot without Hypocrisy be dissembled; that whiles
our Practice is so dissonant to our Doctrine, and our Public Discipline so
loose, though in detestation of their Errors, we have turned our backs upon
them, with Protestation to follow a contrary Rule, yet for the most part we
jump with them at the journeys end. To omit more final agreements of our
Contrarieties, elsewhere showed. They wholly permit the Keys of the Well of
Life to ones man's hands; who, for his own advantage, we may be sure, will lock
it up so close, as none shall look upon it but with Spectacles of his making.
For as the Head is, such we must expect the Eyes will be, if the one, the other
must be universal too, such as will leave nothing to be seen by private or
particular eyes but what they have seen before; or in one word, if we admit one
absolute visible Head, his must be the only Eyes of the Church. We, not
through default of public Constitutions, nor so much by connivence of
Ecclesiastic Magistrates, as by presumptuous disobedience of Inferiors, are
so far from committing the custody of this Sacred Fountain into one or few
men's hands; that the Flock for the most part never expect the Pastors
marshalling, but rushing into it without order trample in it with unclean feet.
If any Beam of Truth have found entrance into one of their Souls, though
quickly eclipsed or smothered by earthly cogitations, he straightway presumes,
Gods Word more plentifully dwells in him, then in all his Teachers: whence if
his Purse be strong, it is with him as with an Horse when Provender pricks him,
he kicks against all Ecclesiastic Authority, and spurns at his poor Overseer
that should feed him; like the wanton Ass in the Fable, that seeing the Moon
lately shining where she was drinking suddenly covered with a cloud; upon
imagination she had drunk it up, ran winsing out ere her thirst was quenched
and threw her Rider.

15 Thrice happy is that Land and State where Civil Policy and Spiritual
Wisdom, grave Experience and profound Learning, (in whose right Commixture
consists the perfect Temperature of every Christian State) do rightly
symbolize. These, where they mutually clasp in their Extremes (without
intermedling in the Essence of each others Profession) are like the Side-postes
or Arches in the Lords House: and the awful respect of Christ Jesus the Judge
of both, and that dreadful Day continually sounding in their ears, by the
voice of Gods faithful and sincere Ministers, would be as the Binding-stone,
or Coupling, to fasten them surely in the joining. But whilst these (each
jealous of other) start asunder, that Breach is made, whereat the Enemies of
the Church and State hope for speedy entrance, to the utter ruin of both.

CAP. XXXII.
Briefly Collecting the Sum of this second Book.

1 TO draw a brief Map of these large Disputes. As the Occasions that breed, so
the right Means to avoid all Contentions and Schisms, are most perspicuously
set down in Scriptures. Amongst others most necessary for this purpose, (for
the plantation, increase, and strength of true and lively Faith,) sincere
Obedience to Spiritual Authority is the chief. For more willing and cheerful
performance hereof, Choice should be made of Pastors or Overseers, qualified as
Scripture requires men of so high a Calling should be; men not given to
Quarrels or strife, men of mild and lowly Spirits, fearing God and hating
Covetousness; men esteeming the hidden treasure of a good Conscience at so
high a rate, as neither Fear of man, nor Hopes of any Worldly favor can move
them to hazard or adventure it. Were these Rules, by such as have the oversight
of Gods Flock, as faithfully practiced, as they are by Scripture plainly
taught, the knowledge of Gods Word should daily increase; Piety, Devotion, and
Christian Charity continually flourish; all Strife and Dissension quickly fade.

2 But if through the default of Princes or Potentates, no fit choice be made
of spiritual Governors, if by their negligence, worse be made of inferior
Ministers: the cause comes not by devolution, to be reformed by the
Congregation: What then must they be altogether silent at such abuse? No, the
Scripture has given as plain a Rule for their employment as for the others.
The more or more often Higher Powers offend, the more fervently frequent should
the lower Sort be in pouring out 1 Timothy 2. ver. 1, 2.
supplications, prayers, and intercessions for Kings, and for all that are in
Authority, that they may Rule according to Gods Word. In the mean time albeit
they Rule otherwise Inferiors should consider, that GOD gives them such
Superiors for their pronenesse to disobedience, scurrilitie, scoffing at
lawful Authority, or other like sins, expressly forbidden by his Word. To
every People as well as Israel he gives such Rulers in his wrath, as shall not
seek them but theirs, not his Glory in their salvation, but their own Glory by
their harm.

3 But as the Tongues of Inferiors must be tied from scoffing or jesting at
men in Authorities bad proceedings: so must not the Word of God be bound. If
their Consciences (rightly and unpartially examined) direct them otherwise then
their Governors command, they must (notwithstanding their Superiors checks)
speak as they think until Death command them silence; if for the freedom of
their Speech (upon good warrant of Conscience) they be punished, Vengeance is
Gods, he will repay Superiors for it: unto whose lawful Authority whilst
Obedience is denied, upon sinister Pretenses, or humorous though strong
Persuasions of Conscience, counselling us to the contrary: our Punishment in
this life is just, whose present smart should teach us to beware of far more
grievous in the life to come. But whether offend or swerve more from the Rules
of Scripture prescribed for their several Christian Carriage; Superiors in
commanding wrongfully; or Inferiors in disobeying just commands, cannot
oft-times (if we speak of particular Actions) be infallibly known in this life;
but must be referred unto that day of Final Judgment. The dread of which
should in the mean time enforce every Superior daily to consult his own Heart,
and strictly to examine his Conscience, whether it be not likely then to give
Evidence against him, for imposing too heavy burdens upon his Inferiors. And
so must every Inferior again use the like diligence in the daily examination
of his Conscience, whether it be likely or no to convince him before the Judge
of quick and dead, of Disobedience to such as he had set in Authority over him,
or of such sinister Pretenses for using the Liberty of Conscience, as
Conscience it self never sought after, but were suggested only by Humor,
Popularitie or other Desires, whose maintenance have either enforced him to
obey Man against God, or not to obey Man commanding for God.

4 Our Partiality it is toward our selves, or rather to our sensual delights
or pleasures, that makes us so ignorant in all things which concern our Weal.
For would we truly and unpartiallie 1 Cor. 11. 31
Judge our selves, we should not be judged. Not the best experienced Justice in
this Land, can, by examining ordinary Malefactors, discern, what issue their
Cause shall have before an unpartiall Judge, better then we, by this strict
pre-examination, might foresee what final Sentence were prepared for us, good
or bad, according to the diversity of our Actions and Course of Life. To this
end has Christ left every man's Conscience in full Authority, during his
absence, to examine, reprove, convince, and sentence the desires of his own
heart: of which would we daily in sobriety of Spirit, and fear of his last
Judgment, ask counsel, and patiently expect Gods Providence; we should by this
ordinary Means discern, who commanded aright, who otherwise, as clearly as
others heretofore have done by Means most extraordinary. For even the most
extraordinary miracles did ascertain the Ancient of Divine Truth, and confirm
them in the practice of Christian Obedience, not immediately, as part of their
Rule of Faith, whereon finally to rely, but by enforcing them to look into
their own Souls and Consciences, in which Truth was already written, if they
had urged it to confession. If our examination without Miracles were as strict,
our Belief would be as firm; Spiritual Governors commands as Christian-like,
and Inferiors Obedience in all points as sincere as was theirs.

5 For Conclusion I would give the Christian Reader a present Antidote, against
all the poisonous enchantments of Romish Sorcerers. The Medicine is very brief
and easy; only to think every morning next his heart, or at other seasonable
hours, That there is a Divine Providence in this life to guide us, and after
this life ended, a fearful judgment to pass upon all such, as here abjuring
the Guidance of it, follow either the Ways of flesh and blood in breeding, or
of carnal Wisdom in composing, strife and dissension about matters Spiritual.
He that will seriously ruminate on these matters in his vacant well composed
thoughts, calling the Adversaries Arguments home to the Point, which they must
touch ere they can wound us: let me have only his dying curse in recompense of
all my pains, if any Difficulty, any Jesuit or other learned Papist, either
hitherto has, or ever shall be able to bring; do trouble his mind. Whatsoever
can be brought either to countenance their unchristian Doctrine, or disparage
our Orthodoxal Assertions, either presuppose a secret denial of Gods peculiar
Providence, and inward calling of men, or else proceed from want of
consideration, that there is a final Judgment, wherein all Controversies must
be taken up, all Contentious and rebellious Spirits punished according to their
deserts: Indeed if the Authors or Abetters of Schism and Heresy might escape
for ever unpunished, or Christian Modesty and Humility be perpetually
overborn by Impudency, Scurrilitie, and violent Insolency, the
Inconveniences, objected by the Romanists, might as much trouble us, as the
wickeds thriving, did the Heathen, that knew not God nor his Providence. But
whilst we acknowledge him and It, the best Arguments our Antagonists bring,
will appear as improbable as they are impious.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND Father in God, and my Honorable Lord, WILLIAM, By
Divine Providence Lord Bishop of DURHAM, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
RIght Reverend Father, the sweet refreshing your Honorable Favors did yield
to such of my labors as hitherto enjoy the light, when a sudden uncomfortable
blast had sorely nipt them in the very setting, makes these last gatherings of
that spring seek that comfortable warmth under your benign Protection, which
the unconstant frowning season would hardly afford them in their growth.
Besides these and other my personal Obligements, that Famous and worthy Founder
of this Attick Bee-hive (of whose sweetness would God I had been as capable as
I have been long partaker) had never allotted any Cell therein for me or other
Countryman of mine, but with particular relation to that seat of dignity, which
he sometimes did, ^r Lordship now does, and, to the increase of Gods glo^ good
of his Church, long may enjoy. Seeing this our ^ Foster-Father is now ignorant
of his childrens de^, and knows not me; it shall be my comfort, to have ^
honorable successors witnesses of my care and industry to fulfill his godly
desire, whose religious soul in his life time (as his written Laws do testify)
did detest nothing more then idleness in the Ministry, specially in his
adopted-Sons. The matters I here present unto your Lordships and the worlds
view, are sometimes in themselves so harsh and hard to be concocted, as he that
would strive to make them toothsome unto nice tastes, should put himself to
excessive pains; unless his judgment be much riper, his wit readier, his
invention pleasanter, his opportunities better, and his leisure greater then
mine are. But it is one and the same point of judgment, not to require exact
Mathematical proofs in discourses of mortality, or a smooth facile Rhetorical
style in Logical or Scholastic conflicts. And, as by the Statutes of that
Society wherein I live, I am bound to avoid barbarism: so my particular
inclination moves me, in controversies especially to approve his choice that
said; Fortia mallem quam formosa. If any professed enemy to the truth we teach,
will answer me from point to point, or attempt (not as their custom now is
only in scoffing sort but seriously) to avert those unsupportable, but
deserved imputations, I lay upon the foundation of his Religion, I shall (I
trust) be able to answer him; the better by continuance of your Lordships
wonted favors, whom I still request the Christian Readers, as many as reap any
profit from my pains on my behalf to remember with such respect as is due to
Honorable Patrons of religious studies, or cherishers of painful endeavors in
good causes. From Corpus Christi College, March 25. 1614.

Your Lordships in all observance, THOMAS JACKSON.

To the indifferent Reader, specially to the learned Artists of the two Famous
UNIVERSITIES.
CHristian and beloved Reader, I have been detained in this entry, though not
longer then the Structure of it required, yet then I my self, or thou perhaps,
could have wished, for speedier dispatch of the main edifice intended. Somewhat
notwithstanding, to my apprehension, I had observed, whereby Artists more
accurate, but younger Divines then my self (whose furtherance in the like,
throughout all my meditations I still respect) might be directed, for taking
sure hold of their slipperie Antagonists in this conflict: and finding my self
every day then other more unapt, more unwilling at least, to be any Actor in
quarrels of this nature, because most desirous to spend my mortal spirits in
opening the pleasant Fountains of immortality; I thought it not altogether
unlawful to dispense with these labors for a while, in hope to prosecute them
more safely and with better success hereafter, by seconding such as had gone
before me with my small strength, for intercepting these despitefull
Philistims, which continually labor to damme up these sacred Wels of Life.
Many excellent wits and grave Divines, as well in our English as other reformed
Churches, I knew, had accurately deciphered the special characters of the
Beast, and demonstrated most properties of great Antichrist upon the Pope. But
that the fundamental Charter of the Romish Church, or the Commission pretended
by Jesuits for the erection of it, should (as the manner was to demolish
lesser religious houses for building others more magnificent) extend to raze
the very first foundations of Religion as common to Christians, Jews, and
Turks; that the acknowledgement of such infallibility as they Deifie her with
should be more incompatible with Christianity then any Idolatry of the
Heathen; that such as absolutely believe all her decrees without examination,
truly believe no article of this Creed; with the like principal branches of
Antichristianisme; were points, for ought I knew, rather touched by the way, or
proposed as clear in themselves to the indifferent and ingenuous, that judge of
the Romish Church by the known picture of her misse-shapen lims, then
prosecuted at large, or with purpose to pull off that artificial painting,
wherewith late Jesuits have so beautified this uglie Monsters face, that the
World bewitched with gazing too much on it cannot but love her other
deformities though in themselves most loathsome. For though the practices
enjoined by her be so vile, as would have caused Rome Heathen to have blushed
at their mention, or her other doctrines so palpably gross, that her own Sons
heretofore have derided them, and as yet spare to speak ought in particular for
their defense: yet to salve all this it must suffice, that the Church, which
cannot err, has now authorized them.

If any think I prejudice the truth of moderate accusations, by laying such
heavy imputations upon this doctrine, as make it incomparably more detestable
then any other, he speaks not inconsequently to his positions, if he hold the
Trent Council was infallibly assisted by the holy Ghost, or that the Pope in
Cathedral resolutions cannot err. But he which thinks foul impieties may bring
Romish Prelates out of favor with the Spirit of Truth, and make them as
obnoxious to errors as others are, or can persuade himself, that many practices
and opinions, by that Church already authorized, are in their nature abominable
and impious, must either accord to me or dissent from Reason, Conscience and
Religion. For these, so be will but vouchsafe his silence or attention, jointly
proclaim aloud, that nothing amiss, either in matter of doctrine or manners,
can be so detestable without this presumptuous / groundless warrant of
absolute infallibility, as with it; that albeit a man would set himself to
practice all particulars directly contrary to what God has commanded, or to
contradict God and his goodness, yet his iniquity without this absolute belief
of full authority derived from him so to do, would be but as a body without a
soul, in respect of the Romish Churches impieties, which makes the Holy Ghost
the principal Author of Gods written Word, the abettor of all her fraud,
untruths, or villainies. Briefly, as it is not the doing of those materials God
commands us to do, but faithful submission of our Wills to his in doing them,
which (as S. James instructs us) makes us true Christians: so is it not the
doing or maintaining of what God forbids or hates, but the doing of it upon
absolute submission of our souls and consciences to other laws then he has
left, which makes men live members of Antichrist, as being animated, informed
and moved by the spirit of error. Now this persuasion of absolute
infallibility and universal warrant from the Holy Spirit, without condition or
restraint, being peculiar to the Romish Church, admitting it to be as faulty in
practices and as obnoxious to errors as any other, none can be reputed so
truly Antichristian as it. For albeit Mahomet pretended divine revelations,
yet his Priests challenge no such absolute infallibility as does the Pope; they
make no second Rocks, or foundations, no ordinary Pastor equivalent to their
great Prophet. Whence although the Turks hold opinions in themselves, or
materially considered, more gross, and maintain some practices not much less
villainous then Jesuits do: yet the grounds or motives of their belief, (which
are as the soul or spirit of Religion) are nothing so pestiferous, nothing so
directly opposite to the Holy Spirit, as is this Jesuiticall rule of faith. Nor
do they either profess such belief in Christ, or acknowledge him for a
foundation so elect and precious, as brings them within the Temple of God,
within which unless Antichrist sit, his contrariety unto Christ could not be
so essential, so immediate or direct, as by the rules of sacred Philosophy we
are taught it must be. Yet I know not, whether the indignity of this doctrine
is more apt to affect Divines and Men rightly religious and fearing God, then
the sottishness of their arguments to persuade it, to provoke the just
indignation of ingenuous Artists, which cannot endure, though in matters of
indifferency, to captivate their understandings to positions devoid of sense.
To require some probability of reason, civil or natural, is on their part no
insolent demand, for exchange of Christian faith or adventuring their
inassurance of life eternal in the service of mere forrainers whom they never
saw. Yet unto peremptory resolutions no less dangerous, do Jesuits solicit
us, not only without any tolerable show of probability, but quite contrary to
Gods principal laws, and our natural notions of good and evil; as by these
labors every Academick may in part perceive, but more fully, if he would
vouchsafe to lift more of their arguments, then in these short transeursive
disputes I could. Nor would I dissuade any Artist well grounded in Arislotle
from perusing the most learned works any romanist has written in this argument
In most other controversies betwixt us and them it is dangerous, I must
confess, even for well grounded Artists to begin with their writings, not so
in this: For I protest in the sight of God and his holy Angels, that as far
as I can remember the inclinations of my youth, or by them prognost eat how
afterward, I might have been affected, I never was, I never should have been so
thoroughly possessed with such great dislike of Romish Antichristianisme in this
point, by hearing the most famous Preachers in this Land, or reading all the
Learned Writers in Reform, Churches, as I was by examining the labors of
Bellarmin, Valentian, and others of best note amongst them seriously addressed
to this purpose; comparing them only with the known Principles of Christianity
and such passages of sacred Writ, as every Christian Artist should be
acquainted with. For the principles whereon I proceed, I have been only
beholden to the Canon of Scriptures, for deducing of such blasphemous
consequences from them, as I charge the adversary with, only to that small
measure of knowledge in Aristotelian Philosophy wherewith my God has blessed
me, whiles I was bound by local statutes to the study of Arts, purposely
abstaining from other writings, which with their informations of my
understanding might have bred prejudice in my affection. Since that time,
although the years of my Ministry hardly exceed the space of ordinary
apprentiships, yet have I often wished the discussion of these points had been
then imposed upon me by some experienced Divine, that would only have given me
right hold of their assertions. Upon this consideration I would beseech the
flourishing Artists of these famous Academies, whom God has furnished with all
store of munition necessary for this service, not to neglect opportunities
present. Let them defer (if so they please) the fruits of their labors in
other points (though this be the fault of our English) until the Autumn of
their age. But the mark I now propose unto them, being the evident resolution
of Jesuitical Positions into those gross and palpable blasphemies whereto they
tend, which they only seek to hide by Sophismes and artificial tricks of wit,
Academical wits might displume them of these figtree-leaves, and manifest their
nakedness to the world, much better in the spring whiles their skill in arts
were fresh and flourishing, whiles the strength and vigor of their invention
would more easily bend this way, then in the Autumn, when their leaves begin to
fade and their sap retire to the root, as their pleasant grapes grow ripe. Many
towardly plants in this nurcery, now able to match the stoutest Jesuit living,
at his own weapon, whilst in his mature age, (multo jam fractus membra labor,
more fit to be a leader, then a Combatant in these encounters) he shall look
back on his former labors, or calls to mind his wonted dexterity in school
disputes, may take up old Nestors complaint.

Tunc ego debueram capienda ad Pergama mitti;
Tunc poteram magni, si non superare, morari
Hectoris arma meis: sed in illo tempore nullus,
Aut puer Hector erat; nunc me mea deficit aetas.
The school Jesuit in these studies is like the Ivy always green, because not
set to bring forth fruit unto salvation, but rather to choke and strangle the
plants of life. And for such instruments of the Romish Church, as this land
usually yields, this wrangling faculty is all the skill they care for, or for
the most part make profession of. Yet such is the brittleness of the matter
they are to work upon in this controversy, that were all the Priests and
Jesuits harbored within the confines of great Britain at this present day, but
enjoined to write all they could to any purpose in defense of their Mother;
some few Artists of those Universities, which out of their pride they seem to
vilify amongst the ignorant, would, I dare not say make them blush (for sooner
might they make a Black-moors face of the same color with his teeth) but as
many of their favorers of this Kingdom, as have not sworn allegiance to the
Church of Rome, and are able to examine an argument, to be ashamed on their
behalf, even to acknowledge, that for ought these Mountebanks could say or
write in their defense, the Positions maintained by their Masters, foreign
Jesuits, were indeed idolatrous and blasphemous, howbeit the Church it self, we
must believe, could never be vanquished, because no man can tell where or in
what shape to find it.

Nor need young Artists fear the countenance of antiquity in this point from
which their enemies supplies are so slender, that would they come to open
trial, and bring only such of the Fathers for the seconds, as lived within
five hundred years of Christ, or before the mixture of Romish Religion with
Heathenism, not fully effected till a little after that time: the paucity of
those whose aid they durst solicit, in respect of that great army, which is as
resolute as we against them, would make them instantly either yield themselves,
or forsake the field. Nor have they been hitherto able to address any answer,
but to their shame, to the Worthies of the English Church, whose labors have
made the conquest in this quarrel easy to any of their successors, that will
adventure to follow their steps. Nothing remains but what best becomes the
exercise of young wits; to exceed the sophistical disputes of Jesuits against
the truth, in copiousnes of irrefragable demonstrations, That the allegiance
they seek to establish unto the Romish Church is solemn Apostasy from Christ;
that the belief of it, is the very Abstract of Sorcery, the utmost degree of
Antichristianism that can be expected. These and like points, being fortified
by strength of argument in the time of your Regency or farewell to the study of
Arts, might be polished at your better leisure, afterward to be revised and
published at the appointment of authority. Or if the zeal of Gods glory thus
mightily eelipsed by this foul idol of the Romish Church do not as yet so fully
move you; yet that indignation which first wrought a desire in me of giving
this onset, should work (me thinks) in every heart, that bears any sparkle of
love unto his native country. For what indignity is it to think, that whilst
our gracious Sovereign is a most zealous Professor and Defendor of the truth we
teach, so many of his natural subjects our countrymen and brethren, should be
won unto the Romish faction, especially by importunate inculcating two
Heresies, of all maintaind by that Church, in themselves most sottishly
improbable; and yet apparently most damnably idolatrous in their consequences,
if erroneous: I mean This concerning their Churches absolute privilege from
all error, and That other of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament, by
Transubstantiation. It cannot again but add much to our grief and indignation,
if we call to mind, how, when the chief Governor and public authority of this
land were for them, subscription was not urged upon such violent and bloody
terms unto any articles of their Religion, as unto that of Real presence. The
mystery of which iniquity cannot better be resolved then into the powerful and
deceitful working of Satan, thus delighting to despite our Lord and Savior by
seducing his professed subjects unto the highest, and most desperate kind of
rebellion he could imagine, upon the least occasions and shallowest reasons.
For such is their madness in that other point, as has been showed in this: Not
one inconvenience they can object to our opinion, but may be demonstrated
against theirs; not any fruits of Godliness they can pretend, but our doctrine
more directly brings forth then theirs could, though we did admit it for true.
For to what other purpose such a Presence as they imagine should serve them,
save only to countenance those desperate idolatrous practices and Litourgies of
Satan touched by the way in some parts of these discourses, is inexplicable; as
shall be showed more at large (without depriving that heavenly mystery of any
solemnity or devotion due unto it) in the unfolding of that controversy.

Yours in Christ Jesus, THOMAS JACKSON.

A Table of the Several Sections and Chapters in the Book following.
SECTION. I.
CAP. I. Containing the Assertions of the Romish Church, whence her threefold
Blaspemie springs. Page 309
SECT. II.
The first branch of Romish Blasphemy, in preferring Human authority before
Divine. 315 2. Bellarmines reply to the main Objection, jointly urged by all
Reformed Churches against the Romish: the Equivocation which he sought in the
Objection apparently found in his Reply. 316 3. Inferring, the general
conclusion proposed in the Title of this Section, from Bellarmins resolution of
faith. 319 4 Containing a further resolution of the Romish faith, necessarily
inferring the authority of the Roman Church, to be of greater authority then
Gods word absolutely, not only in respect of us. 324 5 That in obeying the
Romish Churches Decrees, we do not obey Gods word as well as them, but them
alone in contempt of Gods principal Laws. 327 6 Propounding what possibly can
be said on our adversaries behalf for avoiding the force of the former
Arguments: showing withal the special points that lie upon them to prove, as
principally, whether their Belief of the Churches authority can be resolved
into any Divine testimony. 339 7 That neither our Saviors Prayers, for the not
failing of Peter's faith, Luke 22. 32. nor his commending his sheep unto his
feeding, Joh. 21. 15. prove any Supremacy in Peter over the Church, from which
the authority of the Pope can, with probability, be derived. 31 8 That Christ,
not S. Peter, is the Rock, spoken of Matthew. 16. 18. That the Jesuits
exposition of that place, demonstrateth the Pope to be The great Antichrist.
347 9 That the Romanists Belief of the Churches infallible authority, cannot be
resolved into any Testimony better then Human, whence the main Conclusion
immediately follows. [That the Romanist in obeying the Church-decrees without
examination of them by Gods word, prefers man's Laws before Gods.] 365 10 In
what sense the Jesuits may truly deny, They Believe the words of man better
then the words of God: In what sense again our Writers truly charge them with
this Blasphemy. 373
SECT. III.
11 What restraint, precepts for obedience unto the Priests of the Law, though
seeming most universal for their form, did necessarily admit: How universal
Propositions of Scriptures are to be limited. 376 12 The authority of the
Sanhedrim not so universal or absolute amongst the Jews as the Papists make
it, but was to be limited by the former Rules. 385 13 That our Saviors
injunction of obedience to the Scribes and Pharisees, though most universal for
the form, is to be limited by the former Rules, that without open blasphemy it
cannot be extended to countenance the Romish cause: that by it we may limit
other places brought by them for the Popes transcendent universal authority.
391 14 What it would disadvantage the Romish Church to deny the infallibility
of the Synagogue. 398 15 That justly it may be presumed the Jewish Church,
never had any absolute infallibility in proposing or determining Articles of
Faith, because in our Saviors time it did so grievously err in the
Fundamental point of salvation. 400 16 That Moses had no such absolute
authority, as is now ascribed unto the Pope: that the manner of his attaining
to such as he had, excludes all besides our Savior from just challenge of the
like. 405 CAP. 17. That the Churches authority was no part of the rule of Faith
unto the people after Moses death* That by Experiments answerable unto the
precepts and predictions the faithful without relying upon the Priests
infallible proposals, were as certain, both of the divine truth, and true
meaning of the law, as their forefathers had been that lived with Moses and saw
his miracles. Page 411 18 That the society or visible company of Prophets had
no such absolute authority as the Romish Church usurps. 417 19 That the Church
representative amongst the Jews was for the most part, the most corrupt judge
of matters belonging to God: and the reason why it was so. 422 20 That the
Sovereignty given by Jesuits to the Pope is greater then our Saviors was. 427
21 Confirming the truth delivered in the former Chapter, from the very Law
given by Moses for discerning the great Prophet; further exemplifying the use
and force of miracles for begetting faith: The manner of trying prophesies: Of
the similitude betwixt Christ and Moses. 434 22 That the method used by the
great Prophet himself after his resurrection for planting faith, was such as we
teach: The excess of Antichrists exaltation above Christ: The Diametral
opposition betwixt the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the Papacy. 449 23
That the authority attributed to the present Pope, and the Romish rule of
faith, were altogether unknown unto S. Peter: the opposition betwixt S. Peter's
and his pretended successors doctrine. 452 24 That S. Paul submitted his
doctrine to examination by the Word before written. That his doctrine,
dissposition and practice, were quite contrary to the Romanists in this
argument. 456 25 A brief taste of our Adversaries blasphemous and Atheistical
assertions in this argument from some instances of two of their greatest
Doctors, Bellarmin and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect without the
solemn testification of that Church, the raritie of such testifications will
cause infidelity. 460
SECT. IIII.
Containing the third branch of Romish Blasphemy or the last degree of great
Antichrists exaltation, utterly overthrowing the whole foundation of Christian
Religion, preposterously inverting both Law and Gospel to Gods dishonor, and
advancement of Satan's Kingdom. 464 26 The ^esuits unwillingnesse to
acknowledge the Churches proposal for the True Cause of his faith: Of
differences and agreements about the final Resolution of faith, either amongst
the adversaries themselves, or betwixt us and them. 464 27 That the Churches
proposal is the true, immediate, and prime cause of all absolute Belief my
Romanist can have, concerning any determinate divine revelation. 468 28
Discovering either the gross ignorance, or notorious craft of the Jesuit in
denying his faith, is finally resolved into the Churches veracitie or
infallibility: that possibly it cannot be resolved into any branch of the First
Truth. 471 29 What manner of causal dependence Romish belief has on the
Church, that the Romanist truly and properly believes the Church only, not
God or his Word. 478 30 Declaring how the first main ground of Romish faith
leads directly unto Atheis^: the second unto preposterous Heathenism or
Idolatry. 484 31 Proving the last assertion, or generally the imputations laid
upon the Papacy, by that authority the ^esuites expreslie give unto the Pope
in matters of particular Fact, as in the Canonizing of Saints. 495 32 What
danger by this blasphemous doctrine may accrue to Christian States; that of all
heresies blasphemies, or idolatries which have been since the world began, or
can be imagined (...) Christ come to judgment: this Apostasy of the Jesuits,
is the most abominable and con^ous against the blessed Trinity. 499
BLASPHEMOUS POSITIONS OF JESUITS And other Later ROMANISTS, Concerning the
Authority of their CHURCH. The Third Book of Comments upon the CREED.
SECT. I.
Containing the Assertions of the Romish Church, whence her threefold Blasphemy
springs.

HAving, in the former dispute clearly acquitted, as well Gods Word for
breeding, as our Church from nursing Contentions, Schisms, and Heresies, we may
in this, by course of common equity, more freely accuse their injurious
calumniators. And because our purpose is not, to charge them with forgery of
any particular, though grossest Heresies, or Blasphemies, though most hideous,
but for erecting an Entire Frame, capacious of all Villainies imaginable, far
surpassing the Hugest Mathematical Form, human fancy could have conceived of
such matters, but only from inspection of this real and material pattern, which
by degrees insensible has grown up with the Mystery of Iniquity, as the Bark
does with the Tree. Such inconsiderate passionate speeches, as heat of
contention in personal quarrels has extracted from some one, or few of their
private Writers, shall not be produced to give evidence against the Church
their Mother, whose trial shall be (as far as may be) by her Peers; either by
her own public determinations, in this controversy, or joint consent of her
authorized best approved Advocates, in opening the Title, or unfolding the
contents of that Prerogative, which they challenge for her.

2 Our accusations are grounded upon their Positions, before set down when we
explicated the differences betwixt us. The Position in brief, is This; That
Lib. 2. c. 3.
the infallible authority of the present Church, is the most sure, most safe,
undoubted rule in all doubts, or controversies of faith, or in all points
concerning the Oracles of God: by which we may certainly know, both; without
which we cannot possibly know, either, which are the Oracles of God, which not,
or what is the true sense and meaning of such as are received for his Oracles,
whether written or unwritten.

3 The extent of divine Oracles, or number of Canonical books has They
acknowledge S. (...) as the Oracle of ^ and ^ contradict him in ^ con(...) the
number of Ca(...) books.
been (as our Adversaries pretend) very questionable amongst the Ancient:
though such of the Fathers, as, for their skill in antiquity, were in all
unpartial judgments most competent Judges in this cause, were altogether for us
against the Romanists, and such as were for their opinion, were but for it upon
an error, as thinking the Jews had acknowledged all those books of the old
Testament for Canonical Scripture, which the Churches wherein they lived,
received for such, or that the Christian Church did acknowledge all for
Canonical, which they allowed to be publicly read. Safe it was (our
adversaries cannot deny) for the Ancient, to dissent one from another, in this
question, or to suspend their assent, till new probabilities might sway them
one way or other. No reasons have been produced since, sufficient to move any
ingenious mind unto more peremptory resolutions, yet does the Council of Trent
bind all to an absolute acknowledgement of those Books for Canonical, which, by
their own confession were rejected by S. Hierom, and other Fathers. Si quis
aute^ libr^^ ip^os integ^^s cum omnibus suis (...) (pro^t in Ecclesia Catholica
legi con^ueverunt, and in veteri vulgata Latina Editione habentur) pro sacris,
and Canonicis non susceperit; and traditiones praedictas, sciens and prudens
contemp^e^it, Anathema sit. Conc. Trid. Sess. 4. decret. de Canonicis
Scripturis.
If any shall not receive the whole Books with all their parts (usually read in
the Church, and as they are extant in the old vulgar) for sacred and Canonical;
Let him be accursed. So are all, by the same decree, that will not acknowledge
such unwritten traditions, as the Romish Church pretends to have come from
Christ and his Apostles for divine, and of authority equal with the written
word.

4 So generally is this opinion received, so fully believed, in that Church;
That many of her Sons, even whilst they write against us, forgetting with whom
they have to deal, take it as granted: That the Scriptures cannot be known to
be Gods word, but by the Infallible authority of the present Church. And from
this supposition, as from a truth sufficiently known, (though never proved)
they labor, in the next place, to infer: That, without submission of our faith
to the Churches public spirit, we cannot infallibly distinguish the
orthodoxal, or divine sense of Gods Oracles, (whether written or unwritten)
from heretical or human.

5 Should we admit written Traditions, and the Church withal as absolute Judge
to determine which are Apostolical, which not: little would it boot us to
question with them about their meaning. For when the point should come to
trial, we might be sure to have the very words framed to whatsoever sense
should be most favorable for justifying Romish practices And even of Gods
written Oracles, whose words or characters (as he in his wisdom has provided)
cannot now be altered by an Index Expurgatorius, at their pleasure: That such a
sense as shall be most serviceable for their Turn, may (as time shall minister
occasion) be more commodiously gathered; the Trent Fathers, immediately after
the former decree for establishing unwritten Traditions, and amplifying the
extent of divine written Oracles, The decree of the Trent Council authorizing
the Latin vulgar Edition.
have in great wisdom authorized Insuper eadem Sacrosancta Synodus considerans
non parum utilitatis accedere posse Ecclesiae Dei, si ex omnibus Latinis
Editionibus, quae circumferuntur, sacrorum librorum, quaenam pro Authentica
habenda fit, innotescar: Statuit, and declarar, ut haec ipsa Vetus and vulgata
Editi^, quae longo tot saeculorum usu in ipsa Ecclesia probata est, in publicis
lectionibus, disputationibus, praedicationibus, and expositionibus, pro
Authentica habeatur, and ut nemo illam rejicere quovis praetextu audeat, vel
praesumat. Conc. Trident. Sess. 4. Decret. De editione and usu sacrorum
librorum.
the old and vulgar translation of the whole Canon. Which, though it were not
purposely framed to maintain Popery (as some of our writers, say they, have as
frivolously as maliciously objected) yet certainly, as well the escapes and
errors of those unskilful, or ill-furnished interpreters, as the negligence of
transcribers, or other defects, incident to that work, from the simplicity of
most ancient, the injuries or calamities of ensuing times, were, amongst
others, as the first heads or petty springs of that raging sloud of impiety,
which had well nigh drowned the whole Christian world in perdition, by
continually receiving into its chanel (once thus wrought) the dregs and filth
of every other error under heaven, with the corrupt remainder of former
heresies, for these thousand years and more. And unto many gross errors in
Romish religion (which this imperfect translation did not first occasion) It
yet affords that countenance, which the pure Fountains of the Greek and Hebrew
do not; but rather would scour and wipe away, were they current in that Church.
Finally, though it yield not nutriment to enlarge or feed, yet it serves as a
cloak to hide or cover, most parts of the great mystery of iniquity.

6 Yet, besides the favorable construction, that may be made for that
religion, out of the plain and literal sense of this erroneous translation: the
Church will be absolute Judge of all controversies concerning the right
interpretation thereof. So as not what our consciences, upon diligent search
and just examination, shall witness to us, but what the Church shall declare
to them, must be absolutely acknowledged for the true intent and meaning of
Gods word, as it is rendered by the vulgar interpreter: To this purpose is the
very next decree.

7 Praeter^a, ad coercenda petulantia ingenia, decernit, ut nemo, suae
prudentiae ionixus, in rebus fidei, and morum, ad edificationem Doctrinae
Christianae pertinentium, (...) Scripturam ad suos sensus contorquens, contra
eum sensum quem tenuit, and tenet sancta Matter Ecclesia, cuius est (...) care
de vero sensu, and interpretatione Scripturarum sanctarum, aut etiam contra
unanimem consensum Patrum, ipsam Scripturam sacram interpretari audeat, etiamsi
hujusmodi interpretationes nullo unquam tempore in lucem (...) forent. Qui
contravenerint, per ordinarios declarentur, and poenis a jure statutis
puniantur. Council. Triden^* ^idem.
Moreover, for brideling petulant dispositions, it is decreed; That no man in
confidence of his own wisdom or skill, in matters of faith, and manners, The
Trent Councels decree for interpretation of Scriptures.
making for the edification of Christian doctrine, shall dare to interpret
Scriptures, wresting them to his own conceit or sense, against that sense or
meaning, which the holy Church our mother, to whom it belongs to judge of the
true sense and interpretation of sacred writ, heretofore has held, or now does
hold, albeit he never purpose to publish such interpretations.

8 It is further added in the same place, (because I take it had been specified
in a Synod before) that no man shall dare to interpret Scriptures against the
unanimous consent of Fathers. Which I think were impossible for any man to do;
though were it possible, few or none would attempt, besides the Papists. For,
neither can it be known what all of them hold in most places, whereupon are
grounded controversies of greatest moment; and in such as we have best plenty
of their interpretations, albeit they do not contentiously dissent, yet
absolutely agree each with other they do not. Even one and the same Father
oft-times thinks, of many interpretations, sundry alike probable: most of them
unwilling, by their peremptory determinations, one way or other, to prejudice
the industrious search of others (though their far inferiors) for finding out
some more commodious, then any they bring; oftentimes intimating their doubts
or imperfect conjectures in such manner; as if they would purposely encourage
their successors to seek out some better resolution then they could find.
Whence it is evident, That we should not always interpret Scriptures against
the joint consent of Fathers, albeit we went against all the particular
interpretations which they have brought; because they were more desirous to
have the truth fully sifted, then their conjectural probabilities infallibly
believed: Nor were it possible more to contradict most of them, then by
following their interpretations, upon such strict terms, as the Romanists would
bind all men to do, when they seem to make for their advantage. Not the least
surmise or conjecture of any one Father, but, if it please them, must suffice
against the joint authority of all the rest. For, in all the three points above
mentioned, they admit the Church (as may appear from the decrees cited) for a
Judge, so absolute, That, no man may embrace any opinion, upon what grounds or
probabilities soever, but with humble submission to her censure: Whatsoever she
shall enjoin, in all, or any of these points, (albeit we have reasons, many and
strong, not to hold it, to hold, not one besides her bare authority;) yet must
all believe it alone as absolutely, as if we had the apparent unanimous consent
of Fathers; yea of Prophets, Apostles, or Evangelists, and all good writers in
every age.

9 Hence Bellarmins assertion concerning the Churches authority grounded upon
the former decree.
Bellarmin rejects as dissonant to the former decree) this resolution of In
articulis 115 exillis 500 quos (...) collegit ex libris Lutheri, sic ait:
Capite hoc Evangelium, quia neque Papae, neque conciliis, neque ulli hominum
(...), (...) constituat, and concludat, quid sit fides. Ideo del (...): Papa,
tu conclusisti cum conciliis, nunc habeo (...) judicium, an acceptare queam
^e^ne. Quare? quia non (...) is (...), and respondebis pro me, quando debeo
mori. Et falsam dectrinam nemo judicare potest, nisi spiritualis homo. (...)
(...), quod Concilia concludere and statuere volunt, quid credendum sit: cum
saepe nullus vir sit ibi, qui divinum spiritum vel m^dicum olf^cerit. Idem
confirmat in assertionibus articul. 27, 28, and 29. Bellarm. de verb. Lei Dib.
3 Cap. 3.
Luther, That albeit the Pope and Council conclude points of Faith; yet have
private men a free arbitrament (so far as it concerns themselves) whether they
may safely believe their conclusions, or no. Luther gives two reasons for his
assertion, both most forcible. The one, because the Pope shall not answer for
private men, at the hour of their death: The other, because none are competent
Judges of false Doctrines, but men spiritually minded; when as it often falls
out, that, in their Councels, there cannot the found one man, (much less a
major part of men, without which how many soever there were, all were as none)
that has any the least relish of the Divine Spirit. The like assertion does
the Jesuit condemn in Brentius.

10 It is not lawful (says Similiter Brentius docet in Confessione
Wi^tem^ergica, cap. de sacra scriptura: ^copi^^ in Prolegem^nis contra Petrii a
Soto, ubi duo dicit. (...) (...), inquit, in causa aeternae salutis alienae
sententiae ita inhaerere, ut eam sine nostro ipsorum judicio ample(...) (...)
addit, Ad (...); hominem privatum pertinet, de doctrina religionis judicare,
and verum a falsa ^ interest inter privatum and principem, quod ut privatus
privatam, ita princeps publicam (...) (...) (...) his potestatem judicand^ and
decidendi, etc. Nec illud advertit, si haec sententia vera si^, ^ (...) and
(...) Catholicos Germania principes, si etiam mortis supplicio cogunt omnes
Lutheranos ad tiden. Catholicam. (...) (...) verb. De^ lib. 3. cap. 3.
Brentius) for any man, in a point of salvation, so to rely upon another
sentence as to embrace it without interposition of his own judgment. The
reason is there intimated; because, every man is to be immediately judged by
his own conscience; and may for avoiding the just censure of condemnation by
it, safely disclaim their opinions, the execution of whose sentence or bodily
punishment, he may not decline; seeing they are (as was observed before)
public and lawful, yet Fallible Judges of controversies in Religion. And
Bellarmin bewrayes, either gross ignorance, or great skill in wrangling, when
he exclaims against this position of Brentius, as absurd and repugnant to it
self. [That the Supreme Magistrate, or public Judge, may be bound to command,
where the subject or inferior is not bound to obey.] For, So Bellarmin grants,
that S. Cyprian did not commit any mortal sin, in contradicting Pope Stephens
decree, whom out of ignorance he oppugned, his reason is good, because this
persuasion remaining in full strength, he had sinned against his conscience in
obeying the Pope. His words are these, Ex (...) part non videtur mortaliter
peccasse, quia non peccavit nisi ex ignorantia; putavit enim Pontificem
perniciose errare; and stante illa opinione, tenebatur ei non obedire, quia non
debebat contra conscientiam agere. Ignorantia autem Cypriani non videtur suisse
crassa, neque affectata, sed probabilis, and proinde excusans a mortali peccato
Bellar. Lib. 4. de Roman. Pontif. Cap. 7.
as well the Prince in commanding, as the people in obeying, must follow
whither their consciences lead them. Both may, and in case they disagree, the
one, or other, cannot but err in the precedent information of their
consciences; and Vide Lib. 2. Cap 6. Paragr. 11 and Cap. 32. Paragr. 2, 3.
herein properly does their sin consist, not in doing what erroneous
conscience, upon so strict terms as penalty of eternal death, does
unnecessarily urge them to.

11 The people, says Canus Assertion concerning the Churches Authority. Nih^l
igitur afferuot (forte asserunt) qui Ecclesiae authoritatem non absolute sed ex
condition ponunt. Si namque ad eum modum res habet, and mihi quco^^ fides
habenda est, quando pronunciavero secundum scriptu^ recte intellectas. Id enim
est non mihi sed scripturae credere. At, absolute, non ex condition populus
Domino credidit, (...) Moisi servo ejus. Absolute etiam Prophetis and Apostolis
populi crediderunt. Quale vero esset Prophetis Aposto lisque ^oquentibus,
fidem, ea acceptione, detrahere, quod perperam Dei verba intellexissent? Canus
de Eccles. Cathol. Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
Canus, did absolutely (not upon condition) believe God and his servant Moses:
and unless men So believe the Church, they make it of no authority. Nor is it
enough to believe it to be Infallible in points of Moment, or such as might
overthrow Faith; unless it be acknowledged so absolutely inerrable in all, as
it cannot either believe or teach amiss, in any question of Faith; for, if in
any (seeing there is one and the same reason of all) it might as well fail in
receiving some books (indeed not such) for Canonical and Divine. In summa si
Ecclesia posset in fidei quaestione salli, li^^rum quoque ut divinum recipere
posset, qui tamen a Deo non fuisset. Cum sit eadem ratio de uno libro, ac de
unoquolibet dogu a^e. Quare non valeret argumentum, Ecclesia habet Evangelium
Matthaei pro canonico, ergo canonicum est. Quod quoniam impiissime and
absurdissime diceretur; illud nos dicamus potius, recte fideles Ecclesiam
Catholicam credere, non solum in co sensu, ut Ecclesiae Catholicae fides
deficiat nunquam: sed in ^o etiam, ut nihil ipsa credere aut docere possit,
quod sit verae si ^ei contrarium. Canus Ibid. paulo ante. The authority
ascribed to the Pope in his Bull of Confirmation.
Whereupon, it would follow, that this argument would not follow, The Church
acknowledges Saint Matthews Gospel for Canonical, therefore it is Canonical.
The denial of which consequence is most impious and absurd, in this man's
censure, fully consonant to Valentian before cited, That Scripture which is
commended unto us and expounded by the Authority of the Church, is now even in
this respect (because the Church commends it) most authentic.

12 Unto these, and far more gross conclusions all their modern Writers, for
ought I can find, think themselves bound by the former decrees of the Trent
Council. But what if any should dissent from these great Champions in the
interpretation of it? Who should judge betwixt them, or whither were they to
repair for resolution? To the place which God has chosen, to wit to the Sea
Apostolical, or, in other terms, to Rome. So says the Si cui in cis aliquid o^
dictum, and statutum ^se, (...); ob cansam interpretatione aut decisione aliqua
egere visum suerit; ascendat ad locum, quem Dominus elegit, ad Sedem videlicet
Apofolicam, omnium fidelium magi^^rum, cu^us authoritatem etiam ipsa Sancta
Synodus tam reverenter agnovit. (...) d^cultates and controver^ as, si quae ex
eis decretis ortae suerint, nobis declarandas and decidendas, quen a ^modum
ipsa (...) que sa^cta Synodus decrevit, reservan^us, paraci, sicut ea nobis
merito confisa est, omnium Provinciarum necessitatibus ^a ratione quae
commodior nobis visa suer it providere. Bull. Pii. 4. Sup. Confirm. Council.
Trid.
Pope that confirmed this Council. As if there were only a translation of the
Sea, none of the Priesthood, sometimes established in Jerusalem; where all were
to worship. And if Rome have that place in Christendom, which Jerusalem had in
Jewrie: the Pope must be such a Lord to all Christians, as he that dwelt
betwixt the Cherubims was to the Israelites; both their Answers of like
Authority.

13 But when we repair to Rome, who shall there determine what the Council
meant? the Pope alone, or with his Cardinals? with his Cardinals, if he please;
himself alone, without them, or any other, if he list; all after, as he shall
find himself disposed to use his ordinary or Plenitudinem, qu^ fult Beato Petro
communicata, dicunt Doctores ad Papam ^ quod omnibus and singulis Praelatis in
Ecclesia Dei (...) id solus Papa potest, sed etiam quia amplius quam illi
omnes, and singuli possunt ^pse unus potest; co exemplomentes, quod quemadmodu^
Deus potuerit statuete leges naturalibus ^ebus, ut iuxta eas opera^n: potest
(...) idem Deus pra ter leges natu^^ ex proptia virtute sua agere, quod ^^it
aculum vocari solet: sic in Ecclesia, spectar, ad summum Pontificem condere
leges morales, and prescribere jus omnibus personis Ecclesiasticis, and toti
Ecclesiae, idem tamen non semper tenetur servare hujusmodi leges, sed potest
agere praeter illas. Quando igitur Papa ^a vul^ (...), quae suis legibus
continentur, tunc dicitur uti potestate ordinaria. Quando vero, aliquid vult
exequi supra id, quod legibus constitutum est, tunc dicitur plenitudinem
potestatis exercere. Paleot. de sacr. Consist. Consult. part. 1. quast. 3. art.
1.
plenarie power: by the former of which (answerable to Gods working with
natural agents) he determines of matters by the usual course of Laws
provided for that purpose, using the advice or counsel of his Assistants; by
the other (correspondent to Gods working in miracles effected by his own
immediate peculiar power,) without the coagencie of any inferior or created
cause he may resolve of himself alone, not consulting his Cardinals, Bishops,
or others. The Authority given to the Pope by the Trent Council. Superest nunc,
ut principes onmes, quod sacit, in Domino moneat, ad operam suam ita
praestandam, ut, quae ab ea decreta sunt, ab Haereticis depravari aut violari
non permittant; sed ab his and omnibus devote recipiantur and fideliter
observentur. Quod si in his recipiendis aliqua difficultas ona^^^; aut aliqua
inciderint quae declarationem, (quod non credit) aut definitionem postulant,
praeter alia remedia, in hoc Concilio instituta, confidit Sancta Synodus
Beatissimum Romanum Pontificem curaturum, ut, vel evocatis ex illis praesertim
Provincijs, unde difficultas orta fuerit, ijs, quos eidem negotio tractando
viderit expedire, vel etiam Concilij generalis celebratione, si necessarium
judicaverit, vel commodiore quacunque ratione (...) visum fuerit, provinciarum
necessitatibus pro Dei gloria, and Ecclesiae tranquillitate consulatur. Council.
Trid. Session. 25. De recipiendis and observandis decretis Concilij.
This power and liberty, the Trent Council it self seems to give unto the
Pope, as it were for an up-shot to all the fools thunderbolts they had let
flee before. And lest any man should think this absolute acknowledgement of the
Popes plenarie power, to be a Counsel, rather then a necessary Precept; The The
(...) given to the Pope by the Roman Catechism. Ecclesia vocatur una, tanta
hominum multitudo, quae tam long (...) que (...) est, ob eas causas, quae ab
Apostolo ad Ephesios scriptae sunt. Unum enim Dominum, unam fidem, unum (...)
tantum esle praedicat. Unus est etiam ejus rector and gubernator, invisibilis,
quidem Christus, quem aeternus Pater dedit caput super omnem Ecclesiam, quae
est corpus ejus: visibilis autem is, qui Romanam Cathedram Petri Apostolorum
pricipis (...) us successor tenet. And immediately after proposing this
question, Quid de Romano Pontifice, visibili Eccle^ Christi capite, sentiendum
est? Confirms the former blasphemous Doctrine with this shameless lie; De eo
suit illa om(...) patrum ratio and sententia consentiens, hoc visibile caput ad
unitatem Ecclesiae constituendam and conservandam neces(...) ^ Cateth Roman.
part. 1. cap. 10. de nono art. de Eccles. Cathol. quaest. 10. and 11.
Catechism published by the Trent Councels Authority, has inserted amongst
the Articles of faith, That the present Pope, is the sile visible head of the
whole Christian Church, though Christ the invisible. The meaning of which (if I
mistake not) is this, That the Pope The institution of Sacraments ^ E^llencies
as they call them, are by their coufession peculiar unto Christ, not
communicable unto his (...) general.
concerning the points above mentioned has as absolute power, in Christ's
absence, as Christ himself should have, were he present, or hall have in that
day of final judgment; wherein if these men's Positions be true, he shall have
nothing to do in matters of Faith, but only to ratify what the Pope has
defined, who must not be called to any account of his Spiritual, as Kings and
Monarchs must be for their Temporal Stewardships. Nor shall it be said to him,
as it must be to some of them, Well done thou good and faithful Servant: For
such men only (by our Adversaries Doctrine) do well, as might have done ill;
but the Pope (live as he list) cannot possibly do amiss, in determining
matters of Faith, which are, of all that are, of greatest difficulty and
consequence.

14 When first I read Josephus Acosta, I much wondered, to see a man, otherwise
of an ingenuous spirit, and of parts so excellent, so zealous withal, for the
Popes Supremacy: But now, I perceive, the reason was; all private Catechismes
were to be conformed unto that public one, authorized by the Council and Pope.
Amongst other Contents of that Article of the Catholic Church (almost quite
omitted in the former Indian Catechismes) Doceantur ergo Indi de Ecclesia, tria
praecipue. Primum, quid illa sir, congregatio certe hominum Christum,
doctrinamque Christi profitentium; non Hispanorum aut^^r baroru^, aut nationis
and gentis cujusdam numero and sort definita, omnia terrarum spatia, omnes
temporum successiones complectens. -- Hujus vero caput esse Romanae urbis
Po^^i^cem, Petri successorem, Christi Vicarium, plenissima ipsius in terris
authoritate pollentem, cui c^ o^^s Christiani, etiam Reges and Principes
pareant. Hoc est, Ecclesiam Catholicam credere, and universalem. Jos(...) lib.
5. cap. 7. de procuranda Indorum salute.
Ac^sta's advise is, to have this inserted, as an essential part, That the Pope
is Head of the Catholic Church; Christ's Vicar on earth, endued with his
plenary power; to whom all other Christians (Kings and Princes not excepted) ow
obedience.

These allegations may testify our sincerity in proposing the state of the
question* and points of difference betwixt us, gathered not out of one or two,
but the general agreemeent of best Romish W^iters: and whereunto Valentia^,
were he alive, would willingly subscribe. For he, as since I have observed, An
ut fidei object^m per Christianam Fidem infallibiliter credatur, (...) sit,
illud esse revelatum divinit^s, and explicatum a quovis legitimo verbi Dei
ministro: An vero praeterea necesse sit, ill^d ta^q^^m a Deo revelatum, and
ideo credendum proponi and ostendi fidelibus per infallibilem aliquam and
praeeminentem ^^thoritatem, ad quam proinde spectat editio Symboli, se^
articulorum fidei, and Judicium atque definitio omnium fidei contro^^surum,
quae unquam oriri possunt. Valent. T^m. 3. in Aquin. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. Punct.
7. in Tit. Puncti.
proposes the title of his main Controversy concerning the Churches
Authority, in terms aequivalent to those I used, Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 3. and
Lib. 1. Paragr. u^t.

SECT. II.
The first branch of Romish Blasphemy, in preferring humane Authority before
Divine.

AGainst these late recited, and infinite other aequivalent Assertions frequent
in their Public determinations, and best The general Objection of Reformed
Churches against the former Assertions
private Writers; our Writers usually object, If the Church be Judge of
Scriptures, her Authority must be above the Scriptures; ^f the sense of
Scripture, without the Church or Popes asseveration or proposal be not
Authentic, nor apt to beget most firm Belief: then the Word of God must
receive strength and Authority from the word of man.

Some Romish Writers grant the Inference, with this restraint, [In respect of
us] and yet wipe their mouths with the whore in the Proverbs, as if they had
neither committed Idolatry, nor spoken Blasphemy. But Bellar^in was too
cunning a Baud, to expose his mothers foul face to public view, without more
artificial painting.

CAP. II.
Bellarmin's Replic to the main Objection, jointly urged by all Reformed
Churches against the Romish: the Equivocation, which he sought in the
Objection, apparently found in his Reply.

1 THe former Argument, howsoever much esteemed by such as bring it; ^, vere
esset supra Scripturam, sed hoc non dicimus, quamvis Haeretici calumnientur id
nos dicere, qui ^ (...) nos subij^^se Scripturam pedibus Papae. At secundo modo
judicare Ecclesiam, vel Pontificem de Scrip^ no^ (...), no^ est Ecclesiam esse
supra Scripturam, sed supra judicia privatorum hominum. Non enim ju^ de
veritate Scripturae, sed de intelligentia tua, and mea, and altorum. Neque hinc
sumit verbum Dei aliquod ^ nostra. Non enim Scriptura est verior aut certior,
quia sic ab Ecclesia exponitur, sed mea senten^, ^do ab Ecclesia confirmatur.
Bellar. de verb. interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10. resp. ad 14. Arg.
yet in Bellarmmes judgment is very weak, and as he suspects, sick of his own
desease. Totum in aequivocatione versatur. The aequivocation he seeks to
unfold with this distinction; The former speeches may admit a double sense.
First, their meaning may be, That the Church does judge, whether that, which
the Scriptures teach, be true or false; Or, Secondly, [This sure foundation of
faith being first laid, The words of Scripture are most infallible and true]
The Church does Judge, which is the true Interpretation, or meaning of them.
This distinction he applies thus; The former Objections were pertinent, if we
held the Pope or Council to determine of Scriptures in the former sense; but,
ta^ our right meaning, they are mere calumnies. For we affirm the Church to
judge Scriptures only in the later: and so to judge them, does not set the
Church or Pope above Scriptures, but above the judgment of private men. Nor
does the Church (by this Assertion) (...) a Judge of Scriptures truth, but of
private men's understanding. Neither will it hence follow, that the Word of God
receives strength from the word of man; but private men's knowledge, may and
does receive strength and infallibility, from the Church. Finally, the
Scripture or Word of God (as Bellarmine thinks) is neither more true or
certain, because it is expounded by the Church; but every man's opinion is more
true and stable, when it is confirmed by the Churches exposition or decision.

He has said as much as the whole Council of Trent could have said for
themselves. But let us see if this be enough.

2 A private man's opinion (says Bellarmin) is truer, when it is confirmed by
the Church. If we had only an opinion of the truth or sense of Scriptures; the
consent of others, especially men skilful in such matters, would indeed much
confirm us; for all opinions, or uncertain persuasions, receive increase of
strength, from addition of probabilities. But his words are more general, and
concern not only uncertain, but all persuasions, that a faithful man in this
life, can have of Gods Word; at least of those Writings, which we and they
acknowledge for such: and the mark he aims at, is, That no persuasion, in
Divine matters, can be certain, without the Churches confirmation; as he
expressly adds in his answer to the next Argument. ^


3 If the Reader will be attentive he shall easily perceive, that, not our
Writers Objections, but Bellarmias Answer, is tainted with a quivecation. For
this speech of his, The Church does judge whether that which the Scriptures
(...), be true or false, has a double and doubtful sense.

It may be meant, either Of Scriptures taken indefinitely or indeterminately,
for that which God has spoken, whatsoever that be. Or, In what sense (as
impertinent as ^ue) Gods Word by Romani^^s is acknowledged of greater authority
then the Church.
Of those particular Scriptures, which we and they acknowledge, or any
determinate (written or unwritten) precepts questionable, whether they were
from God or no.


4 If we speak of Scriptures in the former sense, Bellarmins answer is true.
For the Romish Church does not take upon her to judge; whether that which is
supposed, or acknowledged by all, for Gods Word, be most true in it proper and
native, but indeterminate sense, seeing this is a Maxim unquestionable (amongst
all such as have any notion of a Dietie) Whatsoever God has spoken is most
true, in that sense wherein he meant it. But, if we descend to any terminate
speeches; written or unwritten, either acknowledged or supposed for Gods Word,
or such as can but ground any possible question, whether they are Gods Words or
no; the present Romish Church does take upon her, absolutely to judge of all
and every part of them. For this is the very Abstract, or abridgement of that
infinite Prerogative, which she challenges; All man must infalliblie believe,
That to be Gods Word which she commends; That not to be His Word which she
disclaims for such. So as only, the former transcendent, and indeterminate
truth [Whatsoever God says is true] is exempt from the Popes unlimited,
transcendent, royal sentence; no other word, or syllable of truth, which we can
imagine, God has or might have spoken since the World began, either by his own
or his Sons mouth, by the Ministry of his Angels, Prophets, Apostles or
Evangelists; but is every way absolutely subject to the Popes Monarchical
censure.

5 And here, let not the Reader mistake it, as any argument of our Adversaries
ingenuitie, that they will for their own advantage vouchsafe to grant (what no
Heathen Idolater did ever deny) Whatsoever God says is true. For, unless this
were granted by all, the Pope could have no possible grounds of pretense, or
claim, to his absolute Infallibility, or infinite supremacy over all. And
that which his hirelings seek to build upon the former foundation, is,
Whatsoever the Pope has said, or shall say, ex cathedra, is most true;
because, if we descend to any determinate truths, we must believe that God has
spoken all, and only that, which the Pope has already testified, or, (when
any question arises) shall testify he has spoken. In fine, the present Pope
(by their Positions) is Gods only living Mouth, only alsufficient to
justify, or authentically witness all his words past: all which, without him,
are unto us as Dead. Whence they must of necessity, admit the same proportion,
betwixt the present Popes and Gods acknowledged written Word, or supposed
unwritten verity, which in civil matters we make betwixt a credible man's
personal avouchment, or living testimony of what he has seen; heard or known
by undoubted experience, and another man's heresay report, either of the matters
he spoke of, his speeches themselves, or their true sense and meaning, after
his death. For the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists (to use (...) and
Valenrian has use the like speeches.
their words) are dead, and Christ is absent; so as we can neither be certain,
what they have spoken, or what they meant in their supposed speeches but per
vivam vocem Ecclesiae, by the living voice of the present visible Church; whose
words are altogether as unfallible, as Gods own words were. And for this
reason, must be acknowledged a most absolute Judge of Gods written and
unwritten words, as well of their Spiritual Sense and meaning as of their
outward frame or visible Character. This is the height of their iniquity, and
will infer more then our purposed Conclusion in this Section, That even of such
places, as are acknowledged by them for Gods Word, we must not believe any
determinate sense or meaning, but what the Pope shall expressly give or may be
presumed to allow of.

6 This Doctrine, as I would request the Reader to observe, brings the second
and third Person in Trinity on the one Party, and the Pope on the other, to as
plain and evident competition, for Rule or Sovereignty over professed
Christians faith, as God and Baal were at in Elia's time. This their Doctrine,
thus in show grounded upon, in deed and issue most opposite to Scriptures) is
the true Spiritual Inquisition-house, whereof that material or bodily one, is
but a Type: These following, are the joints or limbs, of that The Romish rack
of conscience.
rack of Conscience, whereunto, all such as are, or would be true members of
Christ, but willing withal to hold their Union with the Pope as Visible Head
of the Church, are daily and hourly subject.

7 First, their souls are tied, by surest bonds of faith and nature, unto this
Principle [Whatsoever God has said, is most true:] the Jesuits again, seek to
fasten their faith and conscience, as strongly unto this; God speaks whatsoever
the Pope speaks ex cathedra: This third likewise, must be believed as an Oracle
of God, even by Papists (for the Pope has spoken it ex cathedra) The Books of
Moses, the Prophets, the four Evangelists, are Gods Words. Whatsoever these
have spoken, we contend, all should believe, for Gods own Word, upon such
grounds as Saint Peter did from experience of their life-working sense,
communicate unto them by hearing, reading, meditating, or practice. But the
Pope, upon some controversies arising, propounds a sense of these Writings, or
of some part of them, quite contrary to that which brought the former comfort
to our souls; a sense to all unpartiall senses, contradictory to the places
jointly acknowledged for Gods Word. A sense, the more we think on in sobriety,
the more we dislike; a sense, the more earnestly we pray to God for his Spirits
assistance, and other good means for the right understanding of his Word, and
increase of faith, the more still we distaste and loath. Here, unless we let go
some one, or more of the mentioned holdfasts of faith, either the first,
[whatsoever God says is true] or the second [Whatsoever the Pope says, God
saith] or the third [The Mos^^cal, Lest they might in any doubt go against
their conscience, they are taught to Believe, That whatsoever the Pope shall
command, is good, and cannot hurt the Conscience. See the next Annotation out
of Bella^in.
Evangelical, and Apostolical Writings, or those particular places, about whose
sen^e the Controversy is, were spoken by God] our souls are put to more
violent torture, then Raviliacks body was. But the true Papists are wise
enough to slip the third or last, so as it shall not pinch them; and have a
trick withal to make the First yield, what way they please; who are resolved
to follow what way soever, it shall please the Popes Authority (whereunto their
souls indeed are only tied) to lead them. But of such as ever had, or hope to
have, any taste or relish of Gods Spirit, if any should resolve absolutely to
believe his interpretation of any place of Scripture, contrary to that
life-working sense, which must be in every heart endued with hope of seeing
God: that man's disloyalty toward God and his Holy Spirit, is as impudent, as
if a poor subject should reply unto his Prince, commanding him in express
terms to do thus, or so, I will not believe your words have any such meaning
as they naturally import; but a contrary, such as one of my fellow servants
has already acquainted me withal: whatsoever you say, I know your meaning is,
I should believe him in all things concerning your will and pleasure: and
whatsoever he shall enjoin, that will I do.

8 That neither the Church can prove the Scriptures, nor the Scriptures the
Churches Authority, was proved in the fourth Section of the former Book; That
such as hold this damnable Doctrine, against which we dispute, do not at all
believe God speaking in the Scriptures, shall be evinced in the third Section
of this. The present inconvenience, which now (will they, nill they) we are to
wrest from their resolutions of faith, is, That (in deed and conscience) they
either acknowledge no Authority in the Church, or Scriptures; or else greater
in the Church, then in Scriptures.

CAP. III.
Inferring, the general conclusion proposed in the Title of this Section from
Bellarmines Resolution of faith.

1 As Well to occasion the learned Readers further consideration of their
ill-grounded and worse builded faith, as for deducing thence the proposed
inconvenience: it will not be amiss to propose Bellarmines resolution of a
Roman Catholics faith. One especial Objection of our Writers, as he frames
it, is, That, Faith (if depending on the Churches judgment) is grounded but
upon the word of man, a weak foundation for such an Edifice; that the
Scripture was given by the Spirit of God, and must therefore be understood by
the same, not by the Churches Spirit. Hereunto Respoundeo, verbum Ecclesiae, id
est, Concili^, vel Pontificis docentis ex Cathedia, non esse omnino verbum
hominis, id est, verbum errori obnoxium, sed aliquo modo verbum Dei, id est,
prolatum gube^nante and assistente spiritu sancto, imo dico, Haereticos esse
qui revera nitantur baculo arundineo. Sciendum est enim, propositionem fidei
concludi tali Syllogismo. Quicquid Deus revelavit in Scripturis, est verum: hoc
Deus revelavit in Scripturis, ergo hoc est verum. Ex propositionibus hujus
Syllogismi prima certa est apud omnes, secunda apud Catholicos est etiam ^ima:
nititur enim testimonio Ecclesiae, Concilij, vel Pontificis, de quibus habemus
in Scripturis apertas promissiones ^^od errare non possint. Actorum 15. Visum
est Spiritui Sancto and nobis. Et Luc. 22. Rogavi pro te, ut non deficiat fides
(...). At apud Haereticos nititur solis conjecturis, vel judicio proprij
spiritus, qui plerumque videtur bonus, and est malus* Et cum conclusio sequatur
debiliorem partem, sit necessario, ut tota fides Haeretico^um sit
conjecturalis, and incerta. Bellar (...) (...). Dei interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10.
resp. ad 15. arg.
Bellarmine answers, The word of the Church (...) of the Council, or the Pope
speaking ex Cathedra, is not the bare word of man. He means no word obnoxious
to error, but in some sort the Word of God: in as much as it is uttered by the
assistance and Government of the Holy Ghost. I add (says he) that Heretics
are they, which indeed do lean upon a brokenreed. For we must know, that a
proposition of Faith must be concluded in this or the like S^llogisme;
Bellarmins Catholic Syllogisine, wherein all Conclusions of Faith must be
gathered.
Whatsoever God has revealed in Scripture is true, but God has revealed this
or that in Scriptures, Ergo this or that is true. The first proposition in this
Syllogism is certain amongst all; the second likewise amongst Catholics is
most firm, as being supported by the testimony of the Church, Council, or
Pope: of whose immunity, from possibility of erring we have express promises
in the Scriptures, as, Acts 15. ver. 28.
It has seemed good to the Holy Ghost and us: Luke 22. ver. 32.
I have prayed for thee thy faith should not fail. But, amongst Heretics, the
second or minor proposition, is grounded only on conjecture, or judgment of a
private Spirit; which usually seems, but is not, good. Whence, seeing the
conclusion must follow the weaker part, it necessarily follows, that all the
faith of Heretics (such in his language are all that will not rely upon the
Church) is but conjectural and uncertain.

2 A dreadful imputation, could it be as substantially proved, as it is
confidently avouched And the consequence of his resolution (generally held by
all his fellows) is of no less importance, then this; That no man can be
infallibly assured, either of the truth, or true sense of any particular
proposition, in the whole Canon of Scriptures received by us and them, unless
he have the Churches Authority for confirmation of both. For, unto us, that
only, which the Church avoucheth, is certain, and unfallible; that sense of
it, which the Church gives, only sound; if we speak of any particular or
determinate truths.

3 How certain and unfallible Assent unto all, or any Scriptures, may be
wrought in men's hearts, without any infallible teacher already has been, and
hereafter shall be (God willing) in more particular sort exemplified. In this
place, it stood the Jesuit upon, to have given a better solution to the doubt
objected; which he is so far from unloosing, that he rather knits it faster; as
shall appear, if the Reader will first call to mind; That for the establishing of
firm and undoubted assent to any truth proposed, it skils not how infallible
the truth in it self or the proposer be, unless they, whose Relief or Assent
is demanded, be as infallibly persuaded of this Infallibility in the truth, or
the proposer. In this respect, our adversaries plead their immunity from
error, as an Article necessary to be infallibly Believed, for confirmation of
Gods Word, always most infallible (as all grant) in it self, but not so (as
they affirm) to us, until it be avouched by Infallible authority.

4 Herein they concur with us, Both with the truth; That if, we believe it only
as probable, that God spoke all those words, which we acknowledge to be most
infallible, because his; our belief notwithstanding is not infallible, but
probable or conjectural. For as a man may have bad desires of things
essentially good; so may he have uncertain persuasions of truths in themselves
most certain. It is not therefore the supposed Infallibility of the Church or
Pope, howsoever, but infallibly apprehended and believed that must strengthen
our faith, which otherwise (as is pretended) would be but conjectural. And by
the former principle, (acknowledged as well by them as us) it necessarily
follows, that if we be only probably, not infallibly persuaded, the Pope or
Church cannot err; our assent unto the minor proposition. i. [unto any
determinate part of Gods Word,] is only probable not Infallible. For, by the
Jesuits Doctrine, we cannot be certainly persuaded, that God spoke this, or
that, but by the Churches testimony. The immediate consequence of which two
assertions, compared together, is, we cannot be more certain that God has
spoken this or that then we are of the Churches Infallibility. If then we be
only probably, not infallibly, persuaded, that the Church is infallible: our
Belief of the minor proposition (that is of any determinate truth which men
suppose God has spoken) must be only probable, or conjectural, not infallible.
Consequently to these collections, the learned Papists generaly hold, that the
Churches Infallibility must be absolutely and infallibly believed; (as you
heard before out of Cap. 1. The (...) ^ulty in then opinion whence our our
former conclusion may be deduced
Canus, Bellarmin, and Valentian) otherwise, as Bellarmin would infer, our
Belief of the Minor in any Syllogism^, wherein a Proposition of Faith is
Concluded, can be but Conjectural.

5 The proposed inconvenience we may drive from this difficulty; How the
Papists themselves can attain to the infallible belief of the Churches
infallible authority? The Church, they think, has a public spirit; and
public spirits they know are infallible; hence they may persuade themselves
the Church is infallible, only upon the same terms, they believe it has a
public spirit, if their belief of this later be but conjectural; their assent
unto the former can be no better. Seeing then they must of necessity grant (for
this is the principal mark they aim at) that all must infallibly believe the
Church has a public spirit: the difficulty removes to this point, how this
infallible persuasion is, or may be wrought in them. Either it must be grounded
upon Scriptures, or not: avouched unto them and wrought in their hearts it must
be, either by a public or private spirit. Let us examine all the parts of this
division.

6 First, if private men's infallible persuasion of the Churches public, or
Authentic spirit, be not grounded upon Scriptures acknowledged by us and them:
the Churches Authority without all controversy, is much greater then the
authority of Scriptures; if it, by this assertion, can be any, and the Churches
not all in all. For unto that which men cannot know, whether it be true or
false, they cannot be bound to yield absolute or immediate obedience: unto that
authority, which they absolutely believe as infallible, they are bound to yield
infallible assent, and absolute obedience directly, in it self and for it self.
But by this supposition men cannot know Scriptures infallibly without the
Churches authority, and yet they must infallibly believe the Churches authority
without Scriptures; The Scriptures authority therefore is either less then the
Churches, or none at all.

7 But be it supposed that private men's infallible Belief of the Churches
public spirit is grounded upon Scriptures, acknowledged by us and urged by
them to this purpose, as upon these, it seems good to the Holy Ghost and us;
I have prayed for thee thy faith should not fail: The question whereunto we
demand an answer, is, whether this infallible Belief of the Churches authority
grounded upon these places, must be wrought in men's hearts by a private or
public spirit. If by a private spirit only Bellarmin believed the Churches
public spirit, or those Scriptures truth, or true meaning, whereon he grounds
it: He, and all other Papists (such as he was when he delivered this Doctrine)
neither Bishops nor Cardinals, are subject to the same inconveniences, which he
has condemned us for, as Heretics. For all private spirits, by his positions
are abnoxious to error, unsufficient to plant any infallible persuasion in
matters of faith; yet such is this article of the Churches Authentic spirit,
of which unless men be so persuaded, infallibly persuaded, they cannot be of
the minor proposition in any Syllogism; wherein a point of faith is concluded:
and uncertain of the minor, they cannot be certain of the conclusion, which, as
Bellarmin rightly observes, always follows the weaker part. The infallible
conclusion therefore of Bellarmin's resolution, is; unless private men may
have public spirits to warrant the truth of Scriptures, and the Churches
infallibility thereon grounded; they cannot truly believe any conclusion of
faith. It remains then we inquire; what inconvenience will follow, if they admit
private men to be partakers of public spirits.

8 Diversity of such spirits they acknowledge not. If therefore private men's
Infallible Assent unto the truth, or true sense of those particular Scriptures
whence they seek to prove their Churches Infallibility, must be planted by a
public spirit, planted it must be by the same spirit, which guides, and
guiding makes the Church and Pope authentic and infallible, both in their
proposal of Scriptures and declaration of Scriptures sense. Seeing this spirit
is one and the same, if it can make the Church or Pope infallible in all: why
may it not make all private men (by this supposition partakers of it) alike
infallible, at the least in the right understanding of those places, which
warrant the Churches Infallibility or public spirit. For our adversaries, I
hope, will easily grant, that the Churches public and Authentic spirit must be
most infallibly Believed, because so expressly taught in those Scriptures cited
by Bellarmin to this purpose. If this public or Authentic spirit, can work
such infallible apprehension of those places true meaning in private hearts,
why not in all others as necessary for them to know; that is, in all necessary
to salvation? And if thus it do, why are we bound to believe the Pope, more
then the Pope us, we being partakers of a public and infallible spirit as well
as he?

9 Or if they hold it no absurd^ty to say; we must believe two or three places,
[It seems good to the Holy Ghost and us: Peter feed my sheep,] by a public
and authentic spirit, teaching us from these to rely upon the Pope in all
other parts of Gods Word, because (as it must be supposed) we have but a
private spirit for their assurance: by this supposition the Popes authority, in
respect of us, must have the same excess of superiority unto Scriptures, that
a public spirit has unto a private; or the Pope (who believes all Scriptures
by a public spirit) has unto a private man. This public spirit. whereof they
vaunt, is the same which did inspire the Scriptures to Atoses, the Prophets and
Apostles; and must (by this position) be the Pope or Churches immediate Agent
for establishing this inviolable league of absolute allegiance with men's souls
unto them, but of none so absolute to their Creator and Redeemer; and the rest
of whose written laws, and eternal decrees, must be communicated unto them by a
private spirit, and subscribed unto with this condition, If the Pope shall
witness them to be his laws, or to have this or that meaning.

10 Nor can our adversaries deny the truth of this subsequent collection, If it
were possible for the Pope in matters controversed to teach contrary to Gods
Word: we were bound to follow him; For they S^ volunt, Pontishcem, in rebus
alioqui omnino controversis, id est, non satis express in Ecclesia compertis,
ac determinatis, definite posse, ut personam publicam, errorem re ipsa contra
fidem: erraut ipsi in side gravissime. Posset enim, into teneretur tunc
Ecclesia universa Pontificem de re controversa docentem, ac nondum haeresi
manifest notatum, pro Pastore suo agnolcere, atque adeo ipsum omnino audite.
(...) sieret ut si tunc errare possit, Ecclesia etiam universa possit, immo
teneretur erra^e. Valeitiam Tem. 3. de object. Fid. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. Pu^ct.
(...). Paragraph. 41. Bellarmin from the same grounds Collects that the Pope
cannot err in matters of manners.
themselves argue thus. If the Pope could err in matters of Faith; Faith might
perish from the Earth; all Christians bound to err, because bound to obey him.
This proves that our Assent to any Scriptures (besides those which teach the
Popes authority) cannot in it self be perfect and absolute, but subject to this
condition [if the Pope be infallible.] And even of those places, which (as they
pretend) witness him to be such, there yet remains a further difficulty. These
the Pope believes not, because they are confirmed to him by his predecessor,
but directly and immediately, by his public spirit: But may private men
believe them so too? No. For these, especially, and the Vide Librum 2. Cap. 30.
Paragraph. 14. Nam sides Catholica docet, omnem virtutem esse bonam, omne
vitium esse malum, si autem Papa erra^et pracipiendo vitia, vel prohibendo
virtutes, teneretur Fedesia credere vitia essa bona, (...) virtutes malas, nisi
vellet contra conscientiam peccare. Tenetur enim ^bus dubiis Ecclesia
acquiescere judicio sum^, and sacere quod ille praecipit, non sacere quod ille
prohibet ac ne forte contra conscientiam ^ bonum esse, quod ille praecipit,
(...), quod ille prohibet. Bellarmin. Lib. 4. de Roman. P^ Cap. 5.
Churches infallibility contained in them, are (by all our adversaries consent)
propositions of Faith, in respect of us, and need (by their doctrine) the
proposal or testimony of the Church, whereon all private men's faith must be
immediately grounded: believing this we shall from it (at least conjoined with
Scripture) believe all other parts of Gods Word necessary to salvation, as well
as the Pope does these former from the testimony of his public spirit.
Wherefore his authority must be unto us altogether as great, as the authority
of the Godhead is unto him; which is far greater unto him, then it is or can be
to any others; for even that which is acknowledged for Gods Word, both by him
and us, must be less authentic unto us then the words of this mortal man.

11 For though we pardon our adversaries their former absurdities, in seeking
to prove the Churches authority by the Scripture, and the Scriptures by the
Churches; though we grant them all they can desire (even what shall appear in
due place to be most false) That, whiles they believe the Popes particular
injunctions, or decisions, from a presupposal of his universal transcendent
authority, they do not only believe him, or his words, but those parts of Gods
Word, upon which they seem to ground his infallibility: yet our former argument
holds still most firm; because that absolute Assent, which private men must give
unto the supposed grounds of their Religion, before other portions of
Scripture, is not grounded upon any preheminencie incident to these words as
they are Gods, as if they were more his then the rest, in some such peculiar
sort, as the Ten Commandments are in respect of other Mosaical Laws; nor from
any internal propriety flowing from the words themselves, as if their secret
character did unto faithful minds, bewray them to be more divine then others;
nor from any precedent, consequent, or comitant circumstance, probably arguing
that sense, the Romish Church gives of them, to be of it self more perspicuous
or credible, then the natural meaning of most other Scriptures, all inspired by
one and the same spirit, all, for their form, of equal authority and
perspicuitie. All the prerogative then, which these passages can have before
others, must be from the matter contained in them; and that, by our adversaries
position, is the Churches Infallibility. Wherefore, not because they are Gods
word, or were given by his Spirit, in more extraordinary sort then others; but
because they have more affinity with the Roman Lord, in late years exalted
above all that is called God, Father, Son, or Holy Ghost: these places above
cited, must be more authentickly believed, then all the words of God besides.
As I have read of pictures, though not more artificial in themselves, yet held
in greater estimation amongst the Heathen, and freer from contemptuous censure
then any other of the same Painters doing, only because they represented their
great God Jupiter.

12 Another difficulty, whereunto we demand an answer is, whether, whiles they
assent, as they profess, not only to the Infallibility taught (as they
suppose) in the forecited places, but also unto the Infallibility of
Scriptures which teach it: they acknowledge two distinct assents, or but one.
If but one, let them show us how possibly the Church can be said to confirm the
Scriptures: if two, let them assign the several properties of either; whether
is more strong; whether must be to the other as Peter to his brethren; or if
neither of them can confirm the other, let them declare how the one can be
imagined as a mean or condition of believing the other.

13 An Heretics Belief of the Minor proposition in the former Syllogism (says
Bellarmin) is but weak: A Romanists Belief of the same most strong. Let this be
the Minor. Peter feed my sheep, or Peter I have prayed for thee that thy faith
should not fail: what reason can be imagined, why a Romanists Relief of these
Propositions should be so strong, and ours so weak? The one has the Churches
Authority to confirm his Faith, the other has not. What is it then to have the
Churches Authority, only to know her Decrees concerning those portions of
Scriptures? If this were all, we know the Romish Churches Decrees as well as the
Romanists: but it is nothing to know them, if we do not acknowledge them. To
have the Churches Authority then is, to Believe it as Infallible: and for this
reason is a Roman Catholics Belief of any portion of Scripture, more certain
and strong, because he has the Testimony of the Church, which he Believes to
be most Infallible: and believing it most infallibly he must of necessity
Believe, that to be Scripture, that in every place, to be the meaning of the
Holy Ghost, which this Church commends unto him for such. Let the most learned
of our adversaries here resolve the doubt proposed; whether there be two
distinct assents, in the belief of the forementioned propositions: one unto the
truth of the proposition itself, and another unto the Churches infallibility.
It is evident by Bellarmins opinion, that all the certainty a Roman Catholic
has above a Sectary, is from the Churches Infallibility. For the proposition
it self he can believe no better then an Heretic may, unless he better
believe the Church, i. e believe, the Churches exposition of it, or the
Churches infallibility concerning it, better then the proposition it self in it
self and for it self. And so it is evident that the Churches authority is
greater, because it must be better believed.

14 Suppose then one of our Church, which believes these propositions to be the
word of God, should turn Roman Catholic, his former belief is by this means
become more strong and certain. This granted, the next question is, what should
be the Object of this his strong Belief; the propositions believed: Peter feed
my sheep, I have prayed for thee: or anyother part of Gods written word; or the
Churches authority; not the propositions themselves, but only by accident, in
as much as the Church confirms them to him. For suppose the same man should
estsoones, either altogether revolt from that Church, or doubt of her
authority, his belief of the former propositions becomes hereby as weak as it
was before: which plainly evinceth, that his belief of the Church and this
proposition, were two distinct Beliefs, and that this strong Belief was
fastened unto the Churches authority, not unto the proposition it self
immediately, but only by accident, in as much as the Church which he believes
so firmly, did teach it; for his Belief, if fastened upon the proposition it
self, after doubt moved of the Churches authority, would have continued the
same, but now (by Bellarmins assertion) as soon as he begins to disclaim his
belief of the Churches infallibility, his former strong belief of the supposed
proposition begins to fail, and of this failing no other reason, then already
is, can be assigned. The reason was, because the true, direct, and proper
object of his strong belief was the Churches authority, on which the belief of
the proposition did entirely depend, as the conclusion does upon the premises,
or rather as every particular does on the universal, whereunto it is
essentially subordinate.

CAP. IV.
Containing a further Resolution of Romish faith, necessarily inferring the
authority of the Romish Church, to be of greater authority then Gods Word
absolutely, not only in respect of us.

IF we rack the former syllogism a little farther, and stretch it out in every
joint to its full length: we may quickly make it confess our proposed
conclusion and somewhat more. The Syllogism was thus, What soever God has
spoken is most true. But God has spoken, and caused to be written all those
words contained in the Canon of Scriptures, acknowledged by opposite religions
of these times. Therefore these words are most true. The certainty of the Minor
depends, as our adversaries will have it, upon the present Romish Churches
Insallibility, which has commended unto us these Books for Gods Word. Be it
then granted, for disputations sake, that we cannot know any part of Gods Word,
much less the just bounds, extent or limits of all his words supposed to be
revealed for our good, but by the Romish Church: The Spiritual Sense or true
meaning of al, most, or many parts of these determinate Volums, and visible
Characters, as yet is undeterminate, and uncertain; whereas all ponts of belief
must be grounded on the determinate and certain sense of some part of Gods Word
revealed; for our adversaries acknowledge all points of Faith should be resolved
into the First Truth. Hence, if we descend to any particular or determinate
conclusion of Faith, it must be gathered in his Syllogism, Whatsoever the
Church teaches concerning the determinate and true sense of Scriptures,
whereon points of Faith are grounded, is most tr^^. But the Church teaches
thus and thus, (for example; That her own authority is infallibly taught by the
Holy Ghost in these words, Peter feed my sheep. Peter I have prayed for thee
that thy faith should not fail) ergo, this sense and meaning of these words is
most true. And as true as it is, must the sense likewise of every proposition,
or part of Scripture by this Church expounded or declared, be accounted.

2 The Major proposition of this Syllogism, is as undoubted amongst the Roman
Catholics, as the Major of the former was unto all Christians: but as yet, the
Minor; The Church does give this or that sense of this or that determinate
place, may be as uncertain indeed as they would make our belief unto the Minor
proposition in the general Syllogism, before it be confirmed by the Churches
authority. For how can we be certain that the Church does teach al those
particulars which the Jesuits propose unto us? we have Books indeed, which go
under the name of the Trent Council, but how shall we know that this Council
was lawfully assembled, that some Canons have not been foisted in by private
Spirits, that the Council left not some unwritten tradition for explicating
their decrees, after another fashion then the Jesuits do? who shall assure us
in these or like doubts? The present Church? All of us cannot repair to Rome:
such as can, when they come thither, cannot be sure to hear the true Church
speak ex Cathedra. If the Pope send his Writs to assure us, what Critic so
cunning as to assure us, whether they be authentic or counterfeit? Finally,
for all that can be imagined in this case, only the Major of the Catholic
syllogism, indefinitely taken, is certain; and consequently no particular or
definite conclusion of Faith, can be certain to a Romanist, because there are
no possible means of ascertaining the Minor, [What the true Church does
infallibly define] unto his Conscience.

3 Or if they will hold such conclusions, as are ordinarily gathered from
Wherein the Papists make the Popes authority greater then Gods.
the Trent Council, or the Popes decisions, as infallible points of faith: they
make their authority to be far greater then the infallibility of Gods written
word; yea more infallible then the Deity. This Collection they would deny,
unless it followed from their own premises; These for example, That a
conclusion of faith cannot be gathered, unless the minor (God did say this or
that determinately) be first made certain. But from the Pope or Churches
infallibility, conclusions of faith may be gathered, albeit the minor be not
certain de Fide. For who can make a Jesuits report of the Popes Decrees, or an
Historical relation of the Trent Council, certain de fide, as certain as an
Article of faith: And yet the Doctrine of the Trent Council, and Popes Decrees,
must be held de fide, upon pain of damnation, albeit men take them only from a
Priests mouth or upon a Jesuits faith and credit.

4 This is the madness of that Antichristian Synagogue, that acknowledges
Gods Word for most infallible, (and the Scriptures, which we have, for his
word, if it self be infallible. For it tells us, they are such:) yet will not
have collections, or conclusions with equal probability deduced thence, so
firmly believed by private men, as the collections or conclusions, which are
gathered from the Churches Infallibility. An implicit faith of particulars,
grounded upon the Churches general infallibility, so men steadfastly believe it,
may suffice. But implicit faith of particulars, grounded only upon our general
Belief of Gods infallibility, providence, or written word, suffices not. This
proves the authority of the Church, to be above the athority of Scriptures, or
the Deity, absolutely considered, not only in respect of us. [that is all
besides the Pope and his Cardinals.] For that is of more authority absolutely,
not only in respect of us, which upon equal notice or knowledge, is to be
better believed, more esteemed, or obeyed; but such is the authority of the
Church in respect of the divine authority; such is the authority of the Popes
Decrees in respect of Gods Word. For the Minor proposition in both the former
Syllogisms being alike uncertain; the conclusion must be more certain in that
Syllogism, whose major relies upon the Popes infallibility then in the other,
whose Major was grounded upon the infallibility of the Deity.

6 Briefly, to collect the sum of all; The authority of the Church is greater
then the authority of Scriptures, both in respect of Faith, and Christian
Obedience. In respect of Faith; because we are bound to believe the Churches
decisions read or explicated unto us, (by the Popes messenger though a Sir John
Lack-latin) without any appeal: but no part of Scripture, acknowledged by us
and them, we may believe, without appeal, or submission of our interpretation
to the Church, albeit the true sense and meaning of it seem never so plain,
unto private consciences in whom Gods Spirit works Faith. The same argument
is most firm and evident, in respect of Obedience.

6 That authority over us is always greatest, unto which we are to yield most
immediate, most strict and absolute obedience: but by the Romish Churches
Doctrine, we are to yield supreme, and most absolute obedience, to the Church;
more supreme and absolute then unto Gods word: therefore the authority of the
Church is greater over us. The Major is out of controversy, seeing greatness
of authority is always measured by the manner of obedience due unto it. The
Minor is as evident from the former reason; Our obedience is more absolute and
strict unto that authority, from which in no case we may appeal, then unto that
from which we may in many safely appeal: but, by the Romish Churches doctrine,
there lies always an appeal from that sense and meaning of Scriptures, which
Gods spirit and our own conscience gives us, unto the Churches authority; none,
from the Churches authority or meaning unto the Scriptures, or our own
consciences.

7 Our Savior Christ bids us, search the Scriptures; S. Paul, try all retain
J^ 39. (...) ^h^s. 5. 21 1 J^hn 4. 1.
that which is good; S. John, try the Spirits, whether they be of God or no:
Suppose a Minister of our Church should charge a Romanist, upon his allegiance
to our Savior Christ, and that obedience which he owes unto Gods Word, to
search Scriptures, try Spirits, and examine Doctrines for the r^tifying of his
faith; he will not acknowledge this to be a Commandment of Scripture, or at
least not to be understood in such a sense, as may bind him to this practice.
What follows? if our Clergy charge him to admit it, he appeals unto the
Church: And as in Schools, simus and nasus simus is all one, so in their
language is the Church and the Church of Rome. This Church tells him he may not
take upon him to try of what spirit, the Pope is, nor examine his
determinations, decisions, or interpretations of any Scripture; by other known
places of Scripture or the analogy of faith acknowledged by all. Unto this
decree or sentence of the Church. (although he have it but at the second hand,
or after it have passed through as many Priests and Jesuits mouths, as are
Post Towns from London to Edinburgh, he yields absolute obedience, without
acknowledgement of farther appeal, either unto Scriptures, or other authority
whatsoever; further manifestation of Gods will he expects none. Let all the
reformed Churches in the World, or all the Christian World besides, exhort,
threaten, or adjure him, as he tenders the good of his own soul, as he will
answer his Redeemer in that dreadful day of final Judgment, to examine the
Church or Popes decrees, by Gods written Laws: his answer is, he may not, he
cannot do it, without open disobedience to the Church, which to disobey is
damnation of soul and body. But O fools and slow of heart to believe, and obey
from the heart, that doctrine whereunto ye were delivered. Know ye not, that to
whomsoever ye give your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye are to whom
ye obey, whether it be the man of sin unto death, or obedience unto
righteousness? Of all Mankind are only Roman Catholics, not bought with a
price, that they may thus alienate their souls from Christ, and become servants
of men; that they may consecrate themselves by solemn vow, to the perpetual
slavery of most wicked and sinful men, even monsters of Mankind?

CAP. V.
That in obeying the Romish Churches decrees, we do not obey Gods Word as well
as Them, but Them alone in contempt of Gods principal Laws.

1 BUt the simple (I know) are born in hand, by the more subtle sort of this
generation, That thus obeying sinful men they obey Christ, who has enjoined
them this obedience unto such; That thus believing that sense of Scripture,
which the Church their mother tenders unto them, they do not believe her better
then Scriptures, because these two Beliefs are not opposite but subordinate;
that they prefer not her decrees before Christ's written Laws, but her
interpretation of them, before all private Expositions. This is the only City
of refuge left them, wherein, prosecuted by the former arguments, they can hope
for any succor; but most of whose gates already have been, all shortly shall
be shut upon them.

2 That they neither believe nor obey Gods Word whilst they absolutely The
gross impiety of the Romish Church, in binding men to believe negatives;
without any tolerable exposition of those Scriptures, which seem to contradict
her decrees, in matters, damnable to adventure upon, without Evidence of truth,
on her part.
believe and obey the Church without appeal is evident, in that this Church
usually binds men, not unto Positive points of Religion gathered so much as
from any pretended sense of Scripture expounded by it, but to believe bare
Negatives; as, that this or that place of Scripture, either brought by their
adversaries, or conceived by such amongst themselves, as desire the knowledge
of truth and right information of conscience, have no such meaning as the
Spirit of God, not flesh and blood, (as far as they can judge of their own
thoughts) has revealed unto them.

3 But, the Spirit may deceive private men; or, at least, they may deceive
themselves, in their trial of Spirits. They may indeed; and so may men in
public place, more grievously err in peremptory judging private men (because
obnoxious to error in the general) erroneous in this particular, wherein they
ground their opinions upon Gods Word, plentiful to evince it (at least) very
probable reasons they bring many and strong, whereunto no reasonable answer is
brought by their adversaries, whose usual course, is, to press them only with
the Churches authority; which appears to be of far greater weight then Gods
word, unto all such as yield obedience to her negative decrees, without any
evidence or probability, either of Scripture or natural reason, to set against
that sense and meaning of Gods Laws whereunto strength of arguments unrefuted,
and probable pledges of Gods Spirit undisproved have long tied their souls. Do
we obey God, or believe his word, whilst we yield obedience to the Church in
such Commandments, as to our consciences upon unpartial examination seem
condemned (ere made) by the very fundamental Laws of Religion, and all this
oft-times without any show or pretense of Scripture, to warrant us, that we do
not disobey God in obeying them?

4 But does the Romish exact absolute obedience (in such points, as, if it were
possible they could be false, may endanger the very foundation of true
Religion) without evident demonstration, that their daily practice neither does
nor can endanger it? Yes. For what can more concern the main foundation (which
Christians, Jews, and Mahumetans most firmly hold) then those precepts, in
number many, all plainly and peremptorily forbidding us to worship any Gods but
One, or any thing in the Heaven or Earth but Him only. The Romanists themselves
grant, that, cultu latriae ^ where^ men's ^ f^r ^ with (...) ^damnable, because
contrary to the Doctrine of Faith. And yet to enforce a Belief upon our selves,
that Christ (...) there present, without warrant of Scripture is more damnable;
for this were to affect ignorance for cloaking Idolatry. See l. 2. (...). 7.
God alone is to beadored, that so to adore any other is Idolatry; and Idolatry
(by their confession) a most grievous sin. O how much better were it for them
to hold it none; or Gods Word forbidding it of no authority, then so lightly to
adventure the hourly practice of it (in contempt of such fearful threatenings,
as they themselves out of Gods Laws pronounce against it) upon such broken
distoynted surmises, as are the best they can pretend for their warrant.

5 To believe Christ's flesh and blood should be there present, where it cannot
be seen, or felt, yea where we see and feel another body as perfectly as we can
do ought, is, to reason, without warrant of Scripture, but a senseless blind
Belief. But grant his body and blood were in the Sacrament rightly administered,
yet that out of the Sacrament, either should be in the consecrated Host,
whilst carried from Town to Town for solemn show more then for Sacramental
use, is to reason ruled by Scripture (to say no worse) more improbable. Now to
worship that as God, which to our unerring senses is a Creature, upon such
blind supposals, that Christ's body, by one miracle, may be there; by another,
unseen, is worse then Idolatry committed upon delusion of sense. So to adore a
wafer, only a wafer in all appearance; without strict examination, nay without
infallible evidence of Scriptures urged for the real presence; is more
abominable, then to worship every appearance of an Angel of light, without
trial what spirit it were, Satan or some other, that so appeared. And if we
consider the old Serpents usual slight to insinuate himself into every place,
wherein inveterate custom or corrupt affection, may suggest some likelihood of
a divine presence unto dreaming fancies, (as he did delude the old World in
Oracles and Idols:) the probability is far greater, his invisible substance,
(by nature not incompatible with any corporeal quantity) should be annexed to
the supposed Host, then Christ's real body, incapable for any thing we know of
joint exisrence in the same place with any other; howsoever, most
disproportionable to such base effects as must proceed from the substance
contained under the visible shape of bread, such as no accident could either
breed, or support.

6 This is a point (as is elsewhere observed) wherein Satan seems to triumph
over the modern Papists, more then over all the Heathens of the old World,
whose senses only he deluded, or bewitched their reason, but quite inverts all
use of these men's sense, faith, and reason, making them believe Christ's body to
be present in the Sacrament, after a supposed miraculous manner, quite contrary
to the known nature of bodies, and yet more preposterously contrary to the very
end and essence of miracles. For what miracles were ever wrought to other
purpose, then to convince the imperfect collections of human reason by evidence
of sense, God using this inferior or brutish part (thus astonished by his
presence) to confute the curious folly of the superior or divine faculty of
the soul, as he did sometimes the dumb Ass to rebuke the iniquity of the
Prophet her Master. But so preposterously does Satan ride the modern Papist,
that he is brought to believe a multitude of miracles, against the evidence of
sense, or reason, contrary to the rule of faith; all offered up in sacrifice
unto the Prince of darkness; that he having put out the eyes of sense, reason,
and spirit at once, may ever after lead them what way he list. And as unhappy
wags or lewd companions, may persuade blind men to beg an Alms, as if some
great personage did, when as a troop of more needy beggars then themselves,
pass by: so is it much to be dreaded, lest the Devil persuade the blinded
besotted Papist, that Christ is present where he himself lies hid; that he may
with heart and soul offer up those prayers and duties unto him which belong
properly unto God; and worship in such manner before the Boxes whereinto he
has secretly convaid himself, as the Israelites did before the ark of the
Covenant.

7 Vasquez in part 3. Thomae Tom. 1 Disput. ^. Cap. 5. Number. 33. and Tom. 2.
disp. 209. cap. 4. Number. 41.
Vasquez thinks we may without offense adore that Body wherein the Devil lurks,
so we direct not our worship unto him, but to the inanimate Creature, as
representing the Creator. Suppose this might be granted upon some rare
accident, or extraordinary manifestation of Gods power in some particular
place, in case, men were ignorant, or had no just presumptions of any malignant
spirits presence therein: Yet were it damnable Idolatry daily to practice the
like, especially where great probability were of diabolical imposture, which
the solemn worship of any Creature, without express warrant of Scripture, will
invite. Yet sense does witness that Christ is not, no Scripture does warrant
us, that he or any other living Creature, unless perhaps The known Experiments
of such Creatures arising from corruption of their consecrated Host: have
enforced the Schoolmen to invent new Miracles how they should come there. Some
think per creationem novae materiae primae, others that the quantity of the
late deceased consecrated host, Supplet locum materiae primae, which as
Pererius thinks is the greatest of all the nine miracles about
Transubstantiation. See Pererius disput 16. in 6. Chap. John. and Suarez
Metaphys. Disput. 20. Sect 5. Number. 13.
worms or such as spring of putrefaction, is present in their processions.
Notwithstanding all the express Commandments of God brought by us against
their practice: the Siquis dixerit, in sancto Eucharistiae Sacramento Christum
unigenitum Dei filium non esse cultu ^ externo, adorandum, atque ideo nec (...)
peculiari Celebritate venerandum, neque in processionibus, ^ laudabilem and
universalem Ecclesiae sanctae ritum and consuetudinem, solemniter
circumgestandum, vel non pub^, populo proponendum, and (...) adoratores esse
Idololatias; Anathem^ sit. Council. T^. Sess. 13. Can. 6. ^ decree of the Trent
Council for communicating in one kind, against the express Commandment of
Christ, the practice ^, and the Primitive Church.
Trent Council accurseth all that deny Christ's real presence in procession, or
condemn the proposal of that consecrated substance to be publicly adored as
God; not so much as intimating any tolerable exposition of that Commandment,
which forbids us to have any Gods but one.

8 (...) To omit many more; another instance suitable to the former and our
present purpose, we have in the decree of communicating under one kind. Our
Savior at his institution of this Sacrament gave the cup as well as the bread,
and with the cup alone this express injunction, Bibite ex hoc omnes, Drink all
of this, albeit none of his Disciples were Conficients, or such as did
consecrate. Saint Paul recites the same Institution in like words, and
continued the practice in such Churches as he planted. The S^ 21. cap. 2.
Trent Council acknowledges that the use of the Cup was not infrequent, or
unusual in the Primitive Church; indeed altogether usual, and the want of it
for many hundred years after Christ, unknown. The only instance, that can from
Antiquity be pretended, to prove it lawful, and which in all likeli-hood did
partly occasion it, argues the Ancients use of it in solemn Assemblies, to
have been held as necessary. For even in cases of greatest necessity, when the
Cup could not be carried to parties sick, or otherwise detained from public
Communions; they had the consecrated Bread dipped in it. And ^ autem sub A^
secta viven^^^: and quia ^ st ut ad (...) (...) v^, d^ alio (...) Reges com^
and de alio populus ^i^or, v^ren^m in calice illo pos^it, de quo ^
communicatura erat. Quo illa (...), ^ de part Diaboli. Quid c^ntra^ a^
Haeretici respondebunt. ^ Nos vero Trinitatem in una aequalitate pa^iter and
omnipotentia ^ bi^ (...), in nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti very
and incorruptibilis Dei, nihil nos noc^^i^. Greg. Tu^^n. Hist. Lab. (...). Number.
31.
Gregory of Towers relates the poisoning of King Clouis his Sister (Queen to
Theodorick) by her own daughter, in the Chalice, so, as he intimates withal,
the ordinary use of the Cup at that time, as well amongst French Catholics as
Italian Arrians. Only this was the difference; The Arrians did not, as the
Catholics, drink of the same Cup with their Princes.

9 It may be, fear, conceived upon this or like example, lest the Priests
should, in a more proper sense prove Conficients, not of Christ's, but of Lay*
Princes Bodies; made them, afterward, more willing to forbear the Cup; and the
people, either in manners would not, or otherwise could not, be advanced above
them at this Heavenly banquet. Turonensis reason against these Heretics. I
think, did hold no longer then his life; few Princes afterward durst have
adventured to try the truth of his conclusion [Whether poison drunk in the
Sacrament administered by the supposed true Church would have wrought. For,
unless my memory fail me, Ecclesiastic Princes, Popes themselves, have been
as surely poisoned, in Catholic Chalices; as the forementioned Queen was in
the Arrian Cup.

10 But what occasions soever, either moved the Laity of themselves to embrace,
or the Clergy to enjoin this Communion under one kind; the Council. (...).
S^^^. 21. Cap. 1. Itaque sancta ipsa Synodus (...) Spiritus Sanct^ qui spiritus
est sapienti^ and intellectus, spiritus (...) and pictatis edocta, atque ipsius
Ecclesiae judicium and co^su^tudinem secuta declarat ac docet; Nullo divino
praecepto Laicos, and Clericos non conficientes, obligati ad Eucha^ entum sub
utraque specie sumendum; neque ullo pacto, salva fide, dubitari posse, quin
illis alterius (...) ^ ad ^ ad salutem sufficiat. Nam etsi Christus Dominus in
ultima caena venerabile hoc Sacramentum, in panis and vici speciebus instituit,
and Apostolis tradidit: non tamen illa institutio, and traditio eo tendunt, ut
omnes Christi fideles statu^o* (...) ad ut^^^ que speciem accipiendam
astringantur. Sed neque ex sermon illo apud Johan 6. recte colligitur, utri^
Domino praeceptum esse, utcunque juxta varias sanctorum Patrum, and Doctorum
interpretationes Nan que qui dixit, Nisi manducaveritis carnem ^ilij hominis,
and biberitis ejus sanguinem non habebi^^^ (...) ^n vobis: dixit quoque; Siquis
manducaverit ex hoc pane, vivet in aeternum. Et qui dixit, Qui manducat ^^am ^
habet vitam aeternam; dixit etiam: Panis quem ego dabo, ^aro mea est pro^ Qui
manducat meam carnem, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manner, and ego in illo.
dixit ^ panem vivet in aeternum.
Trent Council specifies none, and yet accurseth all that will not believe the
Church had just causes so to do. Without any sure warrant of Scripture to
persuade it, they bind all likewise to believe this Bare Negative, [That
neither our Saviors Words, at his institution of the Sacrament, nor any other
place of Scripture, enjoin the use of the Cup as necessary, by way of precept
or commandment:] Nor does Christ's words, in the sixth of John, howsoever we
understand them, according to the diverse interpretations of Fathers, (either
of Sacramental or Spiritual eating) enforce any such necessity. Will you hear
their reasons for this bold Assertion. He that said, Unless ye eat the flesh
of the Son of man and drick his blood, you have no life in you; said also, If
any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever; And he that said, Whosoever
eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life; said also, The bread
which I will give is my flesh, which And in the second Canon of the same
Session, it is expressed, sub poena Anathematis. Si quis dixerit, Sanctam
Ecclesiam Catholicam non justis causis and rationibus adductam suisse, ut
laicos, atque etiam clericos non conficientes, sub panis tantummodo specie
communicaret, aut in eo ercasse; Anathema sit.
I will give for the life of the World; He that said, Whosoever eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him: has said withal, He that
eats this bread shall live for ever.

11 Gods Precepts must be very peremptory, and conceived in formal terms, ere
any sufficient authority to enjoin obedience, in what subject soever, will be
acknowledged in them by these men, that dare thus deny a necessity of
communicating Christ in both kinds, imposed upon all in these words; Verily,
verily I say unto you, except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
blood, you have no life in you; only because it is said in the words going
before, If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. Of how much beter
insight in Scriptures, then these grand Seers of Rome, would blind Homer, had
he lived in their time, have proved? For he never denied his fained Gods their
Nectar, because Ambrosia was an immortal meat. And would he, or any man not
more blind in heart and mind then he was of bodily sense, collect, against
Christ's express words, that his blood, the true Heavenly Nectar, was not
necessary, because his flesh does strengthen to eternal life, especially if he
considered their captious interpellation, against whom in that place he
disputes, which caused him not to express his mind so fully there, as
elsewhere he had done, albeit afterward he ingeminates the necessary of
drinking his blood, as well as eating his flesh in such precise and formal
terms; as if he had even then bethought himself, that such Antichristian
Spirits as these Trent Fathers, might happily dare to elude his most sacred
Precept, by such Satanical glosses, as in that Decree they have done.

12 He had told the Jews (as much as was pertinent to their Objection) that he
was the living bread, which came down from Heaven: much better then Minna,
which their Fathers had eaten. Bread he called himself in opposition unto
Manna, not restraining this to his body or flesh only; albeit what he meant by
bread, he expounds partly by his flesh, And the bread which I will give is my
flesh, which I will give for the life of the World; Besides, that, bread in the
Hebrew Dialect contains all sorts of food, the manner of giving this Ambrosia
was such, as did afford Heavenly visible Nectar too. For whilst he gave his
flesh upon the Cross, he poured out his blood withal. But the Jews catch at
this speech, ere he had expounded his full meaning, How can this man give us
flesh to eat? Then Jesus said unto them, Verily, verily I say unto you, except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in
you. Which words, considered with the former circumstances, to any man's
capacity not infatuate, import thus much; Do ye murmur that I should profer you
my flesh? Verily I say unto you, and ye may believe me, Unless Ista distinctio
(says Bellarmin) tam frequens carnis and sanguinis, and cibi ac potus aperte
indicat Christum lo^ de communicatione sui sub speciebus panis and vini:
alioqui enim quorsum ista distinctio, toties praesertim repetita? Spiritualis
enim perceptio Christi per fidem, non eget ista distinctione, cum uno modo
fiat: idem enim est manducare, (...) in su^p^ione per solam fidem. Bellar. Lib.
1. de Sacrament. Euch. Cap. 5. in haec verba Johannis 6. Now if we (...). But
the Romish Church will not suffer Christians to receive Christ's Boat and Blood
sub speciebus panis and vini, the (...) is inevitable, therefore the Romish
Church directly contradicts Christ, and as much as in her lies deprives the
(...) of eternal life. Our Savior in the sixth of John speaks indefinitely
both of Sacramental and Spiritual eating, not pe^ of either.
ye drink my blood, as well as eat my flesh, ye have no life in you. For so he
adds, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed; that is, both are
as necessary to eternal, as meat and drink to corporal life.

13 For these and many like reasons, necessarily arising from the text; some,
as well of their greatest Scholars, as best interpreters, deny the former
places to be meant of Sacramental eating, otherwise, unable to conceive any
possibility, either of avoiding the inconveniences urged by us, or of
defending their infallible Church from error in this Decree. Yet says the
Council, howsoever they be understood, according to the diverse interpretations
of Fathers, they infer no such necessity. No? not if most Fathers, as Maldonate
contends, did hold them to be directly meant of Sacramental eating? Why then
did Jansenius and Hesselius renounce the Fathers in this? surely to defend
their Mother, whose credit they have much better saved, upon supposition that
these words are meant only of spiritual manducation, then Maldonate, otherwise
acute, but most perversely sottish, in his Apology for this Decree, has done.
And yet to speak the truth, the same inconvenience will follow as necessarily,
though not so perspicuously at first sight, albeit we grant them to be meant of
spiritual Eating primarily. For Vide Bez^ annotationes in verse. 63. cap. 6.
Johan.
in that they are meant primarily of spiritual, they cannot but be meant of
Sacramental Eating also, seeing these two (as elsewhere I have observed) are
not opposite, but subordinate. Whence if we grant that Christ's Blood, as well
as his Flesh, must be communicated to us by Faith, or spiritual manducation;
the Consequence will be. [Therefore the Cup, as well as the Bread, must be
administered in the Sacrament;] because Christ says in the institution, that
the Cup is his Blood, and the bread Quoniam^es ipsa, id est, corporis and
sanguinis Christi spiritualis manducatio and potus ibi ^^culenter traditur, ad
quam postea Evangelistae ad (...) historiae su^ declarant Christum adjun xisse
symbola externa panis (...) vini, idcirco nos caput illud a Sacramento
Eucharistiae non putamus esse ali^num Peter Martyr defens* ad Gardener. de
Eucharist. part. 1. Solut. objection. 32.
his Body or flesh: that is, the one is the sure pledge, or instrument;
whereby his flesh; the other whereby his blood, which we must spiritually eat,
(as well in the Sacrament as out of it,) must be communicated unto us. For, as
the Ancient Fathers have observed, our Savior Christ did in his Institution
exhibit that unto us sensibly which before he had promised as invisible, so
that the precept of eating Christ's body, and drinking his blood sacramentally
does bind all capable of this Sacrament as strictly, as that other of eating
his body and drinking his blood Spiritually: seeing this latter is the seal
and assurance of the other. And as our Adversaries acknowledge an absolute
necessity of Precept, for eating Christ Sacramentally and Spiritually, though
that Precept concern not Infants: so in all reason they should grant an equal
necessity of Precept, for eating his flesh and blood distinctly in the
Sacrament, though this be not necessary to all men, at all times, if without
negligence or contempt they cannot be partakers of both. For impossibility,
upon what occasion soever, not caused through their own default, exempts them
from that general Precept of eating Christ under both kinds; as want of years,
or discretion, does children from any injunction, divine, or humane of
communicating so much as in one kind. For notwithstanding the former Precept,
[except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you,] as peremptory as any can be for communicating, as well
sacramentally as spiritually, in both kinds; it were uncharitable to mistrust
Gods mercy toward such poor souls, as long for the Cup of Salvation, which no
man gives them; yea which the Romish Church has by Decree, as peremptory as
she could make, denied to all the Laity without exception, to all the Clergy
except such, as may by a peculiar right challenge his blood as their own, by
way of exchange, because they have made him a Body which he had not before.

14 Yet is it a small thing with this great Whore, to deprive the Christian
World of the Lords, unless she urge it, instead thereof, to pledge her in the
cup of Devils, full of the wine of fornication, colored with her adulterate
Scriptures authorized no doubt for such purposes. Where our Apostle Saint Paul
says, that he, and his Ministers were Stewards of the mysteries of God; the
vulgar Roman Edition renders the Greek, (...) by the Latin Dispensatores, and
(...) (rightly rendered in this place) elsewhere (upon The strange
interpretation of Saint Paul's words whereby the Tren^^ Council deluded by
Satan seeks to delude the Christian World.
carelessness, rather then any intention of harm, as I am persuaded) by the
Latin Ephesians. 5. verse 32.
Sacramentum. Whether upon set purpose of some more learned in that Council,
presuming to gull the simple and illiterate by their cunning, as Chemnitius
probably thinks; or whether the mystery of iniquity (as is more probable)
wrought unawares in the brains of the ignorant, which were the major part, and,
as some have related, did oversway the learned incapable of such impudency as
should give countenance to this ignominious Decree; partly from the
equivocation of the Latin Dispensatores, partly from the synonymical
signification which the vulgar has made of Mysterium, and Sacramentum, the
Beetle-heads have hammered out an interpretation The improper use of which Word
in that place, made Matrimony a Sacrament amongst the Papists, yet Bellarmin
de fends the Translation. Idem esse Mysterium, Gracis, and Latinis Sacramentu^;
Graeci enim cum de Sacramentis agent semper (...) vocant Bellar. Lib. 2. de
verbo Dei Cap. 14. Parag. Septimus. So oftentimes we call an Ass a Beast, but
to translate Bestia by the English Ass, would argue either rudeness or
negligence in the Translator, or the approver, partiality in the Apologizer.
of Saint Paul's words before cited, so scurrilously contrary to his meaning,
that the Black Dog, which is said to have appeared unto Cardinal Crescentius,
(might he have spoken in the Council) could scarce have uttered it without
blushing. For the Apostle meant such Dispensatores or Stewards, as our Savior
speaks of in the four and twentieth of Saint Matthew; such as should give their
Fellow Servants their just portions without purloining; such as daily expected
their Masters Return, to call them unto a strict Account of their Stewardship.
For so it is expressly added, Moreover, (or as much as belongs unto our
office) it is required of Stewards, that they be all found faithful. 1 Cor. 4.
2.

15 Not to dispute of the Churches Authority in disposing of Sacraments, nor to
exagitate the impiety of this decree, be the one for the present supposed as
great, the other as little as they list to make it; only this I would demand
of any that is so himself; whether he can imagine any men, sober, or in their
right minds, would not as soon have urged that text, The fool has said in his
heart there is no God, for establishing Atheism, or S. Peter's check unto Simon
Magus, to prove Simonie lawful; as derive the Churches authority, for
detaining the least part of the Word of life, much less the Cup of Salvation,
from these words, Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of Christ, 1
Cor. 4. 1.
and disposers of the secrets of God. What secrets? of the Gospel, before hid,
but now to be published to all the World; of which the same Apostle elsewhere
had said, A necessity is laid upon me, and woe unto me, if I preach it not. Of
the use, or necessity of the Lords Cup, not a word in this place, not a
syllable, for the Lord had sent him, not to administer this Sacrament, but to
preach the Gospel: of which the Doctrine of the Lords Supper was a part indeed;
but where expressly and directly he delivers that, does he intimate by any
circumstance, that either it had been, was, or might be otherwise administered,
then according to the pattern prescribed by our Savior at the first
Institution? Rather his often repetition of these conjunctives, This bread and
this cup, eating and drinking, the body and blood, etc. argue, he never
thought the one should be received without the other; that this prohibition of
the Cup was a particular branch of the mystery of iniquity, not to break out
till latter Ages, hid from his eyes that had seen the Mystery it self begin to
work. As often 1 Cor. 11. ver. 26, 27, 28.
as ye shall eat this bread (says the Apostle) and drink this cup, ye show the
Lords death till ^e come. Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink
the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the
Lord. Let a man therefore examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread,
and drink of this (...). For he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and
drinks his own d^ tion, because he discerns not the Lords Body. P^a
declarat, hanc potestatem pe^pe^^o in Ecclesia^^isse, ut in Sacramentorum
dispensatione, ^alva illorum substiti^ (...) statuerer, vel ^t, quae
suscipi^^^tium utilitati seu ipsorum Sacram^totum venerationi, pro rerum,
temporum, and locorum varietate magis expedite judicaret. Id autem Apostolus
non obscure visus est ^^sinuasse, cum ait: Sic nos existimet home, ut ministros
Christi and dispensatores mysteriorum Dei, atque ipsum quidum hac potestate
usum esse, satis constat, cum in multis a^^s, tum in hoc ipso Sacramento, cum
ordinatis non^ullis circa ejus (...)(...) ^orinth. 11. verse. 34. ^atera
(inquit) (...) (...), disponam. ^l. ^nt. Sess. 2. cap. 2.
Yet unto the Trent Council Saint Paul in the former place, where he had no
such occasion, as not speaking one word either of the Doctrine, necessity, or
use of the Sacraments seems to intimate, and that not obscurelie, the Churches
Authority in dispensing them as the Trent Fathers have done. What then might
every Minister of Christ, every distributer of Gods secrets, have used the like
authority, before the Church representative did, at least, by tact consent,
approve the practice? This place doubtless proves, either altogether nothing,
or thus much, for the Apostles words are indefinite for their literal sense,
equally appliable to every faithful Minister, or private dispenser of such
secrets; not appropriate to the entire public body Ecciesiastick, or the
Capital or Cardinal parts thereof. Of the Corinthians, to whom he wrote, one
said, I am Paul's, another I am Apollos, the third I am of Cephas,; all boasting
in the personal excellencies of their first Parents in Christ, as the Papists
now do in Saint Peter's and his successors Catholic Primacie. To assuage these
carnal humors in his children, their Father that great Doctor of the Gentiles,
seeks more in this, then in any other place of all his Epistles, to debase
himself, and diminish others high esteem either of his own worth, or of his
calling. ^ ver. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
Who is Paul then? and who is Apollos. but the Ministers by whom ye believed;
and as the Lord gave to every man? I have planted, Apollos watered, but God
gave the increase. So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he
that waters, but God that gives the increase; And he that planteth, and he
that waters are one, and every man shall receive his wages according to his
labor. For we together are Gods laborers: ye are Gods husbandry, and Gods
building. And after a serious incitement of master builders to fidelity, with
the like admonition to Gods husbandry or building, not to rejoice in men, he
concludes as he had begun, Let every man esteem us (such as I have said)
Ministers of Christ and disposers of the mysteries of God. Of whom were they so
to esteem? Of Saint Paul himself, and every faithful Minister. Does he then
intimate here any such Prerogative above the meanest of his brethren, as the
Romish Clergy usurps over the whole Christian World? any authority to
prohibit, either the Dispensers of Gods mysteries from administering, or men so
carnally minded as were these to whom he wrote from communicating Christ's blood
as well as his body? So the Trent Fathers think; and, as if for their wilful
denial of the Lords Cup unto the people, the Lord had given them the cup of
giddiness, to cast them into a Babylonish slumber whilst they consulted about
this decree; and their Scribes through wretchlesnesse had written, what their
raving Masters in their sickly or drunken dreams, had uttered: we find, in the
same Decree, another place of S. Paul immediately annexed, though as
disproportionable to the former (as it is placed in their discourse) as a man's
head to an horses neck, both as unsuitable to their intended Conclusion, as a
super-addition of Fins or Feathers would be, to such a monstrous
Hippocentaurick combination. The place is S. Paul's Conclusion of that discourse
concerning the Sacraments, 1 Cor. 11. ver. ^4.
Other things will I set in order when I come.

16 Granting (what is not necessary) he spoke of ordering matters concerning
this Sacrament: to receive the wine as well as the bread, was no part of their
present disorder, whose misbehaviour at the Lords Table did minister more just
occasions to Saint Paul, then long Beards did to the Council of Constance, to
deny the use of the Cup, might Christ's blood and body, which he had jointly
tendered to all, be upon any occasion justly severed by man in the
administration of his last Will and Testament. Whatsoever the number or
quality of the guests be; the great Lords Table must be always so furnished
as it was at the first Institution; for he has no respect of persons. If a
rich stately Prelate come in with a gold ring in goodly vestiments, and a poor
honest Laick in vile raiments, he says not to him in Pontifical robes, come
sit you here at my mess, where you may drink of my wine, as well as eat of my
bread: nor to the poor Laick, stand thou there apart, or sit down here under my
footstool, where thou may be partaker of the crummes which fall from my
Table, though not of my cup, which must be kept for thy betters High and low,
rich and poor, all were redeemed with one price, all at this offering equal,
all alike free to taste of every dish, so they come with wedding-garments,
without which even the best must be cast out, as unworthy to taste of any part,
if not of all. That part, which the Councels of Constance and Trent, upon
pretenses of reverence to the Lords Supper, have detained from Modern
Christians, the Corinthians had received unworthily; yet was not the Cup, for
this reason, held superfluous by Saint Paul who only sought to repress the
abuse, as knowing the use of it to be most necessary. The matters then he
meant to order, when he came, was, to set out this Heavenly banquet with
greater decency and solemnity, not to abridge them, of any substantial or
material part thereof.

17 Nor do the Trent Fathers, if we may trust them upon their Cited in the
Precedent Annotation. Parag. 15.
words. For they (desirous as it seems to make the whole Christian World as
sottish, as themselves were impious) would make men believe, they could juggle
away the Cup, and never touch the very substance of the Sacrament; as if the
wine were not as substantial a part of the Lords Supper, as was his blood of
his body, or humanity. An integral or material part they cannot deny it to
be; and such if it be, there Apology is as shameless, as if a man should let
out most of another blood, cut off his arm, or leg, or maim him in some
principal part, and plead for himself, I did not meddle with his substance,
meaning (as the Council I take it here does) his Essence, seeing he is yet as
truly a reasonable Creature, as before.

18 But to debar them of that refuge, it may be they sought or their That the
Cup is an essential and substantial part of the Eucharist.
followers may yet hope to find in the equivocation of this word, substance,
importing as much sometimes as a material, or integral, sometimes as an
essential part. If the Cup be an essential and substantial part of this
Sacrament, the Council by their own confession did foully err, in prohibiting
Communion under both kinds: If no such part it be, they might by their own rule
have altogether denied the use of it so much as to the sacrificer, or
conficient: but so the very use and end, on which the essence of the Sacrament,
(as of all other matters of moral practice) immediately depends, and by whose
expiration instantly most determine, should utterly have perished. The end and
use of this sacred Institution, as our Savior expressly teaches, and the
Council grants, was to represent the Testators Death, yea so to represent it,
as we might be partakers of his body and blood, not spiritually only, but
withal, (as the Trent Fathers contend) Sacramentally. Admitting then all they
can pretend against the necessity of the Cup [That whole Christ were in the
Bread alone;] yet this will not preserve the true and fruitful use of the
Sacrament, nor salve that deadly wound, the essence of it must perforce receive
from frustration of the end, necessarily ensuing the Cups absence. For this
Sacrament was ordained, as to represent, so to exhibit Christ's body, unto all
faithful Communicants, not as entire, and whole; his blood, not as it was
enclosed in the veins: but the one, as torn and rent, the other, as shed and
powered out upon the cross. This is my blood of the new Testament, (says our
Savior) which is shed for many, (for all that receive it faithfully) for the
remission of sins. His Blood then, as shed and powered out, is as the loadstar
of penitent and contrite hearts, whereon the eyes of their faith, that seek
remission of sins in this Sacrament, must be fastened: for (as the Apostle
says) without shedding of blood is no remission. This was the complement of
that inestimable all-sufficient Sacrifice, that which represents Heb. 9. 22.
his precious blood thus poured out, the principal part of this Sacrament, as
well in respect of representing his death, as in applying remission of sins
thereby in general purchased, and by this Sacramental Type sealed to every one
in particular; especially if the Trent Councels Doctrine be true, that Christ's
very blood, which was shed upon the cross, is really present in the Chalice,
and might be as immediately sprinkled at least upon the lips or doors of every
faithful receivers heart, as the blood of the Paschal Lamb was upon the
door-posts of the Israelites. Thus as Satan the Father of lies, so false
opinions suggested by him, draw men with pleasure into those evils, for whose
practice in the end they become their chief accusers. That opinion which at
first brought in neglect of the Chalice, and, as the Trent Council presumed,
would have warranted them in making this decree, does most condemn them: for
the measure of their iniquity, could not have been so fully accomplished,
unless they had held a transubstantiation of the wine into Christ's blood.

19 What part of Scripture, can we presume they will spare, that dare thus
countermand the most principal of all Gods Commandments? what reckoning may we
think, they make of our Savior Christ, that adventure thus shamefully to
disanul and cancel his last will and testament, defrauding almost the whole
Christian World, of half their Lord and Masters royal allowance, partly without
any show of Scriptures, either to restrain, or otherwise interpret these
Sovereign precepts; partly upon such idle and frivolous allegations, as may
further witness their slight estimate of Gods Word, save only so far, as it
may be wrested to serve their turns.

20 But grant the places there alleged by the Council, did so mitigate That
the Trent Fathers had preferred their own Authority above the Scriptures,
albeit the Scriptures they allege for this Decree were as probable at these we
bring against it.
either the form of the institution, or the peremptory manner of our Saviors
speeches in the sixth of John, as to make it disputable in unpartial judgments,
whether they did plainly enjoin any necessity of communicating under both
kinds: the former decree notwithstanding would manifestly infer an usurpation
of Sovereignty over Gods word, quite contrary to the general Analogy of faith,
reason, and conscience; by all which, in cases doubtful, and, for the
speculative form of truth, disputable with equal probability, affirmatively or
negatively, we are taught to frame our choice, when we come to practice,
according to the difference of the matter, or of consequences, which may ensue
more dreadful one way, then the other, always to prefer either a greater good
before a less, or a less evil before a greater, though both equally probable.
Suppose then these two contradictory propositions, [The denial of the Cup is a
mutilation of Christ's last will and testament: the denial of the Cup is no
mutilation of Christ's last will, and Testament,] were, for their speculative
probabilities, in just examination, equipendent; yet the doctrine of faith
delivered in Scripture, reason and conscience, without contradiction, instructs
us, that to alter, abrogate, or mutilate the son of Gods last Will and
Testament is a most grievous, most horrible, most dreadful sin; but to permit
the use of the Chalice has no suspicion of any the least evil in it. Had the
Trent Fathers thus done, they had done no worse then our Savior, then his
Apostles, then the Primitive Church, (by Sess. 21. Cap. 2.
their own confession) did. This excess of evil, without all hope of any the
least compensative good to follow upon the denial, should have swaied them to
that practice, which was infinitely more safe, as not accompanied with any
possibility or show of danger; although the speculative probability of any
divine precept necessarily injoyning the use of the cup, had been none. Thus
peremptorily to adventure upon consequences so fearful, whereto no contrary
fear could in reason impel, nor hopes any way comparable allure them; thus
imperiously to deprive the whole Christian World of a good, in their valuation,
(testified by their humble supplications and frequent embassages to that
Council) so inestimable, without any other good possible to redound unto the
deniers, save only usurpation of Lordly Dominion over Christ's heritage, plainly
evinceth, that the Church is of far greater authority with them, then GODS
Word, either written in the Sacred Canon, or their hearts; then all his Laws,
either ingrafted by nature, or positive, and Supernatural. For,

21 Admit this Church representative had been fully persuaded in conscience
rightly examined, and immediately ruled by Scripture, that the former decree
did not prejudice the institution, use, or end of this Sacrament; yet most
Christians earnest desire of the Cup, so publicly testified, could, not suffer
them to sleep in ignorance of that great scandal, the denial of it needs must
give to most inferior particular Churches. Wherefore the rule of charity, that
moved the Father of the Gentiles to that serious protestation. 1 Cor. 8. 13.
Sacrosancta oecumenica and generalis Tridentina Synodus, in spiritu sancto
legitime congregata, praesidentibus in ea eisdem Apostolicae sedis Legatis, cum
de tremendo, and Sanctissimo Eucharistae sacramento varia diversis in locis --
errorum monstra nequis(...) dae^-onis artibus circumferantur, ob quae in
nonnullis provinciis multi a Catholicae Ecclesiae fide atque obedientia vid^
discessisse; Censuit, ea quae ad communionem sub utraque specie, and parvulorum
pertinent, hoc loco exponenda esse: quapropter cunctis Christi fidelibus
interdicit, ne posthac de iis aliter vel credere vel docere, vel praedicare
audeant (...) est his decretis explicatum atque definitum. Council. Trid. Sess.
21. in Proaemto.
If meat offend my brother, I will eat no flesh while the world stands that I
may not offend my brother: should in all equity, divine, or humane, have
wrought these Prelates hearts to like profession, If want of their spiritual
drink offend so many Congregations, and such a multitude of our brethren, we
will rather not use our lawful authority acknowledged by all, then usurp any
that may be offensive or suspicious unto others, though apparently just unto
our selves: for they could not be more fully persuaded, this decree was just,
then Saint Paul was that all meats were lawful to him.

22 But may we think these Prelates had no scruple of conscience, whether the
very form of this decree were not against our Saviors express command, Mat.
26. 27
Bibite ex hoc omnes, drink ye all of this: For mine own part, whiles I call to
mind, what elsewhere I have observed, that the Jews were never so peremptory
in their despightful censures of our Saviors doctrine, nor so outragiously
bent against his person, as when their hearts were touched in part with his
miracles, or in some degree illuminated with the truth he taught: The Councels
extraordinary forwardness to terrify all Contravenaries of this decree, makes
me suspect they were too conscious of their own shallow pretended proofs to
elude Gods word, whose light and perspicuity in this point had exasperated
their hardened hearts, and weak-sighted faith, to be so outrageous, in the very
beginning of that session, as if they had meant to stifle their consciences,
and choke the truth, lest these happily might cross their proceedings, or
control their purposes, if this cause should once have come to sober and
deliberate debatement, For, as thieves oftentimes seek to avoid apprehension by
crying loudest, Turn the Thief; so these wolves hoped well to smother their
guilt, and prevent al notice taking of their impiety by their grievo us
exclamations against others monstrous impious opinions in this point
interdicting all upon penalty of the causes following, ere they had determined
ought to teach, preach, or believe otherwise then they meant to determine.

23 Yet, though the Council accurse all that hold communication under both
kinds as a necessary doctrine, it does not absolutely inhibit all use of the
Chalice, but leaves Cum ^sancta Synodus superiori sessione duos articulos,
alias propositos; and tum nondum discussos, vide^; an rations, S quibus
Catholica Ecclesia adducta suit, ut communicatet laicos, atque etiam non
cele^ntes Sacerdotes, sub una panis specie, ita sint retinendae, ut nulla
ratione calicis usus cuiquam sit permittendus: Et, Au, si honestis and
christianae cha^ati consentaneis rationibus concedendus alicui vel natione vel
regato calicis usus videatur, sub aliquibus conditionibus concedendus sit, and
quanam illae sint, in aliud tempus, oblata sibi occasion, examinandas, atque
dermiendas reservaverit; nunc, little, pro quibus petitur, saluti optime
consultum volens, decrevit, integrum negotium ad sanctissimum Dominum nostrum
esse referendum, prout praesenti decreto refert, qui pro sua singulari
prudentia id efficiat, quod utile reipublicae Christianae and salutare
perentibus usum calicis sore judicaverit. Council. Trident. vicessima secunda
Sessione in decreto super petit: de concessione Calicis.
it free unto their Lord the Pope to grant it, upon what Conditions he please,
either unto private men, or whole Nations. Upon what conditions then, may we
presume, will it please his Holiness for to grant it? upon any better then
Satan tendered all the Kingdoms of the Earth unto our Savior? For this fained
servant of Christ, a true Gehazi, repining at his Lord and Masters simplicity,
that could refuse so fair a profer, made after Satan in all haste, saying, in
his heart, I will surely take somewhat of him, though my Master spared him; and,
pretending, a message in his name, to whom all power was given in Heaven and in
earth, has got an interest in the chief Kingdoms of the World, disposing such
as he can best spare, or worst manage, to any potent Prince, that will fall down
and worship him and his copartner the Prince of darkness; who, of late years,
have almost shared the whole World betwixt them; the one ruling over insidels,
the other over professed Christians. And seeing the Pope (because his pomp and
dignity must be maintained by Worldly wealth and revenews) dares not part with
the propriety of so many Kingdoms at once, as Satan (who only looks for honor)
proffered; he has found out a trick to supply his wants, for purchasing like
honor and worship by his office of keeping S. Peter's keys, if earthly
Provinces or Dominions fail him, Gods Word, his sons blood and body, all, shall
be set to sale, at this price, Fall down and worship him. For no man, we may
rest assured, no Nation or Kingdom, whom he can hinder, shall ever taste of the
Lords Cup, unless they will first acknowledge lawful authority in him, to
grant, deny, or dispose of it, at his pleasure; which is an homage wherewith
the Devil is more delighted, then if we did acknowledge him Supreme Lord of all
the Kingdoms of the Earth: for that were as much less prejudicial to Christ's
prerogative royal, as a damage in possession or goods would be to a personal
disgrace, or some foul maim or deformity wrought upon a Princes body.

CAP. VI.
Propounding what possibly can be said on our adversaries behalf for avoiding
the force of the former arguments: and showing withal the special points that
lie upon them to prove, as principally, whether their Belief of the Churches
authority can be resolved into any divine Testimony.

1 UNto all the difficulties hitherto proposed, I can rather wish some learned
Priest or Jesuit would, then hope any such ever will directly answer point by
point. For the Readers better satisfaction I will first briefly set down, what
possibly can be said on their behalf and, after a disclosure of their last
secret refuge, draw forth thence the dead and putrified darkness of Romish
faith; which unto the ignorant and superstitious, that cannot uncover the holes
and clefts wherein these impostors upon every search are wont to hide it, may
yet seem to live and breath; as the Fable went of S. John the Evangelists body,
after many years reposal in the grave; or as the blinded Jews to this day brag,
the scepter of Judah yet flourishes, beyond Babylon in Media, or some unknown
part of India, whither no European is likely to resort for a disproval of his
relation.

2 Unto the Demonstrative Evidences as well of their error in expounding
Scriptures pretended for, as of other Scriptures rightly alleged by us against
their former or like Decrees, they will be ready to oppose what Bellarmin has
L. 3 c. 10.
done, That the Church must judge of Scriptures Evidence, and private errors
in expounding it, not private men of the Churches expositions. Unto the
objected dreadful consequences of their decrees, (could these possibly be
erroneous) they would regest disobedience to the Church; that to disobey it, is
to disobey God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, a sin as heinous as mangling of
Christ's Last Will and Testament, as Idolatry. On the contrary, to obey the
Church even in her negative decrees and naked decisions, unguarded with any
pretense of Scripture, (much more where this loving Mother, for the education
of her children will vouchsafe, what she need not, to allege some clause or
sentence of Holy writ) we obey not the Church only but Gods Word also, though
not in those particular places, which in our judgments either contradict the
former, or like decrees, or else make nothing at all for them; yet in texts
produced for the Churches transcendent general authority. As he that adores the
consecrated host in procession, because his holy Mother commands him so to do,
or accounts want of Christ's blood no loss, because denied him by her
authority; although unto private spirits he may seem to contradict that Law,
Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve: does yet
sincerely obey the Holy Ghost, and rightly observe the true sense and meaning
of these his dictates, Peter I have prayed for thee, that thy faith should not
fail. Peter feed my sheep. Thou art Luke 4. 8.
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. From these places once
firmly believing the Church possibly cannot err, he must not question, whether
the the practices by it enjoined contradict the former laws both being
delivered by the holy spirit, who cannot contradict himself. This I take it, is
the sum of all the most learned of our adversaries can or would reply unto the
former difficulties.

Not to draw faster, but rather remitting the Vide Lib. 2. Cap. 30.
former Bonds, wherein they have inextricably entangled themselves, by their
circular progress in their resolution of faith; admit their late doctrine left
any possibility of knowing Scriptures, acknowledged by both to be Gods word, or
of distinguishing humane testimonies (written or unwritten) from divine: The
present question we may draw (with their free consent) unto this issue; whether
their belief of the Churches infallible authority, undoubtedly established, as
they pretend, in the forecited places, can be truly resolved into any branch
of the First Truth, or into humane testimonies only. If into the later only,
the case is clear, that absolutely obeying the Romish Church, in the former or
like decrees, (which her authority set aside) to all or most men's consciences
would seem to contradict Gods principal laws; we believe, and in believing
obey, men more then God; humane authorities, laws, or testimonies, more then
divine.

4 The strength or feebleness of Roman faith will best appear, if we try it in
any one of these joints. Whether by Divine testimony it can be proved, that S.
Peter had such an universal, infallible, absolute authority, as these men
attribute unto the Pope: Whether by like infallible testimony it can be proved,
the Popes from time to time, without exception, were Peter's undoubted
successors, heirs apparent to all the preheminencies, or prerogatives he
enjoyed: Whether either the sovereignty or universality of their authority,
(supposed probable in it self, or to themselves;) or particular injunctions
derived from it, can be so fully notified to all Christians, as they need not
question, whether in yielding obedience to decrees, of like consequences as
were the former, they do not grievously disobey Gods Word. For though the Popes
themselves might know this truth by Divine revelation, or otherwise, their
internal assurance, unless generally communicable by divine testimonies, could
be no warant unto others, for undertaking matters of fearful consequences,
whereof they doubt, not only out of secret instinct or grudging of their
consciences, but from an apprehension of opposition betwixt the very forms of
laws papal, and divine.

5 First, it is improbable, that he to whom our Savior said; If thy brother
trespass Peter was not the Church. Mat. 18. 17.
against thee, dic Ecclesiae, was the Bell. lib. 2. de Pont. Romans cap. 12. Quae
dicuntur Petro, ut uni ex fidelibus, certe omnibus fidelibus dicta
intelliguntur: ut Mat. 18. Si peccaverit in te frater tuus, etc By this reason
then the Pope must appeal to the Church; who then are meant by the Church?
Respondemus (says Bellarmin) illud Dic Ecclesiae, significare, deser ad
publicum Ecclesiae judicium, id est, ad eos, qui publicam personam in Ecclesia
gerunt. Bellar. lib. 1 de Pontis. Romans cap. 6. So that if any man offend the
Pope, the cause must come to be decided, by himself, as a public person.
Church unto which all must, from which none may appeal: Or, if Peter, the Pope
if he will be Peter's successor, must, in cases of controversy, appeal unto the
Church. How is he then, as our adversaries contend, the Church, or such a part
of it, unto whom all, even Peter himself (were he alive) must appeal? Must
others appeal to him, as Judge, in his own cause? or he unto himself alone? Not
as alone, but (so a late Papists, to my remembrance, answers Gerson) as
accompanied with his fellow Consul, his Chair, which is to him, as Caesar was
to Julius: and so shall Gods word be to both; as Bibulus was to Julius Caesar, a
mere pretense, or bare name of authority, nothing else. Yet if that word
avouch, that neither S. Peter's, or his successors Faith, could ever fail in
determining controversies, we contradict it, not the Popes decisions only, if
we do not in all doubtful doctrines fully rely upon them.

CAP. VII.
That neither our Saviors prayers, for the not failing of Peter's faith: Luke
22. 32. nor his commending his sheep unto his feeding: John 21. 15. prove any
supremacy in Peter over the Church, from which the authority of the Pope
cannot, with probability, be derived.

1 IS it then probable, our Saviors prayers for S. Peter did collate any
authority Our Saviors prayers for S. Peter did not bestow upon him any
^umenical Sovereign authority, absolutely infallible in such sense as the
Romanists would make the Popes.
upon him, either ecumenical for extent, or sovereign for others dependence on
it; or absolutely, and perpetually infallible for time, without integrity of
life, or other condition: besides such Cathedral consultation, as is required
in the Pope to support it? Rather the proper effect they aimed at, was an
extraordinary assistance in the practice of such points, as already had been,
or afterward should be revealed unto him. Our Savior while he uttered them,
did clearly foresee all his followers should be sifted by Satan; he that
professed greatest love and resolution, more then all the rest, in such fearful
sort, that without this promised supportance, his faith had utterly failed:
which though afterward it proved much stronger, by this shaking, yet whether
stronger then was any of his fellows, is uncertain, most unfit to be disputed:
Howsoever, no circumstance in that place prognosticates, or aboads such
extraordinary future strength, rather all suppose for the present, a peculiar
necessity of his Masters prayers for him, as foreseeing his tripping (to use
the mildest censure) would be so dangerous, as the memorial of his recovery,
might be a perpetual encouragement to all back-sliders, against distrust of
Gods mercies. No man so fit to raise up such as are fallen, The Admirable Use
of Peter's Fall foreseen by the All-seeing Wisdom of God.
or wallow in the filth of sin, as he that has firmly apprehended grace from
above (or rather is so apprehended by it) and yet can withal, out of a sincere
and humble acknowledgement of his relapses, stoop lower then others in
spiritual graces his inferiors, and as it were let himself into the pit of
despair, wherein sinners lie, linking their present frailty in his own
forepassed infirmities. It much disagrees with my temper, ever to exaggerate
the sins of Gods Saints; yea, I think the denial of Christ was less sinful in
Saint Peter, then the like would be in many others, that have received less
grace, because the temptation was above measure Not in respect of danger
represented (which was but death) but of extraordinary license at that time
granted to the power of darkness.
extraordinary permitted (no doubt) to this end, that he might be a more
faithful comforter of his brethren; whose faith was feeble, crazed, or decayed.
He that hopes with fruit to reprehend, or exhort men much daunted, or ashamed
at the foulness of their offenses, must as far as truth will suffer him,
acknowledge himself to be a sharer in his own reproofs, to have been sometimes
tainted with the original of their present grief: for so the parties grieved
will be less jealous, and conceit the medicine better. Thus the royal host, in
the Poet, cheers up his Princely guest, amated at the mention of his infamous
ancestors.

Statius lib 1. Theb. 98^.
Ne perge queri casusque priorum
Annumerare tibi: Nostro quoque sanguine multum
Erravit pietas nec culpa nepotibus obstat.
Tu modo dissimilis rebus mereare secundis
Excusare tuas. --
Did Parents shame their children stain, sweet Prince thy case were mine:
For Piety, sometimes, her course did alter from our line,
The bleminsh though did not descend. Let virtue be thy guide;
So shall thy fame, thy Parents faults, though Foul and Monstrous Hide.
2. By these, and like circumstances, may our Saviors words, [But I have
prayed for thee that thy faith fail not: Therefore when thou art converted
strengthen thy brethren] be construed most appositely to his meaning. What was
^ usually manifested as great want of christian charity and resolution, as
Peter did in that denial; or, as great ignorance in divine mysteries as Peter's
was, when our Savior said unto him: get thee behind me Satan.
it then Peter was to strengthen in others? That which had been defective in in
himself. Was that his charity, his faith, or both? We read (says Bellarmin)
Peter's charity did fail; that his faith did fail, we never read. In vain then
does Bellarmin, in vain do all his fellows labor, to prove our Savior should
in these words ratify a perpetually indeficient purity of Roman faith? for
Peter was to repair in others what had been impaired in himself; to prevent, if
it were possible, the like fall in such as did, or to themselves did seen to
stand; to convert, restore and strengthen such, as in like, or worse sort had
denied their Redeemer. With much greater probability might the Romanists seek
to establish a perpetual indeficient Christian charity in Peter's successors,
had Peter's love, or charity only failed. But the bad lives and manners of the
Roman Clergy, would give too manifest evidence against them in this attemp: In
this respect have these stout challengers taken upon them the defense, of a
never-failing faith, because not so easily confuted. For, it is a matter very
hard (I must confess) to prove, That faith can never fail, which may deny
Christ, so formally and constantly as Peter's did, without defect. The best is,
that by their own confession this place can prove, the acts or exercises of
Roman faith to be no better, then S. Peter's was in this denial of Christ. His
offense, they grant, was foul, but his faith without defect. So may Popes be
monstrously luxurious in their lives, but always infallible in their Doctrine.
Reader, consult with thine own heart, and give sentence (as in the sight of
God) of the whole frame of their Religion, by the foundation: and of the
foundation (such as they willingly acknowledge faith to be of all true Religion
and every Christian virtue) by Bellarmins testimony. If Peter became (as they
pretend) the Fundamental Rock, by confessing: that Religion doubtless, which
has no better ground of infallibility, then Peter's Faith not secured from a
threefold denial of Christ, was first planted by the Spirit of Error, and of
Antichrist.

3 Not to dispute any longer, what it was, but who they were S. Peter was to
strengthen: all without exception? This justly may seem impossible, seeing the
exercise of his Ministry could not extend to all Nations, much less unto all
ages. Yet these words bequeath no hereditary royal jurisdiction over all
persons, but rather enjoin personal acts of penitency unto Saint Peter, for his
former personal offense. He had found extraordinary mercy at his Lord and
Masters hands; and was to communicate the like unto his fellow servants more
guilty of his offense. Christ after his faith had failed did convert and
strengthen him against the like temptation; and he, converted, was commanded to
convert and strengthen others. Whom? Not such as by conversion might become his
brethren, or rather his children in Christ; but rather such, as were hewn out
of the same rock, and could truly call Abraham their father, Sarah their
Mother, joint professors with him of Moses Law and the Prophets, more then his
brethren and associates, in denying him, of whom Moses and all the Prophets
bare testimony.

4 To subtract all matter of calumniation from men, too much disposed to cavil
without any probable cause, or just occasion: notwithstanding his threefold
denial of Christ, I deny not a triple or quadruple prerogative in Peter, in
respect of Christ's other Apostles; yet consisting, not in any authority more
infallible in it self, or more sovereign for superiority, over such as were to
depend upon him as a chief messenger of the Lord of Hosts, but in an
extradinary efficacy of his ordinary Apostle-ship. In what respect then was
his ordinary Ministry or Apostle-ship, so extraordinarily powerful? In respect
of the universal Church throughout all Ages, or of the Jewish Synagogue for the
time being only? S. Paul confutes the former as evidently as he plainly
avoucheth the later, Gal 2. 7, 8, 9
When they saw the Gospel over the uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the
Gospel over the circumcision was unto Peter (for he that was mighty by Peter in
the Apostle-ship over the circumcision, was also mighty by me toward the
Gentiles) James and Cephas and John, which were counted to be pillars, knew of
the grace that was given unto me, they gave to me and to Barnabas the right
hands of fellowship, that we should preach unto the Gentiles and they unto the
circumcision.

5 Here the less in speech I amplify, the more in heart and mind I tacitly
S. Peter's extraordinary power and efficacy in converting the circumcision.
admire the unspeakable power and wisdom of our God, that by the extraordinary
offenses or infirmities of one or two, can firmly establish the faith of all
his Saints. Albeit he used the Ministry of every other Apostle, in
reconciling the world unto himself: yet Paul and Peter were as the two
principal intermediate elements, proportioned and qualified of purpose, for the
more apt connecting this mixed inferior Globe with the Heavenly Sphere, the
sons of men with the son of God; the one by symbolizing with the Jew, the other
with the Gentile in his sin, both with Christ in true wisdom, in all good gifts
and graces of the spirit. Saint Paul's offenses against God manifested in the
flesh, have the same proportion to Saint Peter's, that the ignorance, infidelity
or idolatry of the Gentiles had with the Jews delinquency, or Apostasy from the
God of their Fathers. Saint Paul had not known our Savior in the flesh,
ignorant of his wisdom in teaching or power in working, and in his ignorant
zeal unto Moses and the Law, did persecute his followers and disciples after
his resurrection; hereby made a fitter Symbol for reconciling the Gentiles
unto God, whom they had not known, usually misled in a blind devotion to their
dumb Idols and traditions of their elders, to hate and persecute the Jews, the
only professors of true Religion, the only servants till that time of the
everliving God. S. Peter had long conversed with our Savior, heard him teach
as never man taught, seen him do what no man else could ever do, his eyes had
beheld the brightness of his excellent glory, and, out of his apprehension of
his Deity he had professed more then ordinary love, Lord I am ready to go with
thee into the Prison, Luke 22, 3^.
and to death: yet when he comes unto his trial, flatly denies that ever he
knew him; hereby more fitly qualified for recovering the backsliding
Apostatical Jews, who had known the Lord, and all the wonders which he had
wrought for Israel: they had professed such love and loyalty to him, as no
people could do more unto their Gods; posterity still retaining the protest
ations of their Religious fathers; All this is come upon us, yet do we not
forget thee, neither deal we falsely concerning thy covenant. Our hearts are
not turned back, neither our steps gone out of thy paths. Surely for thy sake
are we slain continually, and are counted as Sheep for the slaughter: Yet when
he came in the similitude of man to exact obedience and allegiance at their
hands, they will not know him; but, as Samuel had foretold, cast him off from
reigning over them, and openly protest against him; We have no King but Caesar.

6 Answerable to this observation is the success of their Apostleship,
registered by the Evangelist. We never read so many Jews at once so thoroughly
converted by our Savior, or so seriously affected with his Doctrine in his
life time, as with that memorable Acts 2. 14. unto the end of the chapter. Acts
3. 12. to the 13 verse of the 4. chapter.
sermon of S. Peter. The manner of his reiterated appellations [Ye men of
Judea, and ye all that inhabit Jerusalem. Ye men of Israel. Acts 2. 20. Acts 3.
25.
Men and Brethren.] Of mentioning Gods promises made to them, and to their
children; of his reply; his earnest beseeching and exhorting them, that had
appealed jointly to him, and the other Apostles: argue these were the brethren,
he in particular was enjoined to convert, confirm and strengthen. And like a
skilful Surgeon, that knew by his own recovery how to prick their consciences,
without giving them a deadly wound, he presses them in the last place, with
crucifying the Lord of glory. The mention whereof had been enough in others
judgment, to have moved them to despair: but this comforter knew by
experience, that to be thoroughly touched in heart, as he had been, for such foul
offenses past, was the readiest way to that true repentance, which he found,
and such repentance the surest holdfast of lively faith. But he that was thus
powerful in the circumcision, became a stone of offense unto the Gentiles, with
whom he had to deal at Antioch. For by his tripping in an uncouth way, (as
being out of his natural Element) he made them stumble, justly reproved, for
his amphibious conversation with men of tempers so contrary, by S. Paul; under
whose hand the edification of the Gentiles did better prosper. Yet he nothing
so powerful in converting the Jews, though his zeal toward them was no less
then S Peter's S. Paul's extraordinary power and efficacy in winning the Gentiles
unto Christ.
was; his endeavors to sow the seed of life in their hearts, as great, but
with small hope of seeing any fruit of his labors. But it will be worth the
Readers pains, I am persuaded, to observe; that albeit he press the Jews at
Antioch with the very same arguments, (but more forcibly and artificially
framed) wherewith S. Peter had converted so many, yet is enforced to make a
contrary conclusion. Peter concludes in hope prognosticating success, Acts 2.
28.
Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus
Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gifts of the Holy
Ghost; For the promise is made unto you and to your children. And the same day
were added to the Church about three thousand souls. See the like success of
his preaching. Acts 4. 4.
Saint Paul, for Conclusion, takes his Farewell of them, as no part of his
peculiar charge; only tells them it was his, and his fellow Barnabas duty, to
admonish them. Then Paul and Barnabas spoke boldly, and said, It was necessary
that the word of God should first have been spoken unto you: but seeing you put
it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to
the Gentiles. For so has the Lord commanded us; saying, I have made thee a
light of the Gentiles, that thou should be the salvation unto the end of the
World. And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified the word
of the Lord: and as many, as were ordained unto eternal life, believed. Thus
the Word of the Lord was published throughout the whole Country: But the Jews
stirred certain devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the City and
raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out of their
Coasts. Acts 13. 46.

7 Thus it is as true of graces, as natures ordination, (...): the power and
efficacy of Christ's chief Apostles, is restrained unto their proper and limited
Sphere; God always blessing those endeavors best, that are employed within
the precincts of that peculiar charge whereto he appoints us. By that which
has been said it may appear, that Saint Peter's and Saint Paul's prerogatives,
how great soever, were both personal, to expire with themselves; although a
title of supremacy over the Gentiles might be pretended, with much greater
probability from S. Paul, then from S. Peter, whose peculiar charge was the
Jew; as may be yet further manifested by the place most urged for his, and his
Successors ecumenical jurisdiction, bequeathed, as the Romanists suppose, in
these words, Peter feed my lambs, Peter, feed my sheep.

8 But the natural circumstances of that place compared with the late
exposition Who were the sheep Peter was principally appointed to feed, and what
authority he had over them.
of the former, deads all their blows, thence intended against us, ere they can
rightly frame themselves to fetch them. A little before these words were
uttered, Peter desirous to approve his excessive love to our Savior, and
manifest more then an ordinary desire of his company (that had appeared unknown
unto him, but from John's notification) girt his coat about him, and cast
himself into the Sea, whiles the other Disciples (not above two hundred Cubits
from Land) came by ship to meet him. After a short dinner passed, as the text
seems to insinuate, in silence; Jesus said unto them, come and (...), and none
of are Disa^ples ^ ask him (...) art thou? (...) they knew he was the (...).
John 21. 12.
at least not entertained with such variety of discourse, as might either
interrupt some private intimation made to Peter of future conference, or put
the former occasion of this following exhortation out of the other Apostles
memory: our Savior enjoins Simon the son of Jona, to feed his Lambs, and,
again, and again to feed his Sheep. He sees him then like a loving Soldier,
desirous (by his adventurous approach unto him) to recover his former
reputation, much impaired by denying him. Whether our Savior check or cherish
this desire I question not; much less determine. His speeches, with the former
circumstances, import thus much, Thou have made profession of more then
ordinary love unto me of readiness to lay down thy life for my sake, though
all others, even these thy fellows, should forsake me; willing I see thee, by
thy present hazard of it, to make thy former words good. But would thou have
me yet to show thee a more excellent way? I have told thee it long since, Thou
art converted, strengthen thy Brethren. SIMON the Son of JONA, if thou desire
to prove thy self a CEPHAS, or testify the sincerity of thy faith and love,
which by the powers of darkness were of late so grievously shaken, Feed my
Lambs. Feed my Sheep. Yea seeing thou thrice deniedst the Shepherd of thy
soul, I say unto thee the third time, Feed my sheep. Let the memory of thy
fore-passed threefold sin; also let this my present threefold admonition,
excite thee unto triple diligence in thy charge; to show such pity and
compassion, as I have showed to thee, unto that lost and scattered Block, which
have denied me, or consented to my crucifying. Let thy faithful performance of
what I request thee at my farewell, be the first testimony of thy love to me, to
be lastly testified by the loss of thy life, which thou did promise me when
I gave mine for my sheep, but shall not pay until thou have fulfilled this my
request; Verily, verily I say unto thee, when thou wast young thou girdedst thy
self, and walkedst whither thou would, Thus much it seems Peter did prophecy
unaware John 1^. verse 37. but failed in application of the time. So our
Savior says, Thou can not follow me now, but thou shall follow (...)
afterward: as well in death as in life after death.
but when thou shall be old, thou shall stretch forth thine hands, and another
shall gird thee and lead thee whither thou would not, John. 21. 18.

9 But here Bellarmin, always exceeding witty, either to elude Scriptures,
whose natural meaning is evidently against him, or to collect a gulling sense
from such, as nothing at all make for him, would infer that the Possessive, ^.
M^. necessarily refers Peter's charge, or jurisdiction, unto all the flock that
called Christ their Lord, Owner. For seeing after his resurrection there was
but one Fold; for this great Shepherd to say; My s^, could not distinguish one
sort from another; and therefore none to be exempted from Peter's oversight.
But, the Flock, though One in respect of the O^, which had purchased all with
one price, did consist of sheep much different in Breeding, and Retaining their
several Marks; some were of the Circumcision, others of the Uncircumcision; the
former had been our Saviors peculiars charge in his life time (for he was not
sent but unto the lost -- sheep of Israel;) these he might with note of
distinction, call My sheep. As if a Shepherd, raised to better fortunes, should
purchase a great many more sheep, then he was wont to look to himself and refer
both sorts to several keepers, though both to Fold together in the evening, he
might Signanter, say to the one, look well to my sheep, though both Flocks were
his by right of possession; but only the one his, by a peculiar relation of
former charge or oversight. And thus, as we have said before, the Jews were
committed peculiarly to Saint Peter's care. Albeit, consonantly to the former
exposition of both places alleged, our Savior by My sheep, might only
intimate his tender care over his flock, without distinction; that Peter might
more carefully feed as many as he could personally look to, seeing the proof of
his love to his Lord and Master, and of his fidelity which had failed, did
consist herein. As for Vide Bellar. de R^m Pont. lib. 1. cap. 16.
Bellarmines other collections, that our Savior, by mentioning his sheep,
should mean Prelates or Superiors; by his little sheep (so their vulgar
distinguishes,) inferior Pastors; by his lambs, mere Laics, such as have
Fathers but no children in Christ: they only prove that in this light of the
Gospel, there is a generation of men professing Christianity, yet as apt as
grossly to transform Christ's Spiritual love, as the Heathen did his Fathers
glory, into the similitude of their carnal corrupt affections.

10 If it may stand with Christian sobriety, so precisely to determine of
particular differences implied in these words; it is most likely our Savior
meant to include all sorts of people, according to the different care their
diverse estates required: some were to be tenderly handled and cherished like
lambs; others to be looked unto like elder sheep, and to be fed with stronger
meat, but with less personal or assiduous attendance. There is no one kind of
argument persuades me more, the Romish Church is led by the Spirit of error,
then whiles I observe, how they still approve themselves to be Peter's
successors in denying Christ, and going the wrong way unto the truth of the
Gospel; always like ungracious children, seeking to enter upon the inheritance
bequeathed, without performance of what the Testator principally required. Our
Savior requested Peter in these terms, Feed my sheep (not thine;) intimating,
he should approve himself a Faithful Shepherd, one that was to give strict
account unto the Owner, of whatsoever befell the flock: these men by commission
pretended from Saint Peter, would make themselves great sheep-masters, to kill
and eat at their pleasures. That to feed, is all one, as to rule and govern, as
they would have it, is a conceit of men only minding their bellies, or seeking
to be fed by others spoils. That feeding or Pastorship is always accompanied
with Rule and Authority, none that ever tasted any Spiritual food will deny.
That Peter was a Pastor and a Feeder, an extraordinary Pastor, a principal
Feeder, and therefore of preheminent Rule and Authority over his flock, we
acknowledge: but no pre-eminence in him above his fellows, which was not
grounded upon his eminent care, and more then ordinary fidelity in feeding
it; not with Lordly injunctions sealed with Anathema's, but with sincerity of
life and soundness of Doctrine. There was no difference betwixt the tenure of
His and Others estates, as if he had been Lord by inheritance, not obnoxious to
any Forfeiture by misdemeanour; and Others but lease-holders (during term of
good life and manners) of the privileges they enjoyed, to return by escheat,
or for want of succession, unto Peter's successors. That Penitential exercise
of feeding Christ's sheep, in such strict terms so often enjoined; rather
argues, that should have been interpreted unfaithfulness or disloyalty in him,
which would have been accounted only neglect or want of diligence in others.
And the ingenious Reader may, if it please him, easily observe, that of all
Apostolical writings now extant, none have either less intimation of any
Preheminencie or Supremacy, or more lively Characters of their Authors
unfeigned humility, and lowly submission of himself unto the meanest of his
fellow-Ministers, then Saint Peter's: as if by them he would have testified his
perpetual mindfulnesse of that former Offense, and strict charge of fidelity,
in feeding Christ's flock thereupon enjoined. The Elders (says he) which are
among you, I beseech, 1 Pet. 5. verse. 1, 2, 3.
which am, what? the chief Apostle, an Ecclesiastic Monarch, Christ's Vicar
General, an elder of Elders? no: but also an Elder (...), and a witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be re
vealed; Feed the flock of God, which depends upon you, caring for it, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; not as
though ye were Lords over Gods heritage, but that ye may be examples to the
flock. Yet for any to arrogate such Infallibility, or challenge such Authority,
as he had, without perseverance in the like Fidelity and Sincerity, as Peter
(requested upon the strictest terms of love unto his Lord and Master, in all
likelihood would and) did use in feeding his flock; is such a mock of Christ
and this his blessed Saint, as none but the Brood of Antichrist could ever have
hatched. Yet inferior to that, which accompanies the third pretended ground of
Romish faith, Tues Petrus and super hanc Petram, Thou art Peter and upon this
Peter (as they would have it) will I build my Church.

CAP. VIII.
That Christ not Saint Peter is the Rock spoken of Matthew 16. verse 18. That
the Jesuits exposition of that place demonstrateth the Pope to be The Great
Antichrist.

1 WHy the Latin Interpreter following the Greek, should vary the Gender,
reading Tues Petrus and super hanc Petram; not, T^es Petra, and super hanc
Petram: although the tongue wherein they suppose Saint Matthew wrote, had but
one and the same word, Cepha, Bellarmin and Dubitabit aliquis, cur, si non
Mattheus, Matthaei tamen Grae^us interpres (...) nominum, and generis
distinctionem adhibu^^ it. Respondeo in promptu rationem esse, quia, quamvis
Graeci, Petra, and (...) genere masculino and (...) ^^mi^ino dicatur, tamen
Petrus, quia vir erat, non Petra, foeminino, sed Pet^u^ masculino nomine
vocandus (...). S^do aut^m loco, ubi de aedificij Fundamento agehatur, non
Petrum sed Petram dixit, quamvis ide^ utrun: que nomen significa^er, ^oi^ in
e^usmodi aedificijs nomen Petra, foemininum magis est usitatum. (...) enim and
Atticum and rarum est. Maldonat. (...) 16. Matthaei. Vide Bellar. de Romans Pont
Lib. 1. Cap. 10. What the name of Cephas does import in Saint Peter.
Maldonate give these two reasons. First seeing Saint Peter was a man, his name
was to be expressed in the Greek and Latin by a word of the Masculine gender.
Secondly, albeit the Greek Masculine (...) be sometimes used for a rock; yet
very seldom, or in the Attick Dialect only, if at all, when it is taken for a
fundamental rock fit to rect Edifices upon. Thus professed Commentators
oft-times find out many witty reasons of like alterations in words, which the
Authors never dreamed of. But granting (what these two learned Romanists only
suppose, none can prove) Saint Matthew had written in the Syriack tongue:
neither of the two reasons alleged for the Greek or Latin Interpreters
variation of the Gender, can have any place in Saint John, who wrote in Greek,
but not in the Attick Dialect (and yet purposely instructing us what the
Syriack word Cepha, which our Savior gave as a Surname to Saint Peter at his
first calling meant) says, it is by interpretation (...) Petrus not Petra;
though this Feminine might have been used without ossence in the interpretation
of his name, so he had not been usually called thereby, or being so usually
called, it might have grown into a masculine; for why should Petra seem a more
Esfeminate name in Saint Peter, then Za^arella, or Carafa, in their Cardinals,
or Aquaviva, in the General of the Jesuits? If Jesus himself had given the
Governor of the Society, instiled by his own name, this Surname in the
Abstract, Aquaviva,: what would men think it did portend? that he should be
that well of water, (...). 4. 14.
which springs into everlasting life? or rather that he had been so
denominate from some relation to such water, that Claudius Aquiviva was as much
as Claudius de Aquaviva? It is most likely then, that as well Saint John when
he interprets Cepha (...), as the Greek Translator of Saint Matthew, in saying,
Tu es Petrus, not Petra; did seek to prevent that sinister sense, which
posterity might cull out of the ambiguous Syriack, Cepha, sometimes signifying
the Rock it self, otherwhiles implying no more then a Denomination from it. Nor
was it Saint Austines ignorance of the Hebrew and Syriac, as ^.
Bellarmin objects; but rather his perfect knowledge of Christ, as, The only
Rock of Salvation, which made him think that (...) in Greek should imply no
more then (...), One belonging to that sure foundation whereon the Church is
built. Would God Bellarmin could plead ignorance in these Tongues for his
excuse; even he that has no acquaintance with the Syriack, but by the affinity
of it with the Hebrew, or with neither but from the Common Analogy betwixt
them, and Modern Tongues destitute of such variety of formations or Cases, as
are facile and plentiful in the Greek and Latin, cannot be ignorant that
Abstracts or Substantives whilst given as names to men, are usually equivalent
to the concrete or Adjective, whereby they are oft-times expressed in Latin, as
in our English we attribute the Substantive or Abstract name of Countries unto
Earls, or of Towns unto Barons; whom our Sovereign Lord when he speaks in
Latin, would call Essexius, in English he calls Essex: so Roger Mortimer with
us, is Rogerus de m^ri mortuo, with Latin Writers. Even in the Latin it self,
wherein the distinction between Abstracts and Concretes, or Substantives and
Adjectives, is obvious and apparent; the Fundamental Abstract or Substantive
is given oft-times by way of cognomination, to express some relation between
it, and the party denominated from it, in value no more then the adjective or
denomination in the oblique case; so Scipto taken properly, or in it direct and
primarie signification, is a Walking staff, Baculum; But attributed to ^
Cornelius, qui patrem luminibus carentem pro baculo regebat, Scipio cognon in^
dedit. Macrob. Satur. lib. 1. cap. 6.
Cornelius (the first of that Honorable Family called Scipiones) implies no
more then one that had been instar Bacul^, or Scipionis, in stead of a rod or
walking staff to his blind decrepit Father: so Vide Macrobium loco citato.
Scropha (though attributed in the Abstract unto another Family in Rome)
imports not that their Ancestors had been Swine, or their mother a Sow, but
only some particular relation to that Creature. The like we may say of ^.
Asina and Bestia, names of other Roman families. And if I mistake not, that
famous Professor which hight Victoria in the abstract, was but Franciscus a
victoria, de victoria, or victorius. In like sort, although it were true that
Cepha in the Syriack did only signify a rock or fundamental stone; yet seeing
all grant that Christ was truly and principally such the same name given unto
Simon the son of Iona, must imply no more then a denominative reference unto
the rock, so as if he had been called in Latin Simon Petra, or in English Simon
Rock, this could imply no more then Simon de Petra or Petreus, Simon a Rock,
or, of the Rock.

2 But whatsoever the Syriack Cephas, or the Greek (...) in the place cited do
import: it will be demanded, why our Savior bestowed this name on Simon the
son of Jona, at his first coming to him? The particular references betwixt him
and the rock it self, or Chief Stone, might be so many as might convince him of
curiosity, perhaps of folly, that would peremptorily or precisely determine,
what one should give occasion to this denomination: Most probable it is, that
he who knew what was in man, did at the first sight of Simon, see in him, or
mean to bestow upon him some extraordinary aptness to apprehend the words of
eternal life, or to descry the Gate of the Lord whereby the righteous were to
enter, or (which is equivalent) Christ to be the Chief corner stone spoken of
by the Psalmist: Herein I willingly assent to Beliarmin, that Saint Peter was
the first that distinctly did apprehend, or at least, by confession, open the
great mystery of Christianity and foundation of true Religion, God Incarnate
in our flesh. Thus much the circumstances of that place seem to infer; For
Jesus when he came Matthew. 16. ver. 13, 14, 15, etc
unto the coasts of Caesarea, he asked his Disciples, whom do men say that I
(commonly known by the name of the Son of man) am; and they said; some say,
John Baptist; some, Elias, and others Jeremiah; all to this effect, that he was
some one of the Prophets, (or as Nathanael in his confession meant) such a Son
of God, as they had been. These were in the way, but came not near John 1. v.
49.
the main foundation which Peter first uncovers, for when our Savior demands;
But whom say ye (whom I must appoint, as chief Builders, and principal Parts of
that spiritual Temple, which is toward) that I am; Then Simon Peter answered
and sad, Thou art The Christ, The Son of the living God. And from his first
discovery of this rock, or chief corner stone, he might well be denominated a
rock or stone, as Maximus was named Messala from a town in Sicily so called,
which he had taken, or, as we might denominate some famous Mariner, from some
notable place which he should first discover. To this effect does our Savior
reply unto Saint Peter; Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jo^a, for not flesh
and blood, not the chief Builders amongst the people, but he that laid this
precious stone in Sion, has uncovered the same to thee. And seeing thou have
said, what should be said and thought of me, I only say of thee, Thou had
not thy name for naught, rightly wast thou called a Rock, or stone, that have
so plainly opened the way unto that very rock, whereon I mean to build my
Church. Had our Savior meant Peter had been That Rock; or were his words to be
interpreted, as in effect the Papists do; He had said, (...), ^ues Petra illa
super quam, etc. But seeing he adds no Emphasis to Peter's name, but unto
petra, these words [(...)] are but an actual expression, or more definite
specification, of what had been potentially included in the indeterminate
transitive (...) revela^, for where our English reads flesh and blood has not
revealed It unto thee; the original is verbatim, has not revealed to thee, to
wit, that rock whereupon (...)build my Church. The direct current then of our
Saviors speech is thus; Blessed art thou Simon the son of Jonah, for not flesh
and blood, but my Father which is in heaven, has revealed that Rock to thee,
whereupon I will build my Church, against which the gates of Hell shall never
prevail, whereof thou (according to the Omen of thy name long since given by
me) shall be the first living stone, by whom all others shall be squared, ere
admitted into this spiritual aedifice.

3 That our Savior did not expressly mention any other rock or stone before he
said to Simon, Thou art Peter, does nothing prejudice this exposition. It
sufficed that God and the Rock of salvation: Pronomen Hanc non potest rese^ri
ad Christum, Petram, sed ad Petrum, Petra^; debet enim referri ad aliquod
proximum, non ad ^emotum, proxime ante dictum fuerat non Christo sed Petro, Tu
es Cephas, id est, Petra, deinde licet Christus dici posset, Petra, tamen hoc
in loco non est vocatus Petra a Petro confitente, sed Christus filius Dei vivi;
de bet autem referri illud, Hanc ad cum qui nominatus est Petra, non ad cum,
qui non est appellatus hoc nomine. Bellar. lib. 1. de Romans Pont. cap. 10. Vide
Deuteronomy. 32. Psalm. 18. psalm. 19. (...) Tu vero considera verborum Prophe^e
amplitudinem, poterat dicere, Mittam vobis Messiam, sed voluit tam insigne
beneficium verbis in^ignibus, and Metapho^icis explicare. Est autem translatio
sumpta ab aedificantibus, quae verborum amplitudine i^^ui^ rei magnificentiam
and majestatem. Pintus in 28. Isai. ver. 16. See other Annotations out of
Bellarmin in this Chapter. See Maldonat on Matthew. 21. cap. 42. ver.
Messiah, the Chief Corner Stone, The Christ, were then known, and yet are held
as Equivalent, even amongst the learned Papists, that the Disciples to whom he
then spoke, did no less perfectly know, more ready to acknowledge as much, as
our Adversaries yet do, that not Peter, but His and Their Master only; was to
be the Chief Corner Stone in that Temple, they had often heard he should, and
now he tells them he was to build. The present Dialogue would abundantly
instruct them, that not the Son of man himself, howsoever considered, but in
such sort as his heavenly Father had revealed him to Saint Peter, truly
apprehended as God and Man, was a Foundation competent for so incomparable a
Structure. Such as before his time had gone the farthest; such as thought he
had been Moses, (who had no Peer among the Prophets, greater then whom it was
scarce expected any son of mortal man should be) had not come unto ground firm
enough to build their own, and all men's Faith upon. To them the gate of the
Lord, by which the righteous were to enter, was not fully opened; They came not
to a distinct, direct, and perfect view of this Chief Corner Stone: for this
reason they could not be accounted (...), stones actually wrought, and so well
fitting this precious Foundation, as that others might be framed by their
Pattern, and then jointly fastened to it. This was Peter's Prerogative, unto whom
the Keys are first given (as unto the first of all the faithful that had
passed this gate) and power by them, to admit as many as were, to exclude all
that were not fashionable to this Rock and Cornerstone.

4 Seeing then neither the Apostles then thought, nor can any man yet conceive,
that Peter could be an extraordinary stone, or second Foundation in the
aedisice, there spoken of, but must withal admit Christ to be The Chief Corner
Stone, or Surest Fundamental Rock: I would appeal to my Adversary in his sober
mood; to any not actually drunken with the Babylonish Cup, unto whether
foundation, unto what stone, the principal or less principal, these words
[and upon this Rock will I build my Church] must be referred? We must judge of
the foundation by the aedifice, and of the aedifice by the attribute. Now, as
there is no one Title wherein the spirit does more delight to express the
Strength and Praises of the living God, then this of Rock: so was there never
any more puissant effect attributed to any Rock, then the eternal stabilitie of
this aedifice. What Saint Paul says of the foundation, I may truly say of the
Edifice and the Attribute. Another Edifice more strong then this Church, can no
man build; no Attribute can be imagined more glorious then This: That the gate
of hell shall never prevail, or (as Omnes quos legi praeter Hilarium existimant
sensum esse; ^ore, ut diaboli potentia Ecclesiam quidem exerceat, Nunquam vero
opprimat. Quae sententia parva est, nec verba Christi implet, nec enim solent
portae vincere sed resistere, itaque non potuit offendendi vis sed desendendi
portas significari. Sensus igitur, nisi fallor, est, Fore, ut Ecclesia super
Petram a Christo fundata, omnem diaboli potentiam expugnet; ita ur nulla art,
nuilis viribus possit resistere. Hoc enim multo majus est, and verbis magis
consentaneum: Po^tas enim Inseri non praevalituras adversus Ecclesiam, phrasis
Hebraica est (...) non poterunt adversus illam, id est, non potetunt illi
resistere.
Maldonate more fully expresses the majesty of the Hebraisme) shall not be
able to stand against it, or confront it. To ascribe the supportance of such a
structure to the strength of Peter's Faith, not as it was in him only, but as
it is perpetually propagated to his successors, is, to impeach him of
disloyalty, and rob Christ of his greatest glory. For, Vide Maldonatum in
versum 18. cap. 16. Mat. and Bellar. lib. 1. de Pont. Romans cap. 19.
even such as plead for this prerogative in Peter's successors, confess, that
this they give to Peter is our Saviors most usual style; we may with the
Prophet demand, Who is the Psalm. 18. ver. 31.
Rock besides our God? Psalm. 46.
The Lord is the Rock of our salvation: (of such salvation as the gates of Hell
cannot oppugn) the same He is the Lord our Rock and our Redeemer. Psalm. 19. 14.

5 The former interpretation will yet further approve it self, to be most
consonant to the general Analogy of faith, most native to the place before
alleged, and in respect of Romish glosses; such, as is the Church of Christ
unto the gates of Hell, or the Ark of old unto Dagon: if we observe (what is
most frequently, and perspicuously taught in other Scriptures, pertinent to the
main point in Controversy:) First, that the immediate subject of Peter's
Confession [God incarnate, or dwelling (as S. Paul speaks) bodily in Christ] is
presupposed, by all sacred Writers as the great Mystery of man's Redemption,
the Fundamental Rock of Salvation. Secondly, that all, and only they, which in
sincerity of heart conceive, and with steadfast perseverance, retain this
confession which Peter made, are true and lively parts of that Edisice, which
the Son of the living God here promised to erect.

6 The Reader, I know, in this fruitful age of learned Expositors may find
variety of Comments, but none that can more fully satisfy him, then Saint
Peter's own Paraphrase upon our Saviors Promise to him, if we compare it with
other Scriptures, in sense and meaning equivalent; That Christ was the only
Rock whereupon this Saint himself, as a living member of the Church, was built,
is apparent: because, intending to make his flock, lively parts of the same
aedifice; he tells them they come not to himself, as to a second Rock, but unto
the Lord, as unto a living stone, disallowed of men, yet chosen of God and
precious: As if he had said; Not flesh and blood, not the wisest of men, but
only our heavenly Father did first reveal him unto me for such, and in the
words following (as if he had purposely intended to certify us) that the name
of Peter did descend to him from this affinity with this elect and precious
stone (not because he was a Rock or fundamental stone himself) he adds, and ye
as lively stones be made a spiritual house, a lively Priesthood (Priests as
living, and altars as stones) to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to
God, by Jesus Christ. Though they were not all to have the title or name of
Peter's (for so there could be no distinction) yet so they would believe and
confess as he did, that Christ was the living stone, they were to have the
realitie or substance, to be stones of that spiritual house, against which the
gates of hell should not be able to prevail.

7 And seeing he now endeavored to fasten them unto Christ, as unto the only
sure Rock of their redemption; it could not be so available to tell them in our
Saviors own words, that becoming such a spiritual house, and continuing in
offering up sacrifices acceptable unto God, the gates of hell should not
prevail against them. Until this Day Star had more fully shined in their
hearts, he knew it for the better method to kindle the same hope in them by the
Prophets light, which in time would break forth clearer of it self: for that
glorious promise of our Savior differed from the prophetical prediction, which
S Peter gives them for their assurance, but as the light which goes before,
does from the brightness following the Suns rising: What Christ had told him,
was in effect contained before in that Isa. 28. 16. Vide Forerium in hunc locum.
Scripture: Behold I lay in Ston a chief corner stone, elect and precious, and
he that believes therein shall not be The word in the Original signifies to
make haste, and therefore any kind of haste according to the difference of the
matter, or object; in this place aequivalent to the latin proripia, a word
signifying haste, but haste caused by shame or fear of men's presence from which
the party ashamed seeks with confused speed to hide himself. Et cum clamarem
quo nunc se proripit ille? Tityre coge pecus, tu post carecta latebas. This is
true of faith, which the Apostle says of love. 1 John 4. 17. Herein is love
perfect in us, that we should have boldness in the day of judgment: for as he
is, even so are we in this world. Vid. Luc. 21. 25, 26. of the confused state
of the wicked.
ashamed? Why not ashamed? because his hope should be most sure; and Hope (as
the Apostle says) makes not ashamed: he meant, It supporteth against all
shame or terror, the world, flesh, or Devil can oppose against us. They may
threaten, but not so deject us, as to cause us, either through fear of
disgrace, or other danger, skulk, or run from men's presence, as a learned
Hebrician expresses the Hebrew word rendered by the vulgar, non festinabit, he
shall not hasten; or to express the full value of both these Apostles
speeches, by the last and most potent object of shame; Believing in Christ we
shall not be Found naked in that last day, nor wish the Mountains for a
covering to our shame; but enabled by sure Hope to stand before the Son of man:
for, not ashamed of him before men in this life, he will not be ashamed of us
in that day. Then shall that victory of this spiritual house over the impotent
assaults of Hell gates be manifested. Thus by Saint Peter's own exposition, The
Son of the living God, whom he confessed was that living Stone, from whose
strength this spiritual house, whereof he and his flock were (...) lively
stones becomes so strong. To make either Saint Peter or his successors joint,
though secondary, supporters of this glorious work, were to divide our Faith
betwixt Christ and Them: For it only stands by faith and confidence immediately
fastened upon the Foundation or supporters. If then we may not so fasten our
faith either upon Peter, or his successors, we can receive no other strength
from them, then we do from Christ's other Apostles, and that is only from their
Ministerial Function, in squaring and fastening us unto this living stone. To
this purpose says S. Paul, Other foundation can no man lay, then that which is
laid, which is Jesus Christ. Whosoever was himself builded on him, albeit he
never heard of S. Peter, albeit the doctrines he heaped upon this foundation
were but hay and stubble, or matter alike apt to take fire; yet the flame
wherein these idle speculations of his brain were to perish, should but singe
his clothes not devour his substance; because by faith united unto that living
stone, which without any other intermediate sconce, or fence, does quench the
flames of hell, and keep them from scorching any, even the last and uppermost
that shall be built upon him, unto the worlds end. For the same Apostles rule
is universal both in respect of time and persons. Romans 10. 9.
If thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall believe in
thine heart, that God raised him up from the dead, thou shall be saved.

8 But did S. Paul by special revelation utter this, as a mystery altogether
unknown before unto the faithful? Rather by participation of the same spirit,
which spoke in the Prophet, he only unfolds the Oracle late expounded, I must
confess without distinct apprehension of so good warrant then, as is now
suggested; For the Apostle to prove his former assertion, urges that place of
the Prophet, Romans 1^.
Whosoever believes in him shall not be ashamed; So then with S. Paul it is all
one, to believe in Christ raised from the dead, or in the corner stone,
rejected of men, allowed of God. And it seems the declaration made unto S.
Peter, that Christ whom he confessed (howsoever a Rock to fall upon to both the
houses of Israel) was the sure Foundation of the faithful, which the Prophet
foretold should be laid in Sion, made his ignorance, (to say no worse) in
dissuading his master from suffering such disgrace and ignominy of the Elders,
bigh Priests and Scribes, more inexcusable, because it had been so plainly
foretold, that the corner stone was to be basely esteemed of them, ere advanced
of God. Hence our Savior reproves him so sharply. Mat. 16. 23.
Then he turned back and said unto Peter, Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an
offense unto me, because thou understandest not the things that are of God,
but, the things that are of men: As if he had said, shall this Rock become a
stumbling stone unto thee also, unto whom it was first revealed? What I now
told thee, the Prophet long since foretold, Psalm (...) (...)
It was the Lords doing, and should have been mavelous (not offensive) in thy
sight. Have thou never read how the builders must first refuse That Stone which
the Lord will afterward appoint Chief in the corners? From remembrance of this
check S. Peter it may be, whiles he paraphrased upon this place, used not the
Psalmists but our Saviors words, Ye come (says he) as unto a living stone,
disallowed not by the builders but of men, chosen not of the Lord, but of God,
howsoever elsewhere he more fully parallels these two, (as S. Paul had done)
[Christ crucisied and raised again] [the stone cast aside, and constituted as
head of the corner] Acts 4. (...)
Be it known unto you all, and to all the people of Israel, that by the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazaret, whom ye have crucified, whom God raised again from the
dead, even by him does the man stand here before you whole: This is the stone
cast aside of you builders, which is become the head of the corner; neither is
there salvation in any other: for among men there is given none other Name
under heaven whereby we must be saved. Then is there no other, whose name
imported as much as a Rock or stone, to support men against all commotions, the
powers of hell could raise against them.

9 So our Savior takes [the husbandmen killing of the Lord of the Vineyard,
Mat. 21.
son] and [the builders rejecting the head stone of the corner] as equivalent;
First, he demands. Verse 41.
When therefore the Lord of the Vineyard shall come, what will be do to those
husbandmen (that had slain his son) Verse 41.
they reply, he will cruelly destroy those wicked men, and will let out his
Vineyard unto other husbandmen, which shall deliver him the fruits in their
seasons: And this judgment they had given against themselves, he ratifies by
the like express sentence, which the Lord already had past upon them; Ver. 42,
(...)
Read ye never in the Scriptures the stone which the builders refused, the same
is made the head of the corner? (This was the Lords doing, and it is mavelous
in our eyes. Therefore say I unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from
you, and shall be given to a nation which shall bring forth the fruits
thereof:) and whosoever shall fall on this stone shall be broken, but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder.

10 This may suffice for proof, that S. Peter's confessing the Son of man to be
The Christ, the son of the living God, was all one with our Saviors
declaration, Upon this Rock will I build my Church, etc. because, Christ and
the livingstone which God had promised to found in Sion, are (unto sacred
Writers, and all participants of that spirit, by which they wrote) The self
same. Nor is there any thing more usual with the holy Ghost, then to refer like
speeches of our Savior unto places of Scripture more different in words then
the two former alleged; albeit there be no such identity of persons, time and
place, or continuation of discourse, to manifest their mutual coherence, but
only equivalency, of their inward meaning; This method the holy Spirit uses
the rather, I think, because he would accustom us to investigate his sense and
meaning, not so much by the like form, or Character of words, as by the
Analogy of Faith. For, as the Apostle says, the letter kills, because it
usually leads such as rely upon it to strange and unwholesome senses; as the
identity of our Saviors and S. Peter's name in the Syriack, or their vicinitie
in the Greek and Latin, made the Rock of salvation become a Rock of Offense
unto the Romanist, who by his stumbling at the word (...), falls upon the ^
stone laid in Sion, and shall be broken: yea for this disobedience to this
eternal word, and seeking to lay another foundation then what was laid already,
that stone shall fall upon him and grind him (at least his doctrine) to powder,
as (...) more sully appear, if we compare their exposition of that Donative,
they suppose he did bestow upon S. Peter, with that Disciples doctrine whom he
loved.

11 As we have showed from S. Peter and S. Paul, and the general Analogy of
Faith, that Simon the son of Jonah had his name of Cephas or (...) from his
affinity with the Rock of salvation, or chief corner stone, he being as the
first wrought stone in that Edisice: so does S. John (whose doctrine pregnantly
confirms our former exposition of these words, Thou art Peter, etc.) make that
very confession which Peter uttered as the surest square or line, the perfect
Index whereby to try and examine all other stones, whether sitting or rightly
proportioned to this everlasting structure. Dearly beloved (says he) believe
not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God, for ^.
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. How should they know true
Prophets from false, such as were true, were of God, such as were false, of
Antichrist: how should they know such as were of God, from such as were of
Antichrist? Hereby shall ye know the spirit of God; every spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of God.

12 But is every spirit of God that can frame an Orthodoxal conceit of this
great mystery, and outwardly confess what they inwardly assent unto, as
undoubtedly true? So should the wicked spirits be of God: for a spirit of an
unclean Devil openly said as much in effect, as Peter did; what he knew by
arguments more sure then most Popes do, I know who thou art, even The Holy One
of God yea many came out of the possessed crying, what Peter afterward
confessed, Thou art the Christ the Son of God. The mystery it seems they had
conceived aright, because our Savior gives them the like injunctions his
Disciples had upon Peter's confession, the one he rebuked, and would not suffer
to say, the other, he charged they should tell no man, that he was Jesus the
Christ, because this Rock was not as yet to be plainly manifested to the world.
Although it is most probable, he would not have the unclean spirits at any time
to be proclamers of this mystery: for unto the ^
wicked said God, What have thou to do to declare mine ordinances, that thou
should take my covenant in thy month, seeing thou hate to be reformed, and
have cast my words behind thee^ etc. If unclean spirits may not be permitted to
promulge this or like divine mysteries, by the mouths of men, whose bodily
members they so possess, as to cause them utter they know not what; may we
without exception safely admit all their Cathedral Decisions, (whose souls and
minds they have wholly transformed into the similitude of their uncleanness)
for heavenly Oracles, for ^ages of Salvation immediately sent from God, for
Foundations of Faith and manners? Christ by the same Psalmist has said, To him
that disposes his way aright, will I show the salvation of God.

13 But to proceed by our Apostles former rule; from which, and Psalm. 50. 25.
others of his fully 1 John 4. 12. No man has seen God at any time, If we love
one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we
that we dwell in him, and he in us: because he has given us of his spirit. And
we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the son to be the Savior of
the world Whos^ever confesses that Jesus is the son of God, in him dwells
God, and ^e in God. See 1 John 2. 15, 16.
parallel thereunto, it is evident, that for a just trial of a spirit speaking
by God, there must be both a platform of doctrine rightly proportioned to the
former Foundation [Christ come in the flesh] and a correspondent edification,
not of verbal or school consequences, but of real and material works,
proceeding from lively faith and inward sanctity, so testifying the habitation
of Christ the living stone in the confessors heart, as Christ's own works and
doctrine did the Godheads bodily dwelling in him, the Apostle adds* Every
spirit which confesses not that Jesus 1 John 4. 3.
Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God (that is) is opposite unto the
spirit of God, but this is the spirit of Antichrist, of whom ye have heard, how
that he should come, and now already he is in the world. A spirit of Antichrist
then is manifested, by a contrariety in the form of doctrine, or by an
hostility between the very foundations, which he and the spirit of God
endeavor to lay; so as the edification of the one does in the issue, menace
the demolition of the other. And as this opposition unto Gods spirit is greater
or less, so does it argue the party in whom it is to participate, more or
less of the spirit of Antichrist. In both these respects of opposition or
hostility in the foundation, or in the issue or consequences of all heretical
temples or congregations, that hitherto have been, or can be imagined as
possibly future, the structure of the Romish Church, does most fully answer to
the Idea or platform of that edifice, which the Apostle has foretold great
Antichrist should erect.

14 For demonstrating which conclusion, we only suppose, what every one must
grant, that if the spirit of unclean devils, he whose coming is by the In what
sense the Papists deny Christ to be come in the flesh.
power of Satan, in guile and deceit, may without prejudice to his grand
hostility against Christ, in formal terms confess the great mystery of
salvation. [Christ manifested in the flesh:] for seeing he must be (...)
opposite unto Christ, not by way of negation or contradiction, but by a
positive contrariety or hostility; Christian Religion and Antichristianism,
must as all other contraries agree in some one kind or matter; and the kind or
matter in matters of Religion, must be the object. If we here only set aside an
agreement with true professors in that general transcendent object, that Christ
is the son of the living God, the very first principle of Romish Religion, even
the specifical difference which makes it Romish, is as contrary with the first
Element of true orthodoxal Christian Religion, as fire to water, heat to cold.
For, if to confess Christ come in the flesh, put to death, and raised again,
be (as is proved) all one, as to acknowledge him the chief corner stone
rejected of men, but advanced by God: if this be the main foundation of
Christianity, so all-sufficient, that without it no other must be laid. How
were it possible more to deny this truth in effect or consequence, more to
oppugn the whole edifice of our faith, then by planting another Rock, another
Foundation, without communication wherewith, none can be supported by the
former, against the gates of hell.

15 But perhaps we mistake, or malign the Romanist, in charging him with
shufling in another foundation besides Christ, in that sense the Apostle denies
any other Foundation can be laid. We rather by too much pressing * 1 Cor. 3. 11.
them with that Axiom of his, make him contradict himself; for elsewhere he
says (...). 2. 20.
We are built upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

16 I will not here dispute whether S. Paul in that place mean, we are built
(...) does that (...) Rev. ^1. 14. prove any more then that (...) the Apostles
(...) the (...) was erected.
upon the persons of the Prophets and Apostles, they being placed nearer the
rock, or main Foundation it self, then we, or rather upon the main Foundation,
which both the Prophets and the Apostles jointly had laid, be^ which no other
can be laid, Christ crucified and glorified: For he is both the Foundation
which wholly supporteth, and the corner stone which only c^ pleth the whole
building; in which he is the Highest and the Lowest, first laid in humility for
the disobedient to fall upon, but now exalted unto greatest glory to fall upon
them. And as the Apostle calls his own scars, the Marks of Christ, because
inflicted for Christ's sake; so may he call Christ the Foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, because the only end whereto both Prophetical and
Apostolical laws were directed, was to lay this sure Foundation.

17 But granting what they take for granted. The Apostle did mean, we were
builded upon the Prophets and Apostles, as upon a second foundation, or first
row of stones; next in order unto the rock do they make Peter a rock, or
foundation only in this sense? If they do not, he could not be the Rock on
which the Church is built. If they do, let them give us the right hand of
fellowship; for we accuse them, not for making him such a Foundation as the
other Apostles were, but such as, it is evident, they were not, yea such in
deed and substance as Christ only is, and should be acknowledged by all the
faithful. For in what sense is Christ said to be the Foundation? Because he is
the head of his Church, both for supporting and directing it. Was not Peter
such in respect even of his fellow Apostles? D^ euta omnes Apostole, (...)
gubernationis. Omnes enum (...) ^apita, rectores, and pastores (...) universae,
sed (...) eodem modo quo Pertus Illi enim habuerunt summ^ atque ampli^^mam
potestatem ut Apostoli, sen Legati, Pe^^us autem u^ Pas^^r ^^di^atius. De^ ita
h^ plenitudmem potestatis, ut (...) (...) esset capur little, and ab illo ^.
Bellar. lib. Romans Pont c. 11. ^ significat Petram, ut ^ and Hi^ronymus te^ 2
Epistolae ad Galat. Graece ^ caput ut lib. 2. coutia ^ annotavit Optatus. A^ ex
celeber^mis C^ Nihil enim frequen^ app^ cum solo ^municans, ^ ut ^ and ^ ^^i^
quam ^ and caput ^ 17.
Bellarmin can assign no disserence betwixt them but in these very terms. All
of them he confesses had ecumenical jurisdiction, but not in such sort as
Peter had; all were infallible, because Apostles and Ambassadors, but not
after the same manner he was: yea Peter was their head, on whom they did
depend; so did not he on them. This makes Peter the corner stone that coupleth
the building. Which doubtless was Christ's peculiar whileit he lived on earth,
not communicated unto Peter as they acknowledge, until his resurrection or
ascension. That they tell us then, they make but one primary Foundation, and
therefore none such as Christ is, as if they should say, they admit no more
such Popes as Pius primus was, because there has never been, nor ever shall be
any Pope Pius the First but he: for to make Peter such a Primate, is to make
him a foundation or head of the same rank and order, that Christ was (only his
inferior, as successor in time) or (to use their words) a foundation in
Christ's place So Bellarmin expressly avoucheth, where proving Peter's Supremacy
or Lordship from his name, he thus infers, Peter only was known by Christ's own
name of Ce^^as or Rock, tribute in which he is set out unto us as often as by
any other whatsoever, yea this is the peculiar attribute in which he is set out
unto us as the foundation and head of the C^ (...) Christ communicating this
unto Peter* would have (...) s^ world that he meant to make Peter the
foundation and head of the Church (...) own place. Why does Christ cease to be
the Foundation in becoming the head stone in the corner? or do they to avoid
open suspicion of Antichristianism acknowledge him come in the flesh, but gone
again to make room for Peter and his successors? Certainly, were the Apostle
to gather the meaning of Bellarmins speeches, his inference would be thus; Heb.
8. 13.
In that he says, a New Head is come in his place, he abrogates the formers
Authority, as he was Ambassador between God and man: nor is it now as the
Testament given by Moses was in the Prophets time ready to expire, but already
expired by actual succession of another, unto whom Christ the first visible
head (or foundation) did at his advancement to higher dignity, seal the same
Commission he had from his father, for transacting all affairs concerning the
state of his visible Church.

18 But does the space between heaven and earth more exceed Romes distance from
the utmost ends of the world, then he to whom all power was given in heaven and
earth, does the present Pope in amplitude of spiritual jurisdiction? Whence is
it else that Christ's regiment cannot so fully and immediately extend it self
unto his Church militant, wheresoever scattered upon the face of the earth, as
the Popes may to the East and West Indies, from either of which he cannot
receive certain information, how his instructions sent thither, succeed with
his flock under a years space at the least. Every Pope in his time is a rock, a
The difference between Christ and the Pope much lose (by the Papists opinion)
then between the Pope and other Bishops.
foundation, an head in Christ's absence from the earth. Might not every one of
them in like sort admit a Pope, a Vicar general, an absolute fellow Monarch,
from whom in these remote countries, there should be no more appeals to Rome,
then are from Rome to Christ's throne of Majesty? If we speak not of that
Majesty which he there enjoyes, but of that authority which he sometimes had,
or we can imagine he could have in regiment of his Church, were he now visibly
present in the flesh: it is evident that Saint Peter, and his successors may
by our adversaries doctrine, be more properly instiled compeers to Christ, then
the best man Nos non negamus, (...) defendimus contra negantes, verbum Dei
ministratum per Apostolos and Prophetas osse primum fundamentu^ nostrae fidei.
Ideo enim credimus, quidquid credimus, quia Deus id per Apostolos, and
Prophetas revelavit; sed addimus, praeter hoc sun^um primum, requi^i aliud
fundamentum secondarium, id est, Ecclesiae testificationem. Neque enim scimus
(...) (...) Deus revelaverit, nisi ex testimonio Ecclesiae, and propterea sicut
legimus, Christum esse lapidem fundamentalem, and ^entum primum Ecclesiae, ita
legimus Matthew. 16. de Petro, Super hanc Perram aedisicabo Ecclesiam mea^.
Itaque fides nostra adhaeret Christo, primae veritati revelanti mysteria, ut
fundamento prim^rio; adharet etiam Petro, id (...), (...) proponenti and
explicanti haec mysteria, ut sundamento secundario. Bellar. de Verbi Dei,
Interpret. lib. 3. cap. 10. Re^ ad 13.
living besides unto the worst of them. For it must be thought that Christ in
his absence ratifies all their decrees without exception, as we may not
question them more then we might Christ's own, were he visibly resident in his
Church. Yet was the authority of Christ's other Apostles so mightily overtopped
by Peter's Supremacy, that they could not be infallible, or ecumenical without
his approbation? If they were, Peter was not such an head to them, as his
successors are to theirs, even to all Bishops or inferior Ministers throughout
the world. If they were not, the Pope, if he will be Peter's Successors, should
make Bishops or Cardinals, at least Eleven, ecumenical Pastors of authority
infallible, though with such dependency on his plenary power, as Christ's other
Apostles had on Peter's. Or let them resolve us in other fundamental
difficulties, which their doctrine ministers.

19 Of all Peter's prerogatives those most urged by the Romanists, as a-like
appertaining to his successors are most personal.
Christ said, thou art Peter; that is, say they, a Rock, an Head, a Foundation
in my place. Unto whom was this said? to one of the twelve expressed by name,
Simon the son of Jona: To whom likewise (singulalised by the same express
terms of individual difference, and like restraint of present circumstances or
occurrences) it was said, Feed my Lambs, feed my sheep. If any of Christ's
speeches, (as the Vide Bella^. lib. 1. de Romano Pontif. cap. 12. and L. 2. cap
12. Paragr. 21. A^not. ex Bella^m.
Popes advocates grant many) were personally directed to Saint Peter,
questionless these two. By what Analogy of Faith or rule of Grammar can they
th^^ extend these, to every Pope in his generation; or, if any such there have
been, or yet may be, unto whom the Foeminine title of Petra, by right of Sex,
may better agree then unto Simon Bar-Jona? Yet might the Name or Title
Infallible draw the supreme Dignity after it, they are much overseen in not
giving the name of Peter to every Pope. Christ they confess, is come in the
flesh, and was in person made head, and foundation of the Church, and at his
departure left Peter in his stead: Peter, the Scriptures tell us, was to follow
Christ; but (as they pretend) left Pope Linus in his place, so has every Pope
his successor since that time. Yet these later mightily fail in not nominating
others, whiles they themselves are living and visible stones; as Christ without
question did Saint Peter, whiles conversant with the faithful in the flesh, and
Peter Linus in his life time.

20 But howsoever, they must of necessity either make Peter, Linus, and their
The Papists either admit many foundations, or build all the Apostles, beside S.
Peter, (...) (...) (...) (...) Popes.
successors but one joint permanent Foundation, (and so the Popes should not be
builded upon the foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles, but rather
Christ's other Apostles upon them; upon whom, likewise, all the faithful, since
the Apostles time, should be immediately built:) Or, if they do not make Peter
and the Popes one joint unseparable Foundation, they must admit as many several
foundations as Popes, so as the everlasting Rock whereon the Church is built,
could not be truly said one and the same, but by a perpetual Equivalency of
alteration or succession: as we say corruptible Elements, fire, or water, or
candles* remain one and the same; because as one part consumes, another, as
good, comes in the place. This glorious Edisice (as has been observed) stands
only by Faith, or firm adherence to the Foundation: and by the Adversaries own
confession, to disclaim the authority of the pressent Romish Church, or Pope in
points of faith, is an Heresy or Apostasy, of the same nature as if a man had
renounced Peter for his supreme head, and this all one, as if he had cut
himself off from being a member of Christ. Wherefore, in respect of us that are
now to be edisied, the authority of this present Pope is equivalent to Christ's:
our adherence to the one, in points of faith and manners must be such, as it
should have been to the other, had we lived in the days of his visible
conversation in the world.

Finally, CHRIST, S. Peter, and his successors, in regiment of the Church
militant here on earth, differ, by the Roman account, no otherwise then
Romulus, Numa, Ancus, etc. Romulus was first Founder of that kingdom, but left
other of kings of the same rank and order he was: only his dignity after his
departure was acknowledged greater in another world because, as his people were
made to believe he ascended alive into heaven, as a God. Much better might the
Romanist derive his Pseudo-catholick-Roman faith, from ^
Romulus the first builder of that great City, that sometimes ruled (...) the
Kings of the earth; then from Christ, who did erect a kingdom indeed, but not
of this world; wherein none was to succeed him, because he remains, Yesterday,
today, The Same for ever: Whence the ^
Proph^t (...), this kingdom shall never be destroyed or given to another
people; but s^ and destroy all former kingdoms, and it self stand for ever.
For any ^ of that (...) whose former kings had put this Immortal King to ^, to
^ile themselves Rocks, and ^, or absolute spiritual Monarchies ^ evidently
show, they are the Feet of that image, most of which have been, and shall be
broken to pieces, by that stone cut out without hands out of the Mountain,
until it become like the chafe of the summer flowers, carried away with the
wind, and no place be found for them; or, as the 2 These. 2. 8.
Apostle interprets the Prophet, the Lord shall consume them with the spirit of
his mouth, and shall abolish them with the brightness of his coming.

21 Would the Jesuit then know, wherein he, and his Latian Lord God must take
after S. Peter? methinks their formal acknowledgement of that general
principle; Christ manifested in the flesh, and made the head stone in the The
Pope successor unto the check, not to the promise given by Christ to S. Peter.
corner, compared with their late mentioned Apostasy, in seeking to lay another
foundation; was lively resembled, if not mystically prefigured, by Saint Peter's
faith, (immediately after his glorious confession) eclipsed by interposition of
such earthly conceits, as perpetually darken their minds. For, upon our
Saviors declaration, what bodily calamity, what ignominy and reproach should
at Jerusalem, shortly after, befall the Rock it self; whereupon that Church,
against which he had now said, the gates of hell should never prevail, was
founded: Peter (as Saint Matthew says) took his Master aside, and friendly
checks him, as if he had forgotten his former promise, Mat. 16. 22, etc.
Master be good to your self, this shall not be unto you. As if he had said, if
the gates of hell shall not prevail against your Church, or us your poor
Disciples; I hope you are able to privilege your own person from such
disgrace, and scorn, as none but they can intend against you. So carnally did
this great Apostle upon ignorance, conceit Christ's spiritual promise, as the
Papacy, upon habitual or affected error, does to this present day. For one
principal argument, most usual in the mouths and pens of that great Heads
chief disciples, to prove the Romish the only Church, unto which that glorious
promise was made, or, at least, has been perpetually performed, is, because no
temporal or secular power has ever been able, (though many wicked Potentates,
Kings, and Emperors (such titles they give to all their enemies) have
attempted, either to deface her external pomp, state, and splendour, or so to
use the Popes or Cardinals, or other of her principal and dearest children, as
the Jews did our Savior Christ and his Disciples. They are of the world, and
therefore speak they of the world, and the world hears them. But could they,
unto any child of God, more plainly prove themselves heirs to that check, given
by our Savior to S. Peter, Bellarmin applies all that is spoken in Peter's
Commendations, unto his Successors, whom he will not have sharers in his
reproofs. Ea quae dicu^tur Petro in triplici sunt differentia; quaedam enim
dicuntur ei pro ^e tantum; quaedam pro se and omnib^s Christianis; quaedam pro
se and successoribus; id quod evidenter colligitur ex ratione diversa, qua ei
dicuntur. Nam quae dicuntur ei, ut uni ex fidelibus certe omnibus fidelibus
dicta intelliguntur. Ut Mat. 18. Si peccaverit in t^ ^^ater tuus, etc. Quae
dicuntur ei ratione aliqua propria personae ipsius, ei soli dicuntur, ut vade
post me Satana Et, Term ^^^^bis, is^a enim dicuntur ei ratione propriae
imbecillitatis, and ignorantiae. Quaedam dicuntur ei ratione Officii Pastoralis
quae proinde dicta intelliguntur omnibus successoribus, ut Pasce oves meas,
etc. Bellar. lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 12. Sect. ultimo.
Go behind me Satan's, ye are an offense, because ye understand not the things
that are of God, but the things that are of men? Could they more evidently
demonstrate, the Pope to be That Man of Sin, that must be inducted to the
Church of God by Satan (...), the chief adversary or accuser, he himself
bearing the name of adversary, likewise, in his ^itle The Romanist makes the
Pope his God in that he makes him the Rock on which the Church is built.
Compare Exodus 17. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 4. The Hebr. (...) is taken in the same sense.
Psalm. 18. 2. Isa. 31. 9.
(...) -- a second foundation, in show subordinate, in deed and consequence
quite contrary to that, which the Prophets and Apostles have laid; eternally
privileged, if we may believe his followers, from those spurnings of men, from
which the precious stone of Sion was not exempted.

22 To collect the sum of late Romanists comments, upon their Churches supposed
fundamental Charter; Their confession of Christ come in the flesh, and made
head stone in the corner, though conceived in form of words Orthodoxal enough,
proves only this, (but this abundantly to all the world) that the Pope, their
supreme head, sits in the Temple of God, whose circumference in respect of men,
who cannot search other men's hearts, is defined by this Confession. Their
attributing the title of Rock, or Fundamental supportance of that spiritual
house, unto this head, proclaims unto all the world, that he sits as God in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. For the Hebrew (...) equivalent
to the Sy^iac (...) in that sense they take it, (as assording such impregnable
supportance, or fortification against the powers of hell, world or flesh) is
oftener by their own This observation will easily approve it self to any that
will read the book of Deuteronomy. and the P^alms
vulgar latin, rendered Deus, then Petra or Rupes, which it directly signifies;
because, considered with these circumstances or effects, it is rather a
glorious Title of the Godhead, or Derty it self then a particular attribute,
taken from some divine propriety, communicable to Gods servants in the Abstract.

23 Lastly, unto me their common exposition of Christ's speeches unto S. Peter,
suggest this argument more then demonstrative, that the Papacy H^w Romi^h
Relig^^n deny^ the ve^tue and power of^ h^st come in the flesh.
is lead by the spirit of great Antichrist, in that no doctrine of Devils can
more directly contradict, or more shamefully deny the virtue and power of
Christ come in the flesh, nor more peremptorily disanul, or cancel his promise
there made unto his Church, then Jesuitical comments upon it, do. Christ's
promise was a promise of life and saving health a full assurance of eternal
happiness to all that should be truly built upon that Rock which Peter
confessed, or which they say, Peter was. They make the tenure of this glorious
covenant to be no more but this, that Peter's successors and such as will build
their faith upon them (speaking ex Cathedra) as upon Rocks invincible; shall be
indefectible in points of Christian faith and manners; howsoever even these
Rocks themselves may be, for life and conversation, as wicked as Annas or
Caiphas, or other blinded guides of the Jewish Synagogue that crucified our
Savior.

24 Thus by a pretended successive perpetuity of Peter's Faith, they utterly
That R^mish Faith is not that Faith by which S. Peter confessed Christ
abolish that lively Faith, whereby he confessed Christ* which is always
included as a necessary condition, without which none can be capable of that
glorious promise, but with it all are made immediate heirs of salvation. Or to
speak more plainly, none may expect the least portion of Peter's blessing
without Peter's Faith; nor can that be in any, but such as are born of God:
Everyone says S. John, that is born of God over comes the world, and this is
the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. And again, who is he
that overcomes the world, but he which Believes: (what Peter had confessed)
that Jesus is the Son of God. And our Savior himself, to whom his father had
given power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to all, given him
by his father; tells us, that this Life Eternal must grow from that root of
Faith which first did branch in Peter's mouth; but must be so planted as it grew
in him, in every heart endued with sure hope; much more in all such as ^ay
challenge to such preheminency, or Prerogative of Faith* or Hope, as Peter had;
This is life eternal that they may know Thee, (says Christ speaking of his
Father) to be the That the Romish Church is neither that Rock, nor built upon
that Rock, against which the gates of hell ^l, because their Faith is un^^nd.
Only Very God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ; so then God manifested in
the flesh, was the Rock of salvation, whereupon the Church is built: he that
rightly knows, and so believes this truth, has life eternal dwelling in him.

25 But shall such a Faith as may be severed from Charity? shall such a
knowledge of Christ as may be in them to whom Christ shall say; Depart from me
I never knew you, I say not, make any so impregnable a Rock, but so fasten any
to that Rock so impregnable, as the gates of hell shall not be able to
dispossess him of eternal life? Whiles we produce the late cited, or other
testimonies alike pregnant to condemn the Pontificians for denying
Justification only by Faith, they think themselves fully acquitted with this
solution, that our assurance of salvation relies not upon Faith, as alone, but
as it is the Foundation of Charity, and accompanied with other Christian
virtues. We never taught (us shall be showed in that controversy) that Faith,
unless thus attended, could with true confidence plead our cause before God,
which yet though thus attended, It only pleads. But here our adversaries must
be contented to take their payment in their own coin: For, if no man can be
justified, or made heir of salvation, it is unpossible any should be a lively
stone, or living member, much less a supreme head, or sure foundation of that
spiritual house, always victorious over death and hell, without a Faith so
appointed, as in the former case they require, without a Faith as clearly
testifying Christ dwelling in men, by works flowing from it, as their
edification upon him by an Orthodoxal form of words. Whosoever is destitute of
a faith thus bearing fruit unto salvation is so far from being a Rock or sure
foundation for others to build upon, that he himself (if we may believe our
Savior, Mat. 7. 26.) builds all his hopes upon the Sand: Whosoever hears
these my words, and does them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which
has builded his house upon the sand, and the rain fell, and the floods came,
and the winds blew, and beat upon that house and it fell, and the fall thereof
was great. Not every one therefore that says unto our Savior, as Peter did,
thou art Christ the son of the living God, but he that expresses his faith,
and hope by works, answerable to Christ's conversation in the flesh, and his
Fathers will, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven; because he only is built
upon that Rock, which the floud-gates of hell cannot undermine or overthrow:
For, whosoever (says our Savior) hears of me these words, and does the
same, I will liken him to a wise man which builded his house on a rock, And the
rain fell, and the floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house,
and it fell not, for it was grounded upon a Rock.

26 Let the Jesuit either produce any Heresy, broached since our Saviors
Incarnation, or frame a conceit of any but Logically possible before his coming
unto judgment, which in outward profession, not disclaiming the former main
foundation of Christianity [God manifested in the flesh] can in deed and issue
more evidently overthrow it, more distinctly contradict either those
Fundamental precepts of salvation last cited, or more fully evacuate the often
mentioned promise made unto Saint Peter* then the foundation of Romish
religion, as Romish does; and I will do public penance in sackcloth and
as^es, for laying the imputation of Antichristianism upon it. Our Savior
says, whosoever hears these words and does them not, does build his house
upon the sand: They teach the contradictory as an Article of faith; that the
Pope or a Council of Bishops assembled by his appointment, instructed by his
Infallibility, confirmed by his plenary power, do always build upon the same
Rock as Peter did; yea that the Pope himself, how wicked soever, is that very
Rock whereupon the Church (that is in their language, the Bishops thus
assembled) is built? the ecumenical Pastor that must keep them, and by them
all Christ's flock, from going astray; the supreme head, that by his virtue and
influence must sustain every member of Christ's body (here on earth) from
falling into heresy, or approaching the territories of hell, through any kind
of error or infidelity.

27 Our Savior promised in solemn manner, ex Cathedra, the gates of hell shall
never prevail against his Church. What Church? the Catholic. What Catholic?
Visible or Invisible? Triumphant or Militant? Visible and Militant! What
Catholic, visible, militant Church? The Roman: that consists of diverse
members: In it some are Pastors, some are sheep; whether P^, Ecclesia
congregata, (...) Concilium prop^ (...) Ecclesia Christi, ^ (...) (...): ^ est
congrega^, ^gi^ (...) les ^ congreg^ and (...), ^ prop^ sunt Ecclesia: ac (...)
est, cum aliquid de alio absolute pronunciatur, excipere id, quod proprijs^in e
per illud significatur; ergo cum Christus dicit, Super (...) (...) ^ Ecclesiam
meam, stulte excipitur Ecclesia universalis congregata, cum ea prop^ijssime sit
Ecclesia. Bellar. lib. 2 de Con. Aut. cap. 15. Of this Church the Pope is the
foundation as he avoucheth in the words going before. Quod est in (...)
fundamentum, est in corpore caput, and in grege Pastor. Ut (...). fundamentum
non pendet a domo, sed domuo a fundamento; ita ^tiam caput non pendet a
corpore, sed corpus a capite, and pastor non pendet a grege, sed grex a
pastore. His conclusion is, Papa p^ae^st omnibus loco Christi quibus Christus
ipse invisibiliter praeest, and quibus etiam praeesset visibil^, si vi^^^^liter
adesset: Christus autem praeest, and praeesset visibiliter, si adesset
visibiliter, non solum Eccles^^s particu^, sed etiam toti Ecclesia universali,
and generalibus Concilijs: igitur etiam Papa praeest Ecclesiae universali.
Either is not the Romish Church representative, that Church spoken of Matthew. 16
or else Christ's promise has failed.
have better interest in that Promise? Pastors. Of Pastors, some are Prelates,
some inferiors; whether are to be preferred before the other? Prelates
doubtless; for of them consists the body of the Church representative, which
is most properly called the Church, and next in reversion unto Peter's
prerogative Did the gates of hell then never prevail against the greatest
Romish Prelates? I nominate no particular person; I speak only of them as the
Scripture does of Drunkards, Whoremongers, Adulterers, Dogs, Enchanters. Many
of highest place in that Church have for a long time lived, and for ought their
followers can, or Caput Ecclesia non potest quidem (...) decendo falsam
doctrinam, tamen potest errare male v^vendo, and male etiam sentiendo, (...)
privatus homo, atque hoc tantum videmus accidisse Adamo: male enim aliquando
vixit, and forte etiam male de D^ s^, tamen non male docuit. Bellar minus de
Ecclesia militante. lib. 111. cap. 16. Resp. ad prim. Some of their Popes by
their own Writers confession have been strangely cut off, in the very acts of
adultery, or other sins by them accounted mortal. Christ's promise unto S.
Peter but a mee^ mockery by the Jesuits construction.
care to say unto the contrary, died such as the Spirit of God has excluded
from the Kingdom of Heaven; such as Gods Word tells us, hell must swallow up
with open mouth. Are they the Church, and may hell gates prevail against them,
and yet not prevail against the Church?

28 But if a woman, an whorish woman cannot be taken without an excuse, may we
think those effeminate sworn creatures of servitude to that great Strumpet, can
want an answer? No, this distinction is always at hand. Their Popes and
Cardinals may as err, so go to hell. But how? as private Doctors, not as
ecumenical Pastors, not as they speak ex Cathedra: so to my remembrance I have
read of a proud Romish Prelate, that being reproved for his secular pomp, made
answer, he followed these fashions as he was a Duke, not as an Archbishop. But
the reprovers reply has made the Apology (better then which no Jesuit can
make for the Pope) most ridiculous ever since. If this be so, quoth the
shepherd (such was the Pastor God had appointed to rebuke the madness of this
false Prophet) I pray resolve me what shall become of my Lord Duke, if the
Archbishop go to the Devil. If many, sometimes Popes, be now in hell (as no
Jesuit I think, will profess any moral hope that all are saved:) What is
become of the Church representative, which lodged in their brains? Has the
number of glorified Saints been increased by their departure from earth? Were
they ever a whit more happy for being heirs to that glorious Promise; Thou art
Peter, and upon this Rock will I build my Church? Or were their Comments upon
that place Orthodoxal? What was the comfort Saint Peter himself could ever have
reaped thence? Only this, though Satan may so fist thee, that thy soul may go
to hell before thy body descend to the grave; yet rest assured of this, that
thy faith which in Cathedral resolutions shall never sail thee in thy life
time, shall survive in thy successors when thou art dead; but to what purpose,
if notwithstanding this prerogative, all may descend one after another into
hell?

29 Or if their Doctrine were true, to what end did Christ come in the flesh?
only to build a Church, which like a lamp or candle may gloriously shine,
whiles there is an uninterrupted succession of Popes to propagate the splendour;
but whose glory when that expires, for ought that glorious promise adds unto
it, must be extinguished; as the light goes out when the oil is spent. Better
assurance then every Pope for his time has; Saint Peter by their doctrine had
none from those words of our Savior. For whatsoever power or prerogative was
in them bequeathed to him, does descend by inheritance to his successors. And
would the meanest Jesuit now living have gloried much in a life, graced with
no greater visible Church dignity then S. Peter's was, perpetually exposed to
like danger, without any other solace to support it, save only this, that his
posterity should enjoy the same privileges? But now that the glory and dignity
of the Romish Church is become so great, and the Jesuits portion thereby grown
so fat; they can be well content to sooth up the Pope in this conceit, that
howsoever his person may go to hell (a place it seems not much dreaded because
unknown) yet hell gates shall never prevail against his faith; which has
brought such large possessions to the Church; both which he may infallibly
entail to his successors until the worlds end. But (as I said before) what
then shall become of that Cathedral faith? shall it augment the quire of Gods
elect, or can they make as many S. Faiths as have been Popes?

30 Herein appears the excess of these days impiety, in respect of former;
The ^ or ^ the ^ and ^.
that this imaginary Idea of Romish faith should be more superstitiously adored
then any other Idol in the World ever was; Although that of the Apostle may be
more properly said of it then any other, nihil est in mundo. Other Idols
represented either men or beasts, some permanent creature, or real quality:
This is a fancy of a Chimaera, a shape of nothing; or if by nature and essence
ought, it is such a conceit or mental quality as may be in devils Existence it
has none, but as Eclipses of the Sun, by fits or courses when the Pope shall
speak ex Cathedra. What shall become of it, and the colors in the Rainbow,
after the day of judgment, are two questions of like use and consequence: and
of these two Objects, the one as fit to direct men's courses by Sea or Land, as
the other to conduct us toward heaven. The dazzled imaginations of these
Idolaters, that can thus conceit this faith to be spiritual, and eternal by
succession, when it cannot save them in whom it is, are much worse then some
foolish Heathens dreams of an immortal fame, that was to accompany their mortal
souls, (as they esteemed them) and argue in these sons of Antichrist, either an
incogitancie, or unbelief of Christ, (who lives for ever) come in the flesh, or
a secure worldly hope, he shall never, or not this long time, come to judgment.

31 Saint Peter has foretold, that there shall come in the last days,
mockers, 2 Pet. (...). 3.
which will walk after their lusts, and say, where is the promise of his
coming? for since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the
beginning of the creation. Atheists and Libertines, I know here are literally
meant. But as the Prophets usually prefigure our future Bliss by Jerusalems
present glory, or other known felicity, by which perhaps it was represented
unto them: So might S. Peter shadow out unto us the mystery of iniquity,
according to that rude draught which it had in his time. For the substance,
native quality, A Parallel of Athen^ P^al ^er^^.
or proportion of the Atheists and the modern godless Romanists mockery, they
are the same, only the one is more rude and rough hewn, the other more
smoothly varnished with Hypocrisy, and overlaied with artificial colors. The
blunt Atheist like a lewd debtor that simply denies his bond, imagines the Lord
will never come to call him to an account. Their subtle Romanist like a crafty
companion that acknowledges the debt, but no set day of payment specified,
save only [to morrow] hopes to drive off God Almighty from day to day, putting
Christ's coming as far from him the next three years to come, as it was the last
three past; and so would hold on these hundred thousand years, if the World
should stand so long, because Antichrist, who by professed enmity against
Christ, shall give the World three years warning (according to the years of an
hireling) of its dissolution, (if we may believe this mocker) is not yet
revealed: Nor ever shall The ^ the ^ witched, the ^ M^s ^ a^^eady (...) and ^,
the ^ king for Anti^ (...) (...), and a^^red (...) him as his God.
be to him, unto whom, since the Patriarchs and Apostles died, all things
continue as they did from the beginning of the new creation, (man's redemption)
without any general Apostasy or decay of Peter's faith, which remains still as
fresh and lively, as when he first confessed Christ Not the Jew more sottish,
in expecting his Messiah, then this hypocrite in deferring Antichrists coming.
And no marvel, when that which first caused the Jew so grievously to stumble,
and since retains him in his unbelief, is made the only ground of the Roman
Catholics faith. Hell, by an approved Experiment of the ones fall, knew well
the same charm would enchant the other: both being equally tainted with a
superstitious heathenish conceit, that their teachers could not err, because
they sit in the seats of such as were Infallible in their life times. And hence
it is they are so blind, and see it not, bewitched, and bewitching others with
continual reiterating that magic Spell of Templum Domini, the Church, the
Church, words whose meaning they understand no more, then simple women do
waggish scholars medicines, or charms for the toothache. Their ignorance
(though) may put us in mind of another mockery, they make of our Saviors words.

32 For where he promised hell gates should never prevail against his Church,
meaning against no true Christian soul espoused to him by an indissoluble knot
of faith and everlasting love: These mockers dispossess the Christian world of
this glorious hope, by a double delusion; first persuading it, that the
universal Church militant may encamp in one man's breast; upon whom, though hell
shut her gates, the simple (such as they would make us all must believe the
Church is safe, because he came not within them as an Heretic. For so in the
second place, though our Savior promises in terms as ample and Majestical as
can be devised, that not Hell gates, that is, no power or force of hell, shall
be able to hold play with that Church, whose safe conduct to his heavenly
Kingdom he there undertook; they make the meaning of his assurance to be but
this: No Heresy (as if hell gates were furnished with no other munition) shall
ever make breach upon the Roman Consistory, or approach the Popes Seat of
dignity. Thus, to support the Popes Supremacy, they would make Christ so to
shufle; as if a Prince (were it possible any Prince could be so base) should
warrant his Confederates safe conduct through his Territories, upon as high
terms, as his Soveraigntie or Supremacy would stretch unto, and yet
challenged upon the others miscarriage, interpret his meaning to have been but
this; I did warrant him he should not die of porson, administered by any
Physician of mine in my Dominions; That no violence should be offered him by
thieves and robbers, or other unrulie subjects, I undertook not.

CAP. IX.
That the Romanists Belief of the Churches Infallible Authority cannot be
resolved into any testimony better then Humane, whence the main conclusion
immediately follows. That the Romanist in Obeying the Church-decrees, without
examination of them by Gods Word, prefers man's Laws before Gods.

1 SEeing it has been manifested as well by Ostensive proof from Scriptures,
as by Deduction to inconveniences, most contrary to the Analogy, and
prejudicial to the main foundation of Faith, that Saint Peter was not the
Church, nor such an head as the Pope does make himself of all the faithful:
the principal Point is clear, that the Romanists Belief of such a transcendent,
absolute ecumenical Authority in the Church, as might warrant our Obedience to
the former Decrees, cannot be resolved into any Divine testimony, or absolute
Promise of Christ: in neither of which the Pope can have any interest, but
only by right derived from Saint Peter.

2 To follow them a little in their School humor, only reckoning the
Speculative probabilities that can be brought for them, without computation of
their Blasphemies, or other dangerous Consequences wherewith their Doctrine
heretofore has been, and must be further charged; let us try what strength
the other joints have in themselves, and see in the next place, what proof they
can make their Popes are successors to such preheminences as Peter had. Albeit
even this joint, as all the rest of their religion, is quite benumbed, and
utterly deprived of sense, by the deadly blow lately given to the principal
nerve, whence life and motion must be derived to the whole body of their
Religion. For if we consider the intensive perfection of that pre-eminence, or
estimation, which Peter in respect of his fellows had, either with his Lord,
or with his flock: this was founded in a correspondent excess of his love, his
lively faith, and diligent feeding; unto no one of which good qualities, the
Popes profess themselves heirs infallible. Or if we respect the extent or
amplitude of Saint Peter's extraordinary sovereignty, it was the same with
David's kingdom, or Christ's own Pastoral charge; and reached but from Dan to
Beersheba. At the utmost, it and the circumcision had the same circumference:
Within which, how great soever his Authority was, the Pope can have have no
pretense to be his successor therein. For the edification of the people
committed to him by our Savior, was to be finished before Ierusalems
destruction; since which time Israel has been perpetually scattered amongst
the Nations without a shepherd, to gather them. And when it shall please the
Lord, as it is probable it will, to reduce them to his fold: their Ruler shall
be of their own people, strangers shall have no more dominion over them.

3 Had the Pope derived his right from Saint Thomas, Rartholomew, or other
Apostle, which have no writings extant, this might have yielded some The
Adversaries folly in deriving Numenical authority per^ly infallible from S.
Peter.
surmises, not so easy to be disproved, that Romish traditions did contain the
sum, at least of all these Apostles unwritten Doctrine: if from Saint Paul
the great Doctor of the Gentiles, and first planter of faith amongst the
Romans, (as much commended by him as any other of his children in Christ) the
improbabilitie had been much less then now it is in Peter's case, that the
Bishop of Rome, if any should have succeeded him. But when that people began to
grow out of love with the truth, fashioning themselves unto this present world,
(the disease whereof Saint Paul Romans 12. 2.
forewarned them) it was Satan's policy to present unto them (longing after
such a Monarchical state as their Heathenish Predecessors had) such shows of
Peter's Supremacy, and residencie at Rome, as by the Divine permission had
either crept into some of the Ancients religious cogitations, or else in time
of darkness have been shufled by the Predecessors of these cheating mates late
discovered, into their writings, as sit baits to entice them unto this
derivation of that absolute power from Peter, to their greater condemnation,
and our good. For God no doubt in his providence ordered this their blindness
to illuminate us, as he did the fall of the Jews to confirm the Gentiles in
faith seeing of all the Apostles Peter's prerogatives (as has been showed) were
most evidently personal; all to determine with himself; unto which observation
his own writings also give testimony. Even a little before he was to leave the
world, where he most manifested his earnest desire of preserving his flock,
found in faith after his death, he gives no intimation (as shall be showed more
at large Chap. 23.
hereafter) of any Successor, unto whom they were to repair. His present
Epistle he foresaw would be more availeable to this purpose, then any Tradition
from him: 2 Pet 1. 12, etc.
I will not be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things,
though that he have knowledge, and he established (...) present truth. For I
think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to ^ you up, by pretting unto
in remembrance; seeing I know that the time is at hand, that I must lay down
this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has shewea me. I will
endeavor therefore always that ye also may be able to have remembrance S.
Peter ^ s^ be ^.
of those things after my departing.

4 As for peculiar direction of later times, whence perpetual infallibility
must be derived; it cannot be gathered from his writings, that he knew so much
as his brother Paul did. Albeit in this point, these two great pillars of
Christ's Church, more famous then all their fellow Apostles besides for present
efficacy of their personal ministry, come far behind the Disciple whom Jesus
loved; whose written Embassage was in a peculiar sense, to tarry till Christ's
last coming unto judgment, as he himself did unto Christ first coming to
destroy Jerusalem, and forewarn the Nations. Besides the Doctrine of common
salvation, necessary for all to know, plentifully set down in this Disciples
Epistle, his Revelations contain infallible directions, peculiar to every age.
And as in some one gift or other, every Apostle almost exceeds his fellows: so
if amongst all, any one was to have this prerogative of being the ordinary
Pastor, or to have ordinary succeslours as Aaron (though inferior to Moses in
personal prerogatives during his life) had after his death: this doubtless was
Saint John; who ascribes that unto the diligent Expositors, hearers, or Readers
of his Books, which the Romanist appropriates to such as rely upon the visible
Churches determinations: never questioning whether it be that Babylon which
Saint John deciphers, or no; Blessed is he (says Saint John) that reads, and
they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those things which are
written therein, for the time is at hand. Blessed they are that read it with
fear and reverence, or so affected as this Disciple was: for unto such the Lord
will by means ordinary, by sober observation of the event, reveal his secret
intent, as he did it unto him by the extraordinary gift of Prophecy, for the
testimo^; of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy Revel. 19. 10.

5 It is evident the Spirit of God intended to show John, and John to show the
faithful, all the Eclipses that should befall the Church until the worlds end.
His prophesies since his death, were so to instruct the world of all principal
events present or to come, as Histories do of matters forepast. Now as he in
our times, wherein God inspires not men with Moses spirit, is accounted the
best Antiquary, that is most conversant, and best seen in the faithful Records
of time; not he that can take upon him to divine as Moses did of the worlds
state in former Ages: so since the gift of prophecy ceased, he is to be
esteemed the most infallible teacher, the safest guide to conduct others
against the forces of hell; chiefly heresies or doctrines of Devils, that can
best interpret him, who first descried them, and in his life time forewarned
the Churches of Asia (planted by Saint Paul, and watered by him) of the
abominations that threatened shortly to overspread them, and after them the
whole visible Church, until these later times. Does the Pope then profess more
skill in Saint John's Revelations then any other? If he do, let him make proof
of his Profession by the evidence of his Expositions. But from this Apostle he
pretends none at all, and we demand but any tolerable proof of succession from
S. Peter.

6 A supreme ecumenical Head (say the Parasites to the Sea Apostolic) is as
necessary now, as in Saint Peter's time: therefore he must jure civino have a
Successor. But neither does Scripture or Reason admit any such Head, as they
have molded in their brains, either then or now. As has Vide lib. 2. cap. 29.
been abundantly proved; and their own instances brought to illustrate the
probability of such a device contradict them. For admit that Christ and
earthly Princes stood in like need of Deputie-Governours in their absence;
would the King of Spain, were he to go on Pilgrimage unto his Kingdom of
Jerusalem, leave but one Deputy over all the Dominions of Spain and Portugal,
the West Indies, Sicilie, Naples, and Millain? Or leaving but one, would indue
him with such absolute power over all his Subjects in these Nations as they
imagine Christ does the Pope over every Christian soul thorowout the whole
world. What spirit then (may we think) did possess RESPONDEO, non esse eandem
rationem Politici and Ecclesiastici regiminis. Siquidem orbis terrarum non
necessario debet esse unum regnum, proinde non necessario postulat unum qui
omnibus praesit; at Ecclesia tota unum est regnum, una civitas, una domus, and
ideo ab uno tota regi debet. Cujus differentiae, illa est, tatio, quod ad
conservationem Politicorum regnorum non necessario requiratur, ut omnes
Provinciae servent easdem leges civiles, and eosdem ritus. Possunt enim pro
locorum, and personarum varietate diversis uti legibus, and institutis, and
idcirco non requiritur unus, qui omnes in unitate contineat. Ad conservationem
vero Ecclesiae necesse est, ut omnes conveniant in eadem fide, ijsdem
Sacramentis, ijsdemque praeceptis divinitus traditis, quod sane fieri non
potest, nisi sint unus populus, and ab uno in unitate contineantur. Bellarmin
lib. 1. de Romans Pont. cap. 9. sob sinem. He acknowledges it were convenient
the whole World should be governed by one Civil Monarch. Were it possible to
create surely one without bloodshed or wrong, it were requisite he or any in
his behalf should resolve us why the whole Church might not as truly be one
people by communion with Christ their head, as the Tartars and Spaniards by
subordi^ to one Lord, to wit, the King of Spain, suppose he were Lord of both,
and they as far distant each from other as they are.
Bellarmine, when he avouched that the Church and Common-weals are different in
this case? let us hear the difference. The Church Catholic must be one by
communion with one head: so must the ^ieg people of every Monarch be one by
subordination to one Sovereign, whether resident amongst them, or far absent.
Why may not Christ then, though absent, be that only supreme head, whence
universally the Church receives unity? or why may not he rule in it, though
dispersed through many Nations, as effectually by his Angels, and ordinary
Ministers of the Gospel, as the Pope does by his Nuncios, fallible Legates, or
other inferior Prelates?

7 But though reason and Scripture fail them, yet Councels, Histories and
Traditions, may be mustered to their aid. These are the first Springs of these
many Waters, whereon the great Whore sits. From what History therefore do they
believe the Pope is Peter's Successor? from history Canonical or divine? no
Secular Monkish or Ecclesiastical at the best, upon which the best faith that
can be founded is but humane: and their profe^^ed villainy in putting in and out
whatsoever they please, into what writing soever, Gods word only excepted)
makes it more then doubtful, whether many ancient Writers did ever intimate any
such estimate of the Romish Church, as is now fathered upon them; or rather
this foul iniquity late revealed, whilst some have been taken in the manner,
has been long time concealed as a mystery of the Romish state. Put they
believe not this succession from express written history, but from Tradition
partly. From Tradition of whom? Of men, what men? Men obnoxious to error, and
parties in this present controversy: yet neither partial, nor erroneous while
they speak ex Cathedra says the Jesuit. But who shall assure us what they have
spoken ex Cathedra concerning this point? The Councels, What Councels? Councels
assembled by the Pope; Councels of men for the most part, as ill qualified as
carnally minded and so palpably carried away with faction, that to attribute
any divine authority unto them, were to blaspheme the holy Spirit. Councels
which the Papists them elves acknowledge not of sufficient authority, unless
they follow the Popes instructions; from whom likewise they ^.
must receive their approbation. The Pope must assure us the Council (which
perhaps elected him, rejecting a Competitor every way more sufficient) does not
err. But that the Pope is lawfully elected; that so elected he cannot err in
this assertion who shall assure us? he himself or his Predecessors. This then is
the last resolution of our says, if it rely us on the Church.

8 We must absolutely believe every Pope in his own cause: First, that he
himself is; secondly, that all his Predecessors up to S. Peter were
infallible. When as many of them within these few hundred years late past (by
their own followers confession) were such, as whatsoever must derive its
pedigree from them, may justly be suspected to have first descended from the
father of lies; such as not speaking ex Cathedra, were so far from the esteem
of absolute infallibility, that such as knew them best did trust them least in
matters of secular commodity, and if they were found unfaithful in the wicked ^
16. 11.
Mammon, who will trust them in the true? Not He that is unjust in the least is
a just also in much, ^aith our Savior in the same place, v. 1^.
Papists themselves, unless they speak ex Cathedra. Then belike our Savior
did not foresee this exception from his general rule: or Judas by this knack
might have proved himself or any other knave as faithful a Pastor as S. Peter.

9 But if a Pope shall teach ex Cathedra, that he is Peter's lawful successor,
and therefore of divine infallible authority, in expounding all the former ^.
places, we must notwithstanding our Saviors Caveat believe him. Why? Because
it must be supposed he has divine testimony for this assertion. As what,
either divine history, divine tradition, or divine revelation? Divine history
they disclaim, nor can impudency it self pretend it. It may be he has the
perpetual traditions of his predecessors. But here again we demand what divine
assurance they can bring forth, that every Pope from S. Peter downwards, did
give express cathedral testimony to this perpetual succession in like
authority. Suppose (what no Jesuit dare avouch, unless he first consult his
superiors, whether he must not of necessity say so for maintenance of the
Popes dignity) that this assertion had been expressly conveyed from S. Peter to
the present Pope, without interruption, yet if any one of them did receive it
from his predecessor, having it but as a private man or upon his honesty, he
might err in delivering it to his successor, so might the third b^h^v^ng i^
him. For no belief can be more certain then its pro^ject, or immediate ground.
If That be fallible, the belief must needs be uncertain, obnoxious to error
and at the best human. No better is the Popes testimony, unless given ex
Cathedra: and no better is the ground of his own belief, of what his
Predecessors told him, unless they told it him so speaking. Wherefore though
this present Pope should teach ex Cathedra, viva voce, that he is Peter's lawful
successor; yet unless he can prove that none of his predecessors did ever
neglect so to avouch the same truth, it is evident that he speaks more then he
can possibly know by any divine testimony, either of history, or unwritten
tradition. It is evident again, he binds us to believe that by divine faith
which he cannot possibly know himself, but only by faith humane. For the only
ground of his Popes bind us to believe by divine faith their reports of matters
forepast which they cannot believe by any other faith, but hnmane and fallible.
assertion, is this supposed perpetual tradition: and this is but humane,
unlesle it be perpetually delivered ex Cathedra. Nor is there any other means
possibly under the sun nay either in heaven or earth, for to know matters of
this nature forepast, but either the testimony of others, that have gone before
us, who either were themselves, or took their relations upon trust from such as
were present, when the things related were acted, or else by revelation from
him who was before all times, and is a present spectatour, an eye witness of
every action.

10 Our knowledge of matters forepast by the former means, (though Popes
themselves be the relators, unless their relation be cathedral) as has been
proved, are but humane and fallible; Things known by immediate revelation from
God are most certain, because the immediate Relator is He that will be reputed
a Prophet of times forepast, must show himself a prophet of things to come.
most infallible. Does the Pope by this means know, what his Predecessors, or
S. Peter thought concerning this perpetual succession, or generally all matters
concerning this point long since forepast? He may as easily tell us what any of
his successors shall do or say an hundred years hence. And thus much if this
present Pope will undertake, the Christian people then living, may safely
believe, what the Pope then being shall say of this; or both of their
predecessors. But to believe man, as an infallible prophet of things past,
which cannot approve himself a true foreteller of things to come, were to
invert Gods ordinance, and mock his word. For it has been a perpetual law of
God, that no man should ever be believed more then man, or by any faith, more
then humane, though in matters present, whereof he might have been an eye
witness: unless he showed his participation of the divine spirit, by infallible
prediction of things to come, or evidency of miracles fully answering to the
prediction of Gods word already written, as shall be showed at large in the
next Section. See Chap. 11.


11 If we put together the first elements of Romish faith, as they have been
sounded apart they make no such compound, as the simple and ignorant Papists
(who in policy are taught to read this lesson, as little children untaught, will
by guessing at the whole in gross, without spelling the parts) believe they
do. First, their prerogatives they give to Peter are blasphemous. Secondly,
their allegations, to prove that their Popes succeed as full heirs to all
Peter's prerogatives, are ridiculous. Whence it must needs follow, that their
faith is but a compost of folly and blasphemy. This pretended perpetuity of
tradition, or suspicious tale of succession from Peter, is the best warrant
they have, that the Church does not err in expounding the places alleged for
her infallibility; and their belief of their infallibility in such expositions,
the only security their souls can have, that obeying the former decree of
worshipping the consecrate Host, of communicating under one kind, they do not
contemptuously disobey Gods principal laws, mangle Christ's last Will and
Testament, vilify his precious body and blood. Seeing then they themselves
confess the places brought by us against their decrees to be divine; and we
have demonstrated that men's belief of that infallible authority in making such
decrees, to be merely humane: the former Conclusion is most firm, that whilst
men obey these decrees against that natural sense and meaning, which the former
passages of Scripture suggest so plainly to every man's conscience, that the
Churches pretended authority set aside, none would ever question whether they
could admit any restraint, they obey men more then God, humane laws more then
divine, and much better believe the traditions of humane Fancy, of whose
forgery for others worldly gain there be strong presumptions, then the express
written testimony of the holy spirit, in the especial points of their own
salvation.

12 Or if unto the testimony of Gods spirit, recorded in Scriptures, we The
present Popes authority is greater then history, traditions or councels, or
ought that can be pretended for it.
add history, tradition, Councels, or former Popes decrees or whatsoever
possibly may be pretended to prove the present Popes authority, it must still be
supposed greater and better known, then all that can be brought for it or
against it, as will appear, if we apply our argument used before. That authority
is always greater which may try all others, and must be tried by none, but
such is the Popes declaration, or determination of all points in controversy
whether about the Canon or sense of Scriptures, over those which are brought
for it, whether about the truth true meaning or authority, of unwritten
traditions, whether about the lawfulness of Councels, or their Authentic
interpretations: in one word, his determinations are Monarchical, and may not
be examined (as S. Austin or others of the ancient Fathers writings may) by any
law written or unwritten. So Aliud est interpretari legem more doctoris, aliud
more judicis: ad explicationem more doctoris, requiritur cruditio; ad
explicationem more judicis requiritur authoritas. Doctor enim non proponit
sententiam suam ut neces^ario sequendam, sed solum quatenus ratio suadet: a
judex proponit ut sequendam necesa^io. Aliter accipimus glossas Bartholi and
Baldi, aliter declarationem Principis. Augustinus igitur and caeteri Patres in
Commentariis fungehantur officio Doctorum: at Concilia, and Pontifices
funguntur officio judicis a Deo sibi commisso. Bellar. de verbi Dei interpret.
lib. 3. cap. 10. respon ad 16.
Bellarmin suitable to the Trent Council, expressly avoucheth: The Fathers were
only Doctors or expositors the Pope is a Judge, What then is the difference
between a Judge and an expositor? To explain as a Judge, there is required
authority, to explain as a Doctor, or expositor, only learning is requisite.
For a Doctor does not propose his sentence as necessary to be followed, but
only so far as reason shall counsel us: but a Judge proposes his sentence to
be followed of necessity. Whereof then will the Pope be Judge? Of expounding
Scriptures: these places of Scripture which make for his pretended authority.
Must his sentence herein of necessity be followed? By Bellarmin it must, albeit
we see no reason for it, either out of Scripture or nature. It is for Doctors
to bring reasons for their expositions; but the Pope neehs not except he will:
nor may we exact it of a Judge. So he adds more expressly, We admit not of
Bartolus or Baldus glosses, as we do of Emperors declarations. Austin and
other Fathers in their Commentaries suppy the places of Teachers, but the
Council and Popes exercise the function of Judges, whereunto God has designed
them. But how shall we know that God has committed all judgment unto them,
seeing we have been taught by his word, Joh 5. 22, 23.
that he has committed all judgment unto his son, Because all men should
honor the son as they honor the father? We read not of any other to whom the
like authority is given by God, or his son; yet of one, whose very name shall
import the usurpation of like authority, that is, (...), Christ's Vicar general,
unto whom the Son as must be supposed, does delegate the same judiciary power
the Father delegated unto him.

13 But may a Princes declaration in no case be examined by his subjects? Yes,
though in civil matters, it may, so far as it concerns their conscienqes; as
whether it be consonant to Gods word or no, whether it make more for the health
of their souls, to suffer what it inflicts upon the refusers, or to act what it
commands. To control, countermand, or hinder the execution of it, by
opposition of violence or contrary civil power, subjects may not. But for any,
but man, to usurp such dominion over his fellow creatures souls, as earthly
Princes have over their subjects goods, lands, or bodies, is, more then
Monarchical, more then tyrannical, the very Idea of Antichristianism. And what
I would commend unto the Reader, as a point of especial consideration, This
assertion of Bellarmin, concerning the Popes absolute authority, directly
proves him, as was avouched Cap. 8. (...). 17, etc. Bellarmin to prove the Pope
is absolutely above the universal Church uses these words, Omnia nomina, q^ae
in scripturis tribuanum Christo, ^nde constat eum esse s^pra Ecclesiam, cad^
omnia tribuu^tur Pontitici. Bellar. de Conciliorum auct. Lib. 2. cap. 17. (...).
before, to be a supreme head or foundation, of the self same rank and order
with Christ, no way inferior to him in the intensive perfection, but only in
the extent of absolute sovereignty. For, greater sovereignty cannot be
conceived then this, That no man may examine the truth, or equity of commands,
or consequences immediately derived from it, though immediately concerning
their eternal joy or misery. No Prince did ever delegate such sovereign power
to his Vicegerent, or deputy: nor could he, unless for the time being (at
least) he did utterly relinquish his own supreme authority, or admit a full
compeer in his kingdom. Christum caput esse Ecclesiae universae libentissime
confitemur, neque ullum hominem, ac ne angelum quidem ^quamus; quod esset
proprie duo capita in Ecclesiae corpore constituere, at quin sub Christo capite
summo Vicarius ejus in terris caput ut sic dicam, ministeriale, non principale
recte nominetur, negari nullo modo potest; Siquidem ut in republica temporali
caput omnium principale Rex est, sub Rege deiude capita sunt Provinciarum, ii
qui dicuntur Pro^, and sub Proregibus capita sunt urbium singularum, certi
quidam. Praetores, and sub praetoribus quaelibet familia suum ^caput, ipsum
videlicet Patrem familias, etc. Ita quoque in Ecclesia Dei, summum caput omnium
hominum and Angelorum Christus est: sub Christo in terris caput omnium
Christianorum est Ponti sex maximus: sub illo Episcopi, sub Episcopis Parochi
capita sunt Christianae multitudinis. Bellar. in Appendice ad libros de summo
Pont. cap. 24. His similitude (...) in this that they admit of no appeal from
the Pope to Christ, no examination of his decrees by Gods word: Nor is the Pope
by (...) doctrine subordinate in such sort unto Christ, as all other Bishops
are to the Pope.
Bellarmins distinctions, of a primary and secondary foundation, of a
ministerial and principal head of the Church, may hence be described to be but
mere stales set to catch guls. Their conceit of the Popes copartnership with
Christ, is much better resembled, and more truly expressed, by the Poets
imaginations of Jupiter, and Augustus Caesar's fraternity,

Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet:
Jove and Caesar are Kings and Gods:
But Jove of heaven; that is the only ods.
That Christ should retain the title of the supreme head over the Church
militant, and the reality of supremacy over the Church triumphant, our
adversaries are not offended: Because, there is small hope of raising any new
tribute from the Angels, and Saints in heaven, to the Romish Churches use; and
as little fear that Christ should take any secular commodity from it, which
anciently it has enjoyed.

14 But though it were true, that we were absolutely bound to obey an absolute
Monarch, of whose right none doubts: yet may we examine whether every Potentate
that challenges Monarchical jurisdiction over others, or gives forth such
insolent edicts in civil matters, as the Pope does in spiritual, do not go
beyond his authority in these particulars; albeit his lawful pre^ogatives in
respect of others, be without controversy many and great, yet limited both for
number and magnitude. For suppose King Henry the eight, after he had done what
he could against the Pope, should still have professed his good liking of Romish
religion, opposing only this to all his Popish Clergy, that had challenged him
of revolt: Am not I defender of the faith? The Pope, whom I trow you take for
no false Prophet, has given me this prerogatr^ amongst Christian Princes, as
expressly, as ever S. Peter bequeathed him his supremacy above other Bishops. It
is as impossible for me to defend, as for his Holiness to teach, any other
besides the true Catholic Faith. Let the proudest amongst my Prelates examine
my expositions of his decrees, and by S. George, he shall fry a faggot for an
Heretic, Would this or the like pretense (though countenanced by royal
authority) have been accepted for a just defense, that this boisterous King had
not contradicted the Pope, but the tatling Monks, or other private expositors
of his decrees? would this have satisfied the Popes agents, until the King and
his Holiness had come to personal conference, for final debatement of the
case? yet for Christ's servants thus to neglect their masters cause, is no sin
in the Romanists judgment, yea an heresy is it not to deal so negligently in
it. For a sin of no lower rank they make it, not to submit our hearts, minds,
and affections, unto the Popes negative decrees, though against that sense of
Scripture, which conscience and experience gives us. Unto all the doubts,
fears, or scruples these can minister, it must suffice; That the Pope says he
expounds scripture no otherwise then Christ would, were he in earth, but only
controls all private glosses or expositors of them. But can any Christian heart
content it self with such delusions, and defer all examinations of doctrine,
until that dreadful day come upon him, wherein the great Shepherd shall plead
his own cause, face to face, with this pretended Vicar and his associates? Do
we believe that Christ has given us a written law, that he shall come to be our
Judge, and call us to a strict account wherein we have transgressed or kept it;
yet may we not try by examination, whether these Romish guides lead us aright
or awry? Whether some better or clearer exposition may not be hoped for, then
the Pope or Council, for the present, tenders to us? What if the Pope should
prohibit all disputations about this point in hand, [whether obeying him
against the true sense of Scripture, (as we are persuaded) we yield greater
obedience unto him, then unto Scriptures;] may we not examine the equity of this
decree, or his exposition of that Scripture which happily he would pretend for
this authority, his amplius, fili mi, ne requiras? No: by their general Tenent,
and Lib. 2. cap. 16. parag. 8.
Valentians express Assertion, it were extreme impiety to traverse this sense,
or exposition, under pretense of obscurity, etc. By the same reason, for ought
I can see, it would follow, that, if the question were, [whether, obeying the
Pope more then God, we did obey man more then God] we might not examine, at
least not determine, whether the Pope were Man or God, or a middle nature
betwixt both, which came not within the compass of that comparison.

CAP. X.
In what sense the Jesuits may truly deny they believe the words of man better
then the words of God: In what sense again our writers truly charge them with
this blasphemy.

1 IF we review the former discourse, we may find, that equivocation, which
Bellarmin sought (as a knot in a bulrush) in our writers objections, to be
directly contained in their Churches denial of what was objected. Whilst they
deny that, they exalt the Churches authority above Scriptures, or man's word
above Gods; this denial may have a double sense. They may deny a plain and open
profession, or challenge of greater authority in their Church then in
Scriptures: Or they may deny, that in effect and substance they overthrow all
authority of Scripture, save only so far as it makes for their purpose.

2 That the Pope should openly profess himself competitor with God, or, in
express terms, challenge greater authority then Scriptures have: Antichrst
must not be a professed or open enemy but a secret underminer of true Religion.
was never objected by any of our writers. For all of us know, the Man of Sin
must be no open, or outward enemy to the Church, but Judas-like, a disciple by
profession: his doctrine, indeed, must be a doctrine of devils, yet
counterseiting the voice of Angels; as he himself, though by internal
disposition of mind a slave to all manner of filthiness, and impurity, must be
enstiled Sanctissimus Dominus, the most holy Lord. If the poison of his
iniquity were not wrapped up in the titles of divine mysteries, it would
forthwith be disliked by many silly superstitious souls, which daily suck
their bane from it, because persuaded that the Scriptures (which they never
have examined, whose true sense they never tasted, but from some relics of
heathenish zeal, idolatrously worship in gross) do fully warrant it. When our
Writers therefore object, that the Papists exalt the Popes laws above Gods; (had
not these holy Catholics an especial grace to grow deaf, as often as we charge
their mother with such notorious and known whoredoms, as they see might
evidently be proved unto the world, if they should stand to contest with us)
their meaning is plain; that the Pope, in deed, and issue, makes the
Scriptures, (which in show he seems to reverence) of no authority, but only
with reference to his own. That he, and his followers should in words much
magnify The Pope and his followers have good reason to magnify Christ's
authority in words or outward show, for their own gain and glory could not
otherwise be so great.
Gods word, written or unwritten, we do not marvel; because the higher esteem
men make of it, the higher still he may exalt his throne, being absolutely
enabled, by this device, to make all that belongs to God, his Word, his Laws,
his Sacraments, the precious Body and Blood of his Son, blessed for ever, mere
foot-stools to his ambition. For, if the authority of Scriptures, or such
traditions as he pretends, be established as divine, and he admitted, sole,
absolute, infallible Judge of their meaning; it would argue either
Antichristian blindness not to see or impudency of no meaner stock, not to
acknowledge that the Pope by this mean might appropriate unto himself the honor
due unto God, and play upon his Creator in such sort, as if a corrupt Lawyer
having evidences committed to his trust, should by virtue of them take up
rents, and let leases to the Landlords damage, and Tenants overthrow. And
(what is most villainous) unto whatsoever prerogatives, though most prejudicial
to the divine majesty; his Parasitical Canonists shall blasphemously entitle
this most holy Father, The Son of God, and his faithfullest servants, (Apostles
or Prophets) must be brought forth to abet the forgery, as if evidence given in
Court by infamous Knights of the Post, should in the final day of hearing be
produced, under the hands and seals of free Barons, or other chief Peers of the
Land; for, as was intimated before, whatsoever the Pope, though in his own
cause, shall say, it must by this doctrine, be supposed, that Christ does say
the same. Yea, if it should please his Holiness to avoach ex Cathedra, that
these words, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melechisedech, are
truly and literally meant of himself as Christ's Vi^ar* or of perpetual
succession in Peter's Chair: the evidence must be taken as upon the Almighties
oath; who in that place has sworn as much as these words import; but what that
is the Pope must judge. That then he permits Christ the title of his sovereign
Lord, and urges others to subscribe unto his laws as most divine, is just, as
if some Politician should solicit the whole body of a kingdom, solemnly to
acknowledge one, othewise lawful heir unto the Crown, for their Monarch most
omnipotent and absolute, (whose will once signified must be a law for ever
inviolable, to all his subjects) not with intent that he should in person
retain such perpetual sovereignty over them, but that he might have absolute
power to dispose of his kingdom, as he pleased unto the worlds end; or to
nominate others, as absolute in his place, whilst he spent his days as a
sojourner in a foreign land. Finally, not the most treacherous and detestable
plot, the most wicked Pope that has been, is or shall be, could desire to
effect, but may by this device be countenanced, with as great and sacred
authority, as were the best actions our Savior ever undertook: which (as may
better appear from what shall be said in the next Chap. (...), 21.
Section) is to make every Popes authority as much greater then our Saviors,
as their lives and actions are worse then his was.

3 Suppose some Devil should possess the Popes place in similitude of a man,
(as some Papists think the great Antichrist, who shall challenge as great
authority as the Pope does, shall be a Devil incarnate, or the son of a Devil)
The same plea the (...) man the Poper absolute ^ ^im (...) might use with as
(...) (...), ^ in (...) place.
might he not hold his dignity by the same plea the Jesuits make for their
Lord and Master? Could he not be content to pretend Christ's name, or succession
from S. Peter, (as Simon Magus, might he have obtained what he desired, would
have done) for his own advantage? could he not urge the authority of Gods word
to confirm his own over it, and all that is called Gods? If in such a case it
might not be permitted men to examine his allegations out of Scriptures, how
could the devil himself be convinced by Scriptures, or deposed from his
supremacy, thence pretended? And can we doubt, whether he which makes no other
plea, then the Devil were he in place might, is not that Filius Diaboli, The
great Antichrist? Were we not taught that the sons of this world are wise only
in their own generation, we might justly wonder that any men endued with
natural wit, could be so blind, as at the first sight not to descrie the
politic Sophisins used by the Romanist to cozen Christ of his kingdom. As
their whole Religion is but the image of the old Roman policy; so their main
plot of Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Church, the Church, as if all were
rebels against Christ, that will not swear absolute fealty to the Church Romish,
may be most fully paralleled by the like practice of such cunning Statesmen,
as having always one eye to the advancement of their own private fortunes,
live under an absolute Monarch, of himself royally minded, but not much
intermedling in the affairs of greatest moment. Opportunity of high place under
a king, upon what occasion soever thus sequestered, that poor men's complaints
cannot possess his ears, tempts politicians to effect their own purposes,
under pretense of his right, and to condemn all of treason or disroyalty, that
will not obey their designs directed in their Sovereigns name, though most
abhorrent from the disposition of his Royal heart, were he acquainted with such
lamentable grievances of his poor Subjects, as are the usual consequents of
Princes gracious Favors upon great Ones. The more absolute such a Princes
lawful authority, the greater is native subjects love unto him is, the more,
may both be abused by such unthankful officers. As it is the Sovereign conceit
all men have of Christ's kingdom, which keeps the silly in such servility unto
the Pope, his pretended agent.

4 This is the only difference in these two cases otherwise most like. An
earthly Prince may live and die deluded of his Machiavillian States men, over
whom he has no power, after he himself is once subject. But Christ lives and
reigns a King for ever; and though his throne be in the highest heavens,
beholds the things done on earth. He sees, and yet suffers his pretended
officers to detain such as love darkness more then light, in grossest
ignorance and blind subjection to the Prince of darkness, and his associates;
he sees and yet suffers them detain all such as delight in lies more then in
truth, from acquaintance with his Holy spirit; He sees, and yet suffers their
foulest villainies to be countenanced by his sacred laws; he sees, and yet
suffers his holy name to be abused, to the establishing of Antichristian
Heresies; he sees and yet suffers his glory made a stale for maintenance of
their secular pomp. He is the keeper of Israel, and cannot so slumber, as any
abuse should escape his notice; his indignation shall not sleep for ever, but
in due time he will rouse himself as a Lion awaked, to take vengeance upon all
the workers of iniquity, on them above others, who have thus usurped his throne
on earth, taking that judgment during the time of his supposed absence wholly
into their hands, which belo^nly unto him: Even so come Lord Jesu, Holy, and
True, and with the breath of thy mouth destroy him that has destroyed truth
and sincerity from amongst the Sons of men.

SECT. III.
Containing the second degree of great Antichrists Exaltation, in making his
authority more absolutely infallible then any the visible or representative
Church of the Jews, Moses or the Prophets ever had: Finally, in making it
greater then Christ's, or his Apostles was.

THat the Church of Rome does advance her decrees above the laws and ordinances
of the Almighty, her words (that in this kind is called Gods) above all divine
Oracles, written and unwritten, is apparent out of their own positions hitherto
discussed, yet is this but the first degree of great Antichrists Exaltation.

(...) second is the exal^^ng the Popes above any personal authority that ever
was either practiced or established on earth. This in brief is the assertion,
which (by Gods assistance) we are in this present section to ma^e evident; The
authority which the Jesuits and Jesuited Priests give, and would bind others
upon pain of damnation to give unto the present Church or Pope, throu (...)
every age, is greater then any authority that ever was challenged since the
world began, by any man or visible company of men, the man Christ Jesus not
excepted.

This conclusion follows immediately out of three Positions generally Ro^i^h
Positions ^ must (...) (...).
held and stiffly maintained by that Church.

The first, that the Pope (live he as he list) cannot err in matters of faith
and manners, when he speaks ex Cathedra: that we are bound infallibly to
believe whatsoever he so speaks, without examination of his doctrine by Gods
word, or evident external sign, or internal Experiment of Gods spirit, speaking
in him.

The second, that we cannot assure our selves the Scriptures are the Oracles of
God, but by the infallible testimony of the Visible Church.

The third, that the true sense and meaning of Scriptures in cases doubtful, or
controversed, cannot be undoubtedly known without the infallible declaration of
the same Church.

CAP. XI.
What restraint, precepts for obedience unto the Priests of the Law, (though
(...)ing most universal for their Form) did necessarily admit: And how
universal Propositions of Scriptures are to be limited.

1 Seeing we undertake to prove, that no such authority as the Romish Church
does callenge, was ever established on earth: The answering of those arguments
drawn from the authority of the Priests in the old Testament, may to the
judicious seem (at the first sight) needless, yet because such as they set the
fairest glosses upon* (if we look into the inside or substance) are fullest
fraught with their own disgrace and ignominy; It will not be superfluous to
acquaint the Reader with some particulars, prefixing some general admonitions
to the younger sort, for more commodious answering of all that can be brought
of like kind.

2 Their common places of cozening the world, especially smatterers of Logic
or school learning, with counterfeit proofs of Scripture, is either from some
universal precept of obedience, given to the people, or general promises of
infallibility made to the Priests in the old Testament. Such as come unto the
Scriptures, having their mind dazzled with notion^ of universale primum, or
other Logic rules true in some cases, think the former precepts, being for
their form universal, may admit no exception, limitation or restraint,
otherwise the holy Ghost might break the rule of Logic) when as they admit
many restraints, not always from one, but oft-times from diverse reasons; from
these following especially. God sometimes (...) may (...) (...), (...)
(...)(...).
injoyns obedience (as we say) in the Abstract, to set us a pattern of such
true accurate obedience, as men should perform unto authority it self, or unto
such governors, as neither in their lives, nor in the Seat of judgment, would
decline either to the right hand or to the left, but square all their
proceedings to the exact rule of Gods word Unto such governors continual and
complete obedience, was to be performed; because the (...) governed upon
examination, should always find them jump with the law of God, unto which
absolute obedience, as has been showed, is due. Nor does the word of God in
setting out such exact obedienc, lie open to that exception, which Politicians
take against Philosophers; as if it (as Philosophers do) did give instructions
only, for happy men of Aristotle's making, or for the Stoics wise men, who can
no where be found but in Plato's commonwealth, whose Metropolis is in the
Region of Eutopia. For the ancient Israel of God had this prerogative above all
the nations of the earth, that their Priests lips whilst they themselves were
clothed with righteousness and bare holiness unto the Lord in their breasts,
should still preserve knowledge, and be able to manifest the will of God unto
the people, not only by interpreting the general written law, but by
revelations concerning particular facts of principal moment, as may be gathered
from that law, Exodus 23. 3^.
Also thou shall put in the breast plate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim,
which shall be upon Aarons heart, when he goes in before the Lord; And Aaron
shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the
Lord continually.

3 To omit the various interpretations, and diverse opinions of this
Brest-plates use; why it was called the Breast Plate of Judgment: Joseph* 3.
cap. (...). (...) (...).
Josephus and Suidas in my mind come nearest the truth. That the Revelation by
it was Extraordinary, that Gods presence, or Juridical approbation of doubts
proposed, was represented upon the precious stones, that were set therein is
probable, partly, from the aptness of it to allure the Israelites unto
Idolatry, partly from that formality which the (...). (...) Siculus, L. 1. c.
3. And a linle after, (...). Suidas ex mee^^o quod^ (...)re haec resert, (says
Fagius) Ephod, (inquit) (...) ^n (...)* (...)braeum, quod si interpreters,
significat i^ a^ a^t redemptionem (Vides autem eum authorem ex quo (...) (...)
exscripsit, Hebraeae linguae ignarum suisse. Ephod ^ aliud significat.
Forta^^is pro Ephod dicere voluit (...) (...) Erat autem forma ejus, textu^a
almaris, vario artificio (...) pectoralis, ex aureis filis consecta. Ac in
medio ha^ (...) stellam omnino auream. Ex utraque autem pa^te du^dos, in quorum
unoquoque sculpta ^rant se^ (...), vid^, duodecim nomina Tribuum Israel. Porro
iuter Smaragelos (...)tinebat lapidem Adamantem. Cum ergo Sacerdos sciscita^
erat de re quadam oraculum a Deo, ligabat Ephod in supe^ humerali ad medium
pectoris, and subjiciebat manus suas sub ip^um, quas cum retraheret,
deprehendebat eas quasi color quodam in^ectas. Pete^ar autem a Deo responsum
de^ixis in ^phod (...). I^aque si Deus annuebat ad id quod pe^ebatur, conses^
micabat lapis Adamas, Si autem neg^bat, n^hil ad (...)number and proprium lapidis
^ulgorem accedebat. Quod si Deus voluit populum subjicere gladio, Lapis
reddeha^ e^uentus. Si autem ^nebar m^rs, lapis ^at (...). ^gius in ca^ut*
(...). Exodus ubi plura Vide de Rationali vid. and Del^ium Dis^sit. Magic. lib.
4. cap. 1. quaest. 2. Sect. 1.
Egyptians in imitation of the Ephods ancient use amongst the Jews, retained
long after in declaration of the truth in Judgment. For Diodorus tells us that
the (...), or chief Judge in that Famous and venerable Egyptian high Court, or
Parliament, did wear about his neck in a golden chain, Insigne, a Tablet of
precious stone, or (if the Reader be disposed to correct the Translator) (...),
which they called (as the Septuagint did Aarons Breast Plate) (...), on which
he steadfastly looked while matters were debating, (as Suidas says the High
Priest did on his Breast Plate, whilst they asked counsel of God;) and whilst
he gave Sentence turned it unto the better cause (exhibited as the fashion was
in that Court, in writing) i^ sign the Truth it self did speak for it. That the
Urim or Thummim were more then an Emblem, yea an Oracle of Justice and right
Judgment, is apparent out of Scripture: When Jos^ was consecrated to be
Isreal's chief Governor in Moses stead, he was to stand before Fleazar the
Priest, ordained to ask counsel for him by the Judgment of (...) (...) 21.
Urim before the Lord: So did Abiathar certisie David of Saul's malicious
resolution against him, and the Lords of ^eilahs treachery, if he should trust
1 Samuel 2^. (...).
unto them. So again David is assured of victory, by the judgment of Urim 1
Sa^ 3^. (...), (...).
and Thummim, if he would follow the Amalekites that had burnt Z^kl^g.

4 Such Priests as these, were to be absolutely obeyed in answers thus given
from the mouth of God. And it is most probable, that the parties whom these
answers did concern, had perfect notice of the Revelation made to the Priests,
howsoever the truths of such answers being confirmed by Experiment in those
days, they were to undertake what the Priests appointed, and to obey his
advice at least by cautelous obedience, until the event did prove the truth.
But neither was this certain manifestation of Gods will so ^.
absolutely promised unto the Priests but not living according unto the
direction of Gods Law, he might fail in his Oracles: Nor was this peoples
Prerogative above others without all limit; that if they lived no better then
others did, they should as often as they asked counsel of God, infallibly know,
whether the answer were from him or no, albeit there were no defect in the
Priest. For this reason the Lord answered not ^
Saul, when he asked Counsel of him, neither by dreams, nor by visions, nor by
Urim, nor by the Prophets, for Saul was now cast off by God, not willing to
vouchsafe an answer unto his demands: which argues, that the revelation made to
the Priests, was also manifested to the party, solemnly and in sincerity of
heart proposing the questions, whereof he desired to be resolved.

5 That the Priest had no such privilege, or absolute promise of Gods ^
infallible presence, as the Pope challenges, is apparent from the law of
temperance prescribed. ^
And the Lord spoke unto Aaron saying, thou shall not drink wine, nor strong
drink, thou nor thy sons with thee, when ye come into the Tabernacle of the
congregation; lest ye die. This is an ordinance for ever throughout your
generations, that ye may put difference between the holy and unholy, and
between the clean and unclean, and that ye may teach the children of Israel all
the statutes the Lord had commanded thee by the hand of Moses. If these Priests
themselves were unholy and unclean, they could not infallibly discern between
the holy and unholy, between the clean and unclean: if they lived not according
to this they could not teach the children of Israel the rest of Gods express
laws, much less could they infallibly manifest unto them his will in all
doubts and controversies. But the Pope (so absolute is his Prerogative, which
the Jesuits attribute unto him) must be thought to be infallibly assisted by
the Holy Spirit, albeit he lead a most unhallowed, unclean, polluted life.

6 But for the promise made unto Levi, and his seed, God himself by his Prophet
Malach. 2 v. 1, 2.
Malachy most expressly interprets the meaning of it; And now O ye Priests, this
commandment is for you, if ye will not hear it, nor consider it in your heart,
to give glory unto my Name, says the Lord of hosts, I will even send a curse
upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea, and I have cursed them already,
because ye do not consider it in your heart, behold I will corrupt your seed,
and ^^st dung upon your faces, even the dung of your solemn feasts, and you
shall be like unto it, and ye shall know, that I have sent this commandment
unto you, that my covenant which I made unto Levi might stand, says the Lord
of hosts. My covenant was with him of life and peace, and I gave him fear, and
be feared me, and was afraid before my Name, the law of truth was in his mouth,
and there was no iniquity found in his lips, he walked with me in peace and
equity, and di^ turn many from iniquity; for the Priests lips shall preserve
knowledge, and theys^^ll (...) the law at his mouth. As if he had said; Such
Priests I have had in former times, and such might your praises from my mouth,
and your estimation with men have been, had you framed your lives according to
the Rules which my servant Moses had set you. But were these Priests, against
whom he here speaks, infallible in their doctrine still, because Gods promise
was so ample unto Levi? If they were not, why does Bellarmin bring this place
to prove the Popes infallible Authority, in teaching divine truths? If they
were, why does the Lord complain in the words immediately following? But ye are
gone out of the way, ye have caused many to fall by the law, ye have broken the
covenant of Levi, says the Lord of hosts, Therefore have I made you also to be
despised, and vile before all the people, because you keep not my ways, but
have been partial in the law.

7 This place alone (though many others might be brought) clearly evinceth Gods
promise unto Levi and his posterity, during the time of their priesthood, to
have been Conditional, not Absolute. And as Gods promise of Infallibility was
unto him and his seed, such was the Obedience due to them and their Authority,
not absolute, but conditional: and where the precepts may seem universal, yet
are they to be limited oft-times by the Condition of the Priests life.

8 But sundry Propositions there be in Scriptures for their Form Universal,
Universal Propositions in Scripture are to be limited by they proper Subject,
the End of the Precept, or other Circumstances.
which are also absolutely true in their proper subject, whose full extent or
limits not withstanding are not always Evident. Whence many mistake in
stretching them too far; others seeing them fail in some particulars, which
seem comprehended under the universality of their form, suspect the
absoluteness of their truth, and account them rather morally probable, or
conditionally true, then necessary and certain; yet are they most absolutely
necessary and certain, only their universality is to be limited by their
proper subjects. This is a common difficulty in all Arts, though less apparent
in the Mathematics, or Metaphysics, or other like abstract contemplative
Sciences. But in Philosophy, as well natural as moral, many general rules
there be most true and evident to such as know the nature or quality, either of
the subject, or matter whereunto they are applied, or of these particulars;
whence the induction was gathered; and yet are obscure and doubtful unto
others, who mark the universality of their form, not so well acquainted with
the nature of those subjects, in which their truth is principally, and most
evidently seen, not so able to discern the Identitie or Diversity, the
proportion, or disproportion which other subjects may have with the former; but
of the trial of rules in Arts (if God permit) elsewhere. I will now instance
in Scripture only; what proposition could be for the form more universal, what
precept conceived in words more general, then that of sanctifying the Sabbath?
In it thou (halt do no manner of work, Exodus 20. 10.
(...) Non facies ullum opus. The Scribes and Pharisees putting a Religion in
the letter of the Law, (as the Jesuits now do, when The Precept concerning the
Sabbath then which none can be more universal did not extend to all manner of
works.
it may make for their advantage) did conclude from the generality of this
precept, that our Savior brake the Sabbath, when he healed the sick upon it:
Their pretenses, if we respect the universalitie of the Proposition only, were
far more probable then the Papist can pick any for their purpose: Yet Jewish
still, in that they considered not the end of the Sabbath which might have
limited the universal form of the precept, and restrained it unto some kind of
works only; for not all, but only all those works which were repugnant to the
end of this Precept were forbidden. The end of the Sabbath was to sanctify
themselves unto the Lord; to set forth his praise both in words and works. Such
works then only are here forbidden as did distract the mind, or make men unapt
to hear, read, or meditate on heavenly matters; all works of secular vocation,
or private consequence, which might hinder men's endeavors for procuring the
health, or welfare of others; not works of charity, or present necessity, not
works tending to greater public good, or to the avoidance of greater harms,
which could not be prevented but by present working; for men are to read, hear,
and meditate upon Gods Word, that by it they may be fruitful in good deeds, by
which Gods Name is more immediately glorified, then only by speaking well, and
not doing so. Wherefore oru Savior Christ did better observe the Sabbath by
working upon it, to save men's lives, or recover their health; then the
Pharisees did by abstaining from such works of mercy, as might have glorified
Gods Name more immediately, then any speculative, or precise Rules, how it
should be kept: Yea, by not working these good works, when fair occasion was
offered, they did the works of Satan, even murder it self, as our Savior
Christ implies in that question proposed unto the Scribes and Pharisees which
sought an accusation against him: Luke 6. (...).
I will ask you a question, whether it is lawful on the Sabbath days to do
good or to do evil, to save life, or to destroy it?

9 The like limitations this precept had in case of necessity, or for the
avoidance of some great extraordinary calamity, not otherwise avoidable then by
doing such works, as upon ordinary and daily occasions were unlawful to be
done upon the Sabbath day. It was an opinion received (as it seems) amongst the
Jews, that they might not fight, nor build the breaches or places whereby their
enemies did hope for entrance upon the Sabbath. In this persuasion 1 Mac. 2 36,
etc.
about the number of a thousand Jews did lay down their lives. But when
Matthias heard of this his people, and Country men's massacre (more general
then it needed to have been, but for this their strict and precise
interpretation of the former general commandment) he and his friends wisely
resolved, 1 Mac 2 41.
Whosoever should come to make battle with us upon the Sabbath day, we will
fight against them, that we die not all as our brethren that were murdered in
the secret places. Which they might have stopped, but would not, for fear of
violating the Sabbath. The reason of this their resolution (contained in the 40
verse) was most strong, drawn from the end of the Sabbath; For they said one to
another, If we all do as our brethren have done, and fight not against the
Heathen for our lives, and for our Laws then shall they incontinently destroy
us out of the earth. And if the whole Jewish Nation had been at that time
utterly rooted out; who should either have sanctified Gods Sabbaths, or
preserved his Laws from the injury of times, or fury of the Heathen? Nature
had taught the Heathen, that it was foolish, propter vitam vivendi perdere
causas: much more might religious discretion teach all men, how preposterous a
course it were for the precise keeping of one, to cross, or overthrow the end
of all Sabbaths.

10 Yet our Adversaries I am sure cannot bring any precept so peremptory or
general, for absolute obedience unto the High Priests, and Governors, as the
former was for not working upon the Sabbath. And yet this we see ^ts restraint
from the End, and holds only absolutely true in certain kind of works, not in
all. The like restraint, either from the End, or from the Circumstances, may
all those places likewise suffer, which seem to be most general for absolute
obedience unto Gods messengers or spiritual governors.

11 The end of obeying Gods messengers is, that men thereby may ^.
obey God himself. Suppose then God had said [Thou shall obey the Priest in all
things whatsoever he shall command thee:] A Wise man not withstanding all this
would thus resolve; Suppose the Priest command me to do that, in doing which I
shall disobey God, or to omit that continually, in performing of which I sboul
I obey God: am I bound to obey him in all such commands? so should I frustrate
the End of the Law, and commit the same offense by this my Blind Obedience,
which others do by presumptuous and wilful disobedience unto spiritual
governors. But it will be replied, who shall judge whether the spiritual
Governor command thee such service, as argues disobedience unto God, or no? If
the case be Doubtful, and I be commanded by my lawful Pastor, I have answered
already in what sense obedience must be performed. But if the case be Evident,
men must openly disobey their Pastors, before they certainly disobey God. But
who shall judge of the Evidence? Every man's conscience. Shall that then be
Evident which every man shall say is Evident unto him? No, but what in deed and
conscience is, and so shall appear in his judgment that searches the heart
and reins. Such as do not fear his censure will make no conscience of
disobeying men, pretending authority from him: Such as with fear and trembling
expect the Son of man's appearance, will not much esteem, how they be judged by
men further then in reason they may be persuaded, their sentence shall be
ratified in the last day of judgment. And because God has endued spiritual
Governors with power of retaining and remitting sins; every one that fears him
which gave, will fear to disobey them to Whom this power is given; lest if they
retain, he will not remit; and retain they justly may, or rather must, the sins
of all such, as add thirst to drunkenness, contempt of Gods Messengers
summons to repentance, unto actual breaches of his Law. This is as open
rebellion upon a riot, perhaps first attempted upon ignorance of the Law,
inconsiderateness or foolish passion, but continued after Proclamation made in
the Kings Name, by a public Magistrate authorized for such purposes: The
parties admonished upon such high terms, to desist from any suspicious
enterprise (though no more) must be certain of the Princes, or chief Lawgivers
future approbation of what they go about, if they persist, otherwise
disobedience to a lawful Magistrate or inferior Officer, will be found
rebellion against the State or Sovereignty.

12 Though it be most true what has been before delivered, that unto Pastors
conditional Conditional obedience of two sorts.
obedience is only due, yet is not the condition precedent to all acts of
obedience, but subsequent, at least to some, and to be inserted by way of
Limitation or Caution, for desisting upon discovery of farther danger, rather
then interposed as a stop to breed delay, or prohibition of all obedience
until evident proof be made, that it is expressly due in the particulars
enjoined. The want of this distinction between a condition Precedent, and a
condition Subsequent, or annexed unto actual obedience, has been the Original
(I am persuaded) as well of the Papists error in demanding absolute obedience
without all condition or limitation, as of many Protestants granting less then
is due to Pastors, that is obedience only upon this condition; If they show
express warrant of Scriptures for the particulars enjoined. Nor is the
condition between the Pastor and his flock like unto that between man and man
in legal contracts, or in controversies of debt, wherein all are equal, and
nothing due unto the plantiffe, before the performance of the condition be
proved: but such as is between a private man, and a Magistrate, (both
subordinate in their several places to one Sovereign, unto whom only absolute
and complete obedience is due, though unto his Officers some obedience is
absolutely due, at the least to be dicto audiens, to hear him with patience,
reverence, and attention, not to contradict, or neglect his commands, but upon
such evident reasons as the inferior party dare adventure to try the cause
instantly with him before the supreme Judge. The acts of obedience which are
absolutely due from the flock to spiritual Magistrates, or Christ's Messengers,
and precedent to the condition interposed or inserted, are the unpartial
examinations of their own hearts and consciences, the full renouncing of all
worldly desires, earthly pleasure, carnal lusts or concupiscences, because
these unrenounced have a command over our souls, In what acts absolute
obediencets due to Pastors.
and detain them from performing service, best acceptable unto God, or yielding
that sincere obedience, which is absolutely due unto his sacred Word. For this
end and purpose the flock stand absolutely bound to enter into their own hearts
and souls, to make diligent search and strict enquiry, what rebellious
affection, or unruly desire is harbored there, as often as their overseers
shall in Christ's Name charge them so to do: otherwise their neglect or contempt
will be in that dreadful day a witness of their rebellion in this life, a bar
to keep sin in, and shut grace out.

13 But if any man out of the sincerity of a good conscience and steadfast
resolution of a faithful heart, (which has habitually renounced the world,
flesh, and Devil, that it may be always ready to serve Christ) shall refuse
his Pastors commandment, though threatening hell pains to his disobedience in
some particulars, he does yet better observe the former precept by this his
denial, then others do by performance of absolute blind obedience without
strict unpartial examination of their consciences, for he does herein obey God,
whom to obey with heart and mind thus freed from the dominion of Satan, and
the World, is the very end and scope, the final service whereunto all
performance of obedience unto spiritual Governors is but as a trayning of
Christ's faithful Soldiers. And in these acts of obedience, is that saying of
our Savior most generally and absolutely true; Luke 1^. 16.
He that hears you, hears me, he that despises you, despises me. That
precept of denying our selves, and renouncing all, is the foundation of all the
rest, concerning obedience: without performance of this, neither can our
undertaking any other acts be sincere, nor our refusal (lawfully admonished)
safe: our best obedience, not hereon grounded, is Non-christian, our disobedien
e Unchristian, and rebellious. For which cause we are absolutely bound unto
habitual performance of this, ere we can be admitted as lawful auditors of
Christ's other precepts. All other our resolutions, or deliberate intendments;
whether for performance of any action commended for good and honest, or for
maintaining any Doctrine proposed by lawful Pastors for true and Orthodoxal,
must be limited by their proportion, or disproportion to the end of obedience
enjoined unto spiritual Commanders; which as we said before, was to obey God in
all. Those acts then must be undertaken, which upon examination appear not
prejudicial to that oath of absolute obedience, which we have taken unto our
supreme Lord: these omitted, which out of this general resolution of
renouncing all and denying our selves, and this unpartial examination of our
souls in particular doubts, may seem to derogate from that absolute Loyalty
which we owe to Christ. No Minister may expect obedience, but upon these
conditions; and he that sincerely obeys in the forementioned fundamental act
of renouncing all, and denying himself, and yet disobeys in other particulars,
upon such grounds and motives as we have said, does perfectly fulfill that
precept, (if any such there were) obey your spiritual Overseers in all things.

14 Be our bond of duty to such Governors, whether by ordinary subjection to
their calling, or voluntary submission of our judgments to their personal
worth, never so great; yet seeing they command only in Christ's Name, and for
the advancement of his kingdom, to imagine spiritual obedience should be due to
such injunctions, as upon sober and deliberate examination seem to cross the
end they propose, would argue such spiritual madness, as if a man should
adventure to kill (by all probability of present occurrence, his father or
mother) because he had formerly vowed (without consideration of any homicide,
much less parricide thence likely to follow) to kill the first live creature
he met. In such a case as Philo de specialibus legibus.
Philo acutely observes, a man should not forswear himself, or break his vow,
yet overthrow the very end and use of all vows, which were instituted as
bridles to make us refram all occasions, or provocations to evil, not as
halters to lead or draw us to such unnatural villainies.

15 These rules hitherto mentioned rightly observed, there is no greater
diffculty in restraining universal precepts of obedience to the Church; then in
limitting general commandments of Kings to their Deputies or Vicegerents.
Now, if a King should charge his Subjects to obey his Lieutenant in all that he
should command: any reasonable man would take the meaning to be this; That he
should be obeyed in all things that belong unto the Kings service, because this
is the end of his appointment, and the proper subject of this precept. No man
in this case would be so mad, as to take the Princes word for his warrant, if
by his Lieutenant he should be put upon some service, which were more then
suspicious to be traitorous, or apparently tending to the Kings destruction. If
a Jesuit should see the Popes Agent or Nuncio (whom he were bound to obey by
the Popes injunction delivered in most ample terms) tampering with the Popes
open enemies; either consorting with us in our Liturgy, or communicating with
us in our Sacraments; receiving pension from forrainers, or secretly conferring
with such of their Counselors as had more wit then himself; could he dispense
with his oath of absolute allegiance to the Pope, upon these or like evasions?
This is suspicious indeed; but how shall I know whether the Popes Agent in
doing this, do disobey his Holiness? If he say no, must I not believe him?
must I not obey him, and do as he does, whom the Pope commands me to obey in
all things? The Jesuits are not so simple in the Popes cause, as they would
make all other in Gods: they could tell how to limit such commands, though
delivered in most universal and ample terms. This is the matter then which so
vexes their devout hearts, and sets them besides themselves with furious zeal
in this argument; that any Christian should be as wary and circumspect, lest he
should prove disloyal unto the Creator and Redeemer of mankind, as they are,
lest they should disobey the advancer and supporter of their Order.

16 But to come nearer the point, and instance in some Precepts of obedience
Precepts of obedience unto masters or parents though most universal for their
Form are limited by their subject. Vide Bellar. l. 2. de Monac. cap. 21.
delivered in most general form: Might the literal or Logic note of
Universalitie carry away such absolute sovereignty as they contend for: far
greater reason there is, why every father, or master should be an absolute Pope
over his own family, then why the Pope of Rome should be a father of all
Christian Congregations, an absolute Judge of Scripture, or master over men's
faith Saint Paul Col. 2. 20. Commands children to obey their fathers in All
things, for that is well-pleasing unto the Lord, which is as much, as if he had
said, in obeying them you obey the Lord. Again, he commands servants to be
obedient unto them that are their masters according to the flesh in All things,
not with eye-service as men pleasers, but with singleness of heart fearing
God. Both these precepts are conceived in terms, as general, as any precept
for obedience to spiritual Governors. In the Precept concerning wives
obedience to their husbands, the note of universalitie is omitted: for he
says, Wives sabmit your selves unto your husbands, as it is comely in the
Lord; not in all things. Had the Apostle made any mention of obedience unto
spiritual Governors, or were there any hope to comprehend Pastors under the
name of fathers or masters, it would quickly be inferred, the note of
universality was purposely added by our Apostle in these later precepts, that
men might know absolute obedience without limitation or examination, was due
unto the Pope.

17 But the Holy men of God, (whose mouths always spoke out of the abundance
of their hearts, as the spirit gave them utterance and were not curious to cast
their words in such exact scholastic moulds, as men addicted to artificial
meditations, having their brains more exercised then their hearts in Gods word,
usually do) even where they seem to speak most Universally for the Form, are to
be Universally understood only in that subject or matter, which for the present
they mind most. As when our Apostle commands servants and children to obey the
one, their masters, the other, their parents in all things; the meaning is, as
if he had said, S^ Aquinas expounds it as Bellarmin acknowledges it: Quod vero
D Paulus air Col. 3. Filii obedite patentibus per omnia, vel ita intelligi
debet, ut illud (per omnia) significat per omnia, ad quae se extendit (...)
(...), ut recte docet Sanct. Thom. in 2. 2. qeast. (...) 4 ar. 5. quen admodum,
si quis diceret, op^^tere milites obedire Impeatori per omnia, exponendum esset
per omnia quae ad militiam pertinent, vel certe renentur filii per omnia
parentibus obedire, sed dum parvuli sunt. Bellar. l. 2. de Monach. c. 21.
ye that are christian servants, be ye most willing to yield all obedience that
is due unto masters; ye that are christian children, to yield all obedience
unto your parents, which is convenient for any children to yield to theirs: So
that the universal note does rather enjoin a totality of heartinesse and
cheerfulness, a perfection of sincerity, in performing that obedience which
other children ought to their fathers, or servants to their masters, then any
way extend the object of christian childrens or servants obedience to more
particulars, then others were bound unto, at the least he does not extend the
object of their obedience to any particulars which might prejudice the
sincerity of their obedience due unto other commanders; whilst he enjoyneth
servants to obey their masters in all things, he reserves their allegiance
entire unto Princes and higher powers. Such must be obeyed both by masters and
servants, by fathers and sons. Much more does God when he injoyns obedience in
most ample form unto Kings or spiritual governors, reserve obedience due to
himself most entire and absolute.

18 Yet entire and absolute it cannot be, unless it depend immediately and
That, universal absolute obedience us to men is incom^ with ^ unto Christ.
absolutely upon his laws; unless it be exempt from the uncontrollable disposal
or infallible direction of other authorities. Nor can Christ be said our
supreme Lord, unless our obedience to him and those laws which he has left us,
do limit and restrain all other obedience due unto any authority derived from
him and his laws, more then a Prince could be said to be that servants supreme
Lord or Sovereign, which were bound absolutely to obey his Master in all
points, without examination, whether his designments were hot contrary to the
public laws and statutes of his Prince and Country. Wherefore as the oath of
Allegiance unto Princes does restrain the former precepts; Servants obey your
Masters in All things, that is, in all things that are not repugnant to public
laws, nor prejudicial to the Crown and dignity of your Sovereign: so must that
solemn vow of fidelity made unto Christ in Baptism, and our daily
acknowledgement of him for our Sovereign Lord, restrain all precepts injoyning
performance of obedience to any power on earth and set these immovable bounds
and limits to them; Obey thy King and Governor in All things, that is, in All
things that are not repugnant to the laws and ordinances of the Great King, thy
supreme Lord and Governor. Whilst thou obeyest him thou do well, in
disobeying them, as well as that servant that takes Arms against his Master in
the Kings desence; whilst thou disobeyest him, all other obedience is
rebellion; Ye are bought with a price (says our Apostle) be not ye the
servants of men; Service according to the flesh he elsewhere approves, he
strictly injoyns: for that is freedom in respect of this servitude of mind and
conscience, in being wholly at any other man's disposition.

19 Nor is it more difficult for Christ's servants to discern when governors
solicit them to disloyalty against him, then for servants according to the
flesh, to know when their masters seduce them unto rebellion; so Christian men
would fear God, as much as natural men do earthly Princes. Such as fear God,
are sure of a better expositor of his laws for fundamental points then servants
can have for their Princes. The transgression of both are easy to discern in
the beginning of revolts or Apostasies; but the later more difficult, when
traitors or usurpers are grown strong, and can pretend fair titles unto
soveraignties, or coin false pedegrees; yet it is not impossible for sober and
observant spirits in such a case, to foresee what party to follow; unto such
the Signs of the time, and carriage of the several causes will bewray who have
the true title. But this difficulty is in none in our spiritual obedience,
challenged by the Church of Rome: for that Church in words confesses Christ to
be the true King, and supreme Lord, no usurper, which is as much as to say, the
Pope is an usurper, and a rebel, that dares in deeds and substance challenge
the sovereignty from him (as you heard in the former dispute) by making claim
to this unlimited, unreserved obedience. Upon what grounds especially we are
now to examine, by these rules hitherto discussed.

CAP. XII.
The authority of the Sanhedrim not so universal or absolute amongst the Jews
as the Papists make it, but was to be limited by the former Rules.

1 ONe especial place on which they stand, is from that Law in Deuteronomy. 17. 8, etc.
Deuteronomy, If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between
blood and blood, between plea and plea, between plague and plague, in the
matters of controversy within thy gates, then shall thou arise, and go up unto
the place which the Lord thy God shall choose, And thou shall come unto the
Priests of the Levites, and to the Judge that shall be in those days, and ask,
and they shall show thee the sentence of judgment, and thou shall do according
to that thing which they of that place (which the Lord has chosen) show thee,
and thou shall observe to do according to all that they inform thee: According
to the Law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which
they shall tell thee, sealt thou do, thou shall not decline from the thing
which they shall show thee, neither to the right hand nor to the left: And that
man that will do presumptuously, not hear kning unto the Priest (that stands
before the Lord thy God to minister there) or unto the Judge, that man shall
die, and thou shall take away evil from Israel, so all the people shall hear
and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

2 This precept admits of many restrictions, any one of which does take away
all the force of our adversaries objections; First, it may (without prejudice
to our cause) be granted; although it cannot out of these words be necessarily
inferred; that God here prescribes obedience in the abstract, such as was to be
performed unto those Priests and Judges that lived, according to that pattern
which he had set them. Thus may this precept of obedience for the extent be
universal, and concern all causes whatsoever, spiritual or temporal; doubts of
conscience or matters of this life: in all which such governors were to be
obeyed; but conditionally [if they were such as God in his law required they
should be] unto such (as you heard before) he gave illuminations extraordinary,
such as the parties that were to obey, might have perfect notice of. But how
great soever the extent of this precept be: not one syllable in it makes more
for absolute obedience unto spiritual, then unto civil governors; for it is
said indefinitely, verse. 10. thou ^ do according to that thing which they
(either spiritual or temporal) of that plac^ which the Lord has chosen shall
show thee. And again, the words are di^ctive, That man that will do
presumptuously, not hearkening unto the Pr^ unto the Judge, that man shall die;
whether the Priest were to be supreme Judge or no, it is not said, at the least
the High Priest was not the chief man always in the Council, for he was not
always admitted into the supreme Consistory or Sanhedrim, which is established
in this place; yet ^
Bellarmin will have the definitive sentence belong unto the Priest, and the
execution of it to the civil magistrate: so indeed the present Romish Church in
spiritual cases would be judge, and m^ke Christian Princes her hang-men, but
their practice must not be taken for an infallible exposition of that The Law ^
temporal causes, either on^.
Law, whence they seek to justify their practice quite contrary to the
practice of the Jewish Church and Synagogue. Nor does Bellarmin or any other,
beside the base parasitical Canonists, or the Popes trencher chaplains, deny,
but that in many civil causes, the Prince or temporal Magistrate has a
definitive sentence; can he then gather out of any circumstance of this place,
that only spiritual causes are here meant? nay, he confesses that the law is
general concerning all doubts that might arise out of the law; yet it is most
probable, that it only concerns civil controversies; and Bellarmins reason to
prove, that it includes spiritual causes, or matters of Religion, is most
idle. The occasion of this Law (says he) was for them that did serve other
Gods, as appears out of the beginnning of the Chapter; now the service of other
Gods is a point of Religion. But what though Moses in the former part of this
Chapter speak of Idolaters, must this law therefore concern Idolaters. In the
former part he speaks only of Idolaters, but this law is not only for them by
Bellarmins confession. Yet the circumstances of the place, and the express law
against Idolaters mentioned before, evince, that in this Chapter, as in the
former, he first sets down laws concerning the true service of God, and in the
later part gives precepts for the observation of the second Table, the
maintaining of love, by the final composition of all controversies that might
arise betwixt neighbors. In the former law Idolaters are sentenced to death,
and Idolatry (says Bellarmin) is a point of Religion; Was the Priest alone
then to give sentence, and the civil Magistrate only to execute it. There is
not the least pretense for it out of this Text. Any ordinary Magistrate might
execute him that was lawfully convicted of this crime, nor was it so hard a
matter to judge, who was an Idolater amongst the Jews, as it is to determine
what is an Heresy amongst the Romanists. This was to be proved by witnesses,
not by Logical proof or force of speculative reason: Had the cunningest Jesuit
in the world been taken amongst them kneeling down before an Image and praying
to it, all the distinctions in the Master of sentences, or Aquinas, or both
their Commentators could not have redeemed him, against two honest men that had
sworn he had done thus much; there had been no appeal from any City in Judah,
unto any higher Court; his doom had been read in the gates, and without them he
should (as Homer speaks) have put on a stony coat.

3 That the Kings of Judah were only to execute the Priests definitive sentence
in all hard controversies, is a position well deserving execution without
appeal at Princes hands. And no doubt but it did so amongst the Jews. The
former Court, as is most probable, was to cease, when they had a King amongst
them. And Moses in the former Chapter, after he had given the other law for
ending controversies, gives the law for the election of their King, if so be
they would have one: as if the former Court had then ceased to be the supreme
Tribunal; seeing all Subjects might appeal unto the King from it, in which this
Sovereignty did before reside, as being the supreme Tribunal whence there could
be no appeal.

4 The King in the Law concerning his qualification, is commanded to have the
Law of his God written out. Deuteronomy. 17. 18.
And it shall be with him, and he shall read therein all the days of his life,
that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep all the words of his
Law, and these Ordinances for to do them, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren, and that he turn not from the commandment to the right hand, or
to the left. Was he to take all this pains, only that he might learn to execute
the Priests indefinite sentence? This any heathen might have done. But the
Kings of Israel, albeit they were not to meddle in the execution of the Priests
office, were not withstanding to be so well skilled in Scriptures as to be able
to judge, whether the Priest did according to that Law which God had set him to
follow, and to control his definitive sentence, if it were evidently contrary
to Gods word, which both were absolutely bound to obey.

5 It may perhaps here be objected, that the King had no such assurance of
infallibility in judgment as the Priest had, and therefore it was requisite he
should rely upon the Priests definitive sentence. What construction then can
any Jesuit make of these words; Prove. 16. 10. That the infallibility of kings
may be defended with as great probability of Scriptures as the infallibility of
priests, Prove. 16. 13.
A divine sentence shall be in the lips of the King, his mouth shall not
transgress, he says not, in execution of judgment given by the Priests, but
in judgment given by himself, seeing it is an abomination to Kings to commit
wickedness, for the throne is established by justice. And again, Righteous
lips (such as the Priests should and might have been, but usually were not) are
the delight of Kings, and the King loves him that speaks right things. This
place if we respect either the abstract form of precept, or plenitude of Gods
promise for abiliment to perform it, is more plain and peremptory for the
Kings, then any can be brought for the High Priests infallibility, in giving
definitive sentence; yet does it not necessarily infer, Kings shall not; but
rather shows that they should not, or that they might not at any time err in
judgment, so they would steadfastly follow those rules which God has prescribed
them. For when God says; A divine sentence shall be in the lips of Kings; this
speech does no more argue a perpetual certainty in giving righteous sentence,
then if he had said; A corrupt or erroneous sentence shall not be in the lips
of the King, or his mouth shall not transgress in judgment. For as that which
God says, shall not be done, oft-times is done: so may that which God says,
shall be done, be oft-times left undone. Who is he then would make this
collection: God says, Thou shall not steal, that is no man shall steal, ergo
there can be no thieves, no theft committed, yet is our adversaries collection
as foolish, The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, Ergo they cannot err in
giving definitive sentence; as again, The spirit shall lead you into all truth;
they shall be all taught of God; therefore the Church shall be infallibly
taught by the spirit, and shall as infallibly teach others, live they as they
list.

6 These places show what should be done, and what God for his part will
infallibly perform (so men would be obedient to his word) but neither do these,
or any of like nature, include any infallibility of not erring without
performance of due obedience in practice of life; nor do they necessarily
conclude, that men always shall perform such obedience. The most which they
infer, is this, that Governors by duty are bound to perform, that performing
such obedience in practice of life, they might be freer from error, in their
doctrine or difinitive sentence. And it was abstinence and integrity of life
that was to preserve sincerity of judgment in Princes as well as Priests lips,
for which reason Princes had their precepts of temperance, answerable to those
rules prescribed for the Priests. So Solomon teaches kings, Prove 31. 3, 4, 5.
Give not thy strength unto a woman, nor thy ways, this is to destroy Kings:
it is not for Kings, O Lemuel, it is not for Kings to drink wine, nor for
^rinces strong drink, lest he drink and forget the decree, and change the
judgment of all the children of affliction. This place evidently shows, that
if their Princes were of riotous or intemperate lives, they had no promise that
they should not pervert the judgment of the children of affliction. The
conclusion hence arising is: all the places that can be brought, either for the
King or Priests authority, rather show what manner of men they should be both
in life and judgment, then ^ure them of any infallibility of judgment, if
they be dissolute in life. This was a point never dreamt of by any, before the
Popes notoriously infamous lives did discredit the Titles of sanctity and
infallibility (which from a concert of their predecessors integrity they have
usurped) and enforced their parasites to frame a distinction of sanctity in
doctrine separated from sanctity in life.

7 It is questionable, where both Priests and Princes of Judah had not an
extraordinary privilege above all other nations, both for being infallible in
their definitive sentences whilst they lived according to the laws which God
had given them, and also for their more then ordinary possibility of living
according to such laws. Gods blessings (as is most probable) in both th^se
respects, were extraordinary unto their Princes and Priests: yet not so
m^nitely extraordinary, that either of them might without presumptuous
blasphemy hope for ordinary integrity (such as the more civil sort of heathens
had) much less for any absolute infallibility, if they were extraordinarily
wicked in their lives, or unfaithful in their other dealings. Even the peoples
wickedness did impair the force and virtue of these extraordinary blesings
promised to their Kings and Priests God gave them Priests as well as Princes in
his anger, such as should be pliable to their humor not such as should
infallibly direct them against the suggestions of the world and flesh for their
spiritual good: So that these gracious promises both for their spiritual and
temporal governors sincerity in judgment, did depend in part upon the
condition of this peoples life.

8 The usual Proverb was most true (though the words thus inverted) Like
people, Like Priests. Thus did the wise Son of Sirach interpret Gods promises
both to Priest and Princes Because Phineas the son of ^leazar had zeal ^*
in the fear of the Lord, and stood up with good courage of heart, when the
people were turned back, and made reconciliation for Israel; therefore was
there ^venant of peace made with him, that he should be the chief of the
Sanctuary, and of his people, and that he and his posterity should have the
dignity of the Priesthood for ever. And according unto the covenant made with
David, that the inheritance of the kingdom should remain to his son of the
Tribe of Judah, so the heritage of Aaron should be to the only son of his son,
and to his seed. God give us wisdom in our heart to judge his people in
righteousness, that the good things that they have be not abolished, and that
their glory may endure for their posterity.

9 From what we have said it is most evident, that the precepts injoyning
obedience unto civil Magistrates, are as large and ample as any can be found
for obedience unto spiritual governors, and what limitations soever the one
did, the other might admit, during the time of the Law. The promises of Gods
extraordinary favor, for directing both in their proceedings, were equal to
both, always conditional in both cases.

10 As for this Law, Deuteronomy 17. the very nature of the Text and circumstances
annexed thereto, inser no more then this; That God would have a supreme This
law of Deuteronomy. does justify our English laws for executing priests and Jesuits,
of all such as acknowledge the Pope supreme Judge in causes Ecclesiastical.
Tribunal amongst the Israelites, wherein all controversies, which could not be
ended in inferior Courts, were to be finally determined, lest private
contentions might grow to public dissentions; or wranglings for petty damages,
turn to the overthrow of the State by disturbance of common peace. It may be
admitted then that absolute obedience is here enjoined, but not universally
absolute, nor in all causes, but in causes of controversy betwixt man and man,
not in causes betwixt men and their own consciences. And although the ground of
controversers plea might be from some spiritual law, (as concerning succession
in the Priesthood, etc.) or have some spiritual matters annexed as consequent,
the Judges censure was to extend only unto men's civil carriage, in such
controversies, and the Plantiffs were to prosecute their right or title (were
it matter of wrong, of inheritance, spiritual or temporal) no farther then the
sentence of his Court did permit. All were bound upon pain of death to sit down
with their private loss, rather then raise tumults or endanger the public
form of government established in Israel. Even when they knew the Judges
sentence in particular to be erroneous, they were to do or suffer as he
commanded, to remit their right, to let go that hold and interest which they
thought they had in matters of temporal consequence (though perhaps of
spiritual title) and undergo what corporal penalty soever the Priest or Judge
(whether soever were supreme magistrates) did enjoin them; but they were not
bound to think as the Priest or Judge thought, nor to hold their sentence was
always agreeable to the law of God. Albeit much easier it was for the
Sanhedrim, then for the modern Romish Consistory, to resolve more controversies
brought unto them by this divine rule. Recause the ancient Israelites did not
use to trouble their Priests or judges with such quirks and quiddities, as
coined for the most part by Schoolmen, have bred greatest contention in the
Christian world, such as never could have been decided by the judgment of Urim
or Thummim, nor by Prophets, (...) or dreams: He that had desired any such,
must have gone to ^ndor for resolution. In Jerusalem or Shiloh (whiles they
flourished) the proposers ^roversies should have been punished for their
curiosity, which 1 Samuel 28.
^ Israelites had been as hateful as the sin of Witchcraft. The want ^bunal as
this, for punishing contentions, and curious spirits, has ^ch fruitless
contentions, and nice questions, as cannot possibly be ^ce set abroach or
prosecuted, but might easily have been prevent^gious care and industry of such
a supreme Consistory in every (...).

11 What has been said concerning the meaning of this place, Deuteronomy. 17. is
confirmed by the practice of the Jews and their ancient Records; First, that
not only conditional, but absolute obedience is here enjoined, is not probable
out of those words, v. 11. ^ d^^t^^^arum and (...) ^eteribus ^ a Mose a^ Prop^
q^o^ (...) ^. S^dum, quod opi^ jud^, ut in S^riptu^a lo^is enar^, qua ad o^t.
(...) quo (...) ^, q^ ob ^^m sub pr^ore templo and ^ a^s po^, t^nta c^ncordia
Judaeo^ rata ^it; don^m magnum ^, ^ c^^to de^ta, ^ummo (...) ^. D^inde in
s^nt^ntia ^^^enda, and ^ de lege ^ co^ject^^ is co^^ixi ^. ^ qu^d ^ic ^rat
pro^ciatum, p^o lege ^. T^us, quod ^^at^^^t ultra leg^^, qu^ (...) de^, (...)
obj^cto sepimento, ut ^, q^am in legem aliquid ^oris ^. H^^ Ch^ domini (...)
inv^^teru^t, (...) prop^aditioues reliq^legem Dei. Hu^ duo genera, ali^
perpe^ua (...) volue^ tempo^a^^a. Fagius in Deute, on. 17.
[according to the Law which they shall teach thee:] not only the written law
of God (as some will have it) but such Customs as were received in this Court,
though but probably deduced from the written law or otherwise invented by their
magistrates in ^ases omitted by the Lawgiver. All such customs, decrees, or
ordinances were to be obeyed absolutely in such matters as did con^ern men's
temporal losses or commodities, there was not appeal to any other Court on
earth, for the reversing of any ^entence given in this; to have attempted thus
much, by this law, had been present death; and by the same all Christian
Princes justly might, yea ought to put to death all such, as in any cause
spiritual or temporal, upon any occasion whatsoever, shall appeal to Rome from
the chief Tribunal allotted for the hearing of such causes in their native
Country: for by nature and Christian duty, all are bound to abide the sentence
of that Tribunal; though not to approve it, yet not to resist it, or
opposeviolence unto it, though it offer violence to them: For God only must
take vengeance of their abusing of that authority, which he had given them for
others good, not for their harm. Would God all Christian Princes would put this
law in practice, and fulfill Gods word in the forementioned place, that all
might die which do thus presumptuously: that so evil, and (the mischief of
mischiefs) all appeals to Rome might be taken away from Israel; that so all
Christian people hereafter might hear and fear, and do no more presumptuously.

12 Secondly, that the high Priest Sed ^ in Sa^ (...), (...) quod pro^ ^it ^
Sa^ ve^^ ^ (...) mo^^ ^apie^^tia (...) es^ Fag^ cap. (...). D^ut. ^.
was not the infallible Judge, nor above Kings in giving definitive sentence,
is most evidently confirmed by consent of Jewish antiquity; for the High
Priest was not admitted into their chief Consistory but upon this condition, If
he were a wise man, and being admitted, yet was he not to sway all as he
pleased, for so is it said in the same place, that the king was not to be of
the Sanhedrim, because they were forbidden to contend with him, with the High
Priest they might. But the Prophets of God did always in their doctrine
withstand either the Priests, Prophets, Kings, or Judges, as often as they went
Vide Fag^^m in cap. 16. Deuteronomy. and the annotations on the 10. of the next
Chapter.
contra stationes Montis Sinai: i. e. against the stations (or statutes) of
Mount Sinai.

CAP. XIII.
That our Savior's injunction of obedience to the Scribes and Pharisees,
though most universal for the form, is to be limited by the former Rules. That
without open blasphemy it cannot be extended to countenance the Romish cause:
that by it we may limit other places brought by them for the Popes transcendent
universal authority.

ANother place there is, which, as it seems has been too much beaten
heretofore, because some of the cunningest Anglers for Peter's tribute, begin of
late to relinquish it. The place is Matthew. 23. verse 2, 3. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses seat. All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do, but after their works do not, for they say, and do not.
Bellarmin in his first attempts, is more forward to fortify this hold then any
other; to what purpose, I cannot divine, unless to terrify such as view it
only a far off; but it seems he felt upon better experience, the mainta^nance
of it once closely besieged, would not quit the coast; for elsewhere he yields
as much expressly, as will enforce him to surrender up this, if it be instantly
demanded. Perhaps he hoped his premunitions might work some secret disposition
in most men's minds more prejudicial to our cause, then we out of our honest
simplicity could at first sight suspect. It will not therefore be amiss, partly
to prevent the possible danger of his concealed conclusion, by showing the
express folly of his premises; partly, to examine the place it self, because
the evidence of it failing, will be a presumption against all they pretend of
like kind, and may afford some farther light how we may restrain pro^ositions
for their form most universal, by the matter or circumstances concomitant.

2 The fortresses which he erects for defense, are Three. His First, that our
Savior in this very Chapter Mat. 23.
wherein he reprehends the Scribes and Pha^isees most sharply, yet gives this
Caveat to such as are weak in faith, lest they should neglect their doctrine
for their bad lives and Hypocrisy. The note, considered in it self, is not
amiss, but brought to countenance their bad cause, or else to prejudice the
truth of ours, by raising a suspicion in the ignorant of our bad dealing, as if
we taught the contrary.

3 His Second Fortress is, that neither our Savior Christ, nor his Apostles
did ever tax the Prelates, or inferior Priests, by these names directly, but
always under the name of Scribes and Pharisees, lest they might thereby seem
to reprehend the Priesthood or Seat of Authority. And this they did, that men
might know, honor and reverence to be due unto the Prelacy or Priesthood,
although the Priests or Prelates in their lives and persons were not so
Commendable. The consequence is not amiss; albeit his reason be not so firm,
and the Co^ollary, which he hence deduceth, most malicious. Hence (says he
Nota tria. Prim^, Toto illo capite Dominum reprehendere vitia Scriba^^ ^um, and
quia poterant infirmi ex eo colligere, non esse credendum Praelatis qui male
vivunt, id^o, initio capitis (...) d^^ere voluisse, n^n obstante mala vita
Praelatorum sequendam esse eorum doctrinam. Secundo, nota cum Cypri^. (...). 4.
Epist. 9. Nunquam Dominum, neque Apostolos in ^ota Scriptura reprehendisse
Ponti^ices and Sacerdo^es Judaeo^, ^do eos Pontifices vel Sacerdo^es, sed solum
sub nomine Scribarum and Phariseorum; ne viderentur repre^ Cath^dram and
Sacerdotium, and ut intelligeremus, semper deberi honorem Sacerdotio and
Pontifica^^i, etiam si sor^ a quae in Cathed^ae sedet, sit minus ^ona. Ex quo
intelligimus haereticos huius temporis, qui passim in Epis^opos ^ and pracipue
in ipsum summum Ecclesiae Pontificem invehuntur, nihil habere commune cum
mo^^bus Domini, ^. Ie^^^^ ^ota quod Dominus de Cathedra Mosis dicit, intelligi
a ^ortiori de Cathedra Petri. Bellar. d^ inte^* ^ 3. c. (...).
) we are given to understand, that the Heretics of this age, which upon every
occasion in^gh against Bishops, Priests, especially the Pope, do but ill
consent in manners with our Savior and his Apostles. But did neither our
Savior Christ, nor his Apostles tax the Priests and Prelates by their proper
names for that reason which Bellarmin brings? ^.
We may suppose I trust without offense, That Gods Prophets did not go beyond
their commission, in taxing the chief offenses or offenders of their times;
that our Savior or his Apostles might upon the like or greater occasions, have
used the same Form of reprehension the Prophets did, or other more personal.
The true reason why so they did not, was, because they had no such respect of
Persons or Titles, as Bellarmin dreams of* but aimed chiefly at the Fairest,
for such usually gave greatest counte^ to foulest sins. And who knows not, how
in the Synagogues later days, the glorious titles of Scribes and Pharisees had
in a sort drowned the names of Priests; as the reputation of Jesuits has of
late years much eclip^ed all other titles of inferior ministers, heretofore
more famous in the Ro^ Church? It was likewise the high esteem of these two
Saint-like Sects, which seduced most silly souls throughout Jewry, to follow
traditions contrary to Gods laws, as the Jesuits late Fame has drawn most of
the blind Churches children (which go more by ear then eyesight) to account
villainy piety, and falsehood subtilty. As our Savior and his Apostles
reprehended the Rabb^es or Priests in their times, not under the names of
Priests and Levites but under the glorious names of Scribes and Pharisees, then
reputed the only guides of godliness: so would they, were they now on earth
(as we in in^itation of them) tax the Romish Clergy, especially under the
names of Jesuits, or other more famous orders in that Church. But the Sect of
Scribes and Pharisees being not known in Malachies time, nor any other order so
glorious then, as the order of Priests, he tells them their own in their proper
names; And now O ye Priests this commandment is for you. So did Micah and
Zephaniah, and every M^^. 2. 1.
Prophet, as their demerits gave occasion.

4 His third Fortress is, that whatsoever Christ says of Moses chair, must be
conceived to make more for Saint Peter's, and such as sat therein. Why our
Saviors admonition should make more for the Popes authority within his own
territories, then it did for the Scribes and Pharisees, or High Priests
authority in the land of Jewry, I See no reason. That it may concern the people
living under the Pope, and Clergy of Rome, as much as it did the people of
Jewry then subject to the High Priest, Scribes and Pharisees, I will not deny
for such Judges as they were, the Popes of Rome in their several generations
may be nay would God they were not. Let us see then, what infallibility in
giving definitive sentence Bellarmin can prove out of the forementioned place.
The words are plain, Whatsoever they bid you do, that do. What? All, without
any exception? nay you do the Papists wrong, if you collect so; Whatsoever they
speak ex Cathedra. Then the proposition, though most universal for the form is
restrained by our adversaries themselves, unto such doctrines only as they
taught ex Cathedra. And justly, seeing this restraint has more apparent ground
in the Text then any other. Therefore it is said They sit in Moses seat, they
are infallible, not always because they sometimes sit but whiles they sit in
Moses seat, or give sentence out of it; what is it then to give sentence out of
Moses seat? to pronounce sentence solemnly, and upon d^liberation? If unto all
their doctrines or definitive sentences so pronounced, men had been bound in
conscience to yield obedience: the Pope (as shall be showed anon) had never
^ate in Peter's chair; yea, Peter himself had been in conscience bound to be an
Apost^ from Christ. But what is the meaning of these words? They ^
sit in Moses sent, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe^ and do? That is, All that Moses first said, and they re^ite, This is a
strange interpretation indeed, will the ignorant or illiterate Papist reply,
yet to omit many others of their own) a late Cum jubet servare, ac facere quae
Scri^ae and (...) (dum in Cathedra Moysis sedent) (...); non de (...), ^ed de
legis, ac (...) oy^is doctri^a ^^qui^^^; p^ est, ac si di^at, omnia, quae lex
and Moses vobis ^, Scrib^s, and Pharisaeis recitantib^, servate ac sacite,
s^^und^ autem opera eoru^lite facere, ut H^la^ and (...). ^^dentur
intellexisse. Cur ergo, di^et aliquis, (...), (...) quaecunque Moses dicet,
servate ac facite, sed q^* Scribae and Pharisaei dixerint? D^ddi c^nsa (...)
altera, quod volueri^ Scribaru^ and P^orum hypo^risin arguere; non autem
arguisset nis^ dixisset ^os aliter vivere, aliter docere. Al^era, quod toto
capite ^ eos esset reprehensuru^, and ^ at aliquan^ (...) pri ^audare, ^e omnia
ex affect^, and sine judicio improbare videretur. Maldonat* in Math. cap. 2* v.
3 S. Austias answer, [Non loquitur de Pharisaeis, nisi in Ca^hedra Moysis
sedentibus; tunc autem Cathedra ipsa coegit eos vera dicere.] He thus rejects;
[Quis d^ ipsa falsa, quae docebant, in Cathedra ipsa, si in Cathedra sedeba^t,
aut in Synagoga and Schola M^^sis do^u isse?] Seeing the Jesuit thus rejects
the ^ speaking ex Cathedra, or as private men, what^ have we to acknowledge the
Popes public or inf^llible spirit, whilst he speaks ex Cathedra, when by
their own confession he may be worse then an Heretic or ^ take him as a
private man.
Jesuits, whose skill in expounding Scriptures (save only where doting love
unto their Church, has made him blind) none of theirs, few of our Church has
surpassed, [* When he commands to observe, and do all that the Scribes and
Pharisees say, whilst they sit in Moses seat, he speaks not of theirs, but of
Moses his doctrine: the meaning is, as if he had said whatsoever the law or
Moses (recited by the Scribes and Pharisees) shall say unto you that observe
and do, but do not ye according to their works.] This he takes to be Saint
Hilaries, and Saint Hieroms exposition of the place. If any man yet further
demand, why our Savior did not speak more plainly, [Whatsoever Moses says,
observe and do] rather then [Whatsoever the Scribes and Pharisees say, observe
and do:] Maldonat in the same place gives two reasons: The first, because our
Savior did now purpose to tax the Scribes and Pharisees hypocrisy which he
had not taxed, unless he had showed, that they taught otherwise then they
lived. The second, that in this Chapter he intended to reprehend the Scribes
and Pharisees sharply, and therefore it was expedient, he should first commend
them for some things, lest all his reproofs might seem to proceed from passion,
or want of judgment. Thus far Maldonat, unto whose answer we may adjoyn, that
our Savior Christ (as Maldonat also well has noted) did speak these words
unto such as had seen his miracles, and heard his doctrine, and yet could not
be his daily auditors with his other Disciples: but were to repair to the
Scribes and Pharisees, as unto their ordinary teachers, and instructers in the
Law. Here, if we consider the humor of rude and ignorant people (for such may
we suppose most of his auditors were as yet) it was very likely they would
either be slow to hear, or ready to distaste any doctrine that should proceed
from the Scribes and Pharisees mouths, whom they had heard so much
discommended by that blessed mouth, which spoke as never man's did. For it is a
work of great judgment, nay of the spirit overruling the flesh, to make men
relish their doctrine, whose lives and conversations they loath. And such as
are but scholars (though never so mean) to an excellent master, will usually
be puffed up with a conceit of themselves, from other men's conceit and
commendations of him, and in this humor scorn to learn of any more meanly
qualified, or of less estimation in the same profession. Again, there is a
jealousy in most illiterate minds, that their Preacher, if he follow not such
lessons in his life, as he gives them, does not teach them as they should be
taught, nor instruct them sincerely as he thinks, but rather in policy injoyns
them strictnes^e of life, that he himself may follow his pleasures without
partners.

5 Hence usually are many wholesome spiritual medicines disproved, The origin^
(...) Je^ (...) the (...), or ^e ex^ the whol^ admon^ of Pa^.
ere proved or tasted, because the parties unto whom they are tendered, have no
conceit or relish of any Good, but what is pleasant to sense, or profitable
for secular purposes; such as none that truly think, or call Good, but will so
entertain it in action and resolution, never willingly preferring the less
before the greater, both being of the same kind. If a man should make choice of
that bargain, which he would persuade as less commodious unto others; none
would believe he spoke sincerely as he thought, but rather cunningly to prevent
others, or to effect his own gain without a sharer. But whilst secular good
stands in competition with spiritual, albeit we approve the one as truly good,
and condemn the other as evil; yet even the best of us is often enforced to
take up that complaint; To will is present with me, but I find ^ 18, 19.
no means to perform that which is good, for I do not the good things which I
would, but the evil which I would not, that do I. Rude and illiterate minds,
ignorant of this difference between sensitive and spiritual good, (as
altogether unacquainted with the one) out of their own custom always to act
what they intend, suspect their Pastors, whilst they commend wholesome food
unto them, do not Think, because they Do not, as they Say. From this soursei^ue
these or the like mutterings amongst themselves; Tush, if our Parson were of
the same mind out of the Pulpit, as he makes show for, in it; why should he not
frame his life accordingly? Does he love us (trow we) better then himself? nay,
I warrant him, He is old enough to know what is good for himself: and if he
knew that which he bids us do, to be as good for him, as he would make us
believe it is for us, what a Gods name, hinders him from doing it? he has
little else to do besides, much less I am sure then any of us.

6 To meet perhaps with all these, but especially with this last temptation,
our Savior gives his Auditors this preservative; [The Scribes and Pharisees
sit in Moses chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do, but after their works do not] As if he had said, Though their lives be
hypocritical and bad, yet be not too jealous of their Doctrine: They deliver
that ordinarily unto you, which Moses did teach your forefathers. The Doctrine
is exceeding good, howsoever these cursed hypocrites do not follow it: But this
is Gods judgment upon them, that they should see the truth with their eyes,
and not understand it by laying it to their hearts.

7 This I take it, is the drift of our Saviors speech; whence the universal
note [whatsoever] must be restrained to such material doctrines, as the The
true re^ of the ^ ^^unction.
Scribes and Pharisees themselves, either expressly delivered out of Moses, or
whiles they interpreted him, commended to others as good in the general,
howsoever they shrunk back or shufled, when they came to the practice of such
particulars as crossed their humors; or unto these precepts of good life,
whose truth and equity their Auditors might easily have acknowledged, either
from their consonancie with the principles of nature, or other undoubted
mandates of Moses law, or from the authority of bad, yet lawful teachers,
whose advise is always to be followed as good, unless there be just suspicion
of evil, or sinister respects, of which their bad lives are then only just
presumptions, when they handle particulars that concern themselves, as making
for their gain, credit, glory, Apologies in bad courses, or avertment of
deserved disgrace.

8 If we take this whole universal affirmative, [whatsoever they bid you, that
observe and do] in that sense our Savior meant it: it is but equivalent to
this, or the like universal negative, [Leave nothing undone that either Moses,
or such as sit in his seat commands as good] or your conscience cannot justly
witness to be evil, albeit they which commend it to you for good, are evil,
and cannot teach themselves to do it. Few Preachers in any well ordered Church,
are so unlearned, or bad of life, but what they solemnly one time or other
deliver out of Moses and the Prophets, might be a sufficient rule for their
hearers internal thoughts, and outward actions: did not the slock
preposterously make their Pastors doings, the rule of their thoughts and
sayings: always suspecting that, as not good, which they see left undone, and
accounting all lawful for themselves to do, which they see done and practiced
by their leaders. When as not the Pastors lives or doings, but their sayings
are to be made rules of other men's lives and actions. And our Savior enjoins
the former obedience unto the very Pharisees, who spoke as well, and did as ill
as any could do; very Paterns of hypocrisy. In expounding Moses, They could
not but often inculcate the orthodoxal doctrine of good works, of alms deeds,
and liberality; yet retained they the roots of avarice in their hearts, whose
bitterness would bewray it self upon particular occasions, Luke 16. 14.
All these things heard the Pharisces, says S. Luke, which were cavetous, and
they mocked him. They often exhorted others to circumcise the heart, to be
humble and meek as Moses was, yet remained proud them selves, ambitious of
highest places in the Synagogues, inwardly full of rapine and wickedness. They
often taught others as Moses had done, to walk uprightly Luke 11. 39.
as in the sight of the Lord their God; and yet did all their works to be seen
of men. They had often taught their Auditors to honor father and mother, and
learnedly discoursed upon the equity of this precept in general: yet could upon
private respects dispense with it in sundry particulars. They said well in the
former, and did ill in the latter. And albeit they justified their practice by
tradition of the elders (as the Pontificians do theirs, when they absolve
subjects from the bond of duty to their civil, or children to their natural
parents, that they may be more serviceable to the Church their mother,) yet
their sayings in these Apologies were but accessory to their doings; not
comprehended under that universal affirmative. [All whatsoever they bid you,
observe, and do,] but under the negative [After their works do not] for they
were more desirous to be honored as Rabbis and Fathers of the Congregation,
then to honor the parents of their flesh: albeit they usually taught others so
to do, save only when their treasury might be enriched, or their own honor
enlarged by dispensations, which the people easily might have discerned for
contrary, as well to the Law of God and nature, as to these dispensators own
doctrine, when themselves were not parties.

9 The authority of the Keys not universal, but to be limited as the former
precept or injunction has been.
From the restraint of this universal precept, we may easily limit that speech
of our Savior unto Saint Peter which Bellarmin labors to make more then most
universal, because the surest ground (in their supposals of the Popes
transcendent Authority, [I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of
heaven, and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven, Matthew. 16.
19.] By these keys says Per istas claves non solum intelligitur potestas
solvendi a peccatis, sed etiam ab omnibus alijs vinculis and impedimetis, quae
nisi tollantur, non potest intrari in regnu^ coelorum: ^ quidem pren^ssio
generalis (...), ^^c dicitur, Quemcunque solveris, sed quodcunque solveris, ut
intelligamus, Nodos omnes, seu legum, dispentando, seu peccatorum and poenarum,
^elaxando, sen dogmatum, and controversiarum, explicando, a Petro ejusque
successoribus solvi (...), Bellar. de verbi Dei interpret. lib. 3. cap. 5.
initio.
Bellarmin, is understood a power of loosing, not only sins, but all ^ber
bonds or impediments, without whose removal there is no possibility of
entrance into the Kingdom of heaven: for the promise is general; nor is it
said, whomsoever, but Whatsoever thou loosest, etc. giving us hereby to
understand, that Peter ^^d bis successors may loose all knots or difficulties,
of what kind soever, if of laws, by dispensing with them; if of sins, by
remitting them; if of controversies, or opinions, by unfolding them. Thus far
would this cunning Sophister improve the universal [Whatsoever] above it
ordinary and ancient value in Scripture phrase: further then the condition of
the party, to whom the promise was made (being Christ's servant, not his
equal) will suffer. For what greater Prerogative could Christ himself
challenge, then such as Bellarmine (for the present Popes sake) would make
Saint Peter's? The Universal note in this place, as the like before, ^includes
only an abundant assurance of the power ^thed; a full and irrevocable
ratification of the Keys right use, such a shutting as none can open, such an
opening as none can shut; as often as sentence is either way given upon
sufficient and just occasions. The proper sa^ject th^^ limits the universal
form of this more then princely prerogative, is the den^ confession of Christ,
either in open speech, in perpetual actions or resolution; as shall be (by
Gods assistance) made evident against Romish assertions, without derogation
from the royalty of Priesthood, which within these Territories is much more
dreadful and sovereign, then worldlings will acknowledge until they be made
feel the full stroke of the spiritual sword, in these our days, for the most
part born in vain.

10 Whatsoever reasons else they can from any other places of Scripture pretend
for absolute infallibility in the High Priests, or Church representative under
the Law, fall of their own accord, these fundamental ones being overthrown.
But before I proceed to evince the Jewish supreme tribunal most grossly
erroneous de facto: I must request the ingenious Readers, as many as understand
Latin, and can have access unto these great Doctor: writings, to be
eyewitnesses with us, or if it please them, public Notaries of their
retchlesse impieties. Of which unless authentic notice be now taken and
propagated to posterity by evident testimonies beyond exception: this impudent
generation in future ages, when these abominations growold, and more stirred
in, begin so to stink, that for the Churches temporal health, the books of
modern Jesuits must be purged, will surely deny that ever any of their grand
Divines were so mad with incestuous love of their ^
whorish mother, as to seek her maintenance by such shameless, gross,
notorious, palpable, written blasphemies, as ungracious Judas would rather have
choked with an halter in their birth, then have granted them entrance into the
world through his throat. He in comparison of these Antichristian Traitors,
ingenuously confessed his foul offense in betraying innocent blood. But even
the flower of Romish Doctors, Bishops, and Cardinals, are not ashamed to
justify him, in betraying; and the Scribes and Pharisees, in solemnly
condemning our Savior* For, if the one sort did not err in judgment, the
other did not amiss in executing what they enjoined: yet by that very
Consistory of Priests, and Elders, brought in by Bellarmin, as chief
supporters of the Churches infallibility, was the life of the world censured
to death for an Heretic, or refractarious Schismatic; and the Triailla ^,
quil us in multitudine, publica honestas continetur. Hinc est quod Prophetae
constan^ qu^ ^ stationes ^^outis Sinai, ut vocant, aut reges, aut Judices, aut
populus al quid ad^ (of ^ Ann^ns to the eleventh paragr^ of the former
chapter.) In Talmud sribitur dominum ^ tionem sal^o intende^unt, quia ^quam
voluit Pouti^icum and Pharisaeorum tan^^ am judi^ autho^ convu^^m, sed
stabilitam potius. Matthew. 23. v. 2. Fagius in Deuteronomy. 17.
Talmu^, taking that Consistories authority but for such as the Jesuits
supposed, conclude directly from principles common to the Synagogue and the
Roman Church, that he deserved no less, because he would not subscribe unto
their sentence, nor recant his opinions.

11 Again, if we understand that other place [The Scribes and pharisees sit in
Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do,]
universally, as most Papists do, (and Heart out of his transmarinal Gate hism^
would gladly have maintained it:) any Jew might thus a^^ me* The S^ sees
solemnly bid Judas and others to observe our Savior as a ^, and charged the
people to seck his blood: therefore they were in ^ and upon pain of damnation,
bound so to do. Do I amplify one word, or wrong them a jo^ in these
collections? I appeal unto their own Writers. Let Melcbur Canus, inferior to
none in that Church for learning, and for a Papist a man of singular ingenuitie
be judge betwixt us. If from his words, as much as I have said, do not most
directly follow: let me die the death for this supposed slander. Against the
absolute infallibility of Councels, or Synods, maintained by him in his fifth
Book; our Writers, as he frames their Argument, thus objects. The Priests and
Pharasees called Councels, whose solemn sentences were impious, because they
condemned the Son of God for such: in like sort may the Romish Prelacie give
sentence contrary unto Christ. Unto this Objection, says Ad id quod deinceps
sequitur, non est difficile respondere. Nam sacerdotum veterum acta quidum
Christo adversa suerunt, it sententia hominu^ ali^qui pessimo^^^ non folum
veris^m^, sed reipub. etiam utilissima suit. Quin divinu^ oraculum suisse Joan.
Evangel. testatur. Cum enim post longam variamque concilij deliberationem
Caiphas, qui ut summus Pontifex Concilio praesidebat, sententiam illam, cui
omnes ^ere c^nsenserual, dix^: Expedit nobis, ut unus moriatur homo pro populo,
and non tota gens pereat: mox Evangelista subjecit; Hoc ^utem a semetip^o non
dixit, sed cum esset Pontisex anni illius prophetavit. Qua ex re fit, ut and
nostrorum Pontificum vita quidem and opera contraria forte sint Domino Jesu;
sed eorum judicia, quae videlicet a summo Pontifice comprobata sint, and (...),
and Christianis utilia, ut quae ad populi salutem sint divinitus instituta. Imo
adeo a Spiritu San to erunt ob (...) causam, quam ab Evangelista didicimus,
quia scilicet Ecclesiae Christi Pontifices sunt. At de secundo argumento satis.
(...), lib. 5. cap. ult. initio.
Canu^, the answer is easy; Let us hear it. The practices of the Priests were
indeed against our Savior: but the sentence of man otherwise most wicked, was
not only most true, but withal most profitable to the Commonweal. Yea, Saint
John the Evangelist tells us, it was a divine Oracle: for after a long and
various deliberation used by the Council, Caiaphas who now sat as chief, being
the High Priest, pronounced that sentence where unto almost all (at the least
the major part) agreed; [It is expedient, that one die for the people, and that
the whole nation perish not,] upon which speech the Evangelist forthwith adds;
This he spoke not of himself, but being High Priest for that year, he
prophesied. Whence it follows, faith Canus, that our Prelates lives and actions
may perhaps be contrary to our Lord Jesus: but their judicial decrees or
sentences, such as are confirmed by the Pope (who must be president in their
Councels as Caiaphas was) shall prove true and profitable unto Christians, as
instituted by God for the peoples good, yea, they shall proceed from the Holy
Ghost, for the reason which we have learned of the Evangelist, to wit, because
such as give them, are Prelates of Christ's Church. And this is all I have to
say unto the second Argument.

12 It is easy indeed for them thus to answer: to whom it is most easy and
most usual to blaspheme. That the Popes, as well as Caiapha's prophecies, may in
the Event prove true and profitable to Christ's Church, we do not doubt: because
unto such as love God, or are beloved of him, all things, even Satan's malice
that had suborned Cai^phas and his brethren against Christ and his members,
turn to the best. But he that had taken this High Priest, whilst he uttered
this sentence, for an infallible Prophet of the Lord, had been bound in
conscience to have done so to our Savior at his, as the people did to Baals
Priests, at Elias's instigation. If our adversaries will permit us to interpret
the Trent Councels Decrees, as the faithful of those times did Ca^a^bus
prophecy; we will subscribe unto them without delay. It is expedient, we
grant, and profitable with all unto the Church, that there should be such
Decrees, whereby the faith of others might be tried. But as it was not lawful
for the people, to imbrue their hands in Christ's blood, though the greatest
benefit that ever befell the world, was by his death: so neither is it safe to
admit the Trent Canons, though a wonderful blessing of God they should be set
forth, because they so clearly testify the truth of his word concerning
Antichrist. Canus said more in this then was needful, according to his
supposed principles in his answer to the next argument. But God who ruled the
mouth of Cai^phas, and made him speak the truth, when he intended nothing
less, d^^ also direct Canus^s pen to vent, what upon better consideration he
would have concealed. Yet herein he wrote, but out of the abundance of his own,
and most of his fellows hearts, who hold, that the Priests and (...) ^^re only
in a ^
matter of Fact, not in any point of Faith* when they (...) Christ. For
conclusion of this, consider with me, Christian Reader* how great cause we have
to thank our gracious God, that the s^^t of (...), or ^abble of Predicants,
were not founded in our Saviors dave^; for the doub^^e the Devil had picked a
traitor out of that crew, whose impuden^ sophistical Apologies for open
Blasphemy, and unrelenting perseverance (...) trait^rous plots, might have
outfaced the world that the delivering of Chri^ into his enemies hands, had
been no ^uch sin as J^ testified it wa^ his p^nitent speech, and desperate end.

CAP. XIV.
What it would disadvantage the Romish Church to ^eny the infall^lity of the
Synagngue.

THat any visible company of men before our Savior Christ's time, d^ challenge
such absolu^e authority over men's faith as the Pore does ^
would be very hard for them to prove; and no question but the high-P^ and ^ers
amongst the Jews, did oftentimes challenge more then they had. If the Rom mist
should say, that they had no such infallible authority in deciding all
controversies, as their Church now challenges; the assertion would be as
improbable in it self, as incongruous to their positions. For unto any
indifferent man such Infalli^ilitie in the Watchtower of Sion, m^ quisite
during the time of the Law, then since the promulgation of the Gospel. ^e it
granted, the points to be expressly believed of the an^ ent people, were but
few: yet even such of them as were most necessary to salvation, were more
enigmatically and mystically set down, then any in the new Testament a^e: and
the measure of Gods Spirit upon every sort of men* (the vulgar especially) in
th^se times, much less. For this c^use God raised u^ Prophets to instruct
them, whose authority though it was not such, as the Roman Church now
challenges (but given to supply the ignorance, and negligence of the Church
representative in those days:) yet much greater th^n is ordinarily required in
the light of the Gospel, by which as the doctrine of salvation is become most
conspicuous in it self, so is the illumination ^ Gods Spirit more plentiful
then before it had been. And since the Prophets have been so clearly expounded
by the Apostles and the harmony of the two Testaments so distinctly heard, the
ordinary* Test^ of ^esu^ ^ (...) to the spirit of Prophe^ie. Allowing then
these infinite ods on our p^rts* ^
that enjoy the labors of former ages, with the ordinary preaching of the
Gospel* an infallible ecumenical authority is much (...) needful now, then it
was in the Law.

2 Or if our adversaries will be so wayward, as to deny the like infallibility ^
to have been requisite in the ancient Jewish Church: they shall hereby thwart
evidently themselves, disanull their chief title* and utterly disclaim the main
plea hitherto used for their own infallibility. For them do u^ge Gods promises
made unto that Church, to prove a^ of (...) a like authority in theirs. And if
these promises made to the Jews, admit any distinction, condition, or
limitation, whereby t^ absolute infallibility (as they suppose it) may be
impaired: then may all the promises made or supposed to be made unto their
Church, admit the same, or like. But besides the weakening of their title, by
debarring themselves of this plea (drawn from the example of the ancient Jewish
Church) no man that reads their writings can be ignorant, that all their chief
and principal arguments (wherewith they carry away most simple souls, and
importune such, as almost neither fear God nor man, to give sentence for them
and their Church against us) are drawn from these, or the like Topics,
[unlesse God had ordained one supreme Judge, or infallible Authority, that
might decide all controversies in matters of faith viva v^ce, he had not
sufficiently provided for his Church, yea, which were most absurd, he had left
it in worse estate then civil Estates are for ordinary matters; for they,
besides their written Laws, have Judges to determine all cases or controversies
arising. And seeing that Monarchical Government is of all others the best; and
in any wise man's judgment most available for avoiding all dissension, and
keeping the unity of Faith; there should be no question, but God has ordained
such an authentical manner of deciding all Controversies. If he have not, it
must needs be, either because he could not establish such an infallible
Authority* and uncontrolable power; or else, because he would not. To say he
could not, were to deny his omnipotency, open blasphemy: to say he would not,
were little better, for this were to deny his goodness and love to his
Church, both which the Scriptures testify to be great, nay infinite.

3 But how great soever his love to his Church, and chosen be (as we
acknowledge it to be infinite and everlasting:) if these or the like arguments
make any thing for the infallibility of the present Romish; they prove as
much, and as directly, for the ancient Jewish Church. For that was a Visible
company of men, (not of oxen and asses, and of them God had a care also.) Nay
they were his own peculiar people, and (without all controversy) Yet I know
not what Bellar^^in should mean, when he makes it a ^articular Church, his
fully consutes it self, and it shall be sufficient to propose it. Bellar^de
Eccles milit. lib. 3. cap. 16. Ad tertium, de tempore Eliae, negatur
consequentia, and antecedens h^jus argumenti. Consequentia quidem, quia non est
eademratio p^puli Judaeorum, and populi Chri^^ianorum: nam populus Judaeorum
non erat Ecclesia universalis, ut est populus Christi^, sed particularis, and
propterea etiam extra ilium populum inveniebantur fideles and justi, ut
Melchisedech, J^h, and p^ Cornelius Centurio, and Eunuchus Candacis Reginae,
and alij nonnulli. Itaque etiam si universa Synagoga Jud^orum (...), non
contin^o omnis Ecclesia Dei in terris desecisset. Sed antecedens etiam negatur.
Non enim o^tendi po^est, (...) Synagogam Judaeorum defecisse omnino usque ad
Christi adventum, quo tempore etiam non tam de^^cit, quam (...) est in melius.
His comparison holds right thus. None were saved then but Isra^lites, none now
but Christians in heart* (...) were saved then, though not Israelies by outward
profession, or solemn association to the people of God: so are many now, (...)
not professed members of the true visible Church, whether that be theirs or
ours. They think many amongst us ignorant of (...), and we in charity ^^pe many
amongst them ignorant of our Churches tenants, yet ready to ^nbrace them when
it shall please ^eal them: are elected to salvation. But it was a pretty
Sophis^e in so great a Clerk to compare not Israelites in heart, or in the
fight of God, but the visible Church of Israel with Christians in heart, not
with any visible Christian Church.
the only visible Church, which he had on earth. Wherefore all the former
arguments, if they conclude any infallible Authority in the present Romish
Church; they conclude much more for the like infallibility of the Jew^sh. And
by necessary consequence, if I prove, That Church had no such Authority, my
assertion stands sure; That this infallible authority which the Factors of the
Romish Church do challenge, is greater then any visible Company of men had
before our Saviors time. And by the same proof, shall the Romish Church be
debarred for ever, of both the two former pleas* either drawn from the
authority of the Priests, or from the best form of government.

CAP. XV.
That justly it may be presumed the Jewish Church, never had any absolute
infallibility in proposing or determining Articles of faith, because in our
Saviors time it and so grievously err in the fundamental point of salvation.

FOr proof of the Conclusion proposed [that Jerusalem had no such absolute
infallibility, as Rome pleads for,] I took it for a long time as granted by
all, that if any such authority had been established in the Law, it should not
have varied until the alteration of the Priesthood. For Gods covenant with
Levi was in this sense everlasting, that it was to endure without interruption,
until His sacrifice was accomplished, that was a Priest after a more excellent
order. His oblation of himself, was the common bond to the Law and Gospel; the
end of the one, and the beginning of the other. Nor did the Legal rites or
ceremonies themselves (though these most obnoxious to corruption) vanish by
little and little, as this sacrifice did approach nearer and nearer, as
darkness does before the rising of the Sun: rather that consummation wrought
upon the Cross, did swallow them up at once, as virility does youth, youth
childhood, childhood infancy. Seeing then our Adversaries suppose this
infallibility was annexed as a prerogative royal unto the Priesthood: they
cannot imagine any tolerable reason, why the one should expire before the other
was quite abolished. Hence it is that most of them hold the Scribes and
Pharisees in our Saviors time, were absolutely infallible in their Cathedral
consultations. And I had just reasons to presume B^llarmin had been of the same
mind. For besides his urging that place (without all sense or reason, unless
grounded on this opinion,) They sit in Moses chair; All therefore whatsoever
they bid you, that observe and do,] these other words of his, seemed to imply
thus much, [ Non ostendi potest, nunquam Synagogam Judaeo^um de^^cisse omnino
usque ad Christi adventum, quo tempore eti^ non tam de^, quam ^tata est in
(...), Bellarde Ecclesia militante l. 3. c. 1^.
It cannot be showed that the Synagogue of the Jews did fail [in faith] until
Christ's coming, at what time it did not fail but rather became better by
change.] By his speeches elsewhere I perceived, by the Synagogue thus changed,
he meant the Church planted by Christ: not the Consistory of the Highpriests
and Elders, not the Catholic Representative Jewish Church. Sunt qui dicunt,
Concilium illud (in quo Christus condemnatus est) errasse, quia non processit
secundum morem legi^ judicij, sed tumultuaria conspiratione, subornatis falsis
testibus, Christum damnavit, id quod adeo notum erat omni^, ut etiam Pilatus
sciret per invidiam ^um fuisse traditum fibi a Pontificibus, ut habemus, Matthew.
27. atque haec qu*dem responsio probabilis est. Quia tamen non est inferiorum
judicare, an superiores legitime procedant necne, nisi manifes^ me constet
intolerabilem errorem committi; and credibile est Deum non per^is^^rum, ut
Co^cilia qui^us summus P^ sex p^asidet, non legitime procedant; Ideo
respondemus; Pontifices and Concilia Judaeorum non potuisse erra^e antequ^
Christus veni^et, sed eo praesente potuisse, imo fuisse praedictum erraturos
Judaeos and Christum negat^ros. Isa^^. 6. Dan^ and ali^i. Sic^^ enim non est
necessarium, ut Vicarius Papae non possit errare, cum ipse Papa regat
Ecclesian, and ab e^ defendat: Si^ e^iam non fuit necessa^ium, ut Pontifices
Judaeorum non possent errare, quando Ch^^stus, su^us totius Ecclesiae Pontisex
pr^se^s ad^rat, and Ecclesiam per se administrabat. Bellar. 4b. 2. de Council.
^uct. cap 8.
For, says he, as it is not necessary the Popes Vicar should be inerrable,
when the Pope himself does guide the Church, and defend it from error: so
neither was it necessary, that the Jewish High Priest should not err, when
Christ the High Priest of the whole Church was present, and did govern his
Church in person.

2 This example were it true, might illustrate (though ill-favouredly) his
assertion once supposed, as possible; but no way argues it to be probable.
Herein his similitude fails, that the High Priests in our Saviors time, were
Aarons lawful successors, their Priesthood as entire then as ever it was: and
they Deputies to none in this rank or order. That their Predeces^ors had such
infallibility he fain would prove. Can he, or any for him, show us when, or by
what means it should determine, whiles the Priesthood lasted? To take away the
Popes infallibility* even in this last age of the word, were, in their
construction to deny Christ's promise made unto S. Peter's chair. And was not the
former like prerogative as inseparably annexed to Moses seat? did our Savior
before his Passover, either by doctrine or practice, derogate ought from any
lawful authority established on earth; much less from that, which God had
expressly instituted? The greatest prerogative, the Scribes and Pharisees,
Priests or Rulers ever had, was, that they were Aarons successors, and
possessed Moses place: and this authority was never disanulled, but rather
ratified by our Savior, after he had undertaken his ministerial function; They
sit in Moses seat, all therefore whatsoever they bid you, that observe and do.
And elsewhere, Go, and show thy self unto the Priest, etc.

3 Bellarmins reason to prov^ the Jewish Church did fail in Faith in our
Saviors time proves it to have been erroneous in the time of Isaiah.
Yet this Sophister would persuade us, that Isaiah and Daniel had foretold the
expiration of this prerogative in later times. They both indeed foretell this
peoples extraordinary general blindness; about the time of our Saviors
conversation on earth. But this directly proves, what we object; not what
Bellarmin should have answered, at least to us, who contend the Priests and
Rulers of this people, were not infallible in our Saviors time; nor does
Isaiah or Daniel or any Prophet of God say, they were at any time such. Let any
Jesuit prove (what easily he may) out of For Daniel has nothing which can be
wrested to this purpose, for which reason this Imposter ci^es only his 9
Chapter at large.
Isaiahs words, cited by Bellarmin, that the Jewish Church representative was
not infallible in our Saviors time; and from the same we shall as clearly
evince it, palpably erroneous in Isaiahs own days, or immediately after. For
the self same words which the Evangelist says, were fulfilled in the
unbelieving Jews that heard our Saviors doctrine, were literally and exactly
verified of their forefathers before the captivity of Babylon, as the Cardinal
himself (would he take the pains to read the whole Chapter, and review the
place cited by him) I know would not deny: His words are these; Isai. 6. 9, 10.
11, 12.
And he said, go, and say unto this people: Ye shall hear indeed, but ye shall
not understand, ye shall plainly see and not perceive. Make the heart of this
people fat, make their ears heavy, and ^^^ut their eyes, lest they see with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, and
convert and he heal them. Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, until
the cities be wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the
land be utterly desolate, and the Lord have removed men far away, and there be
a great desolation in the midst of the land. The truth of our assertion is so
pregnant, that Di^itur autem prophetia, quantum observare potui, quatuor modis
imple^i. Primo, quum id ips^m fit, de quo prop^i^ (...) ^rali sensu
intelligebatur, sicut cap. 1. v. 22. Matthaeus dixit, Imple^am in Maria, Isaiae
prophetiam ^uisse. Ecce (...) concipiet, and pariet filium. Secundo, cum fit,
non id, de quo proprie intelliget at^r prophetia, sed id, quod per illud
^batur, ut 2. Regum 7. 14. Ego ero illi in pa^rem, and ille erit mi^i in
filium, quod proprie de Solomone dic^^m es^e p^^^pic^^m est. Divus ^^men
Paulus, de Christo, cujus Solomon Figura erat interpretatur. Heb. 1. 6. quasi
in eo implet^a^ esset. Et quod Exodus 12. 46. dictum est, Os non comminuetis ex
^o, certum est intelligi de agno, tamen ^oan. cap. 19. 36. in Christo, qui per
agnum significabatur, impletum dicit. Tertio, cum nec id fit, de quo proprie
intelligi^ prophetis, n^c id quod per illud significatur, sed quod illi simile
erat, and omnino ejusmodi, ut prophetia non minu^ (...) de (...), quam de quo
dicta est, dici potuisse videatur. Nam populus hic labiis me honor at, de
Judaeis qui tempore (...) erant, Deus dixerat Isai. 29. 13. Christus autem in
iis, qui suo erant tempore, impletum significat, Matthew. 15. (...), and. (...)
est exemplum Matthaei, 13. 14. and Act. 28. 26. Quarto, cum id ipsum, quod per
Prophetiam, aut Scripture dictum erat, quamvis jam ^actum suerit, tamen magis,
ac magis fit. Tunc enim Scriptura impleri dicitur, ^d e^^, quod per (...)
dictum erat, cumulatissi^^^ fieri. Maldonat. Comment in Matthew. cap. 2. verse.
15. The place cited Matthew. 13. 14. Acts 28. 26. (...) (...) very place out of
the 6. of Esaias, which Bellarmin urges to prove the Jews Church should fail in
our Saviors time.
Maldonat the most judicious expo^^tor amongst the Jesuits, takes it as
granted, the words late cited were literally meant only of that generation,
with whom the Prophet lived, and brings this very Text, as one of the aptest
instances to illustrate the third kind, as he makes it of fulfilling
prophesies, to wit, when that which is truly and literally meant of one, is
fitly applied unto another matter or sort of people, for the similitude of
their nature or disposition. Although (to speak the truth he might have
referred it more justly, at least, more artificially, to the fourth kind there
mentioned by him. For, as shall appear hereafter, this prophecy was alike
literally, properly, and directly meant of both, but verified of the former
times more immediately, as first in order, because that part of its object had
precedence in actual existence; of the later more completely as principally
intended by the holy Ghost.

4 The blindness there spoken of, was even then begun, but did increase from
that age until the captivity, and continued until Christ's coming in whole days
it was augmented, and the prophecy fully accomplished; as the desolation which
followed their blindness in putting him to death, was greater then that which
Nebuchadnezzar brought upon the City and land for the provocations wherewith
Manasseh, Jehoiachim, and other wicked Rulers, as well Priests, as Laics, had
provoked the Lord, by cruel persecution of his messengers sent unto them. This
was a disease in their Prelates and (...) lineally des^^nding to the Scribes
and Pharisees, who took ^
themselves for infallible teachers, and free from oppugning such doctrine, as
therefore-fathers had persecuted unto the death. The sin of these later in
crucifyiag Christ, was in degree more grievous, because his personal worth was
much greater then the Prophets; but the ignorance was of the same kind in both:
for, as our Savior says, (Mat. 23. 32.) the later did but fulfill the measur^
their fathers iniquity, in murdering Gods messengers. And, as afterward shall
be declared, such as the Romanists account the Church representative most
infallible, did continually cause, or countenance these persecutions.

^
The original likewise of this cruelty, continued from former to later
generations, was the very same in both: the one distasted Gods words, whilst
the Prophet spoke them; the other understood them, not whilst they were read
every sabbath day unto them, both A^^, 13. 27.
fulfilled them in condemning Gods messengers and thedding innocent blood, upon
such gross and palpable blindness, as Isaiah describes.

5 It will recreate the attentive Reader to observe, how the Lord has
confounded the ^
language of these cunning builders wh^es they seek to raise up new Babylon
from the foundation of the old Synagogue. Bellarmin would seem to make a
conscience of blaspheming; and therefore has rather adventured to be reputed
ridiculous, in avouching (as you heard before) without all ground or show of
reason, that the infallible authority, formerly established in the Synagogue
did expire upon our Saviors entrance into his Ministerial function. Many of
his fellows knowing how necessary it is for them to defend the public spirit
of the Synagogues, and conscious withal how frivolous it would be, to say it
should vanish by our Saviors presence, who came rather by doctrine and
practice to establish then overthrow any ordinance of the law, resolve (though
by open blasphemy) to maintain the Scribes and Pharisees infallibility, until
the abo^ing of Aarons Priesthood. That they condemned our Savior, was (in
these men's judgments) an ^riour only in matter of Fact, not of ^th, or ^rine:
and in such case the Pope himself may err, whiles he speaks ex Ca^. That the
High Priest did not err in Faith, they take it as proved, because the
Evangelist says, he prophesied, It were good one should die for the people.
John 11. 50.

6 Such infallibility as this, I never shall envy the Pope: and I desite no
more, then that he would confirm this last cited doctrine ex Cathedra. For no
question but all such throughout the Christian world, as bear any love to
Christ at all (any besides the Jesuits, who make no conscience of vilisying
their Redeemer for advancing the Popes dignity, by desending his insallibilin)
would renounce his decrees, and take him for Antichrist ever after. For this
was no error de facto, upon false information, or privy suggestion. Even the
High Priests themselves, for the inveterate hate which they had born unto our
Saviors person and doctrine (such as the Romish Church did unto Hus, and Jerome
of Prage) hold a Council, how they might put him to death; and so far were they
from being missed with false information, that they suborn falls witnesses
against him, and failing in this, seek to ensnare him in his own confession;
and finally condemn him with joint consent, for avouching one of the main
points of Christian Belief, the Article of his coming to judgment. I think
might Satan himself speak his mind in this case, he would condemn Gretzer and
his fellows, if not for their villainy, yet for their intolerable folly, in
questioning, whether it were an error in Faith, or no, to pronounce the
sentence of death with such solemnity against the Judge of quick and dead, for
professing and teaching the main points and grounds of Faith. This villainy is
too open and evident to maintain the policy of the Prince of darkness. And if
neither fear of God, nor shame of the world, could bridle the Jesuits mouths,
or stop the pens from venting such doctrine: yet certainly this Prince of
darkness (their Lord and Master) for fear of some greater revolt, will lay his
command upon them, and make them in this discoursing age speak more warily,
though they niean still no less wickedly.

7 Because this is a point worth the pressing, let us overthrow, not only That
the High ^t with his associates did (...) ex Cathedia (...) the main Article of
Faith.
their answers already given, or arguments hence drawn for their Churches
authority: but in brief prevent all possible evasions. If any Papist shall here
reply, that these High Priests, and their assistants did not speak ex Cathedra,
when they so far missed the cushion: this answer as it might perhaps drop from
some ignorant Jesuits mouth or pen, who is bound by oath to say something (and
therefore must oftentimes say he knows not what) for the defense of the Church:
so we may well assure our selves, that the Pope himself dare not for his triple
Crown deliver it ex Cathedra; nor will the learned Papists hold this point, if
it be well urged. For, as these High Priests error was most gross and
grievous: so was it received upon long and mature deliberation, their manner of
proceeding was public and solemn. They took Jesus (says the Mat. 26. 57.
Evangelist) and led him to Caiaphas the High Priest, where the Scribes and
Elders were gathered together. And lest a Jesuit should have picked a quarrel
at the time of their assembly, as if they had met at some unlawful hour. Saint
Luke 22. 66.
Luke says, as soon as it was day, the Elders of the people, and the High
Priests, and the Scribes came together, and led him into their Council, and
examined him upon the very fundamental point of faith; Saying, art thou The
Christ, tell us? For affirming this (which is open infidelity to deny) the High
Priest himself, not missed by any witnesses, but from Mat. 26. 65.
Christ's own words which he himself had heard, pronounces sentence against
him. And if this were not enough, he proposed the matter to the rest of his
associates; Verse. ^6.
What think ye? and they answered and said, He is worthy to die? After all
this, they urged the people to approve of this their Sentence, persuading them
to ask Barrabas, and to destroy Jesus. And so strongly had they conjured the
multitude by their pretended authority, that they apprehend this their choice,
as a point of faith, or good service to God and his Church. For when Pilate
lays his blood unto their charge: All the people ( Mat. 27. 25.
as the Text says) (all such as relied upon the Scribes and Pharisees, or
their high Priests) answered and said, His blood be upon us and our children.
One of your lay Papists could not have been more thoroughly persuaded of your
Churches authority, nor more violently bent against John Hus, or any other of
Christ's Martyrs, for the like reasons, then this whole multitude was against
Christ, being condemned by the High Priest, speaking ex Cathedra. Here were
more conditions, and more solemnities observed in this proceeding of theirs,
then you require in the Pope speaking ex Cathedra. Theirs was a public
assembly, and sentence was given by joint consent in the Consistory, and in the
morning: you hold it sufficient for the Pope to give his desinitive sentence
alone, without evidence of the fact it self, whereunto he ties men's faith, as
shall appear by your own confessions. Nor do you limit him any time, as well in
the afternoon, as in the forenoon; as well (for ought we can gather) when drink
is in, and his wits out of his head, as when he is sober. For you hold it not
necessary for him to use any long deliberation. But, if it be his will to bind
all Christians to believe him, the whole Church must believe that he was herein
directed by the Holy Ghost: for the Church is bound to hear their chief Pastor:
And, if he bind all men to believe him, then must all of necessity believe,
that he was infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, in showing that which he
binds them to believe: for otherwise the whole Church might err, nay were
bound to err, because it is bound to believe the Pope. These consequents are
your own, not mine, as may in part appear from what has been already, more
fully from what shall be said hereafter. Besides, the whole multitude of the
Jewish people heard the Priests and Elders utter their opinions concerning
Christ and his doctrine viva voce: we have the Popes decrees but by hearsay.
Either was this sentence pronounced ex Cathedra, or else it will be hard for you
to prove, that any sentence in your Church has been so pronounced, or can be,
although the Pope himself be present in the Council, and be an eye witness of
all proceedings.

8 Yet if any of you should here shufle (as ye usually do at the last pinch)
and say [Howsoever Valentia, or some others of our learned, but private
spirits, may define, what it is to speak ex Cathedra; yet we know not, whether
our Church has so desined it, or no: and therefore although these High Priests
and Elders did observe all the circumstances, which these doctors require in a
sentence given ex Cathedra; yet, for ought we know, they might ^ay sure they
did fail in some circumstance which we know not, and did not indeed speak ex
Cathedra, albeit they seemed so to do: wherefore this does not conclude against
the Popes infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra:] if any of you
shall take this last hold (as I cannot imagine any other left you) we shall
quickly beat you out of it. Though it were safficiently (...) that the Pope
could not teach false (...), ex (...), (...) (...) it not safe ^, etc.
For let it be granted for disputations sake, that the Pope has (as ye suppose
these Jews had) an infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra: yet seeing
it is a matter so hard to be known, even by these that hear him, whether he
observe all circumstances required to the exercise and true use of such
infallible authority, and whether he speak ex Cathedra or no, when he may seem
to sundry so to speak; it would be the only safe course for all Christian
Churches utterly to renounce all obedience to him, but upon examination of his
doctrine, to stand continually upon their guard, lest under pretense of this
his infallible authority, when he speaks ex Cathedra, he may work some such
inestimable mischief unto the Scriptures, or Christ's chosen here on earth, as
these High Priests did unto Christ himself, by his seeming to speak ex
Cathedra, when he does not. If, by abusing this his infallible authority, he
should either make away these Scriptures, or animate the people to imbrue their
hands in the blood of Christ's dearest Saints: it is not his speaking ex
Cathedra, that can redeem their souls from hell, nor restore Gods word again;
for these are matters of an higher price, then that they should be purchased
with two or three words of his Holiness unhallowed mouth.

9 To conclude, if this authority of your Church be but such, as the ancient
Church of the Jews had; you cannot expect any faithful people should otherwise
esteem of your decrees, then the faithful in our Saviors time were bound to
esteem of the Jewish High Priests and Elders, whom surely they did not take for
Christ's only, nor best friends. If the Popes infallibility be but such, as
these High Priests had, you may be as guilty of the blood of Christ's Saints, as
they were. If you will challenge (as indeed you do) greater authority then they
had, ye must of necessity renounce your principal arguments brought to prove it.

CAP. XVI.
That Moses had no such absolute authority as is now ascribed unto the Pope:
That the manner of Moses his attaining to such as he had, excludes all besides
our savior from just challenge of the like.

1 WHether Moses were a Magistrate (as the Papists think) spiritual, or (as
others) merely civil, or (whereunto upon grounds in due places to be discussed,
I most incline) actually neither, and virtually both; it will suffice, for proof
of our conclusion, that the Pope is no servant of God, but an adversary, in
that he exalts himself above Moses, whom none, besides the High Priest, and
sole Mediator of the new covenant, was to equalize in sovereignty over Gods
people. Nor does the excess of glory ascribed unto the new Testament, in
respect of the old, argue greater authority in Christian, then was in ordinary
legal governors, whether temporal or spiritual, much less does in infer
greater authority in any (Christ only excepted) then Moses had.

2 If we take Christ's Church, as consisting both of Priests and people: it is a
congregation far more royal and glorious, then the Synagogue so taken was. If
we compare our High Priest (or mediator of the new Covenant) with theirs, the
Apostles comparison is fittest: ^.
Consider the Apostle and High Priest of (...) profession, Christ Jesus: who
was faithful to him that has appointed him, even as Moses was in all his
house. For this man is counted worthy of more glory then Moses, in as much as
he which has builded the house, has more honor then the house. Now Moses
verily was faithful in all his house, as a servant, for a witness of the
things which should be spoken after: but Christ i^ as the Son over (...) own
house, whose house we are. If severally we sort our people, or Ministers with
theirs, as the Apostles successors with Aarons, the pre-eminence both ways, is
ours, Notwithstanding, this excess of our Ministers glory, whether ordinary or
extraordinary, compared with the like of theirs, is not so great as the
preeminences of Christ's flock above the people of the Synagogue. Yet must all ^.
excess in spiritual graces, which the ordinary hearers of the Gospel have of
the ordinary hearers of the law, be subducted from that prerogative which we
that are Christ's messengers, have in respect of Aarons successors, ere we can
take a right account of our own authority over our flock committed to us, in
comparison of theirs over the ancient people. Computatis computandis, our
sovereignty will prove less, not greater, (...) our adversaries confusedly
reckon without their host. Their pretended glosses, that all such places of
Scripture as make for the authority of Moses chair, conclude a fortiori for S.
Peter's, because the New Testament is more glorious then the old, are, as if a
man should argue thus: The ancient Roman and modern German, are States far more
noble then the Turkish or Moscovi^ish; therefore the Roman Consuls had more
absolute authority over the people, or the present Emperor, over the Princes
and States of Germany, then the Turk has over his Bashaw^, or the Moscovit
over his Vassals.

3 The glory of a commonweal, or praise of government, consists in the
ingenuity or civil liberty, not in the slavery, or servile condition of the
governed: or in their voluntary obsequiousness to wholesome laws, proportioned
to common good; not in their absolute subjection to the omnipotent will of an
unruly Tyrant, subject to no law, but the law of sin. Our Saviors authority
over his Disciples was more sovereign, then is befitting any to usurp or
challenge over his fellow servants; his kingdom more glorious after his
resurrection then before: yet a little before his suffering, he says to his
Disciples: ^. 15. 14, 15
Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you. Hence for the I you not
servants, for the servant knows not what his master ^oth, but I have called
you friends, for all things that I have heard of my Father, have I made known
to you. It is the very conceit of the base degenerate, dissolute, sottish later
heathen Roman, more delighted in such gaudy shows as his luxurious Emperors
made (happily, once or twice in their whole reign) then in the valor and virtue
of his victorious, freeborn Ancestors, that to this day swims in the Jesuits
brain, and makes him dream the royalty of Christian Priesthood, or glory of
the Gospel, should consist wholly, or chiefly in the magnificent pomp of one
visible high Priest or Ecumenical Bishop; for garnishing of whose Court, the
whole Body of Christ besides, must be content to spend their lives, goods, or
substances, and as his occasion shall require, to pawn their very souls, as
younglings will be at any cost or pains they can devise, to deck up a Lord of
the Parish, a victor in a Grammar school; or as merry fellows will be ready to
spend more then their incomes will defray, to have a gallant Lord of misrule of
their own making.

4 But they demand, Wherein does the Pope aspire above the pitch of Moses
throne? He desires but to be reputed an infallible teacher, and was not Moses
such? yet not such after the same manner. He approved himself perpetually
Wherein the Popes ^ is made greater than Moses had a ^.
infallible, because always found most faithful in all affairs belonging to
God: but had it been possible for him to have worshipped the golden Cal^* to
Psalm. 106. 2^.
have eaten the offerings of the dead, or to have joined himself to Baal-Peor:
The Levites and such as clave unto the Lord in these Apostasies would have
sought Gods will at more sanctified lips, then his, at least for that time,
were. If then we consider him not as he might have been, but as indeed he
proved: the peoples obedience unto him, was de facto perpetual and complete:
yet but conditionally perpetual, but conditionally complete, or perpetually
complete upon their sight and undoubted experience of his extraordinary
familiarity with God, of his entire fidelity in all his service. The Pope would
be proclaimed so absolutely infallible by irrevocable patent or inheritance, as
no breach of Gods commandments, no touch of disloyalty to Christ in actions,
might breed a forfeiture of his estate, or estrange Christian consciences from
yielding obedience to him, every way as complete and absolute, as that which
the people of God performed unto Moses, or Christians do yet unto their
Savior. Whence though we admit Moses infallibility, and his to be the same;
yet the difference between the absoluteness of their authority, or the tenor,
or holds of the same infallibility, would be such, as is between a Tenant at
will, or one that enjoyes a fair estate, perhaps, all his life time, yet only by
continuance of his Lords good liking of his faithful service; and a Freeholder
that cannot by any act of felony, murder, treason, or the like, forfeit his
interest in as large possessions.

5 Again, albeit the authority gotten, or manner of holding it, were the same;
yet the manner of getting it in Moses and the Pope is not alike. The one
profers no miracle for the purchase, no sign from heaven, no admirable skill in
expounding Gods word; his calling he professes to be but ordinary, and in this
respect (say his followers) he was to succeed Saint Peter. Moses not such, nor
so affected: his miracles were many and great; the signs and tokens of his
especial favor with God, almost infinite: his calling extraordinarily
extraordinary: otherwise that obedience the people performed to him had been no
less then desperate Idolatry; as the challenge of the like without like proof
and evidence of such favor with God, is no better then blasphemy or Apostasy.
Hence says Cum igitur oporteret Dei legem in edictis Angelorum terribiliter
dari, non (...) homini p^^cisse sa pientibus, sed universae gen^i and populo
ingenti, co*ram eodem populo magna facta sunt in monte, ubi lex per unum
dabatur, conspiciente multitudine metu enda ac tremenda, quae fiebant. Non enim
populus Israel, sic Moysi credidit, quemadmodum suo Lycurgo Lacedaemonii, quod
a Jove sen Apolline leges, quas c^didit, accepisset. Cum enim lex dabatur
populo, qua coli unus iubebatur Deus, in conspectu ip^us populi, quantu^
sufficere divina providentia judicaba^ mira^^libus rerum signis ac motibus
apparebat, ad eanden* legem dandam docentem creatori service creaturam. Aug. de
Civit. Dei. lib. 10. cap. 13.
S. Austin, the people of Israel did believe Moses laws were from God, after
another manner, then the Laced^monians did Lycurgus laws were from Apollo. For
when the Law which enjoins the worship of one God, was given unto the people,
it did appear (as far forth as the divine providence did judge sufficient) by
strange signs and motions, whereof the people themselves were spectators, that
the creature did perform, service to the Creator for the giving of that Law.
But we must believe as firmly as this people did Moses, that all the Popes
injunctions are given by God himself, without any other sign or testimony, then
the Lacedaemonians had, that Lycurgus laws were from Apollo. Yet is it here
further to be considered, that the Israelites might with far less danger have
admitted Moses laws then we may the Popes, without any examination, for divine,
seeing there was no written law of God extant before his time, whereby his
writings were to be tried. No such charge had been given this people, as he
gives most expressly, to this purpose. De^^. 4. 1, 2.
Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the ordinances, and to the Laws which I
teach you to do, that ye may live and go in, and possess the land which the
Lord God of your fathers gives you. Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I
command you, neither shall ye take ought there from, that ye may keep the
commandments of the Lord your God which I command you. But was the motive or
argument by which he sought to establish their belief (or assent unto these
commandments) his own infallible authority? no, but their own experience of
their truth, as it follows, Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of
Baal-Peor. For all the men that ^.
followed Baal-Peor the Lord thy God has destroyed every one from among you:
but ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God, are alive, every one of you this
day; so gracious and merciful is our God unto mankind, and so far from exacting
this blind obedience which the Pope does challenge, that he would have his
written word established in the fresh memory of his mighty wonders wrought upon
Pharaoh and all his host. The experiment of their deliverance by Moses had been
a strong motive to have persuaded them to admit of his doctrine for infallible,
or, at the least, to have believed him in his particular promises. When the
snares of death had compassed them about on every side, and they see no way but
one, or rather two inevitable ways to present death and destruction, the red
sea before them, and a mighty host of blood behind them, the one serving as a
glass to represent the cruelty of the other: they (as who in their case would
not?) ^
cry out for fear. He that could have foretold their strange deliverance from
this imminent danger, might have gotten the opinion of a God amongst the
Heathen: yet ^ confidently promises them, even in the midst of this
perplexity, the utter destruction of the destroyer, whom they feared. (...), 14
Fear ye not, stand (...), and behold the salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you this day: for the Egyptians whom you have seen this day, you shall
never see again. The Lord shall fight for you: therefore hold you your peace.
Notwithstanding all this, Moses never ^.
enacts this absolute obedience, to be believed in all that ever he shall say,
or speak unto them, without farther examination, or evident experiment of his
doctrine. For God requires not this of any man, no not of those to whom he
spoke face to face; always ready to feed such as call upon him, with
infallible signs and pledges of the truth of his promises. For this reason* the
waters of Exodus 15. 23.
M^rah are sweetened at Moses prayer. And God upon this new experiment of his
power and goodness, takes occasion to re-establish his former covenant, using
this semblable event, as a further earnest of his sweet promises to them. [
Ver. 26. Faith ^ust be (...) by ^nts an^le ^.
If thou will diligently hearken O Israel unto the voice of the Lord thy God,
and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear unto his
commandments, and keep all his ordinances: then will I put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that
heals thee.] As if he had said; This healing of the bitter waters shall be a
token to thee of my power in healing thee. Yet for all this they distrust Gods
promises for their food, as it follows, cap. 16. Nor does Moses seek to force
their assent by fearful Anathema's, or sudden destruction, but of some
principal offenders herein. For God will not have true faith thunder-blasted in
the tender blade: but rather nourished by continuance of such sweet
experiments: for this reason he showers down Manna from heaven. ^.
I have heard the murmuring of the children of Israel, tell them therefore, and
say, At evening ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning you shall be filled with
bread, and ye shall know that I am the Lord your God. For besides the
miraculous manner of providing both Quails and Manna for them, the manner of
nourishment by Manna did witness the truth of Gods word unto them. They had
been used to gross and solid meats, such as did fill their stomachs, and
distend their bellies, whereas Manna was in substance slender, but gave
strength and vigor to their bodies; and served as an emblem of their spiritual
food, which being invisible, yet gave life more excellently then these gross
and solid meats did. So says (...). 8. 3.
Moses, Therefore he humbled thee, and made thee hungry, and fed thee with
Manna which thou know not, neither did thy Fathers know it, that he might
teach thee, that man lives not by bread only, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.

6 Yet in their distress (so frail is our faith, until it be strengthened by
continual experiments) they doubt, and tempt the Lord, saying. ^.
Is the Lord amongst us or no? Nor does Moses interpose his infallible
authority, or charge them to believe him against their experience of their
present thirst, under pain of eternal damnation, or sufferance of greater
thirst in hell: such threats without better instruction in Gods word, and the
comfort of his spirit, may bring distrusts or doubts to utter despair, and
cause faith to wither where it was well nigh ripe, they never ripen and
strengthen any true and lively faith. Moses himself is fain to cry unto the
Lord, saying. What shall I do unto this people? for they be almost ready to
stone me. As the Papists would do to the Pope, were he to conduct them through
the wilderness in such extremity of thirst, able to give them no better
assurance of his favor with God, then his Anathema's, or feed them only with
his Court-holywater, or blessings of wind. But even here again God feeds
Isreal's faith with waters issuing out of the rock, making themselves
eyewitnesses of all his wonders, that so they might believe his words and
promises, nay himself, from their own sense and feeling of his goodness, and
truth of his word.

7 Though no Lawgiver or Governor, whether temporal or spiritual* especially,
whose calling was but ordinary, could possibly before or since so well deserve
of the people committed to his guidance, as this great General already had done
of all the host of Israel; were they upon this consideration, forthwith to
believe what soever he should avouch without further examination, sign, or
token of his favor with God; without assured experience, or at the least more
then probable presumptions of his continual faithfulness in that service,
whereunto they knew him appointed? Albeit, after all the mighty works before
mentioned, wrought in their presence, they had been bound thereunto: the
meanest ^.
handmaid in that multitude had infallible pledges plenty of his extraordinary
calling, locked up in her own unerring senses. But from the strange, yet
frequent manifestation of Moses power and favor with God, so great as none
besides the great Prophet whom he prefigured, might challenge the like, the
Lord in his al-seeing wisdom, took fit occasion to allure his people unto
strict observance of what he ^.
afterward solemnly enacted, as also in them to forwarn all future generations
without express warrant of his word, not absolutely to believe any governor
whomsoever in all, though of tried skill and fidelity in many principal points of
his service. That passage of Scripture wherein the manner of this peoples
stipulation is registered, well deserves an exact survey of all especially of
these circumstances, [How the Lord by rehearsal of his mighty works so epassed,
extorts their promise to do whatsoever should by Moses be commanded them, and
yet will not accept it offered, until he have made them ear-witnesses of his
familiarity and communication with him.] First, out of the Mount he called
Moses unto him to deliver this solemn message unto the house of Jacob; Ye have
seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I carried you upon ^agles wings, and
have brought you unto me. Now therefore, if you will hear my voice (...). 19.
4. (...)* and (...).
indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my chief treasure above all
people, though all the earth be mine. After Moses had reported unto God this
answer, freely uttered with joint consent of all the people, solemnly ^.
assembled before their Elders [ Verse. (...).
All that the Lord commanded, we will do,] was the whole business betwixt God
and them, fully transacted by this Agent in their obsence? No, he is sent back
to sanctify the people, that they might expect Gods glorious appearance in
Mount Sinai, to ratify what he had said upon the return of their answer; Verse.
(...)
Lo I come unto thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear, whilst I talk
with thee, and that they may also believe thee for ever. They did not believe
that God had revealed his word to Moses for the wonders he had wrought; but
rather that his wonders were from G^d because they heard God speak to him, yea,
to themselves. For their principal and fundamental laws were uttered by God
himself in their hearing, (...) Moses expresses, These words, (to wit the
Decalogue) the Lord spoke unto ^ (...) ^
^ul^^tude, in the ^ou^t, out of the midst of the fire, the cloud and the
(...), with a great voice, and add^d no more. And lest the words which they had
heard might soon be smothered in fleshly hearts, or quickly slide o^^ of their
brittle memories, the Lord wrote them in two Tables of stone and at their
transcription, not ^oses only, but Aaron, Nada^, and A^th^, with the seventy
Elders of Israel, are made spectators of the Divine glory, ravished with the
sweetness of his presence. They saw, says the Text, the ^
of Isr^^l, and un^er his feet, as it were, a work of a Sapphire stone, and as
the (...) h^a^^n when it is clear. And upon the Nobles of the children of
Israel ^e (...) his (...), also they saw God, and did eat and drink. After,
these Tables through A^^s^s anger at the peoples folly and impiety, were
broken, God writes the (...) same words again, and renews his Covenant ^
before all the people, promising undoubted experience of his Divine assistance.

8 Does Moses after all this call fire from heaven upon all such as distr^^t
his words? ^aron and M^riam openly derogate from his authority, which the Lord
consirmes again viva voce, descending in the pillar of the (...), co^ng these
d^tractors in the door of the Yabe^^acce; Wherefore were you (...) ^
a^raid to sp^ak against my servant, even against Moses? Th^^s the Lord was
(...) a^g^^e and depa^t^d, leaving his mark upon Miriam, cured of her leprosy
by Moses instant prayers. No marvel if Korah, Dathan, and ^^irams judgments
were so grievous: when their sin against Moses, after so many documents of his
high calling, could not but be wilful; as their perseverance in it, after so
many admonitions to desist, most malicious and obstinate. Yet was M^s^s further
countenanced by the appearance of Gods glory* unto all the Congregation, ^
and his authority further ratified by the strange and fearful end of these
chief malefactors, ( foretold by him) and by fire, i^luing from the Lord to
consume their confederates, in offering incense ungrateful to their God.
Tantae molis erat Judaeam condere gentem! So long and great a work it was to
^ie Israel in true faith. But without any like miracle or prediction, such as
never saw him, never heard good of him, must believe the Pope as well as Israel
did their Lawgiver, that could make the Sea to grant him passage, the clouds
send bread, the winds bring flesh, and the hard rock yield drink sufficient
for him and all his mighty host, that could thus call the heavens as witnesses
to condemn and appoint the earth as executioner of his judgments upon the
obstinate and rebellious, yet after all this he inflicts no such punishments
upon the doubtful in faith, as the Romish Church does, but rather (as is
evident out of the places ^ 17, ^ in ^ Phara^h, and unto all Egypt, The great
tentati^n which ^ stret^hed ^ut ^n, whereby the Lord thy God brought thee out:
so shall the L^ thou fear.
before alleged (confirms them by commemoration of these late cited, and like
Experiments, making Gods favors past the surest pledges of his assistance in
greatest difficulties that could beset them. To conclude, this people believed
Moses, for God^ testimony of him, we may not believe Gods Word without the
Popes testimony of it. He must be to God as Aaron was to Moses, his mouth,
whereby he only speaks distinctly or intelligibly to his people.

CAP. XVII.
That the Churches authority was no part of the rule of faith unto the people
after Moses death; That by Experiments answerable to his precepts and
predictions, the faithful without relying upon the Priests infallible
proposals, were as certain, both of the divine truth, and true meaning of the
Law, as their forefathers had been that lived with Moses, and saw his miracles.

1 TO proceed unto the ages following Moses; How did they know Moses law,
either indeed to be Gods Word, or the true sense and meaning of it, being
indefinitely known for such? By tradition? Yes, By tradition How far the
Traditions, Exhortations, or Instructions of Parents did steed their children
for establishing of Faith.
only? No, But how at all by tradition? As by a joint part of that rule, on
which they were finally to rely? Rather it was a mean to bring them unto the
due consideration, or right application of the written rule, which Moses had
left them. So hard were their hearts with whom this great Lawgiver had first
to deal, that faith could not take root in them, unless first wrought and
subacted by extraordinary signs and wonders: but once thus created in them,
the incorruptible seed thereof might by means ordinary, easily be propagated
unto posterity, with whom it was to grow up and ripen, not by bare credence to
their Ancestors traditions, nor by such miraculous sights as they had seen; but
by assiduous and serious observation of Gods providence in their own times. For
all his ways, to such as mark them, are ever parallel to some one or other
rule contained in this book of life. The Israelites in every age might have
discerned the truth of his threats or promises, always fulfilled according to
the diversity of their ways, though thus much the best amongst them would
seldom have observed, perhaps not so much as once have compared their course
of life, with either part of Gods covenant of life and death, unless thus
forewarned by their Ancestors. The tradition then of former, was of like use,
for begetting true belief in latter generations, as the exhortations of tutors,
who have already tasted the sweet of Helicon, are unto their pupils for
attaining true knowledge in good Arts, of whose pleasantness they never
conceive aright, until they taste it themselves, though taste it, but upon the
others commendation, they would not, without their direction, (ordinarily) they
could not.

2 This Method Moses himself prescribes; De^t. 11. 2.
Consider this day, for I speak not unto your children, which neither have
known nor seen the chastisement of the Lord your God, his greatness, his
mighty hand, and his stretched-out arm, and his signs, and his acts which he
did in the midst of Egypt, unto Pharaoh the King of Egypt, and all his land.
For your eyes have seen all the great acts of the Lord which be did. Therefore
shall ye keep all the Commandments which I command you this Verse 7. (...)
day, that ye may be strong, and go in and poss^sse the land whither ye go to
possess it. Gods wonders past they were to consider, to what end? That they
might lay up their Lawgivers words Verse 18.
in their hearts, and in their souls, ^ind them (...) remembrances upon their
hands, that they might be as frontlets between their eyes, or sights whereby to
level their steps, lest they trod awry. Gods Word so rooted in the fathers, as
thus to fructify in their carriage, gesture, speech, and action, the seed of
it was to be sown in the tender and supple hearts of children, as Moses in the
next words adds; Verse 19.
And ye shall teach them your ^^^l^ren, speaking of them when thou sit in
thine house, and when thou walk by the war, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. And thou shall write them upon the posis of thine house,
and upon thy gates. Thus was Gods Covenant with his people, first, briefly
drawn in signs and wonders, and uttered by a mighty voice in mount Horeb as it
had been a Demise Paro^; afterward, conceived in more ample sort, and written
in more special terms by M^ses, but was to be sealed to every generation, by
their sure experience of Gods mere^e and justice; the one, infalliblie
accomplishing their prosperity for obeying; the other, their calamities for
transgressing it, as in the same place follows. For if ye keep diligently all
these commandments which I co^ ^
(...) to ^o that is) to l^ve the Lord your God, to walk in all his ways, and
to ^^ea^e unto (...); then (...) the Lord ^ast out all these nations before
you, and ye shall ^ great nations ^^ghtier then you. All the places whereon the
soles of your feet (...) ^^ea^, shall ^e ^^^rs; your coast shall be from the
wilderness, and from Lebanon, (...) from the river, even the river Perah, unto
the uttermost Sea. No man shall (...)* (...) you, for the Lord your God shall
cast the fear of you upon all the land that ye shall (...) upon, as he has
said unto you.

3 Every light or formal observation of this covenant sufficed not to avert
Gods threats, or make them capable of those bounteous promises, which he never
failed to fulfill, as long as in heart and deed they used Moses writings for
their rule, not weighing the foolish traditions of the Elders; ^ he ^^ew them
(says the Psalmist) they sought him, and they returned an: ^
sought God (...)* And they remembered that God was their strength, and the me^
high God th^^r redeemer. Proportionally to their repentance (but far above, or
rather without all proportion of deserts) did the Lord deal with them. For, as
their h^a^ts (though in some sort turned unto him) were not upright (...) him,
neither were they faithful in his covenant: so he b^i^g merciful, thus far
for gave their iniquity, that he destroyed them not, but o^t-times called back
his anger, and suffered not his whole displeasure to arise.

4 The whole historical part of the old Testament, until David's time
(epitomized by this Psalmist) witnesses what way soever this people went,
either the blessing or the curse which Moses there sets before them, did
always surely meet them, ^.
Behold I s^t before you this day a blessing, and a curse; the blessing, if ye
obey the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you this day, and
the curse, if ye will not obey the commandments of the Lord your God, but turn
out of the way which I command you this day, to go after other Gods which ye
have not known. In these terms of blessings and cursings, he en^tiles the
former disjunctive covenant; If ye shall hearken therefore to my commandments
which I shall command you this day, that you love the Lord your ^. 13.
God, and serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul: I also will
give (...) unto your land in due time, the first rain and the latter, that thou
may gather in thy whe^t, and thy wine, and thine oil. Also I will send
grass in thy field, for thy catt^ll that thou may eat, and have enough. But
beware lest your he^^t dece^ve you, and lest ye turn aside and serve other
Gods, and worship them, and so the anger of the Lord be kindled against you,
and he shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that your land yield not
her fruit, and ye perish quickly from the good land which the Lord gives you.
To stir them up to more st^^t observance of the former covenant, the blessings
and cursings here mentioned, were to be pronounced with great solemnity at
their first entrance into the land of Ca^^an, When the Lord thy God therefore
has brought thee into the land weaher tho^ ^
go to possess it, then shall thou put the blessing upon Mount Ger^m, and
the curse upon Mount (...). And elsewhere Moses charge the People saying,
These (all sons of the freewoman) shall stand upon Mount Geri^ to (...) the
pe^^^^ ^
(...) ^e pass over Jordan, Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and I^^a^har, and
^oseph, and Benjamin, and these (sons of the bondwoman) shall stand (...)
Mount E^al to ^urse, Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulon, Dan, and Nephtali,
(...) the Levites shall answer and say unto all the men of Israel, with a loud
voice, Cursed, etc Nor was this rehersall more strictly enjoined by Moses, then
faithfully performed by Iosuah; And all Israel and their Elders, and Officers,
and their ^ges stood on this side of the Ark, and on that side, before the
Priests of the Levites, J^suah 8. v* 33, 34, 35.
which bear the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, as well the stranger, as he
that is born in the Country, half of them were over against Mount Gerizim, and
half of them over against Mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of the Lord had
commanded before that they should bless the children of Israel. Then afterward
he read all the words of the Law, the blessings and cursings, according to all
that is written in the book of the Law. There was not a word of all that Moses
had commanded, that Josuah read not before all the Congregation of Israel,
as well before the women and children, as the stranger that was conversant among
them. The like solemnity was to be continued every seventh year, as Moses
commanded them, saying, Every seventh year, when the year of freedom shall be
in the feast of Tabernacles, Deuteronomy. 31. 1^, 11, 12, 13.
when all Israel shall come to appear before the Lord thy God in the place
which he shall (...), thou shall read this Law before all Israel, that they may
hear it. Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn,
and fear the Lord your God, and keep and observe all the word^ of this Law, and
that their children which have not known it may hear it, and learn to fear the
Lord your God, as long as ye live in the land, whither ye go over Jordan to
possess it.

5 The Israel^es care to inst^uct their children in the precepts of the Law,
necessary unto Christians, seeing faith ^^l^^m g^s without miracles, unless
planted in tender (...).
Children were to be instructed, first privately, then publicly; that the
solemnity of the spectacle might work in them a modest fear and reverence,
without whose precedent impression true faith hardly finds entrance into the
heart of man. And without miracles it seldom takes, but where the seed, of it
have been sown in tender years; nor does it usually sink into younger breasts*
unless sucked in with admiration. All that Moses, all that Josuah, all that
Priests and Levites, all that Parents or other Instructers, private or public,
could do to such, all they aimed at, was to propose the infallible word in such
sort, as might stir up their hearts to receive it with attention and
admiration* and afterward to make sure trial of it (always sufficient to
prove it self) by their practice. No instructor in that people, ever taught his
hearers, either finally or jointly, to rely upon the infallibility of his
proposals.

6 But the Jesuits heart, though his mouth will not utter it, thus indictes;
Did all this stir these Scripturians would seem to make, or tatling parents
daily invitation of their children to strict observance of this rule, take such
effect as Moses dreamed of in posterity? No. But the reason why it did not, was
because they sought not in time to supply the defect or raritie of miracles in
latter, with more frequent and solemn memorial of such as had happened in
former ages; or with more abundant meditation upon their written law, and
diligent observation of their ordinary success, always correspondent
thereunto. Take heed to thy self, says Moses, and keep D^. 4. 3. etc.
thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things thine eyes have seen, and
that they depart not out of thine heart all the days of thy life, but teach
them thy sons, and thy sons sons; forget not the day that thou stoodest before
the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, Gather me the people
together, and I will cause them to hear my words, that they may learn to fear
me all the days that they shall live upon the earth, and that they may teach
their children. The necessity of this, and like premonitions, was too well
manifested by the event. The people ^.
(says another Penman of the sacred Canon) had served the Lord all the (...)
of Josuah, and all the days of the Elders that outlived Josuah, which had
seen all the great works of the Lord that he aid for Israel. Not the avouchment
or presence of infallible teachers, but their sure experience of Gods power and
mercy, did more surely fasten this peoples assent unto the truth of that which
Moses had left written, then Moses live-personal proposal could do their
Fathers, to his words uttered in their audience. But after that generation
Judge. 2. ver. 10, 11.
(with whom Josuah had conversed) was gathered unto their fathers, and another
generation arose after them, which neither knew the Lord, nor yet the works he
had done for Israel, then the children of Israel did weekenly in (...) sight of
the Lord, and served Baal. Whence it came to pass, that whithersoever they
went out, the hand of the Lord was sore against them, as the Lord has Verse 15,
16.
said, and as the Lord had sworn unto them, so he punished them sore.
Notwithstanding, the Lord raised up Judges which delivered them out of the
hands of their oppressors: yet when the Judge was dead, they returned, and did
worse then their fathers, in following others gods, to serve them, and worship
them, they ceased not Verse 19.
from their own inventions, nor from their rebellious way. What rule then was
left to reclaim them? the infallible proposals of their Priests? Though these
or an Angel from heaven should have proposed any other Doctrine, then what was
consonant to their written law (whose true meaning in this respect, every one
of them should have known) Moses curse before mentioned, had overtaken them
following it. So much were they addicted Of Gideons distrust, and the means how
his faith was established.
unto Baals Priests proposals, that Angels could scarsly be heard, though
suggesting nothing but what their Lawgiver had taught, though assuring them by
their presence of such assistance from their mighty God as he had promised.
Thus when the general of these heavenly soldiers, sought to encourage Gideon,
The Lord is with thee thou valiant man; He replies, ah, my Lord, if the Lord be
with us, why then is all this come upon us, and where be all his Judge. 6. v. 13.
miracles which our Fathers told us of, and said, Did not the Lord bring us out
of Egypt? but now the Lord has forsaken us, and delivered us into the hand of
the Midianites. As if he had said, I will not deny but the Lord has done of
old, as our fathers have declared unto us; Moses story I distrust not, but am
sure he has dealt far otherwise with us.

7 But does this defect of faith in him, convince the Law of imperfection?
rather the object of his distrust, might have taught him to have believed the
perfection of Moses Law, which had so often forewarned them of such oppression
by their enemies, when they forsook the God of their fathers. These
forewarnings had Gideon believed aright; he had not distrusted the Angels
exhortation. What was the reason then of his misbelieving, or rather overseeing
that part of the law? Not ignorance of Gods word in general; for the miracles
related by Moses he had in perfect memory. What then? want of sufficient
authority to propose unto him these particular revelations, or their true
meaning? This is all the Romanist can pretend. Yet what greater authority could
he require, then that Angel had, which spoke unto Gideon? Our Apostle supposes
any Angels proposal of divine Doctrines, to be at the least equivalent to
Apostolical, Though we, says he (whether Paul or Cephas) or (which he
supposes to be more) an Angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, then we
have preached unto you, Gal. 1. 8.
let him be accursed. Or, if we respect not only the personal authority of the
proposer, but with it the manner of proposing Gods word: What proposal can we
imagine more effectual then this great Angel of the Covenants reply unto
Gideons distrustful answer; [and the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in
this thy might, and thou shall save Israel out of the hands of the Midianites:
Judge. 6. 14.
have I not sent thee?]

8 Whether Gideons diffidence after all this, were a sin, I leave it to be
disputed by the Jesuits. A defect or dullness, no doubt it was, and only in
respect of the like in us, they hold a necessity of the visible Churches
infallibility: unto whose sentence whosoever fully accords not, is by their
positions, incapable of all other infallible means of divine faith. To pretend
doubt or distrust of Gods Word once proposed by it, yea, to seek further
satisfaction or resolution of doubts then it shall vouchsafe to give, is more
then a sin, extreme impiety. Yet had this great Angel stood upon his authority
in such peremptory terms, Gideon had died in his distrust. For after a second
reply made by Gideon, [Ah my Lord, whereby shall I save Israel? Judge 6. v. 15,
behold my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the least in my fathers house]
and a further promise of the Angels assistance not like the former, [have I not
sent thee] but [I will therefore be with thee, and thou shall smite the
Madianites as one man,] he yet prefers this petition; I pray thee if I have
found favor in thy sight, then show me a sign that thou talkest with me:
Depart not hence I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring mine offering,
and lay it before thee. After he had by more evident documents fully perceived
it was an Angel of the Lord that had parlied with him all this time, erecting
his dejected heart with these comfortable words, Peace be with thee, fear not,
thou shall not die; He yet demands two other signs before he adventures upon
the Angels word. But after it is once confirmed unto him by experience of his
power, in keeping his fleece dry in the middle of moisture, and moistning it
where was nothing but dryness about it; he is more confident upon a Soldiers
dream, then a Jesuit in like case would be upon the Popes sentence or blessing
given ex Cathedra. Judge. 7. 15.
When Gideon heard the dream told, and the interpretation of the same, he
worshipped and returned to the host of Israel, and said, Up, for the Lord has
delivered into your hand, the host of Midian.

9 Nor he, nor his people could at any time have wanted like assurance of Gods
might and deliverances, had they according to the rule which Moses set them,
turned unto him with all their heart, and with all their soul; but as far were
they, as the Papists from admitting his words for their rule of faith. The
unwritten traditions of Baal, were (at the least) of equal, or joint authority
with his writings, and in deed, and action, though not in word and profession,
preferred before them. Longer then their assent was (by such miraculous
victories as Gideon had now gotten over the Midianites,) as it were tied and
fastened to the blessings and cursings of Moses law, this stiff-necked
generation did neither cleave to it, nor to their God; Judge 8. 33.
But when Gideon was dead, they turned away and went a whoring after Baalim,
and made Baal-Berith their God, and remembered not the Lord their God, which had
delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every side. Miracles
after the Law-given, were usually either tokens of precedent unbelief, or for
signs to unbelievers, serving especially to put them in mind of what Moses had
foretold: the attentive consideration of whose predictions, wrought greater
faith and confidencie in such as without miracles laid this law in their
hearts, then this people conceived upon the fresh memory of Gideons
extraordinary signs and glorious victory.

10 The peoples experience of such calamities as Moses: threatened, mat their
(...) (...) ground of such joyful hopes as he had promised.
The like occasions of such distrust as were observed in Gideon, were frequent
in those times, wherein the four and fourtieth Psalm was written, yet the
Author of it, is not so daunted with the oppression of his people, as Gideon
was. The manifestation of such reproach, contempt, and scorn, as Moses said
should befall them, did always animate such as indeed had used the Law as a
perpetual rule to notify the diversity of all success, good or bad, by the
degrees of their declining from it, or approach unto it. The greater calamities
they suffered, the more undoubted Experience they had of divine truth contained
in Mosaical threats, the more undoubted their Experience of their truth, upon
consciousnesse of their own transgressions; the greater motives they had upon
sincere and hearty repentance, to apprehend the stability of his sweetest
promises for their good. No depression of this people, but served as a
countersway to accelerate, intend, or enlarge the measure of their wonted
exaltation, so long as they rightly weighed all their actions and proceedings
in Moses balances, equalizing their permanent sorrow for sins past, unto their
wonted delight in transient pleasures.

11 Thus when Jeremy more admired then distrusted Gods mercies, in tendering
the purchase of his kinsmans sield to him, close prisoner, for denouncing the
whole desolation of his Country, when the Kings and Princes of Judah had no
assurance of so much possession in the promised land, as to inherit the
sepulchers of their fathers: the Lord expels not his suspensive rather then
dissident admiration, with signs and wonders, as he had done Gideons doubt, or
his stiff-necked forefathers distrust. By what means then* by the present
calamities which had seized upon the Cities of Judah, and that very place
wherein his late purchased inheritance lay. When he cast these, and the like
doubts in his mind; (...). ^2. 24, 25, etc.
Behold the Mounts, they are come into the City to take it, and the City is
given into the hand of the Caldeans that fight against it, by means of the
sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence, and what thou have spoken is
come to pass, and behold thou see it: And thou have said unto me, O Lord
God, Buy unto thee the field for silver, and take witnesses: for the City shall
be given into the hand of the Caldeans. Then came the word of the Lord unto
Jeremiah saying, Behold, I am the Lord God of all flesh, is there any thing too
hard for me? The Lord had Jer. 3^ 13. 14
stricken Jacob with the wound of an enemy, and with a sharp chastisement, for
the multitude of his iniquities, wherefore he cried for his affliction, and
said, My sorrow is incurable, not considering who it was had done all this unto
him: for, because the Lord had killed, they must believe he would make alive
again. Their present wounds inflicted contrary to the rules of politic
defense, were the best pledges of their future health, beyond all hope of
State-Chirurgions. And this is the very Seal of Jeremiahs assurance, from the
Lords own mouth: Thus says the Lord, like as I have brought all this great
plague upon this people; so will I bring upon them all the good I have promised
Jer. ^2. 42, 43, (...).
them. And the fields shall be possessed in this land, whereof ye say, It is
desolate, without man or beast, and shall be given into the hand of the
Caldeans. Men shall buy fields for silver, and make writings, and seal them,
and take witnesses in the land of Benjamin, and round about Jerusalem. So
absolute and all-sufficient was Moses's his law in particular actions, much more
in general or doctrinal resolutions, that God himself, for confirmation of his
Prophets, and this distrustful peoples faith, in a point by humane estimate
most incredible, thought it sufficient to be a remembrancer to the Lawgiver.
For the Lord here says to Jeremiah, concerning this particular; Moses many
generations before had universally foretold; Deuteronomy. 3^. 1.
Now when all these things shall come upon thee, either the blessing or the
curse which I have set before thee, and thou shall turn into thine heart among
all the nations, whither the Lord thy God has driven thee: then the Lord thy
God will cause thy Captives to return, and have compassion upon thee, and will
return to gather thee out of all the people, where the Lord thy God had
scattered thee. Though thou wast cast unto the uttermost part of heaven; from
thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he take thee.
And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed,
and thou shall possess it, and he will show thee favor, and will multiply
thee above thy fathers. By this rule of Moses, according to the prediction of
Jeremiah; does Nehemiah afterward frame his prayers to God, and direct his
enterprise for restoration of Jerusalem: We have grievously sinned Nehem. 1. 7.
against thee, and have not kept the commandments nor the statutes, nor the
judgments which thou commandedst thy servant Moses, I beseech thee remember
the word that thou commandedst thy servant Moses, saying, Ye will transgress,
and I will scatter you abroad among the people. But if ye turn unto me, and
keep my commandments, and do them, though your scattering were to the uttermost
part of the heaven, yet will I gather you from thence, and will bring you unto
the place that I have chosen, to place my name there. Now these are thy
servants, and thy people, etc. O Lord I beseech thee, let thine ear now hearken
to the prayer of thy servants, who desire to fear thy name, and I pray thee,
cause thy servant to prosper this day, and give him favor in the presence of
this man. He saw the truth of Moses divine prediction confirmed by the Kings
present grant of his petition, and speedy restoration of Jerusalem, Nehe. 6.
10, 11.
albeit a Prophet by profession, had dissuaded the enterprise, as likely to
prove dangerous to his person.

CAP. XVIII.
That the Society or visible Company of Prophets had no such absolute authority
as the Romish Church usurps.

1 DId the Records of Antiquity, afford us any the least presumption to think,
that absolute belief or obedience might safely be tendered by inferiors, as
due to any visible Company of men, without examination of their proposals by
Moses writings, since they were extant: the society of Prophets, in all
respects the Romanists can pretend, had the most probable That the company of
Prophets had as great privilege as any justly can c^a^lenge.
title to this prerogative. Their profession or calling was public and lawful;
their distinction from all others, eminent; their persons and places of
residence, visible and known; their promises, for enjoying the extraordinary
presence or illuminations of Gods spirit, peculiar: many of them, venerable for
their integrity in civil dealings, and sanctity of private life; some of them
endued with the gift of miracles: In all these, and many like considerations,
that fraternity or collegiate society, might justly have pleaded all the
privileges a public spirit can grant to one sort of men before others. For,
if the more or less express testimony of Gods word for extraordinary
assistance of his spirit, or the different measure of his illumination, or
manner of immediate teaching be that which makes some men's spirit more public
then their brethrens: this difference was greater between the Priests or
Prophets, and people of old, then since God spoke unto the world by his Son;
yet what Prophet did once intimate the necessity of his proposal, for notifying
the truth of Scriptures? What one did ever bewray the least desire to have his
That the people were not bound to believe what a major part of Prophets
determined without Examination.
interpretations of them, universally held authentic? or his particular
predictions, absolutely assented unto, without further trial then his bare
assertion, without examination of them by Moses doctrine already established?

2 Had they been the infallible Church representative, had their assertions,
though given by joint consent ex Cathedra, or in the most solemn manner used in
those times, been of such authority as the Romanist would persuade us, a
Council of their Prelates, lawfully assembled, is, Gods people had stood bound
to embrace whatsoever a major part of that profession had resolved upon: but
this inference, though necessarily following the supposed premises, the Jesuit
I know, dare not affirm, lest Ahabs blood, untimely shed by confidence in their
infallibility, cry out against him. Yet ^ l. 3. (...). 17. Ad primum dico illos
^ suisse Pseudo-prophetas, ^ vel ip^um A^^ab, qui eos consule^ dic^^et ^^x
(...): non ^ Proph^ta Domini p^^ q^^m (...) ^ R^spondet A^ R^sit un^s, ^ qui^
non p^ophetat mihi nili malum. ^ in media Saxonia consul^^et 400. ^ de ^ide
justifican^e, and pos^ea ^ non esset mirum, si major pars er^ nunc non (...),
to^am ecclesiam ^ si (...) 4^0. Minis^^^i Lutherani, ^ and vicina quaedam loca,
sunt alia ^ ve^a ^ides (...), i^a non sequitur, ^ Jud^ tempore A^hab ^rrasse, ^
Propheta, qui in Samaria erant. ^ ^os Prophetas ^rant in Judaea multi alii ^
est) ^rant Sac^rdotes in ^ ex (...) incumbeb^^ responde^e ^ lege D^.
Bellarmin too well knowing the liquorish temper of this pr^^^a age, (for the
most part acquainted with none but table-talk Divinity) to be such as will
swallow down any doctrine be it never so idle, profane, or poisonous, so it be
saneed with pleasant conceit and merriment, would put us off with this jest;
That as in Saxony, one Catholics verdict were to be taken before four hundred
Lutherans: so should one of the Lords Prophets have been followed in those
times, before five hundred of Baals. And Ahab no doubt had so done, had not the
Devil taught his Divines then, as he has done Bellarmin and his fellows since,
to take universality* as a sure note of the Church; traditions, and customs of
the Elders, for the rule of faith, and (which is the undoubted Conclusion of
such premises) to follow a multitude to any mischief. So mightily did the
opinion of a major part, being all men of the same profession, sway with the
superstitious people of those times, that ^
Ahabs Pursevant conceived hope of seducing Micaiah whilst they were on the way
together, by intimating such censures of schism, of heresy, of peevishne^^e,
or privacy of spirit, as the false Catholic bestows on us, likely to befall
him, if he should vary from the rest. The best answer (I think a Roman
Catechism could afford, would be to repeat the conclusion which Bellarmin
would have maintained [All the rest besides were Baals Prophets.] They were
indeed in such a sense as Jesuits and all seducers are: but (...) not by
public profession or solemn subscription to his rites, as may partly appear by
jehosaphats* ^
continuing his resolution to go up to battle against Micaiahs counsel, which
questionless he would rather have died at home, then done, had he known
Micaiah only to have belonged unto the Lord, and all his adversaries unto Baal;
partly, by that reverent conceit which even the chief of these seducers
entertained at that time of Elias, whose utter disgrace Baals servants would by
all means have sought, for his late designs acted upon their fellows: Yet as ^
e P^^udo*^roph^tis ^dium (...), ^ (...) qu^d M^ (...), (...) enim very ^um p^e,
ar^ p^aedixisse (...) ^aelem in Nabuthi suburbano lambendum ^ N^buthi opera
ipsius lapida^i a populo. (...) ^ ve^eatur con^rarium dicere, q^od periturus
sit rex abhinc die (...), etc.
Josephus records, the chief argument used by Zidkiah to diminish Micaiahs
credit with both Kings, was an appearance of contradiction betwixt his and
Eliahs prediction of Ahabs death, the accomplishment of both being apprehended
as impossible, less credit (as he urged) was to be given to Micaiah, because
so impudent as openly to contradict ^o great a Prophet of the Lord as Elias, at
whose threatenings Ahab King of Israel trembled, humbling himself with fasting,
clothed in sackcloth. And is it likely he would so shortly after entertain the
professed servants of Baal for his Counselors? yet seeing the event has
openly condemned them for seducers, and none are left to plead their cause: it
is an easy matter for the Jesuit or others to say, they were Baals Prophets
by profession. But were not most Prie^ and Prophets in Judah and Benjamin
usually such? yes, and (as afterward shall appear) did band as strongly with as
joint consent, against Jeremy, and Ezechiel, as these did against Micaiah. The
point wherein we desire resolution, is, by what rule of Romish Catholic
Divinity, truth in those times might have been discerned from falsehood, before
Gods judgments did light upon the City and Temple. He is more blind then the
blindest Jew that ever breathed, who cannot see how such as professed
themselves Priests and Prophets of the Lord, as well in Judah as in Israel, did
bewitch the people with the self same spells the Papist boasts of to this day,
as the best prop of his Catholic faith. Yet such is the hypocrisy of these
proud Pharisees, that they can say in their hearts; Oh had we lived in the
days of Jezabel, we would not have been her inquisitors against such Prophets
as Elias and Micaiah were: When as in truth Jezabels impiety toward them, was
clemency in respect of Romish cruelty against Gods Saints, her witchcrafts but
as venial sins, if we compare them with Jesuitical sorceries. But of this
error more directly in the Chapter following; of their sorceries and impieties
hereafter.

3 Unto our former demand, [whether the society of Prophets were the Church
representative, whether the people were bound without examination to believe
whatsoever was by a major part, or such of that profession as ^^re in highest
or most public place, determined.] What answer a learned Papist would give I
cannot tell. Then this following, better cannot be imagined on their behalf.
[That this supreme authority which they contend for, was in the true Prophets
only; that they, albeit inspired with divine illuminations, and endued with
such authority as the Jesuit makes the Popes ^mana divinitas inspirata, did
notwithstanding permit their declarations, for the hardness of this peoples
heart to be tried by the event, or examined by the law, not that they wanted
lawful power (would they have stood upon their authority) to exact belief
without delay; seeing readiness to believe the truth proposed, is always
commended in the sacred Story. And no doubt, but the people did well in
admitting the true Prophets doctrine, before the false, at the first proposal;
the sooner the better. But were they therefore to believe the true Prophets
absolutely without examination? Why should they then believe one of that
profession, before another, seeing seducers could propose their conceits with
as great speed and peremptorinesse as the best? Nor did reason only dissuade,
but the Dent. 13. 1*
law of God also expressly forbid that people, always, and in all causes to
trust such, as upon trial had been found to divine aright of strange events.
Yet grant we must, that hardness of heart made this people more backward, then
otherwise they would have been to believe truths proposed; that oft-times they
required signs from their Prophet, when obedience was instantly due from them
to him; that oft-times they sinned in not assenting immediately, without
interposition of time for trial, or respite to resolve upon what terms belief
might be tendered. Thus much we may grant with this limitation; [if we consider
them absolutely, or so well disposed as they should, and might have been, not as
the Prophets found them.] For in men inwardly ill affected or unqualified for
true faith, In what cases and persons pronenesse to b^lieve particular truths
is ^, in what or in whom suspi^ious.
credulity comes nearer the nature of vice then virtue, a disposition of
disloyalty, a degree of heresy or infidelity, rather then a preparation to
sincere obedience, or any sure foundation of true and lively faith. Assent
perchance men so affected may more readily then others would unto sundry divine
truths; yet not truly, not as they are divine and consonant to the rule of
goodness, but by accident, in as much as they in part confort with some one or
other of their affections. And the more forward men are upon such grounds, to
believe some generalities of Christian duties; the more prone they prove, when
opportunity tempts them, to oppugn others more principal, and more specially
concerning their salvation. For credulity, if it spring not out of an honest
disposition uniformly inclining unto goodness, as Suc^ from some unbridled
humor, or predominant natural affection: will alwaye^ sway more unto some
mischief, then unto any thing that is good. (...) 2. 23.
Many (...) in Jesus (says Saint John) when they saw his miracles. It pleased
them we^ had turned water into wine. That he had given other proofs of his
power, (...) driving buyers and sellers out of the Temple, did minister hope
unto proud hearts, he might prove such a Messiah as they expected; as elsewhere
upon the like occasion they said, This is of a truth the Prophet that should
come into the world. The ground of this their aptness to believe thus much,
(as is intimated ^ 14.
in the words following) was their inordinate desire of having an earthly King,
that might rule the nation with an iron rod. When Jesus therefore ^ 6. 1^.
perceived by their forwardness to profess the former truth, that they would
come and take him to make him a King, he departed again into a mountain himself
alone; for the same cause no doubt, which the Evan^elist speci^ the former
place, J^hn 2. 24* (...).
But Jesus did not commit himself unto them because he knew them all* and had
no need that any should testify of man. He knew such as upon these glimpses of
his glory were presently so stiffly set to believe in him upon hopes of being
fed with dainties, or mighty protection against the Heathen; would be as
violently ^e^t against him, even to crucify him for a seducer* ^tter they had
discovered his constant endeavors to bring them both by life and doctrine unto
conformity with his cross, mortification, humility, contempt of the world*
patience in affliction, with other like qualities despiseable in the worlds
eyes, yet main principles in his school, and elementary grounds of salvation;
so his countrymen of Nazareth suddenly admiring, the grat^ous words which
proceeded out of his mouth, after he begun to upbraid them ^.
with unthankfulness, as speedily attempt to throw him headlong from the top of
the hill, whereon their City was built. By this it may appear, that of the
^ewish people in ancient times, some did sin in being backward: others in an
immature forwardness to believe prophetical doctrines. But the fountains or
first heads whence these swift motions of life were depraved in the one, was
inordinate assection, or intrinsic habitual corruption; the root whence such
deadness was derived into the actions of the other, was hardness of heart,
precedent neglect of Gods word, and ignorance of his ways thence ensuing.
Which presupposed, the parties so affected, did not ^
amis^e, in not believing the true Prophets without examination; but in not
abandoning such dispositions, as disenabled them for believing all parts of
truth proposed, with constancy, and uniformity, making them fit instruments to
be wrought upon by seducers. Hence says our Savior, ^
I come in my fathers name, and ye receive me not: if another shall come in his
own name, him will ye receive. How can ye believe which receive honor one of
another* and seek not the hon^^r that comes of God alone: Nor Prophetical, nor
Apos^olical* nor Messiacal, much less could Papal authority make them believe
the doctrine of life, entirely and sincerely, whilst their hearts were
hardened; whose hardness though, might easily have been mollisied, by laying
Moses law unto them, while they were young and tender.

4 It is a rule as profitable for our own information in many points, as for
^^^ut^tion of the adversary, that The commendation of necessary me^ns, is
always included in the commendation of the end; which how good or excellent
soever it be, our desires of it are preposterous, all earnest endeavors to
attain it, turbulent, unless first addressed with proportionable alacrity to
follow the means that must produce it. Sober spirits always bound their ^
hopes of accomplishing the one by perfect survey of their interest in the
other; as minds truly liberal, determine future expenses, by exact calculation
of their present revenews. Even in businesses of greatest importance, though
requiring speediest expedition, a wise man will moderate his pace according to
the quality of the ground whereon he goes, otherwise the more haste may cause
worse speed. The Jews were, as we are, bound to believe truths proposed without
delay: but, both for this reason most strictly bound to a continual uniformity
of practicing divine precepts already known, without dispensing with this or
that particular, though offensive to our present disposition; without
indulgence to this or that special time, without all privilege sought from the
pleasure or displeasure of men; Both bound, so to frame our lives and
conversations, as to be instantly able to discern the truth proposed, not by
relying upon their authority that propose it, but for it self, or from a full
and lively, though a quick and speedy apprehension of immediate homogeneal
consonancy between the external and the internal word. For if any part of Gods
word truly dwell in us, though secret it may be and silent of it self, yet will
it Echo in our hearts, whilst the like reverberates in our ears from the
live-voice of the Ministry. Thus, had the Jews hearts been truly set to Moses
law, had their souls delighted in the practice of it as in their food, they had
resounded to the Prophets call, as a string though untouched, and unable to
begin motion of it self, will yet raise it self to an unison voice, or as the
fowls of heaven answer with like language to others of their own kind, that
have better occasion to begin the cry. In this sense are Christ's sheep said to
hear his voice, and follow him; not every one that can counterfeit his or his
Prophets Call.

5 The issue of all that has been said, is, that none within the pr^cincts of
these times, whereof we now treat, from the Law given, unto the Gospel, were
bound to believe Gods messengers, without examination of their doctrine by the
precedent written word. Only this difference there was; such as had rightly
framed their hearts to it, did make this trial of Prophetical doctrines, as it
were by a present taste, which others could not without interposition of time,
to work an alteration in their distempered affections. For this reason do the
Prophets always annex Mosaical precepts of repentance, to their predictions of
future events, as knowing that if their hearts to whom ^
they spoke, were turned to God, their sight should forthwith be restored
clearly to discern the truth. For further manifestation of the same conclusion,
it appears sufficiently from sundry discourses in the former book, that Isreal's
incredulity unto their Prophets, was finally to be resolved into their neglect,
their imperfect, or partial observance of Moses precepts. Wherefore not the
live-voice of them, whose words in themselves were most infallible (and are by
the approbation of time, with other conspicuous documents of Gods peculiar
providence preserving them in divine estimation so long, become an undoubted
rule of life unto us:) but the written word before, confirmed by signs and
wonders, sealed by the events of times present and precedent, was the
infallible rule, whereby the prophetical admonitions of every age, were to be
tried and examined.

6 The words of the best, while they spoke them, were not of like authority, as
now written they are unto us, nor were they admitted into the Ca^on, but upon
just proof of their divine authority. That one speech which Fsay uttered, was
an Axiom so well known, as might bring all the rest to be examined, before
admission; ^ Is^^ah (...). 20.
To the Law and to the Tescimony if they spea^ not according to this word, it
is because there is no light in them. For Gods Will already known and manifested
to the peoples consciences was to over-sway the contrary proposals of known
Prophets, though never so peremptory. Nor was it impossible for Prophets to
avouch their own conceits under the name of divine Revelations, more
immediately sent from God, then the Pope pretends: witness the man of God,
that went from Jud^h to Bethd, ^ 18
seduced by his fellow Prophets feigned revelation from an Angel, counselling
him to divert into his house, contrary to the Lords commandment given before.
The ones dealing was, I confess, most unusual; so was the others death, yet a
lively document to cause all, that should hear of it until the worlds and take
heed of dispensing with the word of the Lord once made known unto themselves,
upon belief of more manifest revelations or instructions, by what means soever
given to others, either for recalling or restraining^. Hence may the Reader
des^ry, as well the height of our adversaries folly, as the depth of their
impiety, making their Churches authority (which by the^ own acknowledgement
cannot add more books to the number of the Canon already finished, but only
judge which are Canonic^ which not* ^ar greater then theirs was, that did
preach and write these very books, which both we and they acknowledge for
Canonical. For the Prophets words were no rule of faith, until examined and
tried by the written word precedent, or approved by the event; the Popes must
be, without trial, examination, or further approbation then his own bare
assertion.

CAP. XIX.
That the Church representative amongst the Jews was, for the most part, the
most corrupt judge of matters belonging to God: and the reasons why it was so.

1 ^ Ut was the neglect of Moses law, or this peoples inward corruption*
abounding for want of restraint by it, the sole cause of their dullness in
perceiving, or of their error in perverting the things of Gods spirit? This
overflow of wickedness served as a tide to carry them: but the continual
blasts of such vain doctrine, Templum Domini, Templum Domini, the Church, the
Church, was like a boisterous wind to drive them headlong into those sands,
wherein they always made shipwreck of faith and conscience. The true Prophets
never had greater opposites then the Priests, and such as the Papists would
have to be the only pillars, yea the only material parts of the Church
representative. Not withstanding, whom the Fathers had traduced for impostors
or Sectaries, and often times murdered as Blasphemers of the Deity, or turbulent
members of the State; the Children ^
reverenced as men of God, and messengers of peace unto the Church and
commonweal. What was the reason of this diversity in their judgment? or does
it argue more steadfast Belief in posterity? No, but more experience of the
events, foretold oft-times, not fulfilled until the Priests, and other
opposits, either coaevals or ancients to the Prophets, were covered with
confusion. The childrens motives, to believe particulars oppugned by their
parents, were greater; and the impediments to withdraw their as^^nt from them,
less. That the children should thus brook what their fathers most disliked in
the Prophets, is no more then we may observe, in other Writers. Few much
reverenced in any faculty by posterity, but had eager detractors in their
flourishing days, Vicinity always breeding Envy. And even of such, as did not
aemulate them for their skill, nor would have been moved with envy at their fame
or glory, they were not esteemed as they deserved, being defrauded of due
praise by such of the same profession, as better pleased the predominant Humor,
always next in election to the lavish Magnificats of present times; but
usually rejected by posterity, when that particular humor, (evermore shorter
lived then the humorous) began to change. Thus in every Faculty, have those
Authors which most applied themselves to solidity of truth, (neglecting
new-fangle tricks or flashes of extemporary wit) endured in greatest request,
and best Credit throughout all ages: as meats strongest and most nourishing,
not most delicate, are fittest for continual diet. What the Latin Poet said of
his Poems, every Prophet might have more truly Statins in fine 12. Thebaid.
applied unto his writings.

Mox, tibi si quis adhuc pretendat nubila, livor
Occidet, and meriti post me referentur bonores.
Though clouds of envy now may seem,
thy splendent rays to choke;
These with my ashes shall dissolve,
and vanish as their smoke.
What whilst I breath sharp censures blast,
when my leaf falls, shall spring,
Thy fame must flourish, as I fade;
Grave honor forth shall bring.
It was a method most compendious, for attaining such eternity of fame as the
continual succession of mortality can afford us, which is given by Petrarch.
another Poet, but in Prose; Dum vivas virtutem colas, invenies famam in
Sepulchro; He that hunts after Virtue in his whole course of Life, shall be
sure to meet with Fame after Death; but hardly sooner: least of all, could
these Prophets be much honored in their own Country, whilst men of their own
profession, carnally minded, possessed the chief seats of dignity, sometimes
the best stay and pillars of faith in Gods Church, most capable of that
infallibility, which their proud successors did more boast of. Yet Why the
priests or spiritual rulers hated the living Prophets whilst they loved the
memory of the deceased.
were, even these seducers always willing to celebrate the memory of ancient
prophets, because the authority given to their sayings, or reverence showed
unto their memory by the present people, over whom they ruled, did no way
prejudice their own dignity or estimation, which rather increased by thus
consorting with the multitude in their Laudatoes of Holy men deceased. Thus
from one and the same inordinate desire of honor and praise from men, did
contrary effects usually spring in these masters of Israel. The dead they
reverenced, because they saw that acceptable unto most, and likely to make way
for their own praise amongst the people: but fear lest the living Prophets
should be their corrivals in Suites of Glory, (whereunto their souls were
wholly espoused) did still exasperate and whet the malice of impatient minds,
conscious of their own infirmities, against their doctrine, which could not be
embraced, but their estimation must be impaired, their affections crossed, and
their politic projects dashed. The higher in dignity the Priests and Rulers
were, the more it vexed them, such poor men, as the true Prophets, for the most
part, were, should take upon them to direct the people. Their objections
against those men of God, their scurrilous taunts, and bitter ^ their odious
imputations forged, to make way for bloody persecuti^, are most lively
represented by the like practices of the Romish Clerg^e; ^d almost as many
years against the Albigeans, Hussites, and ge^ against all whom they suspect to
have any familiarity with the Spirit ^ testimony against them, is as authentic
as evident) only over^gh Gods permission in the worlds sight, by prejudice of
private^ Thus, when poor Michaiah would not say, as the King would have ^ the
politic State-Prophet Zidkiah, son of Chenaanah, gave him a ^ the cheek, to
beat an answer out to this demand; Wehn went the ^ the Lord from me to thee? As
many a proud Prelate would in like ^ upon his poor brother, that should cross
his opinion, specially ^er belonging, though but a far off, unto the State;
Sirrah, I ^ know your place, before whom, and in what matter you speak* Nor did
^ only, but 400. more (no otherwise discernable for false P^ ^uch trial as we
contend for) as if they would have bound the ^ followed most voices in
bes^owing victory, persuade the King ^ Ramoth Gilead. But my former assertion
is fully ratified by ^ reply to the others demand; When went the, etc* Thou
shah see ^
^ that day, when thou shall go from chamber to chamber to hide thee. ^ but
such as were neuters before, after they see his (...) in Ahabs overthrow, did
take Micaiah for a Prophet, as true, as (...) ^.

3 In like manner when Jeremy a poor Prophet and Priest of Anathoth had ^
Jerusalem among the Prelates, and Prophesied the truth (but truth ^ to the
State) ^
That all the evils which God had pronounced should be ^ upon that City, and
her towns: Pashur the son of Immer the Priest, which was appointed governor in
the house of the Lord, entreats him worse then Zidkiah had done Micaiah. He
could have flouted him with as good appl^^se of his accomplices, as the
Inquisitors can a Protestant now: ^^u that can read State fortunes a far off,
can you tell where you shall lodge your self this next night? if you cannot,
take him for a better prophet that can. And by Pashurs Prophecy, he was to
take up his lodging in his way home, in the Stocks, that were in the high gate
of Benjamin, near unto the house of the Lord, whose desolation he had
threatened. The like entertainment he found again at the whole multitudes hands,
but by the Priests and Prophets instigation; ^ 9.
Now when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that the Lord bad commanded
him to speak unto all the people, then the Priests and the Prophets, and all
the people took him and said, Thou shall die the death. Why have thou
prophesied in the name of Lord, saying; This house shall be like Shiloh, and
this City shall be desolate without an inhabitant? As if the Church of God
could possibly err, or the gates of hell prevail against the splendour of it,
would the Romish Clergy add, should the Lord send a Prophet with such tidings
unto Rome. And did they not learn this interpretation of Christ's promise unto
his Church, from the hypocritical Jews their predecessors, which made the like
comment in Jeremiahs time, upon Gods words as pregnant for the High Priests
succession as S. Peter's; Je^. 18 18.
Come and let us imagine some devise against Jeremiah, for the Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the
Prophet, come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed
to any of his words. Away with the Heretic! The manifestation of like
affection in the Prelates toward Gods Prophets, did embolden Shem^ the
Nehelemite, to write from Babylon unto Zephaniah the high Priest and his
associates to this effect. Jer. 29. 26.
The Lord has made thee Priest, for Je^oiada the Priest, that ye should be
officers in the house of the Lord, for every man that raveth and makes himself
a Prophet, to put him in prison, and in the stocks. Now therefore, why have not
thou reproved Jeremiah of Anathoth which prophes^^d unto you. This captivity is
long: build houses to dwell in, and plant gardens, and eat the fruits of them.

4 But when Pashur found the Omen of that Jer. 20. 3^ 4.
name which Jeremiah gave him, when he and his mates proved indeed
Magor-Missabib, a terror to themselves and all about them when they saw with
their eyes all the miseries there expressed, then was Jeremiah held for a true
Prophet, especially by such as outlived the captivity, to see the truth of his
Prophecy for their good as exactly fulfilled, as this had been for their harm,
whilst according to his Jer. 59. 31, 32
prediction, Shemaiah and his seed were rooted out from amongst Gods people
happily replanted in their native soil. For from the reasons set down before,
posterity did always better judge of prophesies then the age wherein their
Authors lived, at the least, the younger and meaner sort of that age which
outlived the event usually better digested their doctrine, then the ancient or
men of dignity that envied them Credit amongst the people, yet were not such as
less maligned them, greater believers universally (as was said before) but
only of some few particulars. For, if a new Prophet should have risen amongst
them he was almost as evil entreated by the present Clergy, or others whose
humors he contradicted. This is evident by the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
chief Rulers of the Jewish Church in our Saviors time; Mat. 23 29, 30.
They builded the tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the sepulchers of the
righteous, and said (as they verily thought) If we had been in the days of our
fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the
Prophets: yet made they the people of their own time so mad, as to be partakers
with them in the blood of that great Prophet, their long desired Messiah, the
only Savior of the world. Throughout the whole Story almost of the old
Testament, the truth proposed may appear, that the visible Church (if it be
taken in such a sense as the Romanists take it) was the most corrupt Judge
either of the truth, or true meaning of Gods word; that the people seduced by
their goodly shows and glorious titles of Moses successors, were still brought
into the combination of blood, until they brought upon themselves, their
postetity, and the holy City, Mat. 23. 35.
All the righteous blood that was shed upon the earth, from the blood of Abel
the righteous, until the blood of their Messiah.

5 But though their cruelty and hypocrisy be so notoriously known, as it even
seems to point out the like in the modern Romanist: yet some honestly What
means the people had to dis^ern true Prophets from false.
minded will perhaps demand, how the people of those ages wherein the Prophets
lived, could possibly know the truth of their Prophesies, seeing for the most
part they saw a major part of men in Ecclesiastic authority, bent against
them. This happily may tempt unsettled minds to think the Lord had determined
his Prophets should have Cassandra's Fates, never to be believed till remedy
were past. The peoples mistaking of their predictions, was in a sort Fatal, yet
not necessary, but upon supposition of former neglect. God sent them Prophets
for their good, but their wickedness turned his blessing into cursings, their
hypocrisy and folly made them so blind, that they could not discem The Signs
of the Times, until woeful experience (the fools only Schoolmaster) began to
teach them, when their time for lore was ended. Prove 22* 3.
A prudent man (says the wiseman) sees the plague, and hides himself: but
the foolish go on still, and are punished. But wherein does that prudence
consist, which might have prevented this plague? surely in reading Gods law,
and continual meditation thereon; for this gives wisdom to the simple. Men in
this case should have asked ^.
counsel of their own heart: for there is no man more faithful unto thee then
It, for a man's mind is some times more accustomed to show more thenseven
Watchmen that sit above in an high Tower. And above all this, pray to the ^
High, that he will direct thy way in truth. Had they thus done without
partiality to their corrupt affections, or without all respect of persons (in
which Christian faith cannot be had:) Moses law had been a lantern unto their
feet. for the discerning of true Prophets, and those discerned, had been a
light unto latter Ages, for discerning the true Messiah.

6 The evidence of this truth, not without cause so often inculcated, ^.
will better appear, if we consider how most prophetical predictions of
particular alterations, were but determinations of Mosaical generalities, out
of which they grow as branches out of the stock. As for example, the Lord told
Moses before his death, and he gave it to Israel for a Song to be copied out by
all, Deuteronomy. (...). 16.
That when they went a whoring after the Gods of a strange la^^, forsaking him,
he would forsake them, and hide his face from them. After Ihoia labs death,
Zechartah his son seeing the Princes of Judah leaving the house of the Lord to
serve Groves and Idols, albeit he were moved as the Text says, by the Spirit
of God, yet only applies Moses general prediction to the present times, ^.
Thus says God, Why transgress re ye the commandment of the Lord? Surely ye
shall not prosper, because he have forsaken the Lord, he also will forsake you.
Saint Paul himself uses his own advise, not the Lords authority in such
points, as were not evidently contained in Moses law; ^.
Unto the married command not I, but the Lord, Let not the wife depart from her
husband, for so Moses had expressly commanded. But to the Remnant, I speak, not
the Lord, If any brother have a wife that believes not, if she be content to
dwell with him, let him not forsake her. And again, concerning Virgins, I have
no commandment of the Lord, but I give mine advice, as one that has obtained
mercy of the Lord to be faithful; This was his judgment, and as he thought
warranted by the Spirit of God, yet he prescribes it not as a general rule of
faith to all, but rather leaves every man to be ruled by his conscience, and
the Analogy of Moses law. ^.
So likewise, though God use an extraordinary revelation to instruct Saint
Peter in the free use of meats forbidden by Moses; yet he persuades him it, by
manifesting the true meaning of another clause of the same law; for what he
uttered upon this instruction and the Experiment answerable thereto, was but a
further specification of what Moses had said. I perceive of a truth (says
Saint Peter Acts 10. 34.) that God is no accepter of persons. Moses had said,
Deuteronomy. 10. 17. The Lord your God is God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, a great God
mighty and terrible, which accepts no persons, nor takes reward, who does
right unto the fatherless and widow, and loves the It was a p^ (the principal
end of this Revelation) to instruct Saint Peter that Gods graces were to be
communicated hence^ Ge^^iles. And this was but a branch of that Precept of
loving strangers, so often ingeminated by their Law give* Had the (...)
practiced this duty toward Aliens, the communication of Gods graces unto the
Gentiles, could not have seemed ^ ^^to them.
stranger, giving him food and raiment.

7 These passages sufficiently inform us, that the extraordinary spirit
wherewith the Apostles themselves were above the measure of Gods former
messengers inspired oft-times, only made the Stems, whether of the Tree of
Life, or of Knowledge planted by Moses, to blow and flourish in them by little
and little, after the manner of natural growth, it did not always bring forth
new ones in an instant, as the earth did at the first creation. Much more
usually did prophefies during the standing of the first Temple, spring out of
Mosaical predictions. If we compare his writings with latter prophe* ^ies, not
long before the Babylonish captivity, though he had departed this life before
their fathers entered into the land of Promise, yet he speaks unto this last
generation as an intelligencer from a far Country, that great preparation was
made against them, but who should be the executioners or managers of mischief
intended, he leaves that to such Prophets as the Lord should raise them up for
the present. Jeremie and Ezechiel upon his admonition, following his direction,
are sent by God, as it were, to scowre the coast, to descrie when the Navy
comes, for what Coast it is bound, and how near at hand. Here had the people
faithfully examined their hearts by Moses law, whether not guilty of such sins
as deserved the plagues threatened by him they had quickly assented unto Moses
writings, and the Prophets words For as consciousnesse of their sins in
general, might cause them fear some plague or other, indefinitely threatened by
their Lawgiver, whose writings they best believed: so might the diligent
observation of their particular transgressions, and their progress in them,
have taught them to presage the determinate manner of their plagues and
punishments foretold by the present Prophet. For God in his usual course of
justice, so suites his punishments to the most ac^ustomary habits or
predominant sins, as unto men religiously observant of Times and Seasons, the
growth and process of the one will give a certain Crisis of the other.
Besides, Every age has peculiar signs subordinate to the general predictions
of good or evil foretold by Gods messengers, whereby the faithful learn to
know the day of their visitation, and as Solomon says, to hide themselves (in
lat^b^^lo altissimi) from the plague; if not by their hearty repentance, godly
prayers, and religious endeavors, to prevent it. And because we in this age,
are not so well acquainted with the particular Signs of former Times, wherein
true Prophets lived, it is hard for any living now, though easy to all the
faithful then, to give any certain or particular rule how the truth of their
prophesies might have been, at least probably known, before the event did
finally and absolutely approve them. Would to God we could discern the Signs
of Times present; and the Lord of his infinite mercy give us grace to know the
day of our visitation. But of this argument elsewhere by Gods assistance. It
shall suffice in the next place to show that our Saviors Doctrine was by the
same means to be discerned.

CAP. XX.
That the Sovereignty given by Jesuits to the Pope is greater then our
Saviors was.

1 IT is a Rule in Divinity [whatsoever can rightly be conceived as an absolute
perfection, has Real Existence in the Almighty.] From this notion of the
Deity, swimming in the brains of such as in heart and deed make the Pope their
Lord and God, do the parties thus affected, usually take whatsoever power might
possibly be delegated by God to any, as actually granted unto his holiness.
And thus I imagine some Jesuit or other, when he shall bethink himself will
except against our disputes in this present case, [Deny you cannot that God
can, and what if he should expressly grant such authority as the Pope now
challenges, would your arguments conclude him to be Antichrist, or the
Doctrine we teach to be blasphemous.] On the contrary, seeing our Savior
Christ did never either practice or challenge, seeing neither Moses nor the
Prophets did ever so much as once intimate such absolute power should be
acknowledged in that great Prophet, of whom they wrote, we suppose the
imagination of the like, in whomsoever, cannot be without real blasphemy. Yet
suppose Christ's infallibility and the Popes, were (in respect of the Church
Militant) the same; The Popes authority ^.
would be greater: or were their authority but equal, his privileges with God
would be much more magnificent then Christ's* That which most condemned the Jews
of infidelity, in not acknowledging Christ as sent with power, full and
absolute from God his Father, were his mighty signs and wonders, his admirable
skill in Gods Word already established; but chiefly his sacred life and
conversation, as it were exhibiting unto the World, a visible pattern or
conspicuous model of that incomprehensible goodness which is infallible. Now,
if we compare Christ his power fullness in words and w^, with the Popes
imperfections in both; or his divine virtues with the others (...)strous vi^es:
to equalize their infallibilities, were to imagine God to be like man, and
Christ (at the best) but as his faithful servant; the Pope his ^in^on, his
Darling, or Son of his age. For such is our partiality to our own flesh, that
oft-times (though the Wise man advise to the contrary) a lewd and naughty son
(in that he is a son) has greater grace and privileges then the most
faithful servant in the Fathers house. So would the Jesuits make God dote
upon the Pope, whose authority (be his life never so ungracious* if they should
deny to be less then Christ's in respect of us, their practices enjoined ex
Cathedra would confute them. For much sooner shall any Christian, though
otherwise of life unspotted, be cut off from the Congregation of the faithful,
for denying the Popes authority, or distrusting his decrees, then the Jews that
saw Christ's miracles, for contradicting him in the days of his flesh, or
oppugning his Apostles after his glorification. Nor boots it ought to say, They
make the Popes authority less then Christ's, in respect they derive it from
his; rather, because they evidently make it greater then Christ's was, it cannot
be truly thence derived: or if it could, this only proves it to be less then
the other, whilst only compared with it, not whilst we consider Both in
respect of us: for Christ's authority as the Son of Man, in respect of us, is
equal to his Fathers, whence it is derived, For the Father judges no man, but
has, ommitted all judgment unto the Son. ^.


2 But wherein do they make the Popes authority greater then Christ's? First, in
not exempting it from trial by Christ's and his Apostles doctrine, ^.
neither of which were to be admitted without all examination of their truth,
for as you heard before Gods Word was first uttered in their audience,
established by evident signs and wonders in their sight, and presence, of whom
Belief and Obedience unto particulars was exacted. And it is a rule most
evident and unquestionable, that Gods Word once confirmed, and sealed by
Experience, was the only rule whereby all other spirits and doctrines were to
be examined; that not Prophetical visions were to be admitted into the Canon of
Faith, but upon their apparent consonancie with the Word already written. The
first Prophets were to be tried by Moses, the latter by Moses and their
Predecessors; Christ's and his Apostles, by Moses and all the Prophets, for unto
him did all the Prophets ^. The manifest experiments of his life and doctrine
so fully consonant ^.
to their predictions, did much confirm even his Disciples Belief unto the
former Canon, of whose truth they never conceived positive doubt.

3 Again, there had been no Prophet, no signs, no wonders, for a long time in
Judah, before our Saviors birth, yet he never made that use either of his
miracles, or more then Prophetical spirit, which the Papists make of their
imaginary public spirit: he never used this or like argument, to make the
people rely upon him. How know ye the Scriptures are Gods Word? How know ye
that God spoke with Moses in the wilderness, or with your Fathers in Mount
Sinai? Moses, your Fathers, and the Prophets are dead, and their writings
cannot speak. Your present Teachers the Scribes and Pharisees do no wonders.
Must you not then believe him whom daily you may behold doing such mighty works
as Moses is said to have done; that Moses as your fathers have told you, was
sent from God; that Gods Word is contained in his writings: otherwise you
cannot infallibly believe that there was such a man indeed as you conceive he
was, much less that he wrote you this Law, least of all can you certainly know
the true meaning of what he wrote. He that is the only sure foundation of
faith, knew that faith grounded upon such doubts, was but built upon the sand,
unable to abide the blasts of ordinary temptations; that thus to erect their
hopes was but to prepare a Rise to a grievous Downfall, the ready way to
Atheism, presumption, or despair. For this cause he does not so much as once
question how they knew the Scriptures to be Gods Word: but supposing them known
and fully acknowledged for such, he exhorts his hearers to search them, seeking
to prepare their hearts by signs and wonders to embrace his admirable
expositions of them. And because the corruption of particular moral doctrines
brought into the Church by humane tradition, would not suffer the generality of
Moses, and the Prophets already believed to fructify in his hearers hearts,
and branch out uniformely into lively working faith: he labored most to weed
out Pharisaisme from among the heavenly seed, as every one may see, that
compares his Sermon upon the Mount, with the Pharisees glosses upon Moses. If
the particular, or principal parts of the Law and Prophets, had been as purely
taught, or as clearly discerned, as the general and common principles: His
Doctrine, that came not to destroy, but to fulfill the Law in words and works,
had shined as brightly in his hearers hearts at the first proposal, as the Sun
did to their eyes at the first rising. For all the moral duties required by
them, were but as dispersed rays or scattered beams of that divine light and
glory; which was incorporate in him, as splendour in the body of the Sun. Nor
was there any possibility the Jews Belief in him should prosper, unless it
grew out of their general assent unto Moses Doctrine, thus pruned and purged at
the very root; John 5. 45
Had all believed Moses (says our Savior) (...) would have believed me, for
he wrote of me, but if ye believe not his writings, how so^^l ye believe my
words? For which cause, they were in conscience bound to examine his doctrine
by Moses, and the Prophets: otherwise they might have believed the saving
truth, but falsely; and upon deceitful grounds. The (...) believe Christ
without examination of his doctrine by Moses, had been neither to believe
Christ nor Moses.
stronger or more absolute credence they had given unto his words or works
without such examination, the more they had ensnared their souls, and set their
consciences upon the Rack, by admitting a possibility of contradiction betwixt
two doctrines both firmly believed, without any evidence of their consonancy,
or Both conspiring to the same end. The speedier and higher this edification in
Christ had been, the sooner it might have ruinated that foundation which God by
Moses and the Prophets had reared in Israel, unless this new work had been
orderly squared, well proportioned, closely laid, and strongly cemented unto
the former. In secular schools he is held an unwise answerer, that will admit
Socraticall Interrogations; for, albeit there appear no difficulty in any one
proposed apart, yet in the process, a respondent may be easily brought to
grant Conclusions, from which he knows not what Consequences may be drawn,
because their Consonancie with the Problem, whose defense he undertakes, is not
so evident nor immediate, as upon a sudden may be fully examined. And not
examining the consonancie of every other proposition with the principles of
that faculty, whereto the Problem belongs, the best answerer living may be made
either grant what he should not, or deny what should be granted. Now Christ's
doctrine was to Mosaical and Prophetical, as the Conclusion to the Promises, or
as the Corollary of greatest use unto the Speculative Theorem. Suppose then a
Jew well skilled in Moses and the Prophets, should instantly upon the first
hearing of our Saviors Sermons, or sight of his miracles, have admitted him
for such an infallible teacher, upon terms as absolute and irrevocable, as the
Jesuit would have the Pope acknowledged by all Christians, a good disputant
might easily have staggered him by these or (...) Socratical demands; Do you
steafastly believe Moses writings for Gods word? G^^ forbid I should doubt of
this: Do ye believe this new doctrine confirmed by miracles as firmly? What if
I do? Do you know as certainly, whether both agree as well as one part of Moses
writings with another? What if I do not? Until you be fully resolved in this,
your belief in both cannot be sound: for in case they should disagree, the one
must needs be false; and if choice were given you, whether in sooth would you
disclaim? Here a wise man, that (as the wise King speaks) had eyes in his head,
and would not be led by a blind faith, would have paused a while, and thought
with himself, This is a point that should be looked to: for if these new
doctrines should prove incompatible, as for any just examination hitherto made,
they may, I cannot see whither deserves more credence; Whiles I consider Moses
writings, and call to mind those mighty wonders our fathers told us, with like
continual experiments of their divine truth; nothing can seem more certain
then they; again, whiles I behold these new miracles, me thinks his authority
that works them, should be as great as Moses was; yet if they should happen to
disagree, the one must be better believed then the other, or else (for ought I
see) there can be no certainty of either; for, if this man's possibly may be,
why might not Moses doctrine likewise be false, or if our fathers were deceived
by his signs and wonders, why may not we be so served by this man's miracles?
But if upon just trial they shall be found fully to agree in every point, (as
I trust they do) then doubtless both are from God, and I shall steadfastly
believe this new doctrine to be divine, if such as Moses had foretold; and
withal, more evidently acknowledge, then before I could, that Moses spoke by
the Spirit of the all-seeing, everliving God, if this Jesus of Nazareth be in
all points like to him, and so qualified as he foretold the great Prophet
should be. But in the interim till the triali ^e made, it is best to lay sure
hold on Moses and the Prophets. For prior tempore, potior jure: their writings
doubtless were from God, because hitherto they could not be destroyed: time
and they shall try whether Jesus and his doctrine be so or no; whether he be
that great Prophet that should come, or we are yet to look for some other.

4 Thus when John Baptist sent his Disciples to our Savior with this very
question, Art thou he that should come, or shall we look for another; The
Prophetical testimonies did more sufficiently witness our Savior to be the
promised M^ then any miracles.
answer he returned again, (whether for confirmation of John's own faith, or as
the most interpreters think of his Disciples,) was this and no more; Matthew. 11.
v. 3 ^ Luke 7. (...). 18, 19, 22
Go and show John what things ye have seen and heard, that the blind see, the
halt go, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead rise again, and the
Gospel is preached to the poor, and blessed is he that shall not be offended in
me. These or other of their fellow Disciples had informed their Master John
before of Christ's healing the Centurions servant by his word or command, though
absent; of his raising the widows son from death to life; of the rumors spread
abroad of him thorowout all Judea, and the regions round about: and upon this
report, as Saint Luke tells us, did John make the former solemn demand. But
some will yet demand, how could he or his Disciples be confirmed by the answer
given them, wherein is little more then formerly both had heard: for the
raising up of the widows son which especially occasioned their coming was the
greatest of all in this Catalogue, and yet as great as this, some of the
ancient Prophets had done; how could it then prove him to be the Messiah? Had
he told them as much in plain terms, they might have believed him, because
this great work did witness him to be a Prophet, and therefore one that could
not lie: But by this answer, how could See a Treatise called Christ's Answer to
John's Disciples.
they gather more, then the people upon the astonishment of that accident, had
said? for when the dead man sat up and spoke, fear, says the Evangelist, came
on them all, and they glorified God, saying, A great Prophet is raised up among
us, and God has visited his people. Luke 7. 16.

5 Yet this objection, at least the solution, confirms the truth of my former
assertion, that by his miracles alone considered, they were not bound
absolutely to believe he was the Messiah, but by comparing them with other
circumstances, or presupposed truths, especially the Scriptures received and
approved prophesies of the Messiah: though no one for the greatness of power
manifested in it, could of it self, yet the frequencie of them at that time,
and the condition of the parties on whom they were wrought, might absolutely
confirm John and his Disciples; because such they were in these and every
respect, as the Evangelical Prophet had foretold Messiah should work: for this
reason our Savior delivers his answer in the Prophets own words, as Though in
that 61 of Esaias no express mention be made of restoring blind men to sight,
yet the Septuagint (as elsewhere) truly express the meaning of the Hebrew
phrase there used. For in the Hebrew Dialect as s^^e judicious Hebricians
observe, the deaf or blind are called vincti, or ligati.
elsewhere he himself did read them, then best interpreted by The signs of the
Time, that John might see by the Event, he was The Man of whom Isaiah speaks,
Luke 4. v. 18, 19. At that time (when John's Dis^^^les came unto him) he cured
many of their sicknesses and plagues, (...) of evil spirits) and unt^ many
blind men he (...) sight. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Go your ways,
and show John what things ye have seen and ^, that the (...) see, the halt go,
etc. Luke 7. verse 21, 22.
He whom the Lord had anointed to preach the Gospel to the poor, whom he had
sent to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the Blind, to set at liberty such as were bruised, and
that he should preach the acceptable year of the Lord. The multitude of blind
men restored to sight in theirpresence, was a good preparative to dissolve that
sussusion which had blinded their hearts; the releasing of so many from the
possession of unclean spirits, was an ocular demonstration he was the man
appointed to preach deliverance to the Captives; plagues and sicknesses then
cured by him in great abundance, were sure pledges to the observant, that he
was the great Physician of body and soul so often spoken of by Isaiah. Besides,
John's moving this doubt at that very instant, wherein such variety of miracles
(of all, or most of which, his Disciples one or other, were eyewitnesses) did
concur, all, so well suited to the several Isaiah 61. ver. 1, 2, 3. and cap.
35. ver. 5. and cap. 53. ver. 4
predictions of Isaiah; and these, as (...) (...) himself from the words
immediately precedent had been taught by God himself to discern Christ for the
true Messiah. (...) John 1. v. 33. with Esaias 61. v. 1. and Esa. 42. v. 1. and
Esaias 11. v. 2.
John could instruct them, all unquestionably meant of the Messiah, was an
infallible argument of Gods unspeakable providence in thus disposing times and
seasons, for their fuller resolution. The like disposition of the divine
Providence, might the ungrateful Nazarites have observed. First, that when he
Luke 4. v. 16, 17, etc.
stood up to read in the Synagogue, they should deliver the book of the
Evangelicall Prophet before any other; afterward, that he should at the first
opening light upon that very place wherein his late miracles, yet rise in all
men's mouths, (as appears by Saint Mark 6. 2. and Luke 4. (...)
Mark) were foretold: especially, if they had diligently marked the meannesse
of their own estate, the manner of his coming thither, moved (as the Luke 4.
14. ^
Evangelist says) By the Spirit, which as the Prophet had foretold, was to be
upon him, and did manifest it self at that time by his strange escaping his
turbulent country-mens desperate attempts against him. This melodious harmony
betwixt his works and Gods word already established, and this sweet disposition
of the divine providence, in causing the one sound in men's ears, whilst the
other were in their eyes were in his heavenly wisdom the best means to
establish true and lively Faith: he never exacted blind obedience, which who so
suffers to be imposed upon him by others, or seeks to enforce upon himself,
strives to put out that light of nature or inferior grace, whereby he should
view and mark the ways of God, always confirming his truth already revealed,
by Experiments and Signs of the Time proportioned to them.

6 From these instances, to omit others, the Reader may resolve himself, in
what sense, Christ's works are said to bear witness of his Divinity, or condemn
^
the Jews of insidelity. Both which they manifestly did, yet not in themselves,
not as severally considered or sequestered from all Signs of times and seasons;
but as they involved such concurrence of Gods providence or presupposed such
prophetical predictions, as have been intimated. Every miracle was apt of it
self to breed admiration, and beget some degree of faith, as more then probably
arguing the assistance of a power truly divine. But, seeing Moses had
forwarned. God would suffer seducers to work wonders for the trial of his
peoples Faith: who besides him that gave them this liberty could set them
bounds, beyond which they should not pass? who could precisely define the
compass of that circle, within which only Satan could exercise the power he had
by that permission? Be it granted (which is all, men otherwise minded
concerning this point, demand) that Beelzebub himself with the help of all his
subjects, can effect nothing exceeding the natural passive capacity of things
created: he must be as well seen in the secrets of nature, as these subtle
spirits are, that can precisely desine in all particulars, what may be done by
force of nature, what not. Hardly can we (without some admonitions to observe
their carriage) discern the slight of ordinary Juglers: much more easily might
the Prince of darkness, so blind our natural understanding, as to make us
believe (were the light of Gods word taken away) that were effected by his
power, which had been wrought by the finger of God, that, secret conveyance of
materials elsewhere preexistent, into our presence, was a new creation of them.

7 For mine own part (until I be by some others better instructed) I rest
persuaded our Savior taught the same doctrine I now deliver; thus much at
least, [Such signs and wonders might be wrought by seducers, that such as would
gaze on them, and trust their own skill in discerning their tricks, should
hardly escape their snares.] Mark 13. 21, 22.
If any man say to you, Lo here is Christ, or lo he is there, believe it not.
For false Christ's shall arise, and false Prophets, and shall show Signs and
Wonders to deceive if it were possible, the very elect. And possible it was to
have deceived even these; if it had been possible for these not to have tried
their wonders by the written word. Wherefore necessary it was, that which
immediately follows, should be written for our instruction; But take you heed
(this he spoke to his elect Apostles) be hold I have told you all things
before. Much easier it was for such seducers to counterfeit his greatest
wonders with deceitful sleights, undiscoverable for the present, then in these
plain distinct predictions of matters so far above the pitch of ordinary
observation, so to imitate him as time should not detect their impostures, nor
experience convince them of open folly, or their soothsaying of grossest
falsehood. And consequently, this very Oracle compared with the event, was of
more force to establish true Faith then any one miracle he ever wrought,
considered alone. Yea this foolish expectation the Jews had, their Messiah
should work mighty, but pompous and vainglorious wonders, did make them (not
prefashioned in mind to those descriptions the Prophets had made of his first
coming in humility) undervalew both his true miracles and heavenly doctrine.
Even such as are said to have believed in him for the works they had seen him
do, seemed doubtful whether to acknowledge him for some great Prophet, or for
their long looked for Messiah. John 7. 31.
Many of the people (says S. John) believed in him, and said, When the Christ
comes, will he do more miracles then this man has done. And as the same
Evangelist elsewhere tells us, such as had tasted of his miraculous goodness,
and in huge troops followed him for their daily food, that had no where to lay
his head by night, John 6. 30.
desire a further sign that they might see and believe the father had sent him.
His late satisfying five thousand hungry souls with five loaves, they deemed
much less then Moses sustaining six hundred thousand so long with Manna, a
meat Expectation of pempous and vainglorious miracles the original of Jewish
(...)lity.
immediately sent from Heaven, not made by multiplication of such bread as they
might have bought of ordinary Bakers. Nor does our Savior seek to win them by
out-vying Moses in multitude or magnificence of his miracles: but by alluring
them to taste and prove his heavenly doctrine. For, The Experiments that give
us the seal and assurance of lively faith, must of necessety he within us, even
in our hearts, and in our souls; and these are they. Had this people without
miracles been dicto audiens, as they were enjoined by Moses, in that they took
him for a Prophet, they might in short time have known what Peter confessed,
John 6 68. No man is ever ^ this end only ontward miracles serve.
Verba vitae aeternae habes, Thou have the words of eternal life, whose
sweetness once inwardly tasted was much more then all the miracles that could
be wrought without his hearers or upon them. But of such works these proud Jews
never dreamed as not knowing the Scriptures, nor the virtue of their Messiah,
who, as the Prophets had soretold, was to preach the Gospel unto the poor, to
comfort such as mourned in Sion, to whom no miracles could be more welcome,
then such as he did, for what could be more acceptable to the blind then
restitution of sight, to the lame, then right use of his limbs? what more
grateful message could be uttered to the deaf, then Ephata, to have his ears
opened? what to the dumb, then un^ying of the tongue? what to the possessed,
then to be freed from the tyranny of Satan, or his Ministers? Finally, as the
Mark. 7. 37
Evangelist notes, he did all things well, and unto the best contentment
possible of every afflicted soul, far above the exigence or significations of
their peculiar necessities, but further beyond their expectation. In every work
he showed his willingness in all, his power to ease and refresh all that were
weary and heavy laden: but unto such as thought themselves so whole and sound,
as no way to need his Physic, rather desirous to feed their curious fancies
with superfluous or unnecessary wonders, he was not willing to give
satisfaction by turning Gods graces into wantonness, or vain ostentation of
his power or skill. Another especial occasion of this peoples stumbling at this
stone elect and precious, was their not considering that many of Moses greatest
wonders were types, partly of those glorious miracles which Messiah was to work
secretly by his spirit, manifested only to the ^earts and consciences, in whom
they were wrought, partly of that his glory and power, which was outwardly
revealed to his Disciples, and might so have been to more, had they not
stumbled (as the Proverb is) in the very Entry, and so departed from him in
despair, bred from a foolish prejudice, that no great good could be expected
from a Nazarite, of parentage, birth, and education so mean.

CAP. XXI.
Confirming the truth delivered in the former Chapter from the very law given
by Moses for discerning the great Prophet; further exemplifying the use and
force of miracles for begetting faith: The manner of trying Prophesies: of the
similitude betwixt Christ and Moses.

1 AS well for farther discovery of Romish blasphemy, as ratification of our
former assertion, let us view with diligence that place of Moses, wherein such
strict obedience and attention to the Messiah doctrine is enjoined, as no where
else; such, as no other may exact, without incurring the curse there threatened
to the disobedient, Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19.
The Lord thy God will raise thee up a Prophet like unto me from among you,
even of thy brethren: unto him ye shall hearken. According to all that thou
desiredst the Lord thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly, when thou
said, Let me hear the voice of my Lord God no more nor see this great fire
any more that I die not. And the Lord said unto me, they have well spoken. I
will raise them up a Prophet from among their Brethren like unto thee, and will
put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him. And whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak
in my Name, I will require it of him. This prophecy by joint The law cited,
(...) meant both of Christ and the Prophets.
consent of best interpreters, as well modern, as ancient, Pontificians as
Protestants, may be truly and literally applied to other Prophets, whether of
the old or new Testament, according to that measure of the spirit they had from
him, of whose fullness all, as well such as in time went before him, as those
that came after him, had received grace for grace. True it is, if we rightly
value the strict propriety of every word or clause in the whole context; what
all historical circumstances put together import, or the full extent of S.
Peter's Acts 3. 23. See Parag 21.
paraphrase on the last sentence, it cannot be exactly fitted unto any but
Christ, unto whom only the whole discourse is as fully commensurable, as a well
made garment to the body that wears it: yet is this no impediment why the same
rule taken according to some literal circumstances, might not usually serve for
certain discretion of true Prophets from false, as we use to notify lesser,
but indefinite quantities of things, by the known parts of some greater
measure, commensurable, if we take the whole, to substances of a larger size.

2 Evident it is out of the literal meaning of this law acknowledged by all,
that Israel was strictly bound to hearken unto such Prophets as God at any How
far, and (...) what te^n^s Israel was bound by the former law to hear all Gods
Prophets.
time should raise them up, though with most attention and greatest reverence
to hear The Prince of Prophets. But the question is, upon what terms, or how
far they were bound to hear all. Absolutely, and at first proposal of their
doctrines, without examination of them by the written law? So might he that
could have set the best leg foremost, and stepped up soonest into Moses chair,
have kept the rest of his profession in aw, by thundering out Anathema's
thence, as the Pope does from S. Peter's, to all gainsayers, priest or people.
By what rule then were true Prophets to be distinguished from false? By
miracles? These were means of times effectual, but (as was intimated) more
usual for enforcing men to an acknowledgement of the truth in general, then for
trying particular controversies by, amongst true professors; in respect of
whom, they were subordinate to that rule given by Moses in the words
immediately following: Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22.
But the Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in any Name, which I have
not commanded him to speak, or that speaks in the name of other Gods, even
the same Prophet shall die. And if thou think in thine heart. How shall we know
the word which the Lord has not spoken? When a Prophet speaks in the name of
the Lord, if the thing follow not, nor come to pass, that is the thing which
the Lord has not spoken, but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously: thou
shall not therefore be afraid of him.

3 Before this or any other part of the law was written, somewhat in proportion
Miracles in themselves no sure rule of trying Prophets before the Law was given.
answerable to it, did always necessarily concur with miracles, for
distinguishing true professors from seducers. When the controversy was betwixt
Moses and Pharaohs Enchanters, the Lord confutes his adversaries by an ocular
demonstration of his power, yet further ratified by their confession, whose
words were the best Oracles which that people knew. These fair warnings
concurring with the Egyptians consciousnesse of their merciless practices
against poor Israel, still thriving in despite of policy, could not but
witness even to the most unnatural men amongst them, that the God of Jacob and
his seed, was a Father to the fatherless, an Help to the helpless, a God of
mercy, and a God of strength, willing and able to right such as suffered wrong,
to succor all in distress, that with faith and patience commended their cause
unto his patronage. The most devoutly superstitious or idolatrous might (at the
least) more then probably have gathered, that the God of Moses was greater than
any, they or their cunning Magicians worshipped. But it is a curiosity incident
to superstitious hypocrites, at their first entrance into Gods school,
scrupulously to demand full satisfaction in all doubts or difficulties than can
be suggested, and (as if they sought to obtain mercy by way of bargain, not by
faith or favor) to have their assurance precisely drawn, and fully sealed,
before they surrender up the least part of their interest, in any pleasure,
commodity, or custom long enjoyed, though never so destitute of reason. As in
this case, imagine some Romish Schoolman or Jesuit had been in such favor in
Pharaohs Court, as that crew is now in too many Princes; what other collections
could we imagine he would have made, but these? [How do these wonders prove the
God of Israel to be so great a God, as Moses boasts of? He has more skill we
see in these particulars, then the Gods adored by us Egyptians: therefore in
all? or more, in these, then the Gods of any other nation? Thesewere stranger
works indeed, then we expected such poor silly fellows could have wrought: but
may not others by the same reason work more strange hereafter? And to speak the
truth, more, that victory Moses had over the Egyptians, could not prove unto
the natural man (so long as he considered the wonders only in themselves,
without any concurrence of other circumstances or truth (presupposed) then that
this God of Israel was greater then any other he yet knew of, not greater then
any that might manifest himself hereafter. Notwithstanding, these few Documents
or Essaies of his power, compared with the End and occasions, for which they
were exhibited, were so fully conformable to those natural notions, even the
heathen had of the Deity, that no man free from passion or prejudice of their
main estate, for whose good the cunningest were thus foiled at their own
weapon, and the mightiest among the Egyptians plagued, but might have seen The
Finger of a good, a just, and merciful God in all their troubles, had he in
sobriety of spirit seriously consulted his own heart. And who so sincerely had
glorified his name, according to this measure of knowledge, or apprehension of
his justice to him, no doubt more had been given daily of this bread of life.

4 The Jews I am persuaded could have given as instances of Devils cast out by
Mat. 12. 24. The end and (...).
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, as might have defeated any Induction gathered
from the manifold practice of such works (considered alone) to prove the divine
powers assistance. Most apparently, most malicious not withstanding was their
application of such instances to our Savior, whose usual manner of
dispossessing wicked spirits of those mansions wherein they have revelled most,
did abundantly witness he wrought by the Finger of God, who only was greater
then that strong man whom he vanquished, bound and spoiled of his goods,
servants and possessions. For though Devils sometimes suffer themselves to be
commanded by men, neither of greatest wisdom, best place, nor fashion: yet this
they do (as any well instructed in Gods law, or illuminated with the notions of
good and evil will easily discern) always with purpose to bring men unto a
perpetual acknowledgment of some divine power in them, or to performance of
some Magical service unto them; no otherwise then cheating mates or cunning
gamesters can be well content to suffer bunglers beat them the first or second
Set, in hope to entise them to hold play longer, or for greater wagers. On the
contrary, the only Fee our Savior demanded for all his admirable cures in this
kind, was, the parties should give such glory unto God alone, as that infernal
crew most detested, but which the law of Moses, so highly esteemed by his
calumniators, did purposely require in defiance of Beelzebub, and all the
powers of darkness. The end of every particular dispossession was such, and
the multitude of legal consessions, sincerely uttered by poor souls set free,
so many, as his bitterest adversaries own consciences, could not but witness
against themselves, that all the chief Titles of Satan's wanted triumphs over
Gods people, were utterly overthrown, that he could not urge them either unto
such blasphemies against God, or outrages against themselves or their
neighbors, as he most delighted in. Besides, few or no instances could (I
think) be brought of Devils cast out in any Magicians name, in Christ's they
were, and (as it seems) by such as had better acquaintance, or more alliance
with his accusers, then with himself. Thus much our Savior in my conjecture,
intimates in that speech. Mat. 12. 27.
By whom then do your children cast them out? therefore they shall be your
judges. Which words I neither would refer to Christ's Disciples, as some good
Interpreters do, nor (as others) unto such Exorcists as those mentioned, Acts
19. 15. which attempting to throw out this strong man, were overthrown in their
own play: but unto such as John complained of, Master, we saw one Mark. 38.
casting out Devils in thy name, which followed not us, and we forbad him. This
man, though no Disciple, was neither so ill disposed in himself, nor so
maliciously affected to our Savior as these Jews were, as appears by our
Saviors answer unto John; Ver. (...).
Forbid him not, for there is no man that can do a miracle in my Name, that
lightly speaks evil of me, for whosoever is not against us, is on our part. In
the same words he concludes his disputation against the Jews in the Mat. 12. 30.
forecited place.

5 Such as this man was, none of Christ's followers, but rather a friend (as
seems) of his accusers, yet using Christ's not Beelzebubs name, to cast out
Devils, were competent witnesses of his heavenly virtue, and his adversaries
malicious partiality. Many other circumstances well known then, not now:
especially the long want of miracles more then prophesies, before his coming,
did manifest their malice to be more impudent and shameless, then we in such
distance of time can discern. That Finger of God (from such Signs of the Time
as we in general may suppose) far more apparent in his victories over Satan
himself, then in Moses over his Scholars the Enchanters, especially whiles
compared with known Prophesies of the Messiah, did point him out to be The
woman's Seed, ordained of old to bruise the Serpents head, to be the Son of man,
appointed to erect the everlasting Kingdom, foretold by Daniel, unto whose and
other prophesies he refers his enemies in that speech, Mat. 112. 28
But if I by the spirit (or as S. Luk 11. 20.
Luke reads) by the Finger of God cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God
come unto you. Yet were not all his miracles of this kind thus considered, so
effectual to confirm the faithful, or so pregnant to condemn all unbelievers,
as the former Rule of Moses. For this cause after the former dispute ended, he
gave his adversaries such a Sign, as if it did follow would infallibly prove
him to be that great Prophet, Moses there speaks of, and consequently leave
them liable to Gods heavy judgment without excuse, for not hearkening unto
him. Of which hereafter.

6 Here I may once for all conclude, that the power of doing miracles was as
effectual to assure such as did them of salvation, as sight of them done, was
to establish spectators in saving faith. But the power of casting Devils out,
or doing greatest miracles, was no infallible pledge of salvation to such as
did them: much less could the acknowledgement of this divine power in them,
breedful assurance of true faith in others, but only serve as a means to cause
them rely upon the Law and Prophets as their only rule, and to taste and prove
the bread of life proffered to them by our Savior, which alone could ascertain
them their names were written in the book of life. But to proceed by the former
rule.

7 If others by Experiments answerable to it, were known to be true Prophets:
Christ likewise by his known supereminency in that which approved Christ was to
be acknowledged for The great Prophet by his supereminency in those gifts of
the Spirit, whereby former Prophets had been approved.
them, was to be acknowledged for The Prince of Prophets. Now, if we revise the
History of the old Testament, how few Prophets shall we find endowed with the
gift of miracles; such as were, did exercise their power rather among
Idolaters, then true professors. So, when Gods messengers were brought to as
open competition with Baals Priests, in the King of Isreal's, as Moses had been
with the Enchanters, in Pharaohs Court: 1 King. 18.
Elias makes his Calling as clear as the light, by calling down fire from
heaven, which Baals Priests attempting in most furious manner could not effect:
but Elias professed thus much before, as Baals Priests, no question had done:
so as the event, answering to his prediction, not to the others, did, by Moses
rule, demonstrate him to be, them not to be, Prophets of the living God. But
when the like controversy was to be tried between Zidkiah and his four hundred
accomplices, on the one part, and 1 King. 22
Micaiah, on the other before King Ahab, in whom Elias late miracles, and later
threats, had wrought such a distaste of Baal, and such a liking of the truth in
general, as he would not consult either any professed servant of the one, or
open oppugner of the other, for his future success; Micaiah (as was observed
before) appeals to this law of Moses as most competent Judge between such as
jointly did embrace it; Verse. 28.
If thou return in peace, the Lord has not spoken by me, as if he had said,
(what Moses there does) he has not put his word in my mouth. And having
brought his controversy to this trial, he desires the people to contestate the
issue thus joined [and he said hearken all ye people.] From this and many like
cases, ruled by the former express and pregnant law of Moses, Jeremy pleads his
warrant, being born down by the contradictions of Hananiah a professed Prophet
of the Lord, as he was, but of greater favor in the Court, because he
prophesied peace unto the present state, and good success to the Projects then
on foot; ^
Even the Prophet Jeremiah said. So be^it: the Lord so do! the Lord confi^ly
words which thou have prophefied, to restore the vessels of the Lords house,
and all that is carried Captive from Basel into this place. But hear thou now
this word that I will speak in thine ears, and in the ears of all the people.
The Prophets that have been before me, and before thee, in times past propheted
against many Countries, and against great kingdoms of war, and of plagues and
of Pestilence. And the Prophet which prophesies of peace, when the word of the
Prophet shall come to pass, then shall the Prophet be known that the Lord has
truly sent him. Ezechid likewise refers himself to the same trial amongst such
as were professed heared of the word in general, which they would not obey in
particular. ^
And to thou art unto them, as a jesting song of one that has a pleasant
voice, and can sing well: for they hear thy words, and do them not. And when
this ^oweth to pass (for lo it will come) then shall they know that a Prophet
has been among them.

8 From these debatements, we may gather in what cases the former rule held for
certain. First, negatively, it was universally true; for he that prophesied ^
any thing which came not to pass, did sufficiently prove himself to be no
true Prophet, but a Counterfeit. So did not every prediction of what afterward
came to pass, necessarily argue it to have been from God. Yet as the force and
virtue of many things, not such of themselves, became evident from vicinity, or
irritution of their contraries: so though God permitted some to foretell strange
events for trial of his peoples faith; yet this power he restrained when the
controversy came to a Formal trial; then he caused the true Prophets words to
stand, whiles the predictions of the false, and the Princes blood which relied
upon them, fell to the ground, like Dagon before the Ark. So as the fulfilling
of what the one, and frustrating of what the other had said, did sufficiently
manifest the one had spoken of himself presumptuously; the other, what the Lord
has put into his mouth. Hence is the determination easy, what means this
people had to discem, amongst true Prophets which was That Great one, in all
things like to Moses. First* if events foretold did sufficiently testify of
his divine spirit: his own witness of himself would be authentic, because a
true Prophet could hardly lie, or make himself greater then he was. This is an
argument, which directly confutes such, as acknowledge Christ to have been a
Prophet, sincere in doctrine, and mighty in deeds: and yet deny him to be The
Prince of that profession, The great Mediator of the new Covenant, both which
he often avouched. Because the quantity of that spirit, whose sincere quality
manifested him to be a Prophet, would notify his excessive Greatness in that
rank and order; or, more directly to the question.

9 The great Prophet there spoken of was to be known by his similitude with
Moses, who was as the Symbol, or proportional Mean between him and ^
lesser Prophets. Other, in these few gifts wherein they resembled their
father, came far short of him: Christ in all, far exceeded him. Others, were
all of Jacobs line, raised up by Gods appointment, so to instruct their
brethren in doubtful cases, as they should not need to consult sorcerers, or
entertain familiarity with wicked spirits. Christ (to omit the eminency of his
Prophetical function till hereafter) besides this common fraternity with his
people was in more especial manner Abraham's seed, and in particular sort raised
up by Jehovah his God, by intrinsic assumption into the unity of his person,
not by external assistance or impulsion of his spirit. Ruse^ ^
likewise he was in a strict and proper sense (...), from amid this people,
being as it were extracted out of the pure virgin, as the first woman was out
of the man, by Jehovahs own immediate hand; from his cradle to his cross, most
exactly answering to that delineation of the Great Prophet, and Mediator to be
revealed, which was exhibited first in Moses, when he stood before the Lord in
Horeb. His strange deliverance from Herodian butchery, whiles all the Infant
males besides did perish, was fully parallel to the others exemption from
Pharaohs cruelty; like to Moses he was, in the Numb. 11 (...) vid. 8. Luke
(...) 1, etc.
number of his Disciples, in So Exodu 24. God commands Moses to come up to the
Lord in the Mount, with Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and 70. of the Elders of
Israel, which were to worship a far off, while Moses himself alone went near
unto the Lord: so says S. Peter, God caused Christ to be showed openly, not to
all the people, but to the witnesses chosen before of God, to such as did eat
and drink with him, after he arose from the dead. His Disciples alone were
present when God called Christ into heavenly places. Exodus 24 10, 11.
communication of his spirit unto them, in admitting them to more special
participation of his secrets, in the peculiar testifications of his familiarity
with God, in his fasting, in his transfiguration, in multitude of miracles. But
these and the like I leave to the Readers observation.

10 The excellency of the great Prophet in respect of (...) gathered fr^ the ^
and the ^.
The peculiar and proper undoubted notes of the great Prophet there spoken of,
will be most conspicuous in our Savior, if we compare him, first, with Moses,
then with ordinary Prophets, according to that difference the Lord himself made
between these and Moses; Numb. 12. 6, 7, 8.
If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be known to him by a
vision, and will speak unto him by dream. My servant Moses is not so, who is
faithful in all mine house. Unto him will I speak mouth to mouth, and by vision,
not in dark words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord. Wherefore then
were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, even against Moses? It is said
signanter, he should see the similitude of of God, not God; for as the
Evangelist says John 1. 18.
No man has seen God at any time; so was it told Moses from the Lords own
mouth, that he could not see his face and live. Yet saw this great Prophet more
of God, then all the Prophets beside. Herein then was Christ like unto him, but
far above him, that He was in the bosom of his father, (not admitted to see
his back parts only) and has declared him to the world. Moses from the
abundance of his Prophetical spirit, so perfectly foretold the perpetual estate
of his people, from the Law given, to the time of their Messiah, as the best
Prophets may seem to be but his scholars. From participation of that fullness
which was in Christ, has that Disciple whom he loved, far exceeded Moses, as
well in the extent, weight and variety of matters foretold, as in the
determinate manner of foretelling them. And I know not whether if it were
possible to call both Christ and Moses from heaven, their presence (though more
glorious then it was upon Mount Tabor) would be more forcible to illuminate the
Jew or Athiest, then serious reading the books of Deuteronomy, and the
Revelation, comparing the one with the Jews known misery, the other with
Ecclesiastical Stories, the late abominations of the Papacy, and Romanists more
then Jewish blindness. The one, shows Moses to have been the father of
Prophets, the other Christ (from whose immensurable fullness John had that
extraordinary measure of the spirit) to be The Fountain of Prophesies, whose
supereminencies and inexhaustible fullness may yet be made more apparent by
comparing him, not with Moses the Symbol or Mean; but with the other extreme,
to wit, the rank of lesser Prophets.

11 It is rightly observed by the Schoolmen, Lumen Propheticum erat aliqualiter
The gift spropheste not lab^^ual to (...)nary Prophet.
aenigmaticum; these ordinary Prophets illuminations were not so evident or
distinct, as certain; they discerned rather the Proportion then Feature of
truth, which they saw but as it were through the cover, or in the case, not in
it self. And albeit the event did always prove their answers true, oft-times
in an unexpected sense: yet could they not always give such answers when they
pleased. Nor did the light of Gods countenance perpetually reside upon them, as
the Suns brightness does by reflection upon the stars: they had their
vicissitude of day and night, daily Eclipses, overcastings many; their chief
illuminations came but as it were by Flashes. Thus Jer. 28.
Jeremy in the late cited controversy dares not adventure to give the people a
sign for confirmation of his doctrine, or other more distinct, or determinate
prediction, besides that of the general event, about which the contention was:
That, he knew (because the Lord had put it into his mouth) would in the end
condemn his adversary of presumption. But after Hananiah had outfaced him with
a sensible sign of his own making, breaking the yoke which he had taken from
Jeremiahs neck, on which the Lord had put it, and boldly avouched in the
presence of all the people [Thus says the Lord, Jer. 28. 10, 12.
even so will I break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, from the neck
of all nations within the space of two years:] the word of the Lord came unto
Jeremiah again, and sends him back with this message to his adversary Ver. 12,
15, 16.
Hear now Hananiah, the Lord has not sent thee, but thou make this people to
trust in a lie. Therefore thus says the Lord, Behold, I will cast thee from off
the earth: this year thou shall die, because thou have spoken rebelliously
against the Lord. So Hananiah the Prophet died the same year, in the seventh
month. Not long after this event were both Prince and people of J^dah rooted
out of the land the Lord had given them, because contrary to Moses adminition,
they reverenced the Prophet that spoke presumptuously, and would not hearken
unto the words which the Lord put in Jeremiahs mouth: Elisha likewise to whom
Elias had given a double portion of his spirit in respect of his fellows, of
all the Prophets, (unless Elias might be excepted) most famous for the gift of
miracles, a lively type of the Messiah, in raising from death and giving life,
had his spirit of Divination but by Fits, and needed Music to tune his spirits
unto it. He gave the barren Shunamite a son, of death notwithstanding he knew
not as the Lord of life did of Lazarus, in his absence: nor could he by her
unusual gesture or strange signs of sorrow, distinctly divine the true cause of
her coming: only, when Gehezi went to thrust her away, he said as much as he
knew: 2 King 4. 27
Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, and the Lord has hid it from
me, and has not told it me.

12 But from the perpetual and internal irradiation of the Deity, bodily John
Baptist more then a Prophet, from the virmity of the great Prophet.
or personally (such as the Apostle speaks) dwelling in Christ, and incorporate
in his substance, this spirit of Prophecy, (if without prejudice so we may
call it) did never wain, was never Eclipsed, always most splendent in him, as
light in the Moon in the full. As he never foretold any thing which came not to
pass, so could he at all times when he pleased, foretell whatsoever at any time
should befall his friends or foes, with all the circumstances and signs
consequent, or precedent. From this brightness of his glory did John Baptist
(who was sent from God as the morning sta^ to usher this Sun of righteousness
into his Kingdom) become more then a Prophet for distinct illuminations,
concerning matters to come. A Prophet he was in the womb, and bare witness of
that light which enlightneth every man that comes into the world, before he
came into it himself, or saw this bodily Sun, when he could not speak, he
danced for joy at his presence, and at his first approach, after Baptism, he
thus salutes him; John 1. 28.
Behod the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. What Prophet did
ever so distinctly prophecy of his passion, and so fully instruct the people
what was foresignified by the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb? yet was John
himself secured by the former rule, that he spoke this by the spirit of the
Lord, not out of fancy, not presumptuously. For til this Baptism, John 1. 33.
See cap. 20. Parag. 5.
he knew him not, but he that sent him to baptize with water, he said unto him,
Upon whom th^^ sh^lt see the spirit come down and tarry still upon him, that is
He which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And he saw it so come to pass, and
bare record that this was the Son of God. From this more then Prophetical
spirit of John, manifested by this and the like testifications of Christ, all
afterward approved by the event, did the people gather, Christ not John, to be
That Great Prophet, mighty in word and deed. For after he had escaped the
violence offered him at Jerusalem, John 10. 40, 41, 42.
and went again beyond Jordan, into the place where John first baptized, Many
(says the Evangelist) resorted unto him and said; John did no miracle, but all
things which John spoke of this man, were true. And many believed in him there;
For his works sake no doubt, but for these as accompanied with the former
circumstances of place and John's predictions. John had witnessed he was the Son
of God, mighty in deed and word: and reason they had to think his works were
the works of his Father, that his privileges were the privileges of the only
begotten Son, and heir of all things when John though a Prophet, and more then
a Prophet for his portion of the divine spirit, was yet restrained (by reason
of his approach that was before him) from doing such wonders as meaner Prophets
had done. To such as rightly observed this opposition between John's power in
words, and his defect in deeds: or Christ's superabundant power in both, the
case was plain, John was but the Isaiah 40. 3.
Crier, the other (in whose presence his authority decreased) the Lord, whose
ways he was sent to prepare.

13 If unto the variety of Christ's miracles, compared with John's predictions,
The matter of our Saviors predictions compared with the precedent prophesies
of him, declare his Godhead.
and other prophesies, we join his arbitrary usual manner, either of
foretelling future, or knowing present matters of every kind, many such as no
prophet durst ever have professed to belong unto himself: our Faith may clearly
behold the sure Foundation whereon it is built, That he, even he himself, who
had said by the Prophet, [ Isai. 42. 8, 9.
I am the Lord, this is my Name, and my glory will I not give unto another,
neither my praise to graven Images. Behold the former things are come to pass,
and new things do I declare: before they come forth, I tell you of them] did at
the Fullness of Time manifest his Glory in our flesh, by the practice there
mentioned, of foretelling things strange, and unheard of to the world.
Prophesies of former times were fulfilled in his personal appearance, and made
their period at the beginning of his preaching. Whatsoever concerns the state
of the world, chiefly the Gentiles, since, came from him either as altogether
new, or was refined and renewed by him. For what man among the Nations, yea
what Master in Israel did from the Law or prophets conceive aright of John. 3.
(...).
the new birth, by water and the spirit, or of that everlasting Kingdom,
whereunto only men so born, are heirs predestinate? These were the new things,
which he only could distinctly declare before they came forth.

14 That their Messiah was to be this God here spoken of by Isaiah, dwelling
Our Saviors arbitrary discovery of secret^ and predictions of futures
contingent fully consonart to the received nations of the Mession.
and conversing with them in their nature and substance, might have been
manifested to the Jews (had they not been hood-winked with pride and malice)
from that common notion, even the most vulgar amongst them had, of his divine
spirit, in declaring secrets, and foretelling things to come. What one miracle
done by Christ, did ever take so good effect with so great speed in best
prepared spectators, as his discovery of Nathaneels heart in presence, and
outward carriage, in so great distance? John 1. 49.
Rabbi (says Nathaneel) Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel.
Though faith be the true gift of God, only wrought by his Spirit; yet, no
question, but Nathaneel was more inclined to this confession from the general
notion of the Messiah divine spirit; even by it, he was capable of that
promise, habenti dabitur. And our Savior highly approves, and so rewards this
his docility; ^
Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believe thou? thou
shall see greater thing; then these: What were they? Miracles? Yes, for so he
says to him, and the rest of his hearers: Verily, verily I say unto you,
hereafter shall you see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and
descending upon The Son of Max. Then miracles, it seems, were more effectual to
confirm Faith, then this Experience of his Prophetical spirit Not of
themselves, but joined with it, or as thus foretold by him, and foresignified
by ^
Jacobs vision, which compared with the Event, (whether that were at his
ascension or no, I now dispute not) did plainly declare him to be The Way, and
The Door, by which all enter into the house of God.

15 Upon the first apprehension of like discovery made by him, did the poor
Samaritan woman acknowledge he was a Prophet, and upon his avouching himself to
be more then so, she takes him indeed for the expected Messiah, of whom she had
this conceit before, John 4. 25.
That when he came, he should tell them all things. From this preconceived
notion, working with her present Experience of his divine Spirit, able to
descrie all the secrets of her heart, she makes this proclamation to her
neighbors: ^
Come and see a man that has told me all things that ever I did: is not he The
Christ? Upon their like experience, fully consonant to the same common notion,
on conceit of the Messiah, did a many of that City conceive Faith from the
woman's report; but more V^^. 42
because of his own words; And they said unto the woman; Now we believe, not
because of thy saying: for we have heard him our selves, and know that This is
indeed The Christ, the Savior of the World. From the like, but more lively
experience of his discovering secrets, did his Disciples make that confession,
^^h. 16. 30.
Now know we that thou know all things, and need not that any man should
ask thee. By this we believe that thou art come out from God.

16 The manifestation of this Prophetical Spirit, did give life unto his Our
Saviors Dis^^les and Apostles did (according to his inst^ o^s) m^ upon ^ d^
then ^les.
greatest miracles in working Faith: for his Disciples believed in him after
his resurrection, because he had foretold his reedifying the Temple in three
days space. Which speech of his the foolish Jews, not knowing His Body to be
the true Temple, wherein their God did dwell after a more excellent manner then
between the Cherubins, take as meant of the material Temple, which had been
forty six years in building. But (says Saint ^in 2. 22.
John) As Soon as he was risen from the dead, his Disciples remembered that he
thus said unto them: and they believed the Scripture, and the word which Jesus
had said. Nor did they compare these two together by chance: for our Savior
often inculcated this Method, as of purpose to imprint the former Oracle of
Isaiab in their hearts. To assure them of his going to his Father, he expressly
tells them: J^h. 14. (...).
Now I have spoken unto you before it come, that when it is come to pass ye
might believe. Foretelling the persecution of his Disciples, he adds, J^h,
(...). 4.
These things have I told you, that when the hour shall come, ye might remember
that I told you them. That glory likewise which God had professed he would not
give to any other, he foretells should be given Him, and so demands it, ^ling
the fu^lling of that Scripture (...) He that ^th ^^ead ^ up his heel against
me] in Judas; he gave this general Rule, From henceforth tell I you before ^
me to pass, ye might believe that I am He. John 13. 19.
as if He that did glorify, and He that was glorified, were both One: John 12.
28.
Father, Glorify thy Name. Then came there a voice from heaven saying, I have
both glorified is, and will glorify it again. How had he glorified it before?
By glorifying this great Prophet, who did fully express, but for exceed Moses,
in all things wherein Former Prophets did resemble him, but came far short of
him. When was he so glorified? At his transfiguration upon Mount Tabot, which
none without Sacrilegious impiety could have foretold, as likely to befall him
self, save he alone, that had, not as Moses, only seen the Similitude of the
Lord, but being in the Form of God thought it no robbery to be Equal with him.
Yet this Prophet of whom we speak, though like to his Brethren in shape and
substance, to assure them he should come in the Glory of his Father, foretells
his Disciples, that some of them should not Mark 9. 1. Matthew. 16. 28. Luke 9.
27. 2 Pet. 1. 17.
die until they had seen the Kingdom of God come with Power: which was
accomplished in that Transfiguration, where, as Saint Peter witnesses, He
received of God the Father, honor and glory, when there came such a voice unto
him from the excedent glory; This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased;
Yea, so well pleased, as for his sake the world might henceforth know how ready
he was to hear all, that through faith in his Name should call upon him, even
such as had displeased him most. For this cause, the Codicil annexed to the
divine Will and Testament here signified, immediately after to be sealed with
the blood of this Best Beloved Son, was that reciprocal duty before intimated
in the Law, Hear Him: as is specified by Mark 9. 7. Luke 9. 35. Matthew 17 5.
three Evangelists. For more public manifestation of his Majesty, (as then
revealed but to a few) was that glorious commemoration of it lately mentioned,
celebrated again in the audience of the multitude: Joh. 12. 30. Our Savior in
his last conference with the Jews proclaims himself to be the Great Prophet
foretold by Moses.
This voice, says our Savior, came not because of me, but for your sakes. And
in that place again, after his wonted predictions of things should after come
to pass, as of his victory over death, he testifies aloud to all the people
that he was the great Prophet foretold by Moses, sweetly paraphrasing upon his
words; John 12. 44.
And Jesus tried and said, He that believes in me, believes not in me, but in
him that sent me. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I judge him
not: for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He did not
accurse such as would not acknowledge his authority, or derogated from his
person or miracles; nor needed he so to do: John 12. 48.
for he that refuses him, and receives not his words, has one that judges
him; the word which he had spoken, it shall judge him in the last day. This was
that which Moses had said, Deuteronomy. 18. 19.
And whosoever will not hearken unto my words, which he [the great Prophet]
shall speak in my Name, I will require it of him, to wit, in the last day of
accounts, Joh. 12. 49, 50
For I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
commandment what I should do, and what I should speak. And I know that his
commandment is life everlasting: the things therefore that I speak, I speak
them so as the Father said unto me. What is this, but that speech of Moses
improved to it Full Value, according to the circumstances and signs of those
times, and as it concerned the Lord and Prince of Prophets? [ Deuteronomy. 18. 18. Our
Saviors Prophetical spirit gave life to his miracles though his miracles were
good preparatives to Belief.
I will raise them up a Prophet, from among their brethren like unto thee, and
will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall
command him.]

17 This being the last conference our Savior was willing to entertain with
the Jews, this his last farewell given in Moses words, warrants me to construe
that speech of Saint John's Joh. 12. 3^.
[though he had done so many miracles before them, yet believed they not on
him] as I have done the like before: to wit, That, not his miracles considered
alone, but with Mosaical and Prophetical writings, or common notions of the
Messiah thence conceived, or (especially) as they concurred with his own
predictions, did immediately condemn the Jews. Under the name of works, his
words are comprehended; such at the least, as foretell his admirable works, or
in general, all those solemn invocations of his Fathers name, in such
predictions, as had he not been the Son of God, would rather have brought
speedy vengeance from heaven upon his head then such glorious testimonies of
his Divinity. And to me our Savior seems to call his very words works, in that
speech to philip, Joh. 14. 10.
Believe thou not that I am in the Father and the Father in me? the words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self, but the Father that dwells in
me, he does the works. Howsoever as all the works of God were created by this
Eternal Word: so did his words give life unto his greatest works; his
Divinations were to his Miracles, as his humane soul was to his body, And no
question, but the conception of their Faith that heard him preach, was as
immediately from those words of eternal life which issued from his mouth, as
ours is from the Word preached by his Messengers. To what other use then could
miracles serve, save only to breed a praeviall admiration, and make entrance
for them into his hearers hearts? though his bodily presence at all times was
not; yet were his usual works in themselves truly glorious, more then apt to
dispell that veil of prejudice, commonly taken against the meannesse of his
person, birth, or parentage; had it been merely natural, not occasioned,
through wilful neglect of extraordinary means precedent, and stubborn
opposition to present grace most plentifully offered. His raising others from
death to life, was more then sufficient to remove that offense the people took
at that speech, Joh. 12. 32.
If I were lift up from the earth, I should draw all men unto me. To which they
answered, We have heard out of the Law, that the Christ bideth forever; and how
say thou that the Son of Man must be lift up? Who is that Son of Man?

18 To conclude then, his distinct and arbitrary foretelling Events of The
peculiar similitude between Christ and Moses in the office of mediation.
every sort any Prophet had mentioned, many of them not producible, but by
extraordinary miracles, withal including divine testifications of far
greater glory ascribed to him, then Moses or any Prophet ever challenged, was
The demonstrative Rule (according to Moses prediction) whereunto all visible
signs and sensible miracles should have been resolved by their spectators: as
known effects lead contemplators unto the first and immediate causes, on which
their Truth and Being depends. That Encomium, [This is my Beloved Son in whom I
am well pleased, Hear him;] with the like given by John Baptist [Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world] unto all such as took him
for a true Prophet, did more distinctly point out the similitude peculiar to
Him with Moses, expressed (in the forecited place of Deuteronomy) literally:
though not so plainly, as most Readers would without direction observe it,
seeing even interpreters most followed either neglect the words themselves, in
which it is directly contained, or wrest their meaning. Deuteronomy. 18. 15, 16.
Unto him shall ye hearken, according to all that thou desiredst of the Lord
thy God in Horeb, in the day of the assembly. Their request then was; Talk th^^
with us, and we will hear, but let not God talk with us lest we die. Here the
whole multitude bound themselves to hear the word of the Lord, not immediately
from his mouth, but by Moses. For whiles the people stood afar off, he only
drew near to the darkness where God was. This their request and resolution,
elsewhere more fully expressed, the Lord highly commended; Deuteronomy. 5. 28, 29.
I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken
unto thee: they have well said, all that they have spoken, Oh that there were
such an heart in them, to fear me, and to keep all my commandments always, that
it might go well with them, and with their children for ever. If we observe
that increment, the literal sense of the same words may receive by succession
of time, or as they respect the Body, not the Type, both which they jointly
signify; the best reason can be given of Gods approving the former petition
and Isreal's peculiar disposition at that time above others, will be this; That
as posterity in rejecting Vide lib. 1. cap. 28 parag 8, 9, 10.
Samuel, rejected Christ, or God the second Person in Trinity: so here the
Fathers in requesting Moses might be their spokesman unto God, requested that
Great Prophet ordained to be the Author of a better Covenant, even that
promised woman's seed, their brother according to the flesh, to be Mediator
betwixt God and them, to secure them from such dreadful flames as they had
seen, so they would hearken (as then they promised) unto his words, as unto the
words of God himself, esteeming him (as the Apostle says) so far above
Moses, Heb. 3. 3.
As he that builds the house, is above the house. And in the Emphasis of that
speech ( Deuteronomy. 18. 18
[Whosoever will not hearken unto my words which he shall speak in my name, I
will require it of him:] purposely resumed by Moses with these threats annexed,
as if he had not sufficiently expressed his mind in the like precedent, [Unto
him ye shall hearken] The same difference, between Moses and the Great Prophet
then meant, is included, which the Apostle in another place expresses, Heb.
10. 18, 20.
He that despises Moses Law, dies without mercy under two or three witnesses.
Of how much sorer punishment, suppose ye he shall be worthy, which treads
under foot the Son of God, and counts the blood of the Testament as an unholy
thing? Until the sovereignty of the Law and Prophets did determine; that
Encomium of Moses did bear date [ Deuteronomy. 34. 10
There arose not a Prophet si^^e in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord kn^w
face to face:] but vanished upon the Criers voice, when the Kingdom of heaven
began to appear. The Israelites to whom both promises were made, did far exceed
all other nations, in that they had a Law most absolute given by Moses, yet to
be bettered by an Everlasting Covenant; the Former being as an earnest penny
given in hand, to assure them of the Latter. In respect of Both, the name of a
Soothsayer or Sorcerer was not to be heard in Israel, as in the nations which
knew not God, much less expected a Mediator, in whom the spirit of life should
dwell as plentifully, as splendour does in the body of the Sun; from whose
fullness, ere he visibly came into the world, other Prophets were illuminated
(as those lights which rule the night, are by that great light which God has
appointed to rule the day) at whose approach the Prince of darkness with his
followers, were to avoid the Hemisphere wherein they had reigned. In the mean
time, the testimonies of the Law and Prophesies, served as a light or candle to
minish the terrors of the night. Even Moses himself, and all that followed him,
were but as messengers sent from God to solicit his people to reserve their
allegiance free from all commerce, or compact with Familiar spirits, until the
Prince of glory came in person.

19 Thus without censure of their opinion, that otherwise think or The chief
grounds of Moses dissuading Israel from sorcery, was their expectation of the
great Prophet.
teach, albeit the continuance of Prophets amongst this people, were a mean to
prevent all occasions of consulting sorcerers or witches: yet the chief ground
of Moses disswasion from such practices, according to the literal connection of
these words. Deuteronomy. 18 14.
[The nations which thou shall possess, hearken unto those that regard the
times, and unto sorcerers, as for thee, the Lord the God has not suffered thee
so,] with those following hitherto expounded. [The Lord thy God will raise up
unto thee a Prophet] was the consideration of their late mighty deliverance by
Moses, the excellency of their present Law, and their expectation of a greater
Lawgiver, (when the first covenant should wax old, and Prophesies for a long
time fail) unto strict observance of whose precepts they solemnly bound
themselves (as was lately observed) ever whilst the former was established.
That which moves me to embrace this interpretation, is Balaams Prophesle
uttered of Israel, considered in the abstruct, as he might have been, not as he
proved (as Cap. 1.
Malachie speaks of Levt) or according to the excellency of his calling in
Moses and in Christ, or Gods promise, which he for his part was ready to
perform; Number. 23. 22.
God brought them (says he) out of Egypt, their strength is as an Unicorne:
For there is reforcery in Jacob, nor soothsaying in Israel, according to this
time it shall be said of Jacob, What has God wrought? And in the ^ that
curses thee. I shall see him, but not now: I shall behold him, but not near.
There shall come a ^ and a s^^pter shall rise of Israel, and shall smile the
coasts of Moa^, and destroy all the sons of Sheth: And Edom (...) ^ and S^ir
shall be a ^ssion to their enemies: but Israel shall do valiantly. He also that
shall have dominion ^ Jacob, and shall destroy the remnant of the City. Number.
24. 8, 9. and 17. 1^, 19.
Chapter following, he joins Isreal's deliverance from Egypt, as the foundation
or beginning, and his victory in Christ, as the accomplishment or finishing of
his glory. Of that Jacob meant by Bal^, even we Gentiles are a part, every way
as strictly bound by Mos^^ Law, as Israel was to abandon soothsaying and
sorcery, but especially bound to abhor these and like works of darkness, from
that light, the star^e of Ia^o^ has ^fforded us. These two great Prophets
then, Christ and M^ses, appointed successively to declare Gods will unto his
people, were the main supporters of true religion in Israel, by whose doctrine
all curious and superstitions arts were to vanish. And, if my observation fail
not, Israel was much less given to sorcerie after ordmary Prophets ceased,
then before: because this great Prophet, the hope of Israel was at hand.

20 That our Saviors authority might have been and was m^e, omofestly proved
cut of Moses and the Prophets to the ancient: then it can be to the modern Jews
altogether una^quainted with the right manner of interpreting prophecies or
such common not ions or traditions, as the Scribes and Pharisees had in our
Saviors time.
The apprehension of what we now by long search hardly find, was more facile to
the ancient ^ews, from the known conceits, or received traditions thereto
pertinent, Before the Law was written, one they had heard should be sent from
God a mighty deliverer of his people: unto whom Moses thought himself much
inferior, as appears by his reply to God, when he was first sent to visit his
brethren; (...). 4 13.
Mi^te, quaeso quem missurus es; Send, I pray thee, whom thou will send: as if
he had said, One thou have appointed from everlasting, to declare thy Name unto
his brethren, to show mercy to thy people, and thy power upon thine enemies;
and I beseech thee send him now, for this is work besitting his strength, not
my weakness. From the like notions or received opinions, did the Pharisees
understand this place, as meant of the Prophet J^^. 1. 20, 21
that was to come: albeit it may be doubted, whether they took him to be the
same with the Messiah. For so they demand of John severally; (...) words; Now
they which were sent were of the Phaarisees, Joh. 1. ^4. though other (...).
Art thou the Christ? Art thou Eliah? Art thou the Prophet? Eliah was plainly
distinguished from the Messiah by Isaiah; or perhaps they knew the Messiah and
the Prophet to be the same: yet, like strict examiners, proposed these two
several names, to leave John no evasion. It was likewise a truth presupposed
and known, at least amongst the Pharisees, that Eliah, Messta^, the Prophet,
one or all, should baptize. Hence they further question the Baptist; Why
baptizest thou then, if thou be not the Christ, neither Elias, nor the Prophet?
And of himself he says, because He (to wit, the Christ) should be declare^ to
Israel, therefore am I come baptizing with water. This answer, with his
practice permitted by the Pharisees, and approved by the people, so fully
concurring with the former notion, but especially his praediction of Christ's
baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and (as Saint Matthew. 11.
Matthew adds) with fir^ were most pregnant testimonies against unbelievers,
after they had notice of the Holy Ghosts descending (upon the same day their
Law was given) from heaven: for the plentiful manner of effusion; and placide
illapse into the souls of every sort, resembling water powered out (as the Joel
2. 28.
Prophets phrase imports;) but for outward appearance, and inward effects of
ardent zeal, like unto fire. And likely it is, as well the Exo. 13 21, 22.
pillar of fire which enlightened Israel by night, as the cloud that rested upon
the tabernacle, under which (Saint 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2
Paul says) the Fathers being, were baptized in it, were such praeluding Types
of Baptism by water and the Holy Ghost: as the Rock was of Christ; or the
waters thence flowing, of those springs of life, which issue from him to the
refreshing of every faithful thirsty soul. The mystical significations of
such shadows of good things to come, were sufficiently known to the Jews living
in our Saviors time. Whence, (as the two judicious Commentatours, Bucer and
Martyr observe) his adversaries mouths were instantly stopped, at the first
allegation of those places the modern Jews bark most against, as not inferring
what the Evangelists report their forefathers granted: because these had a
peculiar manner of interpreting Scriptures not acknowledged by the later, grown
out of use for the most part amongst Christians, or rather overgrown with the
abuse of luxuriant allegories, and mystical senseless senses, framed by
Monkish or rather Apish imitation of Orthodoxal antiquity. The weeding out of
such tares, as, through these bad husbands sloth and negligence, have abounded
in Gods harvest, will not (we trust) be either difficult, or dangerous to the
good seed, primitive antiquity has sown: whose general method and manner of
interpreting prophecies (though in particulars it often fail; partly, through
adventurous imitation of some Philosophers in unfolding Heathenish mysteries;
partly, through want of skill in the original Tongues) holds the just Mean
between barbarous Postillers, and some late Preachers, worthily famous, yet too
nice and scrupulous in this subject, as shall appear when we come to handle it.

21 But to finish what we had last in hand, the most remarkable, most Our
Saviors Prediction of his death and resurrection, was that which according to
Moses prophecy, did most condemn the Jews.
public document our Savior gave to unbelievers, of his designment to that
great Office foretold by Moses, was the constant avouchment of his death and
resurrection, unto such as so well observed his words, that after they had
taken away his life, Mat. 27. 63.
procured a strong watch to be set about his sepulcher, lest his Disciples
should take his body thence, and by emptying It, seem to fulfill his prophecy.
Nor did he once only, but Matt. 12. 39. Matthew. 16. 4.
twice foretell; not barely he would rise again: but that thus much was
presignified by the Prophet Jonahs three days imprisonment in the Whales
belly; thus inviting them to observe all congruity of circumstance beween the
historical type already exhibited, and the substance prophesied: which method,
as hereafter (God willing) will appear, is, of all the best, for insinuating
faith into superstitious, perverse, and crooked hearts, otherwise most unapt to
receive truths late revealed. Since Christ's glorification, sundry Impostors
have done many works, hardly distinguishable by spectators from true miracles:
but the end of all their purposes, which they sought thence to persuade, was
always so dissonant to the incorrupt notions, precedent types, or prophecies
of the Messiah; as, unto hearts well settled, and surely grounded upon
Scriptures formerly established and confirmed, their greatest wonders seemed
but Apish toys, howsoever difficiles nugae. And some of these juglers, either
out of the strength of their own illusions, or upon the presumption of their
profane skill in deceiving others, have adventured to foretell their
resurrection; but were not able to dissolve the bands of death: their
everlasting durance in whose prisons, has openly showed they spoke
presumptuously; that not Mahomet himself the greatest of them, was that Great
Prophet foretold by Moses. What was the reason then the Jews would not; the
Turks, unto this day, will not believe in Christ crucified? For the Acts 13. 27.
inhabitants of Jerusalem, Saint Paul has answered, Because they knew him not,
nor yet the words of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day, they have
fulfilled them in condemning him. The same Apostle, though endued with the
power of miracles, yet in that place rather uses David's words, then his own
works, to prove Christ's resurrection. Of which, that saying of Christ was most
truly verified in the obstinate Jews, Luke 16. 31.
Not hearing Moses and the Prophets (so as to be moved by them to true
repentance) neither were they persuaded, though this great Prophet of whom they
wrote, was raised from the dead again.

22 Were we well acquainted either with that manner of interpretation, or those
prenotions the Apostle supposed as known, when he used that testimony of the
Psalmist Act. 13 33. Psalm. (...). 7.
[Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee] to prove our Saviors
resurrection: it would not be hard to persuade us Moses words, hitherto
expounded, were as literally meant of Gods raising his Son out of his Maiden
grave, as out of his virgin Mothers womb. And I make no question but the
conclusion of S Peter's Sermon, Acts 3. 26.
Unto you (whom a little before he had termed children of the Prophets) has
God raised up his Son, were meant by him of his raising Christ from the dead.
And yet are these words but an application of the former principal text he
there insists upon: Verse. 22.
Moses said unto the Fathers, The Lord your God shall raise up unto you a
Prophet even of your brethren like unto me, ye shall hear him all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. And unto this resurrection does the strict
propriety of that phrase [ Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
from the midst of thee] well agree. Acts 26. 26.
For these things were not done in a corner, but in Jerusalem, the Metropolis
of Judea, not without express notice given to the rulers. Moses indeed
foretold his own death and whatsoever other Prophets, (raised up by God unto
this people) did foretell came still to pass: yet none ever foretold his own
raising up. But seeing Christ First raising from the virgins womb, though most
miraculous, was yet more private: he forewarned the world to expect This
Second, altogether as powerful, but more public. And in it again he is like to
Moses raised up by God, to be a Savior of his people, out of that Ark which
without divine especial providence had been his Tomb. This similitude amongst
the rest, betwixt Christ and Moses, as well in their later as first birth, but
especially the notice our Savior gave unto his enemies of the later; has made
them unwittingly Prophets to their woe. For seeing it has left their unbelief
without excuse, Mat. 27. 64.
their last error concerning his Resurrection, is become worse then the first
concerning his Birth. Neither could have seemed incredible (though both most
miraculous) to this ungratious seed of Jacob; had they looked (as the Prophet
willed them;) Isaiah 51. 1.
unto the rock whence they were hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence they
were dug. The mighty increase of Sarahs womb, no better then dead, and
strange multiplication of Isaacs seed beyond the posterity of all the people
with whom he sojourned, did but portend the fruitful offspring of the Virgins
only Son should in number and dignity far surmount the sons and daughters of
all the fertile mothers in Judea, Isaacs posterity had been great, yet able to
be numbered, by David. Isaiah 51 8
But his generation who shall declare, that was cut out of the land of the
living? ^e^. 11. 12
Therefore strange there even of one, and him as dead: (or destinated to death,
as Isaac was; yea of one truly dead, that made his grave with the wicked, as
many as the stars in the sky in multitude (in dignity greater) and as the sand
by the sea store innumerable. Mightier was the increase of that Rock wherein he
made his grave, whence we are hewn, then of that pit, whence Israel according
to the flesh, was dug. His exaltation since, has been their fall. For
seeing they would not believe his predictions, as their Lawgiver had commanded;
the world may clearly see the curse indefinitely there denounced against all
such as would not hear, fulfilled upon that stubborn generation, according to
the full extent of S. Peter's paraphrase Acts 3. 23. For it shall be that every
person which shall not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed out of the people.
upon it, Not one or a fe^^only were destroyed out of the people (as Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram, for disobedience unto Moses:) but the whole people, or
nation, were utterly rooted out of the land. All which, with all particular
circumstances and signs precedent or ensuing, this great Prophet in his life
time had so distinctly foretold; that, if we compare former Prophets with him,
they may seem to have but dreamed; he alone, that put these unknown ditties
into their heads, to have had the perfect skill of right interpreting their
meaning.

CAP. XXII.
That the method used by the great Prophet himself after his resurrection for
planting faith, was such as we teach: The excess of Antichrists exaltation
above Christ: The Diametrical opposition betwixt the spirit of God, and the
Spirit of the Papacy.

1 MOses was to be acknowledged a great Prophet, because the whole host of
Israel infallibly knew the Lord was with him in all he did; every Prophet after
him to be known by the Rules which he had given, for their discernment; Christ
Jesus to be taken for The Great Prophet and Mediator of the everlasting
Covenant, because in words, in works, in all his ways exactly answerable to
Mosaical and prophetical Characters, of the Messiah that was to come. This
sweet Harmony of legal Types or ancient prophecies, as well with the whole
course of his blessed life, as with his ignominious and cruel death, or manner
of his glorious resurrection, I should either have esteemed or regarded less,
had not my Savior himself preferred the assurance of prophetical testimonies
before the certainty of their senses that had conversed with him in their life
time, admitted to conference with him after his rising from the dead. For so we
read of two Disciples which had seen his miracles, heard his doctrine, and
acknowledged him for a Prophet, mighty in word and deed: but yet distrusted the
report of his resurrection after it had been the second time confirmed by such
of their fellows as had doubted with them: yea their Master himself had told
them as much before his death. And had he not good reason then to upbraid them
with distrust, having now met them as live-like as they themselves were? Was he
to them a Prophet, mighty in word and deed: and yet not able to perform what he
had constantly spoken? But what was the chief matter of their just reproof?
That they had not believed his words, nor given due credence to his works?
Dull, no doubt, they had been, in not esteeming better of both; unwise, in not
learning more of Him, that taught as never man taught: but (as in them he
teaches us) most dull and most unwise, even Luke 24. 25.
Fools and slow of heart, in not believing all that the Prophets had spoken.
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things (as if he had said, Is it
possible your ignorance in them should be gross, as not to know that Christ
was thus to suffer) and so to enter into his glory?

2 You will say perchance they did not well in giving so little attention and
credit to the Prophets, whose light should have led them unto Christ: but now
that they have light on him in person, without their help, only by his seeking
them, shall not he who was the end and scope of all prophetical writings, teach
them all? He will: but not by relying only upon his infallible authority. This
Edifice of Faith must be framed upon the Foundation laid by the Prophets. For
this reason happily our Savior would not bewray himself to be their infallible
teacher, until he had made them by evidence of Scripture, by true sense and
feeling of his spirit, believe and know the truth, which he taught, to be
infallible. He had opened their hearts, by opening the Scriptures unto them,
before their eyes were open to discern his person: for Luk 24 27.
he began at Moses and at all the Prophets, and interpreted unto them in all
the Scriptures the things which were written of him. Steadfast Belief then of
any man's authority, must spring out of the solid Experience of his skill, and
truth of his doctrine. These two disciples might now resolve their hearts, that
this was he who John said should baptize with the holy Ghost and with fire;
when by the working of his spirit, Verse. 32.
their hearts aid burn within them, whiles he talked with them, and opened the
Scriptures unto them. Though before they had received John Baptists witness of
the truth, as a Tie or Fest to stay their fleeting Faith; Joh. 5. 32, 34
yet now they would not receive the record of man; there is another that
bears witness of him; the spirit of truth, which has imprinted his doctrine
in their hearts.

3 Would the Pope who challenges Christ's place on earth amongst his living
members, and requires we should believe his words, as well as these Disciples
did Christ's, but expound those Scriptures unto us which Christ did to them,
with like evidence and efficacy; could he make our hearts thus burn within, by
opening the secret mysteries of our salvation: we would take him for Christ's
Vicar, and believe indeed he were infallibly assisted by the Holy Spirit. But
seeing he and his followers invert our Saviors method, by calling the
certainty of both Testaments in question, telling us we cannot know them to be
Gods word unless it shall please this Roman God to give his word for them, or
confirm their truth; seeing this his pretended confirmation is not by
manifesting the mysteries of our salvation so distinctly and clearly as Christ
did unto these Disciples, nor by affording us the true sense and feeling of the
spirit, in such ardent manner as they enjoyed it, and yet accurseth us if we
believe not his words as well as they did their Redeemers: we may hence take a
perfect measure of that A brief survey of the mouth of Blaspemies spoken of by
S. John.
mouth of Blasphemies spoken of by S. John, according to all the three
dimensions contained in the three assertions prefixed to the beginning of this
Section. Nor can the reader imagine either any other forepassed, like unto it;
or yet to come, likely to prove more abominable: if it shall but please him to
survey the length and breadth of it, but especially the profundity.

4 The length of it I make That assertion: The Pope must be as well believed,
as either Christ was whilst he lived on earth, or his Apostles after his
glorification The breadth; His absolute authority must be for extent as large
and ample as Christ's should be, were he on earth again; or as that commission
he gave unto his Disciples, Go, Preach the Gospel to every creature: his
directions must go forth throughout all the earth, and his words unto the ends
of the world. The depth is much greater then the space between heaven and hell.
For if you would draw a line from the Zenith to the Nadir through the Center,
it would scarce be a gag long enough for this monstrous mouth; so wide as hell
cannot conceive a greater. The depth I gather, partly from the excess of
Christ's worth, either arising from his personal union with the Godhead; his
sanctity of life and conversation; or from his Hyperprophetical Spirit and
abundant miracles. For look how much he exceeds any but mere man in all these:
by so much does the Pope (though supposed as not obnoxious to any crime) make
his authority and favor with God greater then Christ's, which is the
Semidiameter of this Mouth of Blaspemies. The other part, equal hereunto in
quantity, but for the quality more tainted with the dregs of Hell, arises from
that opposition the Popes spirit has unto Christ; or from the luxury and
beastly manners of the Papacy, erected by Satan as it were of purpose to
pollute the world with monstrous sins, and to derogate as much from mankind, as
true Christianity does advance it: finally to make the Christian world as much
more wicked, as Christ's Disciples, Apostles, and faithful followers are better
then the heathen, Nor does the Pope exact Belief only without The chief
arguments brought by Romish Writers to prove the excellency of their Church
directly contrary to the principles of S^e and Nature.
miracles or manifestation of a prophetical spirit: but contrary to all notions
of good and evil, common to Christians and Heathens, and as it were in despite
of the Prophesies that have deciphered him for Antichrist. What heathen
Philosopher could with patience have endured to hear, that a dissolute
luxurious tyrant could not, though in matters of this life, give wrong sentence
out of the seat of Justice? The Jesuits teach it as an Article of faith, that
the Pope, albeit a dissolute and ungracious tyrant, Mankinds reproach, the
disgrace of Christianity, cannot possibly give an erroneous sentence ex
Cathedra, no not in mysteries of religion. But as if it were a small thing thus
impudently to contradict nature, and grieve the souls of ingenuous men, unless
they also grieve their Isaiah 7. 13.
God, seeking as it were to cross his spirit by holding opinions not only
contradictory but most contrary to his sacred rules; they importune the
Christian world with tumultuous clamours, to take that, which the spirit has
given as the demonstrative Character of great Antichrist, the old serpents
chief confederate for the infallible cognizance of Christ's Vicar, the very
signet of his beloved Spouse. Nor will they (I know) though friendly admonished,
cease henceforth to urge their outworn arguments, drawn from antiquity,
universality; from that reverence and allegiance which most Kingdoms of Europe
have for these thousand years and more born to the Sea of Rome; or from the
bloody victories over all other inferior Churches or private spirits, that
have oppugned her. These or like allegations in their judgment abundantly
prove their Church to be Christ's best beloved, the Pope to be his Deputy, or
rather his corrival here on earth whose words sound as the word of God, and not
of Man; albeit the spirit has plainly foretold, that Rev. 13. 4, etc.
the beast which had his power from the Dragon, and should open his mouth unto
blasphemies against God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and them,
that dwell in heaven, should have power given withal to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them, yea, over every kindred, tongue and nation, so as
all that dwell upon the earth should worship hint, whose names were not written
in the Book of life of the Lamb, which was slain from the beginning of the
world.

5 To the Jesuits brags, that no visible Church since the world began did
either spread it self so far, or flourish so long as theirs has done; I only
oppose that of our Savior, Ex tuo ipsius ore judicabere serve nequam, Thine
own confession shall condemn thee, thou bond-slave of Satan. For if the Romish
Hierarchy be or has been in the worlds eye, the most potent and flourishing
that ever was: This description of the Beasts power cannot agree so well to any
as unto it. Nor does the Scripture any where intimate the true Church militant
should dominere over all Nations, or be so triumphantly victorious, as they
boast theirs has been. To think the Antichrist whom they expect should in
three years / space subdue as many Nations as have been tributary to the Sea of
Rome, is a conceit that justifies the Jew as well in his credulity of things to
come which are impossible, as in his hypocritical partiality toward his
present estate, which he never suspects of Apostasy. Unto this observation the
Reader may add other like descriptions of this scarlet Whore; all so fitly
agreeing to the Papacy, as he that will not acknowledge it for the Kingdom of
great Antichrist, has great reason to suspect his heart, that if he had lived
with our Savior, he would scarce have taken him for his Messiah; nor can the
Jesuits bring any better reasons, why the Pope should not be the Antichrist,
then the Jews did, why Christ should not be the great Prophet. Yet this I say,
not to discourage such as doubt whether the Pope be that Man of sin; or to
bring them out of love with their belief, which may be sound without express
or actual acknowledgement of this truth, not as yet revealed unto them: as
those two Disciples, no doubt, were neither hypocrites nor infidels, albeit
they mistrusted the report of Christ's resurrection; for they were farther from
approving the practices of the Jews against him, then from actual
acknowledgement of it. If any man thus doubt, whether the Pope be Antichrist,
so he do not approve his hatred and war against Gods Saints, or his other
devilish practices, Gods peace be upon him; and in good time I trust his eyes
shall be enlightened to see the truth in this particular, as those two Disciples
did in the Article of the resurrection.

6 Seeing we have proved the Popes authority so far to exceed Christ; it may
seem needless to compare it with the Apostles. Yet lest any Jesuit should
except, that their authority might be greater after their Masters
glorification, then his was before: let us a while examine, what they assumed
unto themselves; what they gave unto the Scriptures before extant.

CAP. XXIII.
That the authority attributed to the present Pope, and the Romish rule of
faith, were altogether unknown unto Saint Peter: the opposition betwixt Saint
Peter's and his pretended Successors doctrine.

1 TO begin with S. Peter, the first supposed to be enstalled in this See of
Rome. It may be presumed that this Supremacy over his fellow Apostles, were it
any, was in his life time, whiles his miracles were fresh, and the
extraordinary efficacy of his Ministry daily manifested, as well known amongst
the faithful, as the Popes now amongst Roman Catholics. If necessary it had
been to acknowledge him, or his successors, as a second Rock or foundation, the
commendation of this doctrine unto posterity, had been most requisite at the
time he wrote his second Epistle, 2 Pet. 1. 14.
as knowing then the time was at hand he should lay down his Tabernacle; when
he endeavored his auditors might have remembrance of his former doctrine, to
make their calling and election sure. If ever there had been a fit season for
notifying the necessity of the Sea Apostolicks infallibility, all the
circumstances of this place witness this was it. 2 Pet. 1. 1.
If any, they to whom he wrote, were most bound to obey it: Their faith had
been planted by him: his present intent and purpose was, more and more to
confirm them in the truth wherein they were in some measure established. And
being thus mindful, will he not make choice of means most effectual to prevent
Heresy or Apostasy? What are these then? absolute reposal in his and his
Successors infallibility? Had this been the best rule of faith, he knew his
fault were inexcusable for not prescribing it, to such is most willingly would
have used it. His personal testimony and authority was, I confess, as great as
any mortal man's could be: with his own eyes he had beheld 2 Pet. 1. 16.
the Majesty of our Lord Christ, whom he preached unto them. If any trust there
be in humane senses, this Saint of God could not possibly be deceived. If any
credence to be given unto miracles, or sanctity of life; his flock might rest
assured he would not deceive; his works so witness the sincerity of his
doctrine: or if his eye were not, in these his auditors judgments, sufficient
witnesses of this truth; he further assures them, when his Lord received of God
the Father, 2 Pet. 1. 17.
honor and glory, there came such a voice unto him from the excellent glory,
This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. And this voice, says he, we
heard when it came from heaven, (being not a far off) but with him in the
mount. If S. Peter's seat or chair had been as the Pole Star, whereto our
Belief, as the Mariners needle, should be directed, lest we float we know not
whither in the Ocean of opinions: were the Bosom of the visible Church the
safest harbor our souls in all storms of temptation could thrust into: this
Apostle was either an unskilful Pilot, or an uncharitable man, that would not
before his death instruct them in this course for the eternal safety of their
souls, whose bodily lives he might have commanded to have saved his own. Had
perpetual succession in his See, or Apostolical tradition never interrupted,
been such an Ariadna's thread, as now it is thought, to guide us through the
Labyrinth of errors: Such was S. Peter's love to truth, that he would have so
fastened it to all faithful hearts, as none should ever have failed to follow
it, in following which he could not err. Doubtless had any such conceit
lodged in his breast, this discourse had drawn it out, his usual form of
exhortation had been too mild, his ordinary style too low. This doctrine had
been proclaimed to all the world, with Anathema's, as loud and terrible, as the
Canons of any Papistical Council report.

2 But he followed no 2 Pet. 1. 16.
such deceitful Fables, when he opened unto them the power and coming of
Christ: whose Majesty as he had seen with his own eyes, so would he have others
to see him too. But by what light? By Scriptures. What Scriptures? Peter feed
my sheep? Nay, but by the Light of Prophecy. That is a Light indeed, in it
self, but unto private spirits it is no better, (says Vide lib. 2. cap. 16.
Parag. 6.
Valentian) then a light put under a bushel, unless the visible Church do hold
it out. Where did the visible Church keep residence in those days? In S.
Peter, I trow. How chances it then he says not; fix your eyes on mine that
have seen the glory of the Lord, and the Prophets light shall shine unto you? If
by his commendation and proposal it were to shine, he had said better thus: Ye
do well in that you give heed unto me, as to your only infallible teacher, that
must confirm you in the truth of Prophetical Writings, and cause them shine in
your hearts: but now he says, 2 Pet 1. 19. Ye do well in that ye take beed
unto the Prophets, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the
day star arise in your hearts. This light of Prophets illuminated the eyes of
Peter's faith, albeit with his bodily eyes he had seen Christ's glory. For
speaking comparatively of that testimony which he had heard in the Mount, he
adds, We have also a surer Prophetical predictions of Christ surer grounds of
faith, then the ^-testimonies of the Apostles, that had seen Christ, and
conversed with him. Amplectendus est Commentarius qui interpretatur in hunc
modum, habemus Firmiorem, id est, certiorem, and compertiorem --. Id enim
temporis sermo Prophetarum spectatior erat, and latius receptus quam sermo
Apostolorum and Evangelistarum. Sasbout in 2 Pet. 1. c.
word of the Prophets. That the Lord has been glorified in the Mount, his
Auditors were to take upon his Credit and Authority; nor could he make them to
see this particular, as he himself had done: but that Christ Jesus whom he saw
glorified in the Mount, was the Lord of Glory; he had (...), a surer testimony
then his bodily sense; the light of Prophets. This then was the commendations
of his flock, that they looked upon it which shined as well unto them, as him,
to all without respect of persons, that take heed unto it; able to bring them
not to acknowledge Peter's infallibility, but to the day star it self, whole
light would further ascertain them even of the truth the Prophets and the
Apostles taught. For Christ is in a peculiar manner, the first and the last in
the edifice of faith, the lowest and the highest stone in the corner, refused
by the master builders or visible pillars of the Jewish Church: their faith was
not grounded up on the Prophets, whose words they knew not; and not knowing
them, they knew not him: but unto such as raise their faith by this (...) the
true square and line, Chist is both the Fundamental Rock, which supporteth; and
the chief corner stone, that binds the whole house of God, and preserves it
from clefts and ruptures.

3 But lest his followers might look amiss upon this prophetical light,
rightly esteemed in the general, S. Peter thought it necessary to advertise
them, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
not to content themselves with every interpretation, or accustomary
acknowledgment of their truth, grounded on others relations, reports, or skill
in expounding them, or multitude of voices that way swaying. This had been as
if a man that has eyes of his own, should believe there was a Moon or stars,
because a great many of his honest neighbors had told him so. A thousand
witnesses in such a case as this, were but private testimonies, in respect of
that distinct knowledge which every one may have that list. That the Lord
should preserve light in Coshen, when darkness had covered the whole face of
Egypt besides, seems unto me less strange, but more sensibly true then before:
whilst I consider, how in this age wherein the light of his countenance has
so clearly shined throughout those parts of Europe whence the Gospel came to
us, Ingolstade should still sit in darkness, environed with the shadow of
death. That her great professor Valentian, born, I take it, within these
fourscore years, should grope at noon day, as if he had been brought forth in
the very midnight of Popery, or died welnigh three hundred years ago. Scarce
Scotus himself, not Ockam (questionless) though shut up in a prison, where no
light of any expositor had ever come, could have made a more dunstical
collection of the Apostles words, then he has done. ^ and ingenio: Aut. 2. non
posse certo quidem exponi unum aut alterum scripturae locum ex ingenio propria
aliorum scriptura locotum, cum ea vero collatione posse. Aut. 3. non posse
certo quidem and ^ alicujus alterius communis and infallibilis authoritatis,
quae proinde in Ecclesia sit Fidei Ju^^^ secundum significare voluit, Ergo
tertium. Non quidem primum; Nam constat multa ^ probabiliter exposita a sanctis
Patribus, propria little ingenii solertia atque industria. Non etiam (...) (...)
ut non putet aliquis se posse unum aut alterum scripturae locum ingenio proprio
infallibiliter ac certo expo^ Scripturae locis. Nam quis omnino haereticorum
hoc putat? Aut quid opus erat hoc ^ aut alterum Scripturae locum, ingenio
sensuque proprio interpretari ^ plures inter quos collatio instituitur? Unde
ipse D. Petrus: Omnis, inquit, (...) tantum; sed absolute ac sine ulla
acceptione, omnis Prophetia Scriptur^^, (...) ut tertium illud, quod diximus,
significaverit hoc loco D. Petrus: Nempe (...) (...) Apostolica (...) ^it,
Neminem privato suo labor atque proprio studio, quacunque demum (...)
Scriptura, doctrinam scripturae certo ac infallibiliter in controversis
quaestionibus (...) authoritate in Ecclesia communi, per quam spiritus sanctus
communiter (...). Nam (...) ipse Apostolus ibidem subjungit, quen admodum non
authoritate humana, (...) etiam non humana ac propria industria hujus vel
illius (...) cognoscenda est, sed ex aliqua authoritate, item divina, (...)
est, sit etiam (...) Scripturae interp^es. Ita fit, uc sola Scriptura ^. Valen.
Tom. 3. in Aquinat. disp. 1. quaest. 1. de object. fidei. Punct. 7..
Saint Peter meant one of these Three. First, that there can be no certain or
probable way of expounding Scriptures by our proper wit or industry: or
Secondly, that one or other place of Scripture cannot be rightly expounded by
human wit or industry, but so compared they rightly may: or, Thirdly, that the
Scriptures cannot certainly and infallibly be expounded every where without the
sentence of some other common infallible authority, which in this respect is to
be held as judge of faith in the Church. The Apostle (he infers) did not mean
the first or second: ergo, the third. So as the force and wisdom of the
Apostolical admonition, is this; No man by his private industry or study,
howsoever employed (either he thought not of the holy Ghosts direction or
assistance, or did not except it) no not by any search of Scripture it self,
can certainly and infallibly understand the doctrine of Scriptures, in
controversies (of which S. Peter in that place speaks not one word) but it is
necessary he learn this of some other public authority in the church, by which
the Holy Ghost speaks publicly, and teaches all. His reason follows more
dunsticall then the collection it self: For the Apostle straight subjoyns: As
the holy men of God did speak in Scriptures, not by human authority, but
divine: so likewise cannot the Scriptures be possibly understood by any human
or private industry of this or that man, but by some other authority, likewise
divine, by which the holy spirit which is the Author of Scriptures, may be
likewise the most certain interpreter of Scriptures.

4 Had another read thus much unto me, and bid me read the Author or his works
wherein it was found: I should presently have named either Erasmus Moriae
Encomium, Frishlins Priscianus Vapulans, or some such like Comedian, disposed
in merriment to pen some old Dunces part. Cannot the Sun of righteousness
infuse his heavenly influence, by the immediate operation of his spirit? or
does his influence want force without conjunction with Patticipation of that
Spirit, by which the Scriptures were written, makes private men's
interpretations of them not private but Authentic.
this blazing Comet, or falling star? Was it not the authority of this spirit
which made S. Peter himself to be so authentic in his doctrine? Is it not the
pretended privilege of the same spirit which exempts the Pope from
privatenesse, and makes his authority ecumenical and infallible? Whosoever
then by participation of this spirit understands the Prophesies, either
immediately, or expounded by others, whomsoever; his conceit of them, or their
right interpretation, is not private, but authentic. And It is worth labor to
see Canus 2. lib. Locorum Theol. cap. 8. where he says, Eclesiae authoritas
non est Formalis ratio sidei, and ultima Resolutio Fidei non fit in Ecclesiae
Testimoniu^. See chap. 2^. Parag. 3.
Canus, though a Papist, expressly Teaches, That the immediate ground or Formal
Reason of ours and the Apostles Belief, must be the same; both so immediately
and infallibly depending upon the testimony of the spirit, as if the whole
world beside should teach the contrary, yet were every Christian bound to stick
unto that inward testimony which the spirit has given him. Though the Church
or Pope should expound them to us, we could not infallibly believe his
expositions; but by that spirit, by which he is supposed to teach: so
believing, we could not infallibly teach others the same; for it is the spirit
only that so teaches all. The inference then is as evident, as strong; that
private in the forecited place, is opposed to that which wants authority, not
unto public or common. The Kings promise made to me in private, is no private
promise: but will warrant me, if I come to plead before his Majesty, albeit
others make question whether I have it or no. In this sense that interpretation
of scriptures which the spirit affords us that are private men, is not private
but authentic, though not for extent or publication of it unto others, yet for
the perfection of our warrant in matters of salvation or concerning God. For
where the spirit is, there is perfect liberty, yea free access of pleading our
cause, against whomsoever before the Tribunal seat of justice; especially being
wronged in matters of the life to come. To this purpose says our Apostle. 1
Cor. 2. 15.
But ^e that is spiritual discerns all things: yet he himself is judged of no
man. In those things wherein he cannot be judged by any; he is no private man
but a Prince and Monarch, for the freedom of his conscience. But if any man
falsely pretend this freedom to nurse contentions, or to withdraw his neck from
that yoke whereto he is subject; he must answer before his supreme Judge and
his holy Angels, for framing unto himself a counterfeit license without the
assured warrant of his spirit. And so shall they likewise that seek to command
men's consciences in those matters, wherein the spirit has set them free. This
is the height of iniquity, that has no temporal punishment in this life: but
must be reserved as the object of fiercest wrath in that fearful day; the very
Idea of Antichristianism.

CAP. XXIV.
That S. Paul submitted his doctrine to examination by the Words before
written. That his doctrine, disposition and practice, were quite contrary to
the Romanists in this argument.

1 SAint Paul, as well as other Apostles, had the gift of miracles, which
amongst Barbarians or distressed souls, destitute of other comfort, likely to
be won to grace by wonders, he did not neglect to practice: but sought not to
enforce belief upon the Jews, by fearful signs, or sudden destruction of the
obstinate, albeit he had power to anathematize, not only in word, but in deed,
even to deliver men alive unto Satan. When he came to Thessalonica, he went as
his manner was into the Synagogue, Act. 17. 2.
and three Sabbath days disputed with his countrymen by the Scriptures,
opening and alleging that Christ must have suffered, and risen again from the
dead: and this is Jesus Christ whom I preach to you. These Jews had Moses and
the Prophets, and if they would not hear them, neither would they believe, for
any miracles: which to have wrought amongst such, had been as the casting of
pearls before swine. What was the reason they did not believe? because the
Scriptures which he urged, were obscure? but Saint Paul did open them. Rather
they saw the truth, as Papists do, but would not see it. They rightly believed,
whatsoever God had said, was most true; that he had said what Moses and the
Prophets wrote: and yet Saint Paul taught nothing which they had not foretold.
But that was all one; these Jews had rather believe Moses and the Prophets
meant as the Scribes and Pharisees, or other chief Rulers of their Synagogues
taught, then as Paul expounded them: albeit his expositions would have cleared
themselves to such as without prejudice would have examined them. But the
Beroeans were of a more ingenuous disposition (so the word Acts 17. 11.
(...) imports) they were not vassals to other men's interpretations or
conceits, but used their liberty to examine their truth. They received the word
with all readiness, and searched the Scriptures whether these things were so
or no. If they believed in part before, their practice confirms the truth of
our assertion, that they were not to believe the infallibility of Paul, but of
his doctrine, albeit they were well persuaded of his personal authority. If they
believed neither in part, nor wholly, before they saw the truth of his doctrine
confirmed by that Scripture which they had formerly acknowledged; their
ingenuity herein likewise confirms our doctrine, and condemns the Papists of
insolent blasphemy, for arrogating that authority unto the Popes decrees, which
is only due unto Gods word already established.

2 I would demand of any Papists, whether the Beroeans did well or ill in
examining Saint Paul's doctrine: if ill, why has the Spirit of God commended
them? if well, why is it not lawful and expedient for all true Christians to
imitate them? Unless the Reader bite his lip, I will not promise for him he
shall not laugh at Bellarmines answer, albeit I knew him for another
Heraclitus, or Crassus Agelastus, who never laughed in all his life save once,
when he saw an Ass feed on thistles. Surely he must have an Asses lips that
can taste, and a swines belly that can digest this great Clerks Divinity in
this point. Respondeo, etsi Paulus erat Apostolus, and non poterat falsam
doctrinam praedicate, tamen non constabat hoc initio Beroensibus, nec
tenebantur mox credere, nisi prius viderent miracula, aut alias probabiles
rations credendi. Itaque cum Paulus probaret illis Christum ex oraculis
Prophetarum, merito illi scrutabantur Scripturas, an haecita se haberent.
Bellar. de verb. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 10. resp. ad 7.
I answer (says he) albeit Paul were an Apostle, and could not preach false
doctrine: thus much notwithstanding was not evident to the Beroeans at the
first, nor wore they bound forthwith to believe unless they had seen some
miracles or other probable inducements to believe. Therefore when Paul proved
Christ unto them out of the Prophetical Oracles, they did well to search the
Scriptures, whether those things were so. If Saint Paul had thought miracles a
more effectual means then Scriptures, for begetting faith in such as
acknowledged Moses and the Prophets: no doubt he had used miracles rather then
their authority. Or if the Pope cannot expound the Scriptures, as effectually
and perspicuously as Saint Paul did; why does he not at the least work
miracles? are we bound absolutely to believe him, and is he bound to do neither
of these, without which the people of Beroea were not bound (as Bellarmine
acknowledges) to believe Saint Paul? But, if his reason be worth belief, At
Christiani quibus constat Ecclesiam non posse errare in explicanda doctrina
sidei, tenentur eam recipere, and non dub^^are, an haec ita se habeaur. Idem.
ibid.
Christians, which know the Church cannot err in explicating the doctrine of
faith, are bound to embrace it without questioning, whether the places
alleged be to the purpose or no. Let such Christians as believe the Pope
cannot err, in the name of God believe whatsoever he shall teach, without
examination; yet remember withal, that thus to believe is to worship the
Dragon, by giving their names unto the Beast. But unto what Christians is the
Popes infallibility better known, then Saint Paul's was to the Beroeans? Not
unto us whose fathers have forsaken him for his Apostasy from God; and taught
us, to eschew him, as Antichrist; to hold his doctrine as the very doctrine of
devils. Unto us at least, his Holiness should seek to manifest his
infallibility, by such means as Saint Paul did his, even unto such as had seen
his miracles, and had experience of his power in expounding Scriptures.
Besides, Saint Paul's conversation in all places was continually such as did
witness him to be a chosen vessel full of the spirit of grace. He did not make
merchandise of the Word of God, as most Popes do: 2 Cor. 2. 17.
but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of God, so he spoke through
Christ; he did not walk in craftiness (yet who greater Politicians then
Popes?) 2 Cor. 4. 2.
Nor did he handle the Word of God deceitfully: but in declaration of the
truth, he did approve himself to every man's conscience in the sight of God.
This one amongst others, he accounts as an especial motive to persuade men of
his heavenly calling, in that he did not preach himself, but Christ Jesus, and
himself their servant for Jesus sake. For so our Savior had said: Joh (...).
18.
He that speaks of himself, seeks his own glory. The Pope (that we might
know him to be Christ's opposite) seeks almost nothing else, nothing so much, as
to be absolute Lord over all other men's faith. If this any Jesuit will deny:
let him define what Prince amongst the nations, what Tyrant in the World, did
ever challenge greater sovereignty in affairs of this life, then the Pope does
in all matters whatsoever concerning the life to come?

3 But it may be Bellarmine was either afraid or ashamed of this answer:
wherefore he adds another (as wise) to keep it from blushing. Addo etiam, quod
eth hae^ us peccat dubitando de authoritate Ecclesae in quam perhapt^mum
regeneratus est neque est eadem conditio l^a^etici, qui lemel fidem professus
est, and Judaei ant Eth^c^, qui nunquam suit CChristianus: tamen posito hoc
dubi^, and hoc peccate, (...) male facit ser^^ndo, and ^xa^inando, an (...)
s^^^tura and P^, a Conc^lio ^denti^o prolata, ita se habeant, modoid faciat
intention inveniendi veritatem, non calumniandi. Deberet quidem ille sine
examine recipere doct^ina^ Ecclesiae, tamen melius est, ut exami^do praeparetur
ad veritatem, quam negligendo remaneat in suis te^ebris. Idem. ibid.
I ^^de (says he) albeit an Heretic sin in doubting of the Churches
authority, into which he has been regenerate by Baptism (nor is the case the
same in an Heretic, which has once made profession of faith, and in a Jew or
Ethnic which never was (Christian:) yet this doubt (which is a sin) being
supposed, he does not amiss in searching and examining, whether the places
alleged by the Trent Council oat of Scriptures or Fathers, be true or
pertinent; so h^ do this with an intent to find the truth, not to calumniate.
A man at the first sight would deem B^ll^rmine, for his own part at least, had
given us leave to examine the Popes doctrine by Scripture: but that, as you
heard before, he absolutely denies: nor will he (I am sure) pawn his hat, that
he which searches the Scriptures and Fathers alleged, and cannot find any
such meaning in either, as the Trent Council would thence infer, shall be
freed by their Church from heresy: although he be not so uncivil, as to
calumniate the Pope, but only (salvareverentia) ingenuously profess, that he
thinks on his Conscience the Scripture meant no such matter as the Council
intended. This none of their Church dare promise: for dubious in fide (by their
doctrine) est haereticus: he that doubts after s^uch an authentic
determination, is condemned for an heretic: and yet without such assurance of
being freed from heresy, this permission of reading Scriptures is not worth
God a mercy, seeing he must at length be constrained to believe the Scripture
says just so as the Pope says, albeit his private conscience inform him to
the contrary: so that by reading them, he must either wound his own conscience,
more then if the use of them had been denied him; or else use them but as a
court favor or grace bestowed upon him by the Pope, for which he must in good
manners yield his full assent to his doctrine, with infinite thanks for his
bounty. Howsoever (if he be doubtful in their tenants) he may not read the
Scriptures with Calvin, Beza, or any of our Writers Expositions, or in any
Edition save such as they approve, or with the Rhemish animadversions or
glosses, or according to the analogy of that faith wherein the Jesuits have
catechized him. So that the reading of Scriptures, if their opinions be
erroneous (as we hold the Popes decisions are) serves to as good purpose for
confirming one of their catechizing in the right faith, as the ringing of bells
does to bring a melancholy man out of some foolish conceit, which runs in his
mind: both of them will believe their former imaginations (though never so bad)
the better, because the one thinks the bells ring, the other, that the
Scriptures speak, just so as he imagines. This Bellarmine cannot dissemble in
his next words: Bound he is to receive the Churches doctrine without
examination: but better, he were prepared unto the truth by examining, then by
neglecting it to persist still in his blindness. His meaning in plain English,
is this; He and his fellows could wish Reformed Churches would all come off at
once, and believe as Romanists do, without all examination, whether they
believe as Christians, or Magicians: but if we will not be so forward as they
could wish we were, they could in the second place be very well content to
admit us into their Church again, though after a year or two's deliberation,
rather then lose our company for ever.

4 The learned Doctor Whitakers, of famous memory, out of the former place
gathered these two corollaries: [Every doctrine is to be tried (...) Scripture:
The Apostle taught nothing but what might have been confirmed out of Moses and
the Prophets.] Sacr^boscus reply to these Orthodoxal collections, confirms me
in that conceit I entertained of Romish Schoolmen, when I first began to read
them. They seemed to me then, much more now, to handle matters of greatest
moment in divinity, after the same fashion (for all the world) nimble Artists
do Philosophical Theorems in the Schools, whiles they are coursed by such as
would triumph in their disgrace. Be the argument brought, in it self never so
good or forcible to evince the contradictory to their tenants: yet if the
opponent in his inference of what was last denied, chance but to omit some
petty term or clause impertinent to the main question, or make his
propositions more improbable by framing them more universal then he needs,
occasion will quickly be taken to interrupt his progress and put him off,
especially (if the Answerer be so well provided) with some show of instance to
the contrary, or absurdity likely to follow, if all were true his Antagonist
would seem to prove. Nor do I censure this as a fault in youth, or whilst we
are in Aristotle's forge, so the fire be out of us when we come into the
Sanctuary. But just in this manner does the Mimical Jesuit reply to the former
truth. Neque pra*termit^enda puto duo corollatia, quae ex hoc malo argumento
p^jus colligit doctor iste. Unum est: Omnem doctrinam ex scripturis esse
dijudica^dam. Alterum. Apostolos ^ praedica^^e, quod non ex scripturis
pro-pheticis confirmari posser Quaero enim number illi probetur ^ae^ consecutio?
Paulus praedicans Atheniensibus, suam doctrinam confirmavit testimonio Atati
p^, recteque (...)cissent Athenienses, si Aratum scrutati suissent, an ita se
haberet: Ergo omnis doctrina ex po^tis dijudicanda est. Christoph. Sacrobos^us
Dublin. Def. Council. Trid p. 122.
I demand (says he) whether the Doctor would approve this consequence; Paul
preaching to the Athenians confirmed his Doctrine with the testimony of the
Poet Aratus, and the Athenians had done well if they had sought whether Aratus
had said so or no: therefore all Doctrines must be judged by Poets. But what if
the Beraeans practice considered alone, or as Jesuits do Scriptures, only
Mathematically, do not necessarily infer thus much? The Learned Doctors
charitable mind would not suffer him to suspect any public Professor of
Divinity, as Sacroboscus was, could be so ignorant in Scriptures, as not to
consider (besides the different esteem of Prophets, and Poets amongst the Jews)
what Saint Paul had Acts 26, 22. expressly said; I obtained help of God, and
continue unto this day, witnessing both unto small and great, saying none other
things, then those which the Prophets and Moses did say should come. Unless he
could have proved Christ's resurrection and other Articles of Christian faith,
out of Moses and the Prophets, the Jews exceptions against him had been just.
For they were bound to resist all Doctrines dissonant to their ancient
Ordinances, especially the abolishment of Rites and Ceremonies which Paul
labored most, knowing the Lawgiver meant they should continue no longer then
to the alteration of the Priesthood: but in whose maintenance his adversaries
should have spent their blood, whiles ignorant they were, (without default) of
the truth Paul taught, as not sufficiently proved from the same Authority, by
which their laws were established. Nor See Cap. 18.
was any Apostle, either for his miracles, or other pledges of the Spirit that
he could communicate unto others, to be so absolutely believed in all things
during his life time, as Moses and the Prophets writings. For seeing the gift
of miracles was bestowed on hypocrites, or such as might fall from any gifts or
graces of the spirit they had: though the spectatours might believe the
particular conclusions, to whose confirmation the miracles were fitted, yet was
it not safe, without examination, absolutely to rely upon him, in all things,
that had spoken a divine truth once or twice. In that he might be an hypocrite
or a dissembler, for ought others, without evidence of his upright
conversation, and perpetual consonance to his former Doctrine, could know, he
might abuse his purchased reputation to abet some dangerous error. Nor do our
Adversaries (though too too credulous in this kind) think themselves bound to
believe revelations made to another, much less to think that he which is once
partaker of the Spirit should for ever be infallible. Upon these supporters the
forementioned Doctors reason (which the Jesuit abuses to establish the
Churches Authority) stands sirme and sound; Credo id ve^um esse quod Deus
dicit, quia ille dicit, nec aliam ullam qua^o rationem; non audeo vero homini
ta^ tribuere, ^e ipsum Deo a qua^^m fac^^m. Wha^^. q (...) c. 8. a^g 3. ^tante
Sacrob. p. 122.
I absolutely believe all to be tru^, that ^od says, because he says it, nor
do I seek any other reason: but I dare not as(...) so much unto man, lest I
make him equal to God; for God alone, and he in whom the Godhead dwells
bodily, is immutably just and holy. Many others have continued holy and
righteous, according to their measure until the end: but who could be certain
of this besides themselves? no not they themselves always. And albeit a man
that never was in the state of grace, may oft-times deliver that Doctrine which
is infallible: yet were it (to say no worse) a grievous tempting of God to rely
upon his Doctrine as absolutely infallible, unless we know him (besides his
skill or learning) to be always in such a state. Though both his life and
death be most religious, his Doctrine must approve it self to the present Age,
and Gods providence must commend it to posterity. Nor did our Savior, though
in life immutably holy, and for Doctrine most infallible, assume so much unto
himself before his Ascension, as the Jesuits give to the Pope. For he
submitted his Doctrine to Moses and the Prophets writings. And seeing the
Jesuits make less account of Him then the Jews did of Moses; it is no marvel
if they be more violently miscarried with envious or contemptuous hatred of the
Divine truth it self, then the Jews were against our Savior or his Doctrine.
These even when they could not answer his reasons, drawn from Scriptures
received, though most offensive to their distemperate humor, were ashamed to
call Moses and the Prophets Authority in question, or to demand, how do ye know
God spoke by them? Must not the Churches infallibility herein assure you? And
So Canus argues. See him cited, li. 2. cap. 22 parag 8
if it teach you to discern Gods Word from man's, must it not likewise teach
you to distinguish the divine sense of it from humane? This is a strain of
Atheism, which could never find harbor in any professing the knowledge of the
true God, before the brood of Antichrist grew so flush, as to seek the recovery
of that battle against Gods Saints on Earth, which Lucifer their Father and
his followers lost against Michael and his holy Angels in Heaven.

CAP. XXV.
A brief taste of our Adversaries blasphemous and Atheistical assertions in
this argument from some instances of two of their greatest Doctors Bellarmin
and Valentian: That if faith cannot be perfect without the solemn
testification of that Church, the rarity of such testifications will cause
infidelity.

1 FOr a further competent testimony of blasphemies in this kind wherewith we
charge the Church of Rome, let the Reader judge by these two instances
following, whether the Christian world have not sucked the deadliest poison
that could evaporate from the infernal lake, through Bellarmines and Valentians
pens. Valentian, as if he meant to out-flout the Apostle for prohibiting all
besides the great Pastor Christ Jesus, for being Lords over men's faith, will
have an infallible authority which may sit as Judge and Mistress of all
Controversies of faith, and this to be not the Quod si igitur aliquam humanam
auctoritatem divina assistentia infallibile^, magistram ac judicem omnibus
qu^esti^i^us fidei, ex^are necesse est, ut superius, parag. 1. probavimus:
neque vero ea est illorum hominum propria, qui o^ divi^^m doctrinam aut verbo,
aut scripto tradiderunt, and vita desuncti sunt ut jam etiam probatum est;
restat, ut ^v^va^ auctoritas, successione semper inter fideles presens,
quemadmodum in assertione nostra posuimus. Valent. Tem. 3 in AA^ dis. 1. q. 1.
de object. sidei punct. 7. parag 12. vide annot. lib. 2. cap. 30. parag. 21.
authority of one or two men deceased, not peculiar to such as in times past
have uttered the divine truth either by mouth or pen, and commended it unto
posterity; but an authority continuing in force and strength amongst the
faithful thorowout all ages, able persptcuously and openly to give sentence in
all Controversies of Faith. Yet as these Ambassadors of God deceased, cannot
be Judges: shall they therefore have no Say at all in deciding conroversies of
faith? You may not think a Jesuit would take Jesus Name in vain: he will never
for shame, exclude his Master for having at least a finger in the government of
the Church: Why, what is his office? or what is the use of his authority,
registered by his Apostles and Evangelists? Not so little as you would ween.
For, his speeches, amongst others that in their life time have infallibly
taught divine truths by mouth or pen, may be consulted as a witness or written
law in cases of faith, but after a certain sort and manner, either to speak the
truth, or somewhat thereto not impertinent, as shall be declared in due place.
The place he means, is, where he disputes whether the Pope be bound to consult
other authority besides his own or use any means to search the truth before he
pass sentence ex cath^dra, that is, before he charge the whole Christian World
to believe his decision This he thinks expedient, but so far forth only, as if
it please his Holiness to enjoin the belief of some particular point upon the
whole World, all must believe that he has consulted Scripture and Antiquity,
as far as was requisite for that point, as you shall after hear.

2 That in such Controversies he includes, The means of knowing Scriptures to
be the Word of God: is evident out of his own words in the forecited place.
For the knowledge of Scriptures he would have to be an especial point of faith,
yet such as cannot be proved by Scripture, but by this living and speaking
authority, as he expressly contends in the eleventh paragraph of the same
question. His conclusion is; If it be necessary, there should be some
authority, though humane, yet by divine assistance infallible, to sit as
Mistress and Judge in all controversies of faith, and not to be appropriated
to any deceased, as is already proved: it remains that it be always living in
the Church, always present amongst the faithful by succession, he means of
Popes. Thus you see the present Pope must be Judge, and Christ and his Apostles
must be brought in as witnesses. And yet whether there were such a Christ, as
Saint Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John tell us, there was; or whether the Gospels
which go under their names be Apocryphal, and that of Bartholomews only
Canonical, we cannot know but by the Popes testimony: so that in the end, he is
the only Judge, and only witness, both of Christ, the Apostles, and their
writings; yea of all divine truths, at least assisted with his Bishops and
Cardinals. Which Tertium ^estimonium est Concilij ^^identini self. 7. Can. 1.
ubi additut an^thema neganubus seprem esse vera and propria Sacramenta: ^^od
testimonium etiamsi nullum haberemus aliud deberet sufficere. Nam si tollamus
authoritatem presentis Eccles^ae. and ^sentis Concilij; in dubium revocari
poterunt o^mium ali^rum Conciliorum decreta, and tota sides Christiana. S^er
(...) haec suit consuetudo apud Christianos, ut exop^tas controversias
definirent Episcopi, qui tunc vivebant. Et p^ (...) Conciliorum veterum, and
omnium dogmatum firmitas pendet ab authoritate pr^sentis Eccle^. Non enim habe^
testimonium infallibile, quod Concilia illa fuerint, and legitima fuerint, and
hoc aut illud definieri^t, nisi quia Ecclesia, ^un^ est, and errare non potest,
ita sentit and docet: quod enim historici quidam meminerint eorum Conciliorum,
non p^^est parere fidem, nisi humanam, cui potest subesse falsum. Bellarm. de
Ess. Sac. lib. 2. cap. 25.
Bellarmine though otherwise a great deal more wary then Valentian, has
plainly uttered. Unless (says he) it were for the authority of the present
Church of Rome (he means the Trent Council) the whole Christian faith might be
called in question; so might all the Acts and Decrees of former Councels: his
reason was because we cannot know these Antiquities but only by Tradition and
historical relation, which are not able to produce divine, firm, infallible
faith.

3 Thus whilst this great Clerk would dig a pit for the blind (for he could
not hope (I think) this block should stumble any that has eyes in his head) he
is fallen into the midst of it himself: by seeking to undermine us, he has
smothered himself and buried the cause he was to maintain. For if without the
Trent Councels testification we cannot by divine faith believe the Scriptures,
or former Councels, to be of Divine authority; How can such as were born within
these thirty years, believe that Council it sent, which ended above forty
years ago? Few this day living were Auditors of the Cardinals and Bishops
decisions there assembled; not hearing them, their says must needs be grounded
upon hear-sayes. Again, if it be true, the Scriptures cannot be known to be
divine, but by the Authority of the present vi^ible Church: If this Church do
not viva vo^^ confirm all Christians in this fundamental truth, their faith
cannot be divine, but hu* mane. What the Pope or his Cardinals think of these
points, is more then any living knows unles^e they hear them speak, and then it
may be a great question whether they speak as they think. Pope Alexander the
sixths decisions should have been negative, like the fools bolt in the Psalm,
T^er^ is no God, No Christ, No Gospel, for so his meaning might have been
interpreted, as they say dreams are, by contraries, seeing he never spoke as he
thought. Lastly, if the Trent Council were so necessary for the confirmation of
Scriptures and other Orthodoxal writings, how detestable was your Clergies
backwardness to afford the Christian World this spiritual comfort? For,
whether fear it were the Popes Authority should be curbed* on mere sloth and
neglect of matters divine that did detain them; their shifts to put the
Emperor off, the Reader may sufficiently conjecture from ^, quo^ nimi^um
s^igere and nihil minus quam de cogendo concilio cogitare video, cuius, ut spes
(...) prius ^ (...) incitabat, sic desperatio jamp^idem hebetar atque retardat:
quos enim maxim in publicam Eccles^a ^ bue, atque ejus dignitatis aug^nd^
nullam occasionem ^ternuttere oportebat, ab ijs Co^c^^ij r^i ^ quam alias, ^unc
^ n^aria, n^entionem fi^ri ^ al o^en p^re video, quam c^m bellum aut ^ cipes
Christianos, au^ in^pendet. Se^ul^. Lab. 2. ^pist. (...). In his pijs
deliberati^ ni^^s, illud ^ sin^um d^^ietum in p^in is ^^ur (...) renovarique
^oler, ne qua ^ in aliquo ^ite coacto ^ da^ in dubium a^ disputatio^en
revocet^r. Cujus sacrosancti d^cr^ti ^a vis est, ut hoc uno c^ncta ^ ranorum
(...)* Qu^d enim novi exc^gita^unt ingenicsi artifice^? quid vero a^terunt quod
^ dan^^ta s^nt^^tia? Hac cum ita sint, religiouis n^orunique summam in hu^usn
odi ^ doctorum ho^ i^^m di^pu^ationi, and quasi certamini aqua^is utri^que
clas^ibus, and quid^m l^c^ ^ (...) Maxi^^i volunta^^ per^itti, ^^nne sin^ile
est, ac si quos capitalium, and n^anifestorum ^ and cum summa auctoritate
damnare, summus Magis^ratus sic suam ^ ut (...) pl^ne conf^ in leges receptas
sacro^^nctas, quae a^g^te di^putent, and c^m jus^it^a, and inn^ v^cent* ^ de
vetere sua paternaque possessione judicibu^ quoque ^ ^ Lib. 2. Ep^^t 28.
Sepul veda at that time Chronicler to the Emperor in his Epistle to Cardinal
Cont^r^^ one of the Popes Legates in that Council; That my intermiss^^n of
writing, and silence in that question concerning the Correction of the ^ear,
has (...) so long; I wish the fault had laid in my sloth or forgetfulne^^,
that I might have been hence oc^asioned to acknowledge and depreccate the
blan^^, rather then (as no^ I freely must) impute the true cause to the
negligence of your Roman^ Priests, whom I perceive to wax cold, and to think of
nothing less then of calling the Council: with hop^ whereof as heret^fore I
was excited, so now ^^spair has made me dull. For I see well that such as are
most bound to have a ^^gilant care o^ the Churches public welfare, and not to
foreslow any opportunity of increasing her dignity; never so much as mention
the Council, (at this time as nec^ssary, as always useful) but when
Christians either are al^caay, or are lik^ be at viriance. In one word, never
but then, when there is sure hope it may b^ hinde^ed by their discord. For when
peace gets it turn, and all is quiet, not (...) word of the Council. So as what
they aim at by these unseasonable (...), is so manifest, as will not suffer
the slon est capacity to live in doubt or s^^pition.

4 This great Learned Antiquaries Learned advice, in ^ ^ile sent to the same
Cardinal, then employed by the ^ cel, was, not to suffer matters Decreed in
any former ^ assembled together, to be disputed or called in question.
Sufferance hereof was in his judgment no lesle prejudicial to the State
Ecclesiastic, then unto the temporal it would be, to permit malefactors
traverse the equity of public Laws established and known, after sufficient
proof or confession made of Capital offenses committed against them. The
marginal quotations of the Trent Council, compared with this grave admonition,
which had antiquitie-customes Canonical, as the Author urges, to give it
Countenance, may serve as a perfect Index for our instruction, with what
prejudice the Bishops there assembled came to determine, by whose manuduction
or set rules they drew their supposed inerrable lines of life. Now it is
impossible any determination, that takes it force from multitude of voices,
should be either in it self more certain, or more forcible to persuade others,
then are the motives or inducements that swayed the suffragants so to
determine; and these in this case could, by Bellarmines reason, be but
historical persuasions or presumptions. For no Jesuit I think, will say these
Bishops had the Popes sentence ex Cathedra, to assure them beforehand what
Councels had been lawfully called, and fully confirmed; or whether all the
ancient Canons they afterward reestablished were already as authentic and
certain as they could be made: For so it had been a labor altogether lost, yea
a matter no less profane then rebaptization, to have confirmed them by
suffrages of Bishops, after their Cathedral confirmation by the Pope. Even of
his Holiness himself, whose verdict (as in this case must finally be supposed)
adds Divine credence unto testifications in their own nature fallible and
merely humane, the question proposed in the former Section remains still
insoluble. For without the relation of some Historian, or Register, or especial
revelation from above, no Pope can divine how many Councels have been held,
much less what was finally determined in every ancient Canon confirmed by the
Bishops assembled at Trent. Special revelations, such as the Prophets had, they
acknowledge none. And yet distinctly to tell what has been done in times past,
or places afar off, without relying on others relations, is an extraordinary
effect of special revelation, a work of higher nature and greater difficulty,
then Prophetical prediction of things to come. Are then the relations of
Historians, or Registers of Ancient Councels divine and authentic. Not without
the Popes ratification: with it they are? Yes, or else a great part of Roman
faith by Bellarmines reason can be but humane.

5 Hence may we safely annex a corollary, as necessary, as suitable to the main
conclusion proposed, for the principal subject of this Section. [As the Popes
authority is, by Jesuiticall Doctrine made much greater then our Savi^^rs, so
may the assistance or countenance of his Omnipotent spirit, make the reports of
any temporizing Historian, or mercenary Register, as divine, authenti^k an^
^^rtain, as any Prophetical or Apostolical testimonies of the Messiah] Yea, if
it should please him to authorize Baronius Annals, or relations of former
Councels, their credit should be no less then the Evangelists. Yea hence it
follows, (as the discre^t Reader without further repetition of what has here
been said, or new suggestion of the reasons whereon the inference is grounded,
will (I hope) of his own accord Chap. 31. paragraph. 5.
hereafter collect) That determinations proceeding upon any knaves or loose
companions testimonies, though more loosely examined, so examined at all, or
taken for examined by the Pope, shall, by his approbation, be of force as
all-sufficient, either for producing Divine belief of men's spiritual worth we
never heard of, or for warranting daily performance of Religious worship to
their memory, as any declaration he can make upon our Saviors promises unto
his Apostles. For we may not more doubt of any Religion he shall authorize, or
any man's salvation canonized by him (whosoever be the Relators of their life
and death) then of S. Peter's, though our Savior promised he should be saved.
The reason is plain. The Pope is sole Judge of all divine Oracles: our Savior
(as you have heard out of Valentian) is but a witness, and so may others be,
whomsoever he shall admit.

SECT. IV.
Containing the third branch of Romish blasphemy, or the last degree of great
Antichrists exaltation, utterly overthrowing the whole foundation of Christian
Religion, preposterously inverting both Law and Gospel to Gods dishonor, and
advancement of Satan's Kingdom.

THat the authority challenged by the Romish Church is altogether prejudicial
to Gods word, greater then either the visible Church of Israel from Moses till
Christ, or Christ himself or his Apostles, either before or after his
resurrection, did either practice or lay claim to; is evident from the former
treatise. It remains we demonstrate, how the acknowledgement of this most
absolute, most infallible authority, does quite alienate our faith and
allegiance from God and the Trinity, unto the Pope and his triple Crown. The
Proposition then we are to prove is this, Whosoever steadfastly believes the
absolute authority of the Romish Church, as now it is taught, does truly and
properly believe no article of Christian faith, no God, no Trinity, no Christ,
no redemption, no resurrection, no heavenly joys, no hell.

CAP. XXVI.
The Jesuits unwillingnesse to acknowledge the Churches proposal for the true
cause of his says: of differences and agreements about the final Resolution of
says, either amongst the Adversaries themselves, or betwixt us and them.

1 THe conclusion proposed follows out of their principles before In the ^ ^ing
^ the second Section. Chap. 2, and 3.
mentioned, and afterward to be reiterated, that they may be the more
thoroughly sounded. But ere we come to raze the very foundation of their painted
walls, a few weak forts must be overthrown, which some have erected in hope
thereby to save their Church from battery. Val^ian T^^n. 2. in A ^.
Falentian (as you heard before) seeing his Mother would lie more open to our
as^aults, if they should admit this manner of speech. [I believe this or that
proposition or article of says, because the holy Church does so instruct me;]
would mitigate the harshnesse of it, thus* [If you ask me, why I believe a
Trinity, or God to be one in three persons, I would answer, because God has
revealed this mystery.] The divine revelation then is the cause of your Belief
in this particular. But how do you know, how can you Believe, that God has
revealed this? by another divine revelation? No. For so we should run from
revelation to revelation without end. If by revelation you do not believe it by
what means else? By the infallible proposal of the Church, as a condition,
without which I could not believe it. Mark the mysticalnesse of this speech, Ob
propositionem Ecclesiae infallibilem, For the Churches infallible proposal. Is
not this as much as if he had said, because the Church, which is infallible,
proposes it to me? Why then does he make it but a condition necessary or
requisite to this assent? ^elik^ he meant not so, but would have us to see the
condition, not the true and principal cause of his belief. The Churches
authority, by his doctrine, may in diverse respects be truly said both a cause
and condition; Or, to speak more distinctly; the Churches proposal is a
condition without which no man can ordinarily believe propositions of faith:
the infallibility of her proposal is the true and only cause of every Roman
Catholics belief in all points. This denial of the Churches authority to be
(according to their principles) the true cause of belief, Is the sconse that
must first be overthrown; but after a friendly parley of the difference betwixt
us.

2 Valentian, if we well observe his process in the forecited place, proves
only that, which none in reformed Churches did ever deny; albeit he profe^ more
in his premises: which whilst he seeks to perform, he has only proved him
self a ridiculous Atheist; as partly is showed in the former treatises, and
shall more fully appear in the end of this. To ease his fellows hereafter of
such unnecessary, or impertinent pains, as often times they take, I dare avouch
in the behalf of all my brethren in reformed Churches, no Jesuit ^al be more
forward to demand, then we to grant, That God in these later days does not
teach men the Gospel in such sort, as he did S. Paul, Without the help or
ministry of man. In ^ it is true: He (...) has not the Church for his Mother
ha^h not God for his Father.
We maintain as well as they, God is not a father to such as will not
acknowledge the Church for their Mother. Notwithstanding, thus we conceive and
speak of the Church indefinitely taken, not consined to any determinate place,
not appropriated to any individual, or singularized persons. Now to verify an
indefinite speech or proposition, the truth of any one particular suffices: As
he that should say, Socrates by man was taught his learning, does not mean the
specifical nature, or whole Mankind; but that Socrates, as others, had one man
or other at the first to instruct him. The same Dialect we use, when we say,
Every one that truly calls God father, receives instructions from the Church his
Mother, that is, from some in the Church lawfully ordained for planting faith;
unto whom such Filial Obedience, Lib. 2 cap. 4. and (...), etc.
as elsewhere we have spoken of, is due. The difference likewise between the
Romanists and us, has Lib. 2. Sect (...) and cap 1. (...). and 19.
partly been discussed before. In brief, it is thus: We hold this Ministry of
the Church is a necessary condition, or mean precedent, for bringing us to the
Infallible Truth, or true sense of Gods word; yet no infallible Rule whereon
finally or absolutely we must rely, either for discerning divine Revelations,
or their true meaning. But as those resent^^ances of colors, which we term
Species visibiles, are not seen themselves, though necessary for the sight of
real colors: so this Minisiery of the Church, al^ in it self not infallible,
is yet necessarily required, for our right apprehension (...) the Divine Truth,
which in it self alone is most infallible; yea as infallible to us as it was to
the Apostles or Prophets, after it be rightly apprehended. The difference is in
the manner of apprehending or conceiving it. * They conceived it immediately,
without the Ministry or instruction of man; so cannot ^.
we. This difference elsewhere I have thus resembled, As trees and plants, now
growing up by the ordinary husbandry of man from seeds precedent, are of the
same kind and quality, with such as were immediately created by the hand of
God: so is the immediate ground of ours, the Prophets and Apostles Faith the
same. Albeit theirs was immediately planted by the finger of God, ours
propagated from their seed, Sown and cherished, by the daily industry of
faithful Ministers.

3 Neither in the substance of this assertion, nor manner of the explication,
do we much differ, if ought, from (...) hic Earorem dissimulare non possum, qui
(...), Fidem nostram co tanquam in ultimam ^am reducendam esse, ut credamus Ec^
(...) vera^^m, cui prius (inquiunt) assentimur (...) acqu^^uam quam per
infusam. Quod sive^ ratio formalis insusae Fidei non esset ve^, sed creata. --.
Praeterea Apostoli and P^ophe (...) (...) ultimo fidem suam in divinam and ^em
and veritatem. Ergo nos in humanam ^ fidem nostram non resolvimus. ^ Fides est,
idemque p^oinde habet objectum, (...); formalem. Confirmat autem hoc, vel maxin
e, quod ea quae per accidens conting^^t, (...) alicujus habitus, non variant
ilius object^ rationem. sed articulos credendos (...) per hos, au^^llos
homines, per accidens om^. Cum ergo Prop^eta and Apostoli as^ articulis sidei,
quia Deus revelavit: eandem qu^qi nos credendi rationem habebimus; Nisi (...)
Fides nostra non est virtus Theologica, cujus videlicet prima and formalis
ratio, si his credimus, non (...), (...) humana veritas est. Canus. Lib. 2.
loc. Theol. Cap. 8.
Canus in his second book, where he taxes Scotus, Durand, and others for
affirming the last resolution of our faith was to be made into the veracity or
infallibility of the Church. The Apostles and Prophets (says he) resolved
their faith into truth and authority divine: Therefore we must not resolve our
faith into the humane authority of the Church: For the faith is the same, and
must have the same Formal Reason. For better confirmation of which assertion he
adds this reason; Things incident to the object of any habit by accident, do
not alter the formal reason of the object. Now that the Articles of faith
should be proposed by these, or these men, is merely accidental: wherefore
seeing the Apostles and Prophets did assent unto the Articles of faith, because
God revealed them, the reason of our assent must be the same. Lastly, he
concludes, that the Churches authority, miracles, or the like, are only such
precedent conditions, or means for begetting faith, as sensitive knowledge,
exhortations, or advise of Masters, are for bringing us to certain knowledge in
demonstrative faculties. Had either this great Divine spoken consequently to
this doctrine, in his 5th Book, or would the Jesuits avouch no more then here
he does; we should be glad to give them the right hand of fellowship in this
point. But they go all a wrong way unto the truth, or would to God any way to
the truth, or not directly to overthrow it. Catharinus, though in a manner
ours, in that question about the certainty of salvation, says more, perhaps,
then they meant, whom Canus late taxed; Avouching (as At (in^uit Cath^) soli
sider Catholicae conv^nit, ut ^i sa^um subesse nequcat, quoniam est de objecto
pro bato ab Ecclesia. Fidei autem divinae particula^i saltum subesse potest,
quoniam est de objecto non probato ab Ecclesia. Respondeo, novam atque
inauditam hanc esse doctrinam, ut sidei divinae possit subesse salsum, antequam
ejus objectum probatum fuerit ab Ecclesia. Probatio enim (...) ^ innotescat,
objectum illud esse revelatum a Deo, and propter hoc certum, and indubitatun;
non autem ^ verbo Dei aliquid revelantis. Itaque implicat contiadictionem, ut
aliquid sit revelantis a De^, and (...) ^ve illud ab Ecclesia probatum sit,
sive non sit. Alioqui quod CHRISTUS Paralytico and (...) ^ ti^i peccata tua,
poterat esse falsum, quia nondum fuerat ab Ecclesia approbatum; quis ita de^
CHRISTI ab Eccl^^ae approbatione pendere arbitretur? Et si quis insantem
baptizer, ^, nonne (...) censebitur, si dubitet an insans ille sit vere
justificatus? Et tamen non est hoc obje^ ab ^, etc. Bell. lib. 3. de Justific.
cap. 3.
Bellarmin cites his opinion) that divine faith could not be certain and
infallible, unless it were of an object approved by the Church. Whence would
follow, what Bellarmin there infers, that the Apostles and Prophets should not
have been certain of their Revelations, immediately sent from God, until the
Church had approved them; which is a doctrine well deserving a sharper censure
then Bellarmin bestows on Cathirinus. Albeit, to speak the truth, Bellarmin was
no fit man to censure, though the other most worthy to be severely censured.
Catharinus might have replied, that the Prophets and Apostles, at least our
Savior, in whom Bellarmin instanceth, were the true Church, as well as they
make the Pope. Nor can See the (...) Chapter.
Valentia's with other late ^esuites opinions, by any pretense or thew, hardly
Bellarmins own, be cleared from the same inconveniences he objects to
Catharinus, as will appear upon better examination to be made hereafter.

CAP. XXVII.
That the Churches Proposal is the true, immediate, and prime cause of all
obsolute belief any Romanist can have, concerning any determinate divine
Revelation.

1 WHereas Valentian and (as he says) Caietan, deny the Churches infallible
proposal to be the cause why we believe divine Revelations: This speech of his
is Equivocal, and in the equivocation of it (I think) Valentian sought to hide
the truth. The ambiguity or Fallacy, is the same which was Chap. 2.
disclosed in Bellarmins reply unto us objecting, that Pontificians make the
Churches authority greater then Scriptures. In this place, as in that the word
of God, or divine revelations, may be taken, either indefinitely, for
whatsoever God shall be supposed to speak, or, for those particular Scriptures
or Revela tions which we suppose he has already revealed and spoken. Or,
Valentian may speak of the object of our belief, not of belief it self. If we
take his meaning in the former sense; what he faith is most true. For the
Churches infallibility is no cause why we believe that to be true which we
suppose God has revealed: nor did we ever charge them with this assertion.
This is an Axiom of nature presupposed in all Religions; yet of which none ever
knew to make so great secular use as the Romish Church does. But if we speak of
that Canon of Scripture which we have, or any things contained in it; (all
which we and our adversaries jointly suppose to have come from God) the only
cause why we do or can rightly believe them, is, by Jesuitical doctrine, the
Churches infallibility that commends them unto us.

2 If that Church which Valentian holds so infallible should have said unto him
totidem verbis: you must believe the books of Maccabees are canonical, even for
this reason, that your holy Catholic Mother tells you so: he durst not but have
believed as well the reason as the matter proposed; [To wit, That these Books
were Canonical, because the Church had enjoined him so to think:] albeit his
private conscience, left to Gods grace and it self, would rather have held the
Negative. For if we believe, as the Papists generally instruct us, that we our
selves, all private spirits, may err in every perswa^on of faith, but the
Church which only is assisted by a public spirit, cannot possibly teach
amisle in any: We must upon terms as peremptory, and in equal degree, believe
every particular point of faith, because the Church so teaches us, not because
we certainly apprehend the truth of it in itself. For we may err, but this
public spirit cannot. And consequently we must infallibly believe these
propositions [Christ is the Redeemer of the world, not Mahomet, There is a
Trinity of persons in the divine nature] for this reason V^d. Cap (...). P^.
only that the Church commends them unto us for divine revelations: seeing by
their arguments brought to disprove the sufficiency of Scriptures or certainty
of private spirits, no other means possible is left us. Nay, were they true, we
should be only certain, that without the Churches proposal, we still must be
most uncertain, in these and all other points; because the sons are perpetually
obnoxious to error, from which the mother is everlastingly privileged. The
same propositions and conclusions we might conditionally believe to be
absolutely authentic, upon supposal they were Gods word: but that they are his
word, or revelations truly divine, we cannot firmly believe, but only by firm
adherence to the Churches infallible authority, as was in the second ^.
Section deduced out of the Adversaries principles. Hence it follows that every
particular proposition of Faith, has such a proper causal dependence upon the
Churches proposal, as the conclusion has upon the premises, or any particular
upon it universal. Thus much ^.
Sacroboscus grants.

3 Suppose God should speak unto us face to face, what reason had we absolutely
and infallibly to believe him, but because we know his words to be infallible?
his infallibility then should be the proper cause of our belief. For the same
reason, seeing he does not speak unto us face to face, as he did to Moses, but
as our adversaries say, reveals his will obscurely, so as the Revealer is not
manifested unto us; but his meaning is by the visible Church ( Vide Annot. ^.
Pa^ 5.
which is to us in stead of Prophets, Apostles, and Christ himself, and all the
several manners God used to speak unto the world, before he spoke to it by his
only son) this Panthea's infallibility must be the true and proper cause of our
Belief: And ^. non propter infidelitatem proprie, ut est vit^um contra fidem
Catholicam, reprehendi, sed ^ and duritiem coldis. Pertinet enim ad prudentiam
insu^am, and ad donum Consilii, ejusmodi praeb^re vel negare, consideratis
circumstantiis, quae docent eas esse a Deo vel non: ^, ex prudentia and do^o
consilii credere illis debuissent. Valent. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. De objecto fidei
^ this Position is, because, Sola Divina Revelatio ab Ecclesia proposita est
objectum fidei.
Valentian himself thinks that Sarah and others of the old world, to whom God
spoke in private, either by the mouth of Angels, his son, or holy spirit, or by
what means soever; did not sin against the doctrine of says or through
unbelief, when they did not believe Gods promises. They did herein unadvisedly,
not unbelievingly. Why not unbelievingly? because the visible Church did not
propose these promises unto them.

4 If not to believe the visible Churches proposals, be that which makes
distrust or dissidence to Gods promises, infidelity: then to believe them, is
the true cause of believing Gods promises: or if Sarah and others did (as
Valentian faith) unadvisedly or imprudently, in not assenting to divine truths
proposed by Angels: surely they had done only prudently and advisedly in
assenting to them; their assent had not been truly and properly belief. So that
by this assertion, the Churches proposal has the very remonstrative note and
character of the immediate and prime cause, whereby we believe and know matters
of says. For whatsoever else can concur, without this, our aslent to divine
truths proposed is not true Catholic belief; but firmly believing this
infallibility, we cannot err in any other point of faith.

5 This truth ^.
Valentian elsewhere could not dissemble, howsoever in his prosessed resolution
of Faith he sought to cover it by change of apparel; Investing the Churches
proposal only with the title of a Condition requisite, and yet withal (so
dislonant is falsity to it self) making it the Reason of believing divine
Revelations. If a reason it be, why we should believe them, need, must it sway
any reasonable mind to embrace their truth. And whatsoever inclines our minds
to the embracement of any truth, is the proper efficient cause of belif or
assent unto the same. Yea Efficiency or Causality it self does Formally consist
in this inclination of the mind. Nor is it possible this proposal of the
Church should move our minds to embrace divine Revelations by any other means
then by believing it: And Belief it self being an inclination or motion of the
mind, our minds must first be moved by the Churches proposal, ere it can move
them at all to assent unto other divine truths. Again, Valent. Tom. 3. in Aqum.
(...) Quaest 1. De object. fidei. Punct. 1. Part. 10. His words are quoted.
lib. (...). cap 30. Parag 16.
Valentian grants that the orthodoxal or catechistical answer to this
interrogation;. [Why do you believe the doctrine of the Trinity to be a divine
revelation?] is [because the Church proposes it to me for such.] He that
admits this answer for sound and Catholic, and yet denies the Churches
proposal to be the true and proper cause of his Belief in the former point,
has smothered, doubtless, the light of nature, by admitting too much
artificial subtilty into his brains. For if a man should ask, why do you
believe there is a fire in yonder house? and answer were made, Because I see
the smoke go out of the Chimney: should the party thus answering in good
earnest, peremptorily deny, the sight of the smoke to be the cause of his
Belief there was a fire; he deserved very well to have either his tongue
scorched with the one, or his eyes put out with the other. Albeit if we speak of
the things themselves, not of his Belief concerning them, the fire was the true
cause of the smoke, not the smoke of the fire. But whatsoever it be, [Cause,
Condition, Circumstance, or Effect,] that truly satissieth this demand, [Why do
you believe this or that] it is a true and proper cause of our belief, though
not of the thing believed. If then we admit the Churches proposal to be but a
condition annexed to divine revelations: yet if it be an infallible [medium] or
mean; or as our adversaries all agree, The only mean infallible, whereby we can
rightly believe this or that to be a divine revelation; it is the true and only
infallible cause of our Belief. That speech of Valentian, which to any ordinary
man's capacity includes as much as we now say, was Lib 2. cap. 16. Part. 8.
before alleged, [That Scripture which is commended and expounded unto us by
the Church, is, eo ipso, even for this reason, most authentic and clear.] He
could not, more emphatically, have expressed the Churches proposal to be the
true and prime cause, why particular or determinate divine revelations become
so credible unto us. His Second, Voluerit igitur de side supernaturali (...)
loqui (...) dissert a (...) a^ and acquisita: and vim generandi fidem habere,
quicquid ad actum sive ex part parentiae, sive ex part object^ est
necessarium. Verum ^ Ecclesia; quae respectu nostri est causa proponens, ut est
supra explicatum. And a little after; An^ Ecclesiae proponentis, and loquentis
Dei in SCriptura, respectu actus fidei, se habent (...) lumen, and ^ (...); vel
quemadmodum potentia, and dispositiones in materia se habent, respectu actus
informationis ^ and quod consequens est, quae habetur fides a Scriptura Dei
mentem contmente, eadem habetur ab Ec^ (...) Dei, and quis sit verus scripturae
sensus, indicante. Sacroboseus Def. Decr. ^ Sertent. Bella^m. cap ^. page 105.
Sacrobos^us has many speeches (to be inserted hereafter) to the same effect.
Amongst others where D^. Whittaker objects, that the principal cause of faith
is by Papists ascribed unto the Church; he denies it only thus far [What we
believe for the Churches proposal, we jointly believe for God speaking either
in his written word, or by tradition:] Yet, if a man should have asked him why
he did, or how possibly he could, infallibly believe that God did speak all the
words either contained in the Bible, or in their traditions: he must have given
either a woman's answer, [because God spoke them] or this, [because our holy
mother the Church does say so.] For elsewhere he plainly Vide Annot. Cap. 30.
Parag. 4. V^get (Whittakerus) qui sensum ^ (...), nisi quia sic Ecclesia
statuit, non propter Prophetieam and Aposto^icam Scripturam, tribuit
augustionem ^ Ecclefiae quam Scripturae: sed cum in fide hac duo sint, quid and
propter quid, Papistis, ^ V^ respondetur, id esse falsum: quae enim credimus
propter Ecclesiam prop^ D^^m loquentem, verbo suo scripto vel tradito; ut est
alias explicatum. Sacrobes. page 125.
avows, the Books of Canonical Scripture need not be believed without the
Churches proposal, whose infallible authority was sufficiently known before one
tittle of the New Testament was written, and were to be acknowledged, though it
had never been; he plainly confesses withal, that he could not believe the
Scriptures taught some principal Articles of faith most firmly believed by him,
unless the Churches authority did thereto move him, against the light of
natural reason. Now if for the Churches proposal, he believe that, which
otherwise to believe he had no reason at all, but rather strong inducements to
the contrary, as steadfastly as any other truth: the Churches infallibility must
be the true and only cause, both why he believes the mystery proposed, and
distrusts the natural dictates of his conscience to the contrary. In sine, he
does not believe there is a Trinity, (for in that Article is his instance)
because God has said it, but he believes that God has said it, because his
infallible Mother the Church does teach it. This is the misery of miseries,
that these Apostates should so bewitch the World, as to make it think they
believe the Church because God speaks by it; when it is evident they do not
believe God, but for the Churches testimony: well content to pretend his
authority, that her own may seem more Sovereign. Thus make they their
superstitious groundless magical Faith, but as a wrench to wrest that principle
of nature, [Whatsoever God says is true,] to countenance any villainy they can
imagine as will better appear hereafter. But first the Reader must be content to
be informed, that by some of their At inqu^es; quando Papi^ d^c^nt se c^^to
(...)(...), id quod ^ccle^^^ d^ v^: pr^posi^es (...)* s^nt ^sse ve^^^, v^l quia
Ecc^^s^^ id illis dicit, vel non quia Ecclesia dicit, s^d qu^a S^^ip^ d^cit. Si
^mum, null^ dis^n inter D^um and Ecclesi^m ^^atnetur, nam h^c prop^ium solius
Dei est, ut id verum esse credamus quod ille dicit, nul^am aliam q^ ^^tion^m.
Sin s^^un^um: summa authoritas definiendi, non Ecclesiae, sed scriptu^ae
dese^tur. Verum ne in aere di^pu^^^us (ut s^pe solet adversarius) Catholici
o^^es firma fide credunt Ecclesiam in nulla fidei quaestione deter^ (...)^^re
po^^e: ubi igi^ur Ecclesia definit aliquid esse de fide, id illi hoc Theologico
discurs^ concludunt esse ce^^um. Ecc^ non potest al^quid non ve^um pro Fidei
dogmate credendum proponere. At hoc Ecclesia pro dog^ate fidei p^opoui^ (...)
(...): ^st hoc e^go certum. In qua ratiocinatione medius terminus est
determinatio Ecclesiae, atque ita, quo ^en^ ^diu^ ^^rm (...) dici^u^ ^ausa
cognosc^ndi conclusionem, dici potest definitio Ecclesiae causa, propter quam
haec conclu^, (...) (...) (...) inus pr^dicti disc^rsus, certo persuadeatur.
Absit vero ut quicquid per modum medii est causa c^r^^ cogn^, ^o ip^o ^tur D^o.
S^cus enim angulus externus soret Deo ^qualis, n^m per hunc ^ognosco omnem
tria^gulum habe^^ tr^^ ^gulos aquales duobus rectis. Atque ^aec solutio
perspicua est, solum advertat, qui minus exercitatos habet se^, dict^
conclu^em, ut pendet ex discursu facto, pertinere ad habitum Theologi^ (q^i
quidem cert^s est; que^^dm^ ^st h^b^tus fidei and scie^uae: est tamen ab
utr^que distinctus; ut verior tenet Theologorum sen^entia) n^n a^^a ^^tione
per^in^ pot^st ad habitu^ fidei, quatenus assen^u simplici sine discursu
creditur, and tunc Ecclesiae d^finitio non ^e ha^et p^ modum ^^dii te^m ni, sed
per modum sufficientis propositionis; and authoritas Dei loquentis verbo suo
scripto vel (...), in l^co (...) quo petitu^ d^finitio, est ^orn alis ra^io
credendi* ita ut istae d^ae r^tiones subordinatae, ^unt causae con^ act^^
(...), qui exercetu^ ^i^ca propositionem d^^nitam, sicque, quemadmodum ait
Aristor^les, non Policletus, ^^c (...)*^^us, s^d Pol^^letus ^tuarius est causa
statuae; dice^e possumus, non definitio Ecclesiae per se and soli^a^^e, nec
s^lus l^c^^ (...) quo (...) est ^^fini^io Ecclesiae, est causa assensus fidei*
Sed definitio and locus; illa ut causa ^ine q^a non, author^^as De^ l^quenti,
in hoc, ut formalis ratio objecti. Sacrobos. def. Decr. and Sent. Bellarm. cap.
6. part. 1. page 113, 114, 115.
Tenants the same Divine revelations may be as^ented unto by the Habit either
of ^heologie or of Faith; both which are most certain, but herein di^ferent;
That the former is discursive and resembles science properly so called; the
later not so, but rather like unto that habit or faculty by which we perceive
the truth of general Maxims, or unto our bodily sight which sees diverse
visibles all immediately, not one after, or by, another. Whilst some of them
dispute against the certainty of private spirits, their arguments suppose
Divine revelations must be believed by the Habit of Theology, which is as a
sword to o^^end us Whiles we assault them, and urge the unstability of their
resolutions, they sly unto the non dis^ursive Habit of faith infused, as their
best buckler to ward such blows as the Habit of Theology cannot bear off.

6 Not here to dispute either how truly or pertinently they deny ^aith infused
to be a discursive habit; the Logical Reader need not (I hope) my ad^onition to
observe, that faith or belief whether habitual or actual, unless discursive,
cannot possibly be resolved into any preexistent Maxim or principle. From which
grant, this Emolument will arise unto our cause; that the Churches authority
cannot be proved by any divine revelation, or portion of Scripture; seeing it
is an Article of Faith, and must be believed ^od^m intu^^u with that Scripture
or part of Gods Word, whether written or unwritten, that teaches it, as light
and colors are perceived by one and the same intuition in the same instant.
And by this assertion we could not so properly say, We believe the divine
revelation because we believe the Church (nor do we see colors because we see
the light;) but We may truly say, that the objects of our faith, (divine
revelations) are therefore actually credible, or worthy of belief, because the
infallible Church does illustrate or propose them; as the light does make
colors though invisible by night, visible by day. This similitude of the light
and colors is not mine, but Sacroboscus's; whom in the point in hand I most
mention, because Doctor Whitakers Objections against their Churches Doctrine,
as it has been delivered by Bellarmine and other late Controversers, has
enforced him clearly to unfold, what Bellarmine, Stapleton, and Valentian left
unexpressed, but is implicitly included in all their Writings* But ere we come
to examine the full inconveniences of their opinions, I must request the Reader
to observe, that as often as they mention R^solution of faith, they mean, the
discursive habit of Theology. For all resolution of Belief or knowledge,
essentially includes discourse. And See the A^notations cap. 3 par. 1.
Bellarmine directly makes, His words are quoted in the Annotat. parag. 5 of
this Chapter.
Sacroboscus expressly avoucheth, the Churches authority the medius terminus,
or true cause, whence determinate conclusions of faith are gathered. From which
and other equivalent assertions, acknowledged by all the Romanists this day
living, it will appear that Valentian was either very ignorant himself, or
presumed he had to deal with very ignorant Adversaries, when he denied that the
last resolution of Catholic faith, was into the Churches authority, which
comes next in place to be examined.

CAP. XXVIII.
Discovering either the gross ignorance, or notorious craft of the Jesuit in
denying his Faith, is finally resolved into the Churches veracity or
infallibility: That possibly it cannot be resolved into any branch of the First
Truth.

1 IT were a foolish question, as Cajetan (says Re^^^ (...) quid^ a Cajeta^
dictum est, Fa^ esse qu^ nem, si qu^s a^t^ interr^t* ^ur ^re^at pr^^^ veritati
^evelanti. Nam in p^imam ve^^tatem (...) fi^ (...) ass^^sus ^id^^, atqu^ ad^o
^^op^^^ (...) (...) ^d^s a^^enti^^^. (...)*que non e^^ q^da (...)(...) ratio,
q^des a^* Sed solum p^^^st q^ae^i ulte^iu^, unde habeat illa prima veritas, u^
sit prima veritas? Et tunc respondendum est, id h^b^^e s^cundum (...)
intelligendi modum ex divinitate, cuius attributum and quasi passio est, and
qu^ neque ^alli neque falle^e pote^^. (...). (...). 3. in Aq^inat. Disp. 1.
qu^st. 1, de object. ^^dei* punct. 1. parag. 5.
Valentian) has well observed, if one should ask another, why he believes the
First Truth revealing. For the Assent of Faith is finally resolved into the
First Truth. It may be Cajetan was better minded toward Truth it self, first
or secondary, then this Jesuit was, which used his authority to color his
former rotten position, [That the Churches proposal by their doctrine is not
the cause of faith:] but our former distinction between belief it self and it
object (often confounded,) or between Gods Word indefinitely, and determinately
taken, if well observed, will evince this last reason to be as foolish as the
former assertion was false. No man, says he, can give any reason besides the
infallibility of the Revealer, why he believes a divine Revelation. It is true,
no man can give, nor would any ask, why we believe that which we are fully
persuaded is a divine Revelation. But yet a reason by their positions must be
given why we believe either this or that truth, any particular or determinate
portion of Scripture, to be a divine Revelation. Wherefore seeing Christian
Faith is always of desinite and particular propositions or conclusions, and,
as Bellarmine says, (and all the Papists must say) these cannot be known but
by the Church: As her infallible proposal is the true and proper cause why we
believe them to be infalliblie true, because the only cause whereby we can
believe them to be divine revelations: so must it be the essential principle
into which our Assent or Belief of any particular or determinate proposition
must finally be resolved. Every conclusion of faith (as is before observed out
of Cap. 3. parag 1.
Bellarmine) must be gathered in this or like Syllogism [Whatsoever God or the
first Truth says, is most true: But God said all those words, which Moses, the
Prophets, and the Evangelists wrote: Therefore all these are most true,] The
Major in this Syllogism, is an Axiom of Nature, acknowledged by Turks and
Infidels: nor can Christian faith be resolved into it, as into a Principle
proper to it self: The Minor say Bellar. loco citato.
our Adversaries, must be ascertained unto us by the Churches authority, and so
ascertained, becomes the first and main principle of faith, as Christian; Vide
Sacro^o^^. ca 6. par. 1. page 109.
whence all other particular or determinate conclusions are thus gathered.
[Whatsoever the Church proposes to us for a divine Revelation, is most
certainly such: Chap. 1.
But the Church proposes the Books of Moses and the Prophets, finally, the
whole volumes of the old and new Testament, with all their parts, as they are
extant in the vulgar Roman Edition, for divine revelations; Therefore we must
infallibly believe they are such] So likewise must we believe, that to be the
true and proper meaning of every sentence in them contained, which the Church,
to whom it belongs to judge of their sense, shall tender unto us.

2 For better manifestation of the Truth, we now teach, the young Resolution
twofold: either of objects believed, or of our Belief, or persuasions
concerning them.
Reader must here be advised of a Twofold Resolution; One of the things or
matters believed, or known, into their first parts or Elements; Another of our
Belief, or persuasions concerning them, into their first Causes or motives. In
the one, the most general or remotest cause; In the other, the most immediate
or next cause always terminates the resolution. The one imitates, the other
inverts the order of composition; so as what is first in the one, is last in
the other, because that which is first intended, or resolved upon by him, that
casts the plot, is last effected by the executioner or manual composer. In
the former sense, we say mixed bodies are lastly resolved into their first
Elements; houses into stones, timber and other ingredients; particular truths
into general maxims: conclusions into their immediate premises; all
absurdities into some breach of the rule of contradiction. Consonantly to this
interpretation of final resolution; The First Verity, or divine infallibility,
is that into which all Faith is lastly resolved. For (as we said before) this
is the first step in the progress of true Belief, the lowest Foundation
whereon any Religion, Christian, Jewish, Mohammedan, or Ethnic can be built.
And it is an undoubted Axiom, quod primum est in generatione, est ultimum in
resolutione; when we resolve any thing into the parts whereof it is compounded,
we end, in the undoing or unfolding it, where nature begun in the composition
or making of it. But he that would attempt to compose it again, or frame the
like aright, would terminate all his thoughts or purposes by the end or use,
which is farthest from actual accomplishment. Thus the Architect frames stones
and timber, and lays the first foundation according to the platform he carries
in his head; and that he casts proportionably to the most commodious or
pleasant habitation: which, though last effected, determines all cogitations or
resolutions precedent. Hence, if we take this ultima resolutio, as we always
take these terms, when we resolve our own persuasions, that is, [for a
resolution of all doubts or demands, concerning the subject whereof we treat] A
Roman Catholics faith must, according to his Principles, finally be resolved
into the Churches infallibility. For this is the immediate ground, or first
cause of any particular or determinate point of Christian faith; and the
immediate cause is always that, into which our persuasions concerning the
effect is finally resolved, seeing it only can fully satisfy all demands,
doubts, or questions concerning it. As for example, if you ask why men, or
other terrestrial Creatures, breath, when fishes do not: to say they have
lungs, and fishes none, does not fully satisfy all demands or doubts
concerning this Subject. For it may justly further be demanded, what necessity
there was the one should have lungs rather then the other. If here it be
answered, that men and other perfect terrestrial creatures, are so full of
fervent blood, that without a cooler their own heat would quickly choke them,
and in this regard, the God of nature who did not make them (...), or give them
life in vain to be presently extinct, did with it give them lungs, by whose
respiration their natural temper should be continued: This answer does fully
satisfy all demands concerning the former effect. For no man of sense would
further question, why life should be preserved, whose preservation immediately
depends upon respiration, or exercise of the lungs, and is therefore the
immediate cause of both, and that whereunto all our persuasions, concerning the
former subject, are lastly resolved. Or, if it should be demanded, why only
man of all other creatures has power to laugh; to say, he were endued with
reason, does not resolve us; for a Philosophical wit would further question,
[Why should reasonable substances have this foolish faculty rather then
others?] A good Antonius Laurentinus Politianus, de Risu.
Philosopher would persuade us, the spirits which serve for instruments to the
rational part, are more nimble and subtle, and so more apt to produce this
motion, then the spirits of any other creatures are. But this I must profess
resolves not me: for how nimble or subtle soever they be, unless man had other
corporeal Organs for this motion, the spirits alone could not produce it: and
all organical parts are framed for the operation or exercise of the faculty, as
their proper end. Whence, he that would finally resolve the former Problem,
must assign the true final cause why reasonable substances, more then others,
should stand in need of this motion. Now seeing unto reason only it is proper
to forecast danger, and procure sorrow and contristation of heart by preconceit
of what yet is not, but perhaps may be: it was requisite that our mortality
through reason, obnoxious to this inconvenience, should be able to correct this
contristant motion by the contrary, and have a faculty to conceive such
pleasant objects as might dilate the heart and spirits; that as man hurts his
body by conceited sorrow, whereto no other Creature is subject, so he might
heal it again by a kind of pleasance, whereof he alone is That according to the
Jesuits own Principles, the Churches infallibility does so terminate all doubts
or demands in matters of the Romanists faith, as the immediate or prime cause,
does all doubts or questions concerning any demonstrable effect.
capable.

3 Answerable to this latter acception of final resolution, if you demand a
Roman Catholic [why he believes there is a Trinity, there shall be a
resurrection, or life everlasting;] his answer would be, because God, or the
First Verity has said so: but this does not fully satisfy; for we might
further question him, as he does us, why do you believe that God did say so?
Here it suffices not to say, This truth is expressly taught in Canonical
Scriptures; for the doubt whereby he hopes to stagger us most, is this, [Why do
you believe, or how can you know, those Books which ye call Scriptures were
from God.] The last and final answer (according to the Jesuitical Catechismes)
wherein (as you heard before out of Cap. 3. par. ^*
Bellarmine) they think they have great advantage of us, would be this: The
holy Church our Mother does so instruct, giving us this express admonition
withal, Ecclesiastes 12. ver. 11. Hoc loco Solomon docet (inquit ^^llarminus)
non esse (...) inquitendum, sed ^ pe^, quando ^ data est a (...) (...),
adjuncto ^ sapientum. Quod (...) dicuntur de Sacerdote veteris Testamenti,
quanto magis dici possunt de Sacerdote Testamenti novi, (...) long man
promissiones* Deo accepit Bellarde verb. Dei, lib. (...) cap. 4.
his amplius fili (...) ne requiras. Here (upon God their Father, and the
infallible Church their Mothers blessing,) their souls are bound to rest
without further doubt or demand. Whence unless they use some mental
reservation, or seek to shroud themselves in the former aequivocation hitherto
unfolded, they must of necessity account themselves accursed, if they deny the
last or final resolution of their belief to be into the Churches infallibility
or veracity. Again, what reasonable man would demand further resolution of any
doubts incident to his faculty, be it real or verbal, speculative or practick,
then into the prime and immediate rules? He should surely be lasht in a Grammar
School, that either for quantity of syllables, right accent, construction of
words, or the like, would seek a further reason, then a known general rule
which admits no exception. So should he with disgrace be turned over the
Bar amongst the Lawyers, that would demur or seek a devolution of an evident
ruled case, which by his own confession, could never alter. Much more gross
would his absurdity appear, that in the Mathematics or other demonstrative
science, should attempt to resolve a Problem or conclusion, further then into
an unquestionable Theorem or definition. Finally, might we have a centumviral
Court of all professions under the Sun, our Adversaries would be condemned with
joint consent, either of intolerable folly, or impudency, if they should, with
Valentian, deny the last resolution of their faith to be into the Churches
infallibility; seeing they make it such a Catholic inerrable, perpetual rule
of Christian faith, as admits no exception, no devolution from it, no appeal.
It is to them more then he said of Logic, Ars artium, and scientia
scientiarum, a faculty of faculties, a Rule of Rules, able rightly to resolve
all doubts concerning the very Canon of Scriptures, or Gods Word, written or
unwritten, or the true sense or meaning of both; briefly able most
authentically to determine and define all Controversies in Religion of what
kind soever.

4 Nor will it boot them ought to say, that Gods Word in the Churches mouth is
the Rule whereinto faith is finally resolved, seeing the Church defines nothing
but by Gods Word either written or unwritten. For this is more then the party
which believes it can know, nor has he any other motive to believe it, besides
the Churches definition or assertion. Suppose then we should conceive so well
of a temporal Judge, as to presume he did never speak but according to the
true meaning either of Statute or customary Law: yet if we could not know
either the one or the other, or their right interpretation, but only by his
determinations; the Law were little beholden to him (unless for a flout) that
should say, he were resolved jointly by the Judge and it. For, seeing the Law
is to him altogether uncertain, but by the Judges avouchment or interpretation,
his last resolution of any act of justice, must be only into the Judges skill
and fidelity. This inference At dices, quando Ecclesia definit, ex verbo Dei
scripto, vel tradito, semper definit: neque enim amplius accipit novas
revelationes, and assistentia Spiritus sancti ibi promissa, est tantum ad ea,
quae jam revelata sunt, cognoscenda: ergo a primo ad ultimum, quod terminat
controversias, and quod judex est quaestionum fidei, est verbum Dei. Respondeo:
quoniam nobis non constat certo, quis sit verus Scripturae tensus, nisi per
vocem Ecclesiae, quae nostras audit contentiones, and respondet, Ecclesia Judex
est, quamvis judicet ex Dei verbo, quod illa serutando and examinando, propter
assistentiam Spiritus sancti, semper recte intelligit. Si autem quilibet
nostrom haberet infallibile donum intelligendi verbum Dei, alio judice non
indigeren us; Nam hoc, fidei veritates conti^ sed quonium ita non est, verbum
Dei respecttu nostri, non habet rationem judicis: Non quasi certam and veram
non ^, sed q^ de ejus sensu per nos ipsi noquimus infallibiliter esse certi,
sicut certi (...) de (...) Eccle^ potest voces; unde liquet deesse aliquid
scripturae comparatione nostri, quo ^ index esse (...), quod non deest
Ecclesiae. Sacrebos. Def. Decr Trid. and sentent. Bellarm. cap. 6. These words
immediately follow upon th^se s^ (out of the same author, Part. 1. page 115.)
in the 27. Chap. parag. 5.
Sacroboscus would not deny, he himself has made the like, to prove that not
the Scripture but the Church must be the infallible rule of faith. You will
object (says he) when the Church defines, it always defines according to the
Word of God, either written or unwritten. New revelations it receives none: the
promised assistance of the spirit helps it only to know what is already
revealed: Therefore from the first to the last, that which determines
controversies, and is the Judge in all questions of faith, is the Word of God.
To this objection thus he answers, Because we cannot be certain of the true
sense of Gods Word, but by the voice of the Church which hears our
controversies, and answers them: The Church is Judge, although it judge
according to Gods Word, which upon examination and by the spirits assistance it
always understands aright. And if every one of us should have the infallible
gift of understanding Gods Word, we should not need any other Judge The Reader,
I hope, will remember what was said before; that those flowting hypocrites
would fain believe the Pope says nothing but what God says, that God may be
thought to say all he says; which is the most abominable Blasphemy, that
ever Hell broacht, worse then worshipping of Devils as shall appear hereafter.

5 It may be some Novice in Arts that has late read some vulgar Logicians upon
the demonstrations, might here frame this doubt in favor of the Romish
Churches Doctrine. As the final cause may be demonstrated by the efficient,
and the efficient by the final: so may the Church be infallibly proved by
Scriptures, and the Scriptures again by the Churches authority, both infallibly
believed each for others sake, as both the former demonstrations are true and
certain, and yet mutually depending one upon the other.

6 This objection, had some late Logicians understood what they said, would
carry some show of truth to countenance Valentians former Circular Resolution;
but they lace their Masters Rule, uttered by him Pingui Minerva, too too
straightly. For taking it as they do, we should admit A rule in Logic by some
much misconstrued. Whose misconstruction not impeached might in some sort
shroud the Romanists sottishness in this Argument.
of circular demonstrations, the conceit whereof can have no place but in a
giddy brain. To demonstrate the final cause in any work of Nature, were to
assign a Counselor to the infinite wisdom of the God of Nature; in whose
intention the end is first, and is the cause of all operation or efficiencie.
Who could give, or who would demand a natural cause why life should be
preserved? for this is the will of him that gave it. If question were made of
the manner how the life of man and other creatures is preserved, when as their
heat might seem to choke them? A man might truly answer, by respiration: and
respiration is from the lungs. But it is one thing to ask, How or by what
Means; another, for what End any effect is produced. The former is an inquiry
of the Efficient, within these precincts of means or motions always, prime and
independent; The later of the final cause absolutely, indemonstrable, because
it implies a contradiction to give a reason why that should be, for whose sake
all other things of that rank have being. Nor is the End it self (to speak
properly) ever produced, though oft-times in common speech, we take the Effect
immediately thereto destinated (because most sensible) for the End it self, as
we do the star next to the Pole, because visible, for the Pole or point
immovable. Thus we confound respiration or actual preservation of life with
the Final cause why men have lungs; when as both are effects of the lungs, both
means of accomplishing Natures or rather the God of Natures purpose, in whose
will or pleasure the final cause of any natural effect always consists. And
seeing nothing in Nature can preoccupate his will, no cause can be precedent to
the final. This consideration of natural effects tending as certainly to
their proposed end, as the arrow flies to the mark, caused the irreligious
Avertues.
Philosopher to acknowledge the direction of an intelligent supernatural agent
in their working, the accomplishment of whose will and pleasure (as I said)
must be the final cause of their motions; as his will or pleasure which
bestows the charges, not the Architect (unless he be the owner also) is the
final cause why the house is built. Finally, every End supposes the last
intention of an intelligent Agent, whereof to give a reason by the Efficient
which only produces works or means thereto proportioned, would be as
impertinent, as if to one demanding why the bell rings out, it should be
answered, because a strong fellow pulls the rope.

7 Now that which in our Adversaries Doctrine answers unto the cause Jesuits
faith cannot be resolved into any definite branch of the First Truth.
indemonstrable whereinto final resolution of Natures works or intentions of
intelligent agents must be resolved, is the Churches Authority. Nor can that,
if we speak properly, be resolved into any branch of the first Truth; for this
reason (besides others alleged before) that all resolutions, whether of our
persuasions or intentions, or of their objects (works of Art or Nature) suppose
a stability or certainty in the first links of the chain which we unfold; the
latter always depending on the former, not the former on the latter. As in
resolutions of the latter kind lately mentioned (imitating the order of
composition) actual continuation of life depends on breathing, not breathing on
it: breathing on the lungs, not the lungs mutually on breathing: so in
resolutions of the other kind (which inverts the order of composition) the use
or necessity of lungs depends upon the use or necessity of breathing; the
necessity or use of breathing upon the necessity or use of life, or upon his
will or pleasure that created one of these for another. Thus again, the
sensitive faculty depends upon the vital, that upon mixtion, mixtion upon the
Elements, not any of these mutually upon the sensitive faculty; if we respect
the order of supportance or Natures progress in their production. Whence he
that questions whether some kinds of plants have sense, or some stones or
metals life, supposes as unquestionable, that the former have life, that the
second are mixed bodies. But if we respect the intent or purpose of him that
sets Nature a working; all the former faculties depend on the sensitive, the
sensitive not on any of them. For God would not have his creatures endued with
sense, that they might live; or live, that they might have mixed bodies: but
rather to have such bodies that they might live, to live that they might enjoy
the benefit of sense, or the more noble faculties.

8 Can the Jesuit thus assign any determinate branch of the First Truth, as
stable and unquestionable, before it be ratified by the Churches authority?
Evident it is, by his positions, that he cannot; and as evident, that belief of
the Churches authority cannot depend upon any determinate branch of the First
Truth, much less can it distinctly be thereinto resolved. But contrariwise,
press him with what Divine precept soever, written or unwritten, though in all
men's judgments (the Churches authority set aside) most contradictory to their
approved practices: for example, [That the second Commandment forbids
worshipping Images or adoration of the consecrated Host;] he straight inverts
your reason thus, Rather the second Commandment forbids neither, because the
holy Church, which I believe to be infallible, approves both. Lastly, he is
fully resolved to believe nothing for true, which the Church disproves, nothing
for false or erroneous, which it allows. Or, if he would answer directly to
this demand, [To what end did God cause the Scriptures to be written?] He could
not (^^son^^t to his tenants) say [That we might infallibly rely upon them,]
but rather [upon the Churches authority So in the first Edition. should it not
be? establishes Them.
which it establishes.] For Gods Word whether written or unwritten, Vide
annot. in cap. 25.
is by their Doctrine, but as the testimony of some men deceased, indefinitely
presumed for infallible, but whose material extent the Church must first
determine, and afterward judge without all appeal, of their true meaning. Thus
are all parts of Divine truths, supposed to be revealed, more essentially
subordinate to the Churches authority, then ordinary witnesses are to royal or
supreme judgment. For they are supposed able to deliver what they know, in
terms intelligible to other men's capacities, without the Prince or Judges
ratification of their sayings, or expositions of their meanings; and judgment
is not ordained for producing witnesses; but production of witnesses, for
establishing judgment. Thus by our adversaries Doctrine, Gods Word must serve
to establish the Churches authority: not the Churches authority, to confirm the
immediate soveraigntie of It ever our souls.

9 Much more probably might the Jew or Turk resolve his faith unto the First
Truth, then the modern Jesuited Papist can. For though their deductions from it
be much what alike, all equally sottish: yet these admit a stabilitie or
certainty of what the First Truth has said, no way dependant upon their
authority that first proposed or commended it unto them. The Turks would storm
to hear any Mufti profess, He were as well to be believed as was Mahomet in
his life time; that without His proposal they could not know either the old
Testament or the Alcoran to be from God. So would the Jews if one of their
Rabbines should make the like comparison betwixt himself and Moses, as the
Jesuit does betwixt Christ and the Pope: who, besides that he must be as well
believed as his Master, leaves the authority of both Testaments uncertain to
us, unless confirmed by his infallibility. But to speak properly, the
pretended derivation of all three heresies from the First Truth, has a lively
resemblance of false pedegrees, none at all of true Doctrine and resolutions.
Of all the three the Romish is most ridiculous, as may appear by their several
representations. As, imagine there should be three Competitors for the Roman
Empire; all pleading it were to descend by inheritance, not by election; all
pretending lineal succession from Charles the Great. The first, like to the
Jew, alleges an authentic pedigree, making him the eldest. The second,
resembling the Turk, replies, that the other indeed was of the eldest line, but
long since disinherited, often conquered and enforced to resign; whence the
inheritance descended to him as the next in succession. The third, like the
Romanist, pleads it was bequeathed him by the Emperors last Will and Testament,
from whose death his Ancestors have been intit'led to it, and produces a
pedigree to this purpose, without any other confirmation then his own
authority; adding withal, that unless his competitors and others will believe
his records and declarations (written or unwritten) to be most authentic, they
cannot be certain whether ever there had been such an Emperor as they plead
succession from, or at least how far his Dominions extended, or where they lay.
This manner of plea in secular controversies, would be a mean to defeat him
that made it. For albeit the Christian World did acknowledge there had been
such an Emperor, and that many parts of Europe of right belonged unto his
lawful heir: Yet if it were otherwise unknown what parts these were, or who
this heir should be; no Judge would be so mad as finally to determine of either
upon such motives. Or if the Plaintiff, could, by such courses as (the World
knows) often prevail in judgment, or other gracious respects, effect his
purpose: he were worse then mad that could think the final resolution of his
right were into the Emperors last Will and Testament, which by his own
confession, no man knows besides himself; and not rather, into his own presumed
fidelity, or the Judges apparent partiality. So in this Controversy,
whatsoever the Pope may pretend from Christ, all in the end comes to his own
authority; which we may safely believe, herein to be most infallible, that it
will never prove partial against it self, or define ought to his Holiness
disadvantage.

10 Here again, it shall not be amiss to admonish younger Students of another
gull, which the Secundum legem Dei ordinariam, ut quis per habitur fidei
Christiana alici i veritati revelata assent ^t^r, praetor ^psam revela ^onem,
necesse est hujus nodi veritatem ab Ecclesia proponi, tanquam a Deo revelatam,
and fide credendam: non quia haec Ecclesiae propositio sit de ratione formuli
objecti fidei, sed quia est conditio quodam requisita: sine qua ordinary
assensus fidei Christianae non elicitur. Valent. Tom. 3. in Aquin. Disp 1. Qu
est. 1. de objecto fidei. Punct. 1. parag. 6.
Jesuit would put upon us to make their Churches Doctrine seem less abominable
in this point, lest you should think they did equalize the authority of the
Church with divine revelations. Valentian would persuade you, it were no part
of the formal object of faith. It is true indeed, that the Churches authority
by their Doctrine is not comprehended in the object of Belief, whilst it only
proposes other Articles to be believed. No more is the Sun comprehended under
the objects of our actual sight, whilst we behold colors, or other visibles
by the virtue of it. But yet, as it could not make colors, or other things
become more visible unto us, unless it self were the first and principal
visible, [that is, unless it might be seen more clearly then those things
which we see by it, so we would direct our sight unto it:] so would it be
impossible the Churches infallible proposal could make a Roman Catholics
Belief of Scriptures, or their Orthodoxal sense the stronger; unless it were
the first and principal, credible or primary object of his Belief; or that
which must be most clearly, most certainly, and more steadfastly believed; so as
all other Articles besides, must be believed by the belief or credibility of
it. This is most evident out of Sacroboscus and Bellarmines resolution, or
explication of that point, how the Churches proposal confirms a Roman
Catholics belief. To give this Doctrine of their Churches infallibility, the
right title, according to the truth: it is not an Article of Catholic Belief,
but a Catholic Axiom of Antichristian unbelief: which from the necessary
consequences of their assertions, more strictly to be examined, will easily
appear.

CAP. XXIX.
What manner of casual dependence Romish Belief has on the Church: that the
Romanist truly and properly believes the Church only, not God or his Word.

1 THe two main assertions of our Adversaries, whence our intended conclusion
must be proved, are these, often mentioned heretofore. First, that we cannot be
infallibly persuaded of the truth of Scriptures, but by the Churches proposal.

Secondly, that without the same, we cannot be infallibly persuaded of the true
sense or meaning of these Scriptures, which that Church and we both believe to
be Gods Word.

How we should know the Scriptures to be Gods Word, is a Problem in Divinity,
which in their judgment cannot be assoiled without admission of Traditions or
divine unwritten verities, of whose extent and meaning the Church must be
infallible Judge. It is necessary to salvation (says Quarto, necesse est
nosse, extare libros aliquos vero divinos, quod certe nullo modo ex Scripturis
habet (...) potest. Nam etiamsi scriptura dicat, libros Prophetarum, and
Apostolorum esse divinos, tamen non certoid credam, nisi prius credidero
Scripturam, quae hoc dicit, esse divinam. Nam etiam in Alco ano Mahume ti
passim legimus, ipsum alcoranum de coelo a Deo missum, and tamen ei non
credimus. Itaque hoc dogma tam necessarium, quod scilicet aliqua sit Scriptura
divina, non potest sufficienter haberi ex sola Scriptura. Proinde cum fides
nitatur verbo Dei, nisi habeamus verbum Dei non scriptum, nulla nobis erit
fides. Bellar. lib. 4. de verbo Dei, Cap. 4.
Bellarmine,) that we know there be some books divine, which questionless
cannot by any means be known by Scriptures. For albeit the Scripture say, that
the Books of the Prophets or Apostles are divine: yet this I shall not
certainly believe, unless I first believe that Scripture, which says thus, is
divine. For so we may read every where in Mahomets Alcoran, that the Alcoran it
self was sent from heaven; but we belief it not. Therefore this necessary
point [that some Scripture is divine,] cannot sufficiently be gathered out of
Scriptures alone. Consequently, seeing faith must rely upon Gods Word; unless
we have Gods word unwritten, we can have no faith. His meaning is, we cannot
know the Scriptures to be divine, but by Traditions; and what Traditions are
divine, what not, we cannot know, but by the present visible Church: as was
expressly taught by the same Author before. And the final resolution of our
believing what God has said, or not said, must be the Churches Authority. To
this collection, Dices Catholicos quosdam rejecisse nonnullas Scripturae veras
parts, quas caruisse Spiritu sancto nos inde non affirmamus: Respondeo, quod
si illi caruissent propositione Ecclesiae pro alijs libris sicut pro illis,
potuissent quoque de tota Scriptura sine peccato dubitare, juxta illud
Augustini: Ego Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Ecclesiae commoveret authoritas.
Et pari modo, vos qui Ecclesiae authoritatem in prascribendo, and definiendo,
quae sunt fidei, facitis insufficientem, qua ratione aliquas Scripturae parts
sine scelere (ut dicitis) repudiatis; eadem possetis and reliquas. Sacrobose.
Def. Decr. Trid. and Sent. Bellar. cap. 6. part. 1. page 85. Vide eundem page
109.
Sacroboscus thus far accords: Some Catholics rejected diverse Canonical
Books without any danger, and if they had wanted the Churches proposal for
others, as well as them, they might without sin have doubted of the whole
Canon. This he thinks consonant to that of Saint Austin; I would not believe
the Gospel, unless the Churches authority did thereto move me. He adds, that
we of reformed Churches making the visible Churches authority in defining
points of faith unsufficient, might disclaim all without any greater sin or
danger to our souls, then we incur by disobeying some parts of Scripture, to
wit, the Apocryphal books, canonized by the Romish Church. The Reader (I hope)
observes by these passages, How Bellarmine ascribes that to Tradition, which is
peculiar to Gods providence: Sacroboscus, that to blind belief, which belongs
unto the holy Spirit, working faith unto the former points, by the ordinary
observation of Gods Providence, and Experiments answerable to the rules of
Scriptures.

2 Consequently to the Sea Cap. 1. of this Book.
Trent Councels Decree, concerning the second assertion, Septimo necesse est,
non solum Scripturam posse legere, sed etiam intel(...). At ^^pissin e
Scriptura ambigua and perplexa est, ut nisi ab aliquo, qui errare non possit,
explicetur, non possit ^gi, igitur sola non sufficit. Exempla sunt plurima: nam
aequalitas divinarum personarum, processio Spiritus sanct^ a Patre and Filio,
ut ab uno principio, peccatum originis, descensus Christi ad inferos, et multa
similia deducuntur qui(...) ex sacris literis, sed non adeo facile, ut si solis
pugnandum sit Scripturae testimonijs, nunquam lites cum protervis ^ possiut.
Notandum est enim, duo esse in Scriptura, voces scriptas, and sensum in eis
inclusum; voces sunt quasi va(...), sensus est ipse gladius spiritus. Ex his
duobus primum habetur ab omnibus, quicunque enim novit literas, potest le(...)
Scripturas: at secundum non habent omnes, nec possumus in plurimis locis certi
esse de secundo, nisi accedat tradi(...)* Et hoc forte dicere voluit Basilius
de Spiritu sancto, cap. 27. Cum ait, sine traditionibus non scriptis Evangelium
esse (...) nomen, id est, esse tantum voces and verba sine sensu. Bellar. lib.
4. de verbo Dei, cap. 4.
Bellarmine thus collects: It is necessary not only to be able to read
Scriptures, but to understand them: but the Scripture is often so ambiguous and
intruate, that it cannot be understood, without the exposition of some that
cannot err: therefore it alone is not sufficient. Examples there be many: For
the equality of the divine persons, the Holy Ghost proceeding from the Father
and the Son, as from one joint original; Original sin; Christ's descension into
Hell, and many like, may indeed be deduced out of Scriptures, but not so plainly
as to end Controversies with contentious spirits, if we should produce only
testimonies of Scriptures. And we are to note there be two things in Scripture,
the Characters or the written words, and the sense included in them. The
Character is as the sheath, but the sense is the very sword of the spirit. Of
the first of these two, all are partakers; for whosoever knows the Character,
may read the Scripture: but of the sense all men are not capable, nor can we in
many places be certain of it, unless Tradition be assistant. It is an offer
worth the taking that here he maks, That the sense of Scriptures is the sword
of the spirit. This is as much as we contend that the sense of the Scripture is
the Scripture. Whence the inference is immediately necessary, That if the
Romish Church bind us to believe, or absolutely practice, ought contrary to the
true sense and meaning of Scriptures, with the like devotion we do Gods
express, undoubted commandments: she prefers her own authority above Gods
Word, and makes us acknowledge that allegiance unto her which we owe unto the
spirit. For suppose we had as yet no full assurance of the spirit, for the
contradictory sense to that given by the Church: we were in Christian duty to
expect Gods providence, and invoke the spirits assistance for manifestation of
the truth; from all possibility whereof we desperately exclude our selves, if
we believe one man's testimony of the spirit, as absolutely and irrevocably, as
we would do the manifest immediate testimony of the spirit: yet Quod caput
religionis majus aut celebri est; quam mysteriu^ sanctissimae Trinitatis; quo
trium personatum astruitur divinitas? hoc tamen tam parum clare insinuatur in
scriptura, ut contrarium e sactis literis ita probabiliter atque ut videbatur
vere docuerint Ariani; ut totos 300. annos vexarint Ecclesiam, orbisque
aliquando universus se fuerit (Hieronymo test) miratus Arianum. Immo hodie
docetur in Transylvania, and tum scriptis libris, tum publicis disputationibus,
defenditur, multo acritus and melius, quam in hoc regno l'arlamentarianismus.
Atque ut libere fatear quod res est, nisi me Ecclesiae authoritas commoveret,
quam certissimo credo in vero Scripturae sensu assignando errare non posse, non
facile ex Scriptura colligerem eum sensum; qui habet Deum esse natura unum, and
personis trinum, ita ut naturae Uni^as, numerosa sit, and personarum distinctio
realis: praesertim vero cum pugnare plan e cum naturae lumine videatur, ut
personae sint inter se realiter distinctae, and simul realiter identificatae,
divinae essentiae, uni and simplicissimae. Sacroboscus Def. Decr. Trid. cap. 6.
par. 1. page 67.
Sacroboscus acknowledges he believes the mystery of the Trinity, as it is
taught by their Church, only for the Churches authority; and yet this he
believes as absolutely as he does, yea as he could believe any other divine
Revelation, though extraordinarily made unto himself.

3 In both parts of Belief above mentioned, the causal dependence of our faith
upon the Churches proposals, may be imagined three ways; either whilst it is
in planting; or after it is planted; or from the first beginning of it to it
full grows; or from it first entrance into our hearts, until our departure
out of this world. How far, and in what sort the Ministry of men in the Church
is available, for planting faith; has been declared heretofore. Either for the
planting or supporting it, the skill or authority of the teacher reaches no
further, then to quicken or strengthen our internal taste or apprehension of the
divine truth revealed in Scriptures; or to raise or tune our spirits, as Music
did Elishahs, the better to perceive the efficacy of Gods spirit, imprinting
the stamp of those divine Revelations in our Hearts, whose Characters are in
our Brains. The present Churches proposals, in respect of our Belief, is but as
the Samaritan woman's report was unto the men of Sichar: Many (says the
Evangelist) Joh. 4.
believed in him for the saying of the woman which testified he has told me
all things that ever I did. But this Belief was as none, in respect of that
which they conceive immediately from his own words. For they said unto the
woman, Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our
selves, and know that this is indeed The Christ. Joh 34. 3.
The (...) (says Job) tries the words, as the mouth tastes meats. Consonant
hereto is our Churches doctrine, that as our bodily mouths taste and try
meats immediately, without interposition of any other man's sense or jugement of
them: so must the ears of our souls try and discern divine truths, without
relying on other men's proposals or reports of their relish. No external means
whatsoever, can in either case have any use: but only either for working a
right disposition in the Organ, whereby trial is made; or by occasioning the
exercise of the faculty rightly disposed. How essentially faith by our
adversaries doctrine depends upon the Churches authority, is evident out of the
former discourses: that this dependence is perpetual, is as manifest, in that
they make it the judge and rule of faith, such an indefectible rule, and so
authentic a Judge, as in all points must be followed, and may not be so far
examined, either by Gods written law, or rules of nature, whether it contradict
not it self or them.

4 It remains we examine the particular manner of this dependence, or what The
principal difficulties in the Romists (...)*pinio^, whereto no sufficient
answer can be given.
the Churches infallibility does or can perform, either to him that believes,
or to the object of his belief; whence a Roman Catholics faith should become
more firm or certain then other man's. It must enlighten either his soul, that
it may see; or divine revelations, that they may be seen more clearly:
otherwise he can exceed others only in blind Belief. The cunningest Sophister
in that school, strictly examined upon these points, will bewray that monstrous
Blasphemy which some shallow brains have hitherto hoped to cover. We have the
same Scriptures they have; and peruse them in all the languages they do. What
is it then can hinder, either them, from manifesting; or us, from discerning,
their Truth or true meaning manifested? Do we want the Churches proposal? we
demand how their present Church it self can better discern them then ours may?
what testimony of antiquity have they, which we have not? But it may be, we
want spectacles to read them; our Church has but the eyes of private men,
which cannot see without a public light: Their Churches eyes are Cat-like,
able so to illustrate the objects of Christian faith, as to make them clear and
perspicuous to it self, though dark and invisible unto us. Suppose they could:
Yet Cats-eyes benefit not bystanders a whit for seeing colors in darkness,
albeit able themselves to see them without any other light then their own. The
visible Church (says the Jesuit) is able to discern all divine truth by her
infallible public spirit. How knows he this certainly, without an infallible
public spirit? perhaps as men see Cats-eyes shine in the dark, when their own
do not. Let him believe so. But what does this belief advantage him, or other
private spirits, for the clear, distinct, or perfect sight of what the Church
proposes? Does the proposal make divine Truths more perspicuous in themselves?
Why then are they not alike perspicuous to all, that hear, read, or know the
Churches testimony of them? Sacroboscus has said all that possibly can be
said on their behalf in this difficulty; Adverte Sectarios, ut supra
insinuavi, nullius Ecclesiae authoritate, tanquam sufficient proponente uti,
ne quidem suae; Sed tanquam proponente nude: nam sibi assumunt Ecclesiae
sententiam corrigere quando libet, and tunc opponunt Christum Ecclesiae, quasi
Ecclesia aliud proponeret, Christus vero aliud docerer; si autem illam
Ecclesiam pro sufficient haberent, oporteret in omnibus suam sententiam cum
illa consormare. Unde si quando verae Ecclesiae authoritate utuntur: ne tunc
quidem de veritate revelata fidem habent, sicut non habet ille scientiam, qui
medio quidem utitur necessario, existimat tamen illud solum esse probabile. Nam
ad fidem non solom ^ est ut Ecclesia sufficienter credenda proponat infallibili
illa sua authoritate, quam a Christo habet nos docendi, and qui libri doctrinam
divinam contineant, and quis verus sit eorum locorum qui in controversiam
vocantur sensus: sed etiam nec^ ut utatur homo Ecclesiae propositione
formaliter, ut sufficiens est, scilicet illam tendendo ut in infallibilem.
Sac^* Def. Decret. Trid. and Sent. Bell. Cap. 6. par. 1. page 95.
The Sectaries, albeit they should use the authority of the true Church, yet
cannot have any true belief of the truth revealed. If the use of it be as free
to them as to Catholics: what debars them from this benefit? They do not
acknowledge the sufficiency of the Churches proposal. And as a necessary Ad
di^cerne^dam doctrina^ orthodoxam p^^ter habitu^ fid^^ in intellectu, and super
naturalem spiritus sancti concursum, ha^^^ti habi^ fidei debitum, quae s^ ^ct
^qui^ prat^^ea (...) duo (...) pate objecti, quorum ^i desit alternuum,
sacul^a^ nunquam obibit pro^^^um actu^. Horum unum est, ut propositio credenda,
sit revelata a D^, (...) nobis^ (...)(...) propo^* D^ illu^ revelasse:
necessitas pri*orie hinc ossiditur, quonia^ illa qualitas five habitus, quae
dicitur fides divira, (...) supernaturalis, and inter virtutes theologicas est
origin prima, suapte natura ad hoc est determinata, and limit ^ta, ut incli^^t
tantum ad ^a, quae sunt a Deo dicta, and quidem obscure Secus euim (si evidens
nobis sorer, mysteria fidei a Deo esse revelata, cum lumine naturae notum sit
illum non posse mentiri, aut salsum dicere) de iis haberemus scientiam. Sect.
Posterioris vero causa est, quod cum non videamus fidei mysteria esse a Deo
testificata, necesse est nobis proponantur tanquam a Deo revelata, idque
sufficienter. Quoniam insufficiens ptopositio objecti, petinde est ac nulla
propositio, ut patet exemplo luminis, quod oculo proponit videndos colores.
Quando enim lumen est in gradu vaide remisso, colores discernere nequimus: non
quod desit objectum; sed quoniam deest sufficiens lumen in medio, illustrans
objectum. Sacrobes. Desers. Decret. Trident. etc. 6. part. 1. p. 92, 93.
proof or medium is not sufficient to the attaining of science, unless a man
use and acknowledge it formally as necessary: so for establishing true faith,
it suffices not that the Church sufficiently proposes the points to be
believed, or avoweth them by that infallible authority, wherewith Christ has
enabled her to declare both what books contain Doctrines Divine, and what is
the true sense of places controversed in them; but it is further necessary that
we formally use this proposal as sufficient, and embrace it as infallible.

5 The reason then, why a Roman Catholic rightly believes the Truth or true
meaning of Scriptures, when a Protestant that knows the Churches testimony as
well as he, rests in both points uncertain, is, because the Catholic
infallibly believes the Churches authority to be infallible, whereof the
Protestant otherwise persuaded, reaps no benefit by it, but continues still in
darkness, laboring in vain to see the Truth of Divine revelations without it,
as much in vain as if a man should strive to see colors without light. For
this is Sacroboscus instance. Besides the habit of faith seated in the
understanding, and the supernatural concourse of the Holy Spirit, due to all
endued with the babit of faith, but necessary in respect of the subject or
party, two things more are requisite on the behalf of the object of which if
either be wanting, the faculty can never perform it proper function. Of these
two, the one is, that the proposition to be believed be revealed by God* the
other, that there be a sufficient proposal made to us that God has revealed
it. For an unsufficient proposal of any object is as none, as may appear by the
example of light, which proposes colors to be seen. For when the light is
weak or scant, we cannot discern Colors, not that we want a visible object,
but because we want light sufficient to illuminate the object, or the space
betwixt us and it. ^am igitur qui ab authoritate Ecclesiae recedunt, and
contenti sunt veritates fidei esse in Scripturis a Deo revelatus, sib* promitre
^tes spiritus sancti concursum ad actus fidei eliciendos, sufticiente
proponente care^t, atque si^ faciu^^, ac qui sine lumine sibi promitteret
conspectum colorum in area, eo quod habeat colores ante oculos positos and
praeditus (...) facul^ate videndi; cum qua Deus paratus est quoties volumus
concurrere. Nam nunc mortui sunt Prophetae, mortui Apostoli, Christus in coelum
^^ces^^^, and nobis omnium loco reliquit Ecclesiam; cujus authoritatem cum
adhuc in ^is age^^t ipse stabilivit, (...) miraculis, tum al^is rationibus
confirmavit, and quantum opus est etiam nunc confirmat. Sect. (...) (...) vult
(...) sit, hanc audiamus, ab hac quid a Deo per Prophetas, and Apostolos dictum
sit, and quo sensu (...) quodque intell (...) sit, accipia^^s: neque
expectandum est, ut Deus temere, and passim per interni (...) co(...) nobis ^at
vicem propositi^s externae, ut secit primo parenti, and Paulo, qui neque ab
homine, neque p^^ (...), sed per revelationem Jesu Christi accepit Evangelium:
(...) enim privilegia sunt. Sacrob p. 93 and 94. (...). (...). (...). and Sent.
(...). c. 6. part. 1.
He adds withal, such as disclaim the Churches Authority, and are content with
this [That Truths of faith are revealed by God in his Word] and hence promise
themselves the supernatural concourse of the Holy Ghost for producing acts of
faith, are destitute of a sufficient proposer, and their presumption such, as
if a man should persuade himself, because he has Colors before his eyes, and
God ready to afford his ordinary concourse as often as he is disposed to exercise
his visive faculty, he should be able to see them without light. For (says
this Jesuit) the Prophets are dead, Apostles dead, Christ gone to heaven, and
instead of all (Prophets, Apostles, or himself*) has left us his Church. Nor
is it to be expected that God will every where, upon all occasions, supply the
want of the external proposals by the abundance of internal illuminations, as
he did to our first parent, or Saint Paul who had his Gospel neither from man,
nor by man, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. For those are privileges.

6 The calumny intended in this last instance, has often heretofore been
prevented. We never denied either the necessity, or suff^iciencie of the
Churches proposal, as an external mean: we account no other of that rank and
nature, is, or could be, either more necessary, or more sufficient. Saint Paul
we grant, had an extraordinary privilege, and yet for his private information,
had the truth proposed unto him by Acts 9. 17.
Ananias, though the gifts of his public Ministry were immediately from God.
Both the measure of his faith, and manner of attaining it, were unusual: but
his faith it self, once attained, no otherwise independent of any external
proposal then ours is and all Christians must be. We should have been more
beholden to this professor, had he distinctly told us, what it is in their
language, to have a sufficient proposer: albeit this we may gather from his
words late cited, and these The Latin are quoted parag. 4.
following; The Sectaries take upon them to correct the Churches sentence as
often as they list, and then they oppose Christ to the Church, as if the Church
did propose one thing, and Christ teach another. If they admitted any Church as
a sufficient proposer, they were bound to conform their opinions to it, in all
things. As you heard before out of Cap 9 parag. 12. 13.
Bellarmine, That the Popes Decrees may not be examined whether consonant or
contrary to Gods Word or the foundations of faith already laid in our hearts:
and out of Cap. 1. parag 11.
Canus, That we must believe the Church absolutely without its or ands Thus
believing we have Gods Word sufficiently proposed; without this belief or
acknowledgement of such authority in the Church, we have no sufficient proposal
of it, but strive as foolishly to hear God speak, as if we sought to see
Colors without the light.

7 It appears, I hope, as clearly to the Reader as to me, that the Churches
testimony or authority (by our Adversaries Doctrine,) benefits none but such as
steadfastly and absolutely believe it in all things. But he that so believes See
Cap. 3. parag. 12. 13.
it, may by it easily believe all other points, as he that can perfectly see
the light, may see Colors by it Want of this radical belief in us, makes our
faith (in their opinion) so unstable, or rather blind and dead. Yet can I
hardly perswad^ my self all of them will grant the Church adds any inherent or
participated splendour to divine revelations, whereby they become perspicuous in
themselves, as Colors are made visible by irradiation of the Sun. Thus much
notwithstanding all of them, I know, willingly would subscribe unto: A
Protestant can neither of himself be infallibly persuaded of the Truth of
Scriptures, or other conclusions of faith; nor does he absolutely believe any
others, that are infallible in their determinations: but a Roman Catholic,
albeit by his private spirit he cannot infallibly believe them, yet he
infalliby believes the Church which cannot err in belief. All then that a
Papist has more then a Protestant is this; his Belief of the Church: if once
he doubt of this, he is where he was: Which in plain terms is as much as to
say, He believes the Church concerning Scriptures; not Scriptures. That this is
the true interpretation of their Tenent, may easily be gathered from their own
writings. For Bellar. lib. 3. de verbo Dei. cap. 8. Sacrob. page 132.
Bellarmine expressly contends, and all of them suppose that saying of Saint
Austin [ Sacroboscus his instances to elude Doctor Whitakers argument (as he
proposed it) do plainly confirm our inference. At urget Whitakerus: cum
Augustinus ita erat dispositus ut non crederet, nisi ipsum Ecclesiae authoritas
commoveret; authoritas Ecclesiae ^rat sola causa fidei ipsius, ergo fides quam
(...) habebat non erat divina: Nam haec praeter authoritatem Ecclesiae respicit
etlam authoritatem Dei. Probat antecedens, nam particula (nisi) omnes alias
causas removet, praeter eam cujus fit expressa mentio: Hujus autem rei testes
vocat omnes Grammaticos. Verum meminisse debuisset regulae D. Dionisij: Bonum
ex integra causa, malum autem ex quolibet de fectu Ut po(...) effectus, necesse
est omnes causas concurrere; At ut impediatur satis est unam deesse. Itaque
omnes istae propositiones sunt verae. Nifi Augustinus (quem etiam ipse fatetur
sanctum, imo sanctissimum) habuisset intellectum, non sui^^et ^^atus. [Nisi
fuisset Deus, Augustinus non fuisset ^^atus] [nisi habuisset fidem Augustinus,
non fuisset beatus.] page 133. Now as the particle (nisi) in his first
instance, excludes all Creatures save intelligent: in the second all
intelligent, save such as shall enjoy the sight of God: in his third all save
the saithfull, from blessedness: So in this our instance, the same particle
excludes all credence of the Gospel, beside that credence we give unto the
Church.
Non crederem Evangelio, nisime commoveret Ecclesiae authoritas; I would not
believe the Gospel, unless the Churches authority did thereto move me] to be
true, as well, after faith is produced, whilst it continues, as whiles it is
in planting. Now if a man should say, Non crederem Francisco; nisi me
commoveret Petri fi^elitas; I would not trust Frances, but for Peter's word:
this speech resolved into it natural or proper sense, is aequivalent unto this;
I do not trust Frances, but Peter that gives his word for him. And in case
Peter should prove false, or be distrusted by him that took his word for
Frances, as yet not believed but for Peter's sake; the creditor could have no
hold of either. Thus if Bellarmine and his fellows be (as they would seem to
make S. Austin) minded, not to believe the Gospel but for the Churches
authority, or proposal of it: let them speak plainly and properly, not in
parables or metaphors; and so we shall know their meaning to be* That they
indeed believe not the Scriptures, but the Church; or the Church truly and
really; the Scriptures only by extrinsecal denomination.

8 Nor can they reply either consequently to Sacrobos us instance or their
general Tenants, that as he which sees colors by the light, truly sees
colors; not the light only: so he that believes Scriptures by the Churches
infallible proposal, believes not the Churches proposal only, but Scriptures
as truly and properly. The diversity of reason in these two consequences,
arises from the diverse manner of seeing colors by the Suns light, and
believing Scriptures by the Church: which we are now to gather from this short
Catechisine containing the sum of Roman faith.

CAP. XXX.
Declaring how the First main ground of Romish faith leads directly unto
Atheism: the second, unto preposterous Heathenisine or Idolatry.

1 IT is a pretty Sophisme (as a judicious and learned Divine, in his public
exercise for his first degree in Divinity, late well observed) wherewith the
Jesuit deludes the simple, making them believe their faith, otherwise weak and
unsettled, is most firm and certain, if it have once the visible or
representative Churches confirmation; when as the Church so taken, seldom or
never instructs or confirms any, at least not the hundred thousandth part of
them, unto whose salvation such confirmation is by Cum dicimus propositionem
Ecclesi^ esse conditionem necessariam ad assensum fidei, Nomine Eccles^^
intelligimus ejus Caput, i. Romanum Pontificem per se, vel una cum Concilio, ex
pradicta authoritate propositiones fidei fide ibus declarantem. Valent. Tom. 3.
in Aq. Disput. 2. Quaest. 1. De objecto fidei, ^unct. 1. Vide Annot: ex
Bellarmino Cap. 25. Parag. 2.
Jesuitical persuasions most absolutely necessary. But suppose the visible
Church or Romish Consistory, the Pope and his Cardinals, should vouchsafe to
catechize any; the Dialogue between them and the Catechized, would thus proceed.

Cons. Do ye believe these sacred Volumes to be the Word of God? Catech. We do.
Cons. Are you certain they are? Catech. So we hope. Cons. How can your hope be
sure? for Mahomet says, His Alchoran is; sundry other Heretics say, their
fained revelations or false traditions are Gods Word? How can you assure us, ye
may not be deceived as well as they? Are not many of them as good Scholars as
you? Catech. Yes indeed, and better. Cons. Are not you subject unto error as
well as they? Catech. Would God we were not. Cons. What must you do then to be
ascertained these are divine revelations? Cat. Nay, we know not: but this is
that which we especially desire to know, and would bind our selves in any bond
to such as could teach us. Cons. Well said: do you not think it reason then to
be ruled in this case, by such as cannot be deceived? Cat. It is meet we
should. Cons. Lo, we are the men: we are the true visible Church, placed in
authority by Christ himself for this purpose. These Scriptures tell you
plainly as much, Ad quintum dico, nos non gloriari in te^plis, and successione
Episcopo^ and Apostolica sede secundum se, sed propter Christi promissionem,
qui ait, Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. and ^, etc. Qualem
promissionem Judaei nunquam habuerunt. Bell. l. 3. de Eccles milit. c. (...).
(...) Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc His holiness, whom here you see, is
Peter's Successor; sole heir of that promise, far more glorious then the Jewish
Church ever had any.

2 This Fides divina (quod omnes notant) licet obscura sit, certa tame^ est and
quidem magis quam scientia. Isti vero de suis dogmatibus sint oportet incerti:
nam quicquid credu^t, hac sola de causa ex part objecti credunt, quod ita
putant Scriptura^ sentire; in quo judicio cum sint obnoxii errori, non possunt
certo statuere, s^ reipsa non errare. Confirmatur: nam sibi pl^s tribuere
nequeunt quam Luthero, Calvino, aut sanctis Patribus; (...) aute^ judicio se
dicu^t non teneri, and hoc ideo quod homo qui libet, quantumvis san^tus, and
spiritu plenus, errare possit. Quare cum generalis sententia ab illis data,
ipsos quoque comprehendit, quippe qui extra homi^u^ numeru^ non sunt, sequitur
eos ad^o ince^tos esse de suis, ac de alioru^ interpretationibus. Sacrob. Def.
Dec. T^id. Cap. 6. Part. 1.
is the very quintessence and extraction of huge and corpulent volumes written
in this argument, which our English Mountibanks sent hither from the
Seminaries, venditate as a Paracelsian medicin, able to make men immortal The
sum of all that others write, or they allege is this; ^very one may pretend
what writings he lists, to be the word of God; who shall be the infalliale
Judge, either of written or unwritten revelations? Must not the Church? for she
is Magistra and Judex fidei. These are the words, and this is the very
Argument, wherein Valentians soul, it seems, did most delight, he uses them so
often. But to proceed: The parties Catechized thus by the visible Church it self,
should any Protestant enter Dialogue with them how they know those received
Scriptures to be the Word of God, could answer, I trow, sufficiently to this
question, thus: Mary sir, we know better then you: For we heard the visible
Church which cannot err, say so, with our own ears. Prot. You are most certain
then that these are the Oracles of God, because the visible Church (Gods living
Oracle) did bear testimony of them? Catech. Yea, sir, and their testimony is
most infallible. Prot. But, what if you doubt again of their infallibilities?
How will you answer this objection: Mahomet says his Alcoran is Scripture; the
Turkish Priests will tell you as much, viva voce, and show you, if you be
disposed to believe them, evident places therein, for his infallibility? Manes
could say that he had divine revelations. The Pope pretends he has this
infallibility, which neither of them had. Who shall judge? the Consistory? But
why should you think they may not err as well as others? Did they show you any
evidence out of Scriptures, or did they bring you to such entire acquaintance
with their public spirit, as to approve your selves Divine Critics of all
questions concerning the Canon as often as any doubt should arise? Catech Oh no,
these audacious Criticismes of private men they utterly detest, and forewarned
us upon pain of damnation to beware of. For there is no private person but may
err, and for such to judge of Scriptures were presumption justly damnable.
Rely they must for this reason upon the Churches infallibility, and that
continually. It alone cannot; without it, all others may err, as well as Manes,
Mahomet, Nestorius, or Eutyches: undoubtedly believing it, cannot err, we our
selves are as free from error, as he that follows such good counsel given by
others as he cannot give himself, is more secure then he that altogether
follows his own advice, albeit better able to counsel others then the former.
Prot. Then I perceive your only hold-fast in all temptations, your only
anchor when any blasts of vain doctrine arise, is this: The present Romish
Church canndt err: for if you doubt of any doctrine taught to the contrary,
ask her and she will resolve you; or if you cannot see the Truth in it self,
yet believe without all wavering as she believes that sees it, and you shall be
as safe, as if you rode in the harbor in a storm. Catech. Ah yes, Gods holy
name be praised, who has so well provided for his Church: for otherwise
heretics and schismatics would shake and toss her, even in this main point or
ground of faith, as evil spirits do ships in tempests: we must either hold this
Test sure, or else all is gone. God has left off speaking unto men, and we
cannot tell, whether ever See Cap. 29. Sect. 5.
he spoke to them or no; but as the present Church, which speaks viva voce,
tells us.

3 But the Reader perhaps expects what inconvenience will hence follow. First,
hereby it is apparent, that, Belief of Scriptures divine Truth, and their true
sense, absolutely and immediately depends upon the Churches proposal, or rather
upon their Belief of what it proposes, as well after they are confirmed in
that general point, [That they are Gods words,] as in the instant of their
confirmation in it. The first necessary consequence of which opinion, is; That
the Church must be more truly and properly believed, then any part of
Scriptures or matter contained in it. For in this matter of dependence, that
transcendent rule of Nature, (...), has it Arist. (...) 1. Post. cap. 2.
proper force: whether we speak of the Essence, Existence, or Quality of things
being, or existing: that upon which any other thing thus absolutely and
continually depends, does more properly and really exist, and has much firmer
interest in it essence and existence, then ought can have which depends upon
it. One there is, and no more, that can truly say My Essence is Mine own, and
my Existence necessary. Whatsoever is besides, is but a shadow or picture
borrowed from his infinite being. Amongst created Entities, all essentially
depending on Him, Accidents have a kind of existence peculiar to themselves;
yet cannot so properly be said to exist, as their subjects, on whom they have
such double dependence. Nor can the Moon so truly say, my beauty is my own, as
may the Sun, which lends light and splendour to this his sister, as it were upon
condition she never use it but in his sight. For the same reason, That for
which we believe another thing, is always more truly, more really, and more
properly believed, then that which is believed for it, if the one belief
necessarily depend upon the other, Tam in facto esse quam in sieri, from the
first beginning to the latter end. For of beliefs thus mutually affected, the
one is real and radical; the other, nominal, or at the most by participation
only real. This consequence is unsound. [Intellective knowledge depends on
sensitive: therefore sensitive is of these two the surer.] The reason is,
because intellective knowledge depends on sensitive, only in the acquisition:
not after it is acquired. But this inference is most undoubted; [We believe the
conclusion for the premises: therefore we believe the premises the better,]
because belief of the conclusion absolutely depends upon the premises, during
the whole continuance of it. This is the great Philosophers Rule, and a branch
of the former Axiom. And some justly question, whether in Scholastic
propriety of speech, we can truly say there is a belief of the conclusion,
distinct from the belief of the premises; or rather, the belief of the
premises, is by extrinsical denomination attributed unto the conclusion. This
latter opinion, at least in many Syllogismes, is the truer: most necessarily
true in all, wherein the conclusion is a particular, essentially subordinate to
an universal of truth unquestionable. As be that infallibly believes every man
is a reasonable creature, infallibly believes Socrates is such. Nor can we say,
there be two distinct beliefs: one of the universal; another of this
particular: for he that says, All, excepteth ^one. If Socrates then make one
in the Catalogue of men, he that formerly knew all, knew him to be a reasonable
Creature: all he had to learn, was what was meant by this name Socrates, a man
or a beast; After he knows him to be a man in knowing him to be a reasonable
creature, he knows no more then he did before, in that uniuersal, Every man is
a reasonable creature. The like consequence holds as firm in our present
argument; He that believes this universal, [Whatsoever the Church proposes
concerning Scriptures, is most true] has no more to learn but only what
particulars the Church proposes. These being known, we cannot imagine there
should be two distinct Beliefs: one of the Churches general infallibility;
another, of the particular truths or points of faith (contained in the
Scripture) proposed by it. For as in the former case, so in this, He that from
the Churches proposal believes or knows this particular, The Book of
Revelations was from God, receives no increase of former belief: For before, he
believed all the Church did propose; and therefore this particular, Because one
of all.

4 The truth of this Conclusion may again, from a main principle of Romish
Faith be thus demonstrated. Sacrosancta, Oecumenica, and generalis Tridentina
Synodus in Spiritu Sancto legiti^e congregata, p^aesidentibus in ea eisdem
t^ibus Apostolicae sedis legatis, hoc sibi perperuo ante oculos proponens, ut
sublatis erroribus, puri^as ipsa Evangelii in Eccl^a conservetur: quod
p^omissum ante per Prophetas (...) Scripturis sanctis, Dominus noster Jesus
Christus, D^isili^s, proprio ore primum promulgavit; deinde per suos Apostolos
tanquam fontem o^, and ^alutaris (...), and ^ rum disciplinae, o^^i Creaturae
praedica^^ ju^: perspiciensque h^nc veritatem, and disciplinam ^ libris
scriptis, and sine scripto traditionibus, quae ^ps^us Christi ore ^b Apostolis
acceptae, a^t ^ stolis, Spiritu Sancto dictante, quasi per ^, ad nos usque
pervenerunt, Orthodoxo^ Pa^^um exempla secuta, o^^es libros tam ve^^^is q^am
novi Testamenti, c^ urin^que ^ De^ctor, ne^ non traditiones ipsas, tum ad sidem
^ res pertinentes, tanquam vel ore (...) Ch^, V^l a Spi^it^ Sancto d^ctatas,
and ^ Ecclesia Cath^a conservaras, pa^i (...), a^^^ct^, a^^e veren^ia susc^^it,
and veneta^^r. Council T^^dent. S^i^. 4. Decret^ de Canonicis Scripturis. And a
little after having reckoned up the Apocryphal Books with the Ca^ical, they
thus conclude. Si quis a^tem libros ipsos integros cum omnibus suis partibus,
prout in Eccl^s^a Catholica legi consueve^unt, and in veten vulgata Latina
editione habentur, pro Sacris and Canou^^^s non susceperit; and traditiones
praedictas sciens and p^udens contempserit; ana^hema sit. O^; in^^lliga^t, quo
ordi^e and via, ipsa Synodus ^ f^d^^ conf^ssionis fundamentum, sit progr^* and
^mum testimoniis, ac praesidiis in co^ d^g^^atibus, and instaurandis in
Ecclesia (...), ^^t usura. The Council was very wise in not expressing as well
what unwritten traditions, as written Books, they meant to follow.
Whatsoever unwritten traditions the Church shall propose, though yet unheard
of or unpossible otherwise to be known then only by the Churches asseveration,
all Romanists are bound as certainly to believe, as devoutly to embrace, as any
truths contained in the written word, acknowledged by us, the Jews, and them,
for divine. Now if either from their own experience, the joint consent of
sincere antiquity, or testimony of Gods spirit speaking to them in private, or
what means soever else possible or imaginable, they gave any absolute credence
unto the written word or matters containd in it, besides that they give unto
the Churches general veracitie: the Scriptures by addition of this credence
(were it great or little) arising from these grounds peculi^r to them, must
needs be morefirmly believed and embraced, then such unwritten traditions, as
are in themselves suspicious, incapable of other Credit then what they borrow
from the Church. For in respect of the Churches proposal, which is one and the
same, alike peremptory in both; Scriptures, and traditions (of what kind
soever) must be equally believed. And if such traditions as can have no
assurance besides the Churches testimony, must be as well believed as
Scriptures, or Divine truths contained in them: the former conclusion is
evidently necessary, That they neither believe the Scriptures, nor the truths
contained in them; but the Churches proposal of them only. For the least
belief of any Divine Truth, added to belief of the Churches proposal, which
equally concerns written, and unwritten verities, would dissolve the former
equality But that, by the Trent Council may not be dissolved. Therefore our
adversaries in deed and verity believe no Scriptures, nor Divine written Truth
but the Churches proposal only concerning them. And R^sponde^: ^ ^^n^s c^^^^s
ess^ Eccl^s^^m ^* ^ dubitare ^ H^ ca^e^a rev^^^ ^, ab ip^a m^^^e Eccle^^a ^* ^,
^ ull^^ No^ a D^o, and (...) ^* a ^: and ^odi^ (...), (...) Nov^ unus quid^^
a^* qu^ madmodum^ev^l^tae (...) ^ (...) A^ his m^ll^ i^ Mo^e P^. Sa ^ Sen^
Bell. ^. (...). p. 109.
Sacrobosous bewrays his read^ness to believe the Church as absolutely as my
Ch^istian can do God or Christ though no (...) of the New Testament were
extant. For, that the Church cannot err, was an ^led by God, proposed by the
Church ^ by the the faithful before any part of the New ^estament was written.
Now he that without (...) D^ctrines of Jesus Christ, would believe the
Doctrines of faith as sirmly as with it, believes not the Gospel which now he
has, but their authorities only, upon which, though we had it not he would as
absolute rely, for all matters of Doctrine supposed to be contained in it.

5 Of further to illustrate the truth of our conclusion with this Jesuits
former comparison, which has best illustrated the Romish Churches Tenent. That
Church in respect of the Canon of Scriptures or any part thereof is as the
light is to colors As no color can be seen of us but by the light: so, by his
Doctrine, neither the Canon of Scriptures, or any part thereof, can be known
without the Churches testimony. Again, as removal of light presently makes us
lose the sight of colors: so doubt or denial of the Churches authority
d^prives us of all true and steadfast belief concerning Gods Word or any matter
contained in it, God (as they plead) has revealed his will obseurely: and unto
a distinct or clear apprehension of what is obscurely revealed, the visible
Churches declaration is no less necessary, then light to discernment of
colors. The Reason is one in both* and is this. As the actual visibility of
colors wholly depends upon the light, as well for existence, as duration: so
(by Jesuitical Doctrine) True belief of Scriptures wholly depends on the
visible Churches Declaration, as well during the whole continuance, as the
first producing of it. By the same reason* as we gather that light in it self
is more visible then colors, seeing by it alone colors become actually
visible: so will it necessarily follow, that the Churches Declaration (that is,
the Popes privilege for not erring) is more steadfastly to be believed, as more
credible in it self, then either the Canon of Scriptures or any thing therein
contained: because these become actually credible unto us only by the Churches
Declaration, which cannot possibly ought avail for their belief, unless it were
better believed.

6 Perhaps the Reader will here challenge me, that this last instance proves
not all that I proposed in the Title of this chapter. For it only proves the
Popes supremacy is better to be believed, then that Christ is come in the
flesh; that God did ever speak to men in former ages by his Prophets, and ^tter
by his Son. But this infers no absolute alienation of our belief from Christ,
seeing even in this respect that we believe the Church or Pope so well, we must
needs ^elieve that Christ is come in the flesh, and that God has spoken to us
sundry ways: for thus much the Pope avou^^eth. Yea, but what if the Church
teach us that Christ is our Lord and Redeemer, and ^et urge us to do that which
is contumelious to his Majesty? What if it teach us that these Scriptures are
Gods Word: and yet bind us by her infallible d^^^^es to break his Laws, and
give his spirit the lie? Should we make profession of believing as the Pope
teaches, and yet take his meaning to be only such as Marnixius, whom we better
believe, would make it: His Holiness would quickly pronounce us Apostat's from
the Catholic faith. Or if this suffice not the indifferent Reader for
satisfying my former promise: let him have patience but for a while, and I will
pay him all.

7 Their first main position, [That no private man can certainly know The two
mai^ b^a^^hes (...) R^^ish ^
the Canon of Scriptures to be Gods Word, but by relying upon the present
Church,] infers as much as has been said: much more will follow from their
second, [That no man can certainly be persuaded of the true sense and meaning
of particular propositions contained in the general Canon, without the same
Churches testimony, unto whom the authentic interpretation or dijudication of
Scriptures ^holly belongs.] Imagine the former parties now fully persuaded of
the Scriptures divine truth in general, should by the Consistory which late
C^^^chized them, be questioned about the meaning of some particular pla^^^.
Consist. We hope you adore the consecrated host with Divine worship, as often as
you meet it in procession. Cat. Desirous we are to do any thing that becomes
good Christians, and obedient Sons unto our holy mother the Church: but we
cannot satisfy our consciences how this may stand with the principles of
Christianity. Your Holinesses (for which we rest yours unto death) have assured
us these sacred volumes are the very words of God, and his words we know must
be obeyed. Now since we know these to be his words* we have found it written in
them, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. It
is, we doubt, our simplicity that will not ^ v. 5.
suffer us to conceive how the consecrated Host can be adored as God without
open breach of his commandment. For, to our shallow understanding, there is no
necessity to persuade us Christ God and man should be hid in it. These words,
Hoc est corpus me^m, may bear many interpretations, no way pregnant to this
purpose. And it is doubtful, whether Christ's Body, though really present in the
Sacrament, should retain the same presence in procession: whereas the former
commandment is plain, We must worship the Lord our God, and him only must we
serve. Consist. Ye think this Text is plain to your late purpose: we think
otherwise. Whether is more meet? ye to submit your private opinions to our
public spirits: or us that are Pastors, to learn of you silly sheep? Cat.
Therefore are your servants come unto you, that they may learn how to obey you
in this decree without Idolatry: well hoping, that as ye enjoin us absolutely
to obey you in it; so ye can give us full assurance we shall not disobey the
Spirit of God, in the former great commandment, whose exposition we most
desire.

8 Would these or like supplications, though conceived in Christian modesty,
though proposed with religious fear, and awful regard of their persons, though
presented with tears and sighs, or other more evident signs of inward sorrow,
find any entrance into Romish Prelates ears, or move the Masters of the
Inquisition house to forbear exaction of obedience to the for^er, or other
Decree of the Trent Council; Were the Form of the Decree it self, unto private
judgments, never so contradictory to Gods express written laws; or the
consequence of practizing as it prescribes, never so dreadful to the doubtful
conscience? How much better then were it for such silly souls, had they never
known the Books of Moses, to have been from God? for so committing idolatry
with stocks and stones, or other creatures, they had done what was displeasing
to their Master, and justly punishable; ^
yet with fewer stripes, because his will was not made known unto them. But now
they know it, and acknowledge the truth of this Commandment. To what end? That
they may be left without all excuse for not doing it; They see the general
truth of Gods Oracles, that they may be more desperately blinded in wilful
perverting the particulars. For what glory could the allurement of silly
ignorant men to simple idolatry be unto great Antichrist? Let them first
subscribe to the written Laws of the everliving God, and afterward wholly
submit themselves to his determinations for their practice, and so the
opposition betwixt him and the Deity, betwixt his injunctions and the Decrees
of the Almighty, may be more positive, more directly contrary. The Heathen or
others not acknowledging Gods Word at all, are rightly termed unbelievers: men
thus believing the Scriptures in general to be Gods Word, from the testimony of
the Church, and yet absolutely relying upon her judgment for the meaning of
particular places are transported from unbelief to misbelief, from gross
ignorance to wilful defiance of God and his Laws. Finally, they are brought
to know Gods Word, that they may doubt in this and like fearful practices
enjoined; that so first doubting, and afterward desperately resolving
absolutely to follow the Churches injunction, against that sense and meaning of
the divine decrees which the holy Spirit does dictate to their private
consciences, they may without doubt be damned, for not abiding in the truth.
Like their first parents they hear Gods sentence, but prefer the
interpretations of Satan's firstborn before their own, because it must be
presumed he is more subtle then they. Or to refer the two main streams of
th^s iniquity to their proper heads: The first, [That we cannot know the old or
new Testament to be Gods Word, but by relying upon the Church] makes all
subscribers to it, real Atheists or Infidels, and Christians only in conceit
or upon condition: [If the Church, whose authority they so highly esteem, be as
infallible as is pretend.] Heretofore I have much grieved at the Trent
Councels impiety: but now I wonder at these grave Fathers folly, that would
trouble themselves with prescribing so many Canons or overseeing so large a
Catechism, when as the beginning of Protagoras Book, one or two words altered,
might have comprehended the entire confession of such men's faith, as rely upon
their Fatherhoods; The Atheist thus began his Book; De dijs non ha^^o quod
decam, utrum sint necne: Concerning the Gods or their being, I can say nothing.
A private Roman Catholic might render an entire account of his faith in terms
as brief: De Christo and Christiana fide non habeo quod dicam, utrum sint
necne: Whether there be a Christ, or Christian Religion be but a Politic
Fable, I have nothing to say peremptorily, yea, or no, the Church or Council
can determine: whom in this, and all other points wherein God is a party, I will
absolutely believe, whilst I live: if at my death I find they teach am^e, let
the devil and they (if there be a devil) decide the controversy. Yet this
conceit or conditional Belief of Christ and Christianity, conceived from the
former, serves as a ground color for disposing men's souls, to take the sable
dye of Hell, wherewith the second main stream of Romish impiety will deeply
infect all such as drink of it. For once believing Gods Word from the Churches
testimony, this absolute submission of their consciences to embrace that sense
it shall suggest, sublimates them from refined Heathinisme or Gentilisme to
diabolisme or symbolizing with infernal spirits, whose chiefest solace consists
in acting greatest villainies, or wresting the meaning of Gods written Laws to
his dishonor. For just proof of which imputation, we are to prevent what (as
we late intimated) might in favor of their opinion be replied to our former
instance of light and colors.

9 Some perhaps, well affected, would be resolved, why, as he that sees An
objection, which might be made in favor of the Romanists, answered and
retorted.
colors by the sun, sees not only the sun, but colors with it: so he that
believes the Scriptures by relying upon the Church, should not believe the
Church only, but the Scriptures too, commended by it. The doubt could hardly
be resolved, if according to our adversaries Tenent, the Churches declarations
did confirm our faith by illustrating the Canon of Scriptures, or making
particular truths contained in it, inherently more perspicuous: as if they were
in themselves but potentially credible, and made actually such by the Churches
Testimony, which is the first and Principal Credible; in such sort as colors
become actually visible, by illumination of the principal and prime visible.
But herein the grounds of Romish doctrine, and the instance brought by
Sacroboscus, to illustrate it, are quite contrary. For the light of the Sun,
though most necessary unto sight, is yet necessary only in respect of the
object, or for making colors actually visible; which, made such, or
sufficiently illuminated, are instantly perceived without further
intermediation of any other light then the internal light of the Organ, in
discerning colors always rather hindered then helped by circumfusion of light
external. For this reason it is, that men in a pit or cave may at noon day see
the stars, which are invisible to such as are in the open air: not, that they
are more illuminated to the one, then the other; but because plenty of light
does hinder the Organ or eyesight of the one. Generally all objects, either
actually visible in themselves, or sufficiently illuminated, are better
perceived in darkness then in the light. But so our Adversaries will not
grant, that after the Church has sufficiently proposed the whole Canon to be
Gods Word, the distinct meaning of every part is more clear and facile to all
private spirits, by how much they less participate of the visible Churches
further illustration. For (quite contrary to the former instance) the Churches
testimony or declaration is only necessary, or available to right belief, in
respect, not of the object to be believed [Scriptures;] but of the party
believing. For (as has been observed) no man in their See Cap. 2. and Cap. 29.
judgment can believe Gods Word, or the right meaning of it, but by believing
the Church: and all belief is inherent in the believer. Yea this undoubted
Belief of the Churches authority, is that, which in Bellarmine and
Sacroboscus's judgment, makes a Roman Catholics belief of Scriptures, or
divine truths taught by them, much better then a Protestants. If otherwise the
Churches declaration, or testimony, could without the belief of it
infallibility; which is inherent in the subject believing, make Scriptures
credible, as the light does colors visible in themselves: a Protestant that
knew their Churches meaning, might as truly believe them as a Roman Catholic,
albeit he did not absolutely believe the Church, but only use her help, for
their Orthodoxal interpretation, as he does ordinary Expositors, or as many do
the benefit of the Sun for seeing colors, which never think whether colors
may be seen without it or no. For though it be certain that they cannot, yet
this opinion is merely accidental to their sight: and if a man should be so
wilful as to maintain the contrary, it would argue only blindness of mind,
none of his bodily sight. Nor should distrust of the Romish Churches authority,
ought diminish our Belief of any divine Truth, were her declarations requisite
in respect of the object to be believed, not in respect of the subject
believing.

10 Hence arises that difference which plainly resolves the former doubt. For
seeing the Sun makes colors actually visible, by adding virtue or luster to
them: we may rightly say, we see colors, as truly as the light, by which we
see them. For though without the benefit of it, they cannot be seen; yet are
they not seen by seeing it, or by relying upon it testimony of them. Again,
because the use of light is only necessary in respect of the object, or for
presenting colors to the eye; after once they be sufficiently illuminated or
presented, every creature endued with sight, can immediately discern each from
other, without any further help or benefit of external light, then the general,
whereby they become all alike actually visible at the same instant. The Suns
light then is the true cause, why colors are seen: but no cause of our
distinguishing one from another being seen, or made actuallie visible by it.
For of all sensible objects sufficiently proposed, the sensitive faculty,
though seated in a private person, is the sole immediate supreme Judge, and
relies not upon any others more public verdict of them. On the contrary,
because the Romanists supposed firm belief of Scriptures, or their true
meaning, arises only from his undoubted belief of the Churches veracicie which
is in the believer as in it subject, not from any increase of inherent
credibilitie, or perspicuitie thence propagated to the Scriptures: Hence it is
that consequently to his positions, most repugnant to all truth, he thinks,
after the Church has sufficiently avouched the Scriptures divine truth in
general, we cannot infalliblie distinguish the true sense and meaning of one
place from another, but must herein also rely upon the Churches testimony; and
only believe that sense to be repugnant, that consonant to the analogy of
faith, which she shall tender, albeit our private consciences be never so well
informed by other Scriptures to the contrary. The truth then of our former
conclusion is hence easily manifested. For seeing they hold both the Scriptures
and their distinct sense to be obscure and unable to ascertain themselves,
unless the Church add perspicuitie or facility of communicating their
meaning to private spirits: such, after the Churches proposal, cannot possibly
discern them any better, or more directly in themselves, then they did before,
but must wholly rely upon their Prelates, as if these were the only watchmen in
the Tower of Gods Church, that could by virtue of their place discern all
divine truth. Others must believe there is an omnipotent God, which has given
his Law; a Mediator of the new Testament: but what the meaning either of Law or
Gospel is, they may not presume otherwise to determine, then weak sights do of
things they see confusedly a far off, whose particular distance or difference
they must take only upon other men's report, that have seen them distinctly,
and at hand.

11 To illustrate these deductions with the former similitude of the prime and
secondary visibles. Let us suppose for disputations sake, that the Sun which
illuminates colors by its light, were further endued (as we are) with sense
and reason, able to judge of all the differences between them, which it can
manifest to us, and hence challenge to be a Pope or infallible proposer of
colors. This supposition the Canonist has made less improbable. For Deus
fecit duo luminaria, God made two lights, that is, by his interpretation, the
Pope and the Emperor. Or, if you please to mitigate the harshnesse of it, let
the Man in the Moon, whom we may not imagine speechless, be supposed the Sun,
or Pope of colors, his Mercury or Nuncio. As the Papists say, we cannot know
Scriptures to be Scriptures, but by the infallible proposal of the Church: so
it is evident we cannot see any color at all, unless illuminated or proposed
by the Suns light. But after by it we see them, suppose we should take upon us
to discourse of their nature, or determine of their distinct properties as now
we do, and the Sun or Pope of colors, by himself or his Nuncio should take us
up, as Duke Humphrey did the blind man restored to sight, which he never had
lost; Yea, who taught you to distinguish colors? were you not quite blind but
now? as yet you cannot discern any colors without my public light, and yet
will you presume to define their properties, and distinguish their natures
against my definitive sentence known? Must not he that enables you to see them,
enable you to distinguish them seen? Must you not wholly rely upon my
authority, whether this be white, or that black? If a man upon these Motives
should absolutely believe the Suns determinations, renouncing the judgment of
his private senses: could he truly say, that he either knew this color to be
white or that black, or another green? Rather were he not bound to say, I
neither know white from black, nor black from blew, nor blew from green: but I
know that to be white which the Sun, the only infallible Judge of colors,
says is white; that only to be black, that blew, and that green which he
shall determine so to be. I may think indeed that the snow is white, or coals
black: but with submission to the Suns determination.

12 And yet, as you have heard at large out of the Trent Council, and best
Apologies can be made for it, the Church must be the infallible Judge of all
Scripture sense, and must absolutely be believed without all appeal to
Scriptures, not conditionally as she shall accord with them. The conclusion
hence issuing, is most infallible, and on their parts most inevitable;
[Whosoever absolutely acknowledges this authority in the Church or Consistory,
and yields such obedience unto it in all determinations, concerning the Canon
of Scriptures, does not believe either this or that determinate proposition of
faith, or any definite meaning of Gods Word.] The best resolution he can make
of his faith is this; [I believe that to be the meaning of every place, which
the Church shall define to be the meaning:] which is all one, as if he had
said, I do not believe the Scriptures or their meaning, but I believe the
Churches decision and sentence concerning them. He that believes not the Church
(says Nihil igitur afferunt, qui Ecclesiae authoritatem non absolute, sed ex
condition ponunt. Si namque ad eum modum res habet, and mihi quoque fides
habenda est, quando pronunciavero secundum Scripturas recte intellectas. Id
enim est non mihi, sed Scripturae credere. Caenus lib. 4. ca. 4. See cap. 1.
parag. 11.
Canus) but with this limitation, [if it give sentence according unto
Scriptures;] does not believe the Church but the Scriptures. By the same reason
it follows most directly; he that believes not the true sense and meaning of
Scriptures, but with this reservation, (if the Church so think or determine:)
does not believe them, but the Church only. For, as the Schoolmen say, Ubi
unum propter aliud, ibi unum tantum. He that serves God, only because he would
be rich, does not serve God but his riches, albeit he perform the outward acts
of obedience. Or if, we love a man only for his affinity with another whom we
dearly love: we truly and properly love but the one, the other only by way of
reflection or denomination, in such a sense, as we say, a man appears by his
proxy, that is, his proxy appears, not he. In like sort, believing the sense
of Scriptures only from the supposed authentic declaration of the Church, or
because we believe it: we infalliblie believe the Church alone, not the
Scriptures, but only by an extrinsecal denomination.

13 Yet as a man may from some reasons less probable, have an opinion of what
he certainly knows, by motives more sound; or as we may love one in The
greater Moral or Historical Belief the Romanist has of the truth or true
meaning of Scriptures, the greater his condemnation by subscription to this
doctrine of the Churches absolute infallibility.
some competent measure for his own sake, and yet affect him more entirely for
another, whom we most dearly love: so may an absolute Papist, in some moral
sort believe the Scriptures for themselves, or hold their authodoxal sense as
probable to his private judgment; albeit he believe them most for the Churches
sake, and that sense best which it commends. But this his belief of the Church,
being by their doctrine more then moral or conditional, does quite overthrow
all moral or probable belief, he can possibly have from what ground soever, of
Scriptures themselves. For as I said before, the This argument holds (as we say
(...) fortiori of says insased: (...) (...) can be so fully persuaded that be
bath (...) says (...) of any point, but must renounce his persuasion, when the
Church defines the contrary: whose definition or asseaeration, be it a cause or
condition of believing, will fully perswade^^ Romanist, that he now has divine
i^s^^^d faith of the c^ntrary to that be believed before. For his divine
in^^ted says and his habit of Theology may not disagree, and yet in this case
his habit of Theology may not yield unto the other, because it has the
Churches testimony, which (it is supposed) the other wants.
Church shall determine ought contrary to his preconceived opinion, the more
probable or strong it was, the more it increases his doubt, and makes his
contrary resolution more desperate, yea more damnable if habitual because.
(...) extremely contrary to the doctrine of faith. Bellarmins prescription in
this case, is just as if a Physician or Surgeon should seek to case the pain by
ending of the Patients days. Lest a man should sin against his conscience,
this See the notes out of Bellarmin Cap. 3. parag. 9.
Doctor advises him to believe the Church cannot teach anusse.

14 To conclude then: He that absolutely believes the Pope, as Christ's Vicar
general in all things, without examination of his Decrees by Evangelical
precepts, neither believes Christ nor his Gospel; no not when this pretended
Vicar teaches no otherwise then his Masters laws prescribe. For thus
believing a divine truth only from this man's authority, he commits such
Idolatry with him (for the kind or essence) as the Heathen did with Mercury,
their false Gods supposed messenger, though so much more heinous in degree, as
his general notion of the true God is better, whose infinite goodness, cannot
entertain an interpreter no better qualified then most Popes are, did his
wisdom stand in need of any. But if when the Pope shall teach the doctrine of
Devils, men absolutely believe it to be Christ's, because his pretended Vicar
commends it to them: in thus believing, they commit such preposterous
Idolatry, as those of Calecut, which adore the Devil, upon conceit,
doubtless, of some celestial or divine power in him; as the absolute Papist
does not adore the Pope, but upon persuasion he is Christ's Vicar, and teaches
as Christ would do, viva voce, were he again on earth. And less it were to be
lamented, did these Pseudo-Catholicks profess their allegiance to Satan's
incarnate Agent, as to their supreme Lord, by such solemn sacrisices only as
the inhabitants of Calient perform to wicked spirits. But this their blind
belief of whatsoever he shall determine upon a proud and foolish imagination he
is Christ's Vicar, emboldens them to invert the whole That this doctrine (...)
^dens such as e^brace it, to glory in villainy.
Law of God and nature, to glory in villainy, and triumph in mischief, even to
seek praise and honor eternal, from acts so foul and hideous, as the light of
nature would make the Calecutians or other Idolaters blush at their very
mention. It is a sure token he has not yet learned the Alphabet of their
religion, that doubts whether Jesuitical doctrine concerning this absolute
belief, extend not to all matters of fact. And if out of simplicity, rather
then policy, so they speak: I cannot but much pity their folly, that would
persuade us, it were not the fault of Romish Religion, but of the men that
profess it which has enticed so many unto such devilish practices of late. I
would the Jesuit were but put to instance what kind of villainy either has
been already acted on earth, or can yet possibly be hatched in the region under
the earth, so hideous and ugly, as would seem deformed or odious to such as are
wholly led by this blind faith, if it should but please the Romish Clergy to
give a mild or favorable censure of it. No brat of hell, but would seem as
beautiful to their eyes, as young todes are to their dammes, if their mother
once commend the feature of it, or acknowledge it for her darling. Did not some
of the Powder Plot, after Gods powerful hand had overtaken them, and sentence
of death had passed upon them, even when the Executioner was ready to do his
last office to them, make a question whether their plot were sinful or no? So
modest were some of them, and so obedient sons to the Church of Rome, that
they would not take upon them to say either the one or other, but referred the
matter to their mothers determinations; hereby testifying unto the world, that
if the Church would say, they would believe so great an offense against their
Country were none against God. One of them was so obstinate, as to solicit
his fellow, whilst both were drawn upon one hurdle to the gallows, not to
acknowledge it for any sin. Or if these must be reputed but private men, not
well acquainted with their Churches Tenants, and therefore no fit instances to
disapprove her doctrine: let the ingenious Reader but peruse their best Writers
answers to the objections usually made against the Popes transcendent
authority, and he shall easily perceive how matters of fact are included in the
Belief of it; how by it all power is given him in heaven and earth, to pervert
the use and end of all Laws humane or divine. I will content my self for this
present with some few instances out of Valentian.

CAP. XXXI.
Proving the last Assertion, or generally the imputations hitherto laid upon
the Papacy, by that authority the Jesuits expressly give unto the Pope in
matters of particular Fact; as in the canonizing of Saints.

1 HOw often soever the Pope, in defining questions of faith, shall use his
authority: that opinion which he shall determine to be a point of faith, must
be received Quotiescunque Romanus Pontifex in fidei quaestionibus definiendis,
illa qua est praeditus authoritate utitur, ab omnibus fidelibus tanquam
doctrina fidei recipi divino praecepto debet ea sentententia, quam ille
decernit esse sententiam fidei. Toties autem cum illa ipsa authoritate uti
credendum est, quoties in controversia fidei sic alterutram sententiam
determinat, ut ad eam recipiendam obligare velit universam Ecclesiam. Valent.
tom. 3. in Aquin. Disp. 1. Quaest. 1. De object. fidei, Punct. 7. parag. 10.
as a point of faith by all Christian people. If you further demand, how shall
we know when the Pope uses this his absolute authority: this Doctor in the
same place thus resolves you.

It must be believed, that he uses this his authority, as often as in
controversies of faith, he so determines for the one part, that he will bind
the whole Church to receive his decision. Lest stubborn spirits might take
occasion to calumniate the Pope for taking, or the Jesuits for attributing
tyrannical authority unto him: this Distinguendi sunt modi, quibus potest
contingere Pontificem aliquid asserere. Primo enim potest sibi persuadere aut
asserere aliquid, ut privata persona quaedam, vel doctor alius quispiam, ut si
nollet Ecclesiam universam ad recipiendam suam assertionem obligare, sed tantum
sententiam ipse suam reputaret veram. Hoc modo Innocentius 3. and nonnulli alij
Pontifices opuscula varia ediderunt. Ac illa quidem, quae sic Pontisex
asseverat, communis sententia omnium Theologorum est, non oportere esse onmia
^era and infallibilia, quasi a Pontificia authoritate profecta. Quin imo a
plerisque authoribus conceditur, fieri posse; ut Pon^sex tanquam quaedam
privata persona in haeresim labatur. Idem, Ibidem.
Jesuit would have you to understand that the Pope may avouch some things
which all men are not bound to hold as Gospel; nay he may err, though not when
he speaks ex Cathedra, as Head of the Church, yet when he speaks or writes as a
private Doctor or Expositor, and only sets down his own opinion without
binding others to think as he does. Thus did Innocent the third, and other
Popes, write diverse books, which are not in every part true and infallible, as
if they had proceeded from their Pontificial authority. Yea but what if this
present Pope, or any of his Successors, should bind all Christians to believe,
that Pope Innocents Books were in every part infalliblie true; Whether must we
in this case believe Valentian, or the Pope thus determining, better? If
Valentian in the words immediately following deserve any credit, we must
believe the Pope better then himself: yea, he himself must recant his censure
of Pope Innocents works. For so in the other part of his distinction he adds;
Secundo modo potest Pontifex aliquid asserere obligando universa^ Ecclesia^ ut
illud recipiat, nec quisqua^ audeat sibi persuadere contrariu^. Et quaecunque
Pontisex in aliqua de religione controversia sic asserit, certa side credendu^
est, illum infallibiliter, ac proinde ex authoritare Pontificia, hoc est, ex
divina assistentia, id asserere. Ib.
Secundo, potest Pontifex asserere, The Pope again may avouch something, so as
to bind the whole Church to receive his opinion, and that no man shall dare to
persuade himself to the contrary: And whatsoever he shall thus avouch in any
controversy of Religion, we must assuredly believe he did avouch it without
possibility of Error, and therefore by his Pontificial authority. His proof
is most consonant to his assertion. I will not recite it in English, lest the
mere English Reader should suspect any, able to understand Latin, could be
possibly so ridiculous.

2 These lavish prerogatives of the Popes authority, the Jesuits see well to
be obnoxious to this exception. When the Pope does Canonize a Saint, he binds
all men to take him for a Saint. Can he not herein err? As for Canonizing of
Saints (says Itaque quod ad Canonizationem Sanctorum attinet, omnino nego id,
quod communiter doctores Catholici jure optimo negant, videlicet, posse
Pontificem (...) in (...) (...). Q^amvis enim testimonia, quae pro (...)
hominis sanctitare asseruntur, sint humana, ide^que natura sua fallibilia:
tame^ posito quod Pontifexillis inducatur tande^ ad pronunciandu^, quem piam
sanctum atque beatu^ jam esse; certa fide credendu^ est, testimonia i^^a
(qua^^nus in genere salte^ probant pie atque sancte quenqua^ ex hac vira
excessisse) vera esse, and homine^ eju modi ex cotu^ esse numero, quos per
revelationes scripturae generales in co^muni co^stat, divinae gratiae beneficio
co^sequi aeternae vitae heatitudine^. Quae sane certitudo iisde^ illis Dei
promissionibus nititur, ex quibus co^pertu^ habemus, nimqua^ esse futuru^, ut
universa Eoclesia in rebus religionis fallatur. Falleretur aute^ graviter in
negotio religionis si sanctu^ reputaret, ac pro tall veneraretur eum, qui
sanctus non est. Hic aute^ illud, quod alias ab orthodoxis probatum atque
defensum est, tanquam ex fide certum pono, nempe rem esse omnino, quae ad
Ecclesiae aedisicationem, adeoque ad ossicium Pontisicis pertineat, ut Sancti
quidam aliquando Canonizentur: ac proinde universam Ecclesiam debere, ut
sanctum, venerari illum, quem summus Pontifex, nun^ero Sanctorum adscribit;
sicut etiam usus ipse perpetuus, atque traditio Ecclesiae confirmat. Valent.
ibid. Parag. 41.
Valentian) I absolutely deny, (as the Catholic Doctors upon good reasons
generally do) that the Pope can err in such a business. The certainty of this
his belief he would ground upon those promises, by which we are assured it
shall never come to pass that the universal Church can be deceived in points of
Religion. But the whole Church should err very grossly in such matters, should
it repute and worship him for a Saint which is none. Hereit would be observed,
how Satan instigates these men unto such Tenants, as may occasion God and his
Gospel to be blasphemed. First, they would make it an Article of Faith, that
all must believe as the Pope teaches: whence it follows, that either he cannot
teach amiss, or else faith may perish from off the earth. Which if it could,
God were not true in his promises The surest pledge the Christian world can
have of his fidelity in them, must be the Popes infallibility, so as from the
first unto the last, he must be held as true in his dealings, as God in his
sayings. If he fail in Canonizing a Saint, whom he cannot possibly know to be
such, unless he knew his heart, which belongs wholly unto his maker: God must
be a liar, and there is no Truth in him. The final issue intended by Satan in
these resolutions is this; When men have been a long time led on with fair
hopes of gaining heaven by following the Popes direction, and yet in the end
see (as who not blind sees not) his gross errors and detestable villainies, they
may be hence tempted to blaspheme God, as if he had been his copartner in this
cosenage. From this root (I take it) has Atheism sprung so fast in Italy. For
whilst faith is in the blade, and their hopes flourishing, they imagine God
and the Pope to be such friends as their blind guides make them: But afterward
coming to detestation of this man of sin, and his treachery, holding his
spiritual power as ridiculous, they think either as despitefully, or
contemptuously of the Deity; or say with the Psalm. 14. v. 1.
fool in their hearts, there is no God.

3 Thus Antichrists followers still run a course quite contrary to Christian
The fearful manner of Jesuits tempting God in maintaining this argument.
religion. For if it be true (as it is most true) that faith cannot utterly
perish from off the earth; what damnable abuse of Gods mercy and favor toward
mankind is this, in seeking, as the Jesuits do, to make all absolutely rely
upon one in matters of Faith? For so if he fail, all others must of necessity
fail with him. That is, the whole world must be as kind supernatural fools to
him, as that natural idiote was to his Master, who being demanded, whether he
would go to heaven with him or no, replied he would go to hell with so good a
Master, seeing any man would be willing to go to heaven with an ordinary
friend, yea with his enemy. Though we should use no other argument but that,
Avoid ye sons of Satan; for it is written, ye shall not tempt the Lord your
God: It should, me thinks, be enough to put all the Jesuits in the world unto
silence in this point, did they not as far exceed their father in impudency, as
they come short of him in wit. For this manner of tempting God is more
shameless then Devils suggestion unto our Savior, when he was instanly
silenced with this reproof. A presumption it is more damnable to expect the
protection or guidance of Gods spirit, in such desperate resolutions as
Valentian here brings, then it were for a man to throw himself headlong from an
high towr, upon hope of Angelical supportance. For seeing (as I said) God has
promised, that true faith shall not perish from off the earth; for all men to
adventure their faith upon one man's infallibility, who may have less saving
faith in him then Turk or Infidel, is but a provoking or daring of God to
recall his promise. Or what more damnable doctrine can be imagined, then that
all men should worship him for a Saint, whom the wickedest man on earth does
commend unto him for such?

4 But to proceed. As the Doctrine is most impious, so are the grounds of it
most improbable. For how can the Pope or Papists infallibly know this or that
man to be a Saint; Seeing there is no particular revelation made of it, either
to the Pope or others? I answer (says Valentian) that the general revelation,
whereby it is evident, that whatsoever the Pope shall decree, as pertaining to
the whole Church, is most true, may suffice in this case. Moreover (says he)
unto the Canonizing of Saints appertain these revelations of Scripture, in
which heavenly joys are generally proposed to all such as lead a Godly life.
For by the Popes determination, we know the Saint which he has Canonized, to
be contained in the foresaid universal proposition. Whence it is easy to frame
an assent of faith; by which we may persuade our selves, that such a Saint has
obtained eternal bliss.

5 I would request the Reader by the way to note the Jesuits injurious
partiality, in scoffing at such of our Writers, as without express warrant of
particular revelation, hold a certainty of their own salvation: when as they,
only by Gods general promises to such as lead a godly life, and the Popes
infallibility, in declaring who have so lived, can be certain (defide) others
are saved. But the former doubt is rather removed then quite taken away by this
his answer, if it stand alone. As yet it may be questioned, how any can
infallibly know the truth of what he cannot possibly know at all, but only by
other men's testimonies, in their nature (the Jesuit being judge) not
infallible, and in whose examination it is not impossible his Holiness may be
negligent? For how men live or dye in England, Spain, or the Indies, no Pope
can tell but by the information of others no Popes. The Reader perhaps will
prognosticate Valentians answer, as in truth I did. For when I first framed the
doubt before I read it in him, me thought it stood in need of such a reply, as
Lib. 2 c. 31. Parag. 6.
Bellarmin brought for defense of the vulgar interpreter. Altogether as foolish
it were to think any private man's information of another uprightness in the
sight of God, as to hold Theodotion the Heretic could not err in translating
of the Bible. But though they may be deceived in testification of another
sanctity; yet His words be cited Parag. 2.
Valentian tells you, supposing the Pope is once induced by their testimonies,
though in nature fallible, to pronounce him a blessed Saint, all must
infallibly believe their testimonies (at least so far as they prove in general,
that he died a Godly and religious death) are true, and that the party
commended by them is of that number, which (as we may gather from the general
revelations of Scriptures) shall be made partakers of everlasting life. Objic^
potest, quod, ut postea dicturi sumus, ut Pontifex in definiendo authoritate
sua recte utatur, studio and diligentia in inquirenda veritate opus habet.
Nihil autem obst^r^ videtur, quo minus possit, interdu^ ille ejusmodi
diligentia praetermissa, controversiam definite. Poterit igitur tunc saltem
errare. Respond^o, five Pontifex in definiendo studium adhibeat, sive non
adhibeat: modo tamen controversiam definiat, infallibiliter cer^e definiet,
atque adeo reipsa utetur authoritate sibi a Christo concessa. Quod ex
promissionibus divinis de veritate per magiste^um unius pastoris Ecclesiae fact
is cer^i^^ me colligimus; ut saepius argumentati su^us. Itaque studium ac
diligentia Pontifici neces^aria est, non ut omnino definiat, atque infallibili
sua authoritate utat ur, sed ut convenienter ac recte (hoc est, sine peccato)
ea utatur: sicut patebit etiam ex iis, quae post dice^^us* Hue accedit, quod si
maxim diligentia Pontifici necessaria esset, ut omnino definiat; tamen eadem
side credere de^eremus, illum quando ^em controversam definit, sufficientem
adhibuisse diligentiam; qua supra demonstratum est, dehere nos credere, quod
tunc ille infallibiliter ac ve^e definiat. -- Caeterum non est ratio ulla
firma, quam ob rem existimare debea^us, studii diligentiam Pontifici
necessariam esse, non modo ut convenienter, ac sine culpa, authoritate sua
infallibili utatur, verum etiam ut omnino illa utatur. Quare quod a nobis a^te
responsum est abunde sufficit ad id explicandum quod objiciebatur. Val. Tom. 3.
in Aquin. Quaest. 1. de object^ fidei. Punct. 7. Parag. 41.
Again, whether the Pope in defining a controversy use diligence or no, yet
without all question he shall define infallibly, and consequently use the
authority Christ has given him. Wherefore in his judgment, care and diligence
are necessary to the Pope, not so as if he could not define aright, or rightly
use his authority without them, but that he does not sin himself, whilst he
defines an infallible truth for others to believe. Hereto may be added, that
albeit a diligent care were necessarily required for the infallibility of the
Popes decisions; yet the same faith, which binds us to believe he decides the
controversy infallibly, ^indes us also to believe that he used as much
diligence as was requisite. As for example, in like case, If God should promise
that the next year should be a plentiful year of corn, we would conceive he
promised withal good and seasonable weather, and whatsoever else necessary for
effecting of his promise, as Canus well notes. But Valentians last conclusion
is, that no sure arguments can be brought, why we should think study or
diligence are necessary for the right use of the Popes authority, so far as it
concerns other men's faith that must rely upon it. Rely upon it they must,
whether he determine ex tempore, or upon deliberation, and (for ought I can see)
whether he give his sentence drunk or sober, raving or in his right mind, so he
have the wit to charge all upon pain of damnation to believe it. But what if
some forrainer should of set purpose send a dead-mans water to try this
grand-Physitians skill: could he without either care or diligence, in examining
their testimonies, or special Revelation from above (which in such businesses
Valentian disclaims) discover their knavery? Or would his prognostication of
life and health, redeem the party deceased from the land of death, as some say
Pope Gregory by his prayers, did Trajan? These and many like questions might
here be made, which fall not within the reach of Valentians answers hitherto
recited: and yet these must abundantly suffice for resolution of all doubts
concerning the Canonizing of Saints, or approbation of Religious Orders; And
yet some Religious Orders authorized by P^ proved naught, but we must believe
their Rules were good whilst one Pope approves them; but grew out of date, and
(...) those times wherein succeeding Popes did disanul them. See Valentian in
the place above cited.
in which business likewise we must believe the Pope cannot err. Let the
Reader pause a while, look on their madness, and laugh his fill at their apish
drunkenness in this argument, that when his mirth has found a vent, and his
heart is well settled, he may with a sober, unpartial, steadfast eye, behold the
Mystery of this iniquity.

CAP. XXXII.
What danger by this blasphemous Doctrine may accrue to Christian States: that
of all heresies, blasphemies, or idolatries, which have been since the world
began, or can be imagined till Christ come to judgment: this Apostasy of the
Jesuits, is the most abominable and contumelious against the blessed Trinity.

1 WHat the consequences of these positions may be, none can doubt. No less
they are then I have said; a resigning up of men's souls and consciences into
the Popes hands, a consecration of hearts, minds, and bodies, to work any
mischief imaginable at his appointment. For what if the Pope upon the relation
of Ravilliacks stubbornness, (they would say constancy) in his torture, or
Catesbyes praying to the Virgin Mary at his death, should Canonize both for
Saints, and enjoin the Christian world so to honor them: Every bloody
Assasinate would pray unto the one for good success in acting his blood-thirsty
designs on Princes bodies. And if it should please the Pope so to determine,
all men should stand bound to give such solemn worship, as by their Doctrine is
due to Sacred relics, unto that bloody knife which has been sheathed in
Ravilliacks Sovereigns breast. Every deep dissembling Politician, or ambitious
choleric discontented spirit, would burn incense, saltpeter, sulphur, and
brimstone to the others image, in hope of better speed in undermining states.

2 If any Jesuit, or other brazen faced favorer of their Order, or this
doctrine, should here reply: This dreamer casts doubts beyond the Moon; for is
there any likelihood his Holiness will ever Canonize such wicked Imps for
Saints? I must answer him as Tully did Rullus, utterly disclaiming all purpose
of doing such wrong unto the Roman state, as his Petition unto it, once granted
might enable him to effect; and from my soul I wish every Christian Prince,
every Princes Councellor would take that grave Senators words for his motto,
Tibi nos Rulle, and istis tuis, haru^ omnium reru^ machinatoribus, totam
Italiam iner^^em tradituros existimasti, quam praesidiis confirmaretis?
coloniis occuparetis? omnibus vinclis devinctam and obstrictam te^^retis? ubi
enim cavetur, ne in Ja^iculo coloniam constituatis? ne urbem ha^c urbe alia
premere, atque urgere possitis? non faciemus, inquit. Primu^^ nescio, etc. De
leg. Agrar. Orat. 15.
Primum nescio, deinde timeo, posiremo non committam ut vestro beneficio potius
quam nostro consilio salvi esse possimus. First whether the Pope would Canonize
such miscreants for Saints or no, is more then we know. Secondly, his former
practices minister so just cause of fear to Christian states, that it stands
them upon rather in wisdom to prevent his power of doing, then rely upon his
fidelity for not doing them some inestimable mischief, by putting this practice
in execution, if opportunity serve, and ability be left him thereby to
strengthen his faction. Did not his Fa^^us U^sinus Cardinalis a Pontifice, post
acceptu^ de Parisiensi tumultu non^^^, Legatus in Gall^^ venit. -- Igitur ille
ul^ Lugd^nu^ venit, more solemni (...), mul is ^^^dibus civivu^ fide^ extulit,
and Boidono illo ^ antesignano pala^ laudato, etia^ ei ^ graciae beneficium
impertivi^; and ^ ex Johannis Morvillerii Con^ and parce de ^a re loqueretur,
non ^perare, quin Regis in eo negotio prude^^* (...) magnitudinem, public and
in ^ qu^^s ^bique apud omnes etiam cum de^ commendaret. Thuan. lib. 54. An^
Legate into France, upon notice of the Parisian Massacre, bestow his
Holinesses best blessing, Cum plenitudine potestatis; With absolute and
plenarie power derived from himself, upon the notorious assasinate Boydon,
chief Ringleader of that immane and Wolvish Massacre committed at Lions; begun
without any warrant of public authority, only at this hellish miscreants
instigation, desirous to follow, or rather out-go his Superiors in cruelty?
Was not that villainy it self authorized from Rome, where it found such
extraordinary approbation? Never did that City rejoice so much in memory of
Christ's birth, or Saint Peter's, as at the hearing of this more then Herodian
butchery of so many thousands nobleminded gentlemen, with other Innocents and
Saints of God. So full was this Legates heart of joy hence conceived, that
after he came into France, out of the abundance of it, his mouth did sound the
praises of the bloody actors and contrivers of this shameful Tragedy, Etiam cum
delectu verborum, With such choice and affected words, as caused them blush to
hear him, that had not been ashamed to act the villainy. And as if this
excellent exploit had been effected by virtue of the holy Catholic Church; the
(...) cum Rege colloq^^^us inter alia multis and enGAP DESC="illegible"
RESP="apex" EXTENT="1+ letters" pr^ (...) ^ationibus ab eo contendit, ut Conci^
(...), cu^us publicationem, totu^ jam (...) in Gall^a ^^ag^a cum universi
Christiani Orbis of^ suspensam agebat, in reg^i curiis promulgare^o^, and (...)
facti omnibus saculis depraedicandi, quod ad Dei gloriam, and S. R. E.
dignitate^ per^neret, memo^^^ Sacro-sanctae Synodi approbatione veluti
obsignar^. Sic e^^n apud omnes ta^ qui sunt, qua^ qui postea (...),
constitutu^u^, non odio, aut ultione, aut privatae (...) sensu Regem in tot
capitum perniciem consen^, sed a^denti Dei gloriae propagandae studio a Chri^
Principe datu^, ut quod stante protestantiu^ (...) (...) non pote^at, i^s
sublatis, majo^u^ religio, (...) est, Catholica Apostolica Romana, quae per
Synodu^ T^^denti^am a secta^io veneno asseritur, citra controvers^^ ac ^ine
exceptione per universas Franciae ditionis provincias constitueretur. Idem,
Ibid. Unless the French King had been enforced to make a contrary Apology
before this Legate came into France, this bloody massacre had been authorized
by the Sea Apostolical; as appears from the same Authors word^ immediately
following. His and aliis rationibus ^ apud Regem repetitis, quae magni in Aula
(...) ponderis, plerisque etiam apud nos speciosae vide^, (...) minus Rex ac
Regina acquiescerent, (...) su^pta ad excusandu^ factu^ consilia. Nam diplo^s
po^ promulgatis Rex contra contestabatur, non od^^ religionis, sed ad
revincenda^ colonii ac sequa^ detestanda^ conjuratione^, quae j^ssu suo
Lutetiae acta ^^sent, accidisse, ex^plu^^que ad ^e^eras urbes injussu (...)
^gno suo cum dolo^^ grastatum esse: idque literis, o^ ^nibus ac libellis illis,
de quibus diximus, ubique in^ulc^^atur.
Popes Petition to the French King was, that the Trent Council might, upon that
good success, begin to be of force in France, and be thus sealed with blood.
Yet can any man doubt, whether this Church would authorize murder, or Canonize
Assasinates, for her own advantage? Publicly suppose she would not; yet if the
Popes Decrees, when they expressly bind all, must, as Valentian contends, be
believed by all upon such terms, as he annexeth: no question but if he give any
special injunction to the Order of Jesuits, or such as they shall adjudge fit
Associates to whom these secrets may be imparted, it shall be as devoutly
entertained by them whom it concerns, as if it were universal. If charged they
be, under pain of damnation, secretly to worship this or that damned villain,
it will be held a formal denial of Faith, either not to perform what is
enjoined, or to bewray what they perform. We may well suppose the Jesuits, and
others of their instruction, have more Saints in their private Kalenders then
all the world knows of. Notandum est, duobus modis posse aliquem canoniza^, ^^o
modo particulariter, ita ut solu^ in una Provincia, aut Di^cesi habeatur
Sanctus, and colatur pro Sa^cto. Alio modo generaliter, ita ut in tota Ecclesia
habea^ ^ro Sancto, nec ulli ^ceat de ejus sanctitate dubitare. P^ modo
canoniza^e poterat quilibet Episcopus, ^ Thomas Waldens lib. de Sacramental. ^
pa^e^ ex Cy^no l. (...). Epist. 6. -- Tame^ hoc, q. (...) (...). ^modo non
li^et, Siquidem Alexander (...). and p^^^^a innocentius 3. vide^^es abusus, qu^
ori^ (...) (...) Sanctoru^ cu^tum, prohibueru^t, ne deinceps al^quis pro Sancto
coli inciperet, sine Roma^l Pontificis approbatione, ut patet c. 1. and 2. de
Reliquiis and Sanctorum ve^eratione. Secu^do modo canonizare; id est, ita ut in
tota Ecclesia sancti habeantur, communis sententia est, pertinere ad sumu^
Pontificem: nam id habetur c. Audivimus, etc. Cum ex co de Reliquiis, and
veneratione Sanctorum, etc. venerabili, de testibus and attestationibus. Et
patet etiam ratione; nam ad eum spectat proponere toti Ecclesiae quid sit
cred^ndu^, and quid agendum in iis, quae sunt religionis, qui toti Ecclesiae
praeest. -- Dices, plurimi Sancti sunt, qui in tota Ecclesia colu^tur, quos non
canonizavit su^mus Pontifex: Primus enim Pontifex (^^i forte sallor) qui
Sanctos legatur canonizasse, videtur suisse Leo Papa 3. Respondeo, Sanctos
veteres caepisse coli in Ecclesia universali, non tam lege aliqua, quam
consuetudine. Sed ficut consuetudines aliae vim habent legis ex tacito c^sensu
Principis, and sine eo nulla^ vim habent, ut patet ex B. Thoma, 1. 2. quaest.
97. art. 3. Ita Sancti ali^ujas cultus, ex consuetudine Ecclesiaru^ generaliter
introductus, vim habet ex app^obatione tacita vel expr^ssa summi Pontificis.
Bellarm c. 8. de Sanct. Beat. lib. 1. Vide eundem c. 10. scilicet, Sanctos non
canon^zatos privatim posse coli and coram aliis, sed non nomine totius
Ecclesiae.
Bellarmine grants the Pope may commend some under the title of Saints unto a
set Province or Diocese, though he enjoin not the whole Church so to esteem, or
at least not so to entertain them: That Saints reputed, not Canonized, may be
privately adored; That in this case a general custom may prescribe, and breed
just presumption of the Popes tacit app^^bation, though he give no direct
injunction for the practice, nor positive signification of his consent. For
many were adored as Saints before the solemnity of ^^nonizing was in use,
first practiced (as far as this great Clerks reading serves him) by Pope Leo
the third.

3 Now as their projects are of another mould, and their means to effect them
more desperate then heretofore: so these intimations make it more then
suspicious, lest secretly they crown such of every sort, as have been best
qualified for their purposes, or have adventured farthest for the Churches
dignity, with the Titles of Saints, to encourage others to like attempts. And
if turbulent or ambitious spirits, greedy of ^ame, may be fed with hopes of
being eternized in Jesuitical Kalenders; if men male-contented with this
present, may have sweet promises of everlasting happiness in the life to come;
upon what mischiefs will they not adventure? when as the one sort is weary of
life, the other curbed only with fear of present shame or disgrace after
death, otherwise ready to rush into any danger, or avow most desperate
outrages. Albeit the parties proposed to be worshipped had been in their life
times not so bad, but rather incited to bold enterprises by their ardent zeal:
yet who would not desire to imitate the adventurous actions of them whose
memory he adores? And yet this longing desire of imitating such extraordinary
enterprises, as others of noble spirits have been thrust upon by secret
instinct, is always dangerous, and in men not so well qualified as their
Authors were, prepostorous. For it will find occasions of like practice when
none is given; virtue shall be the object of despite, because in factious
oppositions, contempt of it may afford matter of glory; Hatred and malice to
Princes persons shall be accounted zeal and devotion to the Church. But if
Powder-plotters, or public Assasinates may be dignified with Titles of Saints,
or proposed for imitation: the Christian world may perceive the height whereto
this mischief may grow, when it will be too late to control it. It is an
excellent ca^^at which old Caeterum de locis ab exemplo, and simili, tot sunt
experimenta fallaciarum, quot hominum capita, dum quilibet assequi vult
quemlibet, dum exemplo dicit se vivere talium and talium, quos approbat a^t
canonizat, Ecclesia, vel qui superiores eorum sunt, Qui Rectores, qui Doctores,
qui Laudati. Quid facit filius, aiunt, nisi quod viderit patrem facientem,
Patres tamen optimos ipsi nolunt sed pessimos hoc exemp^o sequi. Vox aliorum
est; Paulus se ^^udavit, Paulus vi^iones in raptu suscepit; cur non potest modo
Dominus in talibus and talibus similia opera^i? Hinc confictio prophetiarum,
hinc miracul^^um admonitio. Hinc etiam adoratio damnatorum ho^um in popul^s.
Tes^^ est mihi Legenda, i^o de adoratione Canis (...) visum est in Vienna.
Caveatur sancta seeds Romana, caveat in ea sedens Papa, quibus argumenti^ and
caus^s and mediis canonizatio alicu^us si^ sa^^enda. Gerson. Troctat. 8. De
custodia Angelorum p^. titio 3. super Magnificat.
Gerson has, not impertinent to this purpose, though intended by him
especially for private use. Amongst other Sophismes used by Satan to ensnare
men's souls, That Topic of examples, or similies, affords as many experiments
of fallacies as there be men; whilst every one strives to imitate any one, and
professes to frame his life by the example of such, (...) either the Church
does Canonize, or their Superiers, Governors, Doctors or men of fame approve,
What does the Son (say some) but what he sees the Father do: and yet these
mates follow not the best, but the worst Fathers; (at least that in them which
is worst for them to follow) by this ex^^ple: some of them stick not to say,
Paul commended himself* Paul had visions in a trance, and why may not God in
these days work the like effects in others? Hence are Prophecies feigned,
hence are admonions by miracles, hence are damned persons adored by the
multitude; witness the Legend, yea and Vienna can bear witness of a dead dogs
adoration. Let the sacred Roman See therefore beware, let the Pope that sits
therein beware, upon what grounds or motives they canonize any.

4 Rather let all Christian States beware, least they give such authority to
either. For if the danger were not always imminent from their traiterous and
blood-thirsty minds, that profess this Doctrine in any Kingdom: Yet from divine
justice the plagues upon Prince and People, that authorize and permit the
profession of it, will be one day public and grievous. For better That
J^suitical ^ in this argument (...) ^^uely and ^^o^^^ly (...) o^ s^^^^^y
might they nurse all other kinds of enchantments, or magical practices;
better might they give harbor to all other heresies broched since the world
began; then susser this Ocean of all mischiefs, whether flowing from errors in
manners, or matters of doctrine, to encroach upon their coasts. And here let not
the Reader deceive himself by imagining the Holy Ghost had used a Metaphor,
rather then strict propriety of speech, when he called the Whore of Babylon a
Witch or Inchantress. For the faith whereby the Romanist boasts he believes the
Scriptures, (as elsewhere God willing shall be showed) is merely magical: this
doctrine we now dispute against, the very Idea of infernal superstition, or, as
they term it, vana observantia, in respect of the essence and quality; and for
the extent of mischief whereto it leads, as the main Sea of sorcery, and all
other kinds of magical superstition, as so many brooks or rivers. For whence
springs sorcery properly so called? Either from express compact with evil
spirits, or from the sole^^ performance of certain blind ceremonies, which are
but sacrifices unto infernal powers; wherein they ga^n interest in the
sacrificers souls, in witness whereof they sometimes bear their marks in their
bodies. But if we look into the mystery of this iniquity, the Jesuits by
subscribing unto this doctrine of the Churches transcendent authority, and
taking the solemn oath of their order; enter a covenant, though not so express
or immediate, yet more sirm and desperate then other Magicians usually do. For
they swear, and teach others to swear absolute obedience to the Pope: they
think themselves bound, and would bind others not to examine his decrees: to
esteem of his Pardons, though des^itute of all warrant srom Gods word, as
highly as the Magicians do of Charms, for which they can give ^o reason either
in art or nature, to offer up their prayers and other religious worshi^ unto
such as he shall appoint them, albeit for ought they know, or as they justly may
suspect, damned miscreants; which is a more hellish sacrifice then any other
Magicians use. And though witches do, yet all sorts of sorcer^^s enter not
express covenant with the Prince of darkness. And it is all one, whether like
witches they give their souls to him immediately; or thus absolutely betroth
them to his Proxy or principal Agent here on earth. For as the Apostle
instructs us, by thus worshipping the Beast they worship the Dragon his Master.

5. Lastly, in respect of this mouth of blasphemy, Mahumetism, and Gentilism
are as a Toy. The ancient Heathen, out of their inbred ignoranc^ and want of
external means for right information of their understanding, changed the glory
of the incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible things; often
taxed by mere Philosophers for their grossness. These blasphemers, though
professing the worship of the everliving, true, and only God, though partakers
of ^is written word, and all the helps his gracious providence from time to
time has afforded for manifestation of it right sen^e and meaning, abuse
Philosophy (wherein they excel) with all other gifts of art and nature, to
transform the most essential attributes of the divi^e nature; to turn his truth
into lies; his goodness into all abomination. For having this natural notion in
their brain, [Whatsoever God says is true, whatsoever ^e approves most just
and good.] Their next presumptuous assumption is, [But God says whatsoever the
Romish Church or Pope says exCathedra, whatsoever he allows, God allows the
same.] And this Assertion, which thus confounds the li^its That this Doctrine
inverts the wholeframe of Christian Religion.
of Gods Truth and the Popes, that the Christian world cannot discern one from
another, once wrought in men's hearts, what untruth or falsehood, what Heresy
can be hatched so dangerous? what villainy conceived so abominable, but may be
presently fathered upon that Holy one, from whom proceeds nothing but good?
Thus may bloody and prodigious massacres be i^vested with the most glorious
Titles the best of Christ's Saints ever enjoyed for their best deeds. Just
reward for matchless impieties that benefit them, may be set forth to the world
as the Crown of Martyrdom. Finally, their gain is hereby made the measure of
goodness, their Pomp and glory, the Rule of piety, and end of every Christians
faith, unto which he must not stick to sacrifice his soul, as an Holocaustum
ever burning, never consuming in that brimstone lake. If it shall please the
Pope to authorize murder, though of the Lords anointed; God the Son must be
the chief Assasinate to give power and strength, and heaven for the reward unto
the Actor. If pleased he be to give way to incest, as for the Uncle to marry
the Niece, a fornication not named but with distaste amongst the ancient
heathens, (I would abhor to speak it, would they be ashamed to give just
occasion:) the Holy Ghost must not disdain to be his Bawd or Pander. If
disposed to dispense with perjury, God the Father must be as his Vassal, to
suffer disgrace at his appointment, to recall the sentence of vengeance, which
the party swearing by his name did imprecate upon his own head, if he relented.
Though this be the greatest injury that can be offered to so great a Majesty
(unto whom execution of just vengeance properly belongs) yet must the Almighty,
at the Popes appointment, be content to put it up.

6. It is a quality in Kings, very commendable, says Paulus Quartus, Sed
multos, ut audio, qui apud te plurimu^ possunt, fidei datae ac jurisju^andi
pactis interpositi religio monet, qua ut nihil Principi antiquius esse debere
mini^ inficias ierim ita eos, qui pi^^atem suae opinioni praetexunt videre
etia^ atque etia^ operter, ne dum rigidi religionis auctores haberi volunt,
religionem ipsa i^ dis^rime^ adducant, quod procul dubio accidet, si Pontifice^
tam necessario tempore deseras, ad cujus defensionem and majorum exemplum, and
fides nuper data, and tua denique te pietas obligat; quae omnia prius violes,
and divine atque humana jure confundas necesse est, si induciarum, pactis stare
velis. Thuanus Hist. l 17. an. 1556.
Legate and Nephew unto Henry of France, Religiously to observe their oaths:
but, when the Popes dignity comes into danger, religion it self is in hazard,
and a prepostorous course it were religiously to observe a^ oath, unto the
overthrow of Religion. With these and the like suggestions, impiously acute,
did this sweet Cardinal, by Commission from the Tandem bellum pro Pontificis
defensione decretum; postquam Carafa Regem jurisjurandi induciarum pactis
interpositi religione, potestati sibi a Pontifice tradita, solvit,
libertatemque ei fecit, in Caesa^em and ejus F. etia^ sine praecedenti belli
denunciatione impetu^ sacere. Ibid. paulo post.
Pope his Master, authorize, and animate this French King to violate the League
lately confirmed by solemn oath, betwixt him and Philip of Spain. Might he not
as justly, though not so politickly, in plain terms have told him, either you
must dishonor God, or suffer the Pope to be disgraced: choose which you list.
Doubtless in the language of Gods Spirit, which searches the heart, he that
dispenses with an oath (of this nature especially) solemnly taken is greater
then he by whom men swear; and is in heart and deed so esteemed, by such as
acknowledge his authority in thus dispensing, or sue unto him for like
dispensations: But as if wilful and open perjurie, without deep and hellish
hypocrisy, were a sin too plain and simple for the Man of sin to countenance:
the Hac siducia fretus C^ra^^ Rege^ aggreditur, and gladio sacrato Pontificis
nomine ei ut Ecclesae R. Defensori magna pompa ac ceremonia porrecto, ad
privatu^ colloquiu^ admistus, quo in statures Romana ac sa(...) sua s^r^^na
sit, demonstrat. Ibidem paulo ante locum ^atum.
Legate first invests this besotted Prince with the glorious Title of Defensor
Ecclesiae Romanae; and in witness hereof delivers him a sword, consecrated by
his Holinesses own hand, ere he make him forswear himself, and forsake his God,
who has now forsaken him, and for his sin (scarce expiated unto this day)
plagued the Realm of France. For as the judicious Historian (who has the
Articles of this perfidious confederacy yet in his custody) well observes, Nunc
ingredimur annu^ 57. supra quingentesimu^, and ^ill^ simum, juxta Caroli
sapientissimi Principis augoriu^ Galliae sun^mum: quo res nostrae per induc^as
in tuto collocatae, unproba Cara^^ru^ suggestione, and ambitiosa quoru^da^
levitate in manifestu^ exit^u^ pracipi^a^a ^^t, and Regnu^ hoc hactenus
florentissin u^ ab eo te^pore b^ilis civilibus diu jactatum, tandem per illos
ipsos ^^lli aud^ores Hispanorum praedae, and ludibrio patuit. Thuanus lib.
Histor. 18. in initio, anno, 1557.
this was the root of all the miseries have since befallen that flourishing
Kingdom, and by Gods just judgments exposed it to the insolences of the
Spaniard, through their means especially that wrought the King to breach of his
oath with Spain for entering this new confederacy with the Pope.

7 Whilst reading this story I called to mind the perfidious, and cruel usage
of that Renowned Rex a Carasis sollicitatus -- negotiu^ dederat Colinio matis
(...) and Picardiae Praesidi, ut in hostico ex improviso, aliquid conaretur. --
Is qua^qua^ invitus faceret, ut inducias, quas sole^ni jurejura^do ipse
firmaverat, viola^et, (...) cu^ res eo deductas videret, ut bello inter Hi^ and
^tice^ ex^^descente Reges necessario ad ar^, a^^everte^du^ duxit, and insigni
aliquo facinore hoste^ praevenie^du^. Itaque noctu cu^ prope oppidu^ 8 id.
(...). Marcentibus vino oppidanis insidias (...), a vetula tame^ insomni
proditus est, quae vix tandem improbo clamore excitatis vigilliis conatu^
nostroru^ irritu^ reddiditi, nde Colinius Lentiu^, (medium inter insulam and
Rigiacu^ Atrebatu^ municipiu^, quod Nimetacu^ olim suisse autumant) vi capit,
diripit, and licen^^ose habitum postremo ince^dit, ingentique prada abacta cum
pl^sculos dies in limite excurrisset, ad suos revertitur, hoc ruptaru^
induciaru^ initiu^ suit, etc. Ibid.
Admiral in the Parisian massacre: the treacherous impiety of his politic
enemies seemed highly to extol the wisdom and justice of his God calling him
to suffer his chastisment in this life, that he might not perish with the
wicked, or such as were impenitent for their former grievous sin; wherein this
worthy Counselor had in some sort (though with grief, yet for the good of
others I must utter it) communicated with the Pope, and his perjured Sovereign.
For knowing the breach of peace was fully resolved upon by the State of France,
he thought it a point of warlike wisdom to begin with the enemy in his own
land, rather then expect his onset upon notice of war proclaimed: and fair
opportunity (as he apprehends it) being offered from an insinuating Heremites
discovering of the situation, and readiest way of expugning Doway, he attempts
the surprisal of it; but prevented of his purpose by an old woman that awaked
the Garrison, he deemed it a shame to return home with empty hands; though fill
them he could not, but with just imputation of being the first that had
actually broken the league, as afterward his venerable person was the first
upon whom these perfidious Assasinates, and actors in the Parisian massacre did
practice their intended butchery, contrary to the oath and faith which they had
given him. God grant such, as in Reformed Churches do most detest, be never
tempted by like opportunities to imitate the worldly policies of the Papacy;
that all our consultations to prevent their malice, may always relish more of
the Doves innocence and integrity, then of the Serpents subtlety.

8 He that would accurately observe the weak supportance of the Roman See at
that time, when the French could not relieve it; how since that time the Popes
have mufled themselves into the Spaniards favor, to the great prejudice of
France, who in love to them had brought it self so low; may by these modern
stories easily discern, the Papacies advancement in times past to have been
wrought by such means, as our Writers out of ancient records have deciphered. I
specially by sowing enmity betwixt Christian Princes, by seeking supportance
now from one, then from another, as several Popes, for the most part
bystanders in such broils, yet skilful to bet always on the fairest side, saw
fittest occasions; until at length they got both feet on Princes shoulders, and
being once mounted, learned cunning to sit fast, and ride them safely. For most
of that succession being still of several lines, and different parentages, none
of them were disposed to continue any ancient, or hereditarie F^bood with the
posterity of their Predecessors greatest enemies, as lineal descents of royal
Families, out of their personal love unto their Ancestors, usually do, unto the
great damage of their state and Country. It is significantly spoken by the
Evangelist, That the ten Kings should give their authority unto the beast;
thereby instructing us, that Antichrist should grow great by Rev. 17. 12.
Princes favors, and gracious privileges bestowed upon him, not as the
Jesuit absurdly imagines, by taking authority unto himself by strong hand
before it was given, as the Turks, or Saracens, or other Barbarians have done.

But to proceed; not the infidelity of Turk, of Jew, or Saracen, not malignant
Apostacy is to be compared with this kind of Idolatry, and blasphemy we now
dispute against. The Turk calumniates the Cross, the Jew accuses Christ
himself as an impostor: but neither make him Author, or approver of such
impieties as they commit. The Jesuit Fathers such prodigious villainies, as his
soul from Satan's suggestion has conceived, upon his Savior: all other
Heretics, or Idolaters, Turks, Infidels, or Apostates, do then only, or
principally offer contumelies unto Christ and Christianity, when they open
their mouths, and vent their bitterness against him. But of this Whore and her
attendants, that Proverb is most truly verified, Sive scortum benedicat sive
maledicat perinde est. The contumelies offered by them to Christ are all one,
(always most grievous) whether they bless or curse; whether they magnify or
blaspheme his holy Name. Whilst they profess such absolute Allegiance to the
Pope, the Son of perdition, Christ's greatest enemy, in taking our Redeemers
praises in their mouths; they do but add profane scurrility unto blasphemy,
using him herein more contemptuously then the Soldiers, which bowed their
knees unto him, but buffet his face; salute him as a King, and yet wound his
head by putting a crown of thorns upon it.

9 But some out of charity, not to be blamed, will here demand: Do all the
maintainers of this strange Doctrine expressly and wittingly conceive as meanly,
or despitefully of Christ, as these dissolute Roman Soldiers did, though
willingly (for their own advantage) to cloak their secret scoffs, and mockery
of his spiritual Kingdom with outward demeanure, more decent and reverent then
the others used? Do all the learned of that Religion in heart approve that
commonly reported saying of Leo the Tenth, Quantum profuit nobis fabula
Christi? and yet resolve (as Cardinal Inde, Carafa Lutetiam regni Metropolim
tanqua^ Pontificis Legatus solita pompa ingreditur, ubi cu^ signum crucis, ut
sit, ederet, verboru^, quae proferri mos est, loco, ferunt cum, ut erat securo
de numine animo, and summus religionis derisor, occursante passim populo and in
genua ad ipsius conspectum procu^be^te, saepius secreta murmuratione haec verba
ingeminasse. Quandoquidem populus iste vult decipi, decipiatur. Thuanus l.
Hist. 17. An. 1556.
Carafa did, Quoniam populus iste vult decipi, decipiatur,) to nuzle the people
in their credulity? For mine own part, as yet, I cannot think so; though, I
have been friendly censured for saying the contrary. Many of them, I am
persuaded, think they honor Christ as much, as the best in the reformed
Churches do. But does this their conceit, or imaginary love to him, lessen
their wrong, in respect of those contumelies offered him by the heathen? Rather
(in the learned) it is a Symptom of that grievous plague, inflicted upon the
Jews, That seeing, they should not see, that hearing, they should not hear, nor
understand: no sign at all of better real affection toward Christ, but rather
a token of greater servility unto Satan, or of that strange spiritual
drunkenness spoken of by the Evangelist. Their hearts and heads are not
acquainted; the one endites what Satan suggests, and moves their outward
members to act what he commands; the other interprets all done in honor of
Christ, as if a man should be so deeply intoxicated with some pleasant poison,
as to enforce it upon his dearest friend, for an extraordinary dainty. Finally,
that these great Clerks should thus acknowledge Christ for the Redeemer of the
world, and yet admit every Pope for his Compeer, and thus devoutly embrace the
doctrine of Devils, is an undoubted document, they are the sworn-followers of
Him, whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power and signs, and
lying wonders, and in all deceiveablenesse of unrighteousness amongst them
that perish. That which especially causes many of us to doubt, whether the
Jesuits do not aequivocate, when they speak well of Christ, is, because their
learning and judgment are, on the one side so great, and this imagination on
the other so prodigiously absurd and sottish, as one cannot possibly better
brook the others company in the same heart or brain, then the most flourishing
Prince, or Potentate in the World, could the beastliest sluttish She fool
living for the only consort of his bed; howsoever these cunning Panders, in
pride of their nimble wits, may hope to betroth more simple souls unto this
outcast of hell. And though experience in some sort has proved it true, that
no opinion was ever proposed so absurd, but found some Philosopher for it
Patron: yet this imagination of the Popes transcendent authority, far exceeds
the limits of any experiments or observation made in Philosophers, answerable
to the former Axiom. Notwithstanding the more their infatuation (of whom we
speak) exceeds the bounds of all folly or vanity merely natural, the more it
ascertains to us the truth of the Apostles prediction in the place late cited.
Doubtless because they received not the love of the truth, therefore has God
sent them strong 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11.
delusions, that they should believe lies. The fulfilling of which prophecy is
most conspicuous in the modern Jesuits, the principal maintainers of this
doctrine. For were they not men of rare wit and exquisit learning; were not this
opinion withal, of all that are or can be imagined the most sottishly
improbable, and preposterously impious; the print of Gods finger, thus
confounding their brain, could not be so eminent or discernable. The first
bait, cast out by Satan, was but to draw the Romish Clergy unto practices, so
suspicious amongst the people that they could not be justified, but by a
conceit of infallibility: and not checking their pride, being challenged of
error in doctrine, and impiety in their dealings; the Lord gave them over to
believe this monster of falsehood and untruth, a bottomless pit of hypocritical
preposterous blasphemies.

10 Would to God the daily ambitious practices of many, that are or would be
in great place amongst us, the pronenesse of most to transgress the bounds of
lawful authority, and their unreadinesse to recall their errors though never
so gross, their extreme impatience of all impeachment by men, as far their
Superiors in spiritual graces, as their inferiors in secular dignity; did
not plainly show the passage from that point, where these men's resolutions
anchor, unto this new Tire, the Rock of honor, and seat of pride, to be but
short, and the transportation easy, if opportunities of Time and Tide did
serve them. But of the particular temptations, and opportunities that did first
drive the Romanists into this harbor, as also of inveterate errors in other
points, and relics of Heathenish dispositions, whereby they tow others after
them, elsewhere, (according to my promise) if God permit. At this time it shall
suffice to have waded thus far in these unpleasant passages, for discovering
the enemies weakness in his new Fortifications, or Repalliations rather of
such breaches, as our ancient Worthies have made in their imaginary Rock of
strength. Now, as my soul and conscience in the sight of God, and his holy
Angels can assure me, these imputations of blasphemy, sorcerie, and
preposterous Idolatry, I have laid upon this fundamental point of Romish faith,
a^e most true, though much less exaggerated then it deserves: so again, I must
confess, it has in some sort over gone against my conscience, publicly to
discipher or display her abominations. For my little experience of this present
ages temper too well instructs me, what great offense is oft-times hereby given
to men, as weak in faith as strong in their persuasions of it, to flatter
themselves in their hypocrisy, or make them seem unto themselves, men rightly
religious or thoroughly sanctified, whilst they measure their love to true
religion by their hatred unto this doctrine of Devils, or compare themselves
with Priests and Jesuits, as they are painted out in their native colors by
eloquent and learned Pastors. But his iniquity be upon his own head, that thus
perverts my labors, undertaken for his good, unto his harm. For unto a quite
contrary purpose have I set forth this survey of Romish blasphemy, in a larger
volume then first I meant it, even to stir up my self, and every Professor of
true Religion, unto serious amendment of our lives, to hold fast our faith, by
holding up hands pure from bribery and corruption, by lifting up hearts and
minds void of all guile and hypocrisy, ardently zealous of every good work,
unto the Lord our God continually; lest such swarms of Caterpillars and
Locusts, as have chosen Beelzebub for their God devour this land, Mortis modus
morte pejor. To think such should be the instruments of our woe, will unto most
of us, I know, far surpass all conceit of any other woe it self, or misery that
in this life can befall us. And yet whilst I consider what God has done of
old to Israel his firstborn, and Judah his own inheritance: the overplus of
our ingratitude toward him for all his goodness, especially our wilful
continual abusing these days of peace, more, and more sweet and gracious, then
Jerusalem it self, the vision of peace, did ever see so long together without
interruption; I am, and have been, as my public meditations can testify, for
these few years of my ministry, possessed with continual dread, lest the
Lord in justice enlarge his threatenings denounced against Judah upon this Land.
Fearful was that message unto Jerusalem, I will bring the Ezech. 7. 24.
most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall possess their houses: but more
terrible is our doom, if this sentence be gone out against us, I will plague
you by the wickedst amongst the Christians, by men more cruel, proud, and
insolent, then Babylonian, Turk, or Infidel, or any other enemy of Christ's
Church has been, or could be, unless Christians or Jesuits in name or show,
they were mere Antichristians, or Bariesus, in heart and affection. Such titles
we readily give, and willingly hear given unto Loyolaes infamous brood. But if
our ways shall continually prove as odious unto our God, as these terms
imp^rt that Society is unto us: what have we done? Surely tied our bodies to
the stake of justice, by the wickedness of our hands, and proud imaginations
of our polluted hearts; whiles our tongues, in the mean while, have set our
cruel executioners hearts on fire more grievously to torment, to consume and
devour us.

11 But though likelihood of their prevailing against us be, without our
repentance, great, and their cruelty, if they should prevail, more then likely
to be most violent: yet this their hope it cannot be long. Tu quoque Crudelis
Babylon dabis impia poenas,
Et rerum insta^iles experi^re vi^es.
The Lord in due time will turn again the captivity of his people, and the now
living may live to see these sons of Babel rewarded, as they have long sought
to serve us. Their shameless Apologies for aequivocation and this old charm of
Templum Domini, which like unluckie birds always flocking, or frogs croaking
against ill weather, they have resumed of late with joint importunate cries
(albeit with these they bewitch the simple, and choke the worldling or careless
liver, that accounts all serious thoughts of Religion his greatest trouble)
sound unto hearts settled in grace, or minds illuminated with the spirit of
truth, but as the last cracklings of Lucifers candle, sometimes shining in the
Roman Lantern as the morning star, or an Angel of light, but now so far spent
and sunk within the socket that it recovers it wonted brightness but by
flashes; nor can his nostrils, (that is able with the least breath of his
displeasure from heaven in a moment to blow it out) any long time endure the
smell. Even so, O Father, for thy Son Christ Jesus sake; even so, O Christ, for
thine Elect and Chosens sake, impose a period to our grievous sins against
thee, and our enemies malice against us: infatuate their policies, enfeeble
their strength, and prevent them in their Devilish purposes, that seek to
prevent thee in thy judgments, by setting the World in combustion before thy
coming.

Amen.
The continuation of matters prosecuted in the first BOOK.
THe ingenious Reader, I trust, rests fully satisfied, that for planting Lib.
2. cap. 30 parag. 16, (...) etc. Si autem quis demum regetur, cum and revelano
and propositi^ infalli^alis obs^ inevidentes sint, quid ipsum im^ulerit, ut
hunc qu ^in-t^um rerum ^bs^u^issimtrum (...) sit ad (...) scaundum se
inevidentem and obs^^am. Id quod luculenter disserere^i. ebit, (...) (...) ^
fides. Valent. Iom. 3. in Aquin. disput. 1. quaest. 1 de object, fidei punct.
1. parag. 1^.
true and lively Faith in every private Christians heart, Experiments
answerable to the Rules of Scripture, without absolute dependan^e upon any
external Rule thereto equivalent, are sufficient; the assistance of the Holy
Spirit (whose necessity, for the right apprehension of aivine truths revealed,
the Romanist nor does, nor dare deny) being supposed, That Valentians heart
did tell him thus much, and secretly check him for his ridiculous curiosity to
make way unto his Circular resolution of Faith * before refuted, his diffident
speeches immediately thereto annexed, (upon consciousnesse no doubt of it
insufficiency) will give the Reader, (though partial) just cause of
suspicion. If a man (says he) be yet further questioned, seeing as well the
divine Revelations, as the Churches infallible Proposal, are obscure and
inevident; what should impel him to enter into such a Labyrinth of Obscurities,
as to embrace the doctrine of Faith by the former Method, [to wit Believing the
Revelation for the Churches Proposal, as for a condition unto Relief requisite;
and the Churches Proposal again for the Revelation, being the cause of his
Belief] then let him come unto the second process (or method) and expound the
reasons and clearer motives whereby he was and every discreet man may be,
induced to embrace Faith, though of it self inevident and obscure. Thus do they
traduce the Grace of God, as if there were no difference betwixt mid-day-light
and mid-night-darknesse; as if the dawning of that Day Star in our hearts, or
light of Prophets our Apostle speaks of, 2 Pet. 1. 19. were not a mean betwixt
that more then demonstrative Evidence of divine Truths, which glorified Saints
enjoy, and obseurity or Jewish Blindness. The particular manner how Gods Spirit
works lively Faith, by such Experiments as ^tly I did and hereafter must
acquaint him withal, the Reader I hope will gather, of his own accord, out of
the discourses following, concerning the nature of Christian Faith, and the
Principal Objects thereof, whereunto my Meditations are now add (...) my long
durance in this unpleasant subject having bred in my soul a more eag^r the
after these well springs of life.

FINIS.
Though the Observant Reader may serve himself well of the Contents of every
Chapter, and the Table of Texts of Scripture, as also of the Titles of every
Page, and Marginal Briefs; yet for his further advantage is made this ensuing
Table.
To which every Reader may add what he pleases, space being left. The Figure
signifies the Page; M. the Margin.
A
THe sin of Aaron extenuated by Jews, page 38 Abraham's faith, and Jews
stubbornness, 132 The sin of Abiram aggravated, 410 The Authors Aboadment, 507
His prayer, 508 Apparitions of Heathen Gods, 34 etc. Actions humane
distinguished, 168 Actions not of faith, 177, to 184 See Doubts. Not of Faith.
Obedience. The same ill Action may be less of faith in the confident, then in
the scrupler, 184 Best method to square our actions to the rule of faith, 185
Adrians severity against the Jews, 111, 112 etc. Acosta's zeal for Popes
supremacy, 314 Adam did eat not doubting, yet condemned, 185 Adoration of the
Host dangerous to men's souls, 328 Council of Trents decree for adoration, 329
m. To Adore a creature wherein the devil lurks, Vasques thinks lawful, if one
direct not Worship to him, 329 Saracens Adore a stone, and a star, 107
Adoration of a dead dog, deliberated if not done. 501 m. Ahabs Prophets, 418
Elijahs and Michaiahs Prophesies abused by Politicians, 1b Albigenses and
Picards persecuted by the Provost Stenelda, who wrote to S. Bernard about them,
245 etc. Alexander the great, General to Solomon, say the Turks, 46 Ancient
times not to be measured by latter, and why, 37, to 42 How we may dissent from
the Ancient, 266, 267, 268 Angels sent to gather the elect how meant, 101
Angels got Israel miraculous victories, 35 Androgyni Platonis, 56 Different
Ages, diverse events, 309 etc. We mistrust Antiquity, why, 37. etc. Alphon. the
great, got great honor being prisoner 61 Antoninies Army relieved with water.
78 Arnuphis the sorcerer, by the Heathen, said to do it. ibid. Arabians cruelty
to the Jews Ambassadors. 77 Antichrists exaltation, first degree. 315, etc.
Second degree of it. 375, etc. Third degree. 464, etc. Excess of His
exaltation. 449 etc. Antichrist may in formal terms confess Christ. 355
Antichrists spirit. ib. Antichristianisme not contradictory to Christianity,
but contrary. 355 Romish religion So. ib. and 360 Antichrist a Judas, a secret
underminer. 373 The Great Antichrist. 347, etc. and 374. Antidote against
Romish enchanting sorcery. 307 Apothegmes, Crantzius, 139. Carafa's; 505. P.
Leo's. ib. Assent conditional. 189, etc. It differs from implicit faith. 196
Four things considerable for guiding our Assent to truth proposed. 191 Assent.
See belief, and faith. Atheists, credulous in their kind though mistrustfull of
Scripture. 37 Atheists rare in old time. 38 Authorit as docentis how it is a
ground unto unevident Assent. 2, 3 Authority Divine is ground of faith
infallible. 7 Authority of Jewish Church after Moses his death. 411, etc.
Authority. see Pope. Sanedrim. Universal. Aristotle's Rule for Poets. To have a
true History for ground. 27 Aristotle confounds the Causes. 54 He leads us not
to the First Cause or last end, ergo imperfect. ib.
B
BAal. See Prophets. Beclzebub might cast out devils, upon design, as Cheaters
lose. 436 Baptism with water and the holy Ghost, Typified by the pillar of
cloud, and of fire. 447 Babels building transformed by Poets into the Giants
war. 56 Roma Babel rediviva. 244, 245 Bassina's vision. 4^ Belief is an assent,
without plain evidence, 2, 3 Belief how increased in strength and certainty. 4,
5, 6 Objects of Belief distinguished. 5 Belief of Gods Word though but
conditional, what it effects, and requires. 8, 9 Belief of Scriptures how to
be confirmed by experiments in our selves. 140, to 145 Belief of known Oracles
confirmed in S. Peter by experiment. 140 Belief of God wrought in Naaman by
experiment only. 141 See experiment. Belief of principal parts of Scripture,
ties our faith to the rest. 148 etc. Belief of Scripture to be got by practice,
not by Discourse. 150 Belief must be wrought by the Spirit, though by means.
150 See Faith. Conditional Belief, the nature, use, conditions, properties of
it. 189 Pronenesse to Believe when, and in whom, good, or ill. 419 Romish
Belief, merely Humane. 365, etc. He that Believes the Romish Churches Authority
(as some teach it) Believes no Article of Christian faith. 464 He that Believes
the Pope absolutely, without all examination, believes, nor Christ, nor his
Gospel. 494 Such Belief emboldens the Believer to villainy. ib. Romish Belief on
the Church, not on God. 478, etc. Bellarmin cited. Bellarmins Catholic
fyllogisme, and resolution of faith. 319, etc. Bellarmins strange position, if
the Pope call evil good, Papists must believe it. 322. m. Bellarmins Put-off
about Ahabs 400 prophets. 418 Bellarmin confesses, that nor Pope nor Councils
can judge of scripture translated into modern Languages. 157 St. Bernard
against Rodulphus a vile Monk, who preached, it was lawful to spoil the Jews
to maintain the Holy war. 117 Blasphemy Romish. 309, etc. 315, etc. Blasphemy
preferring Human Authority before Divine. 316 Mouth of Blasphemy. 450, 502 More
Blasphemy Romish. 460, 499, 507
C
CAnonical Books of the Old Testament to be known by the Jew. 146 Of the New
now confirmed. 147 Trent Canon, about Canonical Books. 310, etc. Cansuizing.
vide Saints. Canus cited. Caxus. See Romish Writers in letter R. Cajetan and
Cassander desired Reformation. 276 Cardinal Carafa's blessing to the people.
505 French Cardinals address to St. Cuthbert at Durham. 160 Carbarinus defends
the Council of Trent, yet holds certainty of salvation. 274 Ex Cathedra, hard
to know when the Pope speaks of it. 404 Characters of sacred Writings. 13
Charles Martel, his martial Act. 110, etc. Christian Religion confirmed by the
ceasing of Oracles. 30, etc. Christ why so little spoken of by Heathen Writers.
113 Christian Expeditions to recover Jewry, bring evil upon the Jews. 116 The
Christian Cause. (and Cause called Catholic.) 155 Similitude betwixt Christ
and Moses. 434, etc. Christ's predictions and discovery of secrets prove him to
be God, and the Messiah. 441 Church, our Church in Romish, as gold in dross.
245, m Comparison between our Church and the Romish, for means of ending
Controversies. 272, etc. The Church of Rome most needs means to end and take up
Controversies. 275, etc. Jewish Church Representative a corrupt Judge in
matters of God. 422, etc. He has not God for his Father, that has not the
Church his Mother. 465 Churches proposal the Cause of Romish faith. 467 The
Church, the Church. see Templum Domini. Church. see Infallibility. Belief. The
Enthusiasts Circle. 150 Circle. dolus circulatorius. 291, to 293, 508
Sacrebosco in a Circle. 294, 297. see Valentian. Coaliers Circle. 242 Coaliers
Catechism. 292 Conditional. see Assent, faith, belief, obedience. Cassius his
sacrilege at Jerusalem, and pilling the Jews punished. 67 Crassus his
sacrilege at Jerusalem the cause of his destruction. 65, 66 Crassus his
overthrow and sin misapplied. ib. Crassus his sin pointed out in his
punishment. 66, 67 Young Crassus and Old, their Ominous stumble as they came
out of the Temple at Hierapolis. 65. etc. St. Cyprian sinned not deadly in
contradicting Pope Stephen, says Bellarmin. 313, m. Cup, confessed, by the
Trent Council, usual of old; yet forbid by it. 330, etc. and that upon a Text
fore strained. 332: etc. Cup essential. 335. Pope may grant it. 338, m. A
Queen poisoned in the Cup, Greg. Tours. 330 Council of Trent cited.
D
DAlilah by Poets made Scylla. 48 Day of the Lord, not limited to one day. 100,
102 Deliverance from Popery like that from Egypt. 138 Divine Authority ground
of faith. 7 Dialogue of Protestant and Papist. 485 Dialogue of Catech. and
Consistory. 489 Differences, dissensions amongst Learned. See Scripture.
Disobedience: see Obedience. Deucalions flood. 50, etc. Devils believe, how. 3
Doctrine. Christ's doctr. tried by Moses his and the Prophets. Popes must not be
so, no not by Christ's. 428 Belief of Christ's Doctrine, without trial by Moses,
etc. had been not belief, but blindness. 429 Christ's Doctrine is to Moses his,
etc. as the Conclusion is to the premises. 430 S. Peter proves his doctrine by
Moses and the Prophets. 453 S. Paul, lets his doctrine be examined. 456 So does
Christ. 428 All doctrine to be tried by scripture. 458 Doctrine of
Infallibility dangerous to States. 499, 507 -- worst of all errors, heresies,
blasphemies. ib. -- in Canonizing Saints, dangerous. 501 -- danger from Gods
wrath. 502 -- more, of the danger of that doctrine. 503 This doctrine inverts
the Frame of Christian Religion. ib. Doubts may arise from extending unduly the
meaning of scripture. 179 One may in some Case obey or disobey not without
doubt, yet without sin. 180 Every doubt is not sufficient to deny obedience.
186 The Text, He that doubts, etc. expounded, 179 180 Adam condemned for
eating, though he doubted not about it. 185 One may sin doubting of the Popes
or Churches power, yet not sin in examining it whilst he doubts says Bell. 313
m. 458 m. 420 Dreams, of them in particular, 27 etc. Wickedness, worldliness,
policy caused defect of Gods warning men by Dreams, 29 Bassinas Dream 41
Dreams usual amongst the Patriarchs, etc. 28 yea, to eminent persons, and
others perhaps that knew not the true God, 29 Strabo says, Moses taught
chastity requisite in those that expected direction from God in Dreams, 29
E
EDition vulgar, part Lucians, part S. Jeroms, part Theodotions the heretic,
says Bellarmine 300 See translation. Ecclesiastic writers of the first age,
why so silent of the wonders of that age, 98, 99 End, he that commends the end,
commends the necessary means: is a rule, 420 Eleazar presents a Golden beam to
Crassus, 66 Emicho wastes the Jews, and kills twelve thousand of them, 116
Enthusiasme dangerous, 150 etc. England, Jews calamities there, 120 etc. See
Jews. Euphrates compounded of Hu prath 56 Evidence excluded from belief 2
Evidence drowns belief 2 Evidence excluded from the thing directly believed,
not from things united to it, 2 Exceptions, See objections, and universal.
Experiments of Scripture-truth in our selves how to be found, 140 to 145 how to
be framed in our selves, 144 Experience confirmed S. Peter in the truth of a
known Oracle, 140 Experiments fruitful and powerful in hearts prepared, 142
etc. Experiments uneffectual in hearts indisposed, why 143 etc. Experiments of
scripture truth small in our days, and why so, 145 Script, as rule of diet.
Experiments as nutriment. Gods spirit as the digestive, 150 etc. Experiments
confirm faith, 408, 411, 428, 433, 508 Experience of evil threatened, begets
hope of good promised, 415
F
FAbius Ursinus his Oration 50^ Fables resembling truths. Helicon B^^r. Cadmus
Moses. Scylla D^l^la. N^obe Lots w^, 47 etc. 59 Fathers, how they used the
authority of the Church, 243 Faith, to beget it in children, parents
instructions be necessary, 411, 412, 413 Faith confirmed, how. See experiments.
Jeremies Faith confirmed by seeing Gods threats fulfilled, 416 Gideons Faith
confirmed, 414 To settle and ripen Faith, a rule, 421 See rule. Christ risen,
revived his disciples Faith, by what Moses and Prophets had foretold of him,
449 Not of Faith, three meanings of that text or phrase 177 to 184 The
universality of it limited, 178 See Actions, see doubts. The doubt and
disobeying may be not of Faith, as well as the positive action, 179 Omission
may be not of faith as well as commission, 185 Implicate Faith Romish differs
from conditional Belief, 196 Popish writers make the Church mistress of m^ns
Faith, 197 Roman rule of Faith unsufficient, 297 to 305 Of Romish Faith, the
first main ground ^ds to Atheism, second to Heathenism, etc. 484 etc.
Resolution of Faith by Valentian 292, 464 etc. He resolves Faith into the
Churches authority, not into the first verity, 471, 472 etc. Not into Gods
veracity or truth of his word, 478 etc. Resolution of Faith two fold, 472
Foundation, what a Foundation the Papists make Christ, 356
G
GIdeons faith confirmed, 414 Gersons caveat to the Pope about Canonizing of
Saints, 501 Godesaealchus a dutch priest persuades the King of Hungary to kill
the Jews 117 Greek letters and inventions taken from the Hebrew, 57 Great day
of the Lord not to be limited to one day, 100, 102 Giants frequent in Moses's
days 35 etc. Giants about mount Vesuvius. 101 Gods patience to the Jews, a
mercy to the Gentiles. 80, etc. Gods mercy and justice exemplified in the Jews.
91 Gods justice and wisdom in the Jews calamity. 133 His proceedings against
them even to this day most just and most wise. ib. Gods favors to Ancient
Jews, paralleld with the the like to the Gentiles. 135, etc Gods judgments why
not so signal now as in former times. 137 Gods providence in the reformation
from Popery remarkable. 138, etc Gods providence how little observed. 143, etc
Gods providence in making the Papists to acknowledge the Apocalypse for
Canonical, 148 Gods providence in preserving clauses of scripture 149 Gods
Spirit not to be discerned but by his fruits. 150
H
HAnnahs faith confirmed by experiment. 142, etc Of Hannah more. 143 Harmony of
sacred Writers. 17, etc Henry 3. cruel to the Jews. 123 Henry 8. by
prosopopaeia brought in. 372 Heathen objections against the Jews all prevented
by Jewish Writers. 78, etc Heretics urge scripture. 235, etc Some heretics
refuse trial by scripture. 239 Orthodox do not so. ib. Heretics likely to
balk scripture when it will not bestead them. 244 Worms in the Host, how, or
whence they breed. Doctors opinions. 329, m. Host. see Adoration. H^^d. see
Monk. Hosius's Coalier. 242 Hypocrites, their curiosity. 435 Hypocrisy. 507
Hypocrisy. see posterity.
I
IAnnes and Iambres, magicians. 38 Jealousies, their original in the people
against their Teachers. 393 Ieremies Lamentation, a prophecy as well as at
Elegy. 90 Ierusalems destruction by the Romans, a Map of the day of judgment.
92, 93 Jesuits medley. 250 King John cruel to the Jews. 122, etc Iris
Thaumantis filia. 54 See Rainbow. Jews favored by their Conquerors beyond all
po litick observation, 62, 63, 68 Jews strange thriving under their Conquerors
testified by Heathens, 68, 69 Jews strange powerfulness in winning Gentiles to
Iudaisme, ib. Jews wronged by Tacitus, and why. 70, 71, 72 Jews thriving in
captivity to be attributed to their Law. 73 Jews more favored by God then any
other Nation. 73, to 75 Jews a mightier Nation then any other. 74, 75 Jews
strange continuance in the midst of miseries. ib. Jews had better security of
their prosperity then any others. 75 Their increase and decay not measurable by
human policy. 76, 77 Jews, why said by Diogenes, Laertius, to be descended
from the Magi. 77 Jews and their Religion despised by Heathens on false
grounds. 78, to 82 All heathen objections against the Jews prevented by Jewish
Writers. 78, etc. Jews calamities and prosperities with their causes foretold
in Scriptures. ib. Their enemies (until Christ was rejected) how punished by
God. 75 Their enemies (after Christ was rejected) how favored by God. 83 Jews
destruction the cause of Gods exalting Vespasian. 83, to 86 Jews a Nation set
apart to exemplify Gods justice and mercy. 91 Jews blind madness in Cyrene
and Cyprus according to Deuteronomy. 28. 28. 111 Jews continuance in misery according
to Deuteronomy. 28. 59. 111 Jews mighty desolation under Adrian. 112 Jews prohibited
to come within the view of Jewry, Deuteronomy. 28. 62. ib. Jews why not mentioned from
Adrians time till Romes captivity. 113 Jews misery in Spain and France. 114,
115 Iewry a Marl-pit for Gods vineyard. 115 Jews bereaved of their children,
according to deuteronomy. 28. 32. 115 Jews calamities in Hungary. 116 Jews calamities
in Germany. 117 Jews why not utterly destroyed. ib. Jews meannesse in the
Eastern parts. 118, 119 Jews rejection of Samuel a type of their rejection of
Christ. 118 Jews punished according to Deuteronomy. 28. ad 33. 120 Jews miseries in
all times and places according to Deuteronomy. 28. 33 ib. Jews calamities in England.
120, to 123 Jews brutish stupidity. 121 Jews massacre in Linne on a small
occasion, 121 Jews madness and self murder in York. 122 Jews may not come on
Horseback, nor in Constantinople but upon Terms. 117 Jews grievous oppressions
under King John, Henry 3. and Edward 1. 122, 123 Aaron the Jew, paid Henry 3. a
Ransom of 30200 marks. 123 Jews banishment out of England purchased by
Parliament. 123 The Jew of Bristow paid 10000* marks after he had lost 7.
teeth. 123 Jews for murdering a Christian child, are massacred at Munchin.
129 Jews poison Fountains, and offer indignities to the B. Eucharist. 124, to
126 Jews for so doing are much afflicted in France and Germany. ib. Jews cannot
be saved from the peoples rage by King, and Governors. 125 Jews banished out
of Spain and Portugal. 126 Jews bereaved of their children again. 127 Jews
urged to serve such gods as their fathers knew not. 128 Jews miseries according
to Deuteronomy. 28. 65, ad 67. 129 Jews become a Proverb and byword to all Nations.
130 Jews banished by the father, bought, and brought in of the son. Banished by
Pius Quintus, recalled by Sixtus Quintus. 129 Jews scattered from the one end
of the world to the other. 131 Jews infidelity a strong argument for Christians
faith. 132 Jews stubbornness an argument that they are Abraham's posterity. 132
Jews the cause of their own misery. 133, 134 Jews thirst of crucifying
Christian children, proves their forefathers crucifying of Christ. 133 Jews
make their fathers sins their own. 133 Jews carriage and temper the Lees of
their forefathers excellency. 134. Jews present depression proves their former
exaltation. 134 Jews blindness a light to the Gentiles. 136 Jews desolation the
most effectual proof of Christian says. 137 Jews misery a type of unbeleevers
eternal misery. 137 From the history of these Jews, general and useful
Collections. 129, to 139 Jews conve^sion as likely to be sudden as at all. 138
Best method to convert the Jews. 251 Church of the Jews. see Infallibility.
San^drim Christian. Ishmaelits, the same with Saracens and Hagarens. 103, to
107 Jews and Ishmaelites, continual signs to the Nations. 1^3 Ishmaels
description by Moses, a prophecy of his posterity. 105 Ishmaelits why called
by themselves Saracens. 109 Ishmaelites or Sarac^ns how like Ishmael. 106, 107
Ishmaelites a mighty Nation. 108, 109 Image worship, the effects of it in
Monks. 128 Indulgences caused a breach in the Church. 270 S. John in some
points above S. Paul and S Peter. 3^^ Infallibility. He that is taken, or takes
upon him to have absolute Infallibility, is made, and makes himself God. 198,
199 Infallibility (granted) is no such means to end controversies as is
pretended. 243, 248 Infall. a means to harden a Mahumetan. 250 Infallibility as
dangerous to the soul as Empericks practice to the body. 257 The differences
amongst Ancients, an Argument against any one man's infallib. 268 Popes
Infallibility pretends to decision of Controversies brought to him, not to
praediction or prevention of them, ere they arise; to censure the opinion not
punish the Author. 274 Popes challenge of infall. cause of Dissensions. 277
Infallibility, is not, de facto, a means to end Controversies. 279, 298 Nor
would infallib. end them aright, if all granted it. 280 Imperfections in the
Popes Infallibleship. 284 Infallibility wherein it consists. 287, 289 Churches,
or scriptures infallibility, which first to be believed, or, are both together
to be believed. 289, etc. Infallibility of the Jewish priests depended upon
their continency. 378 Infallibility of the King defensible by scripture, as
probably as that of the priest. 387 Some Jews brag that Judah's scepter still
flourish in Media. 339. Jews Church erred fundamentally in Christ's time, ergo
not infallible at any time. 400 Infallib. more necessary under the Law. 3^8
Disadvantage to Rome not to hold the synagogue Infallible 399. Jews after Moses
death, made not Churches infallibility the Rule of faith, but experiments
answerable to Gods word. 411 What does infal. perform to the Believer? what to
the object believed? 481 Pope infall. in canonizing Saints, says Valent. 496
Jesuits doctrine of Popes infallib. dangerous to states, and the worst of
errors. 499, 505 Infallibility a device to cover practices not justifiable by
Romish Clerks. 506 Infallibility the doctrine of it inverts the whole frame of
Religion. 5^^
K
POwer of the Keys. 395. see Universal. Kings Infallibility as probable as
the Popes. 387 K^ his sin aggravated. 410 Krantzius (or Cranzius) his speech to
Luther. Frater abi. 139 Hu speech, put in the mouth of a Saracen, at Torutum.
109 Krantzius his Relations touching the Jews. 125, 126, 129, 133
L
LAnguages, (Italian, Spanish, French, English) mixtures of Roman and
Barbarous. 245 Laymen illiterate may as well know the sense of scriptures, as
of the Popes Decrees. 156, etc Laymen not skilled in Languages, how far bound
to believe scripture. 161 Leo the tenth his Apothegme. 505 Lindens panoply no
good Harness. 242 A Logic Rule explained. 475 Lo^^ wife, by Poets,
transformed into Niobe. 49 Loyola's way to try spirits by. 151
M
MAdness of men in not searching Scriptures 9 S. Paul's Man of God, who it is.
154 Carnal man. 212, 213, 236, m. Spiritual man. ib. Manes's heresy. One
creator of matter, another of purer substances. Magic helped and hastened the
sudden making of the golden Calf. 38 Mahomet pretended descent from Sarah. 109
Maldonate, one of the best Expositors of that Gang. 401. His censure of
Iansenius. 275. m. Maldonate censured about the meaning of the sixth of John.
332 B. Virgin Mary her faith confirmed by experiment. 143 Use of Magistracy and
Ministry for avoiding schisms, with Valentians and Sacroboscos extremities
about that point. 237 Ministry of men, how needful to plant faith and keep
it. 153, 163, 185, to 189, 282, 480 Ministers of God, to be advised with in
particulars touching our souls. 145 Ministers not being advised with in
particulars, a cause of fruitless preaching. ib. Miracles used in the infancy
of Christianity. 40 Miracles of Ancient times not to be suspected because none
such now. 37, 42 Miracles of scripture relation, proved true by a strong
Dilemma. 11 Expectation of pompous miracles, the original of Jewish infidelity,
433 Internal miracles the end of external. ib. Miracles of Christ, and of
Devils, and Impostors, differ in the End. 436, 445 Miracles, no rule of trying
Prophets before the Law. 435 Christ's miracles not so much relied on by his
Disciples, as Christ's predictions. 442 More of Christ's miracles. 443 Luthers
miracle wrought sine vi Ferri. 139 Vespasians miracles. see Fespasian.
Miracles, see prophetical testimonies in the let. P Mistrustful man prone to
be an Infidel. 20 Mistrustfulness how it may be well used ib. A monk scrupled
to wear an Hood. 240 Moses and the Israelites wandering made by Poets into
Cadmus's and the Phoenicians. 48 Moses had no such power as is ascribed to the
Pope, though he had virtually, both Civil power and Ecclesiastical or
spiritual. 405 Siimilitude betwixt Moses and Christ. 434, etc Muscovites forbad
Preaching, to prevent schisms. 302 Massacre at Paris, and Boydon the chief man
in it, commended by Fabius Ursinus the Popes Legate. 500. Massacres. Vide Jews.
Mysteries involved in the Aenigmaticall propriety of words prophetical. 100
N
NAamans faith, begot by one single experiment without the word. 141 Naamans
doubting, how like the curiosity of unbelieving Artists. 141, 142 Noah's ^^ood
changed by Heathens into Deucalions. 51 Niobe made of Lots wife. 49 Notions of
good and evil, in Pythagoras, Orpheus, Linus, Euripides 57 Notions of Christ,
what the Pharisees had before he came. 446
O
OAths to be kept, yet not when Pope and Religion is in hazard, says Paulus
Quartus. 503 Observations (made by the Author) out of Poets in general. 27,
etc. see Poets. Oracles, a discourse about them. 30, etc Oracles ceasing, a
proof of Christian Religion. 30, etc Of Oracles failing, Plutarchs 2. reasons.
1. Flitting of Demons, 2. Alteration of soil; exhalations being (said he) as
necessary for Oracles to speak with, as an instrument for a Musician to play
on. 30 Omen. See Crassus, and Vespasian. Objections of Romish Doctors against
scripture. 260, etc. 264, etc. see Scripture. Obedience, what due to God, what
to his Messengers. 154, 271, 306 Obedience to Authority, 168, to 176 Sincere
Obedience makes some actions lawful, which without it would be unlawful. 170,
to 177 Illimited Obedience to the Church, is required by Papists, without
examination or appeal. 165 Antipapists extreme in that point. ib. The
Protestants mean in the same point. 166 Abraham's Obedience commended by S.
Austin, and soldiers obedience so. 171, 172, 175, m. A certain rule when
Authority may be disobeyed. 174 Such as disobey, fearing their practice may
occasion evil, are often taken in their fear. 174, 175 More about Obedience.
See 185, to 189 Of Obedience, or belief conditional, see 189, to 196 How It
differs from implicit faith. 196 Conditional Obedience of two sorts. 381
Pretenses for disobedience. 194, 195 Absolute Obedience due to Pastors, etc.
in what. 382, 389 Spiritual Obedience limited. 391 Precepts of Obedience to the
Priests, in the Law, universal in Form, admit restrictions or exceptions. 376,
etc Sincere Obedience according to the measure of light which men have, the
best way to get more light. 196 Obedience the way to wisdom S. Austin. 224, m.
To Obey the Romish Church absolutely without Appeal, is not to obey God. 327
Against blind Obedience a caveat. 409
P
FOr Pan's death the spirits mour^. 31 Thamous commanded to proclaim it. 31
Pans mother, Penelope. ib. Christian paganismes. 144 A parallel of Atheistical
and papistical mockery. 363 Pharisees did quadrate the sins of proselytes. 250
Parents instructions means to beget faith in children 411, etc. Pashurs
prophecy. 424 Philip the Fair, in one day apprehends all the Jews. 124, 125
Planetiades in Plutarch makes the negligence or ^malignance of the gods, the
cause why Oracles ceased. 58 Plato's Androgyni, a mistake of Moses in Genesis 56
Plutarch's mention of Deucalions Ark and Doves, 51 Persecution of Albigenses
and Picards. 246 -- Of Hushites, Bohemians, Lyonois. 277 Persecution of
Christians by Saracens, greater then of all Roman Emperors. 110 People go to
sermons (at happy be lucky) as if a sick man went to a physic Lecture; good,
but not of his disease. 145 Poets fables prove Scriptures truth. 27, to 30
Poetry more of old, when more wonders were. 42, etc Poetry; right use and
corruption of it. 43, to 47 Poetry, the original, use, etc. of it. 42, etc
Fables transform Scriptures truth. 46, to 57 Poetry, prima quaedam philosophia.
43 Aristotle's Rule for Poets. 28 Pompeys felicity, 63. misery, 64. struck in
the brain by God, 65. never prospered after he entered the sanctum sanctorum.
ib. Pliny Junior, his relation of Vesuvius eruption. 100, 101 Pliny the
philosopher, his uncle, smothered in it. 100. Plinies pine tree, resembles
Joels pillar of smoke. 100 Jewish Proverb, Plus vidit ancilla ad rubrum mare
and montem Sinai quam omnes prophetae. 409, (...) Paulus Fagius cited.
Pescennius Niger his reply to his soldiers; They which beat you drink water.
106 Petrus Cluniacensis persuades King Lewis to war against the Saracens, and
to make the Jews pay for it. 117 Provost of Stenelda, his Epistle to S.
Bernard. 245 King of Portugal Emanuel, uses the Jews ill. 126, etc. A False
Prophet persuades 6000 Jews to wait for miracles and deliverance, but all
perish, says Josephus. 91 Ptolomaeus Philadelphus his goodness to the Jews,
releasing 100000 of them, etc. 62 S. Peter what privilege he had by pasce
oves, and by Christ's prayer for him. 341, to 347 S. Peter's faith confirmed by
experience. 140, etc S. Peter is not the Rock, Christ is. 347, etc S. Austin
thought, S. Peter was not the Rock. 348, m. Of Petra, Petros, and Cepha. 347 S.
Peter's denial. 341 Popes speaking ex Cathedra. 298, etc Popish Foxes set fire
amongst us. 275 Opposition betwixt S. Peter and his successors. 453, etc Pope
exacts belief contrary to all Notions of good and evil. 451 Pope may be an
Heretic, but cannot teach heresy ex cathedra, says Valent. John 22. within
an inch of one. Honorius probably was one. 213, etc. m. All Popes not qualified
to understand scripture. 213 Pope to blame that being infallible he stills not
all Controversies. 213, 243, 244 Pope forces not Infidels in; but corrects
Christians within the Church. 249 Pope Antichrist. 446, etc. 451, 452 Popes
speaking is Ominous. 304 Popes Authority made greater then Gods. 325 Pope is a
Judge. The Fathers but Doctors. 370 Popes primacy overthrown. 341, etc Pope a
ministerial Head. 371, m. Pope his Authority made greater then the Jewish
Churches. 375, etc. Then Moses's. 405, etc. Then the Prophets. 417, etc. Then
Christ's. 427, etc. Then the Apostles. 452, etc. Pope only Judge, say
Bellarmin and Valent. 461 Pope may do what he will, by their doctrine. 463
Pope. See Infallibility. see Oath. The Sun Pope of colors. Facetious. 49^ The
High Priest did err ex Cathedra in a main Article of Faith. 403 Priests hated
the prophets living, loved the dead prophets. 423 Posterities affection to
stain prophets, an Argument of deep hypocrisy. 422 Predictions by dreams
usual of old. 28, 29 Our Saviors prophesies, Matthew. 24. etc. exactly
fulfilled. 93, to 103 A prophecy of a Monarch from the East, misapplied. 86
Joels prophecy (pillars of smoke) agrees with Pli^ies. 100, 101 Prophecy of
Ismaels being a great Nation fulfilled. 108, 109 Moses prophesies fulfilled in
the Jews destruction. 111, to 133 Samuels prophecy fulfilled, how and when.
118, 119 Prophesies of Ishmaels posterity fulfill. 103, to 111 Prophecy of
psalm 59. ver. 11, 13. fulfilled on Jews of later times. 135 Prophesies of the
old Testament exactly fulfilled in the Jews destruction. 87, to 92 Christ
prince of Prophets. 434, 437. see Raised. Prophetical predictions, but
particulars of Moses's generalities. 426, etc Prophetical predictions, surer
grounds of faith, then vive voices of the Apostles. 453, m. Prophets
privileges. 417 Vo^^s of a major part of prophets examinable. 417, 419 etc ^s
400 prophets, no professed servers of Baal. 418. More of those prophets. 424,
437 Elijahs and Michaiahs prophesies of Ahab, by hi dolititians scanned and set
at odds. 418 Prophecy fulfilled 4 ways. 401, m. Whether the society of
prophets was the Church representative. 419 Why Prophets join repentance with
their predictions. 421 Prophets have mostly, Cassandra's Fates. 423 Means to
discern true prophets. 425 Trial of prophesies. 434, etc Prophets testimonies
prove Christ the Messiah, better then miracles do. 430, etc Lumen propheticum
erat aliqualiter Aenigmaticum. 439
Q
PIus Quintus, Sixtus Quintus. see Jews Pharisees did Quadrate the sins of
proselytes. 250
R
CHrist Raised two ways. 448 Rainbow, poets fancies about it. 28 Rainbow,
not before the flood. 54 Rainbow, Gods messenger to assure the timorous
posterity of Noah, they might safely go down to the valleys. 54 m. Rain-bows
colors signify the st^oy of the old world by water, of this, by fire. 55
Reformation desired by Cassander and Cajetan. 276 -- By Sepulveda. 462
Redemption Christ spoke of, was preservat on from the Nations terrors. 101
Revelation of S. John, somewhat about it. 147, etc Revelations private. see
Zachary. Roma Babel Rediviva. 244, m. 245 The Romish Rack, 318 The Roman
Account. 356, 358 Romish religion as Romish, what kind. 361 Romish Church, a
rare Idol. 363 Romish Church, mistress of men's faith. 197, 226 Some Romish
Writers come too near the justification of them that put Christ to death. (as
the Talmud does.) 396, 397, 400, 402 Romish Rule of faith, not known to S.
Peter. 452 Old Roman Historians, seldom mention Jews or Christians, but upon
occasion of war; such as was under Vespasian, Trajan, Adrian. 113 At Richard 1.
Coronation, Jews sore handled. 120, etc Rindeflaish, the Rustic, says he was
sent from heaven to destroy the Jews, as Hartmannus did 124, 126 The Rechabites
live in fo^m of a Kingdom. 119 A Rule for settling and ripening faith. 421 A
Rule in Divinity (All absolute perfections are really in God) abused by
Papists. 427 A Rule of Logic explained. 475 Aristotle's Rule fore Poets. 28 A
school Rule, Ubi unum propter aliud, ibi unum tantum. 493
S
SAcred Writers sobriety compared with Heathenish writers vanity. 58, to 61
Samson and Dalilah by Poets made Nisus and Scylla. 48 Samuels rejection a type
of Christ's rejection by the Jews. 118. Sarah. see Zachary. Saracens, pretend to
Sarah. 109 Saracene a Region in Ishmaels territories. 109 Original of Saracens.
103, etc Saracens, Hagarens, Ishmaelites all one. 103, to 107 Saracens and
Jews, continual signs to the Nations. 103. Saracens how like Ishmael their
fathe. 106, to 110 A Saracens fact. 100 A Saracens Oration. 109 300000.
Saracens slain, by Charles Martell. 110 Saracens living, manners, marriages,
etc. 103, to 107 Saracens City had Zoars privilege. Trajans Army vexed with
wind, lightning, flies, etc. whilst they assaulted their Metropolis. 108
Satan carves for himself out of the Churches broyls. 244 Sanedrim's authority
limited, not as the Papist do. 385 Saul not answered by God, why 29 Saints,
Pope cannot err in canonizing them, says Valentian. 496 More about canonizing
Saints. 500 Popes power to saint men, dangerous to states. 501 Gersons Caveat
to the Pope about canonizing Saints. 501 All State affairs have a ruled case in
Scripture. 144 States, The age or duration of them. 40 Strabo cited. Saying of
Augustus Caesar. 238 Saying of S. Austin, Non crederem Evangelio, etc. 479, 483
Saying proverbiall, scortum sive benedicat, etc. 505. Another Saying, Nemo
senex veneratur Jovem. 40 Scruples. see Doubts. School-aivines assign not a
right subordination of second causes to the first. 144 Silence about Grace and
Free Will, enjoined in Spain for four years. 301 Semele in the Poets, is
Eliiahs, or Moses story spoiled 59 Simon Magus, his sin. 214, etc. Scythians
dispute with the Aegyptian^ about antiquiority. 51 No sign can be given us
Christians aequivalent to the destruction of the Jews. 137 Signs, etc.
discoursed on, from 90, to 103 Signs in the Sun and Moon are past. 98, etc.
Signs of the Time. 85, 136, 425, 427, 432 Sun turned into darkness. 100, 101
Sin in general gets fear of punishment; special sins special punishment. 427
Spirit of God not to be known but by his fruits. 150 Betwixt the Spirit of God
and that of the Papacy, the opposition is Diametral. 449, etc Christ would not
suffer unclean spirits to publish the Gospel. 354 Spirit of Antichrist. 355,
Spirits. see Trial. Proper sorcery in Jesuiticall doctrine 502 Sodom, Straboes
report of it. 50. Circumference sixty furlongs. Thirteen populous cities in
that soil, destroyed by earthquake says he. ib. Lots sons in law, their wives,
Lots other daughters, probably all, destroyed in Sodom. 49 Salt-sea, might
season the Atheist, 50 Scriptures truth has greater and surer tradition then
any other Writings. 10 Incitement to search the script. 9 Madness not to search
the script. 9 Scripture miracles proved true. 11 Script. divine truth proved by
its prevailing without outward help. 11 Script. confirmed by the solid marks of
Historical truth. 13, ad 17 Script. divine truth proved by harmony of sacred
Writers. 17. script. divine truth proved from its drift and scope. 17 Script.
Authority proved from the vehemence and sincerity of spiritual affections. 19,
ad 25 Script. truth proved by Poetical fables. 27 ad 30 Some scripture
relations confirmed by the apparition of Heathen gods. 34 ad 37 Scripture
truths transformed into Poetical fables. 46 ad 57. scriptures relation of the
Suns standing still misapplied to Atreus. 48 Scripture relation of the fiery
serpents changed into Cadmus his Dragon. ib. Scripture relation of Sodom and
Gomor^ha proved true by reason and sense. 50 Scripture genealogies agree with
the names of Nations. 52. scriptures relations of the first inhabited parts how
proved 53 Scriptures truth proved by Gods proceeding with the Jews 61 ad 90
Scriptures proved by the Jews desolation 137 Scriptures truth how to be
confirmed by experiments in our selves 140 ad 145 Scriptures how to be read and
heard 142 Many good qualifications required in Readers of scriptures, that they
may understand them, 210 to 219, 223 to 229, 233, etc. 248, 256, 258, etc 261,
264, 270 Scriptures why so ineffectual in their Readers and Hearers, 142
script. ineffectivenesse in some no derogation to their power, 142. script.
truth confirmed by the consent of Papists, Protestants, Jews. 146. scripture
truth to be known by practice. 150. scriptures how unreasonably neglected and
distrusted. ib. script. writ by Moses, a perfect rule to the Israelites. 229,
to 233, 255, 263 Agreements and Differences betwixt Papist and Protestant about
script. 163 Obscurity pretended by Papists hinders not script. from being that
Rule 201 How Protestants grant 'script. obscure, 201, to 206 Unto what men, and
for what causes scriptures be obscure. 206, to 210 Ro^ish objections against
perspicuity of script. fly at God and the Penmen of holy Writ as much as us.
219, 220, to 222 S. John and other Evangelists intended plainness. 220.
Pretenses of Obscurity are vapors of fleshly corruption 223, 233. Bellarmins
darkning Lucerna. 223, 224, 225, 211. and Valentians. 225, m. 226, etc. yet
this qualified, 234. m. He sets a Candlestick upon the light. 228 Papists
sometimes made the holy Bible the holy Mount, that might not be touched. 229,
m. But now may, 257, upon condition, m. ib. The Devil made the Jews depart from
God, by persuading them that Gods Law was too Obscure. 230 What Protestants
mean by [scripture is the Rule of Faith.] 198, 206, 268, 282, 283. See Faith.
Scripture a rule of Faith even to the unlearned. 199 Two Romish objections
against scripture being Rule of Faith. 155. The former answered, 156, etc Their
other objections (Heretics urge scripture. The Learned differ about sense of
scripture. private spirits uncertain) answered. 235, etc Prove aut nihil, aut
nimium. 266, etc conclude against all science as much as against us. 266, etc
See Heretics. Devil and Heretics cunning in scripture: Christ ^inger and more
ready to help. 241 Scripture a slumbling block and snare to the unwise, so
Valent. 248, 256. m Difficulty of scripture is the Jews vail, so Valent. 209,
252 Sufficiency of scripture. 254, to 260. sine schola Simonis. 259. m Christ
submits his doctrine to scripture. 255 Scriptures teach the remedy for the
danger in reading scriptures. 259, etc The Objection. (Protestants permit all
to use scripture, and to take what sense they please) ergo they have no means
to end Controversies) answered and retorted. 271 Script. must be understood by
the same spirit by which they were written. Bell. confesses this. 286 Scripture
supreme judge of Controversies, in what sense. 302. Council of Trents Decree
about interpreting scriptures. 311 Scripture has a Ruled Case for the success
of all State Business on foot in the World. 144 About the Canon of scripture
146
T
TAcitus his spleen against the Jews 70 etc -- Against Christians 114 Tacitus
objections against the Jews confuted 70, to 72. Tacitus a Tatler 76 Talmud
seems to justify the condemnation of Christ 396 Jesuits Tempt God 497 Templum
Domini, Templum Domini, the Church, the Church 374, 422, 508 Under the second
temple, no Bood added to the Canon. Providence in it 59 Second Temple. see
Urim. When the Temple was fired, Titus kills the priests saying, No need of
them that being burnt 91 Tithes, why so unwillingly paid 144 Titus dying
expostulates with God 85 Tiberius calls a Council about Pan 31 Ten Kings give
power to the Beast 505 The word [therefore] imports not always a cause of the
thing, but of our instruction to be taken from it 130, 131 Testimony of Jesus
spirit of prophecy 366, 398 Testimony of Jews and papists useful about Canon
of scripture 146, 147, etc Thamous Egyptian 31 Thunder; thought the
Pythagoreans made to terrify them in Hell 54 Turk, partner with Ishmael in
Circumcision, A proselyt of Istmael, Heir adopted to that promise, Genesis 17. 20.
110 Turk signifies a wild man, 110. Turks mad Historians. Make Job and
Alexander the Great Officers to Solomon. 46, 47. Under Turks and Saracens
Christians suffer; as Jews did under Greeks and Asiaticks 110 Tradition of
parents, how good for children 411 Traditions by Trent decree equaled to
script. 487 Trajan in an earthquake drawn out at a window by miracle 96. Trajan
shot in the shoulder 108 Trajans Army plagued with storms and flies 108 Traian
pursues the Jews: Enacts, that if a Jew, though driven by tempest, set, foot in
Cyprus, he is condemned, ipso facto 111 Transubstantiation 328 Translation
vulgar partly Lucians, partly S Jeroms, partly Theodotions the Heretic, partly
another, may have scribe s^ps in it, says Bellarm. yet no errata in iis quae
ad Fidem and mores pertinent 300 Forerius his defense and dealing for the
vulgar translation 301 Trent decree for the vulgar translation 311 Trial of
spirits 150, etc. 265, 354 Christians in every Age tried in trial of spirits,
and in their love to God 265 Ignat. Loyola's way of trial of spirits 151
Trial of prophesies 434, etc S Thomas Moors Jest 192 Ren. Tudelensis his visi
ing and relation of the Jews, his Countrey-mens estate 117, to 119 Trent
Council cited.
V
VAlentian cited. Valentian, turned Doctor similitude 227 Valentian his
Enchanted Circle 291, etc. 475, 507 Valentians saying of the veil that is upon
the Jews hearts 209, 252 Vates 43, 10 Vesuvius burning a Beacon to all flesh
100 Vespasians expedition against the Jews, how, and why honored 83, 84
Vespasian advanced beyond policy 84, 87 Vespasians service against Jerusalem,
rewarded as Jehu's was 85. Vespasian another Moses 85 A type of Messiah 86
Vespasian prophesied of by Josephus 83 Vespasian owned by an Ox and a Dog 84
Vespasian cures a blind and a lame man 84, 85 Oracle at Carmel aboads Him
prosperity 84 Vespasian confident that his son shall succeed him in Empire, or
no body 85 Vespasians death foregon by a Comet, and the opening of Augustus his
sepulcher 87 His dying speech Nunc Deus Fio 86 Nor Vespasian nor Titus titled
Judaicus 87 Vicinity breeds envy 423 Visions counterfeited by evil spirits 261
Visions seen to one not to others 34, 35 Vision of Queen Bassina 41 At Vitrye
in Champaine, Jews imprisoned themselves 124 Deus vult, Deus vult, Rumor of a
Voice from heaven 116 Ubi unum propter aliud, ibi unum tantum 493 Evil unity,
good dissension 277 Vulgar Edition. See Translation. An universal Text limited
178 Uniuersal precepts, promises, propositions admitting exceptions 376, etc
All that the scribes and Pharisees bid you do do. limited. 391, etc. And
limited by Maldonat well. 392. That Text unduly extended may be abused to
justify the condemnation of our Savior Jesus Christ 396 Urim and Thummim,
what it was 377 m. Urim ceased 200 years before his time, says Josephus. 36.
It rather ceased with that generation that came back from captivity; soon after
the second Temple was finished 36 Gods promise to direct by Urim, conditional
378 The Authority of the Keys not absolutely universal. 395 Unbelief of
curious Artists, like Naamans doubtting. 141, 142 Unbelief of Scripture
unreasonable 150 Unbelief may find pretenses ib Unbelief Antichristian. An
Axiom of its 478
W
William Rufus cruel to the Jews 117 Jewish Woman's eating her child 91
Wood-worship indeed 129 Lots Wife not transformed, but candyed over 49, 50 Want
of Wine complained of as cause of want of courage in soldiers, who yet were
beaten by water-drinkers 106 Wranglings amongst Christians makes the world
doubt of Christianity 19 Writers. See Sacred and Romish. Whore of Babylon, a
Witch properly 502 Worms in the Host whence they breed. 329, m Written Word,
sole Umpire. 256
Y
THe Horrid Suicidium of the Jews at York 122
Z
ZIdkiah the Prophets dispute against Michaiah out of Josephus 418 Zachary and
Sarah sinned not the sin of proper Infidelity, as it is opposed to sides
Catholica, when they doubted of Gods promises to them; (because the Revelation
was private) but of imprudence, says Valentian. 468
A Table of Scriptures Expounded or Illustrated by Observations in these Three
Books of Commentaries: Out of the Old and New Testament.
Genesis. Chap. Verse. Page. 1. 26, 27 56 2. 14 ibid. 4. 1, 25 13 5. 1, 2 56 29
14 9. 12, 13, 14 54 10. 13, 14, 23 52 11. 1, 2 51 12. 2, 3 77 16. 12 105 17. 20
110 19. 14, 15 49 20. 3, etc 28 25. 14, 15, 16, 18 104 18 105 34. 30, etc 14
37. 10, 11 28 40. 8, 12, 13, 19 ib. 42. 20, etc 15 44. 16, etc ibid. Exodus. 3:
2 34 4. 13 446 14. 13 408 15. 1 43 26 408 16. 12 ib. 17. 7 ibid 19. 4 409 20.
10 379 24. 9 439 10 410 28. 30 377 32. 1, etc 38 33. 13 59 Leviticus. 10. 9 378
26. 14, etc, 44 81 Numbers. 11. 16 439 12. 6 ib. 6, 7 29 21. 6 48 16, etc 47
22. 22 34 23. 22 446 27. 21 377 Deuteronomy. 4. 1, 2 407 5, etc 73 9 413 5. 22
410 28, 29 444 6. 6, etc 230 10. 16 141 17 426 11. 2 411 13 412 18, 19 411 22,
26, 29 412 17. 8 385 19 387 18. 14 445 15 448 15, etc 434 18 438 18 445 19 443
20 435 27. 11, 12, 13, 14 412 28. 29 125 30 127 31 120 32 127 33 120 34 122 37,
41 131 43 84 49, etc. 52 112 53 82 59 111 62 113 64 131 65, etc 130 68 122 29.
19 133 30. 1 416 11, etc 304 31. 16, 11, 12, 13 413 16 426 19 44 32. 26, etc 80
29 141 36, etc 80 39 141 46 44 34. 10 445 Joshuah. 8. 33, 34, 35 413 10. 13 48
Judges. 2. 7, 8 413 5. 1, etc 43 6. 12 34 13, 14 414 15 415 22 60 8. 33 415 13.
22 60 16. 17, 19 49 17. 15 415 1 Samuel. 2. 1, 2, etc 43 8. 7, 11, etc 118 15.
22 171 23. 9 377 28. 6 29. 378 30. 7, 8 377 1 Kings. 9. 7 131 13. 18 422 18. 36
437 19. 11, etc 59 20. 36, etc 172 22. 24 264 24 424 28 437 2 Kings. 1. 24 81
4. 27 440 5. 15 141 6. 17 35 2 Chronicles. 24. 20 426 Ezra. 2. 63 36 Nehemiah.
1. 7 417 6. 16 77 Ester. 6. 13 76 Job. 19. 25 162 33. 14, etc 28 34. 19 140
Psalms. 2. 7 448 3. 1 22 9. 8, 9, 10 23 19. 7 216 27. 1, 3 22 34. 8 45 42. 1 21
43. 5 22 44. 1 21 46. 1, 2 23 50. 16 354 25 355 51. 1, 2, 3, 10, 12, 13 20 and
21 59. 11 117 13 135 66. 16 20 74. 9 21 78. 33, 34 412 81. 11 80 106. 39, 46 79
119. 98, 105 224 Proverbs. 16. 7 81 28. 9 ibid. Isaiah. 5. 13 264 6. 9, 10, 11,
12 401 11. 2 431 28. 16 352 29. 9, 10, 11, 13, 14 209 35. 5 431 40. 3 441 42. 1
431 89 441 11 104 53. 8, 9 448 61. 1 431 63. 10 60 Jeremiah. 2. 3 67 9. 23 17
10. 2 89 18. 18 424 20, 7, etc 18 24. 1, 2, etc 134 25. 29, 91 31 100 26. 8, 2
424 28. 6, 7, 8, 9 43S 10, 12 440 29. 26 425 30. 13, 14 316 31. 33 32 32. 24,
25, etc 416 42, 43, etc ibid. 35. 9, 10, 14, 19 119 Lamentations. 1. 12 87 2.
20, 21 90 Ezekiel. 7. 23 79 14. 3, 4, 5 264 33. 32, 33 438 Daniel. 2. 44 358 9.
2 18, and 20 12. 4, 8 201 Joel. 2. 28, 30, 31 96, and 98, and 100 Habbakkuk. 1.
10, 11, etc 78 Malachy. 1. 11 36 2. 1, 2 378 4. 2 33 4 146 Judith. 5. 21 76
Wisdom. 6. 7 40 Ecclesiasticus. 45. 23, 24, 25 388 39. 24 231 1 Macchabees. 2.
36, 37, 38 380 41 ibid. 2 Macchabees. 6. 14 76 24 182 Matthew. 7. 26 361 11. 3,
4, etc 430 27 216 29 218 12. 20 223 27 436 28 437 16. 13, 14, 15, etc 349 18
347 19 395 22 359 23 353 18. 3 216 15 340 21. 40, 41, 42, etc 353 42 ibid. 23.
2, 3 391 15 250 29, 30, 35 425 24. 14 96 15, to 36 92 19 95 29, 30 93 31 101 34
93 36 94 26. 27 329 57 403 65, 66 404 27. 25 ibid 64 448 Mark. 4. 11 221 25 215
6. 2 431 7. 37 433 9. 38 436 13. 15, 16, 19, 20 102 21, 22 432 Luke. 4. 14 432
16, 17, etc 431 18, 19, 23 ibid. 29, 30 432 34 254 6. 9. 380 10. 16 382 11. 20
437 27 16 16. 31 418 21. 25, 33 93 34 97 22. 32 319, 341 33 343 66 403 24. 25
449 27, 32 450 John. 1. 18 439 20, 21, 25 446 29 440 31 446 33 431 49 441 50
442 2. 22 ibid. 24, 25 420 3. 5 441 4. 25, 29, 42 442 5. 22 428 41 455 43, 44
420 44 211, and 253 46 231, 429 6. 5 331 14 420 30 433 51, 51 331 53 330 54,
56, 58 331 68 433 7. 17 255 18 18, 457 31 433 8. 44 133 10: 40, 41, 42 441 11.
50 403 12. 28 442 30 443 32 444 39 131 44 443 48, 49, 50 ibid. 14. 29 442 15.
14 406 16. 4, 30 442 20. 23 166 31 220 21. 15 345 16, 18 ibid. Acts. 2. 5 96 14
344 3. 12 ibid. 23 ibid. and 434 25 ibid. 448 4. 19 174 8. 19 214 10. 13, 14,
15, 16 183 34, 35 141 34 426 13. 27, 33 448 46 344 17. 2, 11 456 20. 29 167 22.
29 35 26. 22 459 26 448 Romans. 7. 18, 19 394 10. 9 352, 353 11 ibid. 12. 2 212
3 18 13 2 166 14. 14 178 23 177, 180 1 Corinthians. 1. 20, 23 231 26 265 2. 14
213 15 459 3. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 334 11 352 18 216 4. 1, 2 334 7. 10 426 8. 13 182,
337 11. 26, 27, 28, 29 333 34 334 12. 4 19 13. 12 206 2 Corinthians. 3. 6, 7,
8, 12, 13 234 4. 3 233 Galathians. 1. 8 162, 414 2. 7, 8, 9 343 Ephesians. 2.
20 356 4. 11 166 5. 32 333 Colossians. 3. 20 383 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4 360 11
240, 506 2 Timothy. 3. 16 154 Hebrews. 1. 1 32 3. 1, 2, 3, 4 405 3 445 5. 12,
13 190 6. 1, 2 ibid. 9. 22 336 10. 28 445 11. 12 448 12. 18, etc 229 13. 17 166
James. 1. 5 223 2. 19 3 4. 2 236 1 Peter. 5. 1, 2, 3 347 5 167 2 Peter. 1. 14
452 16, 19 453 17 443 3. 12 55 1 John. 3. 22 223 4. 3, 12 355 Revelation. 1. 3
366 13. 4, 5, 6, 7 451

Index Sphalmatum.
Be pleased Reader to help the smaler slips, in points, figures, Gr. Accents,
Parentheses, or known passages. The grosser faults of Copy or Press are
showed. By the first number the Page, by the second the Line, M. the Margin.

Quintilio si quid recitares; corrige sodes
Hoc, aiebat, and Hoc. illud delere jubebat.
Horat. de Art.
Vir bonus and prudens, erratis allinet atrum
Transverso Calamo signum, mutanda notabit;
Fiet Aristarehus.

Errata.
IN the Account, page 5. l. 11. r. in this Author. In the Life p. 1. l. 15.
extorted. 2. 31. relation. 4. 14. Commemorating. Epistle to the Reader, p. 4 l.
19. r. penmen. 7. 2. guarding. In the Book, page 7. 11. man's. 12. 25.
prescribe. 22. 23. dele: 24 18. the represent: 25. 11. of their. 16. 13. it.
27. 31. sensible. 27. 40. Ground. 28. 5. who. 39. 41. yields. 39. 47. these 48.
49. Scylla. 50. 6. incredible. 52. 51. m. nominibus. 59. 31 Poet. 66. 18.
General. 75. 15. prosperity. 78. 26. Persuaded. 82. 4. add of. 90. 42.
Instruments 94. 12. away with. 96 49. apparitions. 101. 4. propiusque. 104. 13.
names. 112. 5. brings. 126. 26. Osorius. 137. 13. done. 139. 24 superasse. 147.
m. Romish. 151. 13. dele: 154. 38. add Though. 159. 12. or guile. 161. 16.
with. 162. 21. add, all. 163. m. manner. 163. 35. man. 165. 3. Scylla. 166.
52. Flock, 171. 21. dele here. 171. m. motus execrabilis. 183. m. (...). 187.
23 decrees. 188. 20, add, or. 202. 15. Cause. 206. 26. dele, at Circles. 213.
30. add, and in the notes. l. 25. 221. 37. admit. 229. 28. be. 229. 48. then.
233. 15. irradiet. 237. 9. detected. 251. 27. add, and in the notes at,
Absurdum. 253. 6. contention. 253. 18. adjoined. 2821^ any as yet, 283. 22.
Come. 292. 32. and. 292. m. six faules. 294. 39. divine. 295. 34. unriddle.
305. 20. One. Epistle before the third Book. 2. 12. morality. 312. m. Dei lib.
320. 38. derive. 330 m. praeceptam. 338. 7, 8. mend the points. Curses. 338. m.
quibus S. nationi. 339. 10. carcass. 341. 5. can with. 347 43. erect. m.
Graece. 356. 39. Christ, is. 358. 40. dele of. 368. 1. No! 375. 5 his (...).
376. m. deduced. 380. 6. our. 385. 16. dele in. 388. 31. whether. 398. m were.
400. m. unquam. 403. 26. Their p. 420. m. cap. 1. parag. 10. 435. 48. mean.
436. 3. add, many. 436. 7. had. 438. 38. Besides. 440. 30. add, whose. 442.
29. or. 442. m. John 16. 4. 462. m. Sepulv. 462. add in marg. at In his pijs,
and in the Text, at in an other Epistle. 462. m. aequatis. 469, m. potentia.
478. 36. causal. 480. m. certissime. 481. 19. add, an: 481. m. in illam. 485.
m. norunt. 486. 9. Fest. 486. 21. add, (...). 495. m. parag. 40. 500. m.
civium, gratiae, constiturum, obstabant jam, Colinij, Innocentius. 501. m.
caveat igitur. 503. m. movet, jerim, opertet. 504. m. vigilijs. reddidit. inde
Col. L. 505. 37. willing. m. fit.

Who can tell how often he offends? O Cleanse thou me from my secret Faults.

O Remember not the sins and offenses of my youth --. But, Remember me, O my
God, for good.


FINIS.

