VICTORIOUS NEWS FROM IRELAND Brought over, Aug. 24.

Wherein is declared three Victorious Battles, obtained by these Worthies,
Namely, The Lord MOORE. The Lord INCHQVID. And Colonel VAVASOR.


Near the City of Trim and Dungarvan, wherein was slain above 200. of the
Rebels, and not above 20. of the Protestant Partio.

Likewise, another Famous Victory obtained by the Lord Moore against the
Rebels, with the number of those that were slain on both sides.

Which happy tidings was read in the House of Commons, and immediately Ordered
to be printed.

Hen. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Aug. 27. Printed for I. Rider. 1642.

Good News from IRELAND.
Upon our return I have sent you a relation of what happened on the march upon
the 10. of August there went about 2000. Foot with some Horse toward Trim,
upon Tuesday following we marched after them, the second day we lay 4. miles
short of Trim, where we heard the Van of our Army, with some Forces out of the
Garrison in Trim, had taken in the Castle Knock, lying 4. miles to the left
hand, we lost 30. men, for they stood it out to the last man. Upon Friday all
the Army met two miles beyond Trim, we had 51. Colors flying and about 1000.
Horse, we marched to the Castle of Baramore, which is the nighest way 42. miles
from Dublin, and never saw an Enemy, only the Enemy made us return and go
more upon the left hand by burning a Bridge, so that we could not pass that
way, there was another Bridge the Wayne marched, and a pretty Town, but
forsaken and burnt by us, as we did all other Towns and Castles all the way we
went, the Enemy has left the Towns, but their Goods they have hid in the
Bogges, or else conveyed them into the County of Weekley; the Rebels had made a
very strong breast Work against the Bridge, and were 500 men to man it, but in
the morning forsook it: The Castle of Baramore where we rested one day before
our return is a place naturally fortified with a great Bogge, only one way to
come to it, where they had made strong Works, yet durst not make them good;
from thence my Lord Jones and Sir Michael Earnely their two Regiments went
alone, which is ten miles further, and are to keep Garrison in Canaught and
thereabouts. The next day we marched straight for Dublin with the remainder of
our Army, finding no opposition, only one day we past by one of the Enemies
Castles, which we could not stay to take in, by reason we wanted pieces of
Battery and bread for our men if we should stay; when the Rear of our Army
was past which we had upon our March that day* some quantity of the Enemies
Horse very well mand came rushing out of a Wood, which caused us when we were
over the Bogge to fall about and make a sudden stand, expecting that they would
have charged us, but they only staid for straglers, the next day we was to
pass a morasle, where there was but a narrow Causey, which way the Enemy
thought we would have marched from Dublin, and had therefore made a strong
breast work, and to hinders us had made a double ditch, half pike deep, and
cast all the loose earth in the midst, which did hinder us in respect we wanted
timber, and the ground was so base, as it was long ere the Carriages durst
venture over; that night we marched to Kilcock a very pretty Town 12. miles
from Dublin, the only Town we left unburnt, it was lately built by the
English; all the way of our march what persons soever, as men, women, or
children that our Soldiers met, they gave no quarter they were so enraged that
the Enemy would not fight.

I never saw finer Countries in all my life then we were through, store of Corn
growing, and that spetiall in all parts, and after the two first days march
we wanted not for good beef, and excellent Cheese, but not a drop of drink
for 3. or 4. days together, and then but a little by chance for the Officer. I
never in my life time in England knew greater and colder raines in winter then
we had every day but one with us, I protest I do verily think we did not come
3. nights all the march to our quarter but our men were wet to the skin, and
then the good earth was our lodging, and we came usually so late as the men had
scarce time to help themselves, and to get rest, for we was to march by 4 or
5. in the morning; it had bred much sickness amongst our fresh Soldiers,
wherein I have a part, being brought to extreme weakness with the Country
disease, for which I this day take Physic. I had much ado to finish my
Letter, I will conclude with the tender of my duty to your self and my Mother,
with my prayers for your happy preservation. My humble service to my Lady
Alesbury with the rest of that worthy family, my Cousin Lowing and his wife, my
love to my brother with the rest of my Friends, so I rest,

Your obedient Son, THO. JOHNSON.
Dublin 19. Augu. 1642. My service to my Cousin Tucker, and I pray let him see
this Letter, that he may know the just reason I do write to him by this Post,
but he may by this understand all the News, I know only thus much more, we
have no pay, nor have little hopes, by reason of the manifold troubles with you.

Ordered that this be printed and published, H. Elsyng, Cler. Parl. D. C.



FINIS.

