The Academy of LOVE describing ye folly of young men, and ye fallacy of women
by Io: Johnson, Gent



Qui antea non cauet, post dolebit, LONDON, Printed for Humphry Blunden, at the
Castle in Cornhill, Ao 1641.

THE ACADEMY OF LOVE. Describing the Folly of Youngmen, and the Fallacy of
women. BY JOHN JOHNSON, Gent.

Qui antea non cavet, post dolebit. LONDON: Printed for H. Blunden, at the
Castle in Cornehill. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORTHY AND EVER HIGH ESTEEMED, Mr. RICHARD COMPTON, Esquire,
perpetual health and prosperity.
THe many obligations (honored Sir) which your deserving actions have made me
servant to draw me to another engagement, which is no less noble, then those
boundless bounties, which you so often have conferred upon me: Therefore I now
become an humble petitioner, that your good liking will protect me from the
detraction of all Mom^sts and Zoylans; and in so doing, I shall not fear that
any one will say this my offspring is illegitimate, because your favorable
eye not only nullifies the malice of all adverse wills, but adds baptism to
this innocent, which here lies mute, wrapped up in the purity of white sheets:
nay more, your gentle worded censure confirms the same, and inlists it in the
roll of Fame and Reputation. Admire then this small pension of my brain with
mild benevolence, so may you add courage to a young beginner, and make his
Labor immortal by your smiling favor; for except this model find mercy in
your kind acceptance, the creation, which I bestowed upon it, was only to
make it nauseall to all men's stomachs, and me ridiculous, because I ever
observed your word to be of more value, then ever my merits could reach unto;
then what is it that Your countenance will not persuade, if You please to add
but a few sillables to make your will appear? Si dicas, factum est. If I
thought or knew not your power to be prevalent in this which I request, I would
not have so audaciously adventured to solicit any such courtesy; but I am
confirmed of this knowledge, and confident of your ever too little praised good
nature, which is a perfect spark of that heavenly goodness which gives all
things, because Your chief desire is to help Your friend with all sort of
encouragement possible, and communicating Your best endeavors to the bettering
of all those that strive to deserve: And therefore I am confident I shall find
You my firm and real Friend, to gain that benevolence for me, for which I
will ever remain

Your faithful servant, IO. JOHNSON.

An Index of the Schools which are in Loves Universitie.
THe School of Rudiments. The Accedence. The Grammar, Syntax. Poetry.
Rhethorick. Logic. Physics, or natural Philosophy. Generation and
Corruption. Meteors. Physic and Chyrurgery. The School of Law. Mathematics.
Fencing School. Arithmetic. Geometry. Music. The School of Inne-keepers
and Vintners. Astrology with a general Prognosticat^on. Loves Library.
THE ACADEMY OF LOVE.
TRuth and Dreams (according to the vulgar opinion of men) agree not in one
and the same subject, but are in such estranged enmity, that the appearance of
the one annihilates the birth of the other: this is a general rule, and
therefore approved of; but notwithstanding there is no general rule, but it
has an exception, and therefore this must participate of the same law; for
which I shall ever acknowledge my self a slave to sleep, and a more facile
creditour of Dreams; and those that are of a perverted will, that will believe
nothing, but what self vision instructs, let them attend to the ensuing
discourse, and when I have concluded, they shall say this Dream is true, which
now I begin to rehearse.

One night (a happy night, the return to my ease and r^st, perioded with the
end of all my miseries,) I had no sooner embarked my fatigated corpse in the
couch of nocturnall repose, purposing to delude my sorrows with the pension of
some pleasing imagination, when passion and Reason fell into so desperate a
controversy, that I could in no wise judge, but that my vexed soul was
entirely given up to the furies to be tormented. The cause of this my Busirian
calamity issued from that monstrous Pasiphae, my Mistress, who deserved rather
the just appellation of a cruel Siren, then serene female, more resembling a
Cockatrice, then a kind lover; and to call her embraces, merciful piety, is to
appropriate unto her the killing qualities of the attractive Magnes, or rather
that insatiable appetite of Sylla, who chiefly lusts after an avaritious
receiving, not less ruinous, then perpetual; and indeed I cannot compare her
greedy desire more fitly to any thing, then materia prima, which gapeth after
the destruction of an absent form, to deface that, which now perfects and
adornes her deformity; for she making me the cadaver of her love to feed her
helluous gorge, never ceased to crave, until she had induced this new form of
poverty, which I am now actuated with; nor had I as yet emerged my low-sunck
senses out of the imprisoning dungeon of love, had my gold and treasure
continued But in fine, as I may say, in the bottom of my store, when parsimony
comes too late, my hands were not so yellow in the palms, nor could my pockets
afford a gingling cheerfulness; the clouds of perfumes, I used to walk in,
were dispersed, the Cuchinell, Arabian tinctures, sericall vermines endeavors,
Hydaspian floods, and Oriental lusters were faded, dead, dried up, and
shipwracked, and I desolate in the wilderness of disdisdaine; and now at lest
vested in the sheep ruggedness, determined rather to be a martyr (as
indeed I both was, and still remain) then a confessor: for finding my self
culpable of nothing but poverty, and most assured my poverty was so low and
desperate, and my fortune so disjoynted, that it was an impossible apprehension
to conceive any amendment, I knew it was frivolous to confess, because I was
incapable of absolution: Nay, finding my self in such a desperation of
redress, the vehemence of my distracted cogitations dispossessed me of my
senses, compelling them to the silent yoke of sleep. But yet kind Morpheus
was so benign, that he charmed not my fancy to the submission of that
slothful dullness, but gave it free liberty to act its dumb tragecomedies.

Thus was the sentinel of my pentarchical soldiers permitted to rest; and
those other interior demesticks, whose tired spirits had not sufference to
march on in nocturnall obscurity, closed up their incorporeall eyes, with a
soft whisper to the pavilion of their silence: when the dreaming sense (that
works up mountains of admiration, which prove but mole-hills in the morning)
ambled about, like Will-with-the wispe, dancing round lays through the
Morphean meadows, and in short space entered the Isle of Cyprus, and (fancy
being my guide) I immediately seemed to be at the great Court of Love, where I
found a by-pathed gate, which led me into Loves pleasant garden; better and
more proper had I said, if I had said, it appeared pleasant, because it was
Loves garden, and moreover the apparition was a dream, and therefore of small
estimation with the watchful; and I may also term it pleasant Ironically,
because it is not that which Poets vaunt of, when the Heliconian streams allay
the tumor of a love sick soul, but rather a bank of weeds pullulating too
abundantly with rugged* nettles, ulcerous trash, and poisoning flowers.

Walking on, I espied the bloody Mulbery, at the foot whereof lay the
worme-eaten bones of that pair, which Cupids fury committed to the tragedy of
a slaughtering sword. Here I began to per^patize and philosophate upon the
force and efficacy of this passion, that occasioned this murder, until at
last I cast my eyes upon the virgin Laurel, which although it grew without the
garden walls, yet was it in such an e'evation, that I saw it, or at least
seemed to see it, and passing nearer to it, I began to contemplate Apollos
happiness (according to the vaporous species that then did swim in my
brain) when Daphnes metamorphosis commanded the amorous flood of his
spring-tide-passion to retire. Well might I say and reiterate my speeches; Thy
labyrinth of discontent was fortunatly cut down, and abbreviated by a deified
fury, since thy labor, care, and vigilance was all abolished and remitted to
repose, by a scornful speed, or speedy scorn: happy, O thrice happy I, had
such benevolent fortune encountered me in the birth, or baptism of my amorous
engagement: for I plainly see, that disdain is a sweet cur^e, especially,
when it is so killing, that it breeds a careless in the disdained Lover,
other wise it ushereth on his own misery, forcing a man to consume his whole
patrimony to buy disdain for a captive, as my adversity, or adverse love,
(which we may justly nominate disdain) recompensed my solicitude with
ruinous effects.

But yet I must audaciously condemn Apollo, for that his immoderate desire
permitted a violent rap^ure to eclipse the rays of his judicious wisedom^;
neither will I adventure to blame him for loving, but for invading a virgin so
openly, with such lascivious fervor, and such obscene speeches* for Virgins
are not only coy at the first congratulation, but also modest and full of
blushing: obscene words are worse then the deed it self, and therefore if you
will purchase your desir^, you must choose darkness to be your guide and
speaker, and your evidence must not be, what you can say, but what you can
do: for know, that silence with action is a maidens delight. But besides all
this, if a liberal hand be not stretched forth, you shall often see the
backside of your idol, then her smiling countenance. And this was great
Apollos error; for he that generateth gold and silver, which in this age are
the Circe that bewitcheth the world, the Medea of skill, reducing old
decrepidnesse to a youthful flourishing: even deformity her self in this
looking glass appears more beautiful then fair Adonis in beauties ardent
eves: Had thou, O Apollo, the dominion of this potent, powerful, and
golden generation, and would not bestow a fee upon her thou had in chase?
had thy gift been without interest, it would have been styled a worthiness
acted for a beauties sake. How could thou forget thy Danoe? why did not
thou reflect upon her, whose mute consent opened her willingness to thy
wishes? was it not those trickling dropps of gold, that caused her to open her
lap, to the end she might contain thee the more? and the more she opened,
the more was thy liberty: I cannot conceive any thing more or less, but that
Cupids bolt had clouded thy clearenesse, since that the only winning way was in
thy hand, and thy drowsinesse neglected to executed the same.

As thus my fancy wasted invectives against the God of Wisdom, the God of
Love instantly placed himself before me, all naked, with his harness of
artilery, as he is accustomed to be painted: yet was he not blind, as
frequently his delineation instructs, but either has recovered his sight, or
at least conserveth that which he never lost: nevertheless his nakedness
cease not to beg an alms of the distressed wretch, and will make no
conscience to steal away clothes from him that has but one vestment, for he
regards not whom he non-suites. In fine, I adoring him for a supreme deity,
implored his aid, thereby hoping to extract my self forth of that
tediousness, which his power had wrapped me in. But he smiling took me by
the hand, and step by step leading me through his maskering shades, read my
secret objections in this manner.

I perceive the description which your eyes have read in admiring me, has
sufficiently informed you, who I am, although your mental complaints veil
your dull ignorance in a cloud of greater darkness; because I find your
error, which has always constituted, or at least conceived me to be
Archbishop of unity and divine love: which prerogative, as it is but nominall
and of your imp^sition, so it is a real mistake, for ^ome it is nomen falsum,
et titulus sine re: for my name is Cupido, which more serious reflection will
explicate to be Covetousness; you may call me Union abusively, because
covetousness aims at the union of treasure; you may call me also love,
because covetousness loves treasure or riches: if therefore any fault can be
imagined, make an intuit into your own endeavors, and my name, and you will
confess your own blindness: look upon your own losses, and you will
conclude, that I am not only the god of Covetousness, but also of Interest,
because Covetousness includes Interest.

The Platonists indeed, being of a generous opinion, say, I am liberal, which
appears by my nakedness; and the Poets also affirm the same; but I think
they might as well assume liberality to themselves, unless they were better
furnished with money and apparel; this fiction is their misery, for they are
so in love with their own Genius, Hippocrene or Helicon, that they take care
for no more then a shirt to shift themselves, when they come forth of these
bathes: Alas, these penetrate not the depth of my craft; for I go not thus
disrobed, because I am a largitious and profuse disperser of my own patrimony,
but contrariwise, because I am miserable and covetous. For I have my Chests and
Coffers well filled with Gold and treasure, and my guard robe plentifully
furnished with all sorts and fashions of clothes; I only put on this face of
poverty, because I am perpetually vested anew; and the ofter I show my penury,
the more bags I heap up in my treasure-house. You may now therefore at this
knowledge, Epimetheus like, weep away your folly, and come to repentance
before you sterve.

Could you be so simple, as to think, I were prodigal and generous, and yet
never bestowed any thing on so faithful a servant as your self? perhaps you
imagined I had given all away, but the next rent day, it would fall to your
share. Attend therefore, and I will fructify your apprehension with the
declaration of all those that are subject to this erroneous mistake.

Cupido or Cupid is the worlds desire; it is that baser heap of love, which
mundane creatures adore: for being that all things desire to be united with
that, which is most agreeable to their natural condition, and this love being
mundane, as the creatures themselves are, therefore they naturally thirst after
this love: This is gold and all sublunary treasure, extracted out of the bowels
of this terrene globe, that causes so much enamoration: this is the gemmish
mischief, which infernal Dis or Pluto the worlds Usurer and grand Bishop is
patron of; who has constituted me his Bayliefe, to gather his tithes, tenths,
and interest; granting full power to extort not only tenthes, but twenties,
nay in every hundred half, or all if I can clutch it: because my covetous
appetite must for small courtesies receive triple, yes tenfold Interest: and for
this cause I am called amongst the wisest the Usurers bag, or the god of
Interest, and only in an oblique kind styled the God of love, only to
signify that all love Interest. For it is the ganderwise train of Ignoramus
his scholars, who take me to be the potent peer, and open-handed God, that
gives ease to all passions, that savor of the fury of an amorous desire,
darting golden shafts which unite souls in heavenly harmony, never to feel
misery after this stroke, when really there is no such thing within the whole
latitude of my power.

For I must ingenuously confess, that there is no true love, no true union, no
true delight, but proceeds from the supreme divinity, the pure and immateriall
essence of the omnipotent King, and sole ruler of all celestial and
terrestiall creatures: it is the love which he powers down upon us, that
supernatural bounty, which by how much the more it is fought for, so much the
more is the increase of it; for it is a communicative delight, whose chief
propriety is perpetually to stream into the hearts and souls of all that are
capeable thereof: This love is free, liberal, profuse, truly generous, and
without limitation; swifter then thought, vaster then the concave of this
universe, which is but a narrow stage, if divine love should act upon it: And
therefore, if simplicians conceit they shall find this profundity in my ebnes,
they deceive their expectation, and will in the end lament the shallownes of
their sequestered intelligence. Friend, you conceive Interest to be liberality,
and take poverty by the hand, if you go to meet me in a generous weed: for
when you receive a kiss by my direction, it may chance to make you undergo a
twelve months penance, or, as it has now, groan under a seven years
servitude: I have known a smile fetch off all the flesh of a man's back, and
the giving of a handkerchiefe cost more then it would hold, had it been filled
with diamonds, to requite the kindness; because nothing is given by me or
mine, but it has a hook in the end, that brings back a double Interest.

If therefore you will rightly know my name, I am the god of Interest, begot of
Lascivious covetousness, Bayliefe to Dis, and Pander to the world. And because
you are in the court of Cyprus, and peradventure may not so suddenly consent
to this, which I have affirmed in my short narration, I will favor you so
much, as to show you my University, or schools of Interest, which (thanks be
to fools) is the most populous, most ample, and most famous University in the
world, where the women proceed graduates, and the men degradates, and all
under my moderation, wearing the signet of this faculty, as registered here form
their matriculation, even unto the honor of doctorates, and the men
dumbe-pocketed-dunce-pates. In speaking this, I found my self conducted near
to a very large poarch, whose frontispiece contained these words in capital
letters, and of gold.

VNIVERSITAS AMORIS. And under this title was inserted this tetrasticon, not
less curious for the golden show, then dangerous for those that should enter
the port.

This is the University of Love:
Noe sort of men can here an entrance moove,
Except they do become free Donatists;
For here the women are all Tolletists.
No sooner had I conceived these words, but the effect that the Remora causes
to a ship, the very same these cautions words wrought in my demurring limbs,
where I stood as if I had been thunder-strucke, or confined by the power of a
spel to a foot-broad piece of ground: for considering the poor condition of my
ayery purse (ayery I may call it, because there was not one penny in it to
expulse that element) I had no motion left in me to perform the obligation,
which my curiosity exacted by entering therein; since I was not more free from
any thing, then how to free my self from this imminent voyage: until at
length my Patron raised up my spirits, and animated my cowardice; saying.

This lingering stop, which you now practice, argues not so much a fainting
spirit; as an unreflective and dull wit; for since you have nothing to loose,
you need not fear robbing, and for any violence, it is against the rules of
our University: you only enter now with me to see, not to be circled in the
list of a Collegian in my University: and therefore be audacious; for if my
courtiers see such a dejected person brought into their schools, they will not
only laugh you to scorn for a woodcocke, but so amaze your abject and
degenerous appearance with the very clamor of a ridiculous sound, that you
will faint when you fix your feet: be courageous, for my female train is
not altogether that sort of Nuns, where you must pay for what you see; but
rather like a fair or great market, where you shall see for love, and buy for
money.

Thus the obstacle being removed, the dead palsy in my joints was expulsed by
a warmth, which gave me freedom to walk, until we came to the second port,
which gave entrance to all the classes, which (God willing) as Cupid did open
them to me, I will open them in order to you, in the form following. I casting
up my head espied a fair character with these words.

OMNES AVARITIAE STVDENT. Under which was this distick subsiged. Silver, Gold,
and all rich treasure
Js our search and chiefest pleasure.
After my conductor had entered I made bold to follow, and finding my self in a
large and spacious hall, whole several ports gave me to understand, that I was
now environed rond about with all the classes, and consequently with all the
sciences Loves University contained.

Cupid turning himself toward me, said; now friend you are in Loves
University, where you shall presently see women of several ages, wits, and
beauties, who teach their masculine disciples the liberal arts, so that those,
who are most prompt in this faculty of liberality, with most celeritie proceed
graduates. Here be many Colleges, over which I am President; and although you
may condemn the overseers, for that they brush not and cleanse their chambers,
as it is the custom in other Universities, yet you must know, that we abhor
so much this quality, that if a pretendent have but a cleansed purse or pocket,
which has been brushed by an extracting set of fingers, we immediately
expulse him out of our University. The men are all of the tribe of Dan, but it
is to be understood paragogically, for we ascribe them de tribu Dant, as a more
proper appellation according to the condition of their quotidian exercise. The
women are de tribu Levi, but you must note that it is cautiously to be applied,
and understood, for they are never Leves, quando pecuniarum summae sunt breves:
but only quando altera lanx ponderosior est, levifacit eas. And in speaking
this we arrived at the first class, which had these verses engraved on the
door.

The School of Loves Rudiments.
Come gallant, come to Cupids school,
We Will teach you by an easy rule:
Our vowells learn, for they be few;
Say with full hands, here, I. OV.
I was no sooner entered this spacious class, but at one glance I vewed an
innumerable number of beauties, which shined like so many suns in a clear
and serene morning, had not their hooking talents informed otherwise: and as
children begin to squeale out their lessons, when their Master enters the
school, the same fear of stripes (as I suppose) possessed these darlings: for
they had no sooner cast their eyes upon their grand Master Cupid, but they
began to voice it forth with all sorts of tones: I perceived they were all
perfect in their syllables, both English and Latin. But I observed moreover an
unheard of method, which they observed also as a precept; for the youthful
gallants were seated all of one rank, and over against them the dainty
minions, these proposing with a notable lifted voice this mono syllable, da,
da; to whom the young petitioners answered in as high a note, do, do; And thus
enterchangably did they only sit smiling at each other, reiterating this short
ode, or odious sharpenes, which tumult seeming offensive to my ears, I
directed my steps toward some other damsells, which were writing, and
learners as I perceived after: I viewed and perused the comely and decen^ form
of their letters, and praised the handsome shape, and even position thereof; to
which she whom I praised answered.

Wonder not that a girl so young should become so perfect a scribe; for
although I wholly bend my desire and willingness hereto, yet know moreover,
that our God has in styled into my fingers a dexterity, adopted for the same,
and last of all I am so fitted with instruments conducing to my intent, that
you could not but condemn me of dullness, if I were not a very famous
proficient.

Whilst my attention observed her speeches, my eye carried another species to
the common sense, and so it passed to those other more perfect powers; and what
was it, but that these damsel^s pens were all made of Harpies wings and other
ravenous birds, such as are Hankes, Cormorants and the rest, whose avaritious
livng they imitated. Nothing more seriously some others, many of them began
always with, Received, Received: some were writing letters of Exchange, others
to set slaves free, because they could not comply with the demand of their
mistresses: some reading what their amorous servants had presented them with:
these registring the promises of their lovers: some noting down the use of
lips, so many pieces; half a dozen courtesies, three smiles, a dozen of
noddes, four beckes, a quarter of an hours talk, the promise of a meeting,
and a million of such engagements, every one with a hanging seal, as the
clogge of Interest.

I wondered that I could not see any thing concerning disbursements, whereupon I
demanded of Cupid, whether there was any or not: We have a book, answered he;
which he showed me, and it was one in folio, whose superscription was, A
memorandum of disbursements; which I evolving, found from the beginning to the
end nothing but blankes: at which I wondering more then before, Cupid said to
me, we have no disbursements of the female side, because it is their proper
office to receive, not to pay: and this book was made for the courtiers which
my female flock entertaines, but they more lofty spirited then pursewise,
climbing up to higher schools in our liberal sciences, scorned to disgrace
themselves in this primary with the setting down of their charges, left the
same to be cast up and numbered at the consummation of their charges; which
before they can attain unto, their lands are morgag'd, their annuities
consumed, and in fine their whole substance all powered into their minions
Lappes.

But because I should not defatigate my self in an overcurious perusuall of
these cheaters, Cupids call commanded me to progress to the second school of
Rudiments, which is the Accedence to Grammar, where over the port, as before, I
read this lesson, as an invitance in.

Loves Accedence.
If you will conjugate, and well decline,
Your rudiments must be the golden mine:
Where other Schoolers decline amo amas,
Here we begin, and finish with do, das.
This hall was not only more ample then the other, but it was also better
furnished with students of both sexes, who according to the theme prefixed,
conjugated do, das; but with this difference, that the men conjugated through
all moodes and tenses; saying, do in the present tense, dabam in the
preterimperfect, dedi, dabo: but the women did only beat on their commands in
the Imperative mood and present tense, saying; da, dato; date, datote. Passing
some thing aside, where were seated the more fresh principiants: I observed
that after they had made an end of Musa, (which they tuned forth with a new
tune, as being the burden to the song that began with do) they passed to
lapis, adjoining to it the Adjective pretiosus. I asking Cupid the cause
hereof; he gave me this reason: the second declination in the rudiments of
Emmanuel Aluaro does not exemplify by magister, but dominus; which word none
here dare to pronounce, because of the short and ingardly pronunciation, for
our delight is in long and large accents, because we still expect and wait
for those which are liberal, and extend their love in large gifts: therefore
if they should decline this word, they must observe this rule, that the women
should decline do minus, and the men do minas, because the other is much
against our proceeding, for if the men should say dominus, they would presently
become dunces, not finding one to instruct their ignorance, since he that
gives least, knows least in our sciences.

Then Cupid commanded one of his smiling girls to decline manus; she with an
humble obesance and demure courtesy glancing her optical darts round about,
after she had settled her self in a majesticall composure, began thus. Dativo
manibus largis, genetivo manuum largarum, for they always annexed adjectives
to their substantives, of which they had a set number, fitting their vocation,
but yet I hearing the sweet maid to begin after this unusual manner, supposed
she had erred, and began to correct her; but Cupid made answer, saying; peace
friend, for she says well: which when I argued the method of our different
constitutions, the witty girlemade me this reply: Sir, we studdy not here that
artificial method which you harp upon, but that de art amandi; in which if
you will be a perfect casuist, you must first practice causes dandi, which is
the general rule in our class prefixed before all other. Although I was stuck
with admiration of the novelty, yet I was so fully satisfied with her answer,
that I had no reason left to retort a contrary syllable.

But since that this (as I thought preposterous) answer had disordered so, that
it bred in me a misty confusion, I made an humble supplication to this pretty
damsel, that she would rectify my rudeness, and instruct me in the true
position of Loves cases: and in speaking these words, I found all to be
certain which Cupid had formerly declared; for she stepped out of her rank,
and holding out her spread apron expected my liberality, to unlock her lips,
that her tongue might make my docill understanding capeable of her documents;
which when I perceived, I was no less ashamed, then unapt to comply with her
mute petition. Whereupon Cupid broke silence, saying: favor, it is not the
custom here to demand any further, be it never so small, unless you pay
Intrest for it: for it is not articulating mouth that obtaines freedom in this
University, but the purses mouth, that prevails, for let the purse make any
sort of noise, it is interpreted to be the winning language, that no sooner
speaks but is heard, and no sooner is heard, but it obtaines the masters
desire: otherwise we observe the physical maxim: ex nihilo nihil fit.
Notwithstanding, since I promised to show you my University, I will not be slow
to give you notice of the orders therein; for you must know that none of my
disciples can do this favor, unless they they would incur the crime of
expulsion, but for me I am extra regulam.

Advert therefore that the first is casus dandi, and the next casus gignendi;
because the Dative begets the Genitive; and when the Dative is no case: that
is, not of force, for that the penurious caitive, or ruffinous swaggerer has
sworn and drunk himself not only out of clothes, but also out of money,
then the Genitive is likewise no case. The Nomnative sometimes we name, and no
more: the Accusative is not known amongst us, because all must be so free,
that none can be accused of negligence to reward their dearest. My minions
have a rule for the Vocative case, which only strike and is termed at their
courtiers ears, which is; Qui non est Dativus quando Vocatiuus clamitat, non
est sodalis Amoris. Yet mark the private rule of the females. When the
Vocative ends in us, the Dative ends in as. The Ablative is the woman's case
only, for because they take all, nay they not only take, but they take away
all that is given, never regarding any recompense, but only the common, which
is thanks, I am your servant, and so: and therefore we constitute the Dative
and the Ablative to be correlatives.

We likewise hold the opinion of the Aristotelians and true Thomistes, that
Relatio fundatur in quantitate, this quantitas we say is Dativus; and therefore
this is our Logical discourse, Sublato fundamento relationis tollitur ipsa
relatio: sed Dativus est fundamentum Ablativi; ergo sublato dativo aufertur
etiam and Ablativus: and what we say of the Dative in respect of the Ablative,
the same we likewise say in liew of the Genitive, quia non admittimus casum
Gignendi, si non adfuerit casus Dandi. Neither be mistake^, for it is not casus
dandi in praesens only, but casus dandi secundum prius, vel antecedenter. But
let us omit this anticipation, since this is not the Class which exacteth
either this form or doctrine. We have and set down here as prime and chief
one Substantive, one Adjective, one Pronoune, and one Verb; for example these
which follow with their best relishing compounds: Pecunia tota mea est. Our
genders properly are but two: the Masculine, which we call genus portans, and
the Feminine, which is genus recipiens. To the Female of Feminine gender belong
all sorts of metal, which are of value and estimation; likewise al stones be
of the feminine gender, even those that are proper to men, are attributed to
the female kind and therefore, we say in our Grammar rule: Propria quae
maribus, foemineo generi tribuuntur. The newter gender is accounted an Eunuch
amongst us, and therefore all newters, as stannum, aes, cuprum, plumbum, and
such like rebellious metalls we burn for heretics, and the same torture is
inflicted upon the Neuter gender, because he that enters our class under this
gender, is neither active in the Masculine, nor passive in the Feminine gender,
but all Eunuch, all neuter, neuter. As c^ncerning the Commons, we admit of
them as they be common, but not else: for the common of two is an
hermaphrodite in loves schools, and the common of three a monster: but our
method in these common genders, is read in this manner: the common to two, the
common to three, the common to thirty, the common to three hundred, and so
forth* The doubtful is excluded, for that it promises nothing of certain.
But yet we could reduce all these tolerated genders to the Epicene but only
that I permit the Masculine and the Feminine to sport sometimes in the commons.

Numbers we admit of, but yet he that will win his Mistress soonest, must
complement in the plural, for the singular is but a slender number, and
therefore not able to satisfy her more capatious appetite; so that those that
will be accounted the best proficients, must be perfect practitioners in the
dative cause and plural number.

In the tract of this discourse we had surrounded the class, and preparing to
pass to the next, I desire Cupid to benefit me with the relation of the rest
contained in this school: It is needless said Cupid, for there is like
difference betwixt ours and those which are taught in other schools: only that
we reject some few rudiments, and transpose in a several order; as for
example: of our undeclined parts of speech the Preposition is first, and the
next is the Conjunction; the reason hereof is this: we aim at Interest,
therefore before the men attain to their wish, they must prepose or give
something, and then no doubt but they shall have a conjunction copulative at
their demand.

Of all the prepositions we except only Adversus and Contra; conjunctions
Adversatives, and Diminatives we hold to be mere obsoletes; and constitute
Reddatives chiefly to be followed and practiced.

My Females admit not of an Interjection, until they have their hands filled
with gold, which causes them to exercise their spleen with ha, ha, he, and
then perhaps they draw the curtain of silence.

Four sorts of Adverbes are those which are of most estimation with us, two
for the men and two for the women: the men's are Quantity and Number, which they
present unto the Wishing and Choosing women. And in speaking this we came to
the Grammar school, whose frontall was thus inscribed.

The Proper names in this our Grammar treasure, Loves Grammar Scholar.

Are Number, and the Nownes are weight and measure:
For Verbes, in Neuters take heed least you woe,
Cause you will find noe supines if you do.
I was no sooner entered into this class, but the numberless multitude of
beauties gazed with such coy, yet constant, eyes upon me, to see such a shrimp
adventure into their presence, that were so richly spangled with the choysest
vestments, natures store, and arts invention could trim them with; for in
comparison of these relucent Angels I could not choose but style my self the
most contemptible animal God had created, and the earth nursed up.

But yet Cupid revived my dying spirits when he said. Attend ye derlings of
delight, and give honorable respect to this shipwracked soldier, who has so
courageously fought under our colors, and borne loves banners to the disabling
of himself; for he to maintain your pomp has suncke himself to this ebb,
who was in times past as powerful in the purse, as these your present rufflers
are: and although it is contrary to custom to return that back, which you
have once received, yet at least give a little knowledge to his forerun harms,
because I pity him in his misery, although I cannot sorrow for the loss of
his substance.

This said he turned toward me in this wise: Although our ascent in school
makes a different letter from those rules which Lilly teaches, yet we cease
not to insist something upon his invention, albeit we convert that of his to
our proper use, which you shall understand in the pursuit: And fitting up his
hand, he gave a sign to one of his train, saying, recite unto us the special
and prime rules in Grammar concerning Nownes: to which she making a bewitching
obeisance thus declared he^ Sovereigns command.

Nomen non crescens, heterocliton esto, Dativo. What if your servant, said
Cupid, come with an extended hand all gilded in the palm; what say you then?

Nomen, crescentis penultima quando Dativi
Syllaba longa sonat, jure est generis muliebris.
But suppose the pretendent curtesan be but a phantasme, a shadow, a mere
mass of penury, like unto this decayed piece of misery (pointing at me) what
is your rule? then she with a disdainefull countenance, a supercilious brow,
and a reproachful eye said.

Nomen, cresentis penultima quando Dativi
Aere corripitur, subito schola spernit Amoris.
What is your interpretation for this last disticke: she answers.

He that cuts his gifts off short,
Shall be debarred of his sport.
She performed this last repetition with so sincere a laughter, and such a
lascivious gesture, that I would compare her more fitly to no creature living,
then the ravenous strumpet, that infernal Hecate which consumed me, so that
now I concluded that any one might play upon their virgin string, that
harmonious minikin string of her lute, that could but show his silver pen:
whereupon I asked Cupid what was their rule for chastity: who answered, we
have a general rule, which is to be observed, yet it has as many exceptions
granted, as there be or shall be opportunities to violate the same. For as
soon as they have passed their conjunction copulatives, then they take the
degree of Licentiates, because they have license granted to practice any sience
art, or activitie, that their capacity can climb unto, to gain the
indulgencie of their liberal curtesans: yet ever premised, that they have a
vehement respect to their chief goal, which is interest.

For as it is a general saying, nay so general that it has no exception with
you; No penny, no Pater Noster; so it is with us in the like manner, for we
say: No treasure, no pleasure: And these graduates, as we have above
mentioned, be of the tribe of Levi. I being not fully satisfied in my
petition, interrupted Cupid, desiring him to solve me of the difficulty, which
yet remained; to wit, to instruct me how I should conceive that these schools
could observe the laws of chastity, when as they waited continually for an
opportunity to shipwreck this virtue? O friend, said he, the very time of
their waiting is their profession and professing of chastity; for their
intention is not to commit an error on their virginity, but an absolute
dominion over their own possession and custody, the total inheritance their
servants can or have attained unto; so to send him or them to their shorn
companions in daw fair to eat a woodcock pie, where their grace before meat
is; Mascula nomina in as dicuntur multa virorum. For after they are thus
cheated of their substance, they scarce can abstain (such is their
desperation) from dissanulling their hospitall-fashioned carcass of life,
exposing themselves to sorrow and lamentations unmercifull huggs; and after
they have breakfasted of this dish of simplicity, they say this aftermeate
grace following: Rarior est hilarus, vox est hilaris been nota. For hilarity
belongs not to them, but to those that fare well, which are the Females;
which causes them to say that Hilaris is not in use.

But let us proceed, said Cupid, to the Syntaxians school, and as we walk I
will rehearse and explain some rules which belong to our verbal method. This
is the order of the first rule, which the women begin thus: As in praesenti;
the men answering, perfectum format in have I. Which Cupid interpreted thus.
The woman says to her Idolator, that he is an ass in the present tense; and
when her loving simplician has wasted all his store, and finds himself
neglected, he sighs and says, have I found out your deceit? I never yet
learned to say no, I am now an as. Now I also find the connective sense of
that exception, Do das rite dedi, sto stas formare steti, vult. For dedi and
steti are relatives, because as long as I gave I stood, but now I can give no
more, I fall from all familiarity, and must now begin the mournful verse,
Dot fleo fles etc. indeque natum deleo delevi; for to speak truly, I have
blotted my self out of the register of graduates, and merely by nothing but my
too much precipitant prodigality; and therefore must entreat my tears to
obtain pardon for my vanity which has pulled poverty upon me.

When I heard Cupid act this part, I was struck with a vehement incitement to
inject a stop in his way, that I might have proceeded in the same theme,
because I apprehended it to be a wrong unto me, that had so largely tasted the
bitterness of this experience: notwithstanding I gave a great groan and said,
O Cupid, I am a real soldier in this camp, for I have turned the
Interjection o, to be no Interjection, but a verb, I have changed woing into
owing, and woe in o, and now I decline nothing but o, o, o, per omnes modos et
tempora.

Repentance, said Cupid, is nothing but sottishness, when it comes too late;
cheer up and be merry, you will live the longer time; you have great reason
to be glad if you considered all; for you must know, therefore you were stung
with my waspish dart, because you were rich, and if you will be rich again,
you shall be as ill tormented as ever you were; therefore rejoice that you
being poor, are uncapeable of this vexing torment.

Come let us pass to the place intended: but yet before we enter the class,
mark our Verbes compound, how amiable and pleasing they are to my Minions, and
how they smile and spread their lappes, when they hear this rule pronounced,
Syllaba Semper, quam simplex geminat, composto bis geminatur. Nay this doubling
rule pricks on the courtly gallants wonderfully to gratify their beauteous
mistresses, because this reduplication leads to that gemination where the
brisk blades find their supines, who inform the men the truth and good liking
of their former gifts, saying, Nunc ex praeterito discas formare supinam; for
if you had not doubled in the preter tense, you had found no supine: and
therefore the witty girls say to those that desire this supinall doctrine, and
end in Need, want, etc. Haec raro aut nunquam retinebunt verba supinam.

But now said Cupid, we delay too much in this class, let us follow our
intention; whereupon we directed our steps to the school of Syntaxe: and
upon the conducting port I read this inscription.

Lover School of Syntax.
This is the school of order, true connection,
Where generous rules find courteous acception:
He Is termed here the best Syntaxian living,
Whose composition is perpetual giving.
As I was entering the school or hall, there was a screene, upon which there
was this sentence inscribed.

Hic omne animal rationale
Discit verbum Personale.
Which I perceived to be a specificall distinction, because Impersonalls had
no government there. In this class all were busied in composition: and as we
walked I espied in one of their books this rule, Verbum infiniti modi
convertimus in finitum; whereby I understod the dexterity of the females in
minorizing the heaps of their servants to increase their own.

As I was descanting upon the nimblenesse of their talents, I heard a tunable
voice say, Adjectivum cum substantivo numero consentit. And why not, genere,
answered I? to which Cupid made reply, saying: you must know, that by the
Adjective is understood the man, and by the Substantive, or more properly
speaking, the Subtractive, the woman, who demands of her Adjective this or that
sum of money to furnish her with a new gown, gorget, or the like, so that
they agree not in true and legitimate construction, until he consents to the
number of pounds she desires, for you know that the Adjective must conform it
self to the Substantive, not the contrary: but they can never agree in Gender,
because they be of two different sexes: but yet replied I, why not then in
case, according to Lillies constitutions? because, said Cupid, the man's case is
the Dative, and the woman's is the Ablative, vt constat ex supradictis: And for
this reason we say, Verbes of receiving or taking away require an Ablative
case.

But for opus and usus, they have no need of an Ablative case, because they
have nothing left to furnish it with, unless it be that odious devil
Penuria. Notwithstanding Adjectiva quae copiam significant, Ablativo gaudent,
interdum and genitivo: for those which have plenty, shall find a way to be
empty; and those which are full, shall have a gull; and though in the night
they obtain their delight for a little space, yet they shall pay, if they live
but till day, for their embrace.

Now of all rules in Syntax this is the chief, to wit: Verba dandi sunt
praecipua in schola Amandi. And Verba promittendi sunt optima juncta verbis
solvendi: otherwise they are as bad as Impersonalls: But est pro habeo is a
strange rule; and Nomen praemii is of great esteem, and never is at rest, till
it rest in Ablativa: This she case is that which bags up all this school;
for my female train no sooner see one loaded with golden pockets, but they
immediately salute him with an easement, saying, Ego hoc te fasce levabo; it is
reason you should do so, answers the woodcocke again; because Adjectivo et
verba abundandi, implendi and onerandi Ablativo gaudent: and thus he yields up
the souls of his pockets for hopes of a smile, an embrace, or a kiss.

The Gerund in Do, is that which commands friendship, and obtains it also:
but the Gerund in Dum is whipped out of our schools for a lazy companion; for
our Actives have no gerunds in Dum, and therefore they govern no case here;
for since this gerund cannot possibly be put in the Dative case, there is no
hopes that the Ablative shall reap any profit at all by it; and therefore we
expulse him for a dumb and mute person, who wanting speech to express his
freeness, he can no way become capable of our method.

It is a special rule without exception, that all Supines require a Dative
case, and then an Ablative: for it is so infallible, as the whole roll of
Supines can testify, that never Supine fell upon pallade, unless she had
received a fee from the Dative case, since you know that the Genitive is a
soleasme, if not conected with the Dative: and in this consists the chief
congruity, because there is no true Syntax either in composition or
construction, except the Dative case, and the personal masculine bear company
and present his power to the personal feminine, which is always accomodated
with an Ablative dish to convey her lovers kindness into the closet of never
be seen again. Nor far distant from this class was another hall over
whose entrance this was inseulped.

Jpse licet venias Musis comitatus Homere, Loves School of Poetry.

Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.
This is prosodia or the school of Poetry, said Cupid, where my darlings study
to congratulate their Donatists, presenting them with Odes or lyricks, some
bearing the face of Epithalamions, Soterian Hymns, and Eucharisticall sonets,
and many other witty Epigrammes, and Anagrammes: The feet on which our verses
run, are but two kinds; the one is Spondaeus, which imports as much as
Spend-on-us; the other is Molossus, it is a foot, whose shoe is made by the
long last, which is the man's foot, for that which it includes of the loss;
because the more they poetize, the more is their loss of store.

Our chief strains or meters are Heroic, and Scazon, because of all sorts
they are most numerous, in which we most properly delight, for in all sorts of
Doctrine we only instruct that which is most large; and since in these kinds
there are as well short syllables as long, for the short we select and
entertain peculiar figures very useful for the extentio^ and reaching of
their short-legg'd nature, inducing art to help nature: In the first order we
constitute three, to wit; Prothesis, Epenthesis, and Paragoge, for these are
friends to the females, as properly appertaining to the men, who always add
and never take away.

Yet the women challenge the other three, as prime properties belonging to their
profession, which are, Aphaeresis, Syncope, and Apocope: nevertheless the
busy blades many times carry away a pock-a pee in their linings, which my
weather beaten widgins bestow upon them, that they may not say they have lost
all.

Systole and Diastole are in great request; for he that gives with Diastole's
hand, and Systoles fingers, is in short time made free in our court: but he
that comes with his pockets stuffed with nothing but Synalepha's and Eclipsis,
is served like unto a sheep in June, turned forth for a bare-neck'd ewe to
seek a new ruff for that piece next below his cockscombe.

Here Cupid commanded me to sit down, for that one of these Damsells had an
intent to gratify her generous servant with a few strains, for the courtesies
he had enriched her with. I obeyed, and being set the sweet Paranassean nymph
began in this form following.

Of Hippocrene old poets highly sing,
And of the lower bath Beotia's spring:
Of Tagus we, and golden-chanell'd Herme,
Two greater glories in one glittering therme.
The Maiden Nymphs, that haunt these fluid streams
Stretch forth sweet strains to praise Apollos beams.
We to Apollo dedicate our will,
For that his golden locks our hands do fill.
My Gallant here presents to me this God,
Golden Apollo, or Golden was his load.
Should I commend him? no^, that is flattery:
I love him, and his load, his liberty.
Thy often entrance, sweeting, J adore;
But thee, or gold, J dare not speak, which more:
Yet this I Will say: let Tagus be still mine,
And my best Hippocrene shall all be thine.
Bring Hermus with thee, that adornes my eye,
And my sweet Helicon shall be thy joy.
J Nymph will crown thee with Apolloes bays,
As often as thou present'st me with his rays.
This said, she made a low courtesy to her servant, and departed to a private
closet, as I thought to lay up her gold, whether it was so or not I am not
certain, because the young gallant traced her forth, and tickled her too, as a
man would probably imagine, because she laughed so heartily. But not to betray
her, nor our selves to time, Cupid lead me away through an obscure vault,
where ascending a degree, as I thought, higher then before, I glaunced my eyes
upon a garland of painted flowers, which was so lively pencilled and garnished
with proper colors, that the laborious bees imagining it to be real, were no
less deceived in their search, then the birds were with Zeuxis grapes. Within
this circular posie was impressed this piece of discipheration, as a true
information to all that thirsted to pass the port.

Loves School of Rhetoric.
He that will learn to win by smooth persuasion,
Must practice much the Topic called Donation,
Strowing the path by which he means to pass
With the sweet flowers of yellow-fac'd Midas,
So shall he find all easy to his will;
Come in at's pleasure, and be welcome still.
Not far from hence we entered into an ample hall, sumptuously beset with
variety of flowers; and upon a double column were placed two statuas of an
indifferent stature, which the curious art of workmen had varnished over with
gold, enamell, and a beauteous order of pearl mixed with sapphires, rubies, and
emeralds.

As I stood gazing upon this strange Colossus, Cupid said to me, now you are in
the school of Rhetoric: and these two which you so seriously admireare, the
most famous Orators, that antiquity celebrateth; the which we likewise adore
as chief gods of this Class: the one is Marcus Tullius Cicero; the other is
Demusthenes: Demosthenes, you would say, answered I; No friend, it is
Demusthenes, the which you may understand if you but ponder the word, and
reflect upon our institution: wherefore I intending my eyes more earnestly upon
the object, found under Marcus Tullius this motto: A nomine and argento disces:
and under the other I read this: Dimidium nominis non indiget Rhetorica.

But because I would not err in the interpretation hereof, I entreated Cupid
to aid me with an explication; to whom he said: for the first which is under
Marcus, to wit; A nomine and argento disces: that is to say, From my name and
from silver you shall learn; You know that Marcus, or a Mark is a certain
sum of money, which is made of silver. Therefore from my name (says the
motto) which is a Mark, and from the matter, which is silver, of which the
mark is made, you shall learn more Rhetoric in this school of Love, then
all my orations, and all my works can teach you.

The other which is, Dimidium nominis non indiget Rhetorica: to wit, Half my
name needs no Rhetoric.

Whereupon Cupid asked me which was half the name: I answered him Demus:
observe then the sense hereof, said Cupid. He that says Demus, needs no
Rhetorical colors, no tropes, figures, circumlocutions, nor any of those
inticeing flourishings: for with one Demus he shall persuade more then ever
Demosthenes did with all his eloquence.

Your Rhetoric then, said I, is more facill, then that which is taught in
externe schools, those I mean which Tully and others have prescribed a method
unto, because they are not so much dependent of tropes, and schemes, and other
difficult members, which instruct Ciceronian Rhetoric. It is confessed
answered Cupid, and therefore our number is the greater, according to the
saying of the ancients: Faciliora acquirunt numerum, difficultas sapientiam
n^trit. But yet (although the grand topic is that which appears in a golden
vestment) our school is not destitute of tropes and figures, since that we
select many very necessary for the better performance of our Rhetoric, the
which are lights and facilitations to these which be of a slow performance*
some of which appertain to the male, some to the female sex: for example, the
women courtiers, although they endure not delays* yet they are much addicted
to the figure Gradatio, especially if their pretendent rhetorize in
Condaplicatio, and through the faithful solution and sweet series of consent
they couple and lovingly rest themselves upon the palladel Polysindeton, or
Multiplex conjunctio.

Of all the useful tropes those two are chief which my girls practice, to
wit; Hyperbole, and Catacresis, which in latin are called Mendacium, and
Abusio; to which their silly believers answer with Subjectio and Reticentia.
Similiter desinens is tunable figure, which is ever sang when the petitioner so
dazels his beloved's eyes with curious and rich objects, which she converts to
be her subjects, as then his, and now hers, when I say such a feast unites her
will to his, then they withdraw and rhetorize in Similiter cadens.

We use no Metaphors, but all in private amongst the women, for fear the men
should learn them; for seeing such like tropes are alienated from their Virgin
sense, and wrested to sound one thing in words, and another in deeds, they
must be shut up from the knowledge of so much cunning; and therefore we
satisfy them with a certain number of figures, as figurae per additionem,
which are the true touchstone of a generous mind; likewise we inuse them with
those per similitudinem, to prick them on with the conceit of dignity, if they
imitate those that are most liberal, setting it down for a principle, that he
cannot be a good and exquisite Rhetoritian, that makes not an ostentation of
his larga manus.

But the women are expert both in tropes and figures; tropes to delude their
adorers, who suppose their real words to be full or real meaning, when as
they only commit a few complements more to inflame their simplitians hearts,
and to feed their own toyish fancy, then any reality; for they abhor it
worse then the pox.

All figures which come per detractionem, belong to the women, as Dissolutio,
Refractio, and many more ejusdem farinae, all takers and dissolvers of their
servants substance.

We practice also in Topickes, and first we begin with Notatio, sive
Etymologia, which is both according to us and Cicero, defined, Indagatio
originis: and by this we search out the true primitive of our courtiers, and
provide his place correspondently. I do not mean, that we exalt and dignifie
him according to his parentage, but his patrimony: for if he be of a great
estate, he is presently annexed to the topic a Causis nobilioribus; because
the cause of greatest preferment here, is that which proceeds out of the
nobility of riches; and thus we draw him on with the plausible appearance and
evident probability, that he shall practice the topic a conjugatis, when we
but only delude him with a Rhetorical slight, extracting in the interim the
very marrow of his purpose, and so leave him in the perceivance of that a
Contrariis: so that he poring upon that ab effectibus, finds himself so
ignorant and incapable of the sweet topic de adjunctis, that he falls into
the woeful knowledge of Repugnantia.

The chief argumentation we use in this our Rhetorical class, is either
framed by a Sorites, or Dilemma. By Sorites, to make the pretendents strive in
generositie, we protract our discourse in this wise. He that gives most,
finds most instructers, (or destructers) he that finds most instructers
profits most, he that profits most, takes most degrees; therefore, a primo
ad ultimum, he that gives most, takes most degrees: but yet after this
induction or graduall deceit we argue secretly per violationem, and begin
our orative composition, of which we have two kinds, to wit, Oration
demonstrativa, by which the self conceited wretch explicates and demonstrates
at large the perfections of his best wished objects, and the men are obliged to
say nothing more, then what they can make manifest by proof, yet they are tied
to insist upon the praise of their Mistresses, and if they betwixt ignorance
and benevolence, chance to sin against truth (as often they do) through the
furious apprehension of their unlawful Hyperbolies, and are confuted of it,
then we make their purses fetch off the fine, which their eagerness led them
into: for such kind of Orators are forced to satisfy the virgin with gifts
for the wrong they have done in belying her beauty, modesty, discretion, or
the like.

The women, when they have received presents either from the obliged or
voluntieres, they Rhetorize in oratione deliberativa, deliberating whether
their servants deserved for this, or no; and in this kind of discourse they are
so witty, being still aided with dilemmicall arguments, that they catch and
let loose again as often as they please, and in so dubious a manner, that
their gazing Auditors become no less ready to present again, then drowned in
confusion which way to interpret the reality of their Mistresses oration.

Some times my females ascend the Pulpit provided with oration funebris, but
this only when a rich Devotist sudainely departs this life, and leaves his
Mistress heir of all; then she laments his death in words filling the air
with lacrymable syllables, although her heart leapeth for joy and alacrity,
that he is gone.

The women also extend their voices in genere orationis demonstrativo, but most
frequently, when their impoverished servants fail to perform their amorous
suites, they use the oration in vituperium, which they freely bestow upon those
vagabondes that have so long been slaves to their wills and their own
misfortunes.

But friends, we lose time in these inferior Classes, let us now proceed to
the more noble liberal arts; which said, Cupid brought me to a double leaved
door, upon which were painted many horrid and unknown monsters, chimeras, and
mere pictoricall fictions, with many conceits, in the midst thereof was this
hexasticon.

Loves School of Logic.
If you with women in our logic school
Desire to argue, still observe this rule:
First with obeisance ask their free consent;
Then put in Darj your whole argument.
So shall you soon conclude, and please them too,
'Cause in Celarent they will answer you.
I had no sooner comprehended in my judgment and memory this stroph, but we
entered into a very fair and spacious hall, all thronged thick with a great
number of gallants, both men and women; men of all ages, or at the least from
those which Terence terms ex ephoebis, to those which I term ex rebus, or
without money, who passed away for bank^outs: but the women were for the most
part all young, few or none exceeding thirty years of age: all were set down,
and gave ear to a grave, and something ancient matron or moderatrix, who was
seated in a most respendent pulpit, studded with pearl and the most precious
gemmes the Indians can afford; she jointly with all her disciples made a very
humble obeisance at our entrance to their Regent Cupid; and the grave Matron
began in this manner.

Logic, which you are to be instructed in, is that, which has for its
formal object ens rationis, and not without cause, since ens rationis habet
fundamentum reale; that is to say, a real, or more significant, a ryall for
its foundation, which is a piece of money so called; for you must know that the
male kind are those that are to stand of the material part of our Logic, and
the femall on the formal: since therefore the foundation or material object
consists of royal, it is convenient that the formal should be ens rationis,
and appropriated to the women kind, who after a present of reales, as the
Spaniard calls them, or ryalls as we term them, then the women make a
congratulory discourse which can be called nothing more properly but ens
rationis; quia discurrit circa ens reale: for if this real and royal subject
were not, this ens rationis converteretur in ens chimaericum, and mere fictum.

Since therefore (proceeded she) we have already concluded of the object both
material and formal of this scence, it follows now that we prosecute our
intent: and in speaking this she opened a very fair manuscript, at the fight
wherefore every one provided their hands and pens to write what she should
dictate unto them: in this preparation Cupid invited me to sit down, which I
accepted of without ceremony, and she began as follows.

Species, as Aristotle defines it, est illud, quod praedicatur de pluribus
numero differentibus in quid. This is our chief predicable, in the definition
of which, you must note three things: the first is species, the second numerus,
the third is quid: by species we understand gold, silver, jewels, etc. by
numerus, is meant twenty, forty, a hundred pounds; so many rings, braceletts,
diamonds, or the like: by quid is understood the substance or pure essence or
quiddity, which must be without any deceit or chimicall sophisme: as for
example, when your servants present their devoted liberty* you ask what
species is the present of? they answer; of gold: you ask again what number?
they answer, an hundred pieces: you ask the third time, saying, quid: they
answer, gold of the best, and most current coin: or if you will exclude this
particle quid, because you must not look a given horse in the mouth, you may
exchange this quid, into quale or quantum, quomodo or vbi, and hereby receive a
sufficient information of the gift presented.

Note also, that whereas other schools treat of individuum, we except it,
not to enter into our Logic: for since individuum est illud quod non
dividitur, and again no man is admitted into this class to participate of our
Doctrine, qui non dividet seipsum a substanti^s suis, therefore such like
caytives are excluded tanquam individua vaga; such as these, are usurers and
co^^^^ous ca^les, that shall sooner pass through the eye of a needle, then
through our school door: for we hold this to be infallible, that he cannot
be a real lover and true soldier in Cupids University, that loves his money
better then his Mistress.

Here the grave Matron fixed a period to her discourse, and her disciples
intended their eyes and minds upon that which she had delivered unto them;
whereupon I took an occasion to ask Cupid what other predicables they
observed; to which he made answer, saying: We have another which is Proprium,
this consists in two points; the proprium or chief property of the men is to
give, and the chief property of the women is to take.

But, said I, why did not the Matron begin with Universal in communi;
because, answered Cupid, it is and must be a stranger to all men that frequent
my University; for you know Universal in commuini ex se non descendit ad
particularia, which amongst us is more abhorred then any thing else; as for
example, he that is Universal in all kind of wealth, and descends not to
present this some of money, that jewel, or so, such a man is termed Universal
in communi, whom we entreat to favor us with his absence, because his
presence is cane pejus and angue: notwithstanding the females are acquainted
with this Universal, in which we instruct them in private conference: and the
reason why they are more familiar with it, then the men, is, because they must
yield as little as possible may be to their courteous requests, and therefore
stand indeterminate toward this or that whe^^ they are in common, lest this
perceiving himself neglected, should refuse to perform his accustomed
gratuities: for you must know that these men which you see here, are all
pretendents o^ suitors, and so are likely to continue; for if they should once
obtain their suite, they would no more be scholars of my University, but
courtiers in Hymen's court: and therefore we instruct the females so, that they
shall never consent to Matrimony (although they become subject to the topic
multiplex conjunctio) but remain inderminate to any one, yet with a liking eye
to all.

Genus is not read publicly in this Class, by reason of that which it
includes of Universal.

Accidens also is a very dangerous predicable to admit of; for that wc^ it
contains of separabile, unless it be understood, as we term it,
cautiously, and in san^ sensu, that is to say, when the woman receive the men's
indulgence, then have the women license to use Accidens separabile, because
they have ever an enlargement granted either to gratify or not gratify in
words, and therefore they use both accidents and separabilitie; but yet accidens
inseparabile is in more respect amongst all, for that which it favoreth of
inseparabilitie, as the men's treasure is inseparable from the women; but being
an accident, we utterly disanul it out of our common wealth, because we must be
certain of all we have promised; and for this reason we banish from the men's
knowledge all accidents, and reserve inseparability; that is, what we heap up
in our Crys^thecary is inseparable, and not to be parted with.

But for that predicable which others call differentia, we constitute Vnio:
for being that we pretend love, and Interest for love, we abhor all
difference; as a mortal enemy to our quietness; and in stead of such
disturbance, we place Vnio, which we d^fin to be quies amica ex coacervatione
causata: for if there be not coacervatio or aggulatio nummulosa, there will be
no quies amica: quies there may be, because we shall constrain such a
penurious pretendent to depart in peace: This is the beginning of our Logic,
or our Organ of Interest.

Next insueth the tract de Antepraedicamentis: the first whereof be Vnivocum
and Aequivocum: Vnivocum belongs to the men, because it is a real and true
hearted expression of their good and generous intention, upon which the females
build the strong walls of their certaineties, which are vowed by their
pretendents promises: Aequivocum of the contrary is an inseparable quality
appertaining to the females, who seldom speak what they think, and as seldom
think of any benefit, but their own: for this female train is never perfect
in our Logic science, until they be complete in two things: the one is
Equivocation, which is the prime in this school; the other is Sophisme,
without which none of my she disciples entertaines a suitor, unless she be
accompanied with a Tuteresse; for of these two we compose the Allegorical
tongue, which is defined aliud verbis, aliud sensu, and unless the amorus
female be expert in this deceiving art, she is in hazard to betray her self to
truth, and violate her own modesty by our liberty.

Next to this follows the last antepredicamentall lecture, which we term
praedicatio; and this is tvvofold; which is concretum and abstractu^: and it
is ordered in such a sort, that the men, or masculine Logicians make their full
handed predication in concreto, and the female in abstracto, abstracting and
taking away the concretion of their store, to feed and pinguifie their lean
and avaritious desires; in this consists our primae and secundae intentiones
logicales, which are not here actus intellectus, but actus manuales, quoniam
in schola* Amoris manus magis quam intellectus exercentur. But to be short, I
will recount briefly unto you the series and number of our Predicaments.

First therefore know, that we are not altogether of the opinion of Aristole,
and therefore we teach not so many predicaments as he does: but yet
praedicamentum substantiae, as it is the prime with Aristotle, so is it with
us, and so necessary, that what pretendent soever is not furnished with
substantia, is excluded totally out of the predicament of Love.

The predicament of quantity is in exceeding estimation amongst us, and he is
only judged amiable, proper, and complete in all parts, that is furnished with
the greatest quantity of gold or other treasure, and without this he is more
deformed then Cerberus, the contemptiblest picture they can fix their eyes
upon, whom we term minimum natural.

But Praedicamentum qualitatis is of no more reckoning here, then a penny less
purse; for we never enquire of the quality of the man, but the quantity he
brings with him.

Relatio is very famous in our school, and it is defined (according to the
ancient and full experienced Philosophers opinion) Relatio dicitur illud, quod
id quod est, aliarum esse dicitur: by this definition it most manifestly
appears, that all the men have belongs properly to the women: peruse it
seriously and you will easily consent unto the same: Relatio dicitur iluld,
Relation is that thing, to wit that substance, which, what or how great soever
it be, it is to be appropriated to others, to the women, which is evident by
the word aliarum; and not to be delivered back again, because we admit not of
any relation, but that which is non mutua; and although all be in one school,
yet all have not the same step of dignity: but he is in the first and most
eminent place, qui in pretiosiori quantitate fundat relationem suam.

But now if I shall name that predicament, which makes all the rest namelesse,
let me say no more but Habere: for this is it to which all other are reduced,
they all sleep in this haven; if you will know more then ever Aristotle did,
you need no more then the predicament habere: habere mollifies the hardest
rock, the flinty heart becomes fluid if but touched with the diamond habere;
habere is sufficient to conquer impossibilities: The predicament Quando, after
the petition is granted, is not complete until it accord with habere: Vbi is
not fully established in certainty, until it meet with habere; neither would
here be any amorous embraces of the pleased couple, no actio nor passio without
habere: and to conclude, habere is so transcendent, that nothing is had without
it.

And although we could reduce not only all the predic^ments, but also the
whole volume of Logic to this de habere; yet to be more complete and course
like, we trace on with Aristotle's method, picking out what is useful for our
purpose, and excepting the remainder; and therefore to show you more exactly our
Logic school, mark the sequel.

Next follows the book called Peri-hermenias, seu de interpretatione, and
this interpretation properly accepted of with us, is a rich present, which
interprets s^ plainly, that there is not a woman in my University, be she
never so dull of apprehension, but she understands it so clearly, that she
carries all away, at once hearing it: we treat here first de nomine and verbo:
nomen est vox significativa ad placitum sine tempore: this nomen is either
gold, silver, or such like, which is so significative a voice semper ad
placitum, always pleasing, always grateful, and sine tempore, or extempore,
because if this word be once spoken, it must be performed with all expedition,
since they women abhor delays, and for this reason we exclude verbum,
because it is cum tempore, it demurres so long, that my females grow weary and
impatient of the expectation.

But yet we admit of one Verb, which is est, because it is a verb
substantive, or a substantial Verb; but this Verb est, is never in its
prime, until it be set for habeo. We use verbum ofttimes, but not as
Aristotle does, for a verb, but for a word, as a conjunction, because Verbum a
verbero derivationem accipit, and the best sounding word to the Petitioner is
the free monosyllable Yes, which causes the malevolent particle, No, to be
excommunicated out of Loves limits; because we teach no contradictions, nor
contraries, but term the denial of a Petition, to be degenerous and want of
true education: for suppose a woman should crave of her Curtesan this or that
ring, jewel, or the like, what an absurd sound would the base and harsh sound
of No, or I will not, make? nay, although he should put it off with an Excuse
me, yet would it be taken for so heinous a crime, that his Mistress would ever
after excuse her self from his presence.

But now to speak something of the Tract De art inveniendi medii, which we
otherwise call Pons asinorum, this is all framed of precious stones, whose
cement is gold and silver; the Ass that is able to build this Bridge, invenit
medium, he find out the middle, which he so long solicited and sought for: but
the other crew of weaker sillies bestovv all their labor and cost in vain,
because they shall never attain to the depth of that punctum reflectionis.

As for the syllogisticall Moodes, we content our selves with a few abhorring
the b^u^ish condition of Barbara, and adoring that of dani: the men must use an
especial care, lest they conclude with Zelantes, for he that puts his
confidence in this Mood, shall infallibly be convinced, and in the end of the
disputation, shall be obliged to begin a new argument all in dabitis.

When we come to the Priors, or demonstrative part, we place the men before
the women; and then the cathedraticall Mistress proceeds in this manner.
Demonstratio est syllogismus procedens ex veris, primis, immediatis,
notioribus, prioribus, causisque conclusionis: In this Science the men are
only doctrinated, not that they shall find out all or any fallacies by the
evidence hereof, but because they shall beware, that they practice nothing, but
what is the real truth; and therefore they syllogize ex veris, because they
must not use any deceit or flattery toward their Mistresses; ex primis,
because they must first give ^o them, bofore they can hope for the least
courtesy; ex immediatis, because their very appearance imports, without any
intermission or mediancie, a present to the females, as a true token of their
prime love; ex notioribus, to induce the women to know their own adorers, and
those better, that give most liberally; for you know Demonstratio est
syllogismus faciens scire; it must also be ex prioribus, for that in our
Schools prior est datio pecuniaris, quam receptio amplexaris; this
syllogisticall discourse ought likewise to be ex causis conclusionis; the
conclusion that our men aim at is an amorous claspe, that which the women
desire, is a Cupidineous gripe closing a golden see, and nothing is able to
cause this clasp or recumbens-subtegmine lecti, but bursa plena liberaliter
offerta ad amicam.

But now, said Cupid, we have overstayed our time, let us pass to the next
School, which, as Aristotle styles it, is de physico auditu, and we with him
proceed to the same School, although we differ both in title and form; and
without any delay, Cupid brought me to a very fair Port, on which I read this
which follows: Two principal per se, matter and form,
This Class of Physic chiefly do adorn: Loves School of Physics, or
natural Philosophy.

The matter's heaps of Gold, and riches free;
The forme's oblation, beanteous Phila's fee.


The perusal of this tetrastick struck me immediately into a difficulty,
whereupon I emboldned my self to stay the God, and asked him, why and how Gold
could be called the matter in this Tract, since that Aristotle in the first
Book of Physics, says, that matter or materia prima est chaos, caeca
farrago, or rudis indigest aque moles: So is Gold, said Cupid, it is a Chaos,
because you see it confounds all men; it is caecum, quiareddit omnes caecos
propter ejus amorem: it is also rude, because it makes most that possess it
rude and vicious.

It is very certain, said I, but Aristotle treates here de primis principiis;
de illis, scilicet, quae primo constituunt compositum natural. It is very
true, answered Cupid, and for that cause I have often said, that we exempt our
selves from being strict Aristotelians: For you must know, that we are already
actuated or formed according to Natures composition; and therefore, as I even
now said, this School is not properly called De physico auditu, but De
Cupidine auditu: and therefore, since nature has made us perfect in the first
mixtion, we account it frivolous, to search or repeat that which Aristotle
has searched out for us, that is, by what means it came to pass, what
concurrence was used, and the like: but now we search that which is most
semblant and agreeable to our condition, I mean our institution: and because
Gold and other treasure are substances and natural mixtures, as these my
females and masculine flock be, speaking of that which belongs to natural
composition, and abstracting from the formal perfection of this or that, only
insisting on those ingredients which are matter and form, deriving their
generating cause from one and the same body as an universal cause, which is
calor solis, I find no difference, but a great similitude: and therefore we
set down Gold and such like estimable substances to be the matter of this our
Physical study, and oblation to be the form, without which our study is to no
purpose, nor the composition which we sweat for is no composition, because
without oblation there is no union, no complementive actuality, which we call
Completio amorosa: these therefore, as I have said, sunt principia per se
nostra physicae, and totius philosophiae; which imimports as much as I had said
of our natural appetite, because Cupid or Cupido is the objective guide herein.

With this answer, although it was not ab essentia rei petita, but a mere
diversion, yet unwilling to be overtedious to the God of Love, I rested as if I
had been fully satisfied; upon the pause whereof we entered the Class. I
could discover few or none here, that were not in action and passion; the
Courtiers giving, and the Courtieresses receiving. In the midst of this Hall
lay many heaps of Gold, Silver, Diamonds, and other sorts of treasure, at the
resplendant glory whereof I was almost distracted: at which Cupid (perceiving
my amazement) asked me what I thought of this so beauteous a Treasure-house.

To whom I said, this is the practical part of yon Logic Class: Why so? said
Cupid: because, answered I, my fancy apprehends all these laborious asses to
be busied in the study De inventione medii; and these heaps of Gold and
precious stones I take to be the materials with which they intend to build
their pons asinorum: No, no, answered Cupid, this aggregatum per accidens is
our Philosophers stone, and those that concur not to the augmenting and
raising up of these beauteous Banckes, these Phebean hillocks, these
Love-starres, which the World terms Earths Planets, for the uncertain Mansion
they have to dwell with this or that amorous Courtesan, those, I say, that add
not to these Idols, are not taken to be Lapidary men, but a certain kind of
jumenta, or rather bomenta, which are commonly called Eunuchs, because they
shall never make use of their intayle, for that they add not the previall
disposition which makes the formal connection: for indeed my females say, that
such kind of Pedlers shall not enter into their Shop, unless they had ready
money, because they never use to trust any man in that kind.

Then I entreated Cupid to better my understanding with some instructions of
the Method that was observed in this School, who freely began in this manner.
Physica is as much as to say natura: and therefore this School and study is of
natural things; neither is there any one that truly endeavors in this
Science, except he loves it; for this is the generating of wisdom, by reason
of which he is called a Philosopher; and for no other cause, then that he is a
lover of wisdom. This supposed, I conclude that all here must of necessity be
Philosophers (as for naturallists or Physicians, it is most evident by the
Tract, that they be the same) because they are not only lovers, but also
lovers of wisdom. I was not able to contain my self within the limits of
silence, but I injected obviously the difficulty which met my attention, as I
gazed upon Cupids preamble, saying: It appears unto me (pardon my bold
attempt, O divine Cupid) that you give these your Disciples a false
appellation, in calling them Philosophers; and my judgment rather names them
Philochrysers, because their study is only of Gold and treasure, as the
portall script manifests, and not of wisdom.

You say well in giving them this Character; but yet you are extremely
deceived, answered Cupid, if you rob them of the name of Philosophers; for in
this Class the men study and contemplate of the beauty of their Goddesses, and
the women of the beauty of their riches; this beauty (for sure there is beauty
in both) is a celestial gift flowing from the will of the increated wisdom,
and in this respect I see no opponent reason can debar them from being truly
styled real Philosophers; nay more, there is not one gemme, a piece of gold or
silver, or any estimable thing else that my Damsels stretch their invention to
compass, but they descant and contemplate the beauty, valuation, and
perfections thereof, extolling gold above silver, and Diamonds above gold, not
only for that the common constitution of men has given this an ascent in
value above that, but also for the poynant virtues, qualities, and superior
qualities contained in one, more then in the other: can you then impugn me
with a negation, that these are not true Philosophers, and this true
Philosophy? and therefore to wipe away clearly the blot in your clouded
apprehension, and restore you to your intellectual sight; you must know, that
our gallants admiring the beauteous blaze of their Mistresses etc. they study
how to gratify so much worthiness with condign praemiums, and therefore
find it necessary to dive into the knowledge of this Philosophy to arrive at
the true Science of all perfections contained in these natural ornaments,
these precious metals, and Indian lustres; and having obtained the verity
hereof, they make the most worthy to become presents or speakers to interpret
their Masters wills; and this is the end of their Philosophy, to offer homage
in these to their most amiable Objects.

And the beauteous Minions likewise gratify their servants with virtuous
smiles, modest looks, affable speeches, celestial glances, courteous behavior,
and sister-like embraces, which could not be performed but by wisdoms
permission, which they likewise understand and perfectly know: neither is our
Philosophical Science haled by so foreign a reduction, but affirmatively it
is a true limb of Philosophy, such as Physic is; for it really includes
wisdom, and therefore is sufficient to style our proficients Sophi, and
sophae, who being also Lovers, why should we doubt to call them Philosophi and
Philosophae, or lovers of wisdom.

But, said I, you involve me in another cloud, because you seem to contradict
your former discourse, where you say the women practice virtue, modesty, and
such good attributes, because your females now licentiates, and therefore not
bound to observe these rules. It is true, said Cupid, but yet you find not
that they are prohibited to use the same: Moreover, if you reflect your eye
upon the antecedent Class, you shall find, that the women are Sophisters or
Fallatians, who with their artificial veiles so blind the eyes of their
Enamorists, that they take this coined show of virtue to be real, when it is
only apparent and not durable, a mere fiction, and nothing but superficial:
for who will seem more modest and virtuous, then she that intends to deceive,
and under this pretense the deceit passes more easily, because it is not
suspected at all.

But I pray you let us proceed, said Cupid, for we have many Schools to
visit, and times Chariot wheels away with great speed. Content, quoth I, for
I am sorry I detained you so long from your desire. Then, said Cupid, you know
our Schools are the Schools of Interest, where the women aim at treasure,
the men at beauty, and both at pleasure: the men aim at the possession of
beauty and pleasure without respect of gold, or any riches he can attain
unto, which makes so many of them to sing the second part of their life in a
new and lamentable tune, to wit, for Gods sake cloth my nakedness, for Christ
his sake relieve my hungry and thirsty soul. The women aim at riches and
pleasure, without regard of beauty; for let him be a Moore or Gypsy that
courts them, if he bring the golden key, he unlockes their modesties Closet
door, and enters as freely, as a known Puritan into his own Congregation:
Nay, I dare be bold to avouch, that if such a pretendent had a bottle nose as
big as a bunch of Grapes of ten pounds, a ruby chin, a strawberry pair of
cheeks, a vermillian forehead, a breath more odious then his Mistresses close
stools lining, and a head as bare as a Cabbage, let him be set forth with all
these deformities, and have but a golden hand, he shall be admitted and have
free entrance into her private presence, and act what part he desires, that
has been found in the comedies of pleasure: But the truly handsome, complete,
and meritorious, that cannot show the face of a Jacobus, shall live a-loofe
from gratia dei, the grace of our good liking; he shall pass by for vas
vacuum, and be embarked in the Ship of scorn, to be conducted to the Haven of
heaviness, and thrust upon the shore of, Never return again. I wondering at
this diabolical institution, said to Cupid, no doubt but I am perpetually
engaged to your Deities bounty, because I perceive you intend by this discourse
to deter me from ever erring in the way of loving, or engaging my self to
any Harpy in the world.

Be not too audaciously confident, said Cupid, presume not any thing of my
mercy; for by this I teach thee to defy all females, and prick thee on to lay
hold of a thriving course, that when thou art grown substantial and strong in
purse, I may boult thee into my family once more, to consume thy self, as thou
have already done. When thou have effected what industrious labor may sweep up
for thee, then let the second effect be a true testimony of my power; for the
poor state of my present fortune is not capable of my Dart. But to return to
our purpose, listen, and I will declare the Laws of this School.

This Physical appropriation, which we here similize under the shapes of
Peripateticks, I intend to show, in disciphering the difference betwixt our
Doctrine and the Aristotelians, and in what points we accord: They hold, that
there are four causes, materialis, formalis, efficiens, and finalis, and so
do we: with us the material and formal are chief, with them the efficient
and final.

The material cause with us (as I have said) is treasure, which facilitates
the intent of the amorous pretendent: it causes affection to wait upon its
glory; it prostrates the Virgin, and therefore compells the insatiable strumpet
to fly into the golden embraces of her servants will: and if this yellow footed
youngster treads but upon the toe of a wife, he makes her to forget her
nuptial duty, being so unresistably inveagled with the luster of this
Interest: this makes the Raven white, and curtains up day in a thorall rug
before the Sun has run half his diurnall course. Even Plato, and he that
looks through as many Dogs faces, as Cerberus, seem more lovely then Adonis,
or Hylas, Alcides boy, if he be but attired with this bracelet of plenty: Why
then should not this our material cause be chief, and most excelling, since it
bears most sway and efficacity: but yet it is not complete without oblation,
which is the formal cause, which is that comfortable presentment, that unites
the soul of the receiver to the thing received, and in that consists the
formality of our Schools of Interest: as for the efficient cause, it is the
same with the formal, because the formal effects, whether it be efficiens
principalis, or the secondary alarmes so full of sweetness and delight, causa
instrumentalis.

But for causa finalis the women have none, because there is no end of their
desire, that appetitive quality called auri sacra fames: neither is there any
final cause for the men, until their substance is consumed, and nothing left
to present to obtain correspondence with their Mistresses, for they hold this
adage: ex nihilo nihil fit; ergo ubi non est aliquid dari, non opus est
intention finali.

De continuo continue agimus, and he that continues in giving, is supreme in
this Class; neither is there any cessation to be admitted of, for he that will
continue his correspondence, must continue also his liberal practice. The
Continuum which we treat of, is not that which Zeno, the Pythagorians, and many
modernes now adays define, but that of Aristotle, who says, that Continuum
componitur ex partibus, non ex indivisibilibus, as they said; for these
indivisibilia non faciunt quantum; ergo nec indivisibilia apud nos facere
possunt acervum, ergo rejicienda.

Here I desired Cupid to tell me what he meant by his indivisibilia; these are,
said he, those poor diminutives, which others call pence; for we are of
opinion, that pence are so small a beginning, that he who begins and
continues in giving pence, shall be so long before he make a sum worthy to
be received, that he shall tire his Mistress so extremely with long
expectation, that she leaves him, giving him a general acquittance for ever
entering the Schools of Interest, to pay any such dribling debts hereafter; for
our continuum is composed of parts, which the grosser they be the better they
compose; these parts are five pounds, ten pounds, twenty, and so, when they
have mounted to an hundred pounds, or the worth thereof, then we say they are
perfect in continuo; and if he desire it, he passes to the proof quomodo dua
corpora possunt esse in uno loco; and at the end of this follows vacuum, which
is proved ex part viri, he having emptied his purse, which draws into the
consequent tract, which is infinitum multitudinis ex part mulieris; for the
evacuation of his bags is the increase of her heap, quod nos vocamus
infinitum syncategorematicum, quoniam per additionem fit, cujus non est
terminus finalis, licet principium habuerit: And when this silly is shrived of
his treasure, my females make his Mittimus, and send him to the Jayle called
Terminus minimus quod non: that is, he shall be the least termer with us, quod
non habet unde dare.

This said, Cupid drew a curtain, which discovered a lesser School, wherein I
espied upon an Ebony Pulpit these words inscribed: Doctrina de Generatione and
Corruptione. Loves School of Generation and Corruption.

Generation of Love, as we have defined it,
Is the corruption of substance to those that do mind it.


This is a pedagogicall School, or a subdivision of Physica, where the true
and most canonical conclusion is, Generatio unius est corruption alterius: for
the pinguitude of the women has made the men like so many macelentoes, or
meager thin-guts; for as the women profit in the tract de augmentatione
substantiali, the men disprofitably profit in that de diminutione.

But yet you must know, that this Treatise of ours is not that which Aristotle
explicates, De generatione viventium, but De generatione mortuorum, that is,
gazarum and nummulorum: and if at any time this vital generation succeedes, it
is termed in our School, Per accidens, and non secundum intentum primarium and
principale doctrinae nostrae: And in case my unexperienced Damsels should give
occasion, or yield to their amorous embracers motions, and so slip into this
doctrine, then incontinently they are sent to the Class de medicina, as having
a necessited coherence with that practice; for Vbi desinit Physicus, incipit
medicus: but if they are not in danger of protuberation, they ascend to the
School where we teach and treat of the Meteors.

We pass over many questions which Aristotle and other Philosophers have
dilated: and one of the chief that the men are doctrinated in, is de action
and reactione, that action produces best liking, that is diamondall, or all
Diamond, the next is the golden action, which the more often it is reacted, the
more it pleases: and without this kindness of reaction we should not hold
condensation of our treasure heaps, and rarifaction of our Courtiers coin;
were it not for reaction, there would be no mixtion; for from reaction and the
ponderous quality called Gravitas resultes in the females illa qualitas
plumosa, cubiculosa, and jocosa, quam nos vocamus levitatem; And in speaking
this we came to another, which was adorned with this Character: The Meteorists
cast up their studious eye, Loves School of Meteors.

To contemplate the wonders of the sky:
We bring them down to earth from that high perch,
Her Mines with fire-drakes and such like to search.


I followed Cupid into this spacious room, where I beheld not so few as a
thousand Mines, at the mouths of which men ascended and descended, as if they
had been Bees: This, said Cupid, is the School of Meteors; where we chiefly
intend not de illis, quae in sublimi generantur, sed potius de subterraneis; de
fossilibus nimirum, and metallorum liquabilium extractione.

Here I observed an infinite multitude with Comets in their hands, expecting to
receive the 2sweet that dropped from their enamorists sweat, who still came
loaded with gold and silver over, marching toward their Mistresses with every
one a Torch of Ignis fatuus in their hands: some came and went accompanied with
their caprae saltantes, others with draco volans, and many with ignis lambens,
and to speak all, it was a true ignis lambens in the women's hands, for that it
licked away all the fruits of their poor endeavors, labor and toil.

This great and mighty Vault was so furnished with the terrifying wonders,
which use to appear in the skies, that I seemed something timorous to proceed;
and in fine, Cupid perceiving my cautious steps to lose their accustomed
distance, said to me, be not amazed man, for these Luminaries can no ways
prejudice an old Soldier; therefore walk with me, and I will declare the
meaning of them.

And pointing at one of the women that held in her hand Flamma, or Fax; that,
said Cupid, is an inflammation which endures but a short time, and for that
cause she holds it in her hand, as you see, to notify that her Lovers Mine
is almost at an end: beyond them are Caprae saltantes, which signifies the
mirth and joy which the newly honored Girls take, for that their servants
have newly found out a Golden Mine: those that you see of your left hand with
Stellae cadentes, are the signification of those that have fallen into poverty
and purse-lamenesse, by adventuring too far for their Mistresses sakes: Some
men carry Lanceae, to signify their courage in behalf of their dearest;
others negotiate with sidera discurrentia, to show their diligence to procure
their fairest her desire: Many more we have, as Castor, and Pollux, ignis
perpendicularis, trabs, Helena, columnae pyramidales, and such like, which are
very useful for the unbowelling of the earths fertile womb, to discover the
choicest and best pleasing mettles.

Then he brought me to a sea, as I imagined, for although it was not
Ocean-like, yet it was salt, and therefore I supposed it to be an arm of the
Sea: Here, said Cupid, we treat not so exactly of the nature of the Sea, its
ebbing and flowing, saltness, and such like qualities and properties, as we
do concerning the several sorts of jewels herein, and the virtue contained in
them: It was a wonderful sight to behold loves Mer-maids as they sat by the
shore side, and the dexterity of their servants that dived into the bottom to
search for pearl, Rubie, Saphir, Diamond, and such like estimative Gemmes; and
if perchance one of the mistaken diverse should unwarily present unto his
expecting Mistress a stone of little or no value, she presently would cast
such a cloud over her clearenesse, made all grim and horrid with frowns, that
the affrighted puffin immediately pulled the water over his head, to veil
himself in that cool Element from the heat of her disdain.

And at this Cupid said, let us now pass to the School De medicina, at which
I asked him, if there were nothing in these his Philosophical Schools De
coelo and mundo. Yes, answered Cupid, we have much De mundo, and of this we
treat in every Class, because it is the prime and chief intent of our whole
University; for this De mundo is not only conditio, sine qua non, but ex
essentia nostrae philosophiae: for if it were not for the treasure of this
inferior world, our Schools of Interest would be but dumb caves, fitter for
lamenters then lovers. We treat also De coelo, because coelum and sidera sunt
causa efficiens metallorum in mundo, which we shall declare more copiously in
our Astrology, where we speak De coelo and coelestibus.

And at this instant I had cast my eyes upon a new Inscription, or Theme, fixed
upon the Portall entrance, which informed me of the inward method; saying thus:
Loves School of Physic and Chyrurgery.
Loves Sicklings hardly able for to live*
Shall soon be cured if the Recipe they give.


The intelligence of this Letter had no sooner appeared in my apprehension, but
I entered the place of Medicinal practice, where I beheld a thousand beauties,
whose profession I could easily imagine to be De medicina, or Cupids
Hospitalists although I had not been informed of the same by the Portall
scripture, for that they seemed to kill with the Recipe of their eyes, not
unlike the Physicians with their druggish receipts: and I dare affirm that the
effectual execution of those bits of paper in which they write their poisonous
receipts, bereave more of vitality, then wars, famine, and the Gallows.

This spacious Hall had scarce received me, when the Batchelonists,
Licentiates and Doctoresses flocked about me, supposing the God had brought me
in to be cured of a love sick disease, and surrounding me in a ring, desired to
feel my pulse, to whom I bowing in a courteous and thankful manner, stretched
forth my arm, at which they all burst ou^ in laughter: whereupon Cupid said to
me, here the Physicians accustom not to feel that pulse, but that of the
purse; for by the pulse of the purse, they can easily discover whether the
infirmity be remediable, or in probabilities to be cured.

Without delay I drew forth my purse, and gave it to one of the gravest, and,
as I supposed, most experienced, which she feeling, and finding empty, said,
this sick man has no pulse; to what purpose was he brought hither, being
incurable? let the charitable ring his passing peale, and we will bury him in
the Sepulcher of Oblivion. After her came the rest, who perceiving that my
purses vital spirits were utterly decayed, they all unanimously extended their
voices, saying; Memento homo quod pulvis es and in pulverom reverteris. Recede,
recede, nam inst^t hora m^rtis tuae.

Although I heard the terrifying noise of this their mortal sentence, yet was
I not astonished at all, partly because I knew my infirmity was a consumption,
and partly because the longs of my estate were quite spent, and last of all
because I was over-growne with the Leprosy of despair, that I should never
see my own happy prosperity in this world, and therefore desired, and wished
for my better fortune in the next.

After this, we entered into another long and spacious Gallery, which Cupid told
me was his Infirmary, where sat an orderly row of beauteous Dames, which at the
first seemed to be Apothecaries wives, or Hospital Nuns, but Cupid said,
they were his Lovers Nurses, and servants to more. This Gallery was completely
furnished with great store of beds, and every bed had on it a sick person, who
after a small time of repose still arose walking male discontent, and as they
men walked, they repeated continually these words, Terminus ambulationis est
causa sanitatis; the sense whereof I presently understood; for the term of
their walk was a visitation bestowed upon their seated attendants, ever
presenting some thing of worth unto them, at the receiving of which the
Doctoresses told them, that they were better then before, and prescribed unto
them a walk in Loves Garden; whereby I could not compare these Love-sicke
wretches to any but prisoners, for before they sallied forth into the serene
and wholesome air, they were continually condemned in new charges, neither
could they obtain this freedom, until they had paid not only the sum
they are damnified in, but also fees to the Gardner.

I observed that when these infirm persons came to the Doctoresses for remedy,
being desperately sick, they took them by the pulses or purses, by which they
judged the disease, and if they gave speedy pulsation, the Doctoresses assured
them of life and cure, but if their pulses went uncertain and intercadentally,
they turned away, shook their head, and said, there is no hopes of recovery,
your malady is greater then my charity, unless you get a good strong pulse, we
cannot cure you.

I asked Cupid the cause that so many men were sick, and no women: yes,
answered he, we have many women sick, although not such a number as there be
men; the reason is, the men are sick, because they give not, and since there
is an infinite number of men that refuse to give, and not the tyth of women
that desist to ask, (for the want of asking is the women's disease) therefore
we have fewer women sicklings, then men: the men there are sick because they
either know not how to give, or else neglect to give after they participate of
the knowledge how, which is a more dangerous disease, and of more difficulty to
be cured: the women fall into sickness, because they neglect to ask, but yet
they recover at the next asking; although the men give five times, before they
recover their perfect health, for as long as they give sparingly, their
recovery is prorogued; and he that holds fast his purse, as if he were
benumbed, and cannot u^tye the strings, this diseased fool shall hold fast his
love-sicke passion without the least hopes of any change, Nisi in pejus.

The reason of this is semblanced from that which Galen affirms in his Book
De partibus, etc. that a knotted vein or sinew hinders microcosmall
operation; so that we, taking the purse to be the substance and the strings to
be the veins or sinews thereof, judge a knotted pair of Purse-strings to
hinder the operation of a Lovers health or happy embraces. Whilst thus he
discoursed, there presented to our view two persons, the one a man, the other a
woman, and both very pale and weak, yet perceiving Cupid so near, the man
after many cringes and congies presented to her asking words, saying, Recipe
scrupulum auri uncius octo, and argenti infusionis anci^s octoginta* a strong
potion thought I, but she took it up and carried it away without any Nausea at
all, and imediately recovered, although the man seemed not perfectly well, yet
his countenance was much amended.

Then curiously perusing the proceedings of these miserable captives; I espied
one very meager, and almost as like a Ghost as my self, who was almost spent
with an extreme consumption of the purse, whose heart strings were so fretted
with the greedy vulture that preyed upon his coin, that he fainted at every
turn; he showed the Doctoresses his water, which one of them took in her
hand shaking it, the rest looking on, imagining it to have been aurum
potabile, or argentum vivum, and when she perceived that it was neither
yellow, like gold, nor white, like silver, but mere ruddy or melancholy muddy
urine, she threw it away, and said, unless you depart from hence presently,
and change the air, you are a dead man; for I find you in such a desperate
and dangerous state, that I cannot endure to look upon your misery; and thus
she sent him crawling away to recover his losses in a bottomless ocean,
frustrate of his intention.

Another I observed that was very costive in the way of liberality, to whom a
vizarded witch gave a glister, that made him so gild her hands, not with that
kind of gold which comes forth of my cousin Johne back give, but that which
comes from the Mi^^^, whereby he recovered himself, and grew afterward very
laxative, both to his own content, and good liking of his attendants. There
was another that had no stomach (I mean to part with any thing) the same
woman gave him but half a do^en pills, and he both purged and vomited so much
yellow ma^ter, like gold, and green l^mpes, much like unto Emeralds, that he
had no sooner done, but they all confirmed him to be sound.

But there was an extreme palsie-handed youngster; that could very seldom
f^^de the way into his pocker, and when he had overcome that difficulty, it was
ten times more hard for him to unthrew his box where his treasure was enclosed,
for which crime he was ^^d to the Universitie gate, blind-folded, ^^^ch-^^sted,
and his pockets sowed up, and so expulsed for an incurable Idiot.

I entreated Cupid to tell me, which of all these sick person, that he now
^ad, or at any time heretofore, was most grateful and best accepted of in all
this his Hospital: he answered, those that had the ^unning Gout, because
there was something coming to those than t^nded them; and those also, that
could purge freely at the hearing of this word, Give me; and finally those that
vomit of their own accord: These are the best deservers, who have both best
cure and most attendants.

Then we directed our steps into another Hall, at each end whereof was a shop,
the one of them an Apothecary, the other of a Barber: the Apothecary had in
store suppositories, injections, and many more such like facilitations, to
compel the hide-bound Caitives to a looseness, and supple freeness: there
were also diverse sorts of plasters, which Cupid recounted to me, as Dia palma,
and emplastrum divinum to make them as generous as the Gods themselves:
unguents in abundance, as Vnguentum basilicon for the men, and Vnguentum album,
and unguentum aureum, to be given to the women: there were also sirrups and
conserves, to be administered to those that were become laxative; also
Gargarismes, Electuaries, Preparatives, Antidotes, and all sorts of purgations,
and drugges necessary or convenient to expulse and drive away the tedious and
detaining humors of such as were through denial or disdain become
participants of Loves infirmary.

In the other shop the Barberesses were very busy in bloudding, cupping,
leeching, scarifying, snipping, and cutting, whereby I perceived, that their
condition was an extracting quality, still to take away what they never
intended to restore. I observed also, that these barbarous Barbaresses never
opened any vein, but the blood flowed still from Vena de arca: those that were
desperately handled with Feavors, as being caused from the inflammation of
their Mistresses beauty, breeding a violent and insupportable passion in the
amorous spectator, were shaved in the crowns, blooded, clipped, and stripped
even to the shirt, for fear they should melt with ardor of their own heat,
and inbred fire, and thus arrayed they were conducted to the cool bathes of
repentance.

This observed and seen, Cupid directed his course forth from these Leeches,
and I steered after him without being shaved, for I had not one crown, neither
was I blooded, because they could not find the vein of my Arc; nor yet was I
purged, for that all the humor of my coin was consumed; neither was I cured,
but rather in more desperate danger then heretofore, for that the tissicke of
my short-string'd purse had stopped my pores, that opened the way to happiness
and freedom. With this cogitation I arrived at an open pair of large gates,
and casting up my head, beheld this verse taken out of the sixth Book of the
Prophet Maro, the hundred twenty and seventh verse: Noctes atque dies patet
atri janui Ditis. Loves Law School.


And under the same was engraven this tetrasticon: The golden oil makes glib
the mutest tongue,
If this appear, no sentence can do wrong:
Show not the weighty cause, but weighty coin,
By this we judge the cause and suite is thine.


This is, said Cupid, the grand hall of Pleaders, where men are clyents, and
women Lawyers, for whatsover the men put in, the women's Law stands: the clyents
here, for the most part, are rivalls, or such as are accused of negligence in
the case of giving; and he that will cast his opposite, must begin with a
bribe, which we call a gratuity or ingresse to the process of the suite: and
if the Iseprise or nisi prius be preferred into the Court, before the party
accused appears, he is condemned in costs, and immediately the accuser is
obliged to morgage his purse until he obtain a significavi, and if the
peccant delay to appear, or at least to put in his lawful excuse, then the
pleader instructs the Judge so sinistrously against the same party, that the
matter proceeds to a declaration, which is ever grounded upon the a fide data,
or Afidavi, and so the cause comes to an execution, and without demurring is
brought to an attachement, which being served by the accuser, the peccant party
is brought in, condemned of double costs, and fined to pay unto his neglected
Mistress a hundred crowns sterling, for the discurtesie he had done her; or
else to be cast into Loves dungeon, which is a place of obscurity, whose walls
are all painted and portratur'd with the visage of disdain, his diet being
nothing but coy look, contempt, reproach, and sarcasmall flou^es; he has at
this examinating feast a set of braying Asses for his Musicians, and never
hears any songs but invective Odes, and Vinegar Satyrs.

Yet you must understand, that although the party that is cast, is damnified,
as I have related, yet the accuser does not escape free, for look what the
peccants charges surmount to, the accuser is constrained to pay half so much
to the Lawyers Box for the trouble and disturbance in the Court: For as in
other Commonwealths, he that conceales the crime of another man, is punished
by the Law, as being an ill member of the public state, so if we, said Cupid,
discover a Lover that keeps secret the faults of another, he is punished in
purse; and if he accuse the delinquent as soon as he perceives his malice,
yet he escapes not scot-free, because he is bound to maintain the right and
legality of our institution; so that he that speeds best, comes off with
loss; for our Maxim is, Discordia minuit substantiam: and we hold another
point, which is most rigorously observed, that is, Qui damnum alterius quaerit,
ipse sibi damnum parit.

I noting in the middle of this Hall a pair of scales, asked Cupid the use of
them, who answered, by these we give judgment, not that they signify level
justice; but according to the institution of our legal rights: for in one
scale we lay the bribe or gratuitie, and in the other the adverse cause, which
if it be not accosted with a greater sum then the gratuity of the other is,
the cause flies up, were it never so ponderous; for my professors say, that a
penurious cause never finds either good close or clause; for if his case be
not well fraught with substance, and clear shining like the Diamond, we judge
it so airy and light, that none of my Counselors will give directions in it,
neither any Barrester take it into the uttering mouth of his consideration; for
all done here is God-a-mercy penny, for he that is guarded with the greatest
Troop of Angels, is certainly proclaimed victor. But now, said Cupid, let us
proceed, and because time will not license us to visit my whole University, as
I intended, for that the night is almost spent, you may observe the institution
of the rest of my schools, as we walk, and I will likewise give you some
brief notice of the same as we pass: and now we came to a port, which was
thus portraitur'd: Loves School of Mathematics.
If that to Mathematics you will climb,
You must ascend up by the golden line;
Our perfect circles are those solid things,
Posy'd with James and Charles about the rings.


This is the grand entrance to the Schools of Mathematics, which has many
ports, for that it has many several arts contained within the latitude of its
infiniteness: and this first is that which treats of the elements
Mathematical, not much different from those, which Euclide has recommended to
posterity. We begin with linea recta, which is made of gold or silver wire,
which is never perfectly recta, until it is in the possession of the
Mathematician Ladies: It is impossible for any student to prove dari triangulum
aequilaterum, unless every angle be equally tipped with pure ductible gold,
because there is no true demonstration where gold appears not, neither can our
young Gallants make good this principle, to wit, Omnis triangulus habet tres
angulos aequales duolus rectis, unless the basis be of gold, and the whole
triangle be pointed with Diamonds; for by the basis we are certified of the
longitude of the rest of the lines, and by the Diamonds we collect first the
equality or discrepancie of the angles, which joined together make just two
straight angles, which position rectifies the uncertain lover so, that he and
his Mistress agree in one and the same opinion of infallibility, both because
she enjoys the figure and all it contains, and he the Science or
experience of the same; but yet of all triangles, that which pleases the women
best is the equilaterall; the Isoschele is also in much request, because it
has one angle equal to one, and only one different; but the Scalenall
triangle is of least esteem, because it consists both of three unequal
lines, and as many angles, and therefore requires most time and trouble in the
verification of the same; yet none of them all are refused, because they are
all beautified with a diamondall luster.

Of all angles, the acute angle is most in request, and therefore he that
presents his offerings acutely and quick, is accounted the best Mathematician;
for the obtuse angle, it is the signification of a dull and slow Mathematitian;
and for this reason we never prove any thing by the externe angles, which in
triangles are continually obtuse, but only what is contained within the figure
evident to be seen.

But yet you must know, that we treat not of lines indivisible as Euclide does,
but De lineis substantialibus, quae quanto grossiores, tanto sunt meliores,
beatioresque illi, qui easdem adferunt; for this reason we treat not of
superficies, ut superficies est proprie, but of superficies solidata, because
we allow of nothing but what is solid, and consequently trinam habet
dimensionem: Now to come to a quadrate, which is thus defined, Quadratum est
figura quadrifariam angulosa, cujus anguli sunt aequales, and recti.

This is never practiced, but when four pretendents or studious amorists
solicit the same female in an equality of engagement; and therefore we term
them a quadrat, because their liberal gifts are still presented, as I may say,
in aequilibrio, not one exceeding his corrivall; but when one out-strips the
rest in generosity, we constitute this quaterniall crew to be a quadrangle,
and no longer a quadrat, ever preferring him that is most bountiful and quick
in freeness of hand and heart before the rest, and because he extends the
quadrilaterall company, and draws them on to imitate his actions, we style
him the acute angle.

But now to speak of a difficult in Mathematics, let us speak of a circle,
which being defined, Omnium figurarum capacissimam esse, therefore most
chargeable to be filled, but the most cost is required, when you will attempt
to find out the center; for this being the chief secret in all this Class,
and only in the women's power to teach and instruct, and again since it cannot
be found out, but by the semidiameter, which is very apt to err, unless your
Mistress hold your compass and rule, and guide your pen, otherwise it is
impossible to draw a straight line from the circumference to the center which
you desire, because the place, where you draw, is in perpetual agitation; and
therefore to effect this, it is necessary you see her exceedingly, otherwise
you shall not obtain her favor or your own freedom; nay, when by her
direction, you have found out the center, yet when you experience again, you
must either bring your reward, or else you labor in vain to find out the same
point. At the end of this discourse we came to the next Port, which was thus
superscribed: If you in Fencing practice do take gust,
And would at pleasure give a secret thrust: Loves Fencing School.

Let your bright Rapier still well pointed be
With a rich Diamond or a golden fee.


This is, said Cupid, our Fencing School, whose wards, thrusts, back-blowes,
venies, wipes, touches, crosse-cudgelling, and under-pointed agility depend all
of Mathematical angles, such as we have abovementioned; very eager and
boisterous are this active train, but yet there is no danger of homicide: the
order is, that men shall fence against women, who although they chance to make
a thrust against these weaker vessels, and pierce them at least two handful
deep, yet the wound is not mortal, because the men have provided a plaster
of yellow salve, and a pretty quantity of unguentum argenteum, the application
of which not only eases her of the wound she felt, but so restores her, that
she is ready for a second combat: and observe how deep the man makes the
incision or penetration, so deep does the woman dive into his purse, for the
marrow of a fat purse is the best and speediest remedy that can be.

We passing by accompanied with this discourse, I perceived the door half
open, whether it were for benefit of the air, or to be beheld, I am not
certain, but I made use of the opportunity, and dulling my pace, I espied
within (as Cupid had related) men to women, and women to men, extreme
beautiful and handsome; the men were furnished with Bucklers, some of plate,
and some of Gold, with bluntish Rapiers in their hands, yet not so blunt, but
they would enter the most difficult and invincible part of any woman there
present: the women had darts headed with Cupids gold, which the women casting
at them, made them half frantic to embrace them; but the Law was, that no man
should close, but he must first deliver up his Buckler into the possession of
his adversary, which they observed, all that made their thrusts and closed upon
it, and at the departure or retiring I marked that the man returned without his
Buckler, and with the point of his Rapier hanging downwards, to signify he
was overcome. Cupid would not permit me to make any longer observation, by
reason of our abreviated time, but commanded me to accompany him, and when I
had overtaken him, we were just against another port caractered with this
exhasticon.

Arithmetic does teach you how to sum, Loves School of Arithmeticke.

Then bring full bags if here you mean to come.
Here in Addition men negotiate;
To girls Subtraction we appropriate:
Multiplication is the Gallants Guide,
Whose quick Division is the women's pride.
This is Arithmeticke, said Cupid, of which you have seen some experience in
other schools: I have nothing more to show you here, but that the chief rule
in this Class, is that which is called the golden number: the rest is a
procession founded upon this matter, which is made by proportions, or rather
proportionalities, which grow into grosser sums by an equal ascent continue
accrescendo; but for those which Euclide calls proportionalitates discretae,
we meddle not with them nisi tam per accidens quam per accedens: verbi gratia:
quando homo indiscretus discrete nobis pecunias annumerat, as, to declare the
case more plainly, when a civil or maudlin-drunkard (for we detest the very
sight of a bedlam-drunkard) has lost his wits in a quart pot, and meeting one
of my Girls, intreates her to keep his ring, rich hat-band, or purse until
next morning, and he immediately fettered in Morphean bands sleeps away the
memory of all his last nights work.

He that will be of most account, must sum in figures of eight and nine, and
the nearer he comes to thousands, millions, and so is graduated and seated
supra convexum gazophylacii, but yet not admitted tangere concavum, nisi sit
fortassis onustus: but he that brings his sums or accounts cast up in nothing
but ciphers, is rewarded like the Poet, that presented a Book of verses to his
Emperor, who perusing them, and not finding one perfect verse throughout the
whole Volume, rewarded him with so many blows upon the back as there were
verses in the Book. This said, we came to another Port, that gave me notice of
the practice within, being thus portured: Loves School of Geometry.
Geometry is never abused worse,
Then when the Student has forgot his Purse;
But he that brings his full's a demi-god,
For that is our Geometritians Rod.


This, said Cupid, is the School of Geometry, which we will also pass by:
here is not practiced the Science of Mega-cosmography, but the perfect
lineaments of Microcosme, its longitude, latitude, and profundity; for the
liberal Geometritian, if he make use of his golden Rod, may measure both the
Marinall and terrestrial parts of his prostrate Lindabrides without
difficulty; it is not to be understood, that he shall only use this Rod, but
let him give it to her, and she will direct him, so that he shall measure her
by the foot, nay palm by palm, inch by inch, where and how his lust or liking
fancies; neither has he cause to fear she will start, because this Rod
charms her to be still and quiet, as the great Globe of the earth; for it is
like the Mercurian wand, that with the first touch convinces her to rest as if
she were in a rapture. If you will know the true Geometrical distance betwix
her and your self, first hang a gold or other rich chain over her head, and
you will really believe she is immoble, and has taken root just under the
chain or gemme that has enamoured her senses, because her affection chains
her to the admiration of that precious shrine; then take your Astro labe,
Quadrant, Jacobs-staffe, or rather Jacobs stuff, or what Astronomicall
Instrument else useful in this Science, and take the elevation of her
Pole-starre, then proceed per gradus cosmimetrales, so ascend till you come
directly over her, and you shall find by the cadencie of the line, that you
are no more distant from her, then she is from the chain; therefore hang the
chain about her neck, and three to one she will bestow a hanging of you.

As my attention sailed on with the wind of Cupids, no less avaritious then
obscene discourse, there arose a stronger gale, that presently grew into a
contrary storm, pleasant, as I imagined, when it first pulsed at my ear,
because it was music, but it seemed not so congruent to Cupids Courtiers and
darlings, because I perceived that those pretenders were repelled with
disdainefull speeches, as full of scoffs as dislike; and without meditation
Cupid desired me to follow him into the School of Music, which he hastily
entered, and I as speedily, having not liberty to peruse the Motto, that
adorned the great Port, that gave entrance to divine Harmony; but yet for all
my haste I glanced my eyes upon the inscription, where I remember it began:
Loves School of Music.
Money is the best Music. --

But what ensued, I never became capable to forget. Here appeared a great
tumult, which was, as I apprehended, caused by a company of threadbare
sharkes, that had Harpes, Viols, Lutes, Citernes, Cornets, and many other
instruments, by which I judged them Musicians, and wondering at the novelty, I
desired Cupid to declare the reason why these men were debarred of entrance
into the Hall of Loves Music; he resolved my doubt, saying, although these
appear Musicians, yet they appertain not to the Quire of Loves Musicians, but
to that of Bacchus; for since the object of Music Non constat solum ex
numeris, quos arithmetica docet, sed ex numeris sonoris; and these
Bagge-pipecheek'd warriers, these fidling sottish trencher-scrapers, whose
object is not the perfection of this Science, but a desire to gain a trifle to
make themselves drunk, we exclude them out of our Train, as fit retainers to
the Phalernian God.

For it is daily seen, that if they rub a crown or so out of the guts of
their base and trouble, or blow a beggary echo into the ears of their
auditors, which ends with a what will you bestow; if they receive their
expectation, it only serves to conduct them through the next Tavern; for a
Tavern as it is their mint house, where their money is coined, so is it their
furnace to melt it over again and again, even until half a crown comes to
a half penny; they will shoot a chained bullet, called a pair of groats, at
the French But, and will hit the white so often until they cannot hit their way
home: Sack is their choice Nectar, and they love it better than their own
souls; they will never leave Sack, until they have sacked out all their
silver, nay nor then neither, for they will pawn their crowds for more Sack:
Claret is a noble Wine, for that it is of the same complexion that Noblemens
coats be of, and therefore to furnish their noses with a hud of this tincture
they scarletfie that promontory, to signify they are such or such Noblemens
Musicians: the noise of glasses is a sweet harmony, which they delight much in;
and when Bacchus is pleased to see sport, then they begin to play the Tailors,
cutting and slashing one another faces in the newest fashion, and these are
such, whom you see, and whom the Statute confirms to be vagabundall Rogues.
Yet I do not condemn all for these Bacchanalians sakes; because there are
many that dedicate the interest of their instruments to my employment, making
their way through my Mother Venus her Court, and all such Devotists we enlist in
the Hall of Music: for you must consider, that our Laws constitute peace and
quiet repose; why should we then expose our selves to the imtuous fury of
ebriety? you know many Drunkards had rather part from their bodies blood, then
their purse; why should we therefore desire such company, if we only desire
the blood of the purse, which they only desire to bestow upon the blood of the
grape? The greatest enemy we have is the Usurer, and the next is this sort of
hide bound Lovers, who are a petty kind of usurers, they make use of their
gains to make themselves frantic; and therefore instead of teaching them our
ut, re, mi, we say, out reeling minstrels; who retire in this distemper to the
Man in the Moon, and from thence to the naked man, where they leave their
shirts in pawn to play the purse-bearer in behalf of the reckning.

And in speaking this I perceived the poor shrugging pedicularians gang away
like so many gagling wild Geese; at whose departure a sweet warbling Girl
standing in a Balcone, tuned her Lute, and sung this Ode: Poor silly sots your
sterved love is cool,
Your flat tuned crowds of Music true do fail,
Such empty airs are noisome in this School,
Your Codrian cringes cannot here prevail;
Those wooden stops we hold in disesteeme,
At Tavern doors Camelions be more bold:
None are admitted here, none here are seen,
But those that play upon the keys of gold.
Why did you knock at this our Music door?
The Port, blind beetles, see, it open stands;
I knew, such stammering argued you were poor,
And therefore practiced thus your begging hands.
Had you dull asses brought your golden load,
Loves smiles had guided all your gayness in,
And sung your cheerful purse a lightning ode,
As absolution from that weight of sin;
But you, like rag-a-muffin-torne-caps came,
Without that feeling fee, which others use;
Therefore depart like Soldiers that are lame;
You must not us, but we must you abuse.
What can such riming rablers do or say?
Give musing Music to a Lady sweet,
This is not giving, but they take away
Rest, honor, fame, and other virtues meet.
The sweetest tune is that of grossest pounds,
It recreates our ears with pleasant glee.
The Organ yields high melodious sounds,
Only for Churches fit, not so for me.
The mettle of the airy voices there,
Are to a mighty high extolment raised;
But certify your silly selves, that here
The voices of the mettle's only praised.
He that to us gives freest, gains all,
That musicks prince, who plays the golden note;
When this attractive Orpheus does but call,
We cannot choose but on his goldings dote.


This pleasant Damsel had no sooner ended her melody, but the knot of roguery
was quite vanished, and I began to ask of Cupid, what Method they observed, to
which he answered in this manner:

Our Gamoth is very compendious, nothing is necessary in it but el a mi, which
if you understood Spanish, you would easily apprehend, for it signifies, he to
me; and this is also the cliffe which the men practice in; no note is more
profitable and better liked, then a brief, which my females delight in for the
quick signification the word imports, although the note amongst other Musicians
is extended to a whole time; a semi-briefe is better allowed of for that which
belongs to time, although of less esteem for the verbal signification; a
crotchet is good, if it make up the time with crowns instead of notes: quavers
and semiquavers, and such like are to be admitted with much caution, by reason
of the trembling condition which is ordinarily annexed to the airy practice
thereof; Minums are as much as mine or munera; and therefore the women do not
say minum, but mine, hum: our songs are all plain, and tangible. Many sorts of
Instruments we use; the women play upon the Ho-boy, when they see their
Gallants well furnished with gold, which they use for a call: Corrivals play
upon the Cornet, which is a manifest sign their Mistress has cornuted them:
and when they have consumed their store, they are forced to play a mournful
Ditty upon the Band-whore; the Virgin-all is an instrument which my Damsels can
scarce play of, because their strings are so apt to break; we have very few
men, but they are experienced in the Vi-hole, and when they have almost spent
their substance, then they begin to practice the Base: the men practice much of
the Virgin-holes, which yields sweet Harmony if the wire be of gold, and the
keys of Diamond, and with this they adjoyne the Bag-pipe, because it is a
wind-instrument, and never plays but when the bag is full.

Many other instruments play the Lovers diapason, but we cannot stay to number
them and their properties, because our time is almost expired. Here is a
Class, a species of Arithmeticke, which is of Hostesses and Vintners, which
instructs them how to make their accounts to their guests; and casting my head
aside, I saw the door cast into my eyes these villainous Rimes: Hosts and
Vint' neresse look to your score, Loves School of Inne-keepers and Vintners.

For a pint set a pottle, for a jugge chalk on four;
If your guests they be lodgers, Love gives you a curse,
If before it be morning you pick not their purse.


I made toward the door, intending to see some of their deceits, but Cupid
detained me, saying, it was a School of reckning, and therefore he were best
take heed; for of all my University there is not a more unconscionable place,
so that if you enter, you shall not return, until you pay them their desire,
because you shall no sooner appear within their walls, but they begin to wait
and watch what you call for, and if you be mute, they will take you for a
fool, and so either uncap you, or uncloake you, and send you back the same way
you enter: This heard, my journey was stayed, but yet my desire was something
warm, insomuch, that I warily peeped in, where I saw such an infinite
multitude of fat Hostesses and lean guests, that I ceased to wonder at Cupids
words, and began to admire the strange posture they appeared in; for every one
lifted up their hands, and, as I thought, said the Lords Prayer; but attending
with a more diligent ear, they continually repeated nothing of it but, Give us
this day; which when I heard, I imagined they prayed for my coming; but
without delay I slided by, and so Cupid conducted me within a short space to
the great Class of Astrology, whose Perch gave this instruction, saying; Loves
School of Astrology.
Astrologia Amoris.

And upon the next Port (which stood a little distance off) all studded with
Diamonds in-laid with Gold, that shined as if they had been so many Stars,
and I come to the stellified firmament, were exposed to the view of all, that
desired to prove their fortunate or sinistrous chance, these verses in fair
Golden Characters, and thus distically distnguished.

Who is it comes? who knocks? or who appears?
The Angel of Gold is he, that moves our Spheres.
He that comes here to know his happiness,
In golden language must himself express.
Therefore Astrology prognosticates
Of rich and poor the various change and states.
I was not pricked on with such speed to have entered the last rehearsed
School, but I was as slow to see and understand the knowledge of this, because
my poverty suggested unto me an assured prognostication of my unhappy
success, yet Cupid comforting me with hopes of change, willed me to forget my
present state, and to follow him: I obeyed his persuasion, and entered the most
glorious concave that ever eyes beheld, for it was made in manner of a sphere,
gilded with Stars of oriental Gold, whose intermedium was skie-colour
enamill, rough-casted with all sorts of rich stones: I had not been a minute,
but I imagined my self to live in the midst of the torrid Zone, and mounting
up my sight, I saw the Sun directly in my Zenith, and in the middle of Aries,
for that it was betwixt the sixteenth degree of that same Sign, being then
equinoctial, and I had a strong conceit, that the very heat which the
resplendency of this Sun caused, had even boiled my brains, had not Cupid
taken me by the hand, and conducted me to a more temperate Climate; for he
brought me to a fair Ebony Table, whereon was placed a Book in folio magno,
which I perceived to be a memorial of successes, or Astronomicall rules for
ensuing matters, and without further pause I unfoulded the volume, in whose
Frontispiece this Title was contained:

A Prognostication of various Events, calculated properly for the Meridian of
Lovers. THis Prognostication, said Cupid, since it is general, not only
prenotes a firm judgment of one or two years, but is infallibly certain to
the consummation of the world; and because I my self know entirely and
intensely the force of those refulgent Diamonds, the Stars, that beautify the
celestial Vault, whose influence instills a golden gift into my Students
desires, therefore I have constituted, that the chiefest Planet that
predominates in my Kingdom shall be Venus, the Goddess of Beauty, and
consequently the Mother of Love, whose computation is to be made per calculum
album, seu aureum, or, as it is commonly practiced, per aureum numerum,
whereupon she threatens oblivion and disdain to the unfortunate Lover, that
cannot sum up his pretended suit by this computation.

Behold Luna, how she beatifies her aspect with a smiling countenance; her
increase promises happy success to the ponderous Lover; but if this sinner
want increase, he causes her favorable friendship to decrease; and in case
he has rivalls, let him expect the true demonstrances of his fortune the next
New Moon, because then she presents him with a pair of horns.

The Conjunctions crescent and diminishing signify, that many gallant Dames
shall increase in riches, and their adorers decrease in the purse.

The silver, golden, and gemmish Stars, are presagers of prosperity; and for
this reason the poor Lover is called disastrous, because his penury cannot
reach to the knowledge or possession of them.

You Laborers, or Husbandmen in love, have a care that you manure your ground
with good fatning, plow without bawkes, and sow thick, if you desire to reap
any fruit by your endeavors, for he that manures seldom, tilleth gowtily and
sowes the thin and light grain of promises or frivolous words, shall gather
nothing but the unprofitable weeds of denyals.

If Loves Husbandmen be married; they must observe strictly the tillage and
semination of that piece of Land that lies next to their houses; otherwise
their Wives will teach them how to ride Taurus, and hold by his head instead of
a bridle.

Close by the Sign Virgo stands Libra, to signify, that Virgo has something
to sell, but if you intend to buy of the best, bring with you your libra
argenti, and then you shall not need to dodge, but clap up your bargain with
only saying, Here is your price.

Jupiter in Virgin signifies, that Virgins had rather be broke up by noble and
rich men, then beggars, because they desire to live and lie where the influence
of treasure is; Vbi thesaurus, ibi and cor ipsarum.

Sol in Sagittario prenotes a prosperous voyage to all our Courtiers that begin
their engagements in this month, for they never shoot when Sol is in
Sagittarius his Bow, but with golden Boults, and then they are sure not only
to hit the white, but cleave the hub of their intent.

Sol in Aquario is a swimmer, and foretells that he may adventure to swim in
the Ocean of Loves embraces, who can make an Hydaspian River toward his Venus.
Quid non mortalia pectorae cogit auri sacra fames?

Venus in Ariete signifies, that Venus sells flesh, and he that brings good
store of gold, shall choose what joint he likes best in all her shambles; but he
that comes without or at most with very little, shall only carry away the
head, as an Ensign how he is esteemed.

Sol in Cancro seldom promises benevolence, but of the women's part clowdy and
obscure events, for our Astronomers prognosticate ill omen to all those that
enter whilst this aspect is in power, because it is the Solstice of liberality
amongst the men. Shut the Universities doors.

The Sextile aspect is very acceptable to the female kind, because its
Character, as you see, *, points like a bountiful Star round about, and
gives to all; which affirms, that all those that woe with this aspect, shall
arrive at the creek of their own desire and content.

The Opposition is malevolent both to poor and rich; to rich, because they
oppose themselves against the generous and laudable quality of giving; to the
poor, because they have nothing to give.

If the Gallant solicit for a conjunction, when Cancer reigns, he hardly
obtaines his wish, because the Crab continually is accompanied with vinegar
sauce, especially if the female be not extraordinarily pleased, who causes a
Pagient of Capricorn, to signify that such a lubber-fisted Gallant is held a
Monster in Cupids Doctrine: But if the Gallant pretend a conjunction when the
Rams golden Fleece and the yellow Lion present their aspects, then the female
dignifies the Rammish Gallant with the mild union of the ly-on.

He that touches the Dragons tail is in danger to be stung; therefore to avoid
this killing kind of malice, it is necessary that he hang his purse about
this Dragons neck, and whilst she plays with it, he may play with her tail.
Cupid would not permit me to pass on, but cut off the eagerness of my desire,
saying, day now approaches, and therefore we must depart, only I will show
you my Library, and there we will end. But as we went, I desired Cupid to
relate something more concerning the fixed stars, who began thus; The
constellations or figured congregations of fixed stars according to other
Astrologers are forty and eight, but in School the number is much abreviated;
we divide them into five for the women, as aggreeable to there disposition, and
other five appropriated to the men's function; those which belong to the women
are ursa major, which signifies the graver sort of my Matrones; the next is
ursa minor, which are the younger; the third is lupus, a true type of their
avaritious stomach; the fourth draco, that with her breath poisons all; the
fifth is argus, whose multiplicitie of eyes darts invincible allurements at all
that come within her view, and also sets vigilant eyes on all, that none shall
escape her.

The masculine are auriga, or as we term it, auri-gaza, that drives Boots to
be unloaded at Dracos closet door; the second is cygnus, representing those
that are serious sollicitors for the fulfilling of their argus desire, who, at
every departure from their fair ones, sing forth the death of their purse,
which nimble-ey'd Argus shows a Mercurian slight; the third is crater, a
standing dish of gold, always fit for lupus stomach, the fourth is corona
australis, representing the noble-minded suitor, who would make ursa major a
Queen, if his power were correspondent to his will; the last is corona
borealis, given freely to ursa minor, to appease her choler or coldness, and
to make her eight bright eyes benevolent to the messenger.

Loves Library.
In speaking of this we entered Loves Library, which was very spacious, and
completely filled with great variety of Books of all faculties, and in all
kinds of Volumes.

These, said Cupid, are not called Books, but Tomes, or Sections, for that our
courtly Dames study only to exect or cut off their threadbare curtesans, and
induce fresh and new furnished ones: And viewing these Tomes, saw chained up in
golden linkes two Spanish Poets, Dante and Cost, and an English one called
Messenger, which Messenger they entertain, hoping still to see the good and
grateful news of a well-filled purse, but if it prove contrary to their
expectation, they command shaving Shirly to make him acquainted with Sir
Philip, and so they flirt him into Arcadia to sing a lamentation for his lost
Mistress.

There was also Shakespeere, who (as Cupid informed me) creepes into the women's
closets about bed time, and if it were not for some of the old out-of-date
Grandames (who are set over the rest as their tutoresses) the young sparkish
Girls would read in Shakespeere day and night, so that they would open the
Book or Tome, and the men with a Fescue in their hands should point to the
Verse.

I proceeded to another rank of Philosophers, and there was Philosophia de
Pla, whom they read as a nominall, for the vicinity that Pla has to Plate; and
after this was their Divine, Plato, a nominall that instructed the same
Doctrine: there were Rubeus and Aureolus, those golden nominalls; also More and
Durandus, to signify, that those which read More, must give more, for
according to the extenuation of the gifts, the persons were assured of their
durance, and this was the reason that More and Durandus were set together, for
^ee that reads More, gives more, and he that gives more, is a Durand or of
durance, but he that gives not, shall not be endured in Cupids Schools.
Infinite was the number of Tomes, which I will omit for brevities sake, only
remembering a few to give the Reader notice, that as they began so they ended,
intending still upon covetousness. There was Tollet, a tollendo, the women's
Author; Asinus aureus, a present for the women, which is interpreted to be a
rich simplitian, more full of gold then wit; Catena aurea, full of bracelets
and such like riches proper to the women's possession; and Bartholomeus Anglicus
de lapidibus preciosis.

These and many other Tomes were imprinted in several places; those which were
Authors for the women, were all imprinted in Capua, a capiendo; and those which
belonged to the men, and treated of Jewels and such like, were imprinted in the
City of Valencia; the other, that treated of gold and silver, had their
impression in the I Will of Weight.

Now, said Cupid, you have seen, what this short time could benefit you with,
and all that I can do, is to reconduct you to the place where I first found
you: Thus we returned, Cupid accompanying me until I came to Loves Garden
gate; and in this passage space I made use of the remnant of time which was
remaining in asking what vacations they observed: to which he answered, O what
a pitiful University should I have, if I permitted Vacations! we disagree in
this point from other Universities, for that we have no Vacations, for the
great hurt they cause both to male and female, which would be employed in
idleness and fruitless actions, contrary to the tenure of our institution;
and therefore what we begin, we prosecute, and allow of no cessation.

But that our Tomes may always be employed, I have ordained many hours of
recreation, and as many sorts of pastime: As to play at ball, the men providing
such balls as that which was cast amongst the Goddesses in Ida's Valley; and
the custom is, that men post and throw, and the women keep and catch; for the
women catch excellent well, but throw as bad; and the men throw, well and catch
very ill. They play much at Nine-holes, but the men bowl continually; and when
they enter, they forfeit a certain sum of money, it being the general rule
with us, that no man can enter without loss. Here also is Artilery, and the
women are the Butts, but the most expert Archer is he that shootes with
golden-headed Arrows, who hits the mark every shoot. We use Dice, and
sometimes Tables, and if the men adventure against the women at Tiktak, they
are certain to lose all they play for, and if the men lose all, then the women
desire them to play at Passage amongst themselves. Noddy and Catch-foole are
their chief Games at Cards. Shoovell-boord is also in great request, and very
acceptable to the Women, because their lap is the Box, and all is theirs that
falls therein.

Whilst my fancy gave audience to the God thus discoursing, and as I imagined
tracing on toward the place of our parting, a boy with a Towell and a Basin of
water opened my chamber door, and avvaked me out of this Dream, when he said
it was seven of the clock, at which I arose, and vested, I turned down the
pillow where I found a branch of Laurel under my head, which one had laid
there, who as soon as the party had given me my mornings salutation, desired
me to declare my dream, if perchance I had any that night: I desired her to
excuse me for the present, and within few days I would accomplish her
desire, because my dream was true; and immediately enclosing my self in my
Closet, I began this relation which you have heard concerning Loves Schools,
from whence proceeds the base and covetous desire of Interest.

FINIS.

