DEVS NOBISCVM.

A SERMON Preached upon A Great Deliverance at SEA: With the NARRATIVE of the
Dangers and Deliverances.

With the Name of the Master and those that suffered: Together with the name of
the Ship and Owners.

By William Johnson, Dr of Divinity; Chaplain and Sub-Almoner to His SACRED
MAJESTY.

PSALM. 40.2, 3. He brought me out of the horrible pit, out of the mire and
clay: and set my feet upon the rock, and ordered my goings.

And he has put a new song in my mouth, even a thanksgiving unto our God.

The second Edition, Corrected and Enlarged.

London: Printed for John Crook, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

IMPRIMATUR,

Joh. Hall. R. P. D. Humfredo Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Jan. 9. 1663.
TO THE Honorable Society of the East-Country Merchants resident in England,
Dantzick, Koningsberg, and elsewhere.
Worthy Friends,
I Am led to honor your Society, not by the hasty choice and election of the
Will, which oftentimes is transported with passion, and loves without any
merit; but by the rational and understanding part, which has a long time
perfectly known and understood your many excellencies, that I cannot choose but
love and honor your Society. Neither are you beholding to any for the respect
they give, or rather pay you, but to your own merit, to which it is due. You
are not like Solomon's Merchants, those I mean that brought over Apes and
Peacocks; but you furnish this Island with such staple Commodities, that ye
have made London as famous as that City of Tire, that crowning City, whose
Merchants are Princes, and whose Trafickers are the honorable of the Earth.
There is as much difference between the trade of those worthy Merchants that
furnish us with Spices, Plums and Taffaties, and our East-country trade that
brings us in Masts, materials for Cordage, and necessaries for Shipping, as
there is in Religion between Ceremonies and Fundamentals. Spices and such
things are pretty Ornaments and Ceremonial supplements to our well-being: But
our East-Country Commodities are those which do constitute the Being, and lay
the foundation of a rich and flourishing Commonwealth. And without them, if not
the Art, yet the practice of Navigation would be lost among us. For we cannot
sail to the Indies in a Nutmeg, embarque our selves in Cinnamon, make a Mast of
a Race of Ginger, and wing our Ships with Taffaty. No, it is our East-Country
Trade that does furnish us with these absolute necessaries for Navigation, and
is indeed the very principle and foundation of all Merchandise, and like a
master-wheel in a Watch, sets all other on work. So that what goods are brought
into this Nation, may be said principally and primarily to be imported by your
aid and assistance, though fetched hither by the hands of others.

This is a general good, and obliges every one to honor you: But I have an
Argument of an higher nature, which does dispute and convince my affections
into an high esteem and reputation of your Society.

Your Company in Prussia were the first that called me to the exercise of my
Ministerial function, being the first charge that ever I undertook to preach
to: And had I not been forced to come into England by an Obligation which I
could not in conscience break, I had rather have parted with my Life then them:
for they were, as the Apostle writes to the Philippians, my hope, my joy, and
crown of rejoicing in the Lord Jesus.

That I had a desire again to come unto them, witness those many sufferings,
losses, shipwracks, fears, streights, dangers, deaths that I did undergo in
that second adventure; and for the Love I bear them, am willing to repeat them
over again, not in words only, but in real sufferings, so I might be any way
serviceable for the good and salvation of their Souls.

But some will say to me, Why would you venture to Sea again, seeing you have
so often found the Ship unsafe, the Mariners fearful, the Winds treacherous,
and the waves rebellious?

I answer, If God call me to it, I shall not fear the frowns of Neptune, nor
the crooked face of an angry tempest. It was a brave Spirit of that Roman, who
being to undergo a dangerous Voyage at Sea for the Service of his Country,
being dissuaded from it, made this answer, (...), It is necessary for me to
sail, but it is not necessary for me to live. And it was a noble and virtuous
resolution in another, who said, if he were commanded to put forth to Sea in a
Ship that neither had Masts nor Tackling, he would do it; and being asked what
wisdom that was, replied -- The wisdom must be in him that has power to
command, not in him whose conscience binds to obey. When the service of God
calls us to hazard our lives, why should we not be willing to sacrifice them?
Quid revolvis? Deus praecipit, says Tertullian. If Christ should call me to
Sea again, why should I be more afraid to go aboard a stately ship, then S.
Peter was to walk upon the very waves, when Christ called him to come to him?

But seeing God would not let me go to Tarsus, but sent me back in an angry and
furious tempest, and made me a Preacher of repentance in this place, I shall
serve you in my devotions, and, as the Apostle says, make mention always of
you in my prayers, that ye may be like that wise Merchant in the Gospel, who
when he had found one Pearl of great Value, sold all and bought that Pearl,
which was the Kingdom of Heaven.

The first that sought after Christ, and (when they had found him) presented
him with gifts, were the Wise men that came from the East. They presented to
him Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh: I should be glad it might be said so of
you, that go to and from the East. I wish with all my heart, that ye would
first seek after Christ Jesus, and when ye have found him out, being guided to
him by the star of your Faith, that then ye offer up to him the sacrifice of a
cheerful obedience, in a true and faithful Service of him; and that will be as
sweet and as acceptable to our Savior, as the gifts of those Chaldean or
Arabian Astronomers, their Gold, Frankincense and Myrrh, or all the riches of
the East.

So prays, Sirs, Your poor Orator, and humble Servant, Will. Johnson.
From my study in Warbois April 6. 1659.
A SERMON Preached Upon a great Deliverance at SEA.
Psalm. 91.15. Yea I am with him in trouble, I will deliver him and bring him to
Honor. Or,

I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him.


THis Psalm is a Psalm of Consolation, of heavenly Consolation, which is above
the joys and felicities of this world. For Spiritual joy, like a precious Jewel
set in the midst, out-shines all temporal comforts and worldly blessings. In
the whole sphere of David's Psalms there shines not a brighter Star of
Consolation. One calls it a Psalm of assurance to those that trust in God:
neither can there be a greater Cordial in grace then the assurance of Gods
love. It is like the blessing of a good Conscience, a perpetual Feast, an
abiding Comfort, a dwelling Consolation. Beza confesses, that when he had left
his own Country, and all that he had, one and thirty years, that he might more
freely serve Jesus Christ; it came to pass the first time he entered into the
public assembly, that the company did sing this Psalm: by the singing whereof,
as though he had heard God calling him in particular, he felt himself so
comforted, that he kept it ever after engraven in his heart. The Soul of man,
if it be well sanctified, might take as much pleasure in reading this Psalm, as
Adam did in walking in Paradise, even in the state of his Innocence, when the
garden was in her prime and perfection, in all her greens and sweetness. For
the beds of new-blown Roses, and banks of morning Violets, hills of
Frankincense, and mountains of Camphire, cannot be sweeter to our sense, then
this Psalm is to the Soul of an afflicted child of God. I do confess, I do love
to read it, as an hungry man loves to eat his meat; for beside the nourishment
and food I receive from it, my Soul is satisfied and ravished with divine
pleasure. For as it is a great Cordial, so it is given us in a cup of Gold, and
this blessed fountain of Consolation runs to us in Silver streams of divine
Eloquence. Mollerus calls it Pulcherrimum exemplar Eloquentiae, a beautiful
picture and pattern of divine Eloquence. Look over the whole Psalm, and you
shall find it every where enriched with sweet Allegories, and adorned with
delicious Metaphors, which the holy Spirit uses, to present the dearness and
love of God to his afflicted Children, that they might be not only comforted,
but delighted with his sweetness, and enamored with his goodness. How most
elegantly is Gods care of the safety of his children presented to us in divine
Rhetoric, verse 4. He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings
thou shall trust? The very same Allegory does our Blessed Savior sanctify
with his own lips, when he bewails the present sin, and the approaching ruin
of Jerusalem: Luke 13.34.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even
as an hen gathers her chickens under her wings, but ye would not? The
greatest Emblem of love and safety in all Nature. And as if this had not been
kindness enough, God further promises, verse. 11. that he will send his own
royal guard, the Militia of Heaven, his holy and glorious Angels, to be our
Guardians, He shall give his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy
ways; they shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against
a stone. Even as a tender Mother has a care of her Sucking child, or as a
Nurse cherishes her Children. And as if that had been too little, he himself
will be with them not in their high estate only, but in their meanest
condition. I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him and honor him.

My Text consists of two parts: 1. The Estate and Condition of Gods Children on
Earth, which is a troubled and afflicted Condition; they are in troubles. 2.
God's care and love to his Children in that condition, expressed by a threefold
promise.


First, there is Promissum praesentiae, a promise of his presence, I will be
with him, and according to the old Translation set down in the present tense,
yea I am with him in trouble; as God's promises are often in the Scripture, to
show both the speed and certainty of the things promised.

Secondly, Promissum liberationis, a promise of deliverance; I will deliver him.

Thirdly, Promissum recompensationis, a promise of reward and recompense; I
will honor him. And what can an afflicted soul desire more in his troubles
then the Presence of God to comfort him, the Power of God to deliver him, and
the Goodness of God to recompense him? Who would not be miserable on such
conditions, and afflicted on such promises?

First, of the State and Condition of Gods Children here upon earth, which is a
troubled state, an afflicted condition. Few and evil have the days of my life
been, Genesis 47.
says good old Jacob, and yet he was the chosen and beloved child of God. Romans
9.15.
Jacob have I loved, says God, but Esau have I hated; and yet this chosen one,
and precious vessel of Election, was filled up to the brim with the very gall
and bitterness of affliction. He was sequestered from all the comforts of this
life, banished from his own house and home, forced to flee from the knees of
his aged and dying Father, and likewise from the bosom of his beloved Mother,
hated of his Brother Esau, going on Pilgrimage with his Staff and Scrip only;
sometimes the cold Earth was his bed, a Stone his pillow; Genesis 28.12.
and after all this (which was before it in bitterness) he was forced, for a
mere livelihood, and sustenance, to serve an Idolater in a strange land many
years. Nothing sure can be more grievous to a true Child of God.

And as we have seen this in Jacob, in his person, so we may behold it in his
Posterity; for even the Sons of Jacob possessed their Father's sorrow as well
as his substance, and were Inheritors of both. But to tell you of all their
troubles and afflictions, were to lead you in a wilderness. And yet these
people were God's own people, his portion and the lot of his inheritance, his
anointed and chief treasure, and as the Prophet Zechary calls them, Z^ch. 1^ c.
the friends of God. There were no people dwelt so near, and in the very bosom
of God, as these people; and yet no people felt so much the hand of God, not in
embraces, but chastisements.

But you will say, this was in the time of the Law, in the time of the Gospel
we shall see better days: when the day does spring from on high and visit us,
then sure we shall all be clothed with the beams of that Sun of righteousness,
and shall shine in the bright garments of joy and gladness. No, in respect of
temporal blessings it will be far worse with God's children then in the time of
the Law. Then they shall meet with days black and dark as death it self: for,
as one says ingeniously, Prosperity is the blessing of the Old Testament,
Adversity the blessing of the New. In the time of the Law the rewards of faith
and obedience were wealth and worldly prosperity; then God said to Moses, I
will make of thee a great Nation. But in the Gospel our Savior says, My flock
it is a little one. Again, in the time of the Law God blessed faithful Abraham
with a promise of plenty and abundance, All the land thou see to thee will I
give it, Genesis 13.15.
and to thy seed for ever, But now the blessings of the Gospel are quite of
another complexion, Blessed are you when you shall be persecuted for
righteousness sake: Mat. 5.10.
And again, at the 11. verse, Blessed are you when men shall revile you, and
persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil of you for my names sake. These
are the blessings of the Gospel: Persecution is the Ensign of Christianity: The
Cross in a Field of Blood are the Arms of Christ, and Afflictions are the
Sables that belong to his Coat.

When our Savior Christ went out of the World he left his Disciples this
Legacy in his last Will and Testament, Joh. 16.33.
In the world ye shall have Tribulation. This was all the Legacy our Savior
left his Disciples, he had nothing else to leave them: for Joseph of Arimathea
had begged his Body, his Spirit he had commended into the hands of God his
Father, and the Soldiers cast lots for his Garments; and what then could our
Savior leave them? Yet, he left them a Royal Legacy, for he left them a Crown,
-- but it was of Thorns; he left them a Scepter, -- but it was of Reed; he left
them a purple Robe, -- but it was of Derision; he left them likewise the rich
embroydery of his scourged Flesh, the marks and wounds of his crucified Body.
This was our Savior's Legacy, this was his Livery; and S. Paul seems to wear
it daily; Gal. 6.17.
I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus. This was the state of the
Church in the time of the Gospel; for the Spouse of Christ is black, though
comely. God will have it so for these reasons.

1. To withdraw his Children from the love of the World. It is in our very
nature to love the World: Adam is more seen in our Covetousness then in our
Concupiscence. There is a kind of Magic in the things of this life, that does
so enchant the hearts of God's dearest Children, that they cannot draw their
affections from them. Lot was a righteous Person, and yet he had no mind to
part from his wealth, and beloved Sodom: and his Wife, though she went out with
him, yet she left her self behind; she went with her feet only, not with her
affections, and therefore she could not (for her life) but she must look back
upon Sodom, though in flames, and she looked back till she could look no more.
The World is our Dinah, to which our soul so cleaves, that we are content to
part with our Rights and Privileges, with our Religion, and would be
circumcised, if we might but enjoy this our Dinah, our new-got wealth and
honor in peace. But God will not have his Children live in peace in this
World, that they may long for a better; a better World, and a better Peace.
Should we always swim in worldly pleasures, and meet with no storms and
tempests in this our vast Ocean of Prosperity, we should say with S. Peter,
Mat. 17.4.
It is good for us to be here, let us build us Tabernacles, and so think to
live here for ever. But God will have it otherwise; and therefore he keeps his
Children in this World in a vale of tears, and often leads them through
Aceldama, a field of blood and persecution, that, with Jacob, they may long for
their Father's house, and say with S. Paul, Phil 1.13.
I desire to depart and to be with Christ.

2. God will have his Children in a troubled condition, not only to make them
long for the Kingdom of Glory, but to keep them in the Kingdom of Grace. The
Valleys are more fruitful then the Hills; and the lowest estate of a Child of
God does more abound with grace and goodness then the highest Mountain of their
Prosperity. The Prophet David says of God's own People, Psalm. 78.34.
Cum occideret eos, When he slew them, then they sought him early. Strange!
that they must be slain before they seek. God is a gracious God, and would lead
us unto himself by the hand, but we will not go without a Rod. A strange
dullness, or rather perverseness in our nature, that we must be whipped into our
own happiness, and beaten into heaven. I find it likewise thus with Christ's
own Disciples in the Gospel: the first time they called upon him was in a storm
at Sea (that School of prayer) when the Ship was covered with waves, (...),
hidden in the Sea. Then they were as loud as the Wind, Mat. 8.25.
and as high as the Tempest in their devotion, Master, save us, we perish. And
I observe in the Gospel, after our Savior began to show himself unto the World
in the Office of his Ministry, the first that came to him were the Blind, the
Lame, and the Diseased. Is it not strange, that the Blind should find the way
to Christ? and that the Lame should first come to him? and that the Sick should
crawl out of their Beds to him? nay more, bring their Beds with them? Which
made our Savior say sometimes to the sick, Mar. 2.9.
Take up thy Bed and walk, It was the affliction of the Body that brought them
first to Christ, who, when they came, cured both Body and Soul. For he never
cured any that came to him of the Diseases of their Bodies, but he forgave them
their Sins, and so healed their Souls. Thy sins are forgiven thee, was the very
Physic that cured the man sick of the Palsy. It is a Salve that cures all
Diseases. Lord, forgive me my sins, and then I am sure I shall be whole. So
then, if by the infirmities of their Bodies these men gained the salvation of
their Souls, was it not happy for that man that he was born blind? good for
that man that he was lame? and health for that man that he was sick? Beloved,
we do not know when we are well; we are most happy when we think our selves
miserable, rich when we are poor, like the Church of Smyrna, and blessed when
we mourn, Mat. 5.
If nothing but poverty will bring us unto Christ, who would not willingly be
as poor as Job? If nothing but the pains of the body would bring us unto our
Savior, who would not be content to be racked with the Gout, and grownd in
pieces with the Stone? If sickness alone would save my Soul, let me be sick, as
Hezekiah was, even unto death, so I may gain eternal life. Who would not go to
heaven, though in a fiery chariot of a burning Fever?

Use 1. Seeing then afflictions are such powerful means to draw us unto Christ,
whatsoever God shall lay upon us of this sad Nature, let us bear it aequo
animo, with a quiet and even mind. But that is not enough; we must undergo it
laeto animo, with a joyful Spirit; such a spirit as S. Paul had, who rejoiced
in his bonds, and sang in prison, and which is above the common Passions of
men, being inflamed with an holy and divine Ambition, 2 Cor. 11. we shall find
him triumphing in his sufferings, glorying in his infirmities, and exalting
himself in his abasement. Even as Hezekiah in the pride of his heart showed to
the Babylonish Ambassadors the house of his precious things, his gold and his
precious ointments, and the house of his treasure: in the same manner, but more
holy, with the same passion of mind, but better sanctified, does S. Paul, in
the same Chapter, show unto the world the rich treasure of his sufferings, his
frequent perils, his hunger, his cold, his bonds, his imprisonments, his whips,
his scourges, his shipwracks, his nakedness. These were Saint Paul's riches,
these were his precious things: His bonds were dearer to him then the golden
chains of Hezekiah, his prison of higher price in his esteem then the house of
his treasure, and his nakedness of more value with the Apostle then all the
wardrobe of the King of Judah. For ye may perceive, in this Chapter, he counts
up his sufferings, as a rich man counts up his Estate and Substance. So much,
says the Merchant, I have at Sea, so much in the City, so much in City, so
much in the Country. So does the Apostle reckon up his sufferings; In perils at
Sea, in perils in the City, in perils in the wilderness. This was Saint Paul's
stock, this was his wealth and treasure. So that this Chapter seems to me to be
the rich Inventory and Sum of S. Paul's sufferings. Thus I have shown you with
what cheerfulness the Apostle did embrace the afflictions of this life. But we
must go a step higher; not only to welcome these good Angels, (for so I think I
may call our afflictions, for they are sent to us for our good) but we must
entertain them grato animo, not only with a joyful, but a thankful Spirit. For
seeing they are such happy opportunities of grace, let us give God thanks that
he has afflicted us, and praise his name that he has made us miserable, and
let us magnify his goodness, that in these days he has slain us, and shed our
blood. Thus we find holy Job praising God upon a dunghill, where he was left as
naked as he came out of his Mothers womb; The Lord gave, Job 1.21.
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. This was Job's
grace, and thanks for his afflictions: And I think I may call it grace after
meat, for all was taken away. Every one can say grace before meat; whilst we
behold God's blessings with our eyes, our tongue cannot choose but praise his
name. Job's Wife could say the former part of the grace, The Lord gives,
blessed be the name of the Lord; but when all was taken away, it was, Curse
God, and die. But a true child of God gives God thanks for afflictions as well
as for blessings, and praises his name for both.

And so I have done with the first part of my Text, the state of Gods children
here upon Earth. I come now unto the second, Gods care of his children in that
condition, expressed by a threefold promise: and first, Promissum praesentiae, a
promise of his presence, I will be, or, I am with him in trouble.

But is not the Lord every where? Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, says
David, or whither shall I flee from thy presence? God indeed is every where,
not only ubique, but primo ubique, as the School calls it, chiefly and most
properly, not in part and in parcels, as accidents dwell in their subjects, but
wholly and according to himself, who is indivisible and infinite in his own
nature and essence: and this Divines call praesentia secundum essentiam, the
essential presence of God, by which he is in all things that were created by
him, even the meanest and most vile of his creatures; and yet no way
contaminated or defiled by their vileness or uncleanness: for he is in them,
not as any part of their essence, sed ut causa essendi, as the very cause and
principle of their being and essence, giving subsistence unto them, without
which they could be nothing. But this is the general presence of God: But there
is a more special presence of God. There is --

First, praesentia gloriae, the glorious presence of God, and that is in heaven,
where God sits upon his throne, enameled with the Souls of the blessed, and
walled about with glorious Angels. Not that God is more in Heaven then upon
Earth according to his divine Essence, but by fuller manifestation of his
power, and by greater dispensations of glory.

Secondly, there is praesentia gratiae, the gracious presence of God, and so he
is upon Earth with the Sons of men. And that, two ways.

First, By his internal affection, and that was eternal; and so he was with us
before we were, and was present when we were not; before we had any Being he
loved us. For he had chosen us in him, Ephesians. 1.4.
that is, in Jesus Christ, before the foundation of the world; now there is
nothing ties us so close together as love. It is said of Jonathan and David,
that their hearts were knit together, because they did burn in mutual flames of
love and affection, so that they seemed to have but one heart and one soul, and
they both one man: and this is praesentia amoris, the presence of his eternal
Love.

But, secondly, he is with us by a temporal manifestation of that Love, and
that three ways: 1. By a real assumption of our nature unto himself, in the
mystery of his Incarnation, he is so with us as he is become one with us, bone
of our bone, and flesh of our flesh. Joh. 1.14. The word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us. Even as a Bride and Bridegroom are one, man and wife; so Christ
and his Saints are one: for our nature in this union was married unto Christ,
who is both God and man: even as before by the creation, Heaven and earth were
married in man, and therefore by Lactantius called Societas coeli and terrae,
the Society and fellowship of heaven and earth; so by a nearer tie in our
redemption, Heaven and Earth, Divinity and Humanity, God and Man, are joined
together: so he may well be named, as the Prophet Isaiah foretells, EMANVEL, God
with us. Secondly, he is with us by a spiritual union of himself to us. And
this was visible when the holy Ghost descended on his Disciples in cloven
tongues, like as of fire, and sat upon them on the day of Pentecost. Christ
took upon him our Nature, to make himself one with us, and then he gave us his
Spirit, which is his Nature to make us one with him. In respect of this
spiritual union, Christ compares himself to a Vine, and we are his branches; to
the Church, whereof he is the head, and we are his members: so that he is one
with us, and we are one with him. And lastly, He is with us in our troubles by
a more particular indulgence of his special favor, he is so with us as to
suffer with us; a fellow-sufferer in our afflictions, and makes himself a party
in our troubles, and puts his shoulder unto the sad burden of our sorrows. And
this is the common interpretation of the words. But we must not understand it
by any actual suffering; for that is beyond the capacity of the Divine nature.
The Godhead cannot suffer. But he is a fellow-sufferer with us in our troubles.


1. Either by his Pity which he has of us, which is an excellent virtue, but
carries this unhappiness along with it, that it makes other men's miseries our
own; therefore it is commonly called Compassion, and they are usually joined
together, Pity and Compassion.

2. Or, else, God may be said to be a fellow-sufferer with us, by a kind and
loving imputation of the afflictions of his children unto himself. For he is so
sensible of any evil or misery done unto his Saints, that he accounts them done
unto himself: Zach. 2.8.
He that touches you touches the apple of his eye; so tender is God of his
own children. But this is more plainly set down in the 9. Chap. of the Acts of
the Apostles, verses 4, and 5. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he
said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.
Why, Saul did not persecute Christ, our Savior; no, but he persecuted the
Saints, and that was all one as to persecute Christ. Saul did not pierce our
Savior's side with a spear, so that from thence issued out water and blood;
no, but he shed the blood of God's dearest children, and that was to pierce our
Saviors side, and to fetch water from his eyes, and blood from his heart. Saul
did not spit in the face of our Savior; no, but he breathed out threatenings
and slaughters against the Disciples of the Lord, and that was to spit in the
face of Christ. Saul did not rob our Savior of his robes, nor was he one of
those that cast lots for his garments, neither was he consenting unto his
death; no, but when the blood of his Martyr S. Stephen was shed, as himself
confesses, he also was standing by and consenting unto his death, and he kept
the raiment of them that slew him; and that was as grievous unto Christ, as if
he had taken his own garments from him, and had been consenting unto his death.
For what is done unto his servants, he accounts done unto himself. Whatsoever
ye do unto the least of these, ye do it unto me, Mat. 25.
says our Savior. He feels the blows that are struck at our heads, and he is
sensible of the smart of our courges; our wounds make him to bleed, our
restraint is his imprisonment, and our chains are his bonds. Thus God is become
our fellow-sufferer. O how happy are we, even in our misery, to have God to
bear a part with us, and to be as sensible of our sorrows as if they were his
own? They say there is some comfort -- Socios habuisse doloris, to have some
companions in sorrow; but that is but a natural Comfort, heathenish and pagan
consolation, and can no ways rejoice the spirit of a Christian, who would have
no body to suffer with him or for him. A good Christian would be unhappy by
himself, and miserable alone. But yet to have God our fellow-sufferer with us
is comfortable Divinity, Solidum gaudium, as the Poet speaks, and comfort in
which there is some bulk and substance. -- For if God be with us, who dare be
against us? if the Creator be on our side, sure the Creatures cannot hurt us.
The Devils tremble at his presence, and every creature loses its enmity,
sting, and power of hurting us. Thus the fire, that insatiable and devouring
Element, lost its nature when Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego were cast into
the fiery furnace. The fire which slew their enemies that cast them in, hurt
not them, but like wanton flames courted them with amorous embraces, as if they
had been flames of love. Dan. 3.27.
Not so much as an hair of their head was singed, neither were their coats
changed, nor the smell of fire passed on them; And the reason was, God was with
them. I see four men loose walking in the midst of the fire, and have no harm,
and the form of the fourth is like the Son of God, ver. 29. Again, water is
Barbarum Elementum, as Cato calls it; yet it could do nothing against the
Disciples of Christ whilst he was with them. Mat. 8.25.
The winds began to blow, and the waves arose, even so much that they covered
the Ship; But when they saw Christ was there, and heard his voice, for he
rebuked them, the winds became dumb, and the obedient waves bowed themselves in
a calm.

Let this serve for an Use of consolation to God's Children, that he is present
with them in their troubles, nothing can hurt them. The very Heathens thought
themselves safe if they carried their Gods along with them in their journeys:
Therefore Aeneas said to his Father, Tu, Genitor, cape sacra manu, patriosque
Penates.
And Rachel, when she went away from Padan-Aram, stole along with her her
Father's gods. Shall these gather such comfort to themselves from the supposed
presence of their gods, gods which indeed are no gods, wooden gods (I may say)
and timber Deities; and shall not we rejoice and be glad, even in our Sorrows,
when we remember that the God of Heaven and Earth is with us? I am with him in
trouble. If God be with us, what need we fear what man can do unto us? Nemo te
laedat nisi qui Deum vincat, says holy Anselm, None can hurt us unless they
can first conquer God, overcome Omnipotency, and slay Immortality, lead the
Almighty Captive, and confound all the Host of Heaven, a thousand, yea
thousands of Angels. For if our eyes were opened in our troubles, as God opened
the eyes of Elisha's servant, we should see horses and chariots of fire, even
more with us then those against us; for God is with us.

I am with him in trouble.
2. And so I pass from the first part of the Promise to the second, which is
Promissum liberationis, a promise of deliverance; I will deliver him.

God's presence is a great blessing, but can we not enjoy him but in a troubled
condition? Can we not taste of the happiness of his presence without the sour
sauce of affliction? The sweetest things lose their pleasantness whilst they
are mixed with bitterness. God fed the People of Israel with Manna, which was
pleasant food; but it was in the Wilderness, and that was the leaven which
sowred it. God to be with us, is an happiness beyond our merit; but to enjoy
him only in troubles, renders even the gracious presence of God less acceptable
to our sense and natural affections. God therefore, who knows we are but flesh
and blood, strengthens our weakness with a second promise of deliverance; I am
with him in trouble, and I will deliver him.

This deliverance is the effect of his presence, and the very work of his pity
and compassion. For when I told you but now, that God had such pity and
compassion upon his afflicted Children, as to be, and suffer, with them, we
must not understand this secundum affectum passionis, according to any
affection or passion, which cannot be in the Divine Nature, but secundum
effectum, according to its effect and operation, which is deliverance. As a man
that does truly pity his afflicted brother, does not only grieve and suffer
with him in his affections, but does ease and deliver him. And this is the
fruit and excellency of pity, and this only is in God; I will deliver him.

God will not leave his Children in endless miseries; they may wander many
years in the Wilderness, but at length he will bring them to the Land that
flows with Milk and Honey. He will not have his Children always dwell in the
Vale of Tears, but he will bring them to the Mountains of Joy and Gladness. He
gives them beauty for ashes, Isa. 61.3.
the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of gladness for the spirit of
heaviness; Thus he delivered Joseph from the stocks, Jeremy from the prison,
the common place of his despised Prophets; he will bring Jacob, banished Jacob,
home again to his Father's house, and he shall both enjoy his Father's blessing
and inheritance. Neither did he return empty, but brought his Sheaves with him,
Wives and Children, Menservants and Maidservants, Sheep and Oxen, and in that
abundance, that he begins to wonder at himself, being amazed at his own
happiness, and astonished at the goodness of God to him, as we may guess by
that expression, Genesis 32.10.
For with my staff have I passed over this Jordan, and now I am become two
Bands: But above all is that great example of Jonah, who was cast into the Sea,
and swallowed up by a Whale. We are wont to say at Sea, when a man is drowned,
he is not only dead but buried: and besides that, he was entombed in a new
Sepulcher, where I believe never man lay so long before; and yet behold, after
three days the Resurrection of Jonah. Who would have thought to have seen Jonah
again a Preacher of repentance in Nineveh? Well, cast me into the Sea, yea let
the Mountains fall upon me, put me in any condition, I will never despair when
I remember Jonah.

And now this being the first Lord's day after my Anniversary Observation of my
great deliverances at Sea, give me leave, as David says, Psalm. 22.2
to give thanks unto God in the great Congregation, and I shall praise him
before much People.

I have, for the testimony of a good Conscience, and to preach the Gospel
beyond the Seas, suffered many adverse things. I can say with S. Paul, but I
speak in all humility of soul, only to the glory of God, and out of
thankfulness to his name for my great and many deliverances, I have been in
perils of Waters, in perils of Robbers, 2 Cor. 11.
in perils by my own Countrymen, in perils by Strangers, in perils in the
City, in perils in the Sea, in perils amongst false Brethren; In weariness and
painfulness, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in cold, and almost
nakedness; In prison after a strict and close manner, in deaths often: twice
have I suffered shipwreck; two nights and two days have I lain upon a Rock in
the deep, several times all hope of life being taken away. Yet, blessed be God,
he has made me a Preacher of his great mercy and deliverance this day. If the
Lord himself had not been on our side, Psa. 124.3.
we may well say, If the Lord himself had not been on our side when the waves
rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick, yea, the waters had drowned
us, and the stream had gone over our head. But, blessed be his name, he has
brought us out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and established our
going.

So that I may truly say, in the words of my text, He was with me in my
troubles, he has delivered me; and I Will add the other clause, he has honored
me, in making me, the meanest of his Servants, a Preacher of his Word, and a
Preacher unto you this day.

Use. Seeing then we have this assured promise, let us wait with patience God's
own time for our deliverance; as it is said of the Prophet's vision, Though it
tarry, wait for it, Habac. 2.3.
because it will surely come, it will not tarry: Yet there is a kind of
peevishness in our nature, even in the best of us: if God does not presently
ease us of our pain, deliver us from those that oppress us, and give us all our
hearts desire, we are weary of our selves, and of our lives, and will needs
dye, like that good Prophet Elijah, the only relic of piety in his days, It
is enough now, 1 King. 19.
Lord, take away my life: Thus Rachel could not endure any longer the disgrace
of her Barneness, Give me Children, or else I die. And thus Jonah, though he
lately drank so deep a draught out of the Sea of God's goodness, and had seen
so many Miracles of God's mercy unto him, yet could not with patience endure
the affliction of a little Sunshine, but cried out, It is better for me to die
then to live. And thus it is with us in the extremity of any pain or
affliction; we call for Death, and we had rather dye then live: but if Death
should come for us, we should be loath to take him by the cold hand, and go with
him. Like that old man in the Fable, who coming from the Wood with a bundle of
sticks at his back, the Sun beating hot upon him, he began to be weary, and
flung down his burden, and called for Death to take him away: but when Death
appeared to him, and asked wherefore he called him, To help me me on, says he,
with my burden. The old man was then loath to dye. It is thus with us in our
extreme and a verse things; we call for Death, and had rather dye then live:
but if God should send Death for us, we should say to him as the old man, Help
us on with our burden; whether it be pain, sickness, poverty, nakedness,
bonds, imprisonment, the tortures of the Gout, or grindings of the Stone; any
burden rather then Death.

Do not therefore provoke the Lord with intemperate exclamations, hopeless
language of despair, and foolish speeches of bitter passion, but possess your
souls with patience, and wait God's leisure; he can and will deliver thee: I
will be with him in trouble, and I will deliver.

3. And so I come now to the third thing propounded, Promissum
recompensationis, a promise of reward and recompense; I will honor him.

What could flesh and blood expect more from Heaven in their troubled
condition, then the presence of God to assist them, and the power of God to
deliver them? Yet all this had not been enough, nor a full satisfaction to our
desires, had we not had the other part of the promise, promissum
recompensationis, a promise of reward and recompense. We think it much to serve
God for naught, and to suffer for Christ, and to have no reward but a bare
deliverance. The very Apostles of Christ had such affections in them; even
Peter, the great Professor of them, said unto our Savior, Mat. 19.27.
Behold we have forsaken all and followed thee, what shall we have therefore?
Even the best of us serve God for a reward, and he is willing to give it us; I
will honor thee.

God honors his People three ways.

1. By giving them titles of honor, and terms of dignity and renown. Thus God
says to Jacob his chosen, Since thou wast precious in my sight, Isa. 43.2.
thou have been honorable.

And again, he calls his Church a Noble Vine; Jer. 2.21.
And the Saints are called the Excellent; To the Saints that are in the Earth,
and to the Excellent; Psa. 16.
And those of the Church of Sardis are said to be worthy; Revel. 2.
and S. Peter writing to the Jewish Christians that were scattered abroad in
Pontus, Galatia and Cappadocia, he calls them, A Chosen Generation, a Royal
Priesthood. Thus the Spirit of God ascribes to the Saints Nobility, Excellency,
Royalty, which are all ensigns of greatest honor.

2. God honors his Children by advancing them to places of honor and renown.
For, He raises the poor (that are his) out of the dust, and lifts the needy
out of the dunghill, that he may set them with Princes, Psalm. 113.
even the Princes of the People: Thus God raised Joseph out of the Dungeon, and
made him Ruler over Egypt: And now was his Dream fulfilled; that the Sun and
the Moon and the eleven Stars made obeisance unto him. And thus God advanced
Daniel from a miserable Captive to be Ruler over the Province of Babylon, And
he sat in the Gate of the King: Dan. 2.49.
Thus you see Grace and Honor may meet together, and one may be both a Saint
and a King, a King and a Martyr, which is the highest of Saints. We read of a
Noble Army of Martyrs in S. Ambrose his Creed, which we commonly call Te Deum.
Thus you see Nobility and Sanctity, Greatness and Goodness, Kingship and
Martyrdom, may meet together in one and the same person; I will honor him.

Lastly, God does not always honor his Children in this World; some he suffers
to dye in Prison, others upon a Scaffold, and the Bodies of his dear Children
are oftentimes sown into their Graves in dishonor: but they shall rise in
honor, yea in the perfection of honor, for they shall be glorified; and so it
is in the Latin translation, Glorificabo eum, I will deliver him, and I will
glorify him: and the more they suffer here, the greater shall be their glory
hereafter. Though all shall receive glory, yet there shall be degrees of that
glory, as we read, 1 Cor. 15.41. There is one glory of the Sun, another glory
of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars, and one Star differs from
another in glory, yet all these Stars do shine in glory: so it shall be in
Heaven, -- Omnibus una salus, sed gloria dispar.
Though all shall be glorified, yet there shall be degrees and differences of
that glory. There is one glory of the Sun, I mean that glorious Sun of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus, that sits at the right hand of God; another
glory of the Apostles: there is one glory of his Confessors, another of his
Martyrs, and one Saint differs from another in glory. They shall be, says
Christ, (...), as the Angels of God in Heaven: not in respect of purity only
and singleness of life, which was the occasion of this speech of our Savior;
but in respect of the spirituality of our Bodies with which we shall rise, and
the glory we shall receive in Heaven. Now we all acknowledge an Hierarchy, and
several degrees of Blessedness among those Divine Spirits; some are Angels,
some Archangels, others Powers, Principalities, and Dominions: which does
plainly testify a diversity and several degrees of Blessedness in the Saints,
if so be that their Blessedness shall be equal with and conformable to the
Beatitudes of the Holy Angels. It Is true, one and the same essential happiness
shall be to all in respect of the Object; for they all shall see God: one and
the same likewise in respect of the Subject; for all the powers of the Soul,
and members of the Body, shall be adorned and beautified with Glory. Again, one
and the same in respect of duration and continuance of time; for all and every
one shall be blessed for ever, and their happiness eternal. And lastly, one and
the same in respect of satiety; for all shall be full; one Vessel may be bigger
then another, but all shall be full. But yet there shall be diversities, as of
Grace here, so of Glory hereafter; and as in some there are greater gifts of
Grace, so shall there be higher degrees of Glory. But whether this increase and
intension of Blessedness arises from a more pure and clear Vision of God, or
from a more perfect disposition of our Understanding, or from greater flames of
Love and Joy in the fruition of God, or whether by the addition of some
accidental happiness, accessory Praemiums, or Indulgences, I cannot say: but
most certain it is, that the Saints in Heaven shall, according to their several
capacities, receive the measure of their Blessedness; for God will deal with
every man according to his service here, and sufferings for the name of Jesus.
Dan. 12.3.
They that turn many to righteousness shall shine as the Stars for ever and
ever: But those that shall lose their lives for righteousness sake shall shine
forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father. Mat. 13.43.


S. John was the beloved Disciple upon Earth; but surely S. Peter, that was
crucified with his heels upward, is the Beloved in Heaven. S. John was wont to
lay his head in the bosom of Christ: but sure now St. Paul must lie there,
that lost his head for Christ; S. John dyed in his Bed. God will reward every
man according to his sufferings in this life for his Names sake: the more they
suffer here, the more they shall be blessed hereafter; the greater their
Dishonor upon Earth, the greater shall be their Honor in Heaven. Every one
that wears a Crown of Thorns here for Christ's sake shall wear a Crown of
Glory; the more Thorns, the more Glory. Which God grant to all those that
suffer for the name of Jesus. Amen.

(...).
A NARRATIVE OF A Great Deliverance AT SEA.

Sen. Quod durum est pati
Meminisse dulce est.
The second Edition Corrected and Enlarged

London: Printed for John Crook, at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

FOR My much esteemed Friend CHARLES SCARBURGH, Doctor of Physic, at his House
in Blackfriars London.
Worthy Doctor, and loving Friend,
I Am one of those many that honor both your Person and Profession: Not
because I have a weak body, and so often stand in need of your healing and
saving hands; for that were to love my self, not you: but because I find in all
ages, as well as in this, that Physicians have been men of most rare parts and
eminent learning, There are but few of your College but are known to me by
their Merit or Courtesy; I never come out of their company, but I feel my self
better both in health and knowledge; and I do not think that any Age can boast
of so many Monsters of wit and learning (for Virtue has its Monsters as well
as Vice) as there is now among you. And truly, if there be no better
encouragement made for the study of Divinity, the Learning of this Nation will
lie in your hands, as does now the welfare, and ye will be Patrons of both.

But then, as your Profession is eminent, so are you in your Profession. I will
not say, more then others, for those Comparative expressions (besides their
uncharitableness and incivility) are poor Commendations; and, I think, do
rather debase then exalt the credit of a friend. For it seems to me to imply,
that a man has not merit enough in himself to make him high in the esteem of
the world, unless we set him upon the head of another. Non tali auxilio --
I shall not need such helps in my addresses to your self; for you may stand
upon the high Mountain of your own worth and merit, and without setting your
foot upon another, make your self visible and known unto the whole world*
Besides those rare things in Nature, you have discovered to us many secrets and
occult qualities, which former Philosophy could not teach us; and are so well
acquainted with the Body of man, that you can un-pin the whole frame, take it
in pieces, as a man does his Watch, set it together again, and make it go
better. I do not mean better then it was created; but since it has been
debauched and disordered by several maladies and obstructions. Besides the
excellent and happy knowledge you have in Physic, you are eminent in
Mathematical Philosophy; you have read over the whole Volume of Heaven, and are
perfectly acquainted with their motions, influences, stars and Intelligences,
as if you had been bred above in that University. Neither does this precious
Jewel of knowledge dwell in a Caskanet of an ill Nature, for that would take
much off its luster and brightness; but in a sweet disposition, as our famous
Oughtred says of you, suavissimis moribus, ingenio perspicacissimo.

From this fountain run so many hasty and full streams of love and kindness to
all your friends and acquaintance: And to this your good Nature do I impute the
earnest desire you have had to hear me often discourse of my dangers and
disasters at Sea; not that you take delight in my sufferings, but rejoice in my
deliverance. You have violently importuned me many years, to write the sad
Story of my shipwreck; which I thought I should never be brought to, [For
personal things ought to be concealed.] But there is such Magic in the love of
a friend, that I can sooner deny my self then him. And therefore I shall give
you in these few lines a brief and hasty relation of my Second Voyage toward
the East. But if this sad story make you Sea-sick, (for good men are not well
when they hear the evils and misfortunes of others) you may thank your self.
For the fault is not in my sufferings, but in your Virtue and tenderness; and
you are to blame your own Commands, not my love in the performance.

Your very Friend, Will. Johnson.

A NARRATIVE OF A Great Deliverance at SEA.
WE went aboard from Harwich on Michaelmas day, 29 of September 1648. I
confess, a dull kind of sadness (as a cloud) sat upon my spirits, so that I
could not look out cheerfully upon my departing friends. But I took my farewell
of them, as if I had been going not only out of England, but out of the world.
I can give no reason of this deliquium, for I was sent on a good Message, to
preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ. I was embarked in a stout ship, with a fair
wind, and a skilful Pilot; so that the understanding and rational part of my
soul could not foresee any, nor suspect the least danger. But (sure) Nature
(whose Apocrypha we shall never understand) was sensible of some approaching
storm; for I was no sooner at Sea, but I was in a strange Anguish and
Propassion, so that I suffered shipwreck in my mind, and all the terrors
thereof, before it came. I presently fell sick (as I usually do at Sea) for
Water has always been an unkind Element to me: yet that sickness has no
specifical name, we neither call it Fever nor Ague, Palsy nor Gout; but I
think it is all these, with the rest of humane infirmities, or at least an
Index where we may find them; for I was so really sick, that to be drowned had
been a punishment indeed, but in my thoughts no affliction to me. This
sickness was neither Tertian, nor Quartan, but Quotidian: for I was as sick
the next day as before. About four of the clock in the afternoon, the Master of
the Ship came into our Cabin with more haste then he was wont, for he was
quickened with the sense and apprehension of some sudden and ensuing danger;
which though he concealed from me, I saw it in his very countenance, written
plainly in pale characters of fear and amazement, which made me ask him,
whether all was well. And like a loving tenderhearted man, who is loath to tell
his dying friend that he is so near his end, he answered me, All is well.

But when I saw him shift himself, and make haste out again in great speed, but
greater passion, I rose from my bed, and crawled upon the Deck, where I saw a
sad spectacle. The Ship having sprung a Leak, or rather a Plank, was ready to
sink. I do not wonder now I was so sick before, seeing death was so near. Oh
how the face of every man was changed by this affrightment, so that we could
not know almost one another, having lost our natural complexions through the
extremity of passion! One was at his prayers, another wringing his hands, a
third his eyes shedding of tears, when we had no need of more salt water. But
after this fit, they fell to work, and (as it is usual in such extremes) we
were all busy about doing of nothing, and we did we knew not what. We began
one thing, -- sed facti poenitet, but we presently fell to another, and
perfected nothing to our safety. The Masters Mate and Brother, whom we sent
down to search out the Leak, quickly returned to us with a sad countenance;
though naturally his face was red, yet fear had snow'd it into a pale
complexion. This man with trembling hands, gnashing of teeth, a quivering
tongue, and words halfspoken, signified to us that the wound was incurable,
that the Leak could not be stopped, and the Water came in so fast upon us, that
we must perish in this moment. I never heard a Death's head speak before; for
he did look not like a Messenger, but Death it self. Had he said nothing, we
might have read our fate and ruin in his countenance.

Here was now no room for counsel, neither had we time to ask one another what
was best to be done. But we presently cast out our long Boat, and shot off some
eight or nine Guns, which seemed to me to be so many tolls of a Passing Bell
before our death. But it was to give notice to one Bartholomew Cook, who was
Master of that Ship that came out with us, and was but a little before us, that
he should come to our relief. In these fair hopes we leapt into the Boat; but
it was my sad chance to leap short, one leg in the boat, alterum in Charontis
cymba: but not without some danger, I scrambled out of the Sea into the boat;
but was no sooner there, but one of the Mariners leapt out of the ship upon me,
and beat me down with his weight; which I took kindly enough, being willing to
have carried them all upon my back to have saved their lives. But there was
one, and but one, left in our sinking ship, who made such lamentable moan, that
his tears prevailed against the fears of our present danger, and we took him
into our boat, when we expected our ship (whose sails lay now flat upon the
water) should sink immediately, which must necessarily have drawn our small
boat after it, as the greater fished swallow up the less.

But (God be thanked) we all came clear off the ship, but now were rowing we
knew not whither. For M. Cook came not to our relief, and we began to be severe
in language against him, as if he had not been kind enough to us; when all
that knew him will say, he was a man of a soft, tender nature, and a friend to
others, rather then to himself. But all men are suspicious in adversity, and
commonly take all things in the worst part, Omnes quibus res sunt minus
secundae magis sunt nescio quomodo suspiciosi se semper credunt negligi,
Terent. Adelp.
and so did we; not considering at all how it might fare with this honest
Master, who, poor man, was in greater distress then our selves, and drank a
deeper draught of affliction; for both he and his ship and all his men perished
in that hour, not a man escaped to tell us the cause, manner and method of his
fate.

Now were all our hopes dashed, as well as our selves, being in despair of
humane help; for we were left in the North Seas, which seldom wear a smooth
brow, but at this time contending with the wind swelled into prodigious
Mountains, which threatened every moment to fall upon us.

To speak plainly, it blew half a storm, and we were now in a small Vessel:
what credit could we give unto our safety in a small and open Shallop, when so
stately a Castle of wood, which we but now lost, could not defend it self
against the insolency of the waves? we were many leagues from any shore, having
no Compass to guide us, no provision to sustain us, being starved with cold as
well as for want of victuals, and the Night grew black upon us, having nothing
in our Boat but a small Which served us as a Scoop to cast the water out of the
Boat.
Kettle, and three bags of Pieces of Eight to the value of 300 li. Sterling.
But alas! what good can money do where there is no Exchange? we could not eat
nor drink our Silver, neither could our Pieces of Eight keep us warm. Money in
its own nature is but an impotent creature, a very cripple, inutile pondus, a
burden of no value.

Good God! into what a sad condition have thou now brought us; for which of our
sins do thou thus punish us? Teach us, O Lord, that we may know it, and
first drown our selves in tears of repentance, before the Sea swallow us up;
that though our bodies be cast away, we may save our souls: Such language my
troubled thoughts spoke within me. For it was with us now as it with St. Paul,
Acts 27.
All hopes that we should be saved were taken away. Nothing could preserve us
but a miracle, being out of the reach of humane help: we were sinful creatures,
and could not expect that God should go out of his ordinary way to save us.
Though the waves carried us up to Heaven, yet we could not hope or believe that
God should put his hand out of the clouds, and take us miserable Caitives unto
himself from the top of a rising wave; we had nothing to help us but our
prayers. I am sorry that word slipped from my hasty pen. Prayer is a multitude, a
Troop of succors, and many enough to deliver us out of the depth, though we
were entombed in the belly of a Whale; as it did Jonah. Prayer, if it be well
qualified, is that rod of Moses, that can turn the Sea into a wilderness, and
make us pass through upon dry land. Psa. 107.
Upon this only staff did we all lean, and I suppose it was with us, as in the
case of Jonah. Jonah 2.
The mariners were afraid, and every man called upon his God; And truly, I
think I may with modesty confess, I thought on those words of David, though
after a more imperfect manner, Psalm. 69.
Out of the depth have I cried unto thee: Lord, hear my voice, and let thine
ears be attentive to my supplication. I sink in the deep mire, where there is
no standing. Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow
me up.

But beside our personal devotion, I am persuaded the extremity of our
condition pleaded for us, and our misery cried aloud in the ears of God for
pity and compassion. It is an usual expression, when we see any man extremely
poor and miserable, to say, his poverty or his misery speaks for him: and
commonly we are not so much moved with a clamorous Beggar, who hunts after our
Alms with open mouth, and makes Hue and Cry after our Charity, as if we had
stolen something from him who begs of us, I say, we are not so much moved with
such loud impudence, as with the silence of those diseased Cripples, and infirm
Lazaro's, that lie at our doors, and in the streets, and say nothing, but show
only their wounds and sores to those that pass by. These beggars speak loudest
to our affections, their very condition is eloquent; quot vulnera, tot ora, so
many wounds, so many mouths, that cry aloud for pity, and cannot choose but melt
us into a charitable compassion. This was our case; our misery was louder then
our prayers, and our deplorable condition certainly was more prevalent with
Almighty God then our imperfect devotions; for we may say with the people of
Israel; Exodus 2.
He heard our cry, and had compassion on us; It is the usual way of God to help
in Extremities, when we are in absolute despair of all outward means he loves
to save us, that we may say, It is his doing alone.

For in this moment of death, when we were without the least expectation of any
deliverance, He sent a Ship to us, which we must needs confess to be Digitus
Dei, the finger of God, that pointed and directed that ship to our deliverance:
for though many ships come from the same place, and are bound for the same
Haven, yet they seldom meet in the vast Ocean, and sail in the same line; for
there are no beaten paths in the floods, no highways and common roads in the
Sea. But such was the goodness of God, this ship made toward us, and we what
we could toward it. But we had but two oars, and the Seamen counted that a
great disadvantage both to their speed and breaking of the waves. Beside, it
blew hard, and the Sea, that knows no pity, rose high upon us, so that we were
forced to sit close to one another, to keep out the Sea with our backs: a poor
shelter against a raging enemy, who finding himself checked, through
indignation flew over our heads into the boat, and fell upon us in angry
showers, so that had we not had that Kettle to cast the water out as fast as it
came in, we might have been drowned from above with rain of our own making. It
was my lot to sit on the weatherside (and there is no complement or changing of
places in a storm) and the waves beat on me so fast, that I had almost said
with the Prophet David, The waters had even entered into my Soul. Psa. 69.


And now we grew into another despair; for with all our endeavors we could not
reach the ship, nor the ship us: yet that good man the Skipper hung on the Lee,
and did what he could to retard the course of his ship; and we on the other
side did what we could to speed our own. His ship rode on furiously before the
wind, like the Chariot of Aminadab; and ours slowly, like the Chariots of
Pharaoh; and how could we expect that our Snail should overtake his Dromedary?
Thus our pregnant hopes brought forth nothing but Wind and Water; and we that
before flattered our selves with an assurance of Safety are now as much
confounded with a certainty of Perishing. It had been better, I think, and less
affliction to us, to have had no hopes at all of a Deliverance, then presently
to fall from it. It did redouble the punishment of Tantalus, to kiss those
Apples with his Lips which he must not taste with his Tongue: to have Happiness
near us in our eye, and not to enjoy it, is the extremity of Unhappiness. Many
Mariners, in a Storm and Tempest, when they see a fatal necessity upon them,
are contented to dye: but these men would murmr portu perire, to perish in a
Haven.

This was our condition: We had a Ship hard by, but could not board her by
reason of the Weather; so that we were ready to perish, whilst we looked
Safety in the face; and that which, in all probability, increased our Danger,
and made our Fate inevitable, it grew dark night, so that we did not know which
way to row.

But this, though it was an evil in its own nature, by accident became a
benefit to us: for now, not seeing our danger we understood it not, and so grew
bolder, and applied two to an Oar, and so brake through the Waves in a most
desperate condition toward the Ship, as we conceived: and that good Christian,
the Master of the Vessel, hung out a Light to us, which was as a Star to guide
us to him; and so by degrees we grew nearer and nearer.

But lest the Howzoner (for the Master was one of Howzon) should think we were
lost, and so hoise up his Sails and be gone, (for he could not see us by reason
of the Night, though we saw him by virtue of the Light he lent us) Order was
given, that when a Wave took us up, we should give a great shout: which we did
so loud, that I believe our Cry was heard to Heaven; for by God's miraculous
assistance, we grew very near the Ship, and our own safety.

Now were we in dispute, which side of the Ship we should go aboard, which was
concluded on the Lee-side; and promise was made, we should go up by order as we
sat, lest by a hasty rising we should endanger our selves, and by making too
much haste to save our lives, lose them. But we had no sooner come to the Ship,
but they all strove to run up at once; and the Seamen being dexterous in the
art of climbing got up in a moment, and left me alone in the Boat: neither do I
blame them, for Life is sweet; and when that is in jeopardy, we care only for
our selves.

And now was I the third time lost, and in the greatest danger of drowning; for
besides the natural weakness I had in my hands, they were now so benumbed with
cold and wet, and made useless, that I could not climb up a Rope, though it was
now to save my Life. But I held the Rope, which was flung to me out of the
Ship, fast in my hands, that our Boat might not stave off: but it struck three
times against our rolling Ship, or rather our Ship against it, and as often
struck me down in the Boat, which was half full of water; so that I was afraid
I should have been drowned in that Epitome of the Sea. It would have grieved a
man, but now to have escaped the vast Champain of the Sea, and to be drowned in
its Enclosure; and it was God's providence, the Boat being so often struck did
not break in pieces, as it did presently afterward, when it had done its last
office to my deliverance. But having used several ways to get up in vain, there
came, at last, two Seamen down to me on the side of the Ship, and would have
heaved me up by the arms. But being so often wet, my Clothes, together with my
own weight, were too heavy a Burden to be trusted in their arms: and in this
straight and exigency I really knew not what to do. I began to have sad
thoughts of my self, and to think, that I alone was the Offender, and must now
be sacrificed to the fury of the Sea, to appease and calm the Tempest. But
whilst I was thus wounding my breast with these thoughts, one of the Seamen
gave me down a Rope with a nooze, and bade me put it about my middle: but as
soon as I got it on one shoulder, he began to pull, and had like to have forced
me into the Sea. But desiring him to stay a while, I then got it over both
shoulders, and ordered him to pull. But the Boat waving up and down cast me off
at some distance, so that he first drew me into the Sea, and my own weight drew
the Rope so fast through his hands, that had there not been a knot at the end
of the Rope by mere chance, (for he tied it not, as he afterward told me in
England) I had gone down into the Depth in a moment; so that I may truly say,
there was not an inch between me and Death. Then at the next pull he struck me
against the side of the Ship, which I shall always look upon as a Courtesy,
being the kindest blow that ever I received: It was like a Dose of Opium to a
man that has the extremity of the Stone, which makes him forget himself as
well as his sorrow; and so it served me, for I remembered no more either good or
evil. But certainly the Master was a good Christian, and was indulgent to me;
For I found my self in his own Cabin the next morning, where I slept all night
very well, though in wet clothes. But I found myself sore and lame all over. I
thought of the Man in the Almanac, wounded in every part and member; only I
really was what he seemed to be, and had some signs likewise of it on my
bruised body.

But I rose from my Cabin, very desirous to know how it fared with my
Fellow Sufferers; and truly I found them, contrary to my expectation, heavy,
not with sleep, but with sorrow. I thought I should have seen joy ride in
triumph in their cheerful countenance; but their looks were dejected, and they
murmured within themselves, suffering (I suppose) over their Shipwreck again in
their sad thoughts, and every man telling himself of his own misfortune. But
the truth was, they having saved their Lives were now at leisure to think of
the loss of their Goods: And I know it was a heavy loss to some, who lost much;
and yet a greater loss to others, who lost less: for they having but a little
lost a great deal, that little being all they had. For my own part, I lost more
then I had, (for it cast me in a Debt, which I have not yet waded through.) But
the Quantity of my loss does not so much trouble me as the Quality; for
(besides my Goods and whole Library) I lost all my Sermons, Notes, Observations
of some years travel abroad, things in themselves of no value, nor much in my
esteem, yet they were the fruits of my (many years) labor and study, and might
have been useful to me, both in my Ministerial Function, and likewise in the
secular and lay-part of my life. But it were a shame to name any loss, when God
so graciously gave us our life; and a sin to murmr at any damage, when God so
often and so miraculously snatched us out of the very jaws of Death. It seems
to me to be like calling Lazarus out of the Grave. And do we think Lazarus,
when he was restored unto life, complained that his Winding Sheet and Napkin
were spoiled by lying four days in the Grave? or that he murmured that the
Ointments and Spices were spent in vain at his Funeral? For sure Mary, that had
a Box of precious Ointment for the burial of our Savior, would be at some cost
at the Funeral of her beloved Brother Lazarus. But these things are not to be
thought upon, when our Life is given us. But we are so enamored on the World,
that we cannot but look back upon things we love and lose; and we would fain be
comforted after our losses, as Job was, with twice as much as we had before.
But then we must remember, it was at the latter end of Job; and before that
time God may redouble these temporal blessings upon us.

The next day, being Tuesday, it blew very fair for Norwey, thither our Ship
was bound; and about twelve of the clock at noon we came in the view of it. But
Norwey being a ragged Coast, full of Rocks, and seeing we could not reach it
whilst it was day, and afraid to come upon it in the dark, we turned our
Sails, and thought to have kept off the Coast till the morning, that the Sun
might show us the way thither. Which done, we sat down to meat, some of us
having taken no sustenance since we first came to Sea; and truly I eat an
hearty meal, being the only meal I made in five days: and so we were all very
well refreshed and comforted. And now God thought it fit we should suffer
again. Had it pleased the Lord before this refreshment to have brought us in
some new distress, we certainly, being weak, had perished under the weight of
it, and the very conceit of it would have killed us, and a little more sorrow
would have drowned us without a wave. But God will lay no more upon his
Children then they can bear.

About ten of the clock at night, when we had set our Watch, and prayed; with
safe and secure thoughts we laid our selves to rest, some of us upon our Beds.
But God had appointed an harder Lodging for us, such as he provided for Jacob
in his journey to Padan-Aram, Genesis 28.11.
when he took of the stones of the place, and made himself a pillow, and lay
down in that place to sleep. For this our second Ship with full Sails ran upon
a Rock, and gave so great a crack, that it was able to awake the most
dead-asleep among us. I wondered, I confess, what the matter was; but the
Mariners, knowing the danger better then my self, cried out, Mercy, Mercy,
Mercy, with so doleful a tone and accent, that, together with that hideous
noise which both the Wind and Waves made in this their pitched Battle one
against the other, it seemed to me to be the very Image and Representation of
the Day of Judgment. I made what haste I could out of my Cabin, but was the
last that came upon the Deck; where meeting with our own Master, with both his
hands upon his eyes, which yet could not stop that current of tears which ran
down his cheeks, he bade me pray for them, pray for them, for we shall
certainly perish. I could believe no otherwise, being taught that Lesson by our
Master; and therefore I fell presently upon my knees, and was just in the
condition of a Condemned Person that expected the stroke of the Executioner,
the night having but a blind before mine eyes: and having prayed awhile I
wondered the Waves did not come to do their office, for I forgave them with all
my heart, having wholly resigned up my self to Death.

But so it pleased God, that the Ship with full Sails struck it self so fast
into the cleft of the Rock, or rather, as the Seamen say, between two sledges
of Rocks, with her Bow over the main Rock, so that it stood as firm, for the
present, I mean the former part of the Ship, as the Rock it self. So I
presently rose, and pulled off my Coat, with an intention to cast my self into
the Sea and swim thither; but was advised to the contrary by a present ensuing
danger: for presently there arose a high and mighty Wave, one of the chief
Giants of the Sea, which first knocked against our Ship, as if it would have
called me forth, and then with greater violence dashed against the Rock, and
brake it self in pieces; which did plainly represent unto me my future
condition, and foretell my fortune, had I ventured to stride that great
Leviathan, and endeavored to swim to the Rock.

But presently our Ship, like Saint Paul's Ship, brake in the hinder parts, and
we were taught to escape our danger by our danger: for our Ship breaking in the
Stern, we were forced to fly to the former part; and one of the Seamen (the
same that pulled me up by the Rope) leaped from the Bow of the Ship upon the
Rock with a rope in his hand, Matthew Bird of Ipswich.
which was fastened to one of our Masts, and held it with so stiff an hand, that
another slipped down by it; and so all our own company, and some of the Danes
(eight and twenty in number) came safe to the Rock that way.

All this while, being left alone upon the Deck, I began to wonder what became
of my company, not then knowing that they had found any means of deliverance.
But perceiving that they all crowded to the head of the ship, I went to see
(God knows that was all my intention) what they did there, and so I came to the
knowledge of their escape, and an opportunity of my own. For I found a Dane
endeavoring to slide down himself and a small leather-trunk by that rope, who
like a loving man took pity upon me, and presently whipped away his trunk, and
bid me slide down there: but I returned him his kindness, and desired him to go
down first, not so much out of complement, but that I might know how to slide
down; for I saw none of them go before me, and I did not know whether I should
go with my head or heels foremost. I had no time to ask counsel, or make
experiment, but presently I got upon the rope with my heels foremost, and back
uppermost. But the waves beat upon me, and the wind (which was high) blew me
round, and had almost made me let go my hold: but, I praise God, I came safely
to the side of the rock; and they cried, Off, off; not out of unkindnesse to me
(whom they knew not in the dark) but that I might make a speedy way for
another, which I quickly did: for having laid one hand upon the rock, I came
off the rope, and so on all four climbed up to the rest of my company.

I was the last that came down the ship that way, for in that very moment the
ship began to decline from us and give way; which the Master perceiving (who
was still aboard) made lamentable moan to us to help him, which we did with our
utmost endeavors. But the ship brake, and sunk immediately. There was this
good man and four of the Mariners drowned. I saw the Master with a light in his
hand fall into the Sea, the saddest sight I ever yet beheld in this world, and
that which pierced my very soul, to see him that saved our lives lose his own.
There was nothing so bitter to me in all my sufferings at Sea as the loss of
this man: it raised such a storm and tempest in my affections, that I am not
yet calm within. I never think of him, but I am cast in a troubled sea of
sorrow, and suffer shipwreck daily in my mind; for as he was a man of a meek
and charitable disposition unto all, so I found him kind unto my self after a
more special manner. How sollicitous was he for us in our distress, and used
all means, though it was to his own hindrance, to save us! and in all
probability, had he not staid for us, he might have arrived at his own Harbor
in safety. What shall we say? shall we plead with the Almighty, with the
Prophet Jeremy? Jer. 12.
No, it is better to cry out, Romans 11.33, 34, 35.
with S. Paul, Oh the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who has
known the mind of the Lord, or who has been his counselor? All that we can
say is, that God sometimes thus deals with his own children. Those whom by
his grace he has made instruments of great good upon earth, he takes unto
himself, to make them highly blessed in heaven. Certainly the Spirit of God
moved upon these waters, and called this good man, as Christ did S. Peter on
the Sea of Galilee, Mat. 14.
to come to him, that for this high act of charity he might receive him, and
presently crown him with glory.

Now were we upon the Rock, but knew not where; and some of the Company, before
I came to them, had measured it round with their feet, and found it both a Rock
and an Isle, and, contrary to our hopes, inhabitable; so that we waited for the
Morning Star to draw the curtain of the night, and discover us first unto our
selves (for, as yet in the dark, we were as ignorant of our selves as of our
sad condition) and, then, to show and discover some coast or land to us, which
we hoped we were near to. It was a long and a sad night with me: a rock is an
hard pillow to sleep on; beside, I was thinly clad, having cast off my coat
when I intended to swim, and had no leisure to put it on again; for I thought
it best to leave that behind me, rather then my self. We went from place to
place, up and down, I may truly say, for I had many a fall upon the slimy Rock:
sometimes we were up to the anckles in water, I cannot say overshooes; for I
had none; so that my feet were cut with the sharp stones, as my body with the
cold wind; so that I felt the very teeth of Winter bite quite through me: for
Winter in that Country is an old man with a gray head, when it is but a child
with us. At length we happened in an hole of the rock, which was a warm shelter
to us against the wind. And now the long-expected Morning drew near, and we
fain would have seen before we could. In that twilight, every black cloud we
discerned, we flattered our selves was land, and here it was, we said, and
there it was. But when the Sun arose, we saw it no where, only we had a glimpse
of the Coast of Norwey; but it was at that distance, that we were not in any
capacity to reach it, but with our desires.

Truly when I rose up and took a view of the Sea, and the place where I was, I
was struck down again with amazement to see so many hundreds of Rocks round
about us, lying for the most part under water, which the Seamen call Breakers,
because they break the Sea, and turn it into feathers. It was a great
providence of God, that we should in the night with full sails pass by all
these rocks, (the least touch against them had been as mortal to us as our
sins) and then to come to the great Rock, which was as a Church above water. I
am sure it was an Asylum to us. The Countrey-people deservedly call it
Arn-Scare. It was the same hand again of Gods providence, that our ship should
be carried with a full strong wind into the cleft and open part of the rock,
which was as a bosom to receive us: had we touched upon any other part, we had
been utterly lost in the twinkling of an eye. Psalm. 107.
They that go down to the Sea in ships, and occupy their business in great
waters, These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. The
Wonders of his Deliverances, as well as the Miracles of his Creation: neither
are the Creatures more to be admired then his Mercies. There is as much wonder
and variety in these as in the other. Psa. 107.8.
Oh that we would therefore praise God for his goodness, and the wonders he
does for the children of men.

But now again were we lost in the eye of man: all our hope was, that a ship
might pass by to relieve us, which in my judgment was vanity of thoughts: for
if a ship should by accident come by us in the daytime, they seeing the Rocks
would be afraid to come at us; had it come in the night, it had certainly
perished, as ours did. And yet we did hope even against hope. But having spent
all that day, with sore eyes, in expectation of an imaginary deliverance, in
looking for a ship (or rather castle in the air) and seeing nothing come toward
us, we began to despair, having now no kind of sustenance to feed on, nor
scarce clothes to keep us warm; so we again crept into an hole of the Rock, and
lodged there, rather then rested, the second night.

In the morning we arose, before the Sun, and still we were looking for that
which came not: and now we began to be an hungry; and some of our company went
searching about the Rock, wishing (I suppose) those stones were turned into
bread. One of the Sea-boyes brought me a leaf of Scurvy Grass, which I told him
was sauce rather then meat. Some of us went a fishing, but with no other Angle
then a long arm, nor no other hook then a bent singer. They put their Arms into
the Sea as far as they could, and drew up some small Muscles, which they eat
heartily. I began to be very sick in a feverish distemper, and so had no
stomach, which I think is a benefit when we have no meat to eat. But I did burn
with thirst, so that I would have given all that I had for a draught of fresh
water. God oftentimes makes us know the worth of his creatures by the want of
them: nothing so mean in our esteem as a little water, we spill it every where
upon the ground, and we look not after it any more; yet at this time a drop of
cold water had been more welcome to me then the gold of Ophir, and in my esteem
a better creature. I went into the highest place of the rock, thinking the
water (that stood every where in holes) might be freshest there: but I found it
salt; so I perceive in some storm it bounded thither from the Sea. Though it
was salt, yet it was water, and therefore (like one of those that were chosen
to fight against Midian) I lapped it with my hand to my mouth till I quenched
my thirst. But it came up again as fast as it went down, and brought a greater
drought with it: and this I did very often, which I am persuaded was both my
present cure, and future preservation of my health, Dr. H.
as a learned Physician told me since.

And now between ten and eleven of the Clock we saw a ship coming toward us
with full sails, which lifted up all our hearts with joy, gilded over our
countenances with cheerfulness, and so painted our faces with gladness that we
seemed to be new creatures. The ship came nearer and nearer, and then we went
all of us to the top of the rock, and waved our hats to show our selves to the
men of the ship. But I know not the cause, but they never came at us, neither
did they send out their boat to know what we were, or our condition. Whether
this unkindness proceeded from the fear of our dangerous rocks, or from their
own more stony hearts, harder then the rock we lay upon, I cannot say; but it
put us out of charity with them, as they seemed to be with us. He was a Dane,
of the same Country with our former kind loving Master; so that I perceive
there may be several dispositions under the same Climate, and one womb may
bring forth twins of several natures: one was as smooth to us as Jacob, the
other rough as Esau. When we saw the ship pass quite from us, our hearts began
to fail, and our countenances changed into there former paleness. How soon was
our fair Morning clouded over, and our beautiful hopes turned into deformity
and black despair? to teach us that man's happiness is but for a moment, and
the joy of this world but a span long. And now we were all lost, even in our
own eyes; our condition, being ready to famish, would not give us time to
expect another ship, neither had we now faith enough to believe, should there
come one by chance, that the Mariners would venture their own lives to save
ours.

So we betook our selves to our old remedy, (...), our prayers. The Danes (I
confess) first began their devotions, having sung one of Luther's Psalms, fell
to their prayers; and then we sung one of our own Psalms, and as long as I was
able to speak, I prayed with the company; and after some Exhortation to my
fellow sufferers, being very weak, I laid my self down upon the rock, thinking
I should rise no more in this world.

But I overheard one of the Seamen (the same that first leapt upon the rock)
say, M. B.
Let us make a Raft, and venture to Sea, I had rather be drowned, then lie here
and be starved. They all presently concluded to follow that design, though it
was full of danger. But, you know, a sinking man will take hold of a bullrush,
and one that is ready to perish will catch at a feather. All things fell out to
further this design: for the water had now fallen from the rock, and left on the
side of it the Bottom of the Ship, the Anchors, the Mast, the Sails lying on
the Rock like linen upon an hedge. In a short time they break a Mast in pieces,
untwisted a Cable, made small Cords, tied four or five Boards to the broken
Mast, put up the small end of the Missen-Mast, cut out a small Sail, with some
slight Stern they had made, and so ventured to Sea on these ruins. God
oftentimes saves by weak means, and preserves us by improbabilities. There were
four on this Raft, two Danes, and two English; I do not remember whether it was
by lot, or voluntary election.

It was now a great calm, such a calm I conceive as was upon the Sea of Galilee
when our Savior rebuked the Sea and the Winds. Mat. 8.
It blew only a small breath, which was our advantage, for it directly carried
them toward that place we conceived the Coast lay. It was the miraculous
goodness of God, that after the loss of two great Ships, he should save us by a
swimming Plank: for this Raft past through, and got clear of all the Breakers:
had it touched only on them, they would have rent the Raft in pieces, as
Sampson did the Wreath when the Philistines were upon him; but they passed by
them all, and we that were upon the Rock followed them with our eyes as long as
we could see, or rather as long as they could be seen: for our life was wrapped
up in theirs, and the hope of our deliverance had no other foundation but their
safety.

And now I may say, God stretched forth his hand as Christ did to S. Peter when
he was ready to sink, and saved these men, and brought them to shore; which yet
we were ignorant of, and so pulled in pieces between two several passions, Hope
and Fear, and both of them equally troublesome; as we see in an Ague, which
has two several operations, contrary in themselves as Hot and Cold, yet both
of them alike afflictive. Our Hope being with that violence of passsion, was as
wounding to our affections as our Fear.

But these fits were soon over, for before night we spied several Shawls rowing
toward us, which gave us a certain knowledge of the safety of our men, and a
promise of our own deliverance: they brought with them provision; but we were
more greedy of the shore then our meat, and therefore we made haste into the
Boats, and by Gods goodness unto us, we came all of us once more to land.

The place that we arrived at was an Island in Norwey, called by the people
Waller Island; so mean and inconsiderable, that Ortelius takes no notice of it
in his Maps, for I have searched with better eyes then mine own, I mean more
knowing in Geography, and could not find it. My Lord of E. Dr. H.
A place it seems not worthy to be remembered, but I am sure never to be
forgotten by us. Though it was a Wilderness in its own nature, yet it was a
Paradise to us.

There was but one house where we landed, and that was the Parson's, an honest
Lutheran, who had many in his family. They showed us, Acts 28.2.
as S. Paul says, no little kindness; the language they spoke was Noss. But I
think it is not much unlike Dutch, for we that spoke Dutch did partly
understand them, and they us, and yet two several kinds of speech. I suppose
there is the same difference between these two languages, as there is between a
Lobster and a Creifish, (which both are in plenty there) for though they both
are alike, yet they are two several Species.

We made a shift to tell the sad Iliads of our misfortune to the people of the
house, and they made a shift to understand us, for they wept most bitterly at
our relation; so that one would have thought that they had suffered Shipwreck,
and not we. Which showed the goodness and tenderness of their nature, which are
principia gratiae, the very beginnings of grace; or else I may safely say, they
are the first dispositions, or, at least, capacities of grace.

They set before us what meat they had; and the Mariners fell to it so
heartily, as if they would have repaired all they lost before by their long
fasting at one meal. Their ordinary Bread was Rye-Pancakes, but their Beer very
strong. I thought of that English Proverb, A Cup of good Beer is Meat, Drink,
and Clothing. Sure these people thought so; for though at that cold season some
of the people had no stockins nor shoes to their feet, yet they kept their
Understanding warm, and their mouths well lined with Lubeck beer.

I lost my stomach, not with eating, but long fasting, and so went sick to Bed;
in the morning I found my self well, I praise God. And we began now to examine
our selves, and one another, what Moneys our double Shipwreck had left us; all
that we had we freely laid down: but there was an Ananias amongst us, who, we
suspected, would conceal some part; and therefore we searched him, and found no
less then four and twenty Pieces of Eight, which certainly this man stole out
of our Bags when we were in the Boat, after our first Shipwreck, at that
present time when we expected every moment we should be cast away. Did this man
think that S. Peter would not let him into Heaven without his Peter's pence? or
that he should go the other way, and must pay Charon naulum suum? It was a sad
thing for a man to steal in articulo mortis, at the point of death: But it was
well for us; for we lost all our Moneys in the second Shipwreck, but what this
man stole from us. There are some Divines that say, Sin is committed ordinante
Deo; but the Ancients are wont to say, Deo permittente, which is a more modest
and civil expression. I will not dispute the question here: but I believe, if
God did ever ordain Sin, it was in this man's stealing; for this Money was our
relief in our necessitous condition.

We staid in this Island till Sunday: in the morning we went to hear our
Landlord preach; after Sermon he gave us Coena dubia, a doubtful meal, full of
variety, in one Dish, as Beef, Mutton, Lard, Goat, Roots, and so many of God's
Creatures, that it seemed to me to be the first Chapter of Genesis in a Dish:
but so confounded, that the best palate could not read what he eat, nor by his
taste know and distinguish the Creatures. Though God has given all his
Creatures for the use of man, so that we may do what we please with them: yet
I think it is not handsome with our grand Mesle's and Ollapodrida's to confound
and undo the Creation, cook it into a new Chaos, and sauce God's Creatures out
of our knowledge. I love to know what I eat, that I may praise God for the
variety of his Blessings. But truly I do not blame the people of this place;
for I think it is not Curiosity here, but Custom, and good Husbandry, rather
then Luxuriousness, who boil all together, to save charges.

After much thanks, and a little money, we parted with this good old Priest;
and I having purchased an old pair of Shoes at the price of a new, we traveled
on foot to Fredericstat, a City in Norwey by the Coast side, and were very
kindly entertained by the Burgo-master. The chief of his discourse to me was in
commendation of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, whom he called
Excellentissimum Dominum. I wonder how he came to know him. But sure, thought
I, if he be thus charitable to speak well of the Dead, who could not hear him,
he will be bountiful to the Living, who are ready to thank him even
beforehand. And truly he was very kind to us, for he commanded some of the
City to entertain us civilly, and provided us Ships both for Holland and
England, with the promise of some Provision at his own charge.

I remember how the People ran after us in the streets; and what their
Compassionate Eye saw we wanted, their Charitable Hand was ready to give
without asking. A good old man bestowed on me an excellent pair of Mittens,
which I brought into England. We found much civility every where: though the
Country is all rocky, yet the Peoples hearts are tender; God made them e
meliore luto, out of a better soil then their own Country.

But to make have out of my Story, as well as out of Norwey; We went away from
Fredericstat 3 or 4 miles to Ostersound, the Haven where our Ships lay, having
laid into the Ship, that was bound for England, some small Provision, as much
as our Stock could pay for, yet not so much as our Necessity required: for had
not God blessed us with a favorable wind, we certainly had wanted much. But
we, with all that was left us, which was now nothing but our selves, entered
into the Ship in the evening. In the morning, before we went out, there came a
ship from Lyn in Norfolk, struck against our harbor, which was naturally
walled about with rocks, and so perished immediately. This was a sad Omen, and
it seemed to me as a Prologue to a new Tragedy.

We had not been above two or three hours at Sea, but there was a sad
distraction amongst us in the Ship, and the Mariners crying again for Mercy,
Mercy: For we had almost fell foul on a Rock, which lay so cunningly in the
Water, that we did not spy it till we were upon it: but by the goodness of God
we sailed close by it, and escaped it; the least touch of it had been our
ruin. Thus God oftentimes does bring his Children as near the mouth of danger
as may be, but he lets them not fall therein, that they may both fear and
praise his Name.

About noon we came clear off all the rocks on the Coast of Norwey, and were
sailing for England with a fair gale of wind. But in this Prosperity another
sad Accident befell us: This third Ship sprang a leak, a new one I cannot say,
but rather repeated an old one, and so our Ship began to swim within as well as
without; and we had no way to relieve our selves (for the Leak could not be
found) but by pumping; which we did day and night, and so took revenge of the
Sea, by spitting that Water back again in its Face, as fast as it came into our
Ship. But now again we were in a sad and deplorable condition, being in danger
to be drowned from the Spring that rose within us, and to suffer an Intestine
Shipwreck, which, like a Civil War, is most dangerous. We had our life now at
our fingers ends; and if we had not lifted up our hands to pump, as Moses did
to pray, these Amalekites had prevailed; I mean, these merciless Waves had
overcome us. Good God! in what, and how many streights have thou brought us?
Our sins are many, as the waves of the Sea; and so have thou, O Lord, made our
punishments.

For now we were, as I conceive, in a worse condition then ever before: for
though our Dangers were great, or rather greater, yet they came upon us so on a
sudden, that we understood them not. That Danger is less afflictive which we
less understand; and that Misery we apprehend not is none at all, or at least
none of our own. But now we see death before our eyes, and are in expectation
to perish every moment; so that we may say, 1 Cor. 15.
with S. Paul, We die daily. We were in the condition of him that sees himself
bleed to death. In our former Dangers we had like to perish suddenly, which had
been less penal to our affections: we were now to dye at leisure, and to be
drowned with premeditation; which is more afflictive to our Thoughts, though a
less punishment for our Sins. Melius est perire semel, quam timere semper: the
fear of Death is more dreadful then Death it self; and it is better once to
dye, then to be always dying.

With these fears about us, and black apprehensions, we sailed on still with a
fair wind; and after four or five days and nights sail, so it pleased God, we
came in the view of the English Coast on Norfolk side, near Winterton; where we
saw the ruins of a Shipwreck, and the Country people enriching themselves
with the losses of other men, the worst way of getting in the world. This was
the Epilogue to our Tragedy, yet we had one Scene of sorrow more: For when we
came near Yarmouth road, on our left hand lay the Shingles, on our right the
Shore; and we could not agree amongst our selves on which side we should go.
Our two Masters and two Pilots (for so many we had in one Ship) like four winds
blew contrary ways. In this contest they made a fearful noise and quarrel;
their language was as foul as the weather, and as high as the wind, and brought
us in as great danger (as our own Master told me) as ever.

I think Monarchy is the best Government in a Ship, as well as in the State.
Many Pilots with their over-wisedomnesse are oftentimes the ruin both of
themselves and their Vessel.

At length we did agree, and ordered one of our own company (a Shotley man) who
best knew the Coast, to sit at Stern: But this crazy and ill-built Ship, though
she was steered one way, flew another, as if all things had conspired to our
ruin. We resolved to sail by the shore side, that in case our Ship should
miscarry, we might swim to land. These were but sad hopes: But it pleased God,
we came safe into Yarmouth road; and having cast our Anchor, thought our selves
secure. But our Anchor came home to us again; and the wind, which was very
high, had like to have driven us on a Scotch-man. They cried out, and so did
we; for they could not be more afraid of us then we were of our selves; for had
we boarded them, we certainly had endangered both our Ships. But that God that
had begun and gone along with us in such visible characters of his
extraordinary mercy, would not now leave us at the last, but did perfect our
deliverance: For our Anchor held, and we rode very secure that night. The next
morning we hung out a Weaf, and there came four Men in a Shallop from Yarmouth,
and demanded no less then thirty shillings to carry me, a single person, to
shore, when our whole Stock was but two Pieces of Eight. Though I did long for
land, yet I could not purchase it at such a rate: But at length they were
content to take less, because they could get no more; and took something,
rather then to turn back with nothing.

But they had no sooner got me in the Boat, but they rowed me up and down, to
weigh Anchors; for there had been a great Storm the night before, and many
Ships had broke their Cables, and were driven away by the Tempest. They tried
at several Anchors, not without great danger, as I conceived; but finding
themselves not strong enough, they at length brought me to the Shore, which was
no landing place: but four men, which stood waiting for us on the Shore, ran
into the Sea up to the middles, laid hands on our Boat, and so ran it on the
Sands, and tumbled us over and over; so that I cannot say whether I set my head
or foot first on the shore. After this manner sure Jonah was cast upon dry
land, when the Whale vomited him up; I suppose that great Leviathan did not
cast him upon his legs: But a man that had made such a trade of suffering at
Sea as we did, and after so long a succession of evils, would be glad to be
cast on dry land in any posture.

From the shore I went into Yarmouth Town, with a company of people following
at my heels, wondering at me, as if I had been some strange Creature come out of
America, though they knew none of my sufferings, but saw me in a sad, ragged,
weather-beaten condition. I presently got into an Inn, to hide my self from
the wonder of the People, and from the trouble of their impertinent questions;
but chiefly, that I might praise God in private for his great and many
deliverances. I cannot choose but tell you so much, lest I should seem
ungrateful to my gracious God: but I will say no more, lest I may seem
vainglorious to my Friend. Therefore I will conceal from you my particular
devotions: Non est religio ubi omnia patent, I learned it from the door of a
Capuchin's Convent.

The Sign of the Inn was the Arms of Yarmouth; the Man, I suppose the Host of
the house, was as kind to me as S. Paul's Host Gaius was to him. Tho. Loman
Esquire. of Wenbeston in Suffolk.
And here I must not forget the kindness of a true Friend indeed, a good
Samaritan, who had compassion on me, bound up my Wounds, pouring in Oil and
Wine, and set me on his own Beast, brought me to his own House, and had a care
of me; and, which I took most kindly, he bestowed on my sufferings Nazianzen's
charity, a tear of compassion [ Si nihil habes, Orat. 16.
da lacrumulam,] God, I hope, will return this kindness to him, in blessings
upon him, and his dear Wife and Children. By the kindness of this Gentleman I
was recruited with all manner of comforts; and now behold another Shipwreck,
not of my goods, but good name. Some there were, when they heard of the Monster
of my sufferings, were affrighted out of their Wits, I suppose, as well as out
of their Charity, and concluded I was a Malignant. Thus God is pleased to
assimilate my sufferings to St. Paul's in some measure (the latchet of whose
shoe I am not worthy to untie) who when he had escaped the danger of the Sea,
Acts 28.
was stung by a Viper as soon as he came to Shore. Suppose I should say I do
serve my God that way which the World calls Malignancy, am I such an one,
because the People say it? or was S. Paul an Heretic, because the World
thought him so? I do not care what the Many say of me, Bellua multorum capitum,
a Beast of many heads, sed nullius ingenii, but of no understanding. Thus the
People censured John the Baptist, the Morning Star of the Gospel; and likewise
our Blessed Savior himself, that Glorious Sun of Righteousness, or as S. Luke
calls him, Luke 2.
the Day that springs from on high; although their deportment in the World was
different, walking under several Schemes, and living after several and contrary
Fashions. For, John the Baptist came neither eating bread, nor drinking wine,
and ye say, He has a Devil. The Son of Man is come eating and drinking, and ye
say, Behold a gluttonous man, Luke 1.33.
and a wine-bibber, and a friend of Publicans and Sinners: Thus the People are
never pleased, neither full nor fasting. Neither the austerity of S. John's
life, nor the sweetness and familiarity of our Savior's conversation could
content the People.

But you are a knowing Person, and one whose good opinion I esteem; I have
therefore, here enclosed, sent you better words of me, drawn by the Company of
Dantzick, and sent to the East-land Company here in London, for whose sake I
have suffered these adverse things, and am content to run them over again to do
them service; such an affection I do and shall ever bear to their society.

Thus I have given your earnest request the sad story of my suffering in my
East-land voyage. What I have related my unhappy experience has found it too
true; yet I cannot tell you all, for there were many dangers which I understood
not. It was my chance, a year afer our arrival in England, to meet with one of
my fellow sufferers (the same man that drew me out of the Sea: M. B.
) he presently began to repeat our shipwracks (for men that have suffered
together love to talk of their dangers past, and bemoan one another) he made
mention of several streights, extremities, dangers, deaths that we were in,
which I do not remember; so that from his mouth this Story seemed to be so
prodigious a Romance, that few but those that felt it would believe. But I have
not told you, in this relation, what others say, but what I my self have
suffered; and though I was loath to begin, I am now as unwilling to make an end
-- Omnibus hoc vitium -- And therefore I shall tell you what further adversity
I have suffered by this barbarous Element of Water.

I will not tell you of my venture over the Bars in foul weather to the Min at
Dantzick in the Baltic Seas, for that it may be was our fear, and not danger,
neither will I speak of my passage from Groningen to Amsterdam, when our ship
struck against the sands; for there was danger and no fear; for the ship got
off as soon as we knew it was on. But I will acquaint you with what happened to
me upon the River Loire in France, at Orleans.

I was advised by a French Gentleman, that had formerly traveled with my Noble
Lord the present Earl of Westmerland, Whose Brother Mr. Robert Fane was in our
company.
not to shoot the Bridge at Bogency; for the bridge is made, not with a direct
line over the river, but something obliquely, and so oftentimes dangerous to
passengers. When we came near the Bridge, I would have bribed the Batelier with
a quart d' Escu, to have set my self and two of my company ashore this side the
bridge, and to have taken us in on the other side. But the rest of the Company
were unwilling to be hindered in their passage, and we were almost as contented
to venture. But this thin Deal-boat (which boats are made on purpose to swim
down the River to Nants, and return no more) came with a swift stream toward a
corner of one of the Arches of the Bridge, which the Batelier seeing, cried,
Nous sommes perdus, we are all lost. He did strive by putting his Rudder
against the bridge to keep off the Blow, but brought it upon himself; for it
beat him all along, and struck off one board of our boat, that we swam almost
equal with the stream, and the water looked in upon us: one touch more would
have dashed our boat in pieces, and so we had been all drowned in wholesale;
for there was no swimming out of a crowd, when our arms were pinioned together
with sitting close to one another. But by the goodness of God we got through
the Arch, and came safe to shore.

There came presently to me two Cordelier Friars, which were our
fellow-passengers: the one bade me thank him, for he made the biggest Cross;
the other told me I must thank him, for he prayed unto the Blessed Virgin for
us. I do remember, indeed, when we were in our greatest danger, these Friars
being struck with fear (which oftentimes kills before death) fell down in the
midst of the boat; one of them measured himself with his finger, or, as he
says, crossed himself; the other pulled out a small Image, I suppose of wood,
about the bigness of my great toe, and it seemed to me not much unlike. To this
he whispered something, which I believe it did not hear, no more then we. I
thanked them both, one for his civil ignorance, and the other for his religious
folly. I confess, in so sad and serious a matter as drowning, I do not love
such puppet piety, such mechanic and handicraft devotion; my thanks must be
addressed to God, the author and fountain of our deliverance, after a more
spiritual manner.

After this, the same year, it was my business to return into England. I came
to Calais the day after the Pacquet-boat was gone: being weary of a chargeable
Town, and burning with a desire of seeing my own Country again, having taken
advice by a Merchant, I ventured to Sea in a Shallop, which the tide before
came from Dover, and brought three Almains safe to Calais without any danger.
The example of their safe arrival was a sufficient argument to persuade me to
venture from thence to Dover. So at four of the clock in the morning with the
tide we went to Sea; but had not gone half a league, but there arose a great
and mighty wind, which did blow, not only our Candle, but our Lanthorn out, I
mean out of the boat, so that we were fain to let our boat drive till it was
daylight.

I offered the Seamen their fare to carry us back again to Calais, which they
did endeavor, but could not, the wind was so strong; yet as fair a wind as
could blow out of the sky to carry us to Dover; but we had too much of it. The
surfeit of good things is as great an evil as the want of them, and a man may be
too well sometimes. How did Neptune play at Tennis with us poor mortals, and
how like Balls were we bandied up and down by his furious waves? Sometimes, as
the Psalmist says, they mounted us up to heaven, as if they would have shown
us Lazarus in the bosom of Abraham. Sometimes they carried us down in the
deep, as if we had been sent with more then a drop of water to cool the tongue
of Dives. By and by there arose a great wind, which with the first blast split
our sail in pieces; so that we were forced to use our great sail, which was too
big for the wind, as the wind was for it, and therefore we made use but of one
half; the other lying on the side of the boat made it run so much on that side,
that I expected every moment it should topple over. We could not go backward,
and we were afraid to go forward. I laid my self down in the boat from the view
of these threatening waves (as a dying man is not willing to look the
Executioner in the face) expecting every moment to be swallowed by those
roaring Lions of the Sea, who came upon us with open mouths, ready to devour
us. But God stopped the mouths of those Lions, that they should not hurt us;
and our small Vessel rode in safety and triumph upon the head of the proudest
wave. We could not say to the Pilot, as the Emperor did, Caesarem vehis etc.
-- but there was in our boat a noble Gentleman, both by birth and virtue (the
best and truest nobility) and likewise another civil person. These Gentlemen
had so much worth and merit in them, that they should not need fear the
threatening of an insolent wave, but might boldly say unto the Sea, Sea do thy
worst. But I Will rather impute all to the goodness of God, in whose hands we
were, and therefore could not miscarry.

By and by a wave took us up, and showed us England. But it was with us as it
was with Moses, we might from this watery Pisgah, and mountain of the Sea,
behold the Land with our eyes, which yet we must not reach with our feet. One
of these Gentlemen called to me to rise, saying I might see Dover Castle: but I
thought it of no concernment to me, and therefore lay still, but wishing that
we were all Prisoners there; and so I said, little thinking that within few
days after I should be apprehended and accused for taking Dover Castle, and
kept some months a close Prisoner in Kent. At Westonhangar my Lord Strangfords
house which was then made a Prison to secure the honest Gentlemen of that
County.
God knows I would have taken it with all my heart, but for a refuge only; not
as a Soldier takes the fort of his enemy, but as a poor weather-beaten
traveller takes the house of his friend as a shelter. The storm continued
still, and the wind blew very high, which though it put us in great danger, yet
being fair for us, blew us the sooner out of it.

For now we came near Dover, and therefore I desired my friend to lie off my
legs, for now I thought I should have some use of them my self; which he did,
and I rose up and saw a world of people standing upon the Pere at Dover,
holding up their hands, not only in admiration of our dangers, but in zeal and
devotion for our deliverance. They directed us with their hands which way we
had best enter into Dover, and so with a fresh gale of Gods mercy, as well as
with a fair blast of wind, with full sails, we, not without some danger in
hitting the Pere, ran ashore.

I must not omit one mercy more (which I forgot in my last) because it is so
near of kin and allied to my deliverances at Sea, a pre-deliverance, a
deliverance before hand, an antidated mercy.

For after I had spent some time in Prussia, and had seen Elbing, Koningsberg,
which is the University; the Pillow, which is both the key to the Country, and
to the chief Revenue of the Marquess of Brandenburg in Prussia. I returned to
Dantzick with a resolution for England, having met with a fair opportunity as
well as a wind; for there was one Captain Sharper of New Castle, a Kings-man
(as they call those that love the King in that Country) this was argument
enough both to confirm and hasten my resolution.

This honest Captain being ready fraught and bound for England, I presently
went to him to speak for my passage; he like a kind man as well as a
King's-man promised me passage gratis, the English Company at Dantzick
understanding so much, the greater part of them came to me, and importuned me
to stay with them, and continue my preaching, with a promise to answer my pains
with more then I could desire or deserve. This unexpected kindness and love,
which is above the price of any reward upon earth soon melted me into a
compliance with their desires, and so without any contract I freely, as
suddenly, without farther counsel, promised to stay with them. But God was in
it, who inclines our hearts to those ways which lead to our safety and
felicity, though we do not for the present see the secrets of his love and
wisdom; for this good man, Captain Sharper, Amongst them were my two loving
Friends, Mr. Randolph Price eldest Son to Mr. Price of Esher, a Gentleman of
great hopes, taken away in the flower of his youth and virtue. I gave him the
Holy and blessed Sacrament before he went to Sea, which he received with much
devotion, which no doubt was a present and heavenly Cordial to himself; so I
mention it as a dwelling and perpetual comfort to his still weeping Friends.
Captain Vaughan who accompanied me in my first Voyage into the East-Country.
with all his company, some few days after they went to Sea, were cast away
near the Zound, not a man escaped. Thus God sometimes prevents his children
from falling into evil, as well as to deliver them when fallen, that they may
enjoy the comforts of his mercy without the sorrow of suffering.

To deliver his children when they are fallen into any calamity and trouble is
an high and broad expression of his love and kindness to them, yet there is
some bitterness in the evil, though there be sweetness in the deliverance: but
now, by his grace and goodness, to escape before we are taken, and to be
delivered before we suffer, is a mercy we cannot hope for, a blessing we could
not expect, and I am sure cannot express. It is like pure wine without the
Allay of water, a lively picture, and true portraicture of the state of the
blessed in Heaven, who possess fullness of joy without any mixture of sorrow,
and life without the shadow of death. I hope I shall never forget this great
mercy; and it is the greater because it was bestowed upon one that had no title
to it, but the free grace and goodness of God.

After these great and many dangers at Sea, and as many and great deliverances,
I had thought once to tell you what happened to me on the shore, Plus habet
infesta terra timoris aqua.
But I will conceal them from my friends; for in this sad Age every man has
sorrow enough of his own, and is not at leisure to consider the sad condition
of another from bemoaning and pitying himself. I will therefore conclude,
giving glory to God for his many mercies, and my thanks to you for giving me an
opportunity to remember them.

I hope you will pardon my plain language; Sorrow is dull, and black, and sad
stories ought not to be presented in painted words and gaudy Expressions of
Rhetoric. No man mourns in colored Taffaty. What is wanting in Allegories,
you have in reality: Truth needs no Metaphors. You have a true relation of many
sad accidents and afflictions at Sea, by him who did undergo them, who is,

SIR, Your most affectionate friend to serve you, Will. Johnson.

TO The Right Worshipful the Governor, Assistants, and Fellowship of East-Land
Merchants in London.
Right Worshipful,
IN Ours of the 28th of August, we gave you notice that in our destitute
Condition, it pleased God by his singular Providence to supply our spiritual
wants by the Ministry of Mr. William Johnson, an able and pious Divine. But he
being now called home, by a Charge fallen unto him, We cannot suffer him to
pass without this deserved Testimony: That, for his Person, he has been
amongst us grave, retired, Learned; in his life, without blame or scandal; in
his studies, laborious; in his preaching, both Orthodox and powerful: So that
truly, in regard of the singular fruition of his Labors past, and considering
our desolate ensuing Condition, We cannot but mourn at his departure. Yet has
he left us this Comfort behind him, That the present distractions at home may
be a motive to dispose of his living there, and to return to us again in the
Spring, if it please God that he be thereunto lawfully chosen and called. Unto
us he is a man without Exception, which we testify by this our general
Subscription. It may please you therefore, and it is our serious and earnest
request, that, if his Occasions will suit with our desires, you will hear him
preach, and by an undoubted Election return him back again with all speed. And
this will be an actual prayer to implore Divine mercy, and to turn curses into
blessings. We say no more, but the Lord be your Protector and Director.

Dantzig, Jan. 1. 1648. Your Worships in full assurance to command, Will. Gore.
Rich. Jenks. Sam. Travel. Robert Searles. Ed. Westcomb. Sam. Short. John
Collins. Rich. Wallis. Will. Williamson. Will. Shires. Ja. Hutchinson. Jo.
Coozin. Rich. Waynde. Ambrose Griggs. Geo. Hackett. Fran. Sanderson. Amb.
Medcalfe. And. Tailor. Ed. Daniel. Jos. Oley. Nic. Mitchel. Tho. Clench. Tho.
Dawson. Will. Lockwood. Jo. Whitehall. Jo. Pearce.


The Name of the SHIP, The William and John of IPSWICH.

The Chief Owners Were William Blithe and Were John Smythier,
both Merchants in Ipswich.

From whom the Ship had the Name; the latter of these my worthy Friend and yet
alive.

The Names of those that suffered in the Shipwrecks were Daniel Morgan, Master.
Edmund Morgan, Mate. Robert Lakeland, Mate. Matthew Bird, Boat-swain. Tailor,
Carpenter. John Holmes Mariners. Rob. Lawrence Mariners. Will. English
Mariners. Tho. Crofferd Mariners. Two Boys. James Tillet, Merchant.


And others, whose Names I cannot remember; most of these are alive, and can
testify these sad things, and some are fallen asleep.

FINIS.

