THE SCHOLARS GUIDE From the ACCIDENCE to the UNIVERSITY.

OR, Short, Plain, and Easy Rules for performing all manner of Exercise in the
Grammar School, viz.

RULES for Spelling, Orthography, Pointing, Construing, Parsing, making Latin,
placing Latin, Variation, Amplification, Allusion, Imitation, Observation,
Moving-passion.

AS ALSO RULES for making Colloquys, Essays, Fables, Prosopopaeia's,
Characters, Themes, Epistles, Orations, Declamations of all sorts.

TOGETHER WITH RULES for Translation, Variation, Imitation, Carmen, Epigrams,
Dialogues, Eccho's, Epitaphs, Hymns, Anagrams, Acrostichs, Chronostichs, etc.

By Ra. Johnson Schoolmaster.

Etsi omnia a veteribus inventa essent; hoc tamen semper novum erit usus etc
inventorum ab aliis scientia and dispositio.

Seneca. LONDON, Printed for The Pierrepont at the Sun in St Paul's
Churchyard. 1665

To the Reader.
READER,
THou may justly wonder, that after so many elaborate Pieces written by the
most Learned and Experienced Pens (both in Latin and English) upon this
Subject, I should suffer these Childish and Unpolished lines to see the light:
But who so looks into our Grammar-schools, may more justly wonder to see so
little improvement of those worthy means which this age enjoys. Many who take
in hand to instruct Youth, requiring no Exercise at all, or however no way
suitable to the Books that are read in their Schools: others exacting brick but
affording no straw, charging Exercise upon their Scholars, yet neither showing
how it may, nor (which is worse) observing that it be performed. I have for
some years, and not without profit made use of these short Rules, each evening
examining, explaining, enlarging upon them, and propounding examples thereof.
And now to save the labor of transcribing, I have caused them to be Printed.
The Rules are not mine, save some few which in teaching I have observed, The
most of them I gathered from Vossius, Macropedius, Clark, Aphthonius,
Buchlerus, Horn and others: I only have for memories sake brought them into
this method, and which none ever yet would stoop to do, have expressed them in
a low and familiar language, such as a Child does readilyest apprehend. If any
one (who is not better provided) please with me to make use of them, I fear not
he shall complain of his labor lost:

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum.

Lincensed according to Order.

RVLES of Spelling.
I. EVery Syllable must have a Vowel (a, e, i, o, u, y,) for without one of
these there can be no sound. II. The Consonant must be taken to the following
Syllable, as A-dam, a-men, not Ad-am, am-en. III. If there be two Consonants
together, the one goes to the former Syllable, the other to the latter, as,
mel-lis, fol-lie, for-mer, ab-sent. IV. Two Consonants in the middle of a word
may not be parted, if in that language they may begin a word, as, a-stray,
e-spy, can-cri, a-tlas. V. Compound words are commonly resolved into their
parts, as, trans-co, per-ago, sus-tuli, up-on, ad-ore
RVLES of Orthographie.
1. Accustom your selves to pronounce the words as you read them, very
distinctly, or by Syllables, for as you use to pronounce them so will they
settle in your memories. 2. Observe the Radix of words, and the Supines of
Verbs, and they will direct to write right, thus you may know that Mansion is
written with (s) station with (t) Schism with (sch) because they come from
Mansum, Statum, (...). 3. (s) must not be written after (x) as, excribo, not
exscribo, exul, not exsul, yet in compound words sometimes, Autl ours use it.
4. The first letter in a Sentence, all Proper Names, remarkable Appellatives,
and (I) per se, must be written with great letters, as, Thomas, London,
Colonel, Parliament, President. 5. These terminations are Latin, not English,
us, ans, ens, ons, am, n, u, i. 6. These terminations of the same sound as
English not Latin, ous, ance, ence once, ome, ay, ve, or ew, y, or ie. 7. Some
English words are not pronounced as they are writ, or have redundant Letters,
as, people, reign, razed, tongue, debt, rogue, beauty, public, goal, isle. 8.
Some words are pronounced alike, but writ diversely, as, hair, hare; bear, beer,
bier: rain, reign: their, there. 9. When a word is pronounced flatly or long,
it must have an (e) at the end, but when sharply, or short, it must have none,
as, non, none, quite, quit, stat, state, us, use, writ, write. 10. Write not
(e) after (g) in the end of a word, unless when (g) has the sound of (j)
Consonant, as, strante, change.
RULES for Pointing.
1. A Comma (,) used at the end of every sentence, and in verse, when words are
displaced. 2. A Colon (:) used in the middle of a period consisting of two
equal parts. 3. A Period (.) used at the end of perfect sentence, viz. when the
sense is finished. 4. A Parenthesis () used when a sentence is put within
another, which yet may be left out, and the Sense not destroyed, as, Parve (nec
invideo) sine me liber ibis in urbem. 5. A note of Interrogation (?) used when
a question is asked, as, Cujum pecus, and Melibai? 6. A note of Exclamation (!)
used when we express any thing with wonder, as, heu pietas! 7. A Subunio (-)
used 1. when two whole words are united, as, pale-faced. 2. when one part of
the word is writ at the end of the line, and the other at the beginning of the
next. 8. A Dialysis () used when a diphthong is parted into two Syllables, as.
pictai, aquai, poema. 9. An Induction () used to bring in a word interlined.
10. An Apostrophus (') used when a letter is cast out, as, dix' tin' for
dixistine. 11. A note of Quotation () used in the Margin, when we quote a
Sentence out of an Author. 12. An Acute tone () used to distinguish doubtful
quantitys, as, cecidit, cecidit. 13. A Grave tone (`) used to distinguish
adverbs from other words, as, stulte, una, serio, palam. 14. A Circumflex tone,
(^) used 1. over Ablative cases of the first, 2. Genitive cases of the fourth
Declension, 3. Words Syncopated and contracted, as, musa, manus, amasti,
tibicen.
RVLES for construing Grammatically.
Praecognita.
1. Read over the Sentence of a period, observing the general scope of the
matter. 2. Find the principal Verb, viz. the first which is not the Infinitive
Mood, nor has a Relative or Conjunction before it. 3. By asking the question
who, or what? find out the Nominative case. This done;
Rule.
1. Take the Vocative case, or what supplies the place thereof, as, Adverb,
Conjunct. Interject. 2. Take the Nominative case, and what depends thereon, as,
Adjective, Genitive case, Gerund. 3. Take the Verb with what depends thereon,
as, Adverb, Infinitive mood, Participle, Supine. 4. Take casual words in this
order, 1. Thing, 2. Person, 3. The rest in order of cases, as, 1 dedit 3 mihi 2
vestem 4 pignori 6 te-praesente 5 propria-manu. 2 Jupiter 1 O 5 mibi 1 si 4
juveniles 3 redderet 4 annos. 5. When any casual word has much depending on it
cast it back to the last place, as, 3
vitam-tuam-suppliciis-justis-debitisque-ere-ptam 2 fugae 1 mandato. 6.
Relatives and Interrogatives cross this order, being taken before the Verb
which they should follow, as, 1 Quantum 1 quisque 4 sua 1 nummorum 3 servat 4
in-arca, etc. 7. A Parenthesis, or Subjunctive sentence must be construed
alone, and taken where the sense gives best room, sometimes in the beginning,
but most usually after the Nominative case. 8. Be sure in construing ever to
avoid nonsense, and breach of Grammar rule.
RVLes for construing Rhetorically.
1. Give every Phrase or Proverb a suitable English one, and construe the whole
Phrase or Proverb together, as, Sator hominum atque deorum, Jupiter. Ad graecas
calendas, at latter Lammas. 2. When a word has various significations, choose
that which may best express the sense, as, colere Deum, to worship God: colere
parents, to honor ones parents: colere sylvas, to haunt the woods: colere
agros, to till the fields, etc. 3. Be careful to express terms of Art by
proper English terms, as, -- viscera nudant, they panch, vela dabant ventis,
they hoised up sails. 4. Resolve Infinitive moods, and words put absolute, as,
te venisse, that thon art come: Me duce, when I am Caplain: interjecto tempore,
after a certain time: Saturno rege, while Saturn ruled. 5. Express Impersonals,
and Passives with their casual words Personally and Actively, as, tibi licet,
thou may: vivitur ex rapto, men live by plunder. 6. Always endeavor to
carry on a proper English style, choosing such expressions as may best fit the
matter in hand.
RVLES for parsing.
1. Read over the sentence distinctly, find the Verb, and so the Nominative
case. 2. Enquire by your Rules what Declension, Number, Gender, Person,
Species, Figure your Nominat. is of. 3. Enquire of what Conjugation the Verb
is, what it makes in the Perfect tense, what in the Supine, what Mood, Tense,
Number, Person, as also what kind, Species, and Figure. 4. Take next the casual
word of the thing, govern it on the next word before which cannot be lest out,
but destroy the sense. 5. Do the like in order with the other casual words
according to their nature, and rule. 6. When you have a Relative, put ille in
the same case and you may see its Government by construing the Sentence, as,
cui similem non vidi, non vidi similem illi. 7. When you have an Adjective,
search what Declensions it is of, what Species, what Degree of Comparison, and
what is its Substantive, unless it be put absolute in the neuter Gender, for
then it has none. 8. In Parsing all words be sure to enquire for the Radix,
whether it be Latin or Greek.
RVLES for making Latin Grammatically.
Praecognita.
1. Learn to know of what parts any Sentence propounded does consist, viz. the
Nominat. Verb, and casual words, with what depends on them. 2. Learn to know
and distinguish by the sense and signs all sort of casual words, viz. of the
thing, person, place, time, cause, crime, space, instrument, price, etc. and
what case they are used in, with the Exceptions.
Rule.
1. Read over the Sentence, and if there be a Vocative case, or any thing in
stead thereof, make that first. 2. Find out the Nominative, see what number it
is of, put it in that number, and write it down. 3. If any thing depend on the
Nominat. as Genesis case, Adjective, Gerund, or Subjunctive sentence, make that
first. Then, 4. Come to the Verb, find what mood and tense it is, from it in
that mood and tense according to its Conjugation, and put it in the same Number
and person the Nominative case is. 5. Make next the Infinitive mood, Gerund,
Supine, Adverb or what else does depend on the Verb. 6. Put the casual word of
the thing in the Accusat. case, the person in the Dat. the rest according to
your Rules. 7. If you have a Verb, or Adjective which will properly Govern a
case, such as, satago, memini, opus, utor, natus, etc. be careful to put the
right case after it. 8. When you doubt what case any Noune or Verb will govern,
if Grammar will not determine, consult with some Author, or the Dictionary,
Cowper, Thomas, etc. 9. When you have a relative, ask the question who, or
what? and thereby find the antecedent, and therewith make it agree in Gender,
and Number; and if it be not the Nominat. to the Verb, make it such case as the
Verb, or other word whereof it does depend, will govern.
RVLES for making Latin Rhetorically.
1. In reading Authors, mark out and remember all Latin Phrases, that so when
you meet with any English Phrase, you may render it in proper Latin. 2. When
you have an English Phrase, and know not a Latin one for it, turn your phrase
into Latin according to the sense, not the words; as, I will not deal doubly,
say, Non utar fraud mala, not, non agam dupliciter. 3. Care not to render a
sentence word by word, but change it so as the Latin may be handsomest, and
most agreeable to a Latin style, as, he must needs grieve that is wronged, non
potest non dolere qui laesus est, or fieri non potest quin doleat cui fit
injuria. 4. The Latin tongue loves Verbals, Participials, Gerundives, and
Participles of the future in rus.
Est mihi oblectamento, Rather than Me oblectat. Ad emendas merces, Vt emeret
merces. Redempturus filiam, Vt redimeret filium.

5. When the English sets the Preposition at the end of the sentence, or after
the Verb, in Latin set it in composition before the Verb, as, pull me out,
Eripe me: get thee away, Eripe re^ cast thy eye back, retorque oculum. 6.
Remember to cast away quod or ut, turning the Verb into the Infinitive mood: to
make Ablative cases absolute by casting away Dum, cum, quando, si, postquam,
quanquam: to express Actives sometimes by Passives, and Personals by
Impersonals: to make have by est or suppetit: and to observe such other Grammar
rules as have most Elegancy, as,
Gaudeo te venisse, Rather than Gaudeo quod venisti. Appetente hieme, Cum
appeteret hiems. Laudatur ab omnibus, Omnes laudant. Misere vivitur, Misere
vivunt. Rerum suppetit usus. Habet usum rerum.

RULES for placing Latin.
1. Read the best Authors by periods, viva voce, thereby their style will be
secretly instilled into your minds. 2. Avoid the craggy concourse of many
Consonants, and the gaping of many Vowels, temper one with the other, so as a
Vowel ending, the next word may begin with a Consonant, and vice versa, as,
Quousque tandem abutere patientia nostra Catilina? 3. Place the word last
wherein the Emphasis of the sentence does lie, as, -- Caesare fortiorem legimus
neminem. So in the Example next above. -- Where these Rules permit, 4. Place
the casual word first, the Nominat. in the middle, and the verb last: as,
Galliam Caesar occupavit, Religionem pauci colunt. 5. Between the Adjective and
his Substantive, likewise between the Praeposition and his case put a Genitive
case or other Particle, as, Innumeras hostium copias Caesar fudit: omnis enim
perturbatio, etc. 6. Comparatives, Superlatives, and Nounes of multitude must
be set after their Substantives, as, sceleratos omnes Catilina unus superavit.
7. Polysyllable Ajectives elegantly begin and end sentences, as, Miserrimi sunt
omnes inglorii.
RVLES of Variation.
1. Express your sentence in proper, choice, and purely Latin words, without
barbarism or Solaecism, as, fecit mihi potestatem abeundi, not dedit mihi
licentiam. 2. By Synonyma's or words signifying the same thing, as, Literae
tuae magnopere me delectarunt: Epistola tua fuit mihi oblectamento: fuit mihi
voluptati. 3. By tropes or figures, viz. 1. Periphrasis, as, homo sapientiae
studiosus, pro Philosopho: cubito se emungit, pro salsumentario: ars been
dicendi, pro rhetorica. 2. Metaphora, as, fluit oration: buccinare lauds: 3.
Allegoria, as, flamma fumo proxima. 4. Mitonymia, as, Bacchus, provino;
Vcalegon pro Domo: ferrum pro gladio. 5. Synecdoche, as, capus, pro homine:
Hanibal: Adria. 4. Express the Active by the Pastive, Or Personal by
Impersonal: and contura, as, Virgilius legitur a me: ego lego, etc. Starur ab
illis: illi stant. 5. Change the Verbs into Verbals or Participles, as quae
nocent, docent; nocumenta, documenta: ut emerem libros: empturus libros: 6.
Express the sentence by the contrary or negative, as, semper, dum vivam, tui
meminero: nunquam dum vivam tui non meminero. 7. Express the sentence by
Interrogation, Admiration, or Aporia, or Ironia, as, Number tui me unquam qucat
capere oblivio? 8. Vary the sentence by the rules in Grammar, viz. Est pro
habeo: The English of the Infinitive mood: Gerunds turned into adjectives, etc.
as, habeo pecuniam est mihi pecunia; suppetit mihi pecunia. Huc veni ad
emendum: emptum: empturus; ut emerem: causa emendi: ad emendos libros.
RVLES of Amplification.
1. A sentence is amplyfied by reckoning up all the parts included within the
General heads of the Theme. ex. gr. love conquers all men: here amplify men,
by reckoning up all there under included, as, poor, rich: wise, foolish: young,
old: Prince, peasant, etc. 2. By handling the Antecedents, concomitants, and
consequents of things ex. gr. theft, the Anteced. crafty looks and gestures.
Concom. fear. Conseq. shame, fear, etc. 3. By showing the causes, grounds, or
occasions of the matter in hand. 4. By Diatyposis or a particular description
of each circumstance ex. gr. if we describe the ransacking of a City, we shall
mention, houses burned, virgins ravished, temples ruined, young men murdered,
etc. 5. By digressions, or stepping aside to other matters, which
notwitstanding bring light to the subject in hand, especially from the
Hypothesis to the Thesis. 6. By Comparisons or Simile's illustrating the
argument; taken from things artificial or natural, from things in heaven,
carth, or sea. 7. By Congeries, or heaping up many sentence signifying all the
same thing in substance: ex. gr. we must all die, Calcanda lethi semel via:
nullum saeva caput Proserpina fugit: Serius aut citius sedem properamus ad
unam. 8. By Definitions or Descriptions various in words but one in Substance,
as, mare est fons imbrium, hospitium fluviorum, Inventio commeatuum, it incrum
compendium, etc. 9. By Rhetorical figures, as, Prosopopeia, Apostrophe,
periphrasis, correctio, Aporia, etc. 10. By showing the good or evil of the
contrary. ex. gr. if we treat of Sobriety, show the evil effects of
drunkenness, it wastes the estate, consumes the body, etc. 11. By producing
examples, Apothegmes and Testimonies out of Authors, viz. Poets or Historians.
RULES of Allusion.
1. It is hand some to allude to the various significations, or nearness in
sound of Hebrew, Greek, Italian, Saxon words, or of any other Language, as what
we call a Grave the Welsh call a bed, so near a kin are death and sleep. 2. We
may allude to Sentences of Authors, applying them to another matter. ex. gr. de
amore dicere possumus, quod olim Seneca de ira, furor brevis est. We may say of
drunkenness as the Poet did of love, raptam tollit de cardine mentem. 3. We may
allude to persons, as, alter Hercules, alia Minerva: a second Alexander: Vsque
adeo Demeae: Si fueris Thraso nusquam decrit tibi Gnatho. Thus persons notable
for any virtues or vices may be used as Appellatives. 4. We may allude to
memorable actions, ex. gr. he consumes his estate. In exstruendo mari, and
montibus coaequandis. Alluding to Xerxes. 5. We may allude to the manners or
customs of Nations, ex. gr. The Baeotians used to burn the Axle-tree of the
Coach that brought home a Bride: intimating that she being once married, might
never return from her husband: We worship the rising Sun. 6. We allude to
places, as, Qui sub zona torrida persecution^ degunt: quasi in insulis
Fortunatis natus. Thus, Psittacorum regio, Terra del fogo, Mare Pacificum, and
the like may be alluded to. 7. We may allude to occasions of Proverbs, as, His
plots are as undiscoverable, as if he had Gyges ring. 8. We may allude to any
observable thing in nature or Art, Viz. Stars, Meteors, Birds, Beasts, Fishes,
Plants, Stones, etc. He is the rising Sun. Thus, Stella cadens, ignis fatuus,
the Stork, the Panther, the Remora, the Turn-sol, the Magnet, and a thousand
such may be alluded to.
RVLES of Imitation.
1. Observe the parts of such Sentences as you would imitate. 2. Take another
subject and make your sentences of the same parts, putting Noune for Noune,
Verb for Verb, Adverb for Adverb, etc. as, The love of money is the root of
evil: The fear of God is the spring of Wisdom. 3. When you would imitate a
whole speech, strive to make like style, phrase, and length of Periods. 4.
Where the Author uses any interrogations, Admirations, Epiphonema's, Simile's,
Examples, Allusions, digressions, do you the like. 5. Observe from what heads
your Author fetches his Arguments, as, cause, effect, subject, Adjunct, a
pari, a minore, a majore, a simili, a contrario, etc. and fetch yours thence
also, if the matter will permit.
See Examples hereof in Horns Manuduct. page 88. The fountains of Eloquence
whence Scholars must draw forth, and lay up matter for Exercises.

1. Histories, remarkable and applicable, See Plutarch, Florus, Justin, Pliny,
Livy, Tacitus, Salust, etc. 2. Fables choice and witty. See Ovids Metam. Aesop.
1. Natal. Comes, Rosse's. Mystag. Poeticus. 3. Proverbs witty and best known.
See Erasmus Chil. Clarks Proverbs. 4. Hierogliyphicks, most significant and
apposite. See Nich. Causinas, Pierius. Clem. Alexandrinus. 5. Emblems, Symhols,
Impresses, upon the Coyns or Arms of Emperors or other great Person, Pictures
of the Heathens Gods, Geaces, Furys, Fates, Virtues, etc. See Rousner, Quarles,
Alciat, Cambden. 6. Laws and Customs of the Jews, Greeks, Romans, Egyptians,
Saxons, etc. See Godwins Antiq. Leo Modena, Plutarch, Verstegan, Olaus Magnus.
7. Neat and Significant Sentences, and Apothegms, out of Tacitus, Salust, Livy,
Tully, Licosthones, and the Poets. 8. Rhetorical sigures especially such as
adorn an Oration, or move the Passions. See Vessius, Faruaby, Vicars, Butler.
9. Topics of Logic, or heads from whence arguments are drawn, viz. Causes,
Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts, Contraries. 10. The whole Series of Natural and
Artificial things, especially Pyramids, Labyrinths, Temples, Palaces, Shops of
Artists, Meats, Merchandise, Stones, Plants, Fish, Fowls, Stars, etc.
Collections out of choice Authors under these heads, will serve in all manner
of Exercise, for Exordiums, Simile's, Testimonies, Allusions, and other
Ornaments.

RVLES of Observation.
In reading Authors (besides the above recited perticulers) Scholars must
diligently observe, and treasure up in memory.

1. All choice single words, especially, such as agree in sound with the thing
signified, as, Boatus, mugitus, ululatus, lugubris, vortex, tinnio, clangor,
stridor, fragor, etc. 2. Such as both by use and Etymology appositely express
the thing signified, as, philomela, sacro-sanctus, sartus-tectus,
praeter-propter. 3. Such whose signification is very large, or hardly to be
expressed in other words, as, colo, s^ringo, mereor, tenor, Idea, tinctura. 2.
All choice Phrases or Idiotisms of the tongue whether Poetical, Historical,
or Oratoricall; together with Congruous and Significant Epithets, Neat
Periphrases, and Descriptions. 3. All choice strains of Eloquence fit to be
imitated, such be, Non feram, non patiar, non sinam: pleni sunt omnes libri,
plenae sapientium voces, plena exemplorum vetustas: nullo possessio firmior
constantior nulla: Obsequium amicos, veritac odium parit. 4. The Rhetorical
Analysis, viz. the parts of which any Oration does consift, the heads from
whence the Arguments are drawn, as also, what passions are moved and from what
heads. 5. (...), or the heights of Eloquence, viz. when an Author does express
a passion, (...), or other Action to the life, so that nothing can be said
further. Such be, Seneca.
Med. Men's intus agitat vulnera, and caedem, and vagum
Funus per artus, levia memoravi cinnis:
Haec virgo feci, gravior exurgat dolor.
Majora jam me scelera post partus decent.

Ja. Infesta memet perime. Med. misereri jubes.


RVLES for moving the Passions.
1. Fear is moved, 1. By setting forth the greatness of the approaching evil.
2. By showing that it is near at hand. 3. By producing examples in like cases,
or prodigies. 2. Confidence and hope are moved, 1. By showing that the Dangers
or evils may be or have been escaped by us or others. 2. By reckoning up the
convenient means, or helps, which we have and others want. 3. By persuasion of
Divine favor from prodigys, prophesies, or common voice of the people. 3.
Shame is moved, 1. By setting forth the baseness of the fact, 2 Or the signs of
baseness in the parties or their relations. 4. Joy is moved, 1. By recounting
our former miseries, 2. By exaggerating our present happiness. 5. Anger is
moved, 1. By showing the hainousness and indignity of the fact, 2. The
Innocence, virtue, dignity of the person injured, 3. The vices and contemptible
condition of the person injuring, 4. That the injury extends not only to the
present, but to posterity. 6. Lenity is moved, 1. By showing that the offense
was not committed through wilfulness or disrespect, but through passion,
rashness, etc. 2. That the former good deeds exceeded this offense, 3. By
testifying our unfeigned sorrow, 4. By setting forth the glory and benefits of
lenity. 7. Love is moved, by expressing our willingness to do good to others or
their relations especially under the notion of good men, without respect to our
own advantage. 8. Hatred is moved by relating and exaggerating the offenses
enviously committed against what is dealt to us. 9. Indignation is moved, by
comparing the former baseness of a person with his present undeserved honor,
or plenty. 10. Envy is moved, 1. By showing that the honor, or riches gotten,
were not obtained by virtue, but basely, 2. By exaggerating the persons
insolency. shewint that it exceeds his merits. 11. Pity is moved, by
exaggerating the misery, from the adjuncts of time, place, person, end, manner,
2. By comparing our former felicity with our present misery.
(...).

OR,

Short and plain directions for the making of all manner of School-Exercises in
Prose, or Verse.

A Colloquie.
A Colloquie is a feigned discourse betwixt two or more Persons.

RVLES for making it.
1. Imagine some discourse betwixt two or more persons, concerning some matter
daily happening among people, as about the School, House, Church, Market, Fields,
Woods, or something done therein: or about News, Travels, Games, Employments,
Trades, etc. 2. Express your thoughts in choice and good phrase, such as you
have collected out of approved Authors. 3. Let not one word or phrase be said
often over, but if you must use the same Sense, vary the Phrase. 4. Endeavor to
make your Colloquy pleasant, with witty jerks, quibbles and fancies (such as
you shall often find in Erasmus) joking upon a name, action, proverb or the
like. 5. In larger Colloquies upon any particular Subject, as, Football,
Hand-ball, Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, Swiming, Shuting, Music, Dancing,
Feasts, Soldiery, Law, Heraldry, etc. Endeavor to apply as many of the terms
belonging to that exercise as may be.
An Essay.
An Essay is a short discourse about any virtue, vice, or other commonplace.
Such be Learning, Ignorance, Justice, Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence,
Drunkenness, Usury, Love, Joy, Fear, Hope, Sorrow, Anger, Covetousness,
Contentation, Labor, Idleness, Riches, Poverty, Pride, Humility, Virginity,
etc.

RVLES for making it.
1. Having chosen a Subject, express the nature of it in two or three short
Definitions, or Descriptions. 2. Show the several sorts or kinds of it, with
their distinctions. 3. Show the several causes, adjuncts, and effects of each
sort or kind. 4. Be careful to do this briefly, without tautology or
superfluous words, in good and choice language. 5. Metaphors, Allegories,
Antithetons, and Paranomasia's do greatly adorn this kind of exercise. 6. In
larger and complete Essays (such as Bacon's, Feltham's, etc.) we must labor
compendiously to express the whole nature of, with all observables about our
subject.
A Fable.
A Fable is a facetious discourse false in it self yet secretly intimating a
truth.

RVLES for making it.
1. Choose some Subject which you intend for your moral, as, Learning, Arts,
Cowardice, Courage, Fraud, Patience, Envy, Ingratitude, etc. 2. Pitch upon some
living creatures for your speakers, which may fitly resemble the virtue or vice
chosen, as the Hieroglyphick thereof, as for Corwardise the Hare, or Dear: for
subtilty, the Fox: for courage, the Lion: for dullness, the Ass: for Hypocrisy,
the Crocodile: for Chastity, the Turtle: for natural affection, the Stork: for
cruelty the Tiger. 3. Let the Style of your Fable be very short, and quick, the
matter witty and facetious, the phrase choice and good. 4. If the conclusion of
the Fable fall in with something remarkable in nature, it adds a singular grace
to the Fable, such be these of Daphne, the Bar, Battus, etc. 4. For enlarging a
Fable, (according to the Rules of amplification) express the perticulers
contained in the generals, and seign speeches to the persons in the Fable.
A Prosopopaeia.
A Prosopopaeia is a discourse, pathetically, and livelily setting forth what
we conceive a person might say in such or such a case.

RVLES for making it.
1. Consider the case and condition of the person you represent, and imagine
your self in such a place, so qualified. 2. Observe what passions the person is
most affected with, as, love, joy, sorrow, fear, hatred, anger, despair; also
what virtues or vices he is inclined to, and by the Rules of moving passions,
make use of those sigures and arguments which best suit the purpose. 3.
Consider the time, place, condition, age, sex, religion, and former estate of
the person, that all things may be done ad decorum, not unsutably in any
circumstance. 4. Consider the endowments, and office of the person, let an old
Patriot speak gravely, a King majestically, a Soldier resolutely, a young
novice headily, all men altogether (...).
A Character.
A Character is a witty and facetious description of the nature and qualities
of some person, or sort of people.

RVLEs for making it.
1. Choose a Subject, viz. such a sort of men as will admit of variety of
observation, such be, drunkards, usurers, liars, tailors, excise-men,
travelers, pedlars, merchants, tapsters, lawyers, an upstart gentleman, a
young Justice, a Constable, an Alderman, and the like. 2. Express their
natures, qualities, conditions, practices, tools, desires, aims, or ends, by
witty Allegories, or Allusions, to things or terms in nature, or art, of like
nature and resemblance, still striving for wit and pleasantness, together with
tart nipping jerks about their vices or miscarriages. 3. Conclude with some
witty and near passage, leavig them to the effect of their follies or studies.
A Theme.
A Theme is a discourse amplifying a subject, by showing the meaning and
proving the truth thereof.

It has eight parts.
1. Exordium, wherein we praise the Author of the Theme, by setting forth his
wit, learning, eloquence, or other excellency above others. 2. Narratio,
wherein we show the meaning of the Theme, by Periphrasing and opening the same.
3. Causa, wherein we show the cause or reason of the Theme, how it comes to be
so true. 4. Coutrarium, wherein we treat of the contrary to our Theme, showing
how ill, if a vice, how good, if a virtue. 5. Simile, wherein we bring in
something in nature or art like to what is said in our Theme, for illustrating
the truth thereof. 6. Exemplum, wherein we bring one or more examples out of
history, of persons that have done or suffered as our Theme says. 7.
Testimonium, wherein we bring sentences out of Authors, proving the truth of
the Theme. 8. Epilogus, wherein we briefly conclude with the praise of the
Author.
General Rules for making a Theme.
1. When you are to make a Theme, run through these eight parts in your mind,
and observe what variety of matter you can, out of which gather the choicest
and best. 2. Strive to adorn your Theme with flowers of Rherorick, Gnome's,
Proverbs, Allusions, Epiphonema's, and the like. 3. For bringing in any part
neatly, at first make use of Clarks Formulae: for Simile's, Examples and
Testimonies, See Licosthenes, Reusner, and the Poets.
An Epistle.
An Epistle is a Discourse wherein we talk with an absent friend, as if we were
with him.

General Rules for all Epistles.
1. All Epistles. have these four Accidents, or parts, 1. A Superscription, 2.
A compellation, 3. A Subscription, and 4. A Date. 2. All Epistles must be
written in a low, short, and pithy style, without affection, periphrase or
garrulity. 3. In all Epistles shun Tauntologies, by varying the phrase, when
the same sense is repeated.
Epistles are either of the Demonstrative, Deliberative, or Judicial kind.

Demonstrative Epistles are such as respect praise, or dispraise -- Such be,
1. Narrative, wherein 1. We declare some matter to our friend, setting it
forth as livelily as we can, 2. We desire out friends advice, or assistance. 2.
Lamentatory, wherein 1. We bemoan our own or friends calamity, 2. We propound
our resolution, 3. We give, or ask advice. 3. Eucharistical. wherein, we praise
the courtesy receive 1. because done voluntarily, ur expectedly, undeservedly,
opportunely, 2. We promise requital in deeds or thankfulness. 4. Gratulatorie,
wherein 1. We express our joy for the good befaln our friend, 2. We extol the
benefit our friend has gotten, 3. We pray that it may have good effect, and be
a favor indeed. 5. Officious, wherein 1. We offer our service to our friend in
any business unrequested, 2. We desire him to take our service in good part. 6.
Disputatorie, wherein we propound, 1. The Occasion, 2. The Question, 3. The
opinion of others, 4. Our own opinion, 5. We ask our friends judgment. 7.
Laudatory, wherein we praise a person, action, or thing. See Orations of the
Demonstrative kind. 8. Deprecatorie, wherein 1. We confess our fault, 2. We
extenuate it from our age, heedlesness, or the kind of the offense, 3. We
express our sorrow for the miscarriage, 4. We praise our friends clemency. 5.
We testify our better resolution for the future.
Deliberative Epistles are such as tend to persuade or dissuade. Such be,
1. Suasorie, wherein we persuade our friend to any thing in a case doubtful,
1. Showing him that it will be honest, profitable, necessary, pleasant, easy,
2. We amplify the reasons ab exemple, a majori, a minori, a simili, a
contrario. In disswasory, we use contrary arguments. 2. Hortatorie, wherein we
exhort our friend, and four him up to a known duty, 1. From the hope of reward,
2. From the fear of disprofit, 3. From the hatted, emulation, expectation, of
our adversaries, 4. From the love, commiseration, and expectation of our
friends, 5. From Examples.
Dehortatory from the Contrary.
3. Petitorie, wherein 1. We insinuate into our friends favor, 2. We tell our
request, 3. We show it to be godly, just, honest, necessary, facile,
honorable, 4. We promise requital. 4. Commendatitious, wherein we recommend
our Friend to another, 1. Showing him to be our dear friend, 2. Worthy our
commendations, 3. That he has done like courtesies for others, 4. We tell our
request, and show it to be just and facile, 5 We promise our thankfulness. 5.
Consolatorie, wherein we show, 1. That our friend in that case ought not to
mourn at all, or however not so much, 2. We lessen the evil, 3. We bring
examples of brave men that have not sorrowed in that case, 4. We acknowledge
Gods providence in ordering all things, 5. We proffer our assistance or help.
6. Responsatorie to Consolatorie Epistles, wherein 1. We give thanks for the
good advice, 2. We mention the comfort we ^eaped therefrom, 3. We mention other
Arguments: whereby we comfort our selves. 7. Monitorie, wherein 1. We advise
our friend what to do, 2. What to shun, 3. We show the Authority we have to do
thus, from our age, relation, experience, former intimacy, or the like. 8.
Convitiatorie, wherein 1. We express our own, and others sorrow for the offense
committed, 2. We reprehend the fact, 3. We admonish our friend to take better
courses. 9. Conciliatorie, wherein we desire acquaintance with one, 1.
Expressing his virtues and indowments which make us love him, 2. We modestly
desire to be reckoned as a friend, 3. If there be any thing which may make him
love us, we modestly mention it, however we promise faithfulness and integrity.
Judicial Epistles are such as accuse or defend, viz.
1. Criminatorie, wherein we accuse a Person, 1. By showing our sorrow for the
offense, 2. By setting forth the hainousness of the crime, 3. By reckoning up
the evil effects thereof. 2. Difensorie. wherein we defend our selves from a
crime imputed, 1. Either by plainly denying it, 2. Or by showing that it was
done otherwise then was objected. 3. Expostulaterie, wherein 1. We express our
complaint, 2. We mitigate the crime with fair interpretation, of the Action, 3.
We admonish our friend to walk more cautiously hereafter. 4. Exprobratorie,
where we upbraid the ingratitude of a friend by showing that we deserved better
things at his hands. 5. Purgatory, wherein we show, 1. That we are not
offended but delighted with the reproof of a friend, 2. We remove the
suspittion objected against us, 3. We prove our own innocence.
ORATIONS.
AN Oration is a Discourse wherein we praise, or dispraise; persuade, or
diswade; prove, or disprove.

there be three sorts of Orations.

Demonstrative, Deliberative, Judicial.

Orations of the Demonstrative kind.
A Panagyrick ancient, used at general assemblies, to see public games,
wherein they used, 1. To praise the God or man that instituted the games, 2.
The Nation or City where they were used, 3. The games themselves, 4. The prize
played for. 5. The master of the play, 6. They exhorted the gamesters to behave
themselves bravely, and leave an example of virtue to be imitated. 2. A
Panegyric modern, used at any public assembly, as the Inauguration, or
Coronation of a Prince, or the yearly Solemnity thereof, or at the well-come of
some Commander to his Office, or Trust; wherein 1. We show the difficulty of
the task, or other cause which makes us undertake it, 2. We praise the Prince
from his Country, Kindred, Nature, Education, Studies, Atcheivements in Peace
or War, virtues, Fortune, Children, Citizens-love; and lastly by comparing him
with some other, 3. We set forth the happiness of the times having such a
Prince, affirming that nothing is so much to be prayed for as his long Life,
and his Children and Grandchildren to Rule after him, 4. We conclude with an
exhortation to obedience and concord. 3. Nuptial, used at Marriages; wherein
1. We treat of the first institution of Marriage, and of natures Prolifick
force in all creatures, 2. We show the pre-eminence of humane propagation above
other creatures, 3. We show the profits of Marriage, as credit or good name,
procreation of children, honor, mutual comfort in prosperity, and help in
adversity, increase of society and civility, affinity with foreigners, 4. We
pray for the felicity of the Bridegroom and Bride, 5. By Hypotyposis we feign
their children before them playing, prattling, singing, waxing, etc. 6. We may
bring examples of what Children have done for their Parents, 7. We praise the
Bridegroom and Bride from the likeness or distlikeness of their country,
nation, age, faculties, etc. 4. Epithalamium, used at the marriage bed, wherein
we treat of 1. The necessity of Marriage, 2. The praise of the Married eouple,
3. We exhort to mutual concord, showing what joy this will be to their
friends, what sorrow to their enemies, 4. We wish they may soon see their
Children. 5. Natalitiall, at or in honor of ones birthday; wherein, 1. We
creat of the time of the Nacivity, year, month, day, hour if any of them
afford observation, 2. The place, nation, or City, 3. The virtue of the
Parents, and Predecessors, 4. The hope we conceive of the Child from his
Kindred, Face, future Education, 5. We pray for long life and prosperity to the
Child. 6. Funeral, used at Burials, wherein 1. We express our present sorrow,
and the sad cause of our meeting, 2. We set forth the worth and virtue of the
deceased, 3. The hope we had of him whereof now berest, 4. An exhortation to
imitate his virtues. 7. Eucharisticall, when we give thanks for a courtesy
received, wherein 1. We express our joy for the benefit received, 2. We
exaggerate the courtesy, from its greatness, opportuneness, etc. 3. We promise
thankfulness in heart, word, or deed, 4. We pray sometimes that God may
requite, where we cannot. 8. Gratulatorie, used when we rejoice with our
friends in some good event; wherein 1. We signify how joyful we were to hear
of the good success, 2. We augment the benefit acquired by showing its
excellency, and use, 3. We pray that like success may be perpetual. 9.
Lawtutatorie, wherein 1. We show into what evil we are falling, aggtavating
it, 2. We exclaim against the Authors, 3. We tell others that it may be their
case, and move pity. 10 Valedictorie, used when we leave a town or Country;
wherein, 1. We express our sorrow to leave our Friends and Country, 2. We
praise the peoples fidelity, clemency, piety, etc. The City or Countries
situation and excellencys, 3. We promise our mindsulness of the courtesies
received, and our study to express our thankfulness. 11. Propempticall, used
when we take our leave of a departing Friend; wherein 1. We complain of
fortune, or other cause of this separation, 2. We mention our former
familiarity, mutual studies, recreations, etc. 3. We express the want and loss
of our friend, 4. We set forth his praise, 5. We pray him to be mindful of us
while absent, 6. We pray for a good journey.
Orations of the Deliberative kind.
1. Monitorie, when we reprove persons, yet so as not to offend; wherein, 1. we
set forth the parts and good qualities of them we admonish, and our love to
them, 2. we show that nothing is so perfect but has some stain or vice, 3. we
mention the fault, or offense, withal telling them that true love causes us
to mention it, and grant the like liberty to them of reproving us when we
offend, 4. Sometimes we lay the blame upon age, nation, so ciety, etc. 5. we
persuade to amendment, ab honesto, utili, glorioso, etc. 2. Conciliatorie, used
when we desire friendship, favor or acquaintance, wherein 1. we tell the
causes of our request, speaking well of the person according to nis place, 2.
we modestly show that we are not altogether unworthy of friendship, or league,
but may be serviceable to him. 3. Hortatorie, wherein we inflame the mind in ^
known duty, by moving the passions. 4. Swasorie, wherein we persuade by
argument in a case doubtful.
In both which

1. we commend the former virtues of the persons we exhort, 2. we bring in
arguments a jucundo, honesto, utili, sacili, 3 we excite love of the thing we
persuade to, and love or pity of the person for whom we move, with hatred to
his enemies, 4. we stir up emulation, by the good examples of others, 5. we
show the hope of good if done, the fear of evil if neglected. 5. Dehortatorie,
wherein 1. we show the matter to be ill, vile, laborious, impossible,
uncertain, not worth the pains, 2. we jeer it as a babble, 3. we blame the
auditors as over-credulous, 4. we show the great dangers likely to accompany or
ensue the undertaking. 6. Consolatorie, used when we comfort mourners; wherein
1. we show the causes of our undertaking, as kindred, friendship, pity, etc.
2. we confess a true cause of mourning, and that we Sympathize, but that
nothing should make men so exceed, 3. we show that misfortunes are common to
all, 4. That effeminate mourning becomes not a man, 5. That what we have is but
lent, 6. That we must show good examples to others, of patience, courage, etc.
7. Petitorie, when we beg any thing; wherein, 1. when occasion serves we use
insinuation, 2. we show our business to be in the power of the Auditors, 3.
That our request is just, honest, and facile, 4. we declare the manner how to
perform it, 5. we promise requital.
Orations of the Judicial kind.
1. Invective, used against an enemy, wherein 1. Either we begin at his birth
and exaggerate his vices to that time, 2. Or we insist on the several heads of
vices whereto he is inclined, 3. The possions we excite are shame, fear, and
sometimes anger, hatred, envy. 2. Objurgatorie, wherein we chide inferiors, in
which 1. we lay the crime before their eyes, 2. we exnggerate it from the
circumstances of time, place, person, manner, or by comparison with others, 3.
we expostulate and threaten more or less, according to the ingenuity or
stubbornness of the offender, 4. Sometimes we bemoan their miscarriage, and
give cantions. 3. Expostulatorie, when we complain of an injury from others;
wherein, 1. Relating the injury we exaggerate it, yet intimating that we have
suffered more than we speak of, 2. That we concealed as long as we could, now
necessity makes us speak, we searing worse things, 3. If the injury be of small
moment, we only jest it out, excusing their will, and laying the blame
somewhere else, 4. we admonish future heed and diligence. 4. Exprobratorie,
when we upbraid unthankfulness in others, wherein 1. we relate and exaggerate
our former favors, yet with excuse as done unwillingly, as forced thereto by
them, 2. we declare and amplyfie the others injurys, 3. we may run out into the
common place of Ingratitude. 5. Deprecatorie, when we plead for others about to
be punished; wherein, 1. we show that the fault was not committed of malice,
but if it were, we ingenously confess it, 2. we treat of the excellency of
clemency, 3. If the cause permit we fetch arguments of pardon, from the
offenders: Nobility, Learning, former Innocence, well-deserving of the
Commonwealth; or least this Sentence though just, prove a bad precedent, 4. we
show that his pardon will be no damage, 5. we add an Aporia what shall he or
his do.
DECLAMATIONS.
A Declamation is a kind of exercise wherein we plead for, or against, or
moderate in a cause propounded.

There be four sorts of Declamations (according to the four States, 1.
Conjecturall, 2. Finitive, 3. Qualitative, 4. Quantitative.

General Rules for Declamations.
1. In Declamations (as in Orations) the Exordium may be taken, 1. Ex
visceribus materia, 2. a persona Oratoris, auditorum, Judicis, adversarii, vel
rei, 3. a generali pronunciato, fabula, proverbio, simili, Historia, vel Lege.
2. Not only in the Exordium, but elsewhere in the Declamation, we must labor
for attention, and good will of the Auditors, by plausible compellations, fair
entreaties, and promises of our candor and faithfulness. 3. Sometimes we must
use insiouation, plausibly yet subtly stealing into our cause and the
Auditors affection, viz. in re turpi, ancipiti, vel paradoxa. 4. If our
adversaries cause be bad we insult over him, jeer his absurdities, and the
weakness of his arguments with Ironia's, Sarcasmus, Epitropt's, Exclamatio's,
etc. Especially near the conclusion. 5. It is frequent and laudable in
Declamations, by Prosopopaeia to seign speeches to the persons most concerned,
and therein livelily to move the passions of sorrow, love, envy, pity, etc. as
our cause requires. 6. We must place strong Arguments in the beginning, weaker
in the middle, and the strongest of all last. 7. In the conclusion we briefly
repeat our strongest Arguments, and strongly moving the passions requisite, we
triumph over our adversary. 8. In Academicall Declamations where the question
is propounded in a short history, either party after the Exoraium, briefly runs
through the parts of the story, hinting what observations make for him, or
against his adversary, and aster insists largly upon the weightiest Arguments.
9. In this kind of exercise there be three parties, Actor, Reus, Judex:
Plaintiff, Defendant, Moderator, who weighs the Arguments and decides.
1. Declamations Conjecturall.
1. A Conjecturall Declamation is, when we enquire whether or by whom a fact
was committed, as, An Roscius occiderit patrem? An Clodius occiderit Milonem?

We prove a person to have committed a fact, by arguments taken from these
heads.

1. A velle, showing that the Person had a will to do it, and that either 1.
From Impulsive causes, as anger, hatred, love, enmity, envy, etc. or 2. From
Ratiocinative, as hope of profit, hope of escaping unpunished, having nothing
to loose, etc. 3. From the dispositions of the parties, as nation, kindred,
sex, education, habit of body, former life, age, friends, study, etc. 4. From
former words or deeds. 2. A posse, showing that the person had ability to do
it, from the Circumstances, 1. Of the person, as that he had strength of body,
wit, means, friends, weapons, etc. 2. Of the thing, as convenience of time, and
place. 3. A Signis facti, from the signs fore going, accompanying, or sollowing
an Action. 4. A testibus, from witnesses, rumors, or reports.
We disprove by Arguments taken from centrary heads, and by showing the
incredibles of what is alleged.

2. Declamations Finitive.
2. A Finitive Declamation is, when we enquire whether the crime imputed be
such as it is deemed; as if a person be slain, whether the fact be murder,
manslaughter, chance-medley, or se defendendo.

We prove a crime to be such as is objected, by Arguments drawn from these
heads.

1. A Definitione, by laying down a Desinition of the crime objected, and
showing there is par ratio in the offense committed. A Lege, by a Law or
custom, either from the letter or the sense of the Law. 3. A Quantitate, by
exaggerating the offense committed. 4. A Comparato, by comparing what was
committed with what was omitted, and showing the hainousness of the one above
the other.
We disprove by the same heads, viz. Defining otherwise, Interpreting the Law
otherwise, exaggerating the requisite omitted, etc.

3. Declamations Qualitative.
3. A Declamation Qualitative is, when we enquire concerning the quality of an
Action, whether profitable or unprofitable, just, or unjust, etc.

These are 1. Negotiall, 2. Juridiciall, 3. Legal.

1. Negotiall, wherein we deliberate concerning matters public, or private. We
persuade to any enterprise from these heads.
1. A legitimo, from Law, or Custom Humane, or Divine. 2. Ab aquo, from what
may advantage Divine Worship, Parents, Citizens, etc. 3. Ab utili, from getting
or keeping what is good or shuning what is evil; or on the contrary, loss or
damage if we neglect. 4. A necessario, when the matter is such that we cannot
be without it. 5. A jucundo, from what may bring pleasure, delight, and
contentment. 6. A possibili, whence we prove the thing possible, and facile, or
excuse the difficulty, from the advantage to be got thereby. 7. A glorioso,
whence we show, what glory and honor we shall thereby get or keep. 8. Ab
eventu, whence we show, that however the matter fall out, the end will be
profitable or honorable.
2. Juridiciall, wherein we plead the lawfulness or justice of a past action,
viz.
1. A natura, that it is according to the Law of Nature. 2. A Lege, that it is
agreeable to the Laws of God or men. 3. A consuetudine, that it is according to
the custom of men, or nations. 4. A judicato, that there have been former
precedents of like nature. 5. Ab aequitate, that it is according to equity, or
equal dealing. 6. A pacto, that it is according to covenant, or former
agreement.
But if the cause cannot be defended from these heads, then we must make use of
Colors, viz.
1. A comparatione, wherein we compare the fact with a worse, whereunto we
should otherwise have been necessitated. 2. A relatione, wherein we lay the
blame upon the person injured, aggravating the provocation. 3. A remotione,
wherein we lay the blame upon some other person or thing, commanding,
provoking, or forcing us. 4. A purgatione, wherein we do not defend the fact,
but excuse our will, laying the blame upon necessity, fortune, or ignorance,
bringing instances of like offenses excused.
3. Legal, wherein the state or cause especially consists in the meaning of a
Law: here are four cases considerable.
1. De scripto and sententia, when the one party stands upon the words, the
other upon the Sense, of the Law or contract. In this case, The former shall
allege, 1. How dangerous it is to depart from the letter of the Law, 2. That
we ought to follow what is briefly and plainly written, and that if the
Lawgiver meant any thing further he would have added it. 3. He shall bring a
reason to prove that no further was meant, 4. He shall add like examples, or
adjudged cases. The other party shall allege, 1. That the Lawgiver thought
not needful to write what every one did of himself see, 2. That it is a
cavillers part to stand upon the Apices of the letter and neglect the sense, 3.
He shall confute the other opinion from some other clause of this Law, or from
some other Law, 4. He shall show that his opinion is according to nature, and
Law, 5. He shall bring examples of Laws where the Sense, not the words have
prevailed. 2. Contrariarum legum, when two Laws or two Clauses of one Law seem
contrary, in this Case if the Laws cannot be reconciled, then the less must
yield to the greater, 1. Humane Laws yield to Divine, 2. Old Laws to new, 3.
Permissive to Preceptive, 3. General to particular, 4. Private to Public. 3.
Ratiocinationis, when there is no particular Law in the Case, but we gather the
cause by likeness from some other Law, Here the one party will allege, that
the matter is either virtually contained in the Law, or that which is less
necessary, The other party shall show that there is not par ratio, and bring a
reason why, and where they are unlike. 4. Ex ambiguo, when the question is with
what Accent a word is to be read, or whither a word is to be referred, or in
what signification to be taken; In this case both the parties shall endeavor
to prove, that his cause is manifest, or at least not absurd, that it is equal
and good, agreeable to Law or custom, and refute the other opinion.
4: Declamations Quantitative.
4. A Quantitative Declamation is, wherein we enquire of the hainousness of an
offense, viz. Whether of two crimes is the greater; and this is proved,

1. Ratione animi depravati, when the offense is committed upon light eauses.
2. Ratione noxae, when the Damage is greater, as to kill, is more then to rob,
or defame. 3. Ratione patientis, when the injured person cannot have justice,
or has therefore grievously punished himself, as Lucretia. 4. Ratione agentis,
as if one offended alone, or first, or with few, or often, or occasioned a new
Law, or Punishment. 5. Ratione adjunctorum, as if one commie an offense on set
purpose, or ungratesully, or if many injuries be involved in one. 6. Ratione
violati juris, as when the written Law is violated, we shall allege that he
who transgresses Laws which are punishable, how much rather would he if there
were no Law, or punishment, so when an unwritten Law is transgressed, we shall
say it is a token of a worse disposition.
POETICAL EXERCISES.
RVLES for making a Verse.
1. When you can perfectly scan and prove a Verse, learn to put in meeter any
Verse displaced, the same words being retained. 2. Upon any common place, as
Virtue, Learning, Love, War, etc. bethink a Sentence consisting of three or
four words, for each word write down what Synonyma's you know, out of which
cull out a Verse; Or seeking the principal words in Thesaurus Poeticus, from
thence piece up a Verse. 3. If a word at any time be awanting to make up the
measure, choose out of Textors Epithets a proper and suitable Adjective. 4. Be
careful to express your sentence in a Poetical manner, using much the Tropes,
especially Metonymia, Metaphora, and Periphrasis.
The virtues and vices of a Verse.
1. The greatest excellency of a Verse is, when the sound of the words or
letters does resemble the thing signified, as vordt aequore vertex. Multum ille
and terris jactatus and alto.
Vna Eurusque Notusque ruunt creberque procellis, etc.
Insequitur clamorque virum stridorque rudentum.
2. Gravity, Majesty, Slowness, require Spondees, Lightness and Swiftness are
expressed by Dactyls, otherwise let the feet be mixed, as, Olli subridens
respendit ore Latinus.
-- Ea lapsa repent ruinam
Cum soritu trahit and Danaum super agnima, etc.
3. Use a Sponde in the first place seldom, and a Monosyllable in the last
place never, unless to express Gravity, Majesty, or Wonder, as, -- Magnum Jovis
Incrementum.
Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus mus.
4. Verses run most pleasantly when no seet end a word, as, Infandum regina
jubes renovare dolorem. 5. Let no verse end in a Fentasyllable, nor three
Dissyllables, such as, Ambubaiarum collegia Pharmacopolae.
Semper ut inducar, blandos offers mibi vultus.
6. Shun too many Collisions or Elisions, such as, Belli ferratos posts,
portasque refregit.
Monstrum horrendum inform ingens cui lumen ademptum.
7. Versus leonimi, viz. such as Rhyme one part to another are absurd, as, O
fortunatam natam me consule Romam. E re terrena premanant mill venena. 8. In a
Pentameter never suffer an Elision betwixt the Penthimimers: Nor end otherwise
then in a Monosyllable. And let the former Penthimimer end a word. For these
are absurd. Non desistere am are omnia si facias.
Deliciae populi qui fuerint Domini.
Hac quoque nostra sententia mentis erat.

1. TRANSLATION.
Translation is when we turn Latin Verse into English or Greek, and contra:
one sort of Verse into another: or Prose into Verse.

RVLES.
1. In all sorts of Translation be careful to express the Sense clearly and
intelligibly. 2. Ty not your self to the words, but take liberty to vary the
expression so, as may best accord with the Phrase and terms of the Language
into which you translate. 3. Where the Poet is obscure, you may enlarge, where
he is prolix, you may contract, so will your Translation be concise and easily
understood. 4. Endeavor as much as may be, to apply the proper terms of Art
belonging to any Subject you Translate.
2. VARIATION.
Variation is when we express the same thing diverse ways, either in the same or
diverse kinds of Verse. See above Rules of Variation.

3. IMITATION.
Imitation is when we take some choice passage of a Poet, and endeavor to
imitate it in all the Excellencies of matter, arguments, order, parts, phrase,
style, flowers, etc. See the Rules of Imitation. See also Horns Manuduct. page
105.

4. CARMEN.
Carmen is a Paper of Verses made upon some common place, and has like parts
with a Theme, ut supra, only you must be careful to express the matter in a
Poetical manner and dress: using much the Tropes and Figures, especially
Perlphrasis, Metonymia, Metaphora, Exclamatio, etc.

5. EPIGRAM.
An Epigram is a short but witty Poem, facetiously expressing the nature or
quality of an action, thing or person.

RVLES for making Epigrams.
1. An Epigram must be short, comprised within a Distich or two, or three at
most. 2. Every Epigram must have a fancy, which is as it were its soul, the
deeper or richer this fancy is, the worthier is the Epigram.
The heads from whence the fancy of Epigrams is fetched, are these and the like.
1. A comparatione, when comparing one thing with another, we do wittily,
suddenly, unexpectedly, and with admiration conclude, 1. A greater from a
less, 2. A less from a greater, 3. Equal from Equal, 4. Diverse from Diverse,
5. Contrary from Contrary, 6. Like from Like, etc.

Exempla Epigrammatum ubi concluditur.
1. Majus -- Ad Trajanum. Tanta tibi est recti reverentia Caesar and aequi
Quanta Numae fuerat sed Numa pauper erat.
Ardua res haec est opibus non tradere mores
Et cum tot Craesos viceris esse Numam.
2. Minus -- De Julio Caesare. Spectat Alexandri picta ut certamina Caesar
Ast ego nondum aliquid gessi ait illacrymans:
Quod si and Alexander spectasset Caesaris acta
Dixisset, Persas vincere pigritia est.
3. Aequale -- Columba, Columbus. Primus aquis terram refluis emergere pinguem
Nuntius apperiens ipsa columba fuit,
Lapsis qui primus tellurem comperit undis
Nuncius apperiens ipse Columbus erat.
4. Diversum -- Quid novi. Nil ait esse novum Salamon sub sole: Columbus
In veteri mundum repperit esse novum:
5. Contrarium -- In Haereticos. Aurum Virgilius e stercore colligit Enni:
Ex auro stercus colligit Haereticus.
6. Simile, -- Eclipsiis animae. Vt solemn tellus lunamque stat inter opacam:
Stat peccatum inter meque deumque meum.

1. Ab allusione: when we allude, 1, To some History, 2. Proverb, 3. Gnome, 4.
Maxim, 5. Term of Art, 6. Custom of a Person or Nation.

1. Historia -- Ulysses and Penelope. Mors nobis, velut Vxori subrepsit Ulysses,
Vivimus ut telam texuit ille suam.
2. Proverbium -- Spiritus Sanctus. Vt semper veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae:
Ingreditur Sanctus candida corda Deus.
3. Gnome -- Medicus and Juris consultus. Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus
honores:
Dum ne sit patiens iste, nec ille cliens.
4. Axioma -- Generatio unius est corruption alterius. Ut genereut unam confuso
semine prolem,
Corpora corrumpunt vir mulierque duo.
5. Vox artis -- A centro ad circumferentiam. A centro ad circum non unica
binea ducit,
A terra ad Caelum fert tamen una via.

3. A Paranomasia, 1. When we play upon the Etymology of a Proper name, 2. When
the proper name is the same with a common or Appellative, whence we observe
some likeness, or unlikeness, 3. When by a small change of a letter, or
Syllable the Sense is changed, 4. When a word is taken in diverse Senses.
Examples,

1. Etymologia -- Erasmus. Quaritur unde tibi sit nomen Erasmus? er as-mus.
Sin sum Musego te judice summus ero.
2. Proprium Appellat. -- Gallus. Ex gallo capo fit, fierent sl quique capones
Galli, nonne foret Gallica rara lues.
3. Mutatio Syll. -- Podagra, Chiragra. Litigat and podagra Diodorus Flacce
laborat,
Sed nil patrono porrigit haec Chiragra est.
4. Diversi sensus. -- Sanguine non virtute. Antiquum est virtute decet non
sangnine niti,
Non meritis tamen, at sanguine nitar ego.
Non inquam virtute decet sed sanguine niti,
Non virtute me a, sanguine Christ tuo.

3. Those Epigrams are the richest which have a double or triple fancy, as,

Opto, poto Anagramma. Opto tibi multam, nullam tibi poto salutem,
Est potior pot a sicca salute salus.

6. DIALOUE.
A Dialogue is a short, pithy, and witty Discourse betwixt two or more persons.

RVLES for making Dialogues.
1. In all Dialogues we must especially observe the (...) or decorum of the
speakers, viz. When, what, how much; How or after what manner they ought to
speak. 2. The choicest Dialogues are those which are framed upon the Pictures
or Statues of the Gods, Goddesses, virtues, vices, as occasion, repentance,
justice, fortune, the fates, the furies, the graces, etc. Briefly demanding,
and wittily rendering the reason of what Poets or Paintets have fansied
concerning them, as,
Cum aquila portante Jovem Dialogismus.

Dic mibi quem ports volucrum regina? tonantem.
Nulla manu quare fulmina gestat? amat.
Que calet igne Deus? pueri, cur mit is operto
Respicis ore Jovem? de Granymede loquor.
Dialogus in Justitiam.

Quae dea? Justitia, quid torvo lumine? flecti
Nescia sum, and Lacrhymis, and precio, and precibus.
Quod genus? a superis, ex quo genitore? modo, ex qua
Matre? fide. Nutrix quae tua? pauperies.
Quis Deus infantem fovit? prudentia, quonam
Freta duce agnoscis crimina? judicio.
Cur gladium tua dextra gerit, cur laeva bilancem?
Ponderat haec causas, percutit illa reos.
Quid rari assistunt? quod copia rara bonorum est.
Quae comes assidua est? caudida simplicitas.
Aurium aperta tibi cur altera, and altera clausa?
Haec surda injustis, panditur illa bonis.
Paupere cur semper cultu? justissimus esse
qui cupit, exiguas semper habebit opes.
7. ECHO.
An Echo is a facetious kind of Poem imitating the resounding Rocks, wherein
the last Syllables of a Sentence repeated, give answer to a question in the
same, or a diverse, and sometime a contrary Sense.

RULES for making an Echo.
1. The answer or repetition must be made at the end of every sentence, whether
it be at the end or in the middle of the verse. 2. The answer sometimes only
affirms the same thing with the question, sometimes it does contain something
diverse, contrary, like, greater, or lesser than the question, and the more
unexpected the better. 3. The Persons speaking are sometimes only the querent
and Echo, sometimes the Poet historically relates the passage. 4. The same
letters are not necessary in Echo, so the sound be the same, or near it: the
first Consonant may be changed, aspiration added, or taken away. 5. The
repetition is most elegant in Dissyllables, as nearest a natural Echo, yet
Trissyllables or Monosyllables may be used. Example. Dic mihi quae gelidis
habitas convallibus Echo
Cur populus pacem sic modo clamat? amat.
Ad divam pacem precibus concurpitur? itur.
Vt damnum fugiat triste colonus? onus.
Rusticus ergo iterum campos reparabit? arabit.
Et tuto curret remige navita? ita:
Omniaque evenient in mundo prospera? spera.
Largaq, nec rerum copia deerit? erit.
Si retulisti Echo mihi vera relata, voleto.
Donec nostra iterum verba novabis, abis.

8. EPITAPH.
An Epitaph is a Poem writ upon the Hearse, or Tomb of a deceased person,
expressing the name, age, merits, state, dignity, praises, studies, kind of
death or the like, in way of commiseration or sorrow.

RVLES for making Epitaphs.
1. In the Epitaphs of Kings Princes, Nobles, etc. 1. We briefly recite their
Praises, viz. Felicity, Wisdom, Justice in Government, Clemency in pardoning
their Subjects offenses, affability, valor, Piety in building Churches or
Schools, or in Defending Religion, or other their peculier virtues. 2. We take
notice of any thing new, admirable, or woeful in Life or Death. 3. We conclude
with a grave Gnome or Epiphonema. (...)

Tumulus Caroli quinti. --

Europae domuit tollentes cornua reges,
Carolus, atque Asiae terror and horror erat.
Et pedibus Libyam calcavit victor, and illi
Innumeras victus praebuit Indus opes.
Deinde sibi fraenum injecit, fratrique regendum
Imperium, and nato caetera regna dedit.
Atque ait e nobis and honores temnere, and unum hoc
Discite mortales, pulvis and umbrasumus.
2. In the Epitaphs of Generals, Captains, or Soldiers, 1. We mention their
skill in Military affairs, valor, authority, good fortune, prudence,
victories, trophies, love to their Country, 2. We compare them with former
Worthies, and Out-vies them, 3. We bemoan the Countries loss, and want of them.

Tumulus Hectoris.

Defensor patriae, juvenum fortissimus Hector
qui murus miseris civibus alter erat.
Occubit telo violenti victus Achillis
Occubuere simul spesque salusque Phrygum.
Hunc feras Aeacides circumsua maenia traxit,
Quae juvenis manibus texerat ante suis.
Heu quantos Priamo lux attulit illa doleres
Quos flet us Hecubae, quos dedit Andromachae.
Sed raptum pater infoelix auroque repensum
condidit and maerens hac tumulavit humo.
3. In the Epitaphs of Learned men, 1. We recount their peculier virtues: in
Divines piety: in Philosophers, quicksightedness: in Physicians, diligence: in
Lawyers, integrity: in Orators, elegancy: in Poets, sweetness: in Grammarians,
much reading, etc. 2. We Allegorically hold on in a strain of Terms proper to
their Art, 3. We compare and prefer them before the Ancients Renowned for those
Arts, 3. We praise their Works.

Epitaphium Paridis Pantoninni.

Quisquis Flaminiam teris viator,
Noli nobile praeterire marmor.
Vebis deliciae, salesque Nili,
Ars, and gratia, lusus, and voluptas,
Romani decus, and dolor theatri,
Atque omnes Veneres Cupidinesque
Hoc sunt condita quo, Paris, sepulcher.
Tumulus Andreae Vesalii Medici. --

Quo non art prior fuit medendi
Aut Asclepius, aut Senex Machaon
Aut magnus Podalarius, medensum
Princeps Vesalius celebriorum,
Dum morbis bonus artifex medetur
Cunctis, tam sibi non medetur ipse
Summus paeoniae magister artis,
Fato mortuus heu nimis maligno.
4. In the Epitaphs of friends, or relations, 1. We mournfully express our
loss, and hopes frustrated, 2. We complain of Deaths cruelty, 3. We use
Simile's of flowers cropped, and withered with heat, or wind, 4. We set forth
their remarkable praises.

Lachryma Rabirii in funere Parentum.

Quisquis laeta tuis and sera parentibus optas
fata, brevem titulum marmoris hujus ama:
Condidit hac charas tellure Rabirius umbras
nulli sort jacent candidiore senes.
Bis sex lustratori nox mit is and ultima clusit,
arserunt uno funera bina roge.
Tumulus Astyanactis. --

Flos Asia, tantaque unus de gente superstes,
Parvulus, Argivis sed jam de patre timendus,
Hic jacto Astyanax Scaeis dejectus ab altis,
Proh dolor! Iliaci Neptunia maenia muri
Viderant aliquid crudelius Hectore tracto.
Tumulus Filii. --

Non lachrymis-indigne meis nec honor sepulchri
rapte mihi ante diem dulcis alumne jaces.
Intra bis denos te ostendit and abstulit annos
parca ferox, vot is inficiata mcis.
Nec potuit probit as, nec amaeni gratia vultus
flectere, nec arae, nec piaturba deum.
Spes hominum stolidas! tumulavi maestus Ephsbum,
qui me debuerat laetus humasse senem.
5. In feigned Epitaphs, or upon vicious persons, 1. We merrily and wittily
play upon the name, manners, lineaments, manner of death, or other memorable
events affording matter of witty conceit.

Ad Henricum Good-year Kal. Jan.

Quid tibi prostren a mittam Goodyere, precabor
ut possis nomen multiplicare tuum.
Tres dimensiones -- in Battologum.

Vox tua mensuris desiderat e tribus unam,
lata satis, nimium longa, profunda parum.
In Vesbiamiracundam faeminem.

Tres habuit furias quondam, sed Vesbia manes
ut petiit, furias quatuor orcus habet.
9. HYMN.
An Hymn is a divine Poem made in honor of the Gods.

RVLES.
1. In an Hymn to the true God; we recount his glorious attributes, and
wondrous works done for his Church. 2. In Hymns to the heathen Gods, the Poets
used to set forth their Pedigree, Inventions, and Memorable Actions. 3. In
Hymns to Saints or Martyrs, Poets use to set forth their virtues and graces,
with what is memorable in their lives, or deaths.
Hymnus ad Deum.

Laus tibi coeli pater atque princeps
Omninm rector simul and creator,
Quem fides very studiosa trinum
credit and unum.
Hymnus Eulaliae Virgini.

Germine nobilis nobilis Eulalia
Mortis and indole nobilior
Emerila^sacra virgo suam
Cujus ab ubere progenita est
Offibus ornat, amore colit, etc.
See Prudentius.
10. ANAGRAM.
An Anagram is, when the letters of a proper Name, or other Title are made into
a Sentence, which expresses the quality of the Person.

RVLES.
1. Write the Letters of the Name in dinstinct squares of Paper, which join
several ways till you light upon a fit Sentence. 2. When you have found an
Anagram, make it up into a Distich, explaining the Sense thereof. 3. In
Anagrams some liberty of taking in or leaving out a letter is indulged, so it
be not Essential to the Name.
Galenus, Angelus. Anag.

Angelus es bonus an malus Galene? salutis
Humanae custos, angelus ergo bonus. -- So
Maria Novila -- Anagr. -- Alia Minerva.
Terra -- Anagr. errat, terar.

Mobile non errat coelum stat terra sed errat,
Funditus in varias undique secta vias.
Errantum pedibus calcabor humallima tellus
Vomere proscindar, dumque ero terra, terar.
11. ACROSTICH.
An Acrostich is a Poem wherein the Initiall Letters of the Lines, make up ths
Name or Title of a Person, or some other pleasant Device.

Sometimes the Name, Motto, or Devise goes crossways from Angle to Angle, writ
in a larger Character.

An Alphabetical Acrostich on Dr Ailmer.

A -- sk you why so many a tear
B -- ursts forth, I Will tell you in your ear:
C -- ompell me not to speak aloud,
D -- eath would then be too too proud.
E -- yes that cannot vie a tear
F -- orbear to ask you may not hear
G -- entle hearts that overflow
H -- ave only privilege to know.
I -- n these sacred ashes then
K -- now reader that a man of men
L -- yes covered, etc. See Quarls Div. Poems, page ult.
12. CHRONOSTICH.
A Chronostich is a Verse, or other Sentence whose Numerall Letters contain the
time of some Memorable Action.

On him who slew his Father. 1568.
Filius ante Diem patrios inquirit in annos.
MDLVVIIIIIIII. -- 1568.
On Owens Epigrams finished 1612.
Si Deus nobiscum. MDCVVII.
13. Epithalamium, or Verses upon a Marriage. 14. Genethliacum, upon ones
Nativity. 15. Panegyricum, used at solemn assemblies. 16. Encharisticon,
wherein we give thanks. 17. Encomiasticon, wherein we praise. 18.
Apobaterion, when we depart from any place. 19. Proseucticon, when we beg any
thing. 20. Dirae, when we curse an enemy. 21. Palinodia, when we recant an
error, etc.
All these are made according to the Rules of Orations or Epipistles of the
same kind; only in a phrase, slyle and dress poetical.

An Ode, Satry, Bucolick, Elegy, Emblem, Comedy, Tragedy, are above the
reach of the Grammar School; only Scholars may observe that the chief grace
of an Ode is Elegantea: of a Satyr. Acrimonia: of a Bucolick, Simplicitas: of
an Elegy, Mollities: of an Emblem, witty device: of a Comedy, joci and
lepores: of a Tragedy, (...), and (...).

CONCLUSION.
Choose always a kind of Verse suitable to your matter.
For Heroic matter, Hexameter. For Mournful, Elegiac. For Light and Merry,
Lyric. Eor Invective, Iambic.
Though Examples for all the forementioned Exercises, he obvious in those
Books which are usually read in Schools, yet the young Scholar for his
direction, may take notice of these that follow.
1. For Variation, see Erasm. Copiae verborum. 2. For Amplification, see Erasm.
Copia rerum. 3. For Allusions, see Horn. Manuduct. page 117. See also the
writings of Mr Fuller. 4. For moving the passions, see Vossius Rhetor. lib. 2.
5. For Colloquys. see Erasm. Coll. Helvicus, etc. 6. For Essays, see Halls
Essays, Bacons Essays, Felthams Resolves. 7. For Fables, see Aesops Fables,
Ovids Metamorph. Aphthon. Progymn. 8. For Prosopopaeia's, see Aphthon. Progym.
9. For Characters, see Blunts Charact Overburys Charact. Bp Halls Charact. 10.
For Themes, see Aphthon. Progym. 11. For Epistles, see Tullys Epistles; Textors
Epist. Politians Epist. Macropedius. Plinys Epist. 12. For Orations, see
Isocrates Orat. Tullys Orat. Livys select Orat. 13. For Declamations, see
Clarks Formulae: Quintilians Declamat. Seneca's Contravers.
Poetical Exercises.
1. For Translatinos, see the Poets, Ovid, Virgill, Seneca, etc. translated by
Sands, Oglby, etc. See also Strada's prolus. page 185. Herns Manuduct. page
115. 2. For Variation. see Virgil de 12 Signis: de Iride: de amne concreto: de
4 anni temp. de ortu Solis. 3. For Imitation, see Horns Manuduct. page 105. 4.
For Carmen, see Virg. de livere, de fortuna: Seneca's Trag. the Chorus. Clarks
formulae, last edit. 5. For Epigrams, see Owens, Martials, Textors Epigr.
Johnsons Epigr. Ausonius Epigr. 6. For Dialogues, see Textors Dialog. Ausonius.
7. For Echo's, se Thesaurus Poet. Ovid, lib. 3. Erasm. Echo. 8. For Epitaphs,
see Auson. Epitaph. Heroum. Martials Epigr. lib. 10, and 11. Virg. Epigr. 9.
For Hymns. see Prudent. Peristeph. Sen. Agam. 310. Barcl. Arg. 1. Met. 6. Hor.
Od. 11.19.111.25.1.10. 10. For Anagrams, Acrost. and Chronost. you may find
Examples here and there in the Epigrammatists, and in the Encomiasticks
prefixed before Books. 11. For Epithalamium, see Sen. Med. 56. Mart. 4.13.
Auson. Eidyl. 13. Barcl. Argenis, 5.2. For Genethliaeum, see Virg. Eclog. 4.
Mart. 6.4. Auson. Eidyl. 5. Sannazarius 1. Eleg. 4. 2 Eleg 8. 12. For
Panegyricum, see Tibul. 4.1. Casim. Lyr. Barlaeus de Fred. Henrici Prefect.
13. For Eucharisticon, see Virgil. 1 Aeneid. Aenaeas ad Didonem. Sidon. 16.
Barclaii Coridon. Barl. ad Pen. 14. For Encomiasticon, see the Laudatory Verses
of Friends upon the Authors worthy Books. See Horat, Od. 2.1. Od. 2.6. Epod. 2.
15. For Proseucticon, see Virg. Aeneid. 1. Juno ad Aeolum. Venus ad Jovem.
Horat. Od. lib. 1.35. 16. For Dirae, see Virg. Dirae. Casim. 2.24. Horat. Epod.
10. Sen. Med. 20.531. Ovid. in Ibin. 17. For Palinodia, see Hor. lib. 1. Od.
16. Od. 34.
FINIS.

