A VINDICATION OF THE BISHOP of CONDOM's EXPOSITION OF THE DOCTRINE OF THE
Catholic Church.

In Answer to a Book Entitled, An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, etc.

With a Letter from the said Bishop.

Permissu Superiorum.

LONDON, Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel. 1686.

A VINDICATION OF THE EXPOSITION of the DOCTRINE OF THE Catholic Church.
PART I. Containing an Answer to the Preface.
IT is no less strange, than much to be deplored that Religion, which ought to
be the Common Band of Unity, should, by the subtilty of Satan, become the
Occasion of Discord and Contention amongst Christians: And that all the Methods
which the Catholic Church makes use of, or the Means her dutiful Children can
suggest, should be so far from opening the Eyes of many, otherwise
clear-sighted and well-meaning Persons, led away with the Prejudice of
Education; as to give them occasion to calumniate her Doctrines, censure her
Practices, and condemn her Pastors.

One would have thought, such a Book as is the Bishop of Condom's Exposition,
free from Passion, grounded upon the Pure Doctrine of the Council of Trent, and
seconded by the greatest Authority in the Church next to that of the Council it
self, should have calmed the Minds of them, who pretend to be lovers of Peace
and Unity, and have made those, who propose to themselves any thing of
sincerity in matters of such high concerns, to acknowledge the Doctrines of the
Catholic Church to have been faithfully Expounded in it.

But we see the contrary, and that a Book thus grounded upon the manifest
Doctrine of a General Council, approved as such by the Learned Prelates of
diverse Nations, and by the Pope himself, must be made to pass amongst our New
Reformers as a Book which Palliates or Prevaricates the Doctrine of our Church;
and the very Approbations as mere Artifices to deceive the World, and not as
Sincere, much less Authoritative Approbations either of the Nature or
Principles of the same Doctrine. Pref. p. 15.


Had the Author indeed of this Calumny, who pretends to lay down the Doctrine
of the Church of England, given us some more Authentic Testimonies for what he
Publishes; or taught us some better Method, whereby to know the Doctrine of a
Church, he might have had a more plausible appearance of Reason to complain:
But when we see him giving us the Doctrines of his Church upon no better
Testimony than his own, and that of an Imprimatur; when we see him to be so far
from fixing himself to the known Doctrine of the Church of England exhibited in
her Canons, and Thirty nine Articles, that in several places he asserts what is
not to be found amongst them; and when we hear him telling us, he has forborne
to set his Name to it, Pref. p. 18.
least perhaps any prejudice against his Person might chance to injure the
Excellence of the Cause which he maintains; I cannot without some wonder
reflect upon his Censure, and the Reception his Book is said to have had. But
it seems for him to tell us, He is so assured he has not Palliated or
Prevaricated the Doctrine of the Church of England in his Exposition, Ibidem.
that he entirely submits himself and it to her Censure; and the sight of an
Imprimatur Carolus Alston R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. prefixed before it, is
sufficient in some Men's Judgments to Authorize an Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Church of England; when the Approbation of so many Learned, Judicious and
Pious Prelates of the Church of Rome, together with that of the whole Assembly
of the Clergy of France, and of the Pope himself at two several times, must by
our Author be noted as proceeding from a Peculiar Art, unknown to Protestants,
who are accustomed, as he says, to sincere dealing. Pref. p. 13.
But we shall have occasion shortly to examine whether he has made use of that
sincerity to which he makes so strong Pretentions.

Indeed an Answer to his Book seems so needless, that I often thought it would
be sufficient to tell this Nameless Author, That when his Exposition of the
Doctrine of the Church of England, has received from the Church of England as
full and as Authentic a Testimony of being neither Palliated, nor Prevaricated
by him, as has the Exposition of the Bishop of Meaux, from the Church
Catholic; and that when his Arguments appear so much as directly to confront
the Bishops Exposition, it would be time enough to Publish a Justification of
that Work against his Calumnies. But because this Author has declared (tho
rashly) in the name of Protestants, that they look upon those Opinions to be
indefensible, Pref. p. 16.
which are not maintained against the Assaults of every one that pleases to
write against them, and that it is an open, and shameful forsaking of them, not
to take care to defend every thing that is Published; it may be some unwary
Persons may look upon all he has said, as Gospel, unless his Discourse be
unravelled, and the mistakes he has fallen under, with the Sophistry of his
Arguments be shown.

But before I begin, it will be necessary to give the Reader a short Account of
the Bishop of Meaux's Intention in publishing this Book, and what he expected
from any one who should go about to Answer it; which may serve for a true state
of the Question.

And First, as for his Intention; having all along observed that our Doctrines
were strangely Misrepresented, and that not only the private Opinions of
Scholastic Authors, but even the Inventions of our Enemies, were most commonly
objected to us as the Tenets of our Church, he thought it necessary to propose
her Doctrine plainly and simply, Expos p. 1.
and to distinguish it aright from those Tenets which have been falsely imputed
to her, Note that the Quotations out of the Exposition are from the Impression
published by His Majesty's Command.
by which he hoped many of those false Notions of her Doctrine, which diverse
Persons had formed to themselves, would have been removed, and an Union much
more easily obtained; For it is a certain Truth, That if the Doctrine of the
Roman Catholic Church, when truly Represented, be Innocent and Pure, and so far
from destroying the acknowledged Foundations of the Christian Faith, that it
alone bears proportion and conformity to them, then all the pretended
Reformations of that Doctrine are but vain and unprofitable Labors, and a
Separation from that our ancient Mother Church, upon no better Grounds, must be
Schismatical; and therefore all those who have broken the Unity of the Church
upon such a pretended Reformation, are obliged to return to her Bosom and
Communion.

So that his Intentions were not so much to Argue or Dispute upon Points of
Catholic Doctrine, as to Propose them truly, and render them Intelligible. And
therefore he pitched upon the Council of Trent as the fittest Compass by which
he might steer his Course, resolving not to deviate from its Sense, being that
of the Catholic Church; but merely to separate Matters of Faith from such
Opinions as are neither necessarily nor universally received. Expos. p. 2.
And therefore he declared,

Secondly, That they who would go about to Answer his Exposition, ought not to
undertake to Confute the Doctrine contained in it, Expos. p. 43.
seeing his Design was only to Propose it without going about to Prove it; That
it would be a quitting the Design of his Treatise to Examine the several
Methods which Catholic Divines make use of to Establish or Explicate the
Doctrine of the Council of Trent, and the different Consequences which
particular Doctors have drawn from it; That it would avail them nothing,
Advert. p. 20.
either to object against us those Practices which they call general, or the
particular Opinion of Doctors; because it suffices in one word to say, That
those Practices and Opinions, be they what they will, which are not found
conformable to the Intent and Decisions of the Council, are nothing to
Religion, nor to the Body of the Catholic Church, nor ought by Consequence, as
the pretended Reformed do themselves avouch, Daille Apol c. 6. p. 8.
to give the least pretense to Separate from us; because no one is obliged
either to approve or follow them. Expos. p. 43.
Lastly, That to urge any thing solid against his Treatise, and which may come
home to the Point; it must be proved that the Churches Faith is not faithfully
Expounded in it, and that by Acts which the same Church has obliged her self to
receive; or else it must be shown that this Explication leaves all the
Objections in their full force, and all the Disputes untouched; or in fine, it
must be precisely shown in what this Doctrine subverts the Foundation of Faith.

So that if they who Answered his Book brought only Arguments against the
Doctrine delivered in it from private Authors holding particular Scholastic
Opinions, and not from Authentic Acts received by the Catholic Church; or did
not manifestly show the Bishop of Condom to have left out the chief Matters in
Dispute, and touched only lesser Difficulties; or did not demonstrate how the
Doctrine, as Expounded by him, subverted the remaining Maxims wherein both
Protestants and we agree, the Bishop might justly esteem their Answers not
worthy his Reflection, and that every Judicious Reader would grant his Pieces
were (as this Author terms them, though in derision) of a spirit and force
sufficient to despise whatever Attempts could be made upon them of that nature.
Pref. p. 16.


How true it is, that nothing solid of this kind was objected by the Pretended
Reformed in France, appears by his Advertisement. And what our Author of the
Exposition of the Doctrine of the Church of England has Proposed, is now our
Province to Examine.

And first as to his Preface.

He tells us of a first Edition suppressed, and another with Corrections
published in its place, because the Sorbon refused to Approve the first. He
tells us of one Imbert and a Pastor of Mechlin Condemned, the one by the
Archbishop of Bourdeaux, and the other by the Faculty of Lovain, though they both
alleged the Bishop of Condom's Exposition for proof of their Doctrines. He
tells us that Cardinal Capisucchi and Father Crasset have taught Doctrines
contrary to that of the Exposition, etc. But suppose all he there says should
be true, what force can his Argument bear against the Doctrine as now
Explicated in the later Editions of the Exposition? what if some particular
Persons have sustained Scholastic Opinions, which in some sense seem to thwart
the Doctrine of the Exposition, as to such Scholastic Opinions; and others,
like drowning Persons, have grasped at any thing to save themselves, whether
for them or against them? It follows not that the Exposition gives us not the
Doctrine of the Church. But to show the World what has been imposed upon them
on this account, by those who in their own Countries studied to maintain old
Calumnies by new Inventions, I shall here insert the Copy of a Letter lately
sent me by that Learned and Pious Prelate; in which they will see the true
Matter of Fact as to those things alleged against his Exposition.

Very Reverend Father,
IT will not be difficult to answer your Letter of the Third Instant, nor to
solve the Objections, drawn from Matters of Fact, sent you out of England
against my Exposition of the Catholic Doctrine. The English Minister who has
oppugn'd it, and whose Objections you have sent me, has done nothing but
gathered together the vain Inventions which our Huguenots endeavored to publish
here, and which are come to nothing of themselves, without my being obliged to
combat them.

This Author first tells us the Sorbon would not Approve to my Book. But all
the World here knows I never so much as thought of asking it. The Sorbon is
never used to License Books in Body: If it did, I should not need its
Approbation, having that of so many Bishops, and being Bishop also my self.
That Venerable Company knows better what is due to Bishops, who are naturally,
and by their Character the true Doctors of the Church, than to think they have
need of the Approbation of her Doctors; when moreover most of those Bishops who
have approved my Book are of the Body of the Sorbon, and I my self also partake
of that Honor. It is a great weakness to require of me to produce the
Approbation of Sorbon, when they see in my Book that of so many Learned
Bishops, that of the whole Clergy of France in the General Assembly of 1682,
and that of the Pope himself.

You see by this, Sir, that it is a manifest Falsity to say, that a first
Edition of my Book was suppressed, because the Doctors of Sorbon had something
to say against it. I never did publish, nor cause to be Printed any other
Edition but that which is in the Hands of every one, to which I never added nor
diminished one Syllable; and I never yet feared that any Catholic Doctor could
find in it any thing worthy of Reprehension.

This to the first Objection of the English Author. As for what he adds in the
Second place, That a certain Catholic, whose Name he designs by a Capital
Letter, had written against me; suppose it had been true, so much the worse for
that ill Catholic. But this is as the rest, an Invention of their own Heads:
Our Huguenots have in vain endeavored to vend such false Wares here: no body
ever yet heard of that Catholic; they could never name him, and all the World
has scoffed at them for going about it.

In the Third place he tells us, That Father Crasset a Jesuit, has oppugned my
Doctrine, in a Book Entitled, La veritable Devotion envers la Saint Vierge. I
have not read that Book; but neither did I ever hear it mentioned there was any
thing in it contrary to mine; and that Father would be much troubled I should
think there was. For Cardinal Capisucchi, he is so far from being contrary to
the Doctrine I have taught, that his express Approbation is to be found among
those which are Printed in my Edition of 1676, and it is he who, as Master of
the Sacred Palace, Licensed the Impression of the Italian Version in the Year
1675, Printed at the Congregation De Propaganda Fide. These are them my
Adversaries bring against me.

As for that Monsieur Imbert, and the Pastor of St. Mary's at Mechlin, whom
they pretend to have been condemned, though they alleged my Exposition as a
Warrant for their Doctrines; the Question is, whether they alleged it right or
wrong. And such Matters of Fact as these advanced without Proof, Or bringing
the Propositions maintained by them. and Condemned.
merit not any further Information.

But because you desire to know something concerning them, I must tell you that
this Imbert is a Man of no Renown, as well as of no Learning, who thought to
justify his Extravagances before the Archbishop of Bourdeaux his Superior, by
alleging my Exposition to this Prelate, who had Subscribed to the Approbation
in the Assembly of 1682. But all Mankind saw very well that Heaven and Earth
was not more opposite then my Doctrine from that which this daring Person has
presumed to broach. Moreover, it never entered into the Mind of any Catholic,
that we ought to adore the Cross after the same manner as JESUS CHRIST in the
Sacrament of the Eucharist; nor that the Cross with JESUS CHRIST was to be
adored as the Human Nature of our Savior with the Divine in the Person of the
Son of God: And if this Man gives out he is Condemned for denying those Errors
which no body ever sustained, he shows his Malice to be as great as his
Ignorance.

For the Pastor of St. Mary of Mechlin, who I am informed is a Person of Merit,
I have seen a little Printed Treatise of his called Motivum Juris: where he
advances this Proposition, That the Pope is in the Church as the President in a
Council, and the Major, or Bourghemaster, as they call them in the
Low Countries, amongst the Company of Aldermen. A Proposition very different
from my Exposition, where I acknowledge the Pope to be as a Head Established by
God, to whom we owe Submission and Obedience. If then the Faculty of Louvain
has Censured this Book, Or any other Proposition of that nature, which this
Author, if he had been Ingenuous, ought to have mentioned.
I am not engaged in that Dispute: And on the other hand, my Exposition is so
far from being rejected in the Low Countries, that on the contrary it has been
Printed at Antwerp in their own Language, with all the Marks of Public
Authority, as well Ecclesiastical as Secular.

As for those Passages which they pretend I have Corrected in a second Edition
for fear of offending the Sorbon, it is as you see a chymerical Invention, and
I do here once more repeat it, That I neither published, nor connived at, nor
caused to be made any Edition of my Book, but that which is well known, in
which I never altered any thing.

It Is true, this little Treatise being at first given in Writing to some
particular Persons for their Instruction, many Copies of it were dispersed, and
it was Printed without my order or knowledge. No body found fault with the
Doctrine contai'nd in it; and I my self, without changing any thing in it of
importance, and that only as to the order, and for the greater neatness of the
Discourse and Style, caused it to be Printed as you now see. If upon that
account they will have me in some manner to have been contrary to my self, they
show themselves to be too credulous.

But suppose it had been so, and that to free my Book from the danger of all
Attempts, I had in some places Corrected my Expressions (which, God be thanked,
I had no occasion to do) the Work ought to be so far from being disesteem'd
upon that account, that on the contrary it would be a Proof I had at last
brought it to that Exactness, that neither the Sorbon, nor any other could find
any thing to say against it, as in reality no Catholic Reprehends any thing
contained in it.

The last Objection which this English Minister brings against me is, That I am
fertile enough in producing new Labors, but steril in Answering what is
written against my Works: from whence he concludes that I am conscious they
cannot be Defended. It Is true, I have written three little Treatises of
Controversy, one of which is this of the Exposition. As the principal
Objection against this was, That I had palliated and prevaricated the Catholic
Doctrine, the best Answer I could make to it, was to relate the Approbations
which were sent me undesignedly from all Parts of Europe, and that from the
Pope himself repeated. This Answer will bear no Reply, and I have said what was
necessary upon that Subject in the Advertisement prefixed to the Edition of
1676.

If he who has sent you the Objections of the English Minister has not seen
this Advertisement, I desire you would take it up at Cramoisy's in virtue of
this Order, and send it to him as it is Printed this Year 1686, because I have
there added the Approbation of the French Clergy, These Approbations are added
in the Edition published by his Majesty's Command.
and a second Approbation of the Pope's very Authentic. And if he will but take
the pains to join this Advertisement and the Approbations to his Translation of
the Exposition, he will render his Labor more profitable to the Public, and
stop the Mouths of all those who contradict it.

Concerning the two other Treatises which I writ upon Matters of Controversy,
one of them is upon Communion under both Species, and the other is my
Conference with M. Claude Minister of Charenton, upon the Authority of the
Church, with Reflections upon the Answers of that Minister. In these Treatises
I have endeavored to prevent the principal Objections, and to give Answers to
them, so that all Men of sense are satisfied. After which to multiply Disputes,
and to compose Books after Books to embroil the Question, and quit the first
Design, neither does Charity require it of me, nor does my Employment give me
leisure.

You may send this Letter into England, that he who desires this Information
may make use of what he thinks convenient; and if he think it may be
beneficial, to mention he has had what concerns these Matters of Fact, and my
Intentions from me, he may do it; and also assure them, without the least
apprehension, that there is nothing in this Letter but what is public and
certain, etc.

From Meaux April the 6th 1686. SIR, Your very humble and affectionate Servant,
J. Benign E. de Meaux.


BEhold what the Bishop of Meaux himself has thought good to Answer to a
particular Account was given him by Letter touching these Matters of Fact.
There are two things remaining in the Preface, which seem to require a farther
Examination, because they were not fully Represented to the Bishop. The first
is the Objection drawn from Cardinal Capisucchi's Book, which this Author
affirms to contradict the Bishop of Condom's Exposition. The other is the
Consequence he draws from thence, and from other pretended Actions, (to wit)
That Roman-Catholics think it lawful even to set their Hands to, Pref. p. 13.
and approve those Books, whose Principles and Doctrine they dislike.

To the First; Whereas he affirms Cardinal Capisucchi to have contradicted the
Doctrine of the Exposition, we must first take notice; The Bishop of Condom's
intention was not to meddle with Scholastic Tenets, but purely to deliver that
Doctrine of the Church which is necessarily and universally received; whereas
Cardinal Capisucchi, being obliged to no such strictness, would not it may be
contradict the Problematical Niceties of those Schools in which he had been
Educated, so that what he said might pass without a Censure. And yet even in
this, if his Sense be rightly understood, the unbiased Reader will plainly see
that his Doctrine is the same with that of the Exposition.

The Bishop of Condom declares, Expos. p. 8. Sess. 24. Dec. de Invoc. etc.
from the Council of Trent, That we are forbidden to believe any Divinity or
Virtue in Images, for which they ought to be reverenced; That the Honor which
is given to them ought to be referred to the Prototypes represented by them:
And this the Cardinal tells us in express Terms. Oh! but he tells us of a
Divine Worship (says this Author) paid to the Images of the Holy Trinity, of
our Blessed Savior, and of the Holy Cross. Whether he use that Expression or
no, I know not, having not yet seen the Book; but yet this very Author tells us
how the Cardinal explicates himself, That the Honor which is paid to the
Images is only upon account of the Things represented by them, and not upon
account of the Images themselves, as thinking any Divinity in them; for to do
that, he confesses, would be Idolatry. Ibidem.
And what is this, but what the Bishop of Condom has expressed in other Terms
from the Council of Trent, That the Honor we render to Images has such a
reference to those they represent; Sess. 25. Dec. de Inv. etc.
that by the means of those Images we kiss, and before which we kneel, we adore
JESUS CHRIST. Nay more, the Cardinal tells us, That this Honor is not to be
paid to them otherwise than upon account of the Things represented by them, and
as they are, in that respect, one and the same with the Thing which they
represent: And what is that, but to adore God or JESUS CHRIST in presence of
the Image, Ibid. Pontif. de Bened. Imag.
as the Bishop of Condom has expressed it from the Pontifical? This St. Thomas
explicates by a familiar Example of the Royal Robes: For, as we plainly see the
Purple puts us in mind of the Prince; and so does the Cross, of our Crucified
Savior: We pay a Sovereign Honor to the King when in His Robes, but in
Incognito we pay not a Respect with such Formalities; it is not the Purple or
the Robes we honor for themselves, but as making one with the King; nor is it
the Cross we honor, but in respect of CHRIST: If the Honor which we show to
the Purple, or the Chair of State, may in some sense be called Regal or
Sovereign Honor, it is only in respect of our King or Sovereign; and in like
manner, if that Honor which is shown to the Crucifix may in some sense be
called Religious, or, which is more, Divine, it is purely in respect of JESUS
CHRIST, who is both God and Man.

All the difference therefore betwixt Cardinal Capisucchi and the Master of the
Sacred Palace is thus easily reconciled; and if there be any difference, it
only consists in this, that when the Master of the Sacred Palace wrote to the
Bishop of Condom, he approved his Book in which he stuck close to the necessary
and universally received Doctrine of the Church, and conformed himself to the
Language of it, making a distinction betwixt the Images and things represented
by them; whereas the Cardinal Capisucchi conformed himself to a Scholastic
Style, and supposed the Representative as Representative, to be
representatively one and the same with the thing represented. But I needed not
to have taken this pains to reconcile the Bishop of Meaux with Cardinal
Capisucchi; seeing another particular Examination of the Bishop's Book upon
this Point ( Answ. to Papist Protesting, etc. page 91.) has reconciled the
Bishop's Doctrine with that of St. Thomas, that is, with Cardinal Capisucchi's,
though he err in the right Explication of both their Doctrines.

Now Secondly, as for his Assertion, That we think it lawful to disguise the
Sentiments of our Religion; and his Confirmation of it, from the Procureur
General of Paris his Answer to Father Thomassin, Pref. p. 14.
That they suffered in France an Italian should write according to the
Principles of his Country, but for a Frenchman to do the same was another
matter: He ought to have made a distinction between Matters of Faith and
Scholastic Opinions, or, to use other Terms, the Doctrines of a Church, and the
Doctrines in a Church: Every one knows, that the Doctrines of a Church, or
Matters of Faith, being Tenets necessarily and universally received, ought upon
no account to be dissembled or disguised; and he can bring no one Example of
that nature: But as for Scholastic Opinions, or the Doctrines in a Church, of
which daily Disputes are raised in the Schools, we see not only one Nation
commanding one thing to be taught, and another quite the contrary; but even one
University against another in the same Country, nay one College against another
in the same University, without the least breach of Unity, or note of
Intriguing Dissimulation.

Thus Father Thomassin having undertaken a Scholastic Dispute of the Authority
of the Sea Apostolic above that of a General Council, a Dispute which is
defended in the Schools of Italy, but forbid in France, and neither generally
nor necessarily received by the Church, no wonder if the Procureur General of
Paris should refuse to suffer it to be Printed.

Thus also it is the Jesuits have found it convenient (upon other accounts
also, it may be, as well as that, such as is the difficulty of sending to Rome
for the Approbation of every Book, etc.) to take their Licenses from their
respective Provincials.

Thus much for his Preface. And as for the Collections he has given of some
Passages in the Edition printed without the Bishop of Condom's consent, we have
little to say to them more than what the Bishop has himself answered in his
Letter, unless it be to thank this Author for being so ingenuous as to print
them; for every unbiased Reader may there see, that the first Edition, instead
of proposing the Doctrine of the Church of Rome (as this Author says it did) so
loosly and favorably, Pref. p. 2.
that many undesigning Persons of that Communion were offended at it; Ibid. p.
3.
did, on the contrary, (if any fault be to be found on that score) propose the
same Doctrine with too much strictness. They may see also, that the Sorbonne
was so far from marking out (as he says) several of the most considerable Parts
of it, Ibid.
wherein the Exposition, by too much desire of palliating, had absolutely
perverted the Doctrine of their Church, that this very Author, in his
Collections, could not propose one Doctrine so perverted, without a forced
Interpretation of his own; nay, on the contrary, he is sensible, that in some
places the Bishop had rather spoken with too much strictness; and therefore,
after his wonted way of turning all things to a wrong intention, he tells his
Reader, Collect. p. 23.
That the other was really the true Sense of the Church, but it was thought too
ingenuous; and it is not fit Protestants should know it: And in another place,
Ibid, p. 32.
That the first Exposition ran much higher than it seems the Spirit of the
Gallicane Church could bear. But it may be what was struck out of the
Exposition to please the Correctors, M. de Meaux recompensed in his Letter to
satisfy his Holiness.

But if in some other Places he has either retrenched or altered his
Expression, any one, who is not willing to take every thing by a wrong Handle,
may easily see it was not out of such ill Designs as this Author endeavors to
persuade us; but purely to retrench what was not conformable to his Design of a
bare Exposition, or what had been sufficiently expressed before; to keep
himself more precisely to the Doctrine of the Council of Trent; or to obviate
any malicious Interpretations, which Persons, disposed to take all things in a
wrong sense, might force upon his Expressions, if he worded them not more
cautiously.

But, above all, it seems to me most strange that any, especially one who dares
publish to the World the Doctrine of a Church, should make the alteration or
retrenchment of some manner of Expressions in a Book writ, as he owns, four
Years before, so heinous a Crime, that the Author must needs pass for one that
either did not understand his own Doctrine, Pref. p. 4.
or at least had not the Sincerity to Expound it right. He may wish, it may be,
he had been as cautious in his own Book, as the Bishop was in his.

However, we have nothing to do with the first Impression. It Is this other, put
out by the Bishop of Meaux himself, which has been presented to you, and to
which so many Authentic Approbations and Testimonies have been given: And I
affirm he must be strangely deceived, or wilfully blind, who will not grant it
to contain the true Doctrine of the Church, according to the Sense of the
Council of Trent. But now to the Book it self.

PART II.
ART. I. INTRODVCTION.
SHould I undertake to examine all the Calumnies, Misrepresentation, unsincere
Dealings, and Falsifications of this Author, in almost every Article, I should
swell this Answer beyond the Bounds I have prescribed to my self, and make it
tedious to the Reader; yet some however I shall take notice of as they fall in
my way; from whence I hope we shall find this advantage, that all those Books
to which an Imprimatur, Carolus Alston, etc. is prefixed, will not hereafter be
concluded free from Errors; nor will every nameless Author, who professes to
be sincere, pass hereafter for an Oracle.

His Introduction is Calumny in a high Degree, and the State of his Question
drawn from thence as unsincere.

He tells us of adoring Men and Women, Crosses, Introd. p. 3, 4, 5.
Images, and Relics; of setting up our own Merits, and making other
Propitiatory Sacrifices for Sin, distinct from that of the Cross, which, he
says, P. 5.
are contrary to our pretended Principles, (to wit) That Religious Worship is
due to God alone; That we are to be saved only by Christ's Merits; and, That
the Death of CHRIST was a perfect Sacrifice: but yet are not, as he tells us,
obscure Consequences drawn from our Doctrines, but the plain and confessed
Opinions of the Church of Rome, the Practice and Prescription of the Chiefest
Authority in it: and therefore for us to refuse their Charge, is to protest
against a matter of Fact; a Plea which even Justice it self has told us may
without Calumny, be rejected as invalid.

Were these Doctrines and Practices, which he alleges, the plain and confessed
Doctrines and Practices of the Church of Rome, he would, it is true, have reason
to say they contradict our Principles: But seeing they are all so solemnly
renounced by us, that we detest the very thoughts of them, and cannot hear
these repeated Accusations without nauseating them; and seeing he has been so
often told, that these Consequences are not only far-fetched, obscure, and
disavowed; but Consequences which are so false, that no Connection can be found
betwixt them and our Doctrines and Practices when truly represented; we have
just reason to refuse the Charge, and tell him, they have no more Justice to
accuse us of them, than Dissenters from the Church of England have to accuse
her of Idolatry and Superstition, for Bowing to the Altar, and at the Name of
JESUS, or for using the Cross in Baptism; or then the Quakers have for accusing
them and us of breach of the First Commandment, because we use the Civility of
Hat and Knee to them who are but mere Creatures as we our selves.

But however, these things must be charged upon us as an Introduction; and then
the Question must be stated after a new mode, and we represented as consenting
to it.

He tells us therefore, Page 5.
That they have got thus much at least by that Reflection; that it shows them
how they, who have been so often charged by the Church of Rome as INNOVATORS IN
RELIGION, are at last, by our own Confession, allowed to hold the Ancient and
Undoubted Foundation of the Christian Faith; and from this pretended Concession
he draws up the State of the Controversy, you may be certain, favorably to
himself. But who is it (I pray) that allows him this Proposition, That the New
Reformers hold the Ancient and Undoubted Foundation of the Christian Faith? and
where does he allow it?

The Exposition has, Sect. 2. p. 2.
it is true, a Section to show, how those of the Pretended Reformed Religion
acknowledge the Catholic Church to embrace all the Fundamental Articles of the
Christian Religion: But how does he from thence show that Catholics
reciprocally grant them to hold all those Fundamental Articles? I say, all; for
no body ever denied they held some of them.

This Author knows very well, we are so far from granting this to them, that,
on the contrary, we always accuse them of Innovations, and denying those
Articles which are Fundamental, and as necessary and as plainly revealed, as
many of those others which they admit.

We always affirm, We are in possession of our Doctrines and our Practices,
that these have been delivered down to us by our Predecessors, as Truths
revealed to the Prophets and Apostles; we always tell them, We have the
Decisions of a Church in our behalf; a Church, I say, 1 Timothy 3.15.
which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth; Matthew. 16.18.
a Church against which the Gates of Hell, by the express Promise of JESUS
CHRIST, was never to prevail; Ephesians. 4.11, 12, etc.
and in which Pastors and Teachers were to remain for ever, lest we should be
led away with every wind of Doctrine: We tell them, He who denies one Article
revealed by God, and proposed by his Church as so revealed, is as guilty of the
Breach of Faith, as he who denies them all; because he rejects God's Veracity,
upon which that Faith is grounded: And by consequence, we cannot but tell them,
That whilst they renounce those Articles, which we believe are revealed Truths,
they are guilty of Fundamental Errors, and hold not the Ancient and Undoubted
Foundation of the Christian Faith.

So that the true State of the Controversy in general betwixt Catholics and
Protestants is, whether they or we do Innovate; they, in refusing to believe
those Doctrines we profess to have received with the Grounds of Christianity;
or we, in maintaining our Possession. And the Dispute is, Whether Roman
Catholics ought to maintain their Possession, for which many Protestants
themselves grant they have a Prescription of above 1000 Years? or whether the
Authorities, brought by Protestants against the Roman Catholic Doctrine, be so
weighty, that every Roman Catholic is obliged to renounce the Communion of that
Church in which he was bred up, and quit his Prescription and Possession? Which
certainly they are not obliged to do, unless it can be plainly proved they have
innovated, or taught such Doctrines as overthrow those Truths which are on both
Sides allowed to be Divine.

This the Bishop of Condom knew they could never do, and that our Doctrines,
when truly represented, were so far from contradicting those mutually-received
Articles of our Faith, that, on the contrary, they confirmed our Belief of
them: And therefore he undertook to separate the Articles of our Faith, from
what was falsely imputed to us, and resolved to propose them according to the
received Sense of the Church declared in the Council of Trent. And whether he
has faithfully performed this Undertaking, or no, is our present Question,
which we are to examine in these following Articles.

What does it therefore avail this Author to tell us, Page 6.
he will, in the following Articles, endeavor to give a clear and free Account
of what they can approve, and what they dislike in the Doctrines of the
Catholic Church; unless he first show us, and that by some Authentic Acts of
the Church, that those are her Doctrines; and secondly, give us some assurance,
of greater Authority then the Prescription of the Roman Catholic Church, that
they are Novelties or Erroneous.

ART. II. Religious Worship is terminated only in God.
THat all Religious Worship is terminated in God alone, is the Biship of
Condom's Assertion, Art. 2.
and the Churches Doctrine; to which both this, and another later Author agree;
Answer to a Discourse entitled Papists Protesting, etc.
but both of them will have the Invocation of Saints, and the Honor which we
pay to Images and Relics, to be inconsistent with that Maxim.

What the Bishop has said is enough to satisfy any one, who is not obstinate;
his Words are these: The same Church teaches us, Expos. p. ^.
That all Religious Worship ought to terminate in God, as its necessary End;
and that if the Honor which she renders to the Blessed Virgin, and to the
Saints, may in some sense be called Religious, it is for its necessary relation
to God. From which Words it is plain, the Bishop thought Religious Honor or
Worship might be taken in a double sense; the first strict, and that he
acknowledges is only due to God; the other in a larger sense, which may be paid
to Creatures. But how this other may be called Religious Honor, he tells us
is, because of the reference which it has to God. Thus that Civil Honor or
Obedience which we pay to Magistrates, if we do it for Conscience sake, that
is, purely to obey the Ordinance of God, may be not improperly called a
Religious Honor or Obedience, because by Honoring or Obeying them, for God's
sake, we Honor and Obey God: Thus to visit the orphan and the widow in their
tribulations is called by St. James a clean and unspotted Religion. James 1.27.
But if we take Religion in a stricter sense, for a Supreme and Sovereign
Honor, or an adhesion to an Independent Being with all the Powers of our Soul,
etc. it is only proper to God, and cannot be paid to Creatures: and in that
sense the Honor which we pay to our Blessed Lady, and other Saints, is far
from being a Religious Honor. Let Mary be Honored, Epiph. Haer. 79.
but let God be Adored, was the Saying of an ancient Father; not with Divine
Honor, for that is due to God alone, Soli Deo honor and gloria; but with an
Inferior Honor, which if our Authors will not have us call Religious, we will
not dispute about the Name. We ought not to deprive God of any thing that is
due to him alone, that we may give it to his Creatures; neither Honor, nor
Worship, nor Prayer, nor Thanksgiving, nor Sacrifice: But yet we may honor
those whom God has honored; we may give an inferior Degree of Worship to
those who are in some Degree of Honor above us in this World, and why not to
the Invisible Inhabitants of the other, so it elevate them not above the State
of Creatures? We may pray to our Friends and Parents here on Earth, to pray for
us, without derogating from our Duty to God; and why the same may not be
addressed to Saints and Angels, who are no less our Friends, without robbing
God of what is his due, is, I must confess, to me unintelligible. If you tell
me the first is only Civil; or if it may be called a Religious Love or Honor,
Answ. to Papist Protest. p. 38.
when it is done for God's sake; yet it is but an extrinsecal Denomination from
the Cause and Motive, not from the Nature of the Act, and therefore cannot make
Gods of them; we affirm the same of the second, and renounce any other sort of
Religious Worship, which is so from the nature of the Act and by consequence
only due to God. This Distinction reflected on will be sufficient to answer all
the Objections brought against our Doctrine by both those Authors: And we
cannot but wonder, that Persons should use so many endeavors not to understand
us; Expos. p. 10.
and because, as the Bishop of Condom has observed, in one sense Adoration,
Invocation, and the name of Mediator are only proper to God and JESUS CHRIST,
we are astonished why they will still misapply those terms to render our
Doctrine odious; whereas if they would but strictly keep to the sense, in which
we use them, all their Objections and Accusations would loose their force, and
we might have some hopes of a more Christian Unity.

ART. III. Invocation of Saints.
AS for the Invocation of Saints, Art. 3. p. 9.
he grants with Monsieur Daille, that several of the Primitive Fathers, in the
Fourth Age of the Church, page 7.
made Addresses to them; but will have them to be only Innocent Wishes, and
Rhetorical Flights; What Authority does he bring for this Assertion, and his
farther accusation of these Fathers of the Fourth Century, that they did
certainly begin to depart from the Practice and Tradition of those before them?
page 8.
Did any in that or the following Ages accuse or censure them? If not, by what
Authority does he condemn those Prayers, those Innocent Wishes, and Holy
Raptures (as he calls them, because he will not have them to be Prayers) as
fond things vainly invented, etc.

We only tell you it is lawful to Pray to them, and condemn such as censure all
those Ancient and Orthodox Fathers. What Authority have you to oppose us? You
say it is repugnant to Gods Word; show that Word? If you cannot, we are in
Possession, and the Antiquity and Uninteruptedness of our Doctrine, besides the
Reasonableness and Innocence of it, confirms us in our belief, and ought to be
more prevalent with us, than all the Sophistical Arguments brought against us.

We name them in our Sacrifices, and give God thanks for the Victories they
have obtained through his Grace, and humbly beseech him to vouchsafe to favor
us by their Intercession; if we mention their merits, it is only those Victories
they had obtained by his Favors, which we beseech him to look upon and not to
regard our unworthiness; even as we beg of him to hear their Prayers, which are
more prevalent then our own, because more pure. But this is far from such an
idle fancy, as if Christ, who is our Sacrifice, page 12.
needed, as he says the Assistance of St. Bathildis or Potentiana to recommend
him to his Father, or the deserts of a St. Martin to obtain our forgiveness. We
detest such thoughts; and abominate such Doctrines. The Bishop of Condom has
fully explicated our Tenets, what this Author or others impose upon us, we are
not to answer for, nor are we concerned to maintain the ill consequences which
follow from such Impositions.

ART. IV. Images and Relics.
HIs next Article of Images and Relics complains how the approved Doctrine of
our most reputed Writers contradicts what M. de Meaux would have us to think is
their only design in that Service. Art. 4. Page 13.
Let us examine this a little?

The Bishop of Condom's business is to explicate the universally approved
Doctrine of the Church, according to the Sentiments of the Council of Trent,
and not to meddle with Scholastic Opinions, or those Practices which are
neither necessary, nor generally received. He tells us therefore, Expos. Sect.
5. page 8.
That all the Honor that is given them, ought to be referred to the Prototypes
represented by them; and that we do not attribute to them any other Virtue but
that of exciting in us the Remembrance of those they represent; That the Honor
we render them is grounded upon this, that the very seeing of the Image of
JESUS CHRIST Crucified cannot but excite in us a more lively Remembrance of him
who died upon the Cross for our Redemption; That whilst this Image before our
Eyes causes this precious Remembrance in our Souls, we are naturally moved to
testify, by some exterior Signs, how far our Gratitude bears us; which
exterior Signs are not paid to the Image, but to JESUS CHRIST represented by
that Image. So that, properly speaking, according to the Bishop of Meaux's
sense, and that of the Council, the Image of the Cross is to be only looked
upon as a Representative or Memorative Sign, which is therefore apt to put us
in mind of JESUS CHRIST, who suffered upon the Cross for us: and the Honor
which we there show, precisely speaking, and according to the Ecclesiastic
Style, is not properly to the Cross, but to JESUS CHRIST, represented by that
Cross. Not to JESUS CHRIST as present in, or with, or to that Cross, as if the
Cross it self were the Object of our Worship (as another Answerer represents
our Doctrine); Answer to Papist Protesting, Sect. 5. passim.
but to him in Heaven, whose becoming Man, and dying for us, we remember by
looking upon the Cross. So that JESUS CHRIST is the sole Object of our
Adoration, and not the Cross.

The Cross therefore, whether taken as Wood or Stone, or moreover as the Image
of JESUS CHRIST Crucified, is not properly the Object of our Worship; but is a
Help to recall our wandering Thoughts back to a Consideration of the Benefits we
have received by his dying for us: and whilst we have these good thoughts in
our Minds, our Affections are inflamed, and we, in presence of that Image,
which occasioned those pious Affections, show, by some exterior Act, what are
our inward Sentiments, and pay our Adorations to our Redeemer, but not to the
Image that represents him.

This is the Pure and Innocent Doctrine of the Church, without mixture of
Scholastic Subtilities: and this the abovenamed Author acknowledges to be very
innocent. Ibid. p. 84.
It is (says he) a very innocent thing to worship GOD or CHRIST, when any
Natural or Instituted Sign brings them to our minds, even in the presence of
such a Sign: as if a Man, upon viewing the Heavens and the Earth, and the
Creatures that are in it, should raise his Soul to God, and adore the Great
Creator of the World; or upon the accidental sight of a Natural Cross (and why
not upon the designed sight of an Artificial one?) should call to mind the Love
of his Lord who died for him, and bow his Soul to him in the most submissive
Adorations. But because he could not deny this to be Innocent, therefore he
will not have it to be the Doctrine of our Church; but will have the Use of
Images in our Church to be not primarily for Remembrance, but for Worship:
Ibid. Page 85.
and this, he tells us, the Council of Trent expressly teaches, but is far from
proving it. The Council indeed tells us (as he cites) That the Images of JESUS
CHRIST, Sess. 25. Dec. de Invoc. etc.
etc. are to be had and retained especially in Churches (not as he renders it,
especially to be had and kept in Churches) and that due Honor and Veneration
is to be given them -- because the Honor given them is referred to the
Prototypes. In Templis praesertim habendas and retinendas.
But it never tells us the Primary Use of Images is for Worship. Nay, on the
contrary, this Council, Ibid.
presently after, commanding Bishops to teach diligently the several Benefits
that occur by the Representations of the Mysteries of our Redemption, makes not
the least mention of that of Worship, but only that they are to Teach, to
Instruct, to Recall to our remembrance, to excite our Imitation, and the like.
But he tells us, that a mere Sign, which only calls CHRIST to our Mind, can
deserve no Honor or Worship: and therefore seems to conclude, That since the
Council of Trent allows of a due Honor to Images, Ibid. page 85.
she must allow it to them as Signs representing the Person of CHRIST as if he
were present; which whether they raise our Hearts to him in Heaven or no, yet,
according to the Council of Trent, (says he) must direct our Worship to him as
represented in his Image. That a mere Sign deserves no Honor, as such, we
deny; but that this Honor which it deserves must be the same with that which
is due to the thing signified, neither does the Council of Trent, nor the
Church determine: The Council tells us only, That due Honor and Veneration is
to be paid them upon account of their Prototypes; but never tells us of what
nature this Honor is. What are the Scholastic Opinions concerning this, is not
to our present purpose; seeing we speak here only of universally received
Tenets. And what he would persuade the World to be our Doctrines, as, That we
do direct our Worship to JESUS CHRIST as represented in his Image; Page 85.
Page 91.
That we worship him before the Image, in that Worship which we give to the
Image; and that we look upon Images as Legal Proxies or Representatives of
JESUS CHRIST and his Saints, and therefore pay the same Worship to them as to
the Prototypes; are neither the Doctrines of the Church, nor of the Schools,
who neither of them look upon Images as Proxies, to which the same Debt is due
as that which ought to be paid to the Person in whose Place it is; but only as
Signs or Representatives, before which we may adore that Divine Object which
those Signs bring to our remembrance, and which we may make use of as a more
effectual Means to put us in mind of that Object. Some Honor, notwithstanding,
is due to this Image thus representing JESUS CHRIST, (for example) as there is
some Honor due to the Image of our Sovereign; but of what nature this Honor
is, is not defined by the Council.

There is a vast difference then betwixt a Legal Proxy or Delegate, and an
Image or Representative. The Picture of my Father is his Image or
Representative, but cannot be called his Proxy or his Delegate. Pictures or
Images are only made use of to call those Persons, whose Pictures they are, to
our remembrance, either by representing their Features (if we had formerly
known the Persons) or some additional Marks, expressing some Actions of their
Lives by which they are known: but they were never used by Christians as the
Proxies or Delegates of those Persons they represented to our Minds. Whether
the Heathens used the Images of their Gods as their Proxies or Delegates, is
not my present purpose to discuss; but this is certain, Just Discharge, Part 3.
they thought a Divinity was annexed to those Images, and some of them esteemed
them Gods, and others thought them the Representatives of their Gods, who were
not Gods, but rather Devils; and therefore when they offered Incence to them,
and adored them, they were properly Idolaters.

The use we make of Pictures or Images is purely as Representatives, or (that
we may use his Term) Memorative Signs, which call the Originals to our
remembrance; and the Honor which we pay to them is of the same nature with
that which we pay to the Name of JESUS. When we either hear that Sound, or see
those Characters, they bring the Author of our Redemption to our remembrance,
and we bow the Knee and adore him. It Is not the Syllables nor the Characters
that we adore, though we have a respect for them, and would not use any Indignity
toward them, because they are Representative Signs; but it is JESUS CHRIST,
represented by them, whom we adore. Thus after the same manner, when we see or
read any other thing which brings his Life, his Death, his Sufferings to our
Minds, we adore him in presence of that which calls those Pious Objects to our
remembrance: neither are we therefore said to adore those Letters, that Book,
or those Resemblances which cause such Thoughts, though we kneel, or bow, or
prostrate our selves before them.

Neither is it more culpable to make use of those Pictures, than of Books: For
if we would meditate upon the Passion of our Blessed Savior, we endeavor to
form in our Minds a Representation of his Sufferings; it is not that Idea or
Representation which we compassionate and adore, but Him who truly suffered for
us: But our Minds being accustomed to wander, and those Ideas which keep our
Thoughts fixed upon him being apt to pass away; therefore we either take a
Book, or Crucifix, or other Representation of his Passion; which whilst we look
upon, those Ideas return to our Imagination, and we being piously affected,
renew our Compassion or our Adorations, not to the Bible or the Crucifix, but
to the Author of our Redemption.

In like manner, in our Public Service, we desire to offer Incence to him who
died upon the Cross for our Redemption; we fix our Eyes upon, and burn Incence
before the Crucifix which represents him; not as if the Crucifix were his
Delegate or Proxy, placed there on purpose to receive our Homage due to Him:
but because by viewing That our Thoughts are fixed upon the Original who is
represented by it to our Minds, and to whom we offer Incence.

If this Homage, which we pay in presence of the Image, be termed by some a
Homage paid to the Image, (which is an improper Speech) they explicate
themselves, and tell us, That it is purely to it as to a Representative, and
upon account of that Representation; not as to a Proxy or a Delegate, placed to
receive that Homage, and to which upon that account it is due, as when we pay a
Homage to a Viceroy upon account of the King in whose stead he is: for there
the Viceroy is the immediate Object of our Honor, though only mediately of that
Sovereign Honor which is due to the King whom he represents; but only as to an
inanimate Being, to which nothing is due of it self, but purely upon account of
that Animate Being which it calls to our remembrance, and as it calls it to our
remembrance. Thus is there no Honor due to the Statue or Resemblance of a
King, as it is a Statue; but only as it is his Resemblance: neither is that
Statue his Delegate, but a memorative Sign of him, and which we honor as such:
and thus as the Indignities offered to that Statue are interpretatively offered
to the King; so is the Honor which is shown it, as representing him,
interpretatively offered to the King whom it represents. In like manner that
Homage which we pay to JESUS CHRIST, represented by the Cross, is, properly
speaking, Adoration: But nothing at all is due to the Cross for it self; for
that is an inanimate Being, capable of no Honor; but that Adoration is due to
him who being an animate Nature, is called to our Minds by that Resemblance.

The want of taking this our Doctrine in a right sense, has been the occasion
of that Author's prolix Discourse of about Twenty three Leaves; in which he has
not at all combated our Doctrine, but only some Scholastic Opinions, and that
with so few Additions of any new Difficulties, that all he has said has been
formerly refuted in the Just Discharge to Dr. Stillingfleet 's Unjust Charge of
Idolatry against the Church of Rome, to which I will refer the Reader, and
return to my other Antagonist, and see what he brings against this our Doctrine.

First, he tells us, That St. Thomas and his Followers were never Censured for
maintaining, in plain terms, That the Image of the Cross ought to be worshipped
with the same Worship as that Savior who suffered on it. Expos. of the Doct.
of the Chapter of Engl. p. 14.
In answer to this, I need only tell him, We are not here to maintain every
Opinion held by the Schools, nor is it necessary the Church should Censure
them, unless they formally contradict her Doctrine, which St. Thomas is far
from being guilty of: But, if he had been sincere, he ought to have taken
notice of the Reason brought by St. Thomas and his Followers, which shows, That
it is purely upon account of JESUS CHRIST represented, that is, brought to our
remembrance by it, and not upon any account of the Cross it self. Which Reason,
if rightly understood, speaks no more than this, That whilst I see the Figure
of our Blessed Savior Crucified, I, by bowing in presence of that Crucifix,
adore him in Heaven; and if I bow, or kneel, or prostrate my self before that
Crucifix, that Bowing, Kneeling, or Prostration may be termed Adoration;
because it tends to JESUS CHRIST, the true Object of our Adoration, who is
represented to my Mind by that Crucifix. It is therefore an Adoration of JESUS
CHRIST represented by the Crucifix, but not an Adoration of the Crucifix it
self: For this Holy Doctor declares, 3. Qu. 25. Art. 3. in Corpore.
That no Reverence is due to any thing for it self, but to a Rational Nature;
but that an Irrational Creature may be honored with respect to a Rational
Nature which it represents; which Honor does not terminate in the Irrational
Creature, but in the Rational Nature: upon which account he maintains, That
that Honor is the same with that which is paid to that Rational Nature.

The Pontifical also (says he) admits the same. In the same sense, I grant, but
not in that which he would willingly make us believe it does. He tells us
indeed, That in the Prayers for Blessing the Image of the Cross, he who
performs that Ceremony, amongst other Prayers, begs of God, That as many as bow
down before it, may find Health both of their Souls and Bodies by it: Which he
will have to be irreconcilable with the Bishop of Condom's Doctrine, and that
of the Council of Trent, which forbids us to believe any Divinity or Virtue
tied to Images, for which they ought to be adored, etc. But if he had dealt
ingenuously, he would not have suppressed the Reason of that Bowing mentioned
by the Pontifical, which would have easily reconciled the whole. The Words are
these: See also the same quoted, and falsely rendered in English by the Answerer
to the Papist Protesting. page 76.
Vt orantes inclinantesque se propter Deum ante istam Crucem inveniant corporis
and animoe sanitatem. But he thought it better to leave out the words propter
Deum, for the sake of God: And this is his usual way of citing Authors. All the
rest of his Expressions drawn from the Pontifical are of the same nature,
either lame, or patched up from several Places; and therefore if they make any
thing against us, are not worthy our regarding.

But he has another Argument, and that from an Authentic Act of the Church her
self in her Good Friday Solemnity; in which the whole Church addresses her self
(says he) to the Cross in these very dangerous words: Behold the Wood of the
Cross! come let us adore it: And he tells us, the whole solemnity of that days
Service plainly shows we do adore it in the utmost propriety of the Phrase: But
here he has been also so unfortunate, as not to give us all the Words of the
Church, and to add another which is not there, to make it speak his Sense. The
Words sung by the Church in that Service are these, Ecce Lignum Crucis, in quo
pependit Salus Mundi: venite Adoremus: Behold the Wood of the Cross, on which
the Savior of the World did hang: come let us Adore. He saw well enough these
words taken altogether, would be a clear Explication of our Doctrine, and show
it was not the Cross we adored, but the Savior of the World who hung upon it;
and therefore he concealed these last Words, and added the word it, and so
gives us this mutilated Sentence, Behold the Wood of the Cross! come let us
Adore IT instead of the other.

But does not the Church in her Hymns of the Passion and Invention, pray to the
Cross in express terms? In this, indeed, he seems to have some show of reason;
but how often has he been told, these are Poetical Expressions, and that the
word Cross, by a Figure sufficiently known to Poets, signifies JESUS CHRIST
Crucified, to whom we pray in those Hymns.

Now as the Honor which we pay to Images is referred to those, who are
represented by them; so likewise, is that Honor and Veneration which we pay to
the Sacred Relics of those Saints, who were Victims to God, entirely referred
to them whose remains they are.

He tells us, If that be the state of the Question, which the Bishop of Condom
has proposed, page 17.
they confess that the Explication of it has taken away a great part of the
difficulty, and that if this be all M. de Meaux desires of them, they are ready
to profess their Opinion, that they judge it to be neither offensive to God,
nor fit to be scrupled by Man. But least we should be thus agreed, the Bishop
must not be allowed to have explicated our Tenets right; and therefore, either
some practices, or abuses, (which might have past amongst those which he says
we complain of) must be brought against him; or else the Council of Trent must
be again Corrupted by him in order to it. He tells us, he can allow of
Honoring them, but that the Council of Trent says, We are to Worship them, and
that by so doing, we shall obtain many Benefits and Graces of God. That these
Sacred Monuments are not unprofitably revered, but are TO BE SOVGHT UNTO for
the obtaining their help and assistance; to cure the Sick, to give Eyes to the
Blind, Feet to the Lame, and even Life to the Dead: Any one, to hear these
words quoted, as from the Council of Trent, would really think we prayed and
sought unto those Relics, that we might obtain sight for the Blind, etc.
whereas the words of the Council express no such thing; which, to the end you
may not think I Cavil, I will here give you as they lie. Sanctorum quoque
martyrum, and aliorum cum Christo viventium sancta corpora, quoe viva membra
fuerunt Christi, and templum Spiritus sancti, ab ipso ad oeternam vitam
suscitanda and glorificanda a fidelibus veneranda esse, per quoe multa
beneficia a Deo hominibus proestantur: ita ut affirmantes Sanctorum Reliquiis
venerationem atque honorem non deberi, vel eas, aliaque sacra monumenta a
fidelibus inutiliter honorari, atque eorum opis impetrandoe causa Sanctorum
memorias frustra frequentari, omnino damnandos esse, prout jam pridem eos
damnavit, and nunc etiam damnat Ecclesia. Sess. 25. dic. de Iovoc. etc.
The Holy Catholic Church teaches also, that the Holy Bodies of Saints and
Martyrs living with Christ, which were the living Members of Christ, and the
Temples of the Holy Ghost, and are one Day to be raised again to Eternal Life,
and glorified by him, are to be Venerated by the Faithful, Hieronymus advers.
Vigilantium.
by which Bodies many benefits have been granted by God to Men: So that they
who affirm, that no Veneration or Honor is due to the Relics of Saints, or
that those Relics, and other Sacred Monuments, are unprofitably honored by the
Faithful; or that they do in vain frequent the Memories of the Saints, to the
end they may obtain their aid (the aid of the Saints eorum) are wholly to be
condemned, Conc. Nic. 2. Can. 7.
as the Church does now, and has also formerly condemned them.

You see there is not one word here of Worshipping them, unless we take
Veneration for it, which in some sense may pass, but not in this; neither is
there one word of seeking to these Sacred Monuments to obtain their help and
assistance; to cure the Sick, etc. These are wholly his own inventions put upon
us for the words of the Council, he might very well say these were fond things
vainly invented, etc. we require them not from him. All we desire is what he
professes they are ready to perform: We will, (says he) Honor the Relics of
the Saints as the Primitive Church did: Page 18.
We will respect the Images of our Savior and the Blessed Virgin; and as some
of us now bow toward the Altar, and all of us are enjoined to do so at the
Name of the Lord JESUS; so will we not fail to testify all due Respect to his
Representation. We will not quarrel with him about the manner how we ought to
call that Respect and Honor; and if any of ours say, that Honor and Respect
being only due upon account of the Things they represent, and no ways upon
their own, ought therefore to have the same Denomination with that which is due
to the Original, I hope such an Explication, being no ways injurious to the
Originals, deserves not so severe a Censure as some of them are pleased to give
it; neither ought the Church, which is not concerned with those Opinions which
are purely Scholastic, to suffer for what is probably disputed of in the
Schools. Those who would see more of this Point, may be pleased to read the
Just Discharge to Dr. Stillingfleet 's Unjust Charge of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome, and Veron's Rule of Faith, upon this Head: and they who have
not those Books, may be pleased to reflect seriously upon the foregoing
Passages, and this following transcribed out of the Council of Trent.

Imagines porro Christi, Deiparoe Virginis, and aliorum Sanctorum, in templis
proesertim habendas and retinendas, eisque debitum honorem and venerationem
impertiendam; non quod credatur inesse aliqua in iis divinitas, vel virtus,
propter quam sint colendoe, vel quod ab eis sit aliquid petendum: vel quod
fiducia in imaginibus sit figenda; veluti olim fiebat a Gentibus, Psalm. 134.
quoe in idolis spem suam collocabant; sed quoniam honos, qui eis exhibetur,
refertur ad prototypa, quoe illoe reproesentant: ita ut per imagines, quas
osculamur, and coram quibus caput aperimus and procumbimus, Christum adoremus
and Sanctos, quorum illoe similitudinem gerunt, Conc. Nic. 2. Actio. 3, 4, and
6.
veneremur; id quod Concilorum, presertim vero secundoe Nicoenoe Synodi
decretis contra imaginum oppugnatores est sancitum.

Illud vero diligenter doceant Episcopi, per historias mysteriorum nostroe
redemptionis, picturis vel aliis similitudinibus expressas, erudiri and
confirmari populum in articulis fidei commemorandis, and assidue recolendis:
tum vero ex omnibus sacris imaginibus magnum fructum percipi; non solum quia
admonetur populus beneficiorum and munerum quoe a Christo sibi collata sunt:
sed etiam quia Dei per Sanctos miracula and salutaria exempla oculis Fidelium
subjiciuntur: ut pro iis Deo gratias agant, ad Sanctorumque imitationem vitam
moresque suos componant: excitenturque ad adorandum, ac diligendum Deum, and ad
pietatem colendam. Si quis autem his decretis contraria docuerit, aut senserit,
anathema sit. In has autem sanctas and salutares observationes si qui abusus
irrepserint, eos prorsus aboleri sancta Synodus vehementer cupit; ita ut nulloe
falsi dogmatis imagines and rudibus periculosi erroris occasionem proebentes,
statuantur. Quod si aliquando historias and narrationes sacroe Scripturoe, cum
id indoctoe plebi expediet, exprimi, and figurari contigerit: doceatur populus,
non propterea divinitatem figurari, quasi corporeis oculis conspici, vel
coloribus aut figuris exprimi possit. Sess. 25. Dec. de Invoc. etc.


Moreover, the Catholic Church teaches, That the Images of JESUS CHRIST, of the
Blessed Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints, are to be had and retained,
especially in Churches; and, that due Honor and Reverence is to be given them,
not that we believe any Divinity or Virtue to be in them, for which they ought
to be worshipped, or that we ought to ask any thing of them, or put our
confidence in Images, as the Pagans did, who put their trust in Idols; but
because the Honor which is paid to them, is referred to the Originals which
they represent: So that by means of those Images, which we kiss, and before
which we uncover our Heads and Kneel, we adore CHRIST, and venerate those
Saints whose resemblance they bear; which Doctrine has been taught by the
Decrees of Councils against all Oppugners of Images, Conc. Nicen. 2. Actio 3,
4, and 6.
especially by the second Synod of Nice.

But above all, let the Bishop^ diligently teach, That by the Historical
Representations of the Mysteries of our Redemption painted, or expressed in
other forms, the People are taught the Articles of our Faith, and confirmed in
them by a frequent Commemoration and Recollection; as also, That great Fruit is
reaped from the use of all Holy Images; not only because the People are
admonished by them of the Benefits and Gifts which are bestowed upon them by
JESUS CHRIST, but also because the Miracles and salutary Examples, which God
has been pleased to show us by his Saints, are visibly represented to the
Faithful, that they may give God thanks for them, and may conform their Lives
and Manners to the Examples of the Saints; and may be excited to adore and love
God, and practice Piety. But if any one do teach or think contrary to these
Decrees, let him be Anathema. But if any Abuses should chance to creep in
amongst these holy and wholesome Observances, the Sacred Synod earnestly desires
they maybe entirely abolished; so that no Images shall be permitted which may
give the ruder People occasion of believing false Doctrines or dangerous
Errors. But if it shall sometimes happen to be expedient, for the Instruction
of the unlearned People, to express or figure out some Histories or Relations
of the Holy Scripture, let the People be taught the Divinity is not therefore
figured to them, as if it could be seen with our corporal Eyes, or expressed by
Colors or Figures, etc.

This is our Doctrine; all other Additions or particular Doctrines we are not
to answer for; and this is what the Bishop of Condom has expressly taught.

ART. V. Of Justification.
IN his Article of Justification he tells us, Art. 5. p. 19.
That the Doctrine of Justification is one of those Points that deserves their
careful Consideration; as being not only one of the chiefest of those Points
wherein they suppose the Church of Rome to have prevaricated the Faith, but one
of the first that gave occasion to that Reformation that was made from it. If
therefore the Doctrine of the Church Catholic, when rightly explicated, be
clear from those gross Apprehensions they had of it, and be in it self innocent
and pure, I hope he will grant the first Reformers to have been strangely out
in their Measures, and that all those, who have followed their Footsteps in
that Schism, are obliged to return to their Mother Church.

He speaks of wonderful Extravagances in Pardons, Indulgences, etc. in former
times, and that generally the People put more confidence in the Inventions of
Men, than in the Merits of JESUS CHRIST; but allows us to be better instructed
since, or at least more cautious, for which, he says, we may thank the
Reformation. But I believe he will find, that all those strange Extravagances
were only the Fictions of their own Brains, and Calumnies raised on purpose to
make us odious; and that if he look into our Councils and Doctors of those
Ages, he will find our Doctrines to have always been the same and our Practices
conformable.

I need not take notice how much he consents to the Exposition of the Bishop of
Condom, nor of the nice Distinction which he gives us betwixt Justification and
Sanctification, which, he tells us, is the Doctrine of their Church, but, I
believe, will be hard put to to prove it; neither need I tell you how much he
imposes upon us, as if we made our inward Righteousness a part of
Justification, and so by consequence said that our Justification it self is
wrought also by our Good Works: for since he tells us, That were these things
clearly stated and distinguished, the difference betwixt us considered only in
the Idea, would not be very great: and that they might safely allow whatsoever
M. de Meaux has advanced upon this Point, provided it be but well and rightly
explained, we need not make any further demur, but go on with him to see how
the following Doctrines will stand upon this Foundation.

ART. VI. Of Merits.
HEre he tells us, Art. 6. Page 22.
That if what the Bishop of Condom has explicated, be all the Church of Rome
ascribes to Good Works, (that is) That our Justification proceeds absolutely
from Gods Bounty and Mercy, and but accidentally only (in as much as God has
tied himself by his Word and Promise to reward them) from our own performances;
they need no long Exhortations to receive a Doctrine which they have always
defended. But he presently dashes these our hopes of Union, by flying to the
particular niceties of the Schools; and thinks it sufficient to shelter the
Justice of their dissent in those Particulars from our Accusations, because
some of those niceties have not been censured by the Church. I need not here
say any thing more to him than what I have said before, that it is sufficient
the Church has declared her Doctrine in the Council of Trent, and that the
Bishop of Meaux has explicated it accordingly. The niceties of the Schools,
when truly represented, as they make no Division in the Church, so ought they
not to make any amongst Christians.

But however, if this Author had been so ingenuous as to have given us the
Words or the true Sense of those Authors he cites, the World would have seen no
such great difference as he pretends there is betwixt them and the Church of
Rome.

He tells us first, That Maldonate the Jesuit, upon Ezekiel. 18.20. says, That we
do as truly and properly merit Rewards when we do well, as we do merit
Punishments when we do ill. But had he read Maldonate, he would have found his
Words, when taken as they lie, to carry with them a very different sense from
what he seems to conclude they bear: For being to explicate this part of the
twentieth Verse, Justitia justi super eum erit, and impietas impii erit super
eum; The justice of the just shall be upon him, and the wickedness of the
wicked shall be upon him; he tells us, Ex hoc loco perspicuum est, and in nobis
aliquam esse nostram ut vocant, inhoerentem, propriamque justitiam, quamvis ex
Dei Gratia, and largitate profectam: and nos tam proprie, ac vere cum Gratia
Dei been agentes proemia mereri, quam sine illa male agentes supplicia meremur.
De proemio enim justi, and supplicio impii eodem prorsus modo loquitur: i. e.
From this Passage it is very clear, both that there is in us an Inherent, as
they call it, and Proper Justice of our own, although proceeding from the Grace
and Bounty of God: as also, that we do as properly and truly when we do well
TOGETHER WITH THE GRACE OF GOD merit a Reward, as we do merit Punishments when
we do ill WITHOUT IT. For he speaks here after the very same manner of the Just
Man's Reward, and of the Punishment of the Wicked. These are his Words: but our
Author, whose Religion, as he tells us, accustoms him to sincerity, had it may
be forgot himself a little here, or read it in have, or copied it from some
other Author, upon whose sincerity he relied, which made him leave out these
words, Together with the Grace of God.

His next Quotation is from Bellarmine, who tells us, says he, De Justif. lib
5. c. 17.
That our Good Works do merit Eternal Life condignly, not by reason of God's
Covenant and Acceptance, but also by reason of the Work it self. The Title
indeed of that Chapter is something toward that sense; for the Words are
these: Opera bona justorum meritoria esse ex condigno, non solum ratione pacti,
sed etiam ratione operis; The Works of the Just are condignly meritorious, not
only by reason of God's Covenant, but also by reason of the Works. But if we
look into the Chapter it self, we shall see his Sense, and that he only holds a
Scholastic Opinion, as most probable, and one not so inconsistent with the
Doctrine of the Church as he would have it, nor so erroneous as that it needs
an Index Expurgatorius.

He tells us first, There are three ways by which Good Works may be condignly
meritorious; either by reason of the Covenant alone, or by reason of the Work
alone, or upon account of them both together. Then he tells us, That several
Authors have held some one and some another of these ways; but he himself will
keep the middle, as most probable, and show, That the Good Works of the Just
are condignly meritorious of Eternal Life, not only by reason of the Covenant,
but also of the Work together with it. And in proving this Assertion, he
explicates his meaning, and shows, first, That the Good Works of the Just,
taken of themselves alone, without that Covenant, are not condignly, or so
rigorously meritorious of Eternal Life, that God could not without an Injustice
refuse such a Reward: And secondly, That in Good Works, proceeding from Grace,
there is a certain Proportion and Equality to the Reward of Eternal Life:
because Eternal Life is, John 1.16.
as St. John tells us, GRACE FOR GRACE; that is, the Grace of a Reward, for the
Grace of Merit: because Grace is SEMEN GLORIAE, the Seed of Glory: and because
our Merits depend upon the Merits of CHRIST, both in this, that he has merited
for us the Virtue of Meriting; and in this, that we merit, as the Living
Members of JESUS CHRIST, and by an Influence which we receive from him as from
our Head. So that he concludes from these and several other Reasons brought by
him (all of which show he does not understand that either our Works can be
called Good, or we be esteemed Just, without the Grace of God) I say, from
these he concludes, That it would be to detract from the Glory of CHRIST, that
our Merits (which receive all their Value from him) should be so imperfect, as
not to be condignly meritorious, unless it were purely by reason of God's
Acceptance. Now let any impartial Man be judge whether this Doctrine require so
severe a Censure as he would have the Church to give upon it.

Then he brings in Vasquez, In D. Th. 1. c. qu. 114. d. 214. c. 5. and alibi.
whose Doctrine is much what the same as Bellarmine's, as to the first of the
three Conclusions brought by him. The second, as appears by the Words, is only
a pure Scholastic Dispute about a Possibility: and therefore I need say nothing
to them. As for his third, after some search, I could not find any Conclusion
bearing that sense. But touching his Remarkable Corollary, I must needs tell
him, he has been so disingenuous as to leave out those Parts which would have
shown his Reader upon what Matter he was treating, and how little it made for
his purpose, or against us. But that he may see I love sincere Dealing, though I
be no Protestant, I will transcribe his Words.

At vero cum opera Justi condign mereantur vitam oeternam tanquam oequalem
mercedem, and proemium, non opus est interventa alterius meriti condigni, quale
est meritum Christi, ut eis reddatur vita oeterna, quinimo aliquid habet
peculiare meritum cujuscunque justi respectu ipsius hominis justi, quod non
habet meritum Christi, nempe reddere ipsum hominem justum, and dignum vita
oeterna, ut eam digne consequatur; meritum autem Christi, licet dignissimum sit
quod obtineat a Deo Gratiam pro nobis, tamen non habet hanc efficaciam and
virtutem, ut reddat nos formaliter justos, and dignos oeterna vita, sed per
virtutem ab ipso derivatam hunc consequuntur effectum homines in se ipsis. Et
ita nunquam petimus a Deo per merita Christi, ut nostris dignis operibus and
meritoriis reddatur merces oeternoe vitoe, sed ut per Christum detur nobis
Gratia qua possumus digne hanc mercedem promereri, quod etiam manifestum signum
est non expectare nos novam imputationem meritorum Christi, proeter eam, qua
initio acceptimus gratiam, and virtutem ad recte operandum, and condign
promerendum. -- Nam cum dicimus Christum meruisse nobis vitam oeternam, non
intelligimus illam ita nobis meruisse, ut nostris operibus and meritis
condignis non reddatur, nisi posteriori illa applicatione meritorum Christi,
sed quia Christus merito suo obtinuit nobis justificationem, and ea omnia,
quibus ad illam proeparamur, and proeterea obtainuit jam justificatis auxilia,
quibus recte operarentur, and vitam oeternam promererentur.

But (says he) seeing the Works of the Just do condignly merit Eternal Life, as
an equal Recompense and Reward, there is no need that any other Condign Merit,
such as that of CHRIST, should interpose, to the end that Eternal Life might be
rendered to them; for the Merit of every Just man has something peculiar in
respect of himself, who is Just, which the Merit of CHRIST has not, that is, to
render him Just, and worthy of Eternal Life, that he may worthily obtain it;
whereas the Merit of CHRIST, though it be most worthy to obtain Grace for us from
God, yet it has not this Efficacy and Power to render us formally Just, and
worthy of Eternal Life; but Men do in themselves, by a Virtue derived from Him,
obtain this Effect. And thus we never beg of God that by the Merits of CHRIST
the Reward of Eternal Life may be given to our Worthy and Meritorious Works;
but that through CHRIST Grace may be given us, whereby we may be enabled
worthily to merit this Reward, which is also a manifest sign that we do not
expect a new Imputation of the Merits of CHRIST, besides that by which we at
first received Grace and Strength to operate rightly, and merit worthily. --
For when we say, that CHRIST has merited Eternal Life for us, we do not
understand it as if he merited it so for us, that it would not be rendered to
our Good Works and condign Merits, unless by that succeeding Application of the
Merits of CHRIST; but because CHRIST by his Merits has obtained Justification
for us, and all other things by which we are prepared to it, and moreover
obtained for them who are already justified those Helps by which they might
rightly operate, and merit Eternal Life.

From which last Words, and the others left out by this Author, it appears
manifestly, that Vasquez was not disputing whether we merited Grace and Glory
of our own selves, without the Assistance of the Grace of JESUS CHRIST; but
whether, after that JESUS CHRIST had merited for us Justifying Grace, and all
other Helps necessary to make our Works good, acceptable, and meritorious,
there was still another Grace of JESUS CHRIST required over and above these his
other Assistances, without which we could not obtain Eternal Life.

Is this that Doctrine then which he says they most justly detest, Page 23.
and are not a little surprised to find that no Index Expurgatorius, no
Authentic Censure has ever taken notice of so dangerous a Prevarication? Or
rather are they not his own Prevarications, which he has put upon us as our
Doctrines, and which are as detestable to us, as they are to him; nay, more, if
he thinks these Authors held it possible for us to merit of our selves, without
the Grace of God, which prevents, accompanies, and Crowns all our Actions: for
he acknowledges, that such a Doctrine of Merit as that which he has
represented, as theirs would at least justify a Dissent from a Church in those
Particulars, though it would not engage them wholly to forsake a Church that
taught such things; whereas we doubt not to say, That it cannot be a True
Church which teaches such Erroneous Doctrines, and therefore that we ought not
to communicate with such an one.

ART. VII. Satisfactions, Purgatory and Indulgences.
HIs next Article is of Satisfactions. Art. 7. p. 24.
In which he confesses, that what the Bishop of Meaux has said they could most
readily allow of, Page 25.
were there but any tolerable Arguments to establish the Doctrine that requires
it. Page 27.
He tells us also, that they practice that Discipline for many other benefits
of it, and wish it were universally established even in a strictness equal to
what it is fallen from: But yet he will impose upon us a belief, that by our
own endeavors we are able to make a true and proper satisfaction to God for
sin. How does he prove it? Ibidem.
Or how does he show that the Council of Trent is contrary to the Bishop of
Meaux's Exposition? He tells us indeed, Page. 26.
that the Council of Trent declares, Conc. Trid. Sess. 14. c. 8.
That the justice of God requires it, and that therefore the Confessors should
be charged to proportion the Satisfaction to the Crime; which he thinks is more
than what the Bishop had explicated when he affirmed, That the necessity of
this payment does not arise from any defect in Christ's Satisfaction, but from a
certain Order which God has established for a wholesome Discipline, and to keep
us from offending; and tells us, that Bellarmine concludes from these words of
the Council, that it is we who properly satisfy for our own sins, and that
Christ's Satisfaction serves only to make ours Valid; and cites in the Margin,
Lib. 1. de Purg. c. 14. whereas there are but eleven Chapters in that Book.

But that you may see how just he is in his Accusation of the Council of Trent,
I will give you the words of it.

The Council having declared the necessity of Satisfactions both from various
Examples of Scripture, Genesis 3. 2 King. 12. Numb. 12, and 20.
in which it appears manifestly, that God sometimes remits the guilt of Sin,
and yet retains a Punishment, as also from the Justice of God which seems to
exact a severer punishment for Sins committed against a greater Grace and
Knowledge than for Sins committed through Ignorance before Baptism: And having
also declared the use and benefits of Penitential Works, to form in us a true
Sense of the Enormity of Sin, to be as a Curb to keep us from sinning, and as a
Medicine to heal the remnants of Sin, and conquer evil habits, and to render us
conformable to our Head CHRIST JESUS, with whom, if we suffer, Romans 8.17. Conc.
Trid. Sess, 14. c. 8.
we shall reign also, adds these words, Neque vero ita nostra est satisfactio
hoec, quam pro peccatis nostris exsolvimus, ut non sit per CHRISTUM JESUM: nam
qui ex nobis, tanquam ex nobis, nihil possumus, eo cooperante, qui nos
confortat, omnia possumus. Ita non habet homo unde glorietur; sed omnis
gloriatio nostra in Christo est: in quo vivimus, in quo meremur, in quo
satisfacimus, facientes fructus dignos Poenitentioe, qui ex illo vim habent: ab
illo offerunt Patri, and per illum acceptantur a Patre. Debent ergo Sacerdotes
Domini, quantum Spiritus and prudentia suggerit, pro qualitate criminum, and
Poenitentium facultate, salutares and convenientes satisfactiones injungere: ne
si forte peccatis conniveant, and indulgentius cum Poenitentibus agant,
loevissima quoedam opera pro gravissimis delictis injungendo, alienorum
peccatorum participes efficiantur. But this Satisfaction which we make for our
Sins, is not so ours, that it is not JESUS CHRIST 's; for we who 2 Cor. 3.5.
Phil. 4.13.
of our selves as of our selves can do nothing, can do all things with him who
strengthens us. So that Man has nothing wherein to glory: 1 Cor. 1.31. 2 Cor.
10.17. Gal. 6.3.
But all our glory is in Christ, in whom Acts 17.28.
we live, in whom we merit, and in whom we satisfy, bringing forth Matthew.
3.8.4.17. Luc. 3.8.10. and 17.
Fruits worthy of Repentance, which have their Power from him: By him are
offered to his Father. From all which the Council concludes thus, Therefore the
Priests of our Lord ought, as Prudence and the Spirit of God shall dictate, to
enjoin salutary and convenient Satisfactions, according to the Quality of the
Crimes, and the Abilities of the Penitents, least if they should chance to
connive at Sins and be too indulgent to Penitents, by enjoining light Penances
for great Offenses, they should be made partakers of the Sins of others.

Is not this the very Sense of the Bishop of Meaux? And what proof can he bring
from hence, that we think we can of our selves make a true and proper
satisfaction to God for Sin as he insinuates.

I would gladly therefore have this Author, and with him all Protestants to
consider whether what he says be a sufficient ground to break off from an
established Church, and separate from her Communion. All the Authority he
brings is, Page 24.
We think the whole of this point to be the advancement of a Doctrine grounded
upon no Authority of Scripture, etc. and we are persuaded, that when ever God
remits the Crime he remits the Punishment also, Page 25.
it being a way most suitable to his Divine Goodness. He tells us indeed, that
this is the Doctrine of the Church of England, but cites no Authority of Canons
or Articles for it, which is very strange, seeing this Doctrine is of such
concern, that it gives more to a Sinner for saying a bare Lord have Mercy upon
us, than all the Plenary Indulgences of the Catholic Church, against which they
make such clamours.

And here also I cannot but wonder, that he who so often uses no other Argument
but we are persuaded, we think, we suppose, that in almost every Article he
brings this as his chiefest Argument, we suppose this is contrary to Scripture;
or we think this is not to be found in it or in Antiquity; Page 25.
should yet quarrel with the Bishop of Meaux for using that word, and tell us,
he ought to have brought some better proof for so great a Doctrine than barely
we suppose: And this, especially, when the Bishop did not use the word, but
only nous croyons, we believe, and so it was rendered by me. But it matters not,
this served to make a show of an Argument, Page 25, 27, 31.
and must be improved upon several occasions.

Indulgences.
INdulgences follow next. Art. 7. page 27.
And here he tells us, That the Bishop of Meaux has stated our Doctrine after a
manner so favorable to them, that he is persuaded he will find more in his own
Church than in theirs to oppose his Doctrine. We do not hear of any one yet
that has opposed it; nay, on the contrary, we see it almost every where
approved. If the Disputes in the Schools have descended to some particular
Niceties not expressed by the Bishop, neither he nor we are concerned in them;
and if some Abuses have crept in, seeing he acknowledges that both the Council
and the Bishop of Meaux seem willing to have them redressed, Page 28.
methinks it should suffice.

He tells us indeed of many Practices in the Church of Rome different (as he
says) from that of the Primitive Church; but these being neither necessary, nor
universally received, we will not quarrel with him about them, but content our
selves with what he has promised, if he will stand to his word, That whenever
the Penances shall be reduced to their former Practice, they will be ready to
give or receive such an Indulgence as Monsieur de Meaux has described, and as
the Primitive Ages of the Church allowed of.

Purgatory.
Though he will not allow a Purgatory, Act. ^.
yet he is forced to acknowledge Prayer for the Dead in the very second
Century. Page 31.
He would willingly attribute this to any other Intention than that of the
Church of aiding or helping Souls departed; nay, further he tells us, they will
not condemn the Practice, Page 32.
so it be not made an Article of our Faith. But since two General Councils have
declared it, that of Florence, in which the Grecian Bishops were, and that of
Trent; and since the Practice of all Nations, and the Testimonies of every Age
confirm the Custom of Praying for the Dead that they might receive help; what
can we say to them, who make a Breach in the Church, and condemn Antiquity upon
no other grounds than a bare supposition, that it is injurious to the Merits of
JESUS CHRIST, which yet has no other Proof but their vain Presumption.

ART. VIII. Of the Sacraments in general.
IN his second Part he tells us, Art. 9. page ^^.
That the Doctrine of the Sacraments has always been esteemed one of the most
considerable Obstacles to their Union with the Church of Rome; That they cannot
imagine why M. de Meaux should insinuate as if our Disputes about these, except
it be in the Point of the Eucharist, were not so great as about other Matters,
unless (says he) it be to serve for an Excuse for his own passing so lightly
over them, or to make us less careful in examining their Doctrine.

One would think, to hear this Discourse, that this Author had something very
material to bring against our Church; neither has he given us any reason to
suspect he would be careless in such a grand Concern: We will trace him in each
Sacrament, and see whether the Arguments he brings be sufficient or no to
justify a Breach in the Church, which has been the occasion of so great Evils.

And first, in this Article we find little difference betwixt our Doctrines as
to the Nature and Efficacy of the Sacraments, or as to the Necessity of them,
or manner how they confer Grace, or the Dispositions requisite to partake of
their Effects; the chief difference lying in the diversity of Expression.

And as for the number of Sacraments, he has removed the chief Obstacle, by
telling us, in the close of this Article, That their own Church says but little
more than what our greatest Schoolmen have voluntarily confessed. But he needed
not to have gone to the Schoolmen; for if they exact this Notion of a
Sacrament, that it must be generally necessary to Salvation, as their Catechism
expresses it, it is true, they will not find Seven Sacraments; but I am afraid
also they will scarce establish Two: and if they add, with this Author, that
the other Sacraments are not Sacraments after the same manner that Baptism and
the Lords Supper are, page 41.
it will be readily granted them, seeing the very Words of our Profession of
Faith express much-what the same thing, when it tells us, there are Seven
Sacraments of the New Law Instituted by JESUS CHRIST for the Salvation of
Mankind, though all be not necessary for every Man.

If the number of Seven Sacraments be not mentioned by the Ancient Fathers, it
is no wonder, seeing they writ not Catechisms; but neither do they limit them
to Two: It is sufficient, that in discoursing upon any of these Seven, they
generally and properly call them Sacraments. Neither can any Argument drawn
from Scripture, against this Number, be of force, since the Scripture does not
term any of them Sacraments but only Marriage. It is sufficient, Ephesians. 5.
that the Scripture mentions an exterior Ceremony, and an interior Grace
annexed thereto, which shows the nature of a Sacrament.

ART. IX. Of Baptism.
AS for Baptism, we both agree, Art. 10. p. 35.
That it is the Law of Christ, which the Eternal Truth has established, that
seeing all men are conceived and born in Sin, none can enter into the kingdom
of God, except he be regenerate and born anew of Water and the Spirit. What
reason therefore they have to break Communion with an established Church,
because she will not be more Charitable than JESUS CHRIST, whose Law this is, I
cannot understand.

But (says he) This Law, as well as others, must be interpreted according to
the Rules of Natural Equity; and since the Roman Church acknowledges that God
sometimes accepts of the Will for the Deed, the ardent Desire of Baptism for
Baptism it self, when it cannot be had; why should we not think he will accept
of the Desire of the Church, and of the Believing Parents, to satisfy for the
want of Baptism in Children who die without it, seeing St. Paul tells us, 1
Cor. 7.
That the Seed of faithful Parentage is Holy from the very Birth.

I must confess I am astonished to see this Argument, and to hear the Church
condemned for her Uncharitableness in this Point, by one who pretends to give
us the Doctrine of the Church of England; whereas she determines nothing of it,
Page 37.
as he confesses. If he had been a Huguenot, or Puritan, it might have seemed
reasonable to justify a Breach with the Church of Rome for a Doctrine which
they condemn: But for a Church of England Man to justify a Breach for a
Doctrine which he affirms his Church has determined nothing of, is to me a
Riddle, but shows how little he esteems the Sin of Schism.

Certainly there is a vast difference betwixt the ardent Desire of those who
are by Age capable of receiving Baptism, and the Desire of the church or
Parents: The one proceeds from Faith working by Divine Charity, already infused
into the Soul of the Unbaptized Person, which if he extinguish not by the
neglect of a Precept, will no doubt of it produce a good Effect: The other is
wholly extrinsecal to the Child, and cannot affect the Soul of it, unless by
the application of that Sacrament which by the Institution of JESUS CHRIST must
wash away our Original Guilt.

So is there also a vast difference betwixt a Legal Purity, of which St. Paul
speaks in the abovementioned Text, and a Cleanness from Original Sin, of which
we treat.

ART. X. Confirmation.
HE acknowledges Confirmation, Art. 11. page 39, 40.
or Imposition of Hands upon those who had been Baptized, to have been very
Ancient in the Church, and which the very Apostles themselves practiced; as
also that the use of Chrism in Confirmation was very ancient. He tells us, they
allow none that is not of Episcopal Order to Confirm, and that they piously
hope the Blessing of the Holy Spirit descends upon those who receive it through
the Prayer of the Bishop, to enable them to keep their Baptismal Covenant, to
Arm them against Temptations, and to assist them in the way of Virtue and
Religion, etc. All which show an outward visible Sign, of an inward Spiritual
Grace; and the Divine Institution of this Sacrament; seeing none but God can
promise Grace to an outward Sign; such as the Imposition of Hands and Chrism
are: and certainly strength to keep our Baptismal Covenant, to resist
Temptations and to practice Virtue are no small Graces, which he, at least,
piously hopes are granted by God, through the Prayer of the Bishop; he might
have added Imposition of Hands also; and should have given us a reason why they
left off the use of Chrism, which he grants was early in the Church, and why
they will not call this a Sacrament, which has all these marks of it, and which
the Ancient Fathers frequently termed so: But if he will have it only to be a
Sacrament not so generally necessary to Salvation as some others are, we will
not dispute about the name under so strict a notion, though we affirm it to be a
Sacrament properly speaking.

ART. XI. Of Penance and Confession.
HE wishes their Discipline were both more strictly required, Art. 12. p. 40.
and more duly observed as to Penance and Confession than it is. He tells us
that their Canons require perhaps as much as the Primitive Christians
themselves did, but that it proceeds from the decay of Piety in the People
rather than any want of care in their Church, that they are not as well and as
regularly practiced.

He cannot deny but that Confession both public and private were very anciently
practiced both in the Eastern and Western Churches; but supposes them to have
been only a part of Christian Discipline: and therefore tells us, the Primitive
Christians interpreted these Passages cited by the Bishop of Meaux, Matthew.
18.18. Joh. 20.23.
with respect to Public Discipline: If he had produced those Fathers, and shown
that they taught it to be only the Orders of a Public Discipline of the Church,
and not an obligation upon a Sinner either to confess publicly or privately to
the Priest, (which was sometimes called Confession to God, as Absolution was
called Absolution from God) it would have been some satisfaction to the Reader.

He insinuates as if we permitted every Priest to hear Confessions, and only
just to hear them, and then without any more ado to say, Page 41.
I ABSOLVE THEE: But this it is not to understand our Discipline, which permits
none to hear Confessions but such as are approved of, after a diligent examen
of their Learning and Capacity, that they may be not only as Judges to pass a
right Sentence upon the Enormity of the Crimes, the various species of them,
the Obligations of Restitution, etc. but also as Physicians to prescribe
wholesome Remedies to prevent Relapses, etc. which cannot be done without the
Knowledge of the Case.

And therefoe, though we assert the great convenience of Private or Auricular
Confession, to take away the occasions of Fear, Shame and Scandal; yet our
Dispute is not so much upon that, as upon a necessity of declaring our Sins to
a Spiritual Physician, which whether it be publicly or privately matters not,
so it be done; and without doing which, we say, neither can a Judge pronounce a
just Sentence, nor a Physician prescribe wholesome Remedies.

We grant therefore, that Public Confession was much in use in the Primitive
Church for Public Sins, and that it was followed with a Public Penance for
them; but that was most commonly either after, or accompanied with Private
Confession of their Secret Sins also. That this Public Confession was a part of
Discipline, and therefore alterable at pleasure, we deny not, but that either
Public or Private Confession were necessary, we affirm.

He tells us, Page 4^.
That the Church of England refuses no sort of Confession either Public or
Private, which may be any ways necessary to the quieting of Men's Consciences;
or to the exercising of that Power of binding and loosing, which our Savior
CHRIST has left to his Church. That her Absolution is so full, Page ^^
that the Church of Rome it self could not defire to add any thing to it. That
they Advise even Private Confession upon many accounts which the Bishop of
Meaux has remarked, and which they willingly allow as very useful to the
Penitent; that is, I suppose, he allows with the Bishop the Penitential Court
of Judicature to be a curb to Liberty, Expos. page 18.
a plentiful sourse of Wise Admonitions, and a sensible consolation for Souls
afflicted for their Sins; all which he acknowledges render it very useful, and
convenient even to those who have no doubt nor scruple. But yet he will not
have this so beneficial an exercise to be necessary, where the Sinner can quiet
his Conscience without it; but calls it an unnecessary Rack to Men's
Consciences: So that if a Man be either insensible of his sins, or have brought
his Conscience to such a pass, that it checks him not, or be presumptious of
Gods Mercies, and upon that think himself secure of a Pardon, it seems it is
not necessary with them he should either have that Curb, or those Admonitions;
whereas we think those Persons have most need of all the helps imaginable; and
doubt not but that God, who gave so large a Commission to his Priest to bind or
loose, did not exempt those who stand in need of it from a due submission to
that Tribunal.

We assirm therefore that Penance is necessary, not for every Man in
particular, but to those only who have offended mortally after Baptism: That
true Contrition, which must vertually include all the parts of it, is
sufficient in case of a non-possibility of performing some of them: That
Confession which is one of the parts of it, either public or private, is
necessary to be performed to a Priest, that they who have Authority to bind or
loose may know upon what it is they are to pronounce Sentence: That though our
Sentence be absolute, yet since we cannot know when the Penitent has those due
Dispositions which are required to receive the Benefit of it; neither also can
we be sure that God always confirms our Sentence.

These are our Doctrines, this we have always held and practiced, and this we
affirm to be conformable to the practice of the most Ancient and Orthodox
Churches; and we cannot but be astonished why they should be rejected and no
better grounds brought than we suppose, Page 43.
or we must beg leave with assurance to say, that such Doctrines ar directly
contrary to the Tradition of the Church, and to many plain and undoubted places
of Holy Scripture. If he say, he only undertook an Exposition of their
Doctrine, and therefore was no more obliged to prove it than the Bishop of
Meaux himself; I must tell him, the difference is great; for the Bishop of
Meaux undertaking to Expound a Doctrine established in the Church, that very
Possession was a sufficient proof of its Antiquity and Universality; it being a
constant maxim in our Church, that no particular Opinions or Practices ought
ever to be established as necessary to all; and that nothing can be declared as
an Article of our Faith, which was not materially so before, that is, which was
not handed down to us by universal Tradition as a revealed Truth: Whereas this
Author undertaking to give us an Exposition of a Doctrine which dissents from
ours so established, and of which we are in possession, if he would have it
bear any weight, he ought to have given some solid Reasons for their defection
from those Doctrines, which had been established in England for above a
Thousand Years, from the very time that Pagan Idolatry was rooted out by St.
Augustine the Benedictin Monk; he ought, I say, to have given some solid
Reasons, such as were no less than Domonstrations, or manifest Revelations, to
which, and to no other, those who are in Possession of a Doctrine so
established ought to submit, and without which all Arguments for a Reformation
dwindle into this which is very inefficacious; we suppose we have a just reason
to reform; we think we are in the right; we are persuaded it is according to
Scripture, etc. but we are not certain.

ART. XII. Of Extreme Unction.
AS to the Sacrament of Extreme Unction, Art. 13. p. 44.
this Author cannot deny but the words of St. James, If any man be sick, James
5.14, 15.
let him call for the Priests of the Church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the Name of our Lord. And the prayer of Faith shall
save the sick, and our Lord shall lift him up: and if he be in sins, they shall
be remitted to him: I say, he cannot deny, but these words exhibit to us an
outward Visible Sign, and an Inward Spiritual Grace: but yet he will not have
the meaning of this Passage to reser at all to a Sacrament, but only to the
miraculous Cures of the Apostles, contrary to the express words of Scripture,
and to the sense of them received and delivered to us by Antiquity.

The Grace of Curing the Sick was not given to all Priests or Elders alike, but
only to some select Persons; these did not only cure the Sick, but the Lame and
the Blind; their Power of Miracles was not tied to the Ceremony of Unction
only; all those that were anointed were not cured; neither had all they who
were cured by them who had the Gift of Healing, any assurance, by that Cure, of
the Forgiveness of their Sins: Yet St. James here speaks of those only that are
Sick; he appoints them to call in the Priests in general, and not them only who
had the Gift of Healing; he speaks only of anointing them with Oil, and not of
any other Ceremonies, used by CHRIST or his Apostles, in order to the curing of
the Sick. He promises, The prayer of faith shall save the sick, adn the Lord
shall lift him up; which, if it had been meant of Bdily Health, those only
would have died in the Apostles time, who either neglected this Advice, or
whose Deaths prevented the accomplishment of that Ceremony: And lastly, he
pronounces, That if they be in sins, they shall be remitted; which shows
plainly enough, it cannot belong only to Bodily Cures, as he would have it.

But he tells us, The Rituals of the Roman Church, for above Eight hundred
years, understood it plainly of Bodily Cures, and that Cardinal Cajetan himself
freely confesses, that it can belong to no other. Had he only told us, that the
ancient Roman Rituals show this Ceremony had a respect to Bodily Cures, as well
as to the Cures of the Mind, he had told us nothing but what our Rituals at
this day manifest, and what may be gathered from the Council of Trent, as the
Bishop of Meaux observes; Sess. 14. de Sac. Extrem. Unc. cap. 2.
which speaking of the Effects of this Sacrament, tells us, That the Sick
Person does sometimes by it obtain Health of Body, when it is expedient for the
Salvation of the Soul. Had he told us also only, that Cardinal Cajetan thought
it could not be proved, Nec ex verbis, nec ex effectu verba haec loquuntur de
Sacramentali Unctione Extremae Unctionis: sed magis de Unctione quam instituit
Dominus JESUS, a discipulis exercendam in aegrotis, Cajet. Annot. in loc.
neither from the Words, nor from the Effect, that the Words of St. James speak
of the Sacramental Unction of Extreme Unction; but rather of that Unction which
our Lord JESUS instituted in the Gospel, to be exercised by his Disciples upon
the Sick, he had been a faithful Quoter of Cajetan's Sense: But to tell us, he
freely confesses it can belong to no other, is to impose upon him and his
Readers.

He tells us, They anoint not their Sick for the Recovery of their Bodily
Health, because the Miraculous Power of Healing, to which that Ceremony
ministered, is ceased in the Church. But unless he can manifestly prove, the
Unction had no relation to the Sicknesses of the Soul, and this from clearer
Testimonies than the continued Practice of the Church till this last Age, he
brings nothing against our Possession, nor can he justify the laying it aside.

ART. XIII. Of Marriage.
HE tells us concerning Marriage, Art. 14. p. 45.
That M. de Meaux says nothing of it, but what they willingly allow: and we
desire no more. He supposes, that all true and proper Sacraments ought to be
generally necessary to Salvation; Page 46.
and after the same manner a Sacrament, as Baptism and the Holy Eucharist are;
and cites Lombard quoted by Cassander on their side: But this, I suppose, was
only for ostentation; for no Catholics ever esteemed Marriage to be a Sacrament
generally necessary to Salvation; otherwise, as he grants himself, they would
never have prohibited the Use of it to the Clergy. But if he intend his
Quotations should refer to the Reason he gives why it cannot be a Sacrament
after the same manner that Baptism and the Holy Encharist are, because (as he
says) it wants an Outward Sign, to which by CHRIST's Promise a Blessing is
annexed, he will not only find this Author against him, but the whole Torrent
of the Fathers, and the plain Texts of Scripture as interpreted by them.

ART. XIV. Of Holy Orders.
HE tells, Art. 15. p. 46.
That the Imposition of Hands in Holy Orders, being accompanied with a Blessing
of the Holy Spirit, may perhaps upon that account be called a kind of
particular Sacrament; but because the Grace that is conferred by it is not
common to all Christians, he thinks it ought not to be esteemed a common
Sacrament of the whole Church, as Baptism and the Lords Supper are. So that
thus far I find no difference betwixt us.

He tells us also, That they will not raise any Controversy about the
distinction of Orders below Deacons; because he acknowledges them to be ancient
in the Church: and I am satisfied with that Acknowledgment, and would not
willingly raise new Disputes.

ART. XV. Of the Eucharist.
WE come now to the Article of the Eucharist, Art. 16. p. 47.
in which we cannot but with him testify our just regret, that this Sacrament
of Love and Charity should become now an Occasion of Contention.

It is not my Province to examine the Arguments he brings against our Doctrine,
they having been so often and so fully answered by others; or to show how
weakly he oppugns the Bishop of Condom's Reasons; but only to justify his
Exposition. Yet however I cannot but take notice how insincerely he begins his
Attaque, from whence we may judge what is to be expected in the Sequel.

He tells us, That M. de Meaux seems to allow, that in two Cases it might have
been lawful to forsake the Literal Interpretation of these Words, This is my
Body: Ibidem.
The first is, If there be such grounds in those Words for a Figurative
Interpretation, as naturally lead to it. Which having supposed to be grantted
by the Bishop, he undertakes to prove from Gratian and Bellarmine, that the
Words do lead to a Figurative Interpretation; and endeavors to confirm it by
the Words of the Institution, and other Examples of Scripture. But what will he
say now, when I shall show him, that he imposes upon the Bishop, and has not
proved one tittle either against him or us?

The Bishop's Words are these: Expos. page 19.
As for us, who find nothing in the Words which JESUS CHRIST makes use of in
the Institution of this Mystery, OBLIGING US to take them in a Figuration
Sense, we think that a sufficient Reason to determine us to the Literal. He
speaks here, you see, of our being OBLIGED to take those Words in a Figurative
sense, which both he and all Catholics affirm can never be proved against us;
but no body ever denied but the Words as they lie (without considering the
Circumstances, and Practice of the Church delivering the Interpretation of them
down to us) might possibly lead to a Figurative Interpretation, seeing the like
Expressions are frequently found in Scripture: as, for example, I am a Door, I
am a Vine, etc. which being always taken by the Church in a Figurative sense,
we should esteem him a Madman that should think it possible after this to
persuade all the World they ought to be taken in a Literal. And as it would be
a Madness to suppose all Mankind might in future Ages become so sottish, as to
renounce this Figurative Interpretation, of JESUS CHRIST's being a Door and a
Vine, and fall so far into the Literal sense, as to believe him to be
substantially present in them, and pay the utmost Adorations to him there; set
them up in Temples to be adored, and celebrate Feasts in Honor of them: So we
cannot but think it to be very irrational to imagine, that, if the Disciples,
and the whole Church in all Nations, had been once taught, these Words, This is
my Body, were to be taken in a Figurative sense, it could ever have happened the
Visible Church in all Nations should agree to teach their Children that it
ought to be taken in a Literal; and proceed so far as to pay their Adorations
to what they knew was but a morsel of Bread, expose it to be worshipped, etc.
which they could not but know was an Idolatry would bring inevitable Damnation
to them and their Posterity, who should be guilty of it. And further, We cannot
see how it can enter into the Minds of Rational men, that this so grand an
Error should either overspread the Church in a moment, or so insensibly creep
into it, that she, who was so vigilant in all other Errors of lesser moment,
should yet be so blind as not to see this, or so wicked as not to take notice
of it.

He should then, if he would have opposed M. de Meaux, or the Catholic Church,
have undertaken to prove, That the very Words of the Institution oblige us to
take them in a Literal sense.

He tells us indeed, That if the Relative This, in that Proposition, This is my
Body, referred to the Bread that our Savior held in his Hands, the natural
repugnancy there is betwixt the two things affirmed of one another, Bread and
CHRIST's Body, will necessarily required the Figurative Interpretation. But
unless he can prove that the Pronoun (hoc) this must necessarily relate to
(Panis) Bread, and not to (Corpus) Body, his Argument will avail him nothing;
but that all his Logic will never be able to effect. Page 45.
His Argument is this: What did he say was his Body, but that which he gave to
his Discipoles? What did he give to his Disciples, but that which he broke?
What brake he, but that which he took? And St. Luke says expressly, He took
Bread. But what follows from all this, but that JESUS took Bread, and blessed
it, and brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, Take eat, THIS IS MY
BODY? But he go's on: What JESUS took in his Hands, that he blessed: What he
blessed, the same he brake and gave to his Disciples: What he gave to his
Disciples, of that he said, This is my Body: But JESUS, says the Text, took
Bread; of the Bread therefore he said, THIS IS MY BODY. But what does all this
argue against us, unless he beg the Question, and suppose that no real Change
was made by those Words? Which to show how true it is, let us propose an
Example. We will suppose, and that not incongruously, that our Blessed Savior,
in changing the Water into Wine, might have made use of these, either mental or
vocal Words; This is Wine, or let this be Wine: Now here it is manifest the
Word This was not determined, but only signified Substance, till the Word Wine
was annexed. This supposed, if any one would see the force of his Argument, let
him change the Expression, and instead of Bread use Water, and instead of Body
use Wine, and then reflect whether he can from thence prove that these Words,
This is Wine, must necessarily mean, This Water is Wine: or rather, whether
that would not be a Proposition which implies a Contradiction, Gratian de
Consecrat. d. 2., c. 55. Bellarm. l. 3. c. 19. SS. prumum,
as Gratian and Cardinal Bellarmine prove in the foregoing Places cited by him,
of the like Proposition, This is my Body.

But it will not be amiss to consider Cardinal Bellarmine's Argument, to which
this Author refers. He tell us there, how these Words, Take and eat, for this
is my Body, must necessarily infer either a real Change of the Bread, as
Catholics; or else a metaphorical Change, as the Calvinists hold: but that they
will by no means admit of the Lutheans sense. Which Proposition he endeavors
to prove against the Lutherans, assirming the Words, This is my Body, to bear
necessarily one of these three senses. First, This which is contained under the
species of Bread, is my Body; which is the Catholic sense, and supposes a
Mutation. The second is that of the Sacramentaries, who admit of no Mutation;
and their sense is, This Bread is the Figure of my Body. The third, which is
that of the Lutherans, who admit of no Change, but yet allow a Real Presence,
must bear this Interpretation, This truly Wheaten Bread is truly and properly
my Body. But this (says he) can by no means be admitted, whether we speak of
the thing it self, or of the Proposition: For it cannot possibly be, that one
thing should not be changed, and yet should be another; for it would be that
thing, and would not be that thing. Moreover, in an Affirmative Proposition it
is necessary the Subjectum, (or thing of which any thing is affirmed) and the
Praedicatum, (or thing affirmed of it) should have a regard to the same thing.
Then follow the Words which he cites: It cannot therefore be, that that
Proposition should be true, in which the Subjectum, or former part, designs
Bread; and the Praedicatum, or latter part, the Body of CHRIST: For Bread and
the Body of CHRIST are two very different things. This indeed may prove that
the Words of the Institution may possibly lead to a Figurative Interpretation;
but are far from proving that they oblige us to take them so, which was what
the Bishop of Condom affirmed, and which he, if he had used Sincerity, should
have oppugned; and not have spent so much time to prove what was not the
Question.

But, as I said, it is not my Business here to justify our Tenets, but to see
what he has to say against the Exposition as such.

I do not find he pretends here that the Bishop of Meaux has palliated or
prevaricated the Doctrine of the Catholic Church: But I observe, he uses
frequently the Word Corporeally, and the Corporeal Presence; which the Bishop
has avoided, keeping himself to the Terms of the Council of Trent, which tells
us only, that JESUS CHRIST is truly, really, and substantially present in the
Sacrament; but uses not the Word Corporeally, I suppose, because it may bear a
double sense, and signify either, first, that the Body is really and
substantially present, though not after a carnal, gross manner, with all the
Qualifications of a Natural Body; and this is the sense of those Catholics who
make use of it: Or, secondly, it may be taken as signifying the Body to be
present after a corporeal, carnal manner, with all the Conditions and Qualities
of a Natural Body; which sense our Enemies are apt to impute to us, as if it
were our Doctrine, tho very unjustly.

But had he been Faithful in giving us the Doctrine of the Church of England, I
doubt not but the Arguments he brings against the Bishop of Meaux, would have
proved as much against it, as it does against ours.

He tells us, Page ^^.
They confess this Sacrament to be somewhat more than a mere Figure; but they
deny, that therefore it must be his very Body; I would gladly know what that is
which is not the thing it self, but yet is more than a mere Gigure of it. If he
mean that it is not the Body Corporeally, according to the Explication of the
word as I have given it in the Second Sense, we agree with him: But if he mean,
by this somewhat more than a mere Figure, that the Body and Blood of JESUS
CHRIST is verily and indeed taken and received by the Faithful in the Lords
Supper, as their Church Catechism has it; I see not also in what the difference
consists betwixt us, neither can I see how his Arguments oppugn our Doctrine
without confuting theirs.

It Is true, their Twenty eighth Article tells us, that The Body of Christ is
given, taken, and eaten in the Supper, only after a Heavenly and Spiritual
manner; and that the means whereby the Body of CHRIST is received, and eaten in
the Supper, is Faith. Yet because I am not willing to think their Canons and
Church Catechism contradict one another; I am willing to think the meaning of
the saying, that Faith is the means by which they receive it, is, that they
cannot receive the benefit of Christ's Presence without a lively Faith, but
should rather Eat and Drink their own Damnation; as is more fully expressed in
the next Article: and also that the expressions of a Heavenly and Spiritual
manner, are only to oppose that Carnal and Gross manner which a Natural Body
has, as having local extention, etc. which Body, as such, cannot possibly be in
more places then one, as St. Augustine affirms, and to which that part of the
Article in Edw. Sparrow's Canons, page 49.
the Sixths days (to which this has succeeded) does allude. If he think I
impose upon their Church, I desire him to let us know by some Authentic
Testimony, what is the meaning of that part of the Article; and to show us how
it can stand with the Doctrine delivered in the Church Chatechism, which
affirms as I have told you, that The inward thing signified is the Body and
Blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST which is verily and indeed taken and received by
the Faithful; it does not say, by Faith, but by the Faithful: As also how it
agrees with these words of the same Article, The Bread which we break is a
partaking of the Body of CHRIST, and likewise the Cup of Blessing is a
partaking of the Blood of CHRIST.

If then he admit with King James, Causab. Ep. ad Card. Per.
that they believe JESUS CHRIST to be as really present in the Sacrament as
Roman Catholics do, but only know not the manner: Page 61.
What becomes of all his Sarcasms of Worshipping a Deity, whose substance they
first formed and then spoke it into a God, etc. He knew full well that such
Objections were the very Calumnies of the Heathens, who did not only object to
Christians their eating of their God, but also of eating Man's Flesh in their
Sacrifices, of drinking Childrens Blood, and several other such like
accusations; all which proceeded from some imperfect knowledge they had got of
the Christian Sacrifice, notwithstanding all the care the Primitive Christians
took to conceal that Adorable Mystery from Infidels, and even Catechumens. What
becomes of all the Arguments brought from pretended contradictions, and an
impossibility of being present in many places at once? Does not their real
Participation ( if, as the Bishop says, there be any Sense in the Words) fall
under the same censures? And what becomes of all his Objections raised from the
difference betwixt some Schoolmen who endeavor to explicate the manner of his
presence; and the free acknowledgment of others, that we are ignorant of it? Do
not they themselves profess the same? And if we cannot comprehend how God can
be three and one, or the Divinity be Incarnate, must we necessarily therefore
deny the Blessed Trinity, or the Incarnation? In a word, what will become of
all the Arguments in General brought against Transubstantiation,
substantiation, Adoration, Sacrifice of the Altar, Communion under one Species,
etc. seeing Learned Protestants themselves confess, that if the words of the
Institution be taken in a Literal Sense (without which a Real Presence can
never be admitted) they must yield up the Cause in all those Points to Roman
Catholics? This Brerelay has shown in his Liturgy of the Mass Printed Anno
1620. page 225, 339. from several of their own Authors.

But he tells us, that many of our Schoolmen acknowledge there is not in the
Scripture any formal proof of Transubstantiation; that there is not any Texts
that without the declaration of the Church would be able to evince it; that it
was not a matter of Faith till the Council of Lateran; and then triumphs as if
these expressions were a perfect yielding up of our Cause.

But I would gladly have him to consider upon what account it is these Learned
Men use those expressions, and examine a little their Reasons, and then I doubt
not but if he observe the Connection of their Discourse, he will not find such
an occasion of triumphing.

It is an usual thing with Novelists to pretend nothing must be admitted as a
matter of Faith, but what can be manifestly proved from plain Texts of
Scripture: This Catholics deny, and tell them, such a proposition destroys all
our Faith; because no body can prove, for example, by Scripture the Books of
the Gospels or the Epistles of St. Paul to be the Word of God or Divine
Revelation: and if they cannot prove those Scriptures to be Divine, but by
Tradition and the Interposition of the Church; and yet tell us Tradition and
Church Authority are not sufficient, what will become of all the Articles
contained in those Books? Nay further, Catholics tell them, that if they rely
only upon the bare words of Scripture without having recourse to the Authority
of a Church, and the Consent of Pastors and Teachers in all Ages and Places,
they will never be able to demonstrate any one Doctrine; that is, they can
never prove it so clearly as to convince those who rely wholly upon their
Reason, and will admit of nothing for a proof in such weighty matters, but what
is so clear, that whoever understands the Terms and Propositions must
necessarily consent to the Conclusion drawn from them. The Schoolmen do not
only instance the Real Presence and Transubstantiation in proof of this; but
the Trinity also and Incarnation, and in a word, all the Articles of our Creed.

And the very opposition which Heretics in the several Ages of the Church have
formed against those Doctrines is a clear proof of this, seeing they, upon all
occasions, pretended Scripture for their grounds, and because Catholics could
not bring any Text of Scripture against them so clear but they could elude it
by some seeming Exposition; therefore Scripture alone could never decide the
Controversies; but the voice of the Church in her Councils was in all Ages
esteemed necessary to stop their Mouths, and her Decisions and Declarations of
the Sense of Scripture was that which confounded all their Errors.

Thus it was that Arius and his followers were condemned by the Council of
Nice, not by the sole words of Scripture, but by the words of Scripture as
understood and explicated by the consent of the Catholic Church; and thus it
was that Berengarius and his followers were condemned by the Council of Lateran
and several others, and that Condemnation confirmed by that of Trent.

He tells us, moreover, That this Doctrine was no matter of Faith till the
Council of Lateran, Page 56:
1200 years after CHRIST; and had not That and the Council of Trent interposed,
it would not have been so to this very day. And cites Lombard, Scotus, Gabriel,
and Bellarmine for this Assertion. Let us examine his Quotations; but first we
will represent the State of the Question, as the best Method to understand
their Meanings.

We must therefore take notice, that the word Transubstantiation was first
publicly used in the Council of Lateran, as the word Consubstantial was in the
first Council of Nice; but that, as the thing intended by the word
Consubstantial was all along of Faith before that Council, so was the thing
intended by Transubstantiation ever believed by the Faithful in all Ages. The
thing intended by the word Transubstantiation is expressed by the Council of
Trent in these words.

If any one shall say, Sess. 13. Can. 2.
That the Substance of Bread and Wine remains in the most Holy Sacrament of the
Eucharist, together with the Body and Blood of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and shall
deny that wonderful and singular Conversion of the whole Substance of the Bread
into the Body, and of the whole Substance of Wine into the Blood, the Species
of Bread and Wine only remaining, which Conversion the Catholic Church does
most aptly call Transubstantiation: Let him be Anathema.

This Council having before expressed our Belief of the true, Ibid. Can 1.
Chap. 1.
real, and substantial Presence of the Body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST in the
most Holy Sacrament, brings this Transubstantiation, or Conversion of one
Substance into another, as the natural Consequence of it. But because there are
many sorts of Conversions of one Substance into another, all which may be
called Substantial Conversions, and by consequence the word Transubstantiation
might be properly enough used to express that Change; therefore it is manifest
the Church does not intend here to fix the Manner of that Conversion; but only
to declare the Matter, (viz.) That the body and Blood of JESUS CHRIST becomes
truly, really, and substantially present, the Bread and Wine ceasing to be
there truly, really, and substantially present, tho the Appearances thereof
remain. This Matter is that which is of Faith, and was always so before the
Council of Lateran: but as for the Manner how this Conversion is made, it is
even at present a disputable Question in the Schools. It being then manifest,
that our Dispute with protestants is not about the Manner how JESUS CHRIST is
present, but only about the thing it self, whether the Body and Blood of JESUS
CHRIST be truly, really, and substantially present after the Words of
Consecration, under the species or appearance of Bread and Wine, the Substance
of Bread and Wine being not so present; let us examine whether the Authorities
he brings, as to both his Assertions, have any force against our Tenets.

He tells us first, That Lombard, Scotus, and many others confess, that there
is not in Scripture any formal Proof of Transubstantiation: and cites in the
Margin Lombard. 4. Sent. did. 10. But there is no such thing in him, as I
shall more fully show in declaring his Doctrine. He brings in Scotus also, 4.
Did. 2. Qu. 11. whereas there are only two Questions in that Distinction.

His next Quotation is Bellarmine, Bellar. de Euch. l. 3. c. 23. ff. Secundo
dicit.
who, he says, confesses, and cites many others of the same Opinion, That there
is not any (formal Proof from Scripture) that without that Declaration of the
Church would be able to evince it. It Is true, Bellarmine here acknowledges that
Scotus said there was not any Place in Scripture so express, that it would
evidently compel any one to admit of Transubstantiation without the Churches
Declaration; which, he confesses, is not altogether improbable. For, says he,
although the Scripture, which we have mentioned above, does appear to us so clear,
that it may compel a Man who is not perverse to believe it; yet whether it be
so or no, we may justly doubt, since Learned and Acute Men, such as in the
first place Scotus was, have thought the contrary. And this is all he says.

It Is true also, that Scotus, in 4. Did. 11. Qu. 3. n. 5. brings this
Objection, That nothing is to be held as of the Substance of Faith, but what is
expressly to be had out of Scripture, or is expressly declared by the Church, or
evidently follows from what is plainly contained in Scripture, or plainly
determined by the Church: But that it neither appears manifestly from
Scripture, nor from the Churches Declaration, nor is it evidently inferred from
either, that the Substance of Bread does not remain in the Eucharist: And
answers it n. 15. thus; That the Church has declared it in the Council of
Lateran, c. Firmiter Credimus: In which Chapter, he tells us, the Truth of some
things which are to be believed, are more explicitly declared than they were in
the Apostles Creed, or in that of Nice, or that of St. Athanasius. So that from
hence some have concluded, that Scotus probably held this Assertion, That the
Scripture did not evince it; as also the other, That the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation was not so explicitly believed before that Council of
Lateran, as it was since. But this is no more than what he, or any one might
say of the Consubstantiality of the Son, before the Council of Nice.

It is also to be taken notice, that this Distinction of P. Lombard was wholly
written upon the Manner of CHRIST's Existence in the Sacrament, and other
Scholastic Disputes of that nature, and not upon the thing it self as of Faith;
and therefore no wonder if Scotus, writing upon that Distinction, should grant
how that manner of Conversion, which he thought was a Consequence of the
Council of Laterans Definition, was not so explicitly known before that Council
as since, or not clearly found in Scripture. But if you look upon him, Did.
10. qu. 1. n. 2, 3. where he is to treat of the Real Presence of CHRIST's Body
and Blood under the species of Bread and Wine, he tells us, that it is a Truth
which was expressly delivered from the beginning, even from the very time of the
Institution of the Eucharist. His Words are, Ista enim veritas a principio fuit
express tradita, ex quo Eucharistia fuit instituta. And he adds, That the
Foundation of that Authority are the Words of the Institution, This is my Body,
and this is my Blood; which he says cannot be taken Figuratively, if we observe
the Rule of St. Augustine, Aug. 83. Quest. qu. 69.
That the Circumstances of Scripture do clear the Sense of it: For CHRIST
having added to these Words, This is my Body, this Circumstance, which shall be
broken for you; and to these Words, This is my Blood, th^^ Circumstance, which
shall be shed for you, it is manifest they ought to be taken in a Literal sense.

Then he tells us, That Cardinal Cajetan acknowledges, That had not the Church
declared her self for the proper sense of the Words, the other might with as
good warrant have been received; and quotes him in 3. D. Thomae, qu. 75. art.
1. But he says no such thing, nay rather the contrary, as will appear to any
one who reads that Article, in which he tells us, That we learn from the Truth
of the Words of our Lord taken in their proper sense, that the Body of CHRIST
is truly in the Eucharist; which is the first thing, says he, which we learn
concerning this Sacrament from the Gospel. But the second, continues he, which
the Gospel has not explicated, we have expressly received from the Church, that
is, the Conversion of Bread into the Body of CHRIST; which, he says, we have
not only received from the ancient Doctors of the Church, but from the Council
of Lateran under Pope Innocent the Third, De Summa Trinit. and Fide Cath.
Firmiter credimus; where both Points are expressed, viz. That the Body and
Blood of CHRIST are truly contained in the Sacrament of the Altar under the
species of Bread and Wine (which regards the first). And it follows, The Bread
bein transubstantiated into his Body, and the Wine into his Blood, by Divine
Power.

After this, he speaks of the Reality of CHRIST's Body in the Eucharist, and of
the Manner how it becomes there, viz. by Conversion; and of the first he says,
Sciendum est, omnes circa primam novitatem continentiae, and re and voce
consensisse, dum omnes communiter fatemur corpus Christi prius non contentum
sub hac hostia modo veraciter contineri: quamvis circa modum quo continetur
variae sint opiniones. (i.e.) We must know, that all Persons are at perfect
agreement both as to the manner of Expression, and as to the thing it self,
when we speak of the first new Change which is there made of the thing
contained, seeing we all commonly confess, that the Body of CHRIST, which was
not at first contained under this Host, is now truly there contained: tho there
be various Opinions concerning the manner how he is there contained.

Then summing up several of those Opinions, as, Whether it be by such a Change
as is made by Nutrition; or, Whether the Bread be Annihilated; or, Whether it
be by a true Conversion;he undertakes to prove, that it is by a Conversion
which does produce and effect the Presence of CHRIST in the Host, and freely
confesses, that this Conversion is not explicitly mentioned in the Gospel, but
only deduced from the words This is my Body, by the Doctors of the Church.

After which, returning to his first Point, in which he had concluded, that the
Body of CHRIST was truly in the Sacrament, he tells us, In hoc omnes fideles
convenient: sed modus quo est in disputationem vertitur: All the Faithful agree
in this; but as to the manner how he is there, that is a disputable Question.

This is, in short, the Intent of that Article, which is far from what this
Author has imposed upon him.

Next he tells us, That the generality of our Commanion confess, that if the
Words of Consecration refer to the Bread which is changed by them, they must be
taken in their (Figurative) sense. Page 74, 75.
But this has been sufficiently cleared already.

Lastly, He tells us, That this Doctrine was no matter of Faith till the
Council of Lateran, 1200 years after CHRIST; and that had not That and the
Council of Trent since interposed, it would not have been so to this very day.
What Doctrine does he here mean? Not that of the Schools, concerning the manner
of CHRIST's Existence in the Sacrament; for a little after he tells us, That
Anathema's have been pronounced against them, and they esteemed Heretics and
Schismatics for opposing it: But the Church never yet proceeded so far as to
declare the Manner, or censure any Opinions concerning it.

By this Doctrine then, which he tells us was not of Faith till the Council of
Lateran, he must understand the Doctrine of the Church, and say, That the Body
and blood of JESUS CHRIST was not till then believed to be truly, really, and
substantially present under the species or appearances of Bread, the Substance
of Bread being not so present after Consecration. But how does he prove this?
He first brings Scotus cited by Bellarmine; but we have already examined his
Concessions, page 84.
which make but little for our Adversary.

Then he quotes Gabriel cited by Suarez, T. 3. Disp. 50. sect. 1. But Suarez
there undertaking to prove two Assertions; the first, That the Sacrament of the
Eucharist is made by a true Conversion of the Bread and Wine into the Body and
Blood of CHRIST, which, he tells us, is of Faith; and the second, That this
Sacrament is made by a true Transubstantiation of the Bread into the Body, and
of the Wine into the Blood of CHRIST: he tells us, That the word
Transubstantiation, taken in its proper and strict sense, signifies transitum
seu conversionem totius substantiae in totam substantiam; a Transition or
Conversion of a whole Substance into a whole Substance. After which, he
concludes thus: From this Doctrine of Faith we may gather, first, That the
Scholastics, as Scotus and Gabriel, are to be corrected -- and, secondly, That
the thing it self was ancient, and perpetually believed in the Church, Non
suerit tam aperte explicata, sicut mode est.
tho perhaps in former times it was not so fully explicated as now it is.

In the last place he quotes Lombard, L. 4. Did. 11. Lit. A. But it is
manifest that Lombard speaks there only of a Scholastic Tenet: Which to the end
you may see, as also what was esteemed of Faith in his time, before the Council
of Lateran, I will give you a short account of his whole Doctrine, as to this
Point.

He begins his eighth Distinction telling us, Lomb. in 4. did. 8. Lit. B.
That the Blessed Sacrament was instituted when JESUS CHRIST, after the Typical
Lamb, gave to his Disciples his Body and Blood in the Last Supper. Then
speaking of the Form, This is my Body, etc. Lit. C.
he tells us, Cum haec verba proferuntur, conversio fit panis and vini in
substantiam corporis and sanguinis Christi: That when these words are
pronounced, there is made a Conversion of Bread and Wine into the Substance of
the Body and Blood of CHRIST.

Then speaking of a Sacrament as being the Sign of a Sacred thing, Lit. D.
he tells us what is the sign, and what is the Thing in this Sacrament. The
Form ( i.e. Appearance) says he, of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament, is the
Sign of the Sacred thing -- So that the species bear the Name of the Things
which they were before, that is, of Bread and Wine: But the thing signified is
twofold; the one contained under those species, and signified by them; the
other signified, but not contained. The thing contained and signified is the
Flesh of Christ which he took from the Blessed Virgin, and the Blood which he
shed for us. But the thing which is signified and not contained, is the Unity
of the Church in those who are Predestined, Called, Justified and Glorified.
So that there are, says he, three things to be distinguished, one which is only
a Sacrament, and not the thing, (viz.) the visible species of Bread and Wine;
another which is the Sacrament and the thing, (viz.) the proper Flesh and Blood
of Christ; and a third, which is the thing and not the Sacrament, (viz.) his
Mystical Body that is his Church; but the visible species are the Sacrament or
Sign of both these things.

Then in his Ninth Distinction speaking of a two fold Manducation, the one
Sacramental, in which the good and bad do Eat the Body of Christ; and the other
only Spiritual, in which only the good are made partakers of it; which is by
Faith: he proceeds to tell us of the Errors of some, who held that the bad did
not receive the Body of Christ: and affirms, that it must be undoubtedly held,
that it is received by the good not only Sacramentally but Spiritually, whereas
the bad receive it only Sacramentally; that is, under the visible species of
Bread and Wine they receive that Flesh of Christ which he took from the Blessed
Virgin, and the Blood which he shed for us; but not the Mystical Body, that is
the benefits of his presence; All which he there proves from St. Gregory and
St. Augustine, and explicates some ambiguous terms which might give occasion of
error.

His next Distinction cited by this Author which Bist. 10.
treats De hoeresi aliorum, etc. Of the Heresy of others, who say, that the
Body of Christ is not upon the Altar but in Sign, tells us, That there are
others who transcend the madness of the former (Heretics) who measuring the
Power of God according to the manner of natural things, do more audaciously and
dangerously contradict the truth, affirming that the Body and Blood of Christ
are not on our Altars, and that the substance of Bread and Wine are not
converted into the substance of his Flesh and Blood -- and take occasion of
erring from the words of Truth, whence began the first Heresy (against this
Truth) amongst Christ's Disciples. Then showing what pretensions they make for
their Error both from Scripture and Fathers, and having solved them, he says,
Satis responsum est Hoereticis and objectionibus eorum: We have sufficiently
answered Heretics and their Objections who deny the true Body of Christ to be
on our Altars, and the Bread to be changed into his Body and the Wine into his
Blood by a Mystical Consecration. Then setting down his proofs out of the
Fathers to confirm our Doctrine, he concludes this Distinction with these
words; Ex his aliisque pluribus constat, etc. From these and many others it is
manifest, that the true Body and Blood of Christ is on our Altars, yea that
whole Christ is there under both species; and that the Substance of Bread is
converted into his Body and the substance of Wine into his Blood.

Having thus confirmed the substance of our Faith as to the thing, Did. 11.
Lib. A.
he proceeds in his next Distinction cited also by this Author to treat of the
manner how this Conversion is made, whether it be Formal or Substantial, or of
some other kind; and this being a pure Scholastic Nicety, he tell us, he dare
not undertake to define it, but declares, that if we ask him about the manner
he will give us this short answer, Lit. C.
Mysterium fidei credi salubriter potest, investigari salubriter non potest, A
Mystery of Faith may be safely believed, but not safely searched into.

This is the Doctrine of Lombardus who lived before the Council of Lateran, and
this is the Doctrine we now hold without the least alteration; and this
Doctrine was always held ever since the Institution, though it was thought
convenient by the Primitive Fathers to conceal it from the Enemies of
Christianity, and from those who were not Initiated; so that it may be said,
that it is now more publicly taught than it was then, but was always equally
believed by the Faithful.

These things being thus cleared, and the charge he has made against us being
found to be thus false, the consequences he has drawn from thence, will fall
upon himself, and we must needs tell him, that we cannot but admire the Power
of Truth, and hope that God has permitted him thus to misrepresent our Tenets,
to disguise the Truth, and to cite Authors contrary to their Intentions, that
the Eyes of of all those of his Communion may be opened, and that they may see
what blind guides they follow, who either take up things upon trust, or
wilfully prevaricate the Text, that they may keep them in Ignorance.

Moreover this Author affirms, Page 61.
the Church never taught nor practiced the Adoration of the Sacrament for above
1000 years; that the Elevation of it was not heard of till the Seventh Century,
and then used not to expose it to the People to be adored, but to represent the
lifting up of CHRIST upon the Cross; that all the Circumstances of this Worship
are but Inventions of yesterday; that the Primitive Christians did several
Actions which seem inconsistent with Adoration, etc. And we must take all these
Assertions upon his bare word for Truths. I shall nto go about to swell this
Answer, by proving an Adoration of the Blessed Sacrament within the first 400
years, and the Expressions of the first Ages which argue an Elevation, nor the
other Proofs we have for a Real Presence, nor the Consent of the most Learned
Protestants; this has been too frequently done, to repeat it here: The Reader
who is desirous of searching into the Truth, may see, if he understand French,
what M. Arnold has writ in Three Volumes, of the Perpetuity of Faith; or else
what Brierlay has written concerning the Sacrifice of Mass; what Coccius in his
Thesaurus, and what many others have published upon those Accounts; in which
they will find, that our Doctrine is conformable to Scripture, that it has been
continued down to our time by an uninterrupted Succession, and that our
Practices have been always conformable to our Doctrine; which is sufficient to
evince the Truth of it, and show the unjust Pretenses of a Reformation.

ART. XVI. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass.
IN his Twentieth Article, Of the Sacrifice of the Mass, Page 62.
which he tells us is justly esteemed one of the greatest and most dangerous
Errors that offends them; he yet acknowledges, That seeting aside the
Foundation of the CORPOREAL PRESENCE, on which the Bishop builds, and his
Consequence, That this Service is a TRVE AND REAL PROPITIATORY SACRIFICE,
which, he says, they are persuaded his manner of Expounding it will never bear;
there is little in it besides, but what they could readily assent to. but if he
cannot allow of the Corporeal Presence, will be, with the Church of England in
her Catechism, allow a Real Presence? If he do, I would gladly know whether
that Foundation be not solid enough to build those Doctrines on, which M. de
Meaux has founded upon that Reality. If he will not allow of a Real Presence,
how is he of the Church of England?

Again, I would gladly know of him what the Church of England holds concerning
her Priests, whether they be truly Priests or no, whether she acknowledge a
Sacrifice and an Altar, truly and properly speaking, though not possibly in such
a rigorous sense as may be put upon the Words? If she do not, what means her
Ordination, and the Title of Priesthood which her Ministers challenge with so
much earnestness? And if she do, why will he quarrel with the Council of Trent
for calling it a True and Proper Sacrifice, Sess. 22.
etc. a True and Proper Priesthood? especially since the same Council tells us,
that this Sacrifice is instituted only to represent that which was once
accomplished upon the Cross; to perpetuate the Memory of it to the end of the
World; Sess. 22. c. r.
and so apply to us the saving virtue of it, for the remission of those Sins
which we commit every day.

In a word, The Bishop of Meaux has expressed himself so clearly and
consequently to the Doctrine of the Council of Trent and of the Catholic
Church, that I cannot but admire any one who affirms, as this Author does, that
the Doctrine the Bishop of Meaux has expressed, Page 63.
is truly the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and such as the Church of
England has never refused: and except it be their doubt of the Corporeal
Presence, Mons. de Meaux had certainly reason to expect there was nothing in it
which they could justly except against; I cannot, I say, but admire he should
upon no better grounds than a pure Cavil about the Name and Nature of a
Sacrifice, when taken in the strictest Sense, and the word Corporeal instead of
Real, Page 62.
affirm this to be one of the most dangerous Errors that offend them. But the
Breach must be kept open, and widened too if possible. And because the offering
of Christ once made, is that proper Redemption, Propitiation, and Satisfaction
for all the Sins of the whole World; and because there is no other Satisfaction
for Sin but that alone, Article 31.
as their Article expresses it and we allow, therefore this Author must from
thence conclude, that the Representation, Commemoration and Application of that
first Offering by those who are Members of that Priesthood, according to the
Order of Melchisedec, which the Apostle tells us was to be perpetual, must not
be called a True, Heb. 6.
Proper and Propitiatory Sacrifice, though it be only Commemorative and
Applicatory.

ART. XVII. Of the Epistle to the Hebrews.
BUT the next Article shows us more manifestly, Art. 21. p. 67.
that all this Dispute is purely de Nomine. In which it manifestly appears that
he mistakes the Sense of the word Offer, Page 32.
as used by the Catholic Church in this place; for the Bishop of Meaux tells
us, the Catholic Church forms her Language and her Doctrine not from the sole
Epistle to the Hebrews but from the whole body of the Holy Scripture, and
therefore, though in that strict sense, in which the Epistle to the Hebrews uses
the word Offer, JESUS CHRIST cannot be said to be now offered, neither in the
Eucharist, nor any where else; yet because in other places of Scripture the
word is used in a larger signification, where it is often said, we offer to God
what we present before him; therefore she does not doubt to say, that she
offers up our Blessed JESUS to his Father in the Eucharist, in which he
vouchsafes to render himself present before him.

But this must not suffice; for then that which he calls the principal and most
dangerous Error, would appear to be none at all; and therefore because the
Epistle to the Hebrews speaks of one Offering which has fully satisfied for our
Sins, of one Offering which was no more to be offered; that is, of an Offering
in a strict Sense, in which there must be a Real Suffering and Death of the
Victim; therefore this Epistle must be against the Doctrine of the Roman
Church, though she speak only of an Unbloody Sacrifice, of a Commemorative
Sacrifice, which without the Sacrifice of the Cross would be no Sacrifice,
which takes its Virtue, Efficacy and very Name from it, because it refers to
it, and applies the Virtue of it to our Souls. Let any one judge if this be not
next door to a wilful misunderstanding of our Tenets, Page 63.
especially when he had before confessed that the presenting to God Almighty
the Sacrifice of our Blessed Lord, is a most effectual manner of applying his
Merits to us, and that if this were all the Church of Rome meant by her
Propitiatory Sacrifice, there is not certainly any Protestant that would oppose
her in it. This is what she means by it, (that is) an application of the Merits
of the Sacrifice of the Cross, which was to be but once offered, and from
whence it takes all its value. But this he will not have to be our Doctrine;
and I see no reason for it, but because if he admit it to be so, one of the
greatest grounds of their pretended Reformation must needs vanish.

ART. XVIII. Reflections upon the foregoing Doctrine.
HIs Reflections upon this Doctrine run altogether upon the same strain; Art.
22. p. 69.
and therefore what I have said will suffice in answer to that Article. If he
admit a Real Presence with the Church of England, Reason must necessarily
assure us, that where Christ is really, he ought to be Adored; and where he
really presents himself to his Father to render him Propitious to us, he may be
said to offer up himself a Propitiatory Sacrifice.

And those who will admit the Reality, or not condemn the belief of it in
others, ought not to condemn the necessary Consequences of it in us, into which
we have penetrated better than they.

ART. XIX. Communion under both Species.
COmmunion under one kind being also a Consequence of the Doctrine of the Real
Presence. Art. 23. p. 72.
Those who admit the Real Presence, or condemn it not, ought not to condemn the
Consequence of it. He refers us to the Answer to M. de Meaux's Book of
Communion; and I refer him to M. de Meaux's Book, which so fully explicates and
proves this Doctrine, that all the effects against it are but vain.

But if the Church of England allow the Communion to be given under one Species
in case of necessity, See Art. 30.
how will it stand that she esteems it to be the express Command of JESUS
CHRIST which is certainly indispensable?

Edw. Sparrows Canons p. 15.
the Sixth in his Proclamation before the Order of Communion, ordains, That the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of our Savior JESUS CHRIST should from
thenceforth be commonly delivered and administered unto all Persons within our
Realm of England and Ireland, and other our Dominions under both kinds, that is
to say, of Bread and Wine, except necessity otherwise require.

And after the Order of Communion, there is this Annotation.

Note that the Bread that shall be Consecrated shall be such as heretofore has
been accustomed. And every of the said Consecrated Breads, shall be broken into
two pieces at least or more, by the discretion of the Minister, and so
distributed. And Men must not think less to be received in part, than in the
whole, but in each of them the whole Body of JESUS CHRIST.

In the Proclamation it is ordained, that it shall be commonly delivered under
both kinds except necessity otherwise require, which shows manifestly that the
Church of England thought then that one kind was sufficient in case of
necessity, and that whole Sacrament was contained under one kind; for half a
Sacrament is no Sacrament. And, if a necessary occasion be sufficient to
dispense with the Administration of it in both kinds, who ought to be Judge but
the Pastors and Teachers in every Age, or the Church Representative? which
shows that this is a part of Discipline and not of Faith, since both sides
confess that in case of necessity it may be given in one kind, and that by
receiving each Particle one receives the whole Body of JESUS CHRIST, as appears
by the Annotation, so that the Bishop of Condom's Argument against the
Calvinists of France has its full force against the Church of England.

ART. XX. Of the written and unwritten Word.
IN the next Article we are agreed in the main, Art. 24. p. 75.
We both acknowledge the unwritten Word to have been the first Rule of
Christians, and that it was so far from losing any thing of its Authority by
addition of the Written Word, that it was indeed the more firmly established.
We receive with equal veneration the Written and the Unwritten Word when we are
assured they come from the Apostles. And as we do not admit of every thing
which is called Tradition, so what is made appear to have been received in all
Churches, and in all Ages we are ready to embrace as coming from the Apostles.
Our difference consists only in this, who shall be judge when this Tradition is
Universal: We rely upon the Judgment of the present Church in every Age either
assembled in the most general Council that Age can afford, or else declaring
her Doctrine by her constant practice, and the uniform Voice of her Pastors and
People; and are assured it is not sufficient for any Private Persons or Church
to say we suppose, or we are persuaded they are contrary to the Written Word,
or we find it not there, to make the Churches Sentence void, or justify a
dissent.

ART. XXI. Of the Authority of the Church.
IN his next Article, Art. 25. p. 76.
of the Authority of the Church he grants many things which the Bishop of Meaux
had asserted, from which we might expect great Fruit, but he presently nips all
our hopes in the very bud.

He grants the Catholic Church to be the Guardian of the Holy Scriptures, Page
76, 77.
and of Tradition, and that it is from her Authority they reeeive both. That
they never deny the Church to have an Authority not only in matters of Order
and Discipline, Page 78.
but even of Faith too. That they neither fear the entire defection of the
Catholic Church, nor that she should fall into such an entire Infidelity as
should argue her not to be a Church. Page 80.
And in his next Article he allows the Church a just Authority in matters of
Faith, and declares as a Doctrine of his Church, that they allow such a
deference to a Churches Decisions, as to make them their directions, what
Doctrine they may, or may not publicly maintain and teach in her Communion;
that they show whatever submission they can to her Authority, without violating
that of God declared to us in the Holy Scripture: And lastly, that whatsoever
deference they allow to a National Church or Council, the same they think, in a
much greater degree, due to a General. In which none shall be more ready to
assist, nor to which none shall be more ready to submit. These are fair offers
to establish a Church Authority; and did he manifestly destroy all he has here
said by some other exceptions we might have hoped some good effects of such a
Submission. He tells us, Page 79.
and that truly, that any particular Church may either by error lose, or by
other means prevaricate the Faith even in necessary points of it. And yet
notwithstanding he does not only set up a particular Church to examine the
Churches Decisions, Page 78.
which he tells us after all may err; but even every individual Person; who
according to his Doctrine, may not only examine the Decisions of the whole
Church, but glory in opposing them, if he be but evidently convinced that his
belief is founded upon the undoubted Authority of Gods Holy Word. His words are
these, Page 79.
Though we suppose the Scriptures are so clearly written, that it can hardly
happen that in necessary Articles of Faith any one Man should be found opposite
to the whole Church in his Opinion: He had told us a little before, that any
particular Church (such as he esteemed the Church of Rome to be) might either
by Error lose, or by any other means prevaricate the Faith, even in necessary
points of it: and yet what he there wishes they had not too great cause to fear
the Church of Rome has in effect done, he here tells us can hardly happen to
one particular Man. But what follows is more intolerable, and since he gives us
it as a Doctrine of the Church of England, I desire him to tell us in what
Canon, Article or Constitution it is contained. But (says he) if such an one
were evidently convinced that his belief was founded upon the undoubted
Authority of Gods Holy Word, so far would it be from any Error to support it
[against the whole Church] that it is at this day the greatest Glory of St.
Athanasius that he slood up alone against the whole World in defense of Ghrists
Divinity, when the Pope, the Councils, the whole Church fell away. Behold here
a Doctrine which if admitted, will not only maintain all the Dissenters that
are, but that ever can be from a Church; a Doctrine which will establish as
many Religions as there are Persons in the World; every one of which may, if he
be but evidently convinced (that is, if he have but impudece enough to think he
is so) that his belief is founded upon the undoubted Authority of Gods Word,
not only oppose the whole Church but glory in it. And a Doctrine backed by as
false and Authority, as the Assertion it self is false and scandalous; for
never any one yet before this Man said that the Pope, the Councils, and the
whole Church fell in St. Athanasius his time; on the contrary it is manifest to
all those who have read any thing of History; that the Pope and all the Western
Churches, and the approved General Councils of those times, all stood up for
St. Athanasius; and if he said he was against all, and all against him, it was
only to express the great number of Eastern Bishops that opposed his Doctrine:
But any thing must pass now, to deceive the vulgar, though Men of Sense see the
contrary.

Another Argument he brings to delude the Authority of the Church of Rome, is
to make her apss only for a particular Church. But how often have they been
told that Catholics do not take the Church of Rome as it is the Suburbican
Diocese to be the Catholic Church, but all the Christian Churches in Communion
with the Bishop of Rome. And that this is the true Church appears by the marks
of it delivered in the Nicene Creed, no other Church being able to pretend to
that Unity, Sanctity, Universality and Antiquity, which she is manifestly
invested with. The true Church must be one, and by conquence free from Schism,
which destroys that notion which some of late have held, that the true Church
is that Catholic Church, which is composed of all Christians, the Roman, the
Grecians, the Armenians, Prtoestants, etc. all which they acknowledge to be
Members of the True Church; though they may be rotten ones, and this notion our
Author seems to have of it when he tells us, that the Roman Church has in all
ages made up but a part of the Church, Page 77.
and that not always the greatest neither. The true Church must be also Holy,
and must by consequence be free from Heresy, and teach no Erroneous Doctrine;
which how it stands with that Idea which this Author insinuates, that the
Church of Rome has erred event in necessary points of Faith, and is yet a
Member of the True Church, is worthy a mature Consideration. This indeed made
the first Reformers who accused the Roman Catholic Church of Idolatry and
Superstition say, that the Church of JESUS CHRIST was hidden, fled into the
Wilderness, See the Protestant Authors cited by Brereley in his Protestant
Apology, Tract. 2. Cap. 1. Sect. 4.
and invisible for 1000 or 1200 years, that the Pope was Antichrist, and the
Church of Rome Antichristian: But the Men of our Age being sufficiently
convinced that the Church of Christ was to have Kings and Queens for Nursing
Fathers and Nursing Mothers, that she was to have Pastors and Teachers in all
Ages, Whitakers contra Duraeum, l. 3. p. 260.
that the Administration of the Sacraments, and the Preaching of the true word
of God were the Essential Proprieties of the Church, etc. and that all these
marks do necessarily denote a Visible Church; and finding moreover they could
never prove any Christian Kings before Luther Converted to Protestancy, or any
visible Pastors or Teachers of their Doctrine, or any Assembly that Administered
the Sacraments as they do, or Preached the word of God in their Sense; and
finding they could not deny the Conversion of many Kings and Nations to the
Religion established in the Church of Rome; found themselves obliged also to
admit her as a part of the True Church though a corrupted one; and would rather
destroy the Sanctity of Christ's Church and her Unity, than acknowledge
themselves to be justly cut off from being Members of her.

The third Mark is Catholic, which is universal as to Place, Time, and
Doctrine; that Church cannot be the true Church the sound whereof is not gone
through the whole Earth, and is not it self spread over and visible in all
Nations; that cannot be the true Church which has not continued in all Ages
Visible, Holy and Uniform; neither lastly, can that be the true Church which
either adds or diminishes from the Doctrines revealed by God to the Prophets
and Apostles; so that those are as guilty of the Breach of Faith, who refuse to
believe what has been taught, as those who impose new Doctrines.

The last mark of the Church is, that she must be Apostolic, that is, grounded
upon the Doctrines and Faith of the Apostles, and deriving a continual
Succession from them. All which marks are so far from being applicable to the
Church of England, or to the Universal Church according to the notion given of
it be these late Writers, that a Man of the smallest judgment, if Impartial,
cannot but see the fallacy thereof.

ART. XXII. Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy.
AS for his two other Articles, The Opinion of the Church of England as to the
Authority of the Church, and that of the Sea Apostolic, and Episcopacy I have
nothing to say to him, but to desire him to remember his promises, Page 81.
and to enquire what is the Authority the Ancient Councils of the Primitive
Church have acknowledged, and the Holy Fathers have always taught the Faithful
to give to the Successor to St. Peter; and whether the first Four General
Councils might not be termed neither General nor Free with as much Reason as
the Council of Trent, or those others acknowledged by all the Western World,
and most of the Eastern Churches before the new pretended Reformation.

The Conclusion.
I Come now to his Close, in which he sums up all the Poison of his Book; lays
what he pleases to our charge, and draws what Consequences he will, to inflame
his Reader.

He tells us of Bitter and Unchristian Hatred we have conceived against them;
Page 82.
and desires to know what warrant we have for it. I desire all unprejudiced
Persons to consider, whether we have not more reason to complain than he.

Here was a Church established in England; Truths delivered to her with
Christianity it self were here Practiced and Preached; Religious Houses were
here endowed with ample Revenues, etc. when behold a Pretended Reformation
comes, destroys this Church; dissolves all the Constitutions of it; changes the
established Doctrines; and alters many of its antientest Practices; pulls down
Religious Houses and Churches; alienates the Revenues; turns the Religious
Inhabitants into the wide World; make Laws against all those who should defend
that Doctrine; Imprisonment, loss of Goods and Fortunes, nay even of Life it
self, are the Punishments ordained for them who are found guilty of Practicing
or Preaching that Religion. And what less could such a Church do than
Excommunicate they, who thus Renounced her Doctrines, Contemned her Authority,
and persecuted her Children. But this Excommunication must be called Severity
and unchristian hatred. And if we declare that all those who forsake the Unity
of the Church are guilty of Schism; and they who will not acquiess to those
Points of Faith which God has Revealed, and the Church, which is the Pillar and
Ground of Truth has declared to have been so Revealed, are guilty of Heresy;
and that Heresy and Schism will bring inevitable damnation to all those who
die without repenting of them; we must be esteemed uncharitable. I must
therefore Retort his Popular Argument, and ask him and all unprejudiced
Protestants what they can find in all our Doctrines, when truly Represented, to
warrant that bitter and unchristian hatred they have conceived against us; a
hatred which has occasioned so many Penal and Sanguinary Laws; and still makes
them use all endeavors to keep them in full force against us?

Do we not firmly believe the Holy Scriptures according to the Sense and
unanimous consent of the Ancient and Primitive Fathers? Do we not embrace the
three Creeds, nay, and believe all the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Religion?

Do you not acknowledge us to be true Members of the Catholic Church, and by
Consequence your Brethren, though you will have us to be unsound and weak?

If we maintain any Doctrines different from yours, do we not show you plain
Texts of Scriture for most of them; and the consent of Primitive Fathers, and
the acknowledged Practices of the Church for above 1000 Years for every one of
them?

Do we not fix our Grounds upon the undoubted Word of God delivered down to us
either by Writing or uninterrupted Tradition, and explicated by the unanimous
consent of the Pastors and Teachers in all times and places?

If we tell you a due Honor is to be paid to Images purely upon the account of
being Representatives, and not for themselves; is it not agreeable to your own
Practice who bow to the Altar, keep uncovered in a Church, bend the Knees at
the Name of Jesus not for the sake of the Altar, Fabric, or Sound, but with a
reference to the Victim, which Consecrates the Altar, to God who is in a
peculiar manner present in the Church, and to JESUS CHRIST the Son of God
understood by that sound; which Honor, if it may be called Religious in some
respect, it is not manifestly because it tends ultimately to God himself?

If we desire the Saints and Angels, who Reign in Heaven to Pray with us, and
for us, to their and our Common Creator, and if we acknowledge such Prayers are
good and beneficial to aid and help us in our necessities; we know no more
injury is done to JESUS CHRIST our sole Redeemer by such Addresses than by your
own to a Parent or a Friend, we detest that Religion of Angels mentioned by the
Apostle, Col. 2. 18.
accoding to that Sense that place manifestly bears, and as the Ancient Fathers
understood it; but we think with the same Fathers that a due Honor ought to be
given them, as to the Messengers and Friends of God. And any undue Worship,
which elevates them above the pitch of our fellow Creatures, we detest. What
more can any one in reason desire of us? And if we pronounce Anathema's against
those who deny it to be lawful to make such innocent Addresses, or to pay such
a due and limited Honor, it is because they contradict Antiquity, and the
approved Fathers of the Church.

We acknowledge, it is true, a Real Presence of the Body and Blood of JESUS
CHRIST under the Species or Appearances of Bread and Wine; and are we not
assured of it by the very Words of Jesus CHRIST, by the manifest consent of
Antiquity; by the continual practice of both the Greek and Latin Churches? If
we be ignorant of the manner, at least we are not of the thing: And does not
your Chatechism and your most Learned Divines acknowledge as much, your
Confession of your ignorance of the manner of his being present does not hinder
you from acknowledging the Body and Blood of our Blessed Savior to be verily
and indeed taken and received, not only by Faith, but by the Faithful in the
Lords Supper.

This Real Presence is grounded upon the Words of our Blessed Savior, This is
my Body, taken literally; from whence also it necessarily follows, that after
the words of Consecration, it is not more Bread and Wine, but the Body and Blood
of JESUS CHRIST. This Consequence of the Real Presence many Protestants
themselves confess and acknowledge, that if the words must be taken literally
they must necessarily grant both Transubstantiation, Adoration, and all the
rest of our Doctrines about this Sacrament: And if any one ask us why we take
it literally, we may with the Bishop of Condom say, they may as well ask us why
we keep the High Road; that is, all the Fathers of the Church in all Ages
having taken it in that Sense, we ought no more to deviate from it, than from a
beaten Road.

If we adore our Blessed Savior in the Sacrament it is but a necessary
Consequence of his Real Presence; and what they who believe him present cannot
but think themselves obliged to do.

We acknowledge, that where Gods Commands are Positive, they are indispensible;
and therefore if we judge Communion under both kinds, not to be positively
Commanded, we judge so because the Church in all Ages dispensed with it; and
you your selves grant, that in cases of necessity eveyr Pastor may give it
under one kind only, and is he not left judge when that case occurs, and when
he may make use of it?

These things considered, I must use your own words.

Men and Brethren: Page 84.
consider, we conjure you, these things: and if you please, consider us too,
what we are and what our Manners and Conversation amongst you has been, even
when Perjury and Faction loaded us with all the Injuries Hell it self could
invent, and exercised their utmost severities upon us. What also we are at
present, and how our change of Fortune makes us neither remember former
Injuries, nor desire to revenge them. Believe us at least, that we have no
other ends but Truth, no designs but to convince your Judgments; and if we dare
not be over curious in enquiring into the manner how the Mysteries that are
revealed can possibly be true, it is because we know they are revealed, and
doubt not of Gods Veracity. Believe us, that we have no other Interest but the
Salvation of our own Souls, and those of others, by endeavoring to represent
our Doctrines as they truly are, and soliciting the Children of the Church to
return to their Mothers Bosom.

We are in possession; the Proofs you bring against us are only Negatives and
mere Conjectures; you think them convincing Arguments, but are not certain, but
that you may fail in your Concjectures.

You cannot show one positive Argument against the Invocation of Saints either
from Scripture, or from Fathers: Not one against the Doctrine of the Real
Presence, Transubstantiation, Veneration of Images upon account of their
Representations; not one against the number of Sacraments, not one to prove
Communion under both kinds to be indispensible, or that Children dying without
Baptism are saved. In a word, you cannot show one positive Argument against any
one Doctrine of our Church if you state it right: All you can say, is, it does
not appear to us out of Scripture, it does not appear to us from Antiquity;
show us, you say, your Authentic Records, your Deeds of Gift, your Revelation
and we will believe; as if uninterrupted possession were not sufficietn Proof.

Our Plea is good, olim possidio prior possidio. If you will dispute our Title,
you must show your positive Records of a more Ancient Date. But what need of so
much bitterness whilst you plead your Cause? Is it not enough to dispossess us,
but all the rigours imaginable must be inflicted, and when Power is wanting
must the Pen and Tongue be exercised, in painting us as the most hideous
Monsters for the Rabble to devour.

If we be silent, we shamefully give up the Cause: If we speak and show our
Doctrine in their true and native dress, we are represented to be New
Reformers, Palliating or Prevaricating our Doctrines. And though we detest all
Dissimulation in any case, much more in matters of Religion; yet even in that
we must be represented as Dissemblers; who make neither Conscience of Lying,
Imposing, Forging, nor any other Villainy to support our Cause: Is this Justice?
is this Brotherly Charity? is this Christianity?

We declare this is our Doctrine: They who are bred up in it acknowledge it as
such; they whose Consciences made them forsake their former Errors, and
embrace the Catholic Faith (of which I my self, I bless God am one) after all
strict enquiry find it to be such: They who are newly converted daily exclaim
against their being formerly deceived, and find this Doctrine as here
represented to be that, and only that which is required of them to believe, in
order to their being Members of Our Church, Nay, even they who are the fiercest
against us are desired to try the Experience themselves, and see whether upon
the profession of these Truths, they will not be admitted to our Communion.
What can we say or do more, to make our selves be believed? We who refuse to
take those Oaths which thwart our Conscience though we lose all our Temporal
advantage by the refusal, are yet ready to take any Oaths that this is our
Doctrine; But yet we must not be believed! And shall not a strict account be
one day given for all these Scandals unjustly thrown upon us?

Lay not, O God, these Sins to their charge, but open the Eyes of all the
People of this Nation, that they may see thy Truth and embrace it, to the
eternal good and comfort of their Souls. Amen.

A Copy of the Bishop of Meaux's Letter.
A Meaux. 6. Auril 1686. Mon Reverend Pere.
IL ne sera pas difficile de repondre a vostre lettre du 3, ni de satisfaire
aux objections de fait qu'on vous envoye d' Angleterre contre mon Exposition
dela Doctrine Catholic. Le Ministre Anglois qui l'a refutee and don't vous
m'enuoyez les objections n'a fait que ramasser des Contes que nos Huguenots ont
voulu debiter ici, and qui sont tombez d'eux memes, sans que j'aye eu besoin de
me donner la peine de-les combattre.

Cet Auteur dit premierement que la Sorbonne n'a pas voula donner son
Approbation a mon Liver. Mais tout le monde scait ici que je n'ai jamais
seulement song a la demander. La Sorbonne n'a pas accoutume d'approuver des
Livers en corpse: Quand elle en approuveroit je n'aurois eu aucun besoin de son
Approbation ayant celle de tant d'Eueques and etant Eueque moymeme. Cette
Venerable Compaignie, scait trop ce qu'elle doit aux Eueques qui sont
naturellement and par leur carractere les urais Docteurs de l'Eglise pour
croire qu'ils ayent besoin de l'approbation de ses Docteurs. Joint que la
pluspart des Eueques qui ont approuve mon liver sont du corpse de la Sorbonne,
and moymeme je tiens a honneur d'en estre aussi. Cest une grand foiblesse, de
me demandre que j'aye a produire l'appobation de la Sorbonne pendant qu'on voit
dans mon liver celle de tant de scavants Eueques, celle de tour le Clerge de
France dans l'assemblee de 1682. and celle du Pape meme.

Vous voyez par la, mon Reverend Pere, que c'est une faussete toute visible de
dire qu'on ait supprime la premiere Edition de mon Liver de peur que les
Docteurs de Sorbonne n'y trouvassent a redire. Je n'en ai jamais publie ni fait
fair d'Edition que celle qui est enter les mains de tout le monde; a laquelle
je n'ai jamais ni oste ni dimiuue une syllabe: and je n'ai jamais apprehende
qu'aucun Docteur Catholic y pust rien reprendre.

Voila ce qui regard la premiere objection de l'Auteur Anglois. Pour ce qu'il
ajoute en second lieu qu'un Catholic, don't il design le Nom par une lettre
capitale, avoit ecrit contre moy; quand cela seroit, ce seroit tant pis pour ce
mauvais Catholic. Mais c'est, comme le rest, un conte fait a plaisir: C'est
en vain que nos Huguenots l'ont voulu debiter ici: Jamais person n'a oiu
parler de ce Catholic: ils ne l'ont jamais pu nommer and tout le monde c'est
moque d'eux.

En troisieme lieu on dit que le Pere Crasset Jesuit a combattu ma Doctrine
dans un liver intitule la veritable devotion envers la Saint Vierge. Je n'ai
pas lu ce liver; mais je n'ai jamais oiu dire qu'il y eut rien contre moy, and
ce Pere seroit bien fache que je le crusse.

Pour le Cardinal Capisucchi loin d'etre contraire a la Doctrine que i'ai
enseignee on trouvera, son Approbation express parmi celles que jay rapportees
dans l'edition de l'Exposition de l'an 1676. Et c'est luy qui comme Maitre du
sacre Palais permit l'an 1675. l'impression qui se sit alors a la Congregation
de propaganda fide, de la version Italienne de ce liver. Voila ceux que les
Aduersaires pensent m'opposer.

Quant a ce Monsieur Imbert and a Monsieur le Pasteur de Saint Marie de
Malines qu'on pretend avoir este condamnez, encore qu'ils alleguassent mon
Exposition your guarend de leur Doctrine; c'est a scavoir s'ils l'alleguoient a
tort ou a droit; Et des faits avancez en l'air ne meritent pas qu'on s'en
inform davantage.

Mais puisqu'on desire d'en estre inform, je vous dirai que cet Imbert est un
homme sans nom comme sans scavoir, qui crut justifier ses extravagances devant
Monsieur l' Archeueque de Bordeaux son Superieur en nommant mon Exposition a ce
Prelat qui en a souscrit l'approbation dans l'assemble de 1682. Mais tout le
monde vit bien que le Ciel n'est pas plus loin de la terre, que man Doctrine
l'etoit de ce qui avoit auance cet Emporte. Au rest jamais Catholic n'a
song qu'il, fallut render a la Croix le meme honneur qu'on rend a J. C. dans
l'Eucharistie, ni que la Croix auec J. C. dust estre adoree dela meme maniere
que la nature human auec la Divine en la person du Fills de Dieu. Et quand
cet homme se vante d'estre condamne pour auoir nie ces Erreurs que person ne
soutint jamais, il montre autant de malice que d'ignorance.

Pour le Pasteur de Saint Marie de Malines qu'on dit estre un homme de merit,
j'ai vu un petit imprime de luy intitule, motivum juris: ou il auance que le
Pape est dans l'Eglise ce que le President est dans un Conseil and le premier
Escheuin ou le Bourgmestre, comme on l'appelle dans les Paysbas, dans la
commpaignie des Echeuins; Chose tres eloignee de l'Exposition, ou je reconnois
le Pape comme un Chef etabli de Dieu, a qui on doit soumission and obeissance.
Si donc la Faculte de Louvain a censure cet ecrit, je ne prends point de part
dans cette dispute, and d'ailleurs mon Exposition est si peu rejettee dans les
Paysbas qu'au contraire elle y paroit, imprimee a Anuers en langue Flamande
auec toutes les marquis de l'autorite public tant Ecclesiastique que
Seculiere.

Pour ces pretendus passages qu'on pretend que j'ai corrigez dans une second
Edtion de peur de facher la Sorbonne, c'est, comme vous voyez, un conte en
l'air, and je repete que je n'ai publie, ni auoue, ni fait fair aucune edition
de mon ouurage que celle que l'on connoit, ou ie n'ai jamais rien change.

Il est urai que comme ce petit Traite fut done dabord ecrit a la main pour
seruir a l'instruction de quelques persons particulieres, and qu'il s'en
repandit plusieurs copies, on le fit imprimer sans order and sans ma
participation. Person n'en improuva la Doctrine and moymeme, sans y rien
changer que quelques chooses de nulle importance, seulement pour l'order and
pour une plus grande nettete du discourse and du style, je le fis imprimer comme
on l'a uu. Si la dessus on veut croire que jaie este quelque sort contraire a
moymeme, c'est estre de trop facile croyance.

Mais quand ainsi seroit, and que pour mettre mon ouurage horse de toute
atteinte je me serois en quelques endroits corrige moymeme, ce que, Dieu merci,
je n'ai pas eu besion de fair; tant s'en faut qu'on en eut deu moins estimer
l'ouurage, qu'au contraire ce seroit une preuve que je serois venu a bout de le
mettre en si bon etat, que ni la Sorbonne, ni qui que ce soit n'y put rien
trouver a redire comme en effet aucun Catholic n'y reprend rien.

La derniere objection que me sait le Ministre Anglois c'est que je suis assez
fertile a fair des nouueaux livers; mais que je ne reponds pas a ce qu'on
ecrit contre mes ouurages: d'on il conclut que je reconois qu'on ne peut pas
les deffendre. Il est urai que j'ai fait trois petits Traitez de Controverse
don't l'un est coluy de l'Exposition. Sure celuyla, comme on objectoit
principalement que j'avois adouci and deguise la Doctrine catholic, la
meilleure reponse que je pouuois fair etoit de rapporter les Approbations qui
me venoient naturellement de tous les costez de l'Europe, and celle du Pape
meme reiteree par deux fois: Cette reponse est sans repartie, and j'ai dit ce
qu'il falloit sur ce sujet la, dans un Auertissement que j'ai mis a la test de
l'Edition de 1676.

Si le Pere qui vous a enuoye les objections du Ministre Anglois, n'a pas
connoissance de cet Auertissement, je vous pry de le prendre chez Cramoisy en
virtue de l'ordre que vous trouuerez dans ce paquet and de l'enuoyer a ce Pere
comme il a este imprime en 1686. Parceque j'ai ajoute dans cette Edition
l'approbation du Clerge de France and une second Approbation tres Authentic
du Pape.

Que si le Pere veut prendre la peine de joindre a la Traduction de
l'Exposition celle de cet Avertissement and des Approbations qui y sont
jointes, il rendra son travail plus profitable au public, and il fermera la
bouche aux contredisants.

Quant aux deux autres petits Traitez que j'ai compose sur la Controverse, l'un
est sur la Communion sous les deux especes: Et l'autre c'est ma Conference auec
Monsieur Claude Ministre de Charenton, sur l'autorite de l'Egiise, auec des
reflections sur les reponses de ce Ministre. Dans ces Traitez je tache de
preuoir les objections principales, and d'y donner des reponses, don't les gents
sensez soint contents. Apres cela, de multiplier les disputes and de composer
livers sur livers, pour embrouiller les questions and en fair perdre la piste,
ni la charity ne me le demand, ni mes occupations ne me le permettent.

Vous pouvez enuoyer cette lettre en Angleterre. Le R. Pere qui a desire ces
eclaircissements en prendra cequ'il trouvera convenable. S'il trouve qu'il soit
utile de dire qu'il a appris de moymeme ce qui regard ces faits and mes
intentions, il le peut: and il peut aussi asseurer sans erainte qu'il ny a rien
qui ne soit public and certain.

Jeluy suis tres oblige de ses trauaux, s'il desire quelqu'autre chose de moy
je le ferai auec joye, etc.

Mon Reverend Pere, Vostre bien humble and tres Affectione Serviteur, J.
Benign E. de Meaux.

A POSTSCRIPT To the Author or Authors of the Exposition of the Doctrine of
the Church of England, etc.
I Doubt not but this Vindication will have the same fate with others of this
nature; that is, it will not be long before some kind of Answer will be made to
it; for nothing can be so clearly expressed or so firmly established, but that
a Person, who intends to Cavil, may either form a seeming Objection against it,
or wrest it into a different sense. But for my part, because I would not have
the unbiased Readers, who are desirous to examine Truth, amused in the search
of it, nor have such things put into their Hands as answer not their
Expectations, but leave them to repent their ill spent Money and their Time;
therefore I would desire there might be such a right undestanding of the Case,
such fair dealing, and such sincerity used amongst us, that the World might be
convinced we contend not for Victory but for Truth. In order to which the best
Method will certainly be to keep close to the Point in Question, which is
whether the Bishop of Condom has truly represented the Doctrine of the Roman
Catholic Church, without either Palliating or Perverting it. I say, the
Doctrine of the Church; for we have nothing here to do with the Doctrine of the
Schools. Seeing therefore the Bishop of Condom professes to conform himself to
the Doctrine of the Church as delivered in the Council of Trent, to which all
Catholics do submit; They who will oppose his Exposition must (if they will
bring any solid Arguments against him) show he has corrupted that Council, and
given us a Doctrine which is neither conformable to that of this Council, nor
consistent with some other Public, Authentic and Universally received
Definitions and Decisions of the whole Church. If any thing of this nature be
produced, I promise an Ingenuous return shall be made, without the least Cavil
or reflecting Language. To aovid which I have one thing earnestly to beg of
you, that before you publish any thing of this nature, you would be pleased to
take the pains your selves to peruse the Authors cited by you, and not to
Transcribe Quotations, nor take up things by hearsay. You cannot be ignorant
but it has ofen been objected to Protestant Writers by us, that they are faulty
in this, and subject to great mistakes, if not wilsul Prevarications. I hope
therefore you will hereafter consult at least your Reputations (if the search
after Truth be not a sufficient motive) and take nothing from any of them
without a serious examination of the Sense of the Authors quoted by them, and a
sincere Application of it to the Point in Question. If you please to take that
necessary Advice along with you for profitably reading Books of Controversy
extracted out of Walsingham 's search into matters of Religion, Part 3. c. 10.
Printed at the end of the Second Edition of the Complaint of the French Clergy,
and follow it precisely, I hope you your selves will one Day see the Truth, and
to the Glory of God profess it. However this benefit will come by it, that you
will save others the pains of examining so many different Authors; that you
will remove that just occasion which is now given of censuring your Religion,
as not maintainable without such sinister doings; and lastly, you will free me
from that troublesome and ungentile Office of demonstrating to the World that
unsincerity which you have shown in your Quotations, the falsications of which
I would not have taken notice of in this, had not Truth and Religion been at
Stake.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
PART I. COntaining an Answer to the Preface. Page 1 PART II. Art. 1.
Introduction. 22 Art. 2. Religious Worship is terminated in God only. 27 Art.
3. Invocation of Saints. 29 Art. 4. Images and Relics. 31 Art. 5. Of
Justification. 46 Art. 6. Of Merits. 48 Art. 7. Satisfactions, Purgatory and
Indulgences. 54 Art. 8. Of the Sacraments in general. 59 Art. 9. Of Baptism. 61
Art. 10. Of Confirmation 63 Art. 11. Of Penance and Confession. 64 Art. 12. Of
Extreme Unction. 68 Art. 13. Of Marriage. 70 Art. 14. Of Holy Orders. 71 Art.
15. Of the Eucharist. 72 Art. 16. Of the Sacrifice of the Mass. 94 Art. 17. Of
the Epistle to the Hebrews. 96 Art. 18. Reflections upon the foregoing
Doctrine. 97 Art. 19. Communion under both Species. 98 Art. 20. Of the written
and unwritten Word. 100 Art. 21. Of the Authority of the Church. 101 Art. 22.
Authority of the Holy See, and of Episcopacy. 106 The Conclusion. Ibid.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Henry Hills, Printer to the King's most
Excellent Majesty, for his Household and Chapel, 1686. And are to be Sold next
door to his House in Blackfriars, at Richard Cheese's.
REflections upon the Answer to the Papist Misrepresented etc. Directed to the
Answerer. Quarto. Kalendarium Catholicum for the Year 1686. Octavo. Papists
Protesting against Protestant-Popery. In Answer to a^ Discourse Entitled, A
Papist not Misrepresented by Protestants. Being a Vindication of the Papist
Misrepresented and Represented, and the Reflections upon the Answer. Quart.
Copies of Two Papers Written by the late King Charles II. Together with a Paper
Written by the late Duchess of York. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Folio. The Spirit of Christianity. Published by his Majesty's Command. Twelves.
The first Sermon Preached before their Majesty's in English at Windsor, on the
first Sunday of October 1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. P. E. Monk of the
Holy Order of S. Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by his
Majesty's Command. Quarto. Second Sermon Preached before the King and Queen,
and Queen Dowager, at Their Majesty's Chapel at St James's, November 1. 1685.
By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of S. Benedict,
and of the English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command. Quarto.
The Third Sermon Preached before the Kind and Queen, in their Majesty's Chapel
at St. James's, on the third Sunday in Advent, December. 13.1685. By the Reverend
Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St. Benedict, and of the
English Congr. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty. Published by His Majesty's
Command. Quarto. Sixth Sermon Preached before the King and Queen, in their
Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, upon the first Wednesday in Lent, Febr.
24.1685. By the Reverend Father Dom. Ph. Ellis, Monk of the Holy Order of St.
Benedict, and of the English Congregation. Published by his Majesty's Command.
Quarto. An Exposition of the Doctrine of the Catholic Church in Matters of
Controversy. By the Right Reverend James Benign Bossuet, Counselor to the
King, Bishop of Meaux, formerly of Condom, and Preceptor to the Dauphin: First
Almoner to the Dauphiness. Done into English with all the former Approbations,
and others newly published in the Ninth and Last Edition of the French.
Published by His Majesty's Command. Quarto. A Sermon preached before the King
and Queen, in Their Majesty's Chapel at St. James's, upon the Annunciation of
our Blessed Lady, March 25.1686. By Jo. Betham Doctor of Sorbon. Published by
His Majestics Command. Quarto. An Abstract of the Douay Catechism, for the Use
of Children and Ignorant People. Now Revised and much amended. Published with
Allowance. Twentyfours. A Pastoral Letter from the Lord Bishop of Meaux, to the
New Catholies of His Diocese, Exhorting them to keep their Easter, and giving
them neeessary Advertisements against the False Pastoral Letters of their
Ministers. With Reflections upon the Pretended Persecution. Translated out of
French, and Published with Allowance. Quarto. The Anser of the New Converts of
France, to a Pastoral Letter from a Protestant Minister. Done out of French,
and Published with Allowance. Quarto. The Ceremonies for the Healing of them
that be Diseased with the Kings Evil, used in the time of King Henry VII.
Published by His Majesty's Command. Quarto in Latin, Twelves in English. A
Short Christian Doctrine. Composed by the R. Father Robert Bellarmin, of the
Society of Jesus, and Cardinal. Published with Allowance. Twelves
ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 15. dele to. p. 10. l. 23. r. Are the men. p. 22. l. 18. r.
Misrepresentations. p. 98. l. 14. r. Efforts. p. 108. l. 31. r. is it not.


