THE LAST INTELLIGENCE FROM IRELAND.

RECEIVED FEBRVARY the first. 1641.

LONDON, Printed for H. Blunden. 1642.

January 26. 1641.
THE same day that the English Army had met with the Rebels at Swords, there
were some Ships sent to relieve Tredah, which arrived very safe there, and
relieved the Town though with much hazard. For the enemy at their entrance
upon our Harbor, discharged a thousand shots at the ships; But they made way
into the Town, without any loss, and killed threescore of the enemy. That
same night, by the treachery of the Townsmen, five hundred of the Rebels
entered the Town, but alarm being stricken by the English, they bear the enemy
out of the Town, and killed above two hundred of them, without any considerable
loss on the English side. Sir Henry Titsborne made three or some several
sallies out of the Town upon on the Rebels, and upon those sallies killed six
hundred of them, without any considerable loss.

The Correnet of Sir Adam Lofties his Troop is noted to behave himself like a
Gallant, and a stout man at their several meetings with the Enemy Captain
Walter Lofties late Lieutenant Colonel under the King of France, is entered as
a Captain of the Company lately commanded by Sir Laurence Carry.

January the seventeenth, Luke Tool supt at Christopher Nicolsons one of Sir
Adam Lofties his Tenants, in Rats furnham Lands, and the night following a
thousand of the Rebels lying at Kilmakeweeke, sent Mr. Dudley Lofties word,
that they would soon assault the Castle of Ratfarnham; but being well informed,
how well the Castle was furnished, with men, and munition, and victuals, they
forbear their attempt.

Msr. Dudley Lofty Sir Adam Lofties second son, now Captain of Ratsfarnham
Castle, does rather wish then fear their approach. Some of the ward of
Ratsfarnham Castle descried four thousand of the Rebels pass by Rebock-hill,
within three miles of Dublin, they descried them from off the plotform, and saw
them at a far nearer distance, (and do confidently say) they were marching by
above four hours.

January the twentieth, the English Army burned Kilternam and Dundrom, two of
the Lord of Merions Towns, Kilgeban a town of Sir Adam Lofties: Kilmaheweeke
and Killake two Irish towns, all within the compass of four or five miles at
furthest at Dublin; This was purposely done that the enemy might not harbor
so nigh Dublin. This is all the news for present, but this came unto my Lady
Lofties is true. Thus with remembrance of my love to your self and good wife,
in haste rest.

Yours to command, Richard Johnson.

THE POSTSCRIPT OF a Letter from Dublin. 16. January. 1641.
BEfore I had well ended my Letter, Dunboyne (distant from Dublin six miles)
was burnt by our Troop, which was the seat of an ancient Lord Baron, and a
strong piece of refuge of the enemies. Oh that we had but timely aid, how
seasonablie would it now be! For two Spanish Priests are taken, who brought
Letters (as credibly is reported) intimating that there is aid coming from
Dunkirke, I mean Arms: I would to God there were shipping of ours at Sea, to
stop their evil intents, and to prevent their inhumane proceedings. For if
they receive Ammunition, I assure you we are likely to have a tedious and a
dangerous war; whereas yet they are most naked, though in very great
multitudes: which being in time prevented of further supplies, must needs
consume themselves by famine, else will they proceed in their Woolvish
devouring what ever comes in their power, without any fear or wit.

FINIS.

